==== Page 1 ====
processes
Article
An Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit for Remaining
Useful Life Prediction
Yi-Wei Lu1, Chia-Yu Hsu1,* and Kuang-Chieh Huang2
1Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, National Taipei University of Technology,
Taipei 10608, Taiwan; t108379001@mail.ntut.edu.tw
2Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan 32003, Taiwan;
s1056222@mail.yzu.edu.tw
*Correspondence: chiayuhsu@mail.ntut.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-2-27712171
Received: 6 August 2020; Accepted: 11 September 2020; Published: 15 September 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: With the development of smart manufacturing, in order to detect abnormal conditions of
the equipment, a large number of sensors have been used to record the variables associated with
production equipment. This study focuses on the prediction of Remaining Useful Life (RUL). RUL
prediction is part of predictive maintenance, which uses the development trend of the machine to
predict when the machine will malfunction. High accuracy of RUL prediction not only reduces
the consumption of manpower and materials, but also reduces the need for future maintenance.
This study focuses on detecting faults as early as possible, before the machine needs to be replaced
or repaired, to ensure the reliability of the system. It is di cult to extract meaningful features from
sensor data directly. This study proposes a model based on an Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit
(AE-GRU), in which the Autoencoder (AE) extracts the important features from the raw data and the
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) selects the information from the sequences to forecast RUL. To evaluate
the performance of the proposed AE-GRU model, an aircraft turbofan engine degradation simulation
dataset provided by NASA was used and a comparison made of di erent recurrent neural networks.
The results demonstrate that the AE-GRU is better than other recurrent neural networks, such as
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and GRU.
Keywords: remaining useful life; predictive maintenance; deep learning; autoencoder; gated
recurrent unit
1. Introduction
Industry 4.0 depends on automated, smart factories, and employs sensor data and the methods of
big data analysis, in the expectation that the equipment in the factory will operate automatically and
self-correct to improve the product yield [ 1]. Sensor-related data are collected during the manufacturing
processes, such as temperature, pressure, power, humidity, and chemical analysis for equipment
monitoring [ 2,3]. These temporal patterns represent the equipment condition, and poor product quality
is often associated with abnormal changes of environment or inappropriate operation settings [ 4].
Equipment condition can be recorded by sensor data from the past and kept as time series data. When
analyzing equipment sensor data, not only the large amount of data recorded should be considered,
but also the time series characteristics. The idea of a smart factory is to link and intellectualize the
manufacturing process. In the past, automation merely used machines to improve production e ciency,
yield, and reduce costs, but intelligence further applies technologies such as the IoT sensor, to monitor
and control production lines. The combination of cloud computing, data analysis, and software and
hardware integration is also an important part of intelligence. Machines communicate with automation
equipment [ 5]. However, there are numerous parameters in the smart factory, and the data are often
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155; doi:10.3390 /pr8091155 www.mdpi.com /journal /processes

==== Page 2 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 2 of 18
highly correlated between equipment and processes. Therefore, the analysis must go beyond a single
stage in the equipment or process, and be comprehensive.
Equipment maintenance methods are divided into the following three types: (1) repair
maintenance [ 6]; (2) preventive maintenance [ 7]; (3) predictive maintenance [ 8]. Corrective maintenance
is a method of maintenance that is performed after some or all of the equipment fails. The most
common equipment maintenance application is preventive maintenance, also known as scheduled
maintenance, which carries out machine inspections, component replacement and other maintenance at
prescribed times. Predictive maintenance is an equipment maintenance method based on the condition
of the machine. It predicts the time when the machine may be damaged according to the development
trend of the past.
Predictive Maintenance (PdM) has been used to monitor the historical health status of equipment
and make timely adjustments to the equipment, which is quite di erent from the methods of routine
maintenance employed in the past. PdM not only saves unnecessary costs, but also allow early repairs
when the equipment is about to break down. It can avoid unpredictable machine stoppages caused
by unexpected breakdown and improper operation. Remaining Useful Life (RUL) is an important
indicator in PdM. The deﬁnition of device or system RUL is the period from the current state to the time
when the device begins to operate abnormally [ 9]. There are two types of RUL prediction: model-based
and data-driven [ 10]. The model-based method establishes the model based on the historical trend
of equipment. Generally, model-based methods perform better than data driven methods when
there is little historical data. Data-driven methods use the health status data and data collected by
sensors. For modeling, the collected data must be closely related to the device status. The advantage
of data-driven methods is that the algorithm is based on learning the correlation between input and
output data. If there are su cient data, the stability and accuracy of data-driven methods are better
than model-based methods
RUL prediction can be described as a time series forecasting problem. The main purpose of time
series forecasting is to build models from historical records and predict future situations. Time series
forecasting can be divided into statistical models, machine learning models and deep learning models.
Common statistical models include Autoregression (AR), Moving Average (MA), Autoregressive
Moving Average (ARMA), and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA). Machine learning
builds a function or model to detect patterns in training samples and then uses these patterns for
prediction [ 11]. Support Machine Vector (SVM) [ 12], Random Forest (RF) [ 13], Extreme Gradient
Boosting (XGB) [ 14] are representative machine learning algorithms for time series forecasting, but it
is dicult to design an e ective machine learning algorithm without substantial knowledge of the
data [ 15]. In addition, the existing methods for analyzing time series data need pre-processing based
on experience, which causes some losses of information. With improved process technology and more
sensors, few existing methods can handle multi-sensor data, which is likely to cause misjudgment or
missed detection.
Deep learning methods are preferred to predict and analyze time series data without predeﬁned
features. Deep learning is a branch of machine learning based on artiﬁcial neural networks with
representation learning [ 16–18], which can learn the key information to make a response by using many
hidden layers integrated in the network. The main di erence between deep learning and machine
learning is feature extraction. Usually, the features of machine learning are manually selected in
advance; deep learning not only identiﬁes features through model training, but is also much better
than other algorithms at calculating results. Makridakis et al. [ 19] compare several time series analysis
methods on the M3-Competition dataset. Most of the machine learning and deep learning algorithms
perform better than traditional statistic methods. Alfred et al. [ 20] demonstrated that algorithms based
on neural networks are more e cient in learning time series data than other algorithms.
Feature extraction is an important data pre-processing method in machine learning for high
prediction accuracy. In the past, the dimension reduction of most data features was accomplished
through Principal Component Analysis (PCA). PCA retains the maximum variation of features by

==== Page 3 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 3 of 18
projecting variables into another space to represent the original complete data with fewer features, to
achieve the e ect of data dimension reduction. The di erence between PCA and Autoencoder (AE)
is that AE is a non-linear dimension reduction method [ 21], and an unsupervised training method.
First, the model compresses the original data through the encoder structure, and then restore the
compressed data through the decoder. The AE rebuilds the original data with fewer features for data
representation [ 22]. It can compress the key information of high dimensional input data into low
dimensional features. AE is often used for feature extraction and dimensional reduction in time series
forecasting problems [ 23]. Moreover, machine learning methods required manual selection of features.
The quality of the features a ected the models’ results. Deep learning has the ability to automatically
extract features. It can reduce the time spent on feature engineering and help experts to make decisions.
Most of the relevant studies on RUL prediction use deep learning as a prediction model, which not
only can save time in selecting features, but also makes prediction results much better than traditional
machine learning models.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are a deep learning model that deals speciﬁcally with time
series data and can select important features from equipment sensors. Long Short-Term Memory
networks (LSTM) is a variant of RNN [ 24]. For example, Zhang et al. [ 25] constructed an LSTM model
to predict the RUL of lithium batteries, predicting after how many cycles of fully charge and discharge
the capacity will be lower than the normal threshold, based on the historical decline rate of capacity.
Heimes [ 9] set the maximum remaining engine life at 130 on the PHM08 data set, and predicted the
RUL using an RNN model. Zhang et al. [ 25] also constructed an LSTM model to predict the RUL
of the jet engine. One hundred jet engines were used as training data and 100 were used as testing
data. Each jet engine has 24 features that record the sensor value from normal to fault, and the RUL
are predicted by the change in these values. Mathew et al. [ 26] predict the RUL of jet engines, using
24 parameters of the original data and comparing ten machine learning methods (Linear Regression,
Decision Tree, SVM, Random Forest, KNN, K-means, Gradient Boost, Adaboost, Deep Learning,
ANOVA), and verify the validity of the model through RMSE. Zheng et al. [ 27] used an LSTM model
to predict the RUL on C-MAPSS data set, PHM08 data set, and Milling data set. The LSTM model
is better than the other models. Chen et al. [ 28] proposed a two-phase model for RUL prediction by
Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), respectively. To the
best of our knowledge, little research has integrated AE and GRU for RUL prediction.
This study develops an Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU) model to predict the RUL
of equipment. In particular, AE is used to select features, and then the correlation between sensors is
found through the GRU model, and the RUL is predicted by Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) model.
The ﬁrst part is the Autoencoder (AE) model which is composed of an encoder and decoder. The
second part is the GRU model which is a type of RNN that can deal with time series data. The GRU
model ﬁnds key information in historical sensor data in combination with the MLP model. The MLP
model calculates the extracted information and combines with the backpropagation algorithm to
predict the RUL e ectively.
2. Literature Review
Time series are statistical data, arranging events or data in order of their occurrence. The main
purpose of time series forecasting is to build models from historical records and predict future situations.
2.1. Recurrent Neural Networks
RNN is the most common time series analysis method in deep learning. The main di erence
between RNN and general neural network is that the neurons of RNN between hidden layers are not
independent, but inﬂuence each other. The neurons of RNN also operate in order. The neurons of
the recurrent neural network have the function of temporarily storing memory. The previously input
data will be temporarily stored in the internal memory, so the neuron can have di erent output values
according to the previous state. However, in the training of RNN, too many hidden layer neuron

==== Page 4 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 4 of 18
weights will cause the problem of gradient vanish because of the heavy calculation, which will let
the gradient descent method stay at the local minimum. The traditional neural network has di erent
parameters to be learned in each hidden layer, but the parameters of the RNN only have di erent
inputs. This feature greatly reduces the training burden of the model.
LSTM solves the problem of the gradient vanish in the random gradient descent in recurrent
neural networks. The biggest di erence between the LSTM and RNN is that each neuron of LSTM
has a control gate function, which is input, forget, and output. These gates have their own weights.
The calculation of the weights after data input determines whether the switches are turned on or
o. The input gate controls whether data can be written to the memory space, and the forget gate
determines whether the contents of the previous memory space are retained. The output gate controls
whether the memory space operation result can be output. Although adding these gates to each
neuron generates more weight to be calculated, it can solve the problem of gradient vanish found in
the recurrent neural network.
Figure 1 is a diagram of the LSTM network unit architecture, and the related formulas are shown
as Equations (1)–(6). The LSTM unit will receive the input vector xtand the output ht 1. Each unit
contains four gates (i, g, f, o) and a cell. xis the input vector of this layer, h is the output vector,J
is
the element-wise multiplication. Wis the weight matrix, bis an error vector, and (i, f, o, g, c) represents
input gate, forget gate, output gate, cell input, and cell activation respectively. The forget gate controls
how much information each memory unit needs to forget, the input gate controls how much new
information each memory unit adds, and the output gate controls how much information each memory
unit outputs. The cell input is the information input of the current time and the information of the
previous time. Cell activation controls the whether the input gate and forget gate information can
be obtained.
it=sigmoid (Wxixt+Whiht 1+bi) (1)
ft=sigmoid
Wx fxt+Wh fht 1+bf
(2)
ot=sigmoid (Wxoxt+Whoht 1+bo) (3)
gt=tanh
Wxgxt+Whght 1+bg
(4)
ct=ftct 1+itgt (5)
ht=tanh (ct)ot (6)
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 will let the gradient descent method stay at the local minimum. The tradit ional neural network has 
different parameters to be learned in each hidden layer, but the parameters  of the RNN only have 
different inputs. This feature greatly redu ces the training burden of the model. 
LSTM solves the problem of the gradient vanish in the random gradient descent in recurrent 
neural networks. The biggest difference between th e LSTM and RNN is that each neuron of LSTM 
has a control gate function, which is input, forget , and output. These gates have their own weights. 
The calculation of the weights after data input determ ines whether the switches are turned on or off. 
The input gate controls whether data can be wri tten to the memory space, and the forget gate 
determines whether the contents of the previous me mory space are retained. The output gate controls 
whether the memory space operation result can be  output. Although adding these gates to each 
neuron generates more weight to be calculated, it can solve the problem of gradient vanish found in the recurrent neural network. 
Figure 1 is a diagram of the LSTM network unit architecture, and the related formulas are shown 
as Equations (1)–(6). The LSTM unit will receive the input vector 𝑥
௧ and the output ℎ௧ିଵ. Each unit 
contains four gates (i, g, f, o) and a cell. x is the input vector of this layer, h is the output vector, ⨀ is 
the element-wise multiplication. W is the weight matrix, b is an error vector, and (i, f, o, g, c) 
represents input gate, forget gate, output gate, cell input, and cell activation respectively. The forget 
gate controls how much information each memory unit needs to forget, the input gate controls how much new information each memory unit adds, and the output gate controls how much information each memory unit outputs. The cell input is th e information input of the current time and the 
information of the previous time. Cell activation controls the whether the input gate and forget gate information can be obtained. 
𝑖
௧= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 ሺ𝑾௫௜𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௜𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௜ሻ (1) 
𝑓௧= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑൫𝑾 ௫௙𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௙𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௙൯ (2) 
𝑜௧= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 ሺ𝑾௫௢𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௢𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௢ሻ (3) 
𝑔௧=𝑡 𝑎 𝑛 ℎ ൫ 𝑾 ௫௚𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௚𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௚൯ (4) 
𝑐௧=𝑓௧⊙𝑐 ௧ିଵ+𝑖 ௧⊙𝑔 ௧ (5) 
ℎ௧=t a n h ሺ𝑐௧ሻ⊙𝑜 ௧ (6) 
 
Figure 1. Structure of Long Short-Te rm Memory (LSTM) unit. 
The gated recurrent unit (GRU) is a variant of LSTM [29]. As shown in Figure 2, (z, r, H, 𝐻෩) are 
update gate, reset gate, activation, and candidate activation respectively. The detailed formulas are 
shown an Equations (7)–(10). The update gate is used to control how much historical information and 
new information needs to be forgotten in the current state. The reset gate is used to control how much 
information is available from the candidate state. The candidate activation can be regarded as the new information at the current time. The reset gate is used to control how much historical information 
Figure 1. Structure of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) unit.
The gated recurrent unit (GRU) is a variant of LSTM [ 29]. As shown in Figure 2, (z, r, H, eH) are
update gate, reset gate, activation, and candidate activation respectively. The detailed formulas are
shown an Equations (7)–(10). The update gate is used to control how much historical information and
new information needs to be forgotten in the current state. The reset gate is used to control how much
information is available from the candidate state. The candidate activation can be regarded as the new
information at the current time. The reset gate is used to control how much historical information needs

==== Page 5 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 5 of 18
to be retained. The activation is generated by the update gate and candidate activation. The update
gate in activation controls how much new and old information is retained. New information and
old information have a complementary relationship. If a lot of new information is retained, the old
information considered will be less, and vice versa.
zt=sigmoid (Wxzxt+Whzht 1+bz) (7)
rt=sigmoid (Wxrxt+Whrht 1+br) (8)
eHt=tanh
WxeHxt+WHeHrtK
Ht 1+beH
(9)
Ht=ztK
Ht 1+(1 zt)K
eHt (10)
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 
 needs to be retained. The activation is generated by the update gate and candidate activation. The 
update gate in activation controls how much new and old information is retained. New information 
and old information have a complementary relationship. If a lot of new information is retained, the 
old information considered will be less, and vice versa. 
𝑧௧= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 ሺ𝑾௫௭𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௭𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௭ሻ (7) 
𝑟௧= 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 ሺ𝑾௫௥𝒙௧+𝑾 ௛௥𝒉௧ିଵ+𝒃 ௥ሻ (8) 
𝐻෩௧=t a n h ሺ𝑾௫ு෩𝒙௧+𝑾 ுு෩𝒓௧⨀𝐻 ௧ିଵ+𝒃 ு෩ሻ (9) 
𝐻௧=𝑧 ௧⨀𝐻 ௧ିଵ+ሺ1−𝑧 ௧ሻ⨀𝐻෩௧ (10) 
 
Figure 2. Structure of gated recu rrent neural network. 
GRU simplifies the input gate and forget gate of  LSTM into an update gate, and combines the 
cell states and hidden states together. Therefore, the GRU unit retains the advantages of LSTM, and 
further reduces the model training time by reducing the parameters in the model. According to the 
analysis results in [30], the results of the RNN mo del are poor and the results of GRU and LSTM are 
similar, and better than RNN. However, the GRU ha s fewer parameters than LSTM, so the trend in 
deep learning models applied to time series analysis is toward GRU. 
In view of the excellent feature extraction performance of AE, and the fast calculation advantage 
of GRU, in this study the RUL prediction model wo rks by extracting the important features from the 
original data using AE. After pre-processing of the extracted features, the GRU model and DNN 
(deep fully connected neural networks ) are applied to predict the RUL. 
2.2. RNN Applications in Time Series Forecasting 
Chen et al. [31] performed a prediction of mechanical state (PMS), and extracted the collected 
sensor data of the machine through the feature ex traction of empirical mode decomposition. This 
method makes the unstable signal slightly stable for building the LSTM model. Zheng et al. [32] predicts the short-term power system load capaci ty, the time range collected from a few hours to 
several weeks. The characteristics of power system load data are non-linear, non-stationary, and non-
seasonal, so the research applies an LSTM model to solve this problem. ElSaid et al. [33] applied an 
LSTM model to predict aircraft engine vibration and predicted aircraft engine vibration values in the 
next 5, 10, and 20 s. 76 parameters  are recorded in the aircraft flight data recorder. Fifteen key features 
were selected by experts with a professional bac kground. The features were normalized to make the 
values range between 0 and 1, and used to make predictions. Cenggoro and Siahaan [34] constructed a DLSTM (Deep Long Short-Term Memory) neural ne twork to predict traffi c flow. The input layer 
had 5 input values, there were 5 hidden layers, and ea ch hidden layer had 100 ne urons. Bao et al. [35] 
conducted a stock price prediction. The stock price prediction is divided into three stages. Stage one applied a wavelet transform algorithm to remove no ise from the original data. Stage two stacks AEs 
to reduces the data dimensions and picks out feat ures automatically. Stage three applies an LSTM 
Figure 2. Structure of gated recurrent neural network.
GRU simpliﬁes the input gate and forget gate of LSTM into an update gate, and combines the cell
states and hidden states together. Therefore, the GRU unit retains the advantages of LSTM, and further
reduces the model training time by reducing the parameters in the model. According to the analysis
results in [ 30], the results of the RNN model are poor and the results of GRU and LSTM are similar,
and better than RNN. However, the GRU has fewer parameters than LSTM, so the trend in deep
learning models applied to time series analysis is toward GRU.
In view of the excellent feature extraction performance of AE, and the fast calculation advantage
of GRU, in this study the RUL prediction model works by extracting the important features from
the original data using AE. After pre-processing of the extracted features, the GRU model and DNN
(deep fully connected neural networks) are applied to predict the RUL.
2.2. RNN Applications in Time Series Forecasting
Chen et al. [ 31] performed a prediction of mechanical state (PMS), and extracted the collected sensor
data of the machine through the feature extraction of empirical mode decomposition. This method
makes the unstable signal slightly stable for building the LSTM model. Zheng et al. [ 32] predicts the
short-term power system load capacity, the time range collected from a few hours to several weeks.
The characteristics of power system load data are non-linear, non-stationary, and non-seasonal, so the
research applies an LSTM model to solve this problem. ElSaid et al. [ 33] applied an LSTM model
to predict aircraft engine vibration and predicted aircraft engine vibration values in the next 5, 10,
and 20 s. 76 parameters are recorded in the aircraft ﬂight data recorder. Fifteen key features were
selected by experts with a professional background. The features were normalized to make the values
range between 0 and 1, and used to make predictions. Cenggoro and Siahaan [ 34] constructed a
DLSTM (Deep Long Short-Term Memory) neural network to predict tra c ﬂow. The input layer had
5 input values, there were 5 hidden layers, and each hidden layer had 100 neurons. Bao et al. [ 35]
conducted a stock price prediction. The stock price prediction is divided into three stages. Stage one

==== Page 6 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 6 of 18
applied a wavelet transform algorithm to remove noise from the original data. Stage two stacks AEs
to reduces the data dimensions and picks out features automatically. Stage three applies an LSTM
model to make predictions. Zhang et al. [ 36] divided Sea Surface Temperature (SST) into two part to
make the prediction. The ﬁrst part is short-term forecasting, which predicts the SST after 1 and 3 day.
The second part is long-term forecasting, which predicts the weekly average and monthly average of
SST. It ﬁnds the relationship between sequences through LSTM, and then make the prediction through
the fully connected layer. How et al. [ 37] uses the angle changes on di erent motion sensors of the
NAO robot to classify the current actions of the robot through an LSTM model. Truong et al. [ 38]
construct an LSTM model to identify changes in human type and object type, and even predict
possible human actions through the action combinations. Kuan et al. [ 39] constructed an MS-GRU
(multilayered self-normalizing gated recurrent units) model. It has good results in predicting power
loading. Zhang and Kabuka [ 40] used the GRU model to predict the tra c volume. The training data
included the historical weather data 100 h previously to predict the tra c volume in the next 12 h.
It was found that weather conditions can improve the prediction accuracy.
3. Research Framework
This study constructs an AE-GRU model for RUL prediction to increase equipment life, reduce
unexpected harm caused by sudden shutdown of machinery, and improve the reliability of system
operation. The proposed AE-GRU includes the steps of data pre-processing, feature extraction, and RUL
prediction as shown in Figure 3. The data pre-processing step ﬁrst deﬁnes the engine life to predict
the exact RUL of the engine, and then standardizes the data to avoid errors caused by di erent scales
of the data. It then uses the deep learning autoencoder model to extract the features of the original
data. GRU is specialized in processing time series related data, and considers the changes of historical
characteristics. The data is converted from 2D to 3D; the new dimension is the time data. The last
step of data processing is to change the value range of the RUL. Because the original data is linearly
decreasing, the results in model training and prediction are not optimal. Finally, the RUL expectancy is
predicted through the GRU model and a fully-connected layer neural network.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 model to make predictions. Zhang et al. [36] divide d Sea Surface Temperature (SST) into two part to 
make the prediction. The first part is short-term fo recasting, which predicts the SST after 1 and 3 day. 
The second part is long-term forecasting, which predicts the weekly average and monthly average of 
SST. It finds the relationship between sequence s through LSTM, and then make the prediction 
through the fully connected layer. How et al. [37] uses the angle changes on different motion sensors 
of the NAO robot to classify the current actions of  the robot through an LSTM model. Truong et al. 
[38] construct an LSTM model to identify changes in human type and object type, and even predict 
possible human actions through the action combinations. Kuan et al. [39] constructed an MS-GRU (multilayered self-normalizing gated recurrent units) model. It has good results in predicting power 
loading. Zhang and Kabuka [40] used the GRU model to predict the traffic volume. The training data 
included the historical weather data 100 h previously to predict the traffic volume in the next 12 h. It 
was found that weather conditions can improve the prediction accuracy. 
3. Research Framework 
This study constructs an AE-GRU model for RUL prediction to increase equipment life, reduce 
unexpected harm caused by sudden shutdown of ma chinery, and improve the reliability of system 
operation. The proposed AE-GRU includes the steps of data pre-processing, feature extraction, and 
RUL prediction as shown in Figure 3. The data pre- processing step first defines the engine life to 
predict the exact RUL of the engine, and then standard izes the data to avoid errors caused by different 
scales of the data. It then uses the deep learning  autoencoder model to extract the features of the 
original data. GRU is specialized in processing time  series related data, and considers the changes of 
historical characteristics. The data is converted fr om 2D to 3D; the new dimension is the time data. 
The last step of data processing is to change the value range of the RUL. Because the original data is 
linearly decreasing, the results in model training and prediction are not optimal. Finally, the RUL 
expectancy is predicted through the GRU model  and a fully-connected layer neural network. 
 
Figure 3. Research framework of Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU).  
The symbols used in this research are defined as follows: 
𝑁: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠  
𝑆: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑠  
𝑛: 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎  
𝑌: 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑛𝑒𝑢𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑠  
Figure 3. Research framework of Autoencoder Gated Recurrent Unit (AE-GRU).
The symbols used in this research are deﬁned as follows:

==== Page 7 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 7 of 18
N:numbero f engines
S:numbero f sensors
n:lengtho f sensingdata
Y:numbero f neurons
L:numbero f hiddenlayers
W:weight
b:errorvector
Features :New f eaturesa f terextraction
Xij:thesensingdatao f thejthsensor 2theithengine ;i=1:::N,j=1:::S
Xit:thecurrenttimet2theithengine , ;i=1:::N,j=1:::T
hly:thenumbero f theythneuron 2thelthhiddenlayer ;l=1:::L,y=1:::Y
T:engineusagetime
RUL :remainingli f e
RUL0:Remainingli f ea f tertrans f orm
:theaveragevalueo f sensingdatax i
:Standarddeviationo f sensingdatax i
x0i=dataa f terstandardize ,iisthedatalength ;i=1:::n
yi:trueremainingli f e ;i=1:::n
y0
i:predictedremainingli f e ;i=1:::n
3.1. Data Pre-Processing
In the original engine data, there are only usage records for each engine, and there is no speciﬁc
RUL of the engine recorded. Therefore, this study deﬁnes the time from good to bad for each engine,
so that we can apply supervised learning methods to the experiment. It is possible to predict the RUL
accurately using the parameter changes recorded by the sensors. As shown in Table 1, after ﬁnding the
available time for each engine record (Equation (11)), the di erence between the maximum time and
the current time (Equation (12)) is the RUL of the engine.
T:Max (Xit) (11)
RUL :T Xit (12)
Table 1. Deﬁnition of Remaining Useful Life (RUL).
Engine Usage Time Parameter 1 Parameter 2 Parameter 24 RUL
1 1 10.0047 0.2501 17.1735 222
1 2 0.0015 0.0003 23.3619 221
::: ::: ::: ::: ::: :::
1 223 34.9992 0.84 8.6695 0
::: ::: ::: ::: ::: :::
218 132 35.007 0.8419 8.6761 1
218 133 25.007 0.6216 8.512 0
In the original engine data, the scales of the values measured by di erent sensors are di erent,
such as pressure, temperature, humidity, etc., In order to avoid the di erence in scales and make all
the sensor values standard, the original data are all converted to Z-scores. The average value is the
sum of the sensor data xidivided by n, the number of observations (Equation (13)). The standard
deviation is also calculated (Equation (14)). The transformed data x0
iis calculated by calculating

==== Page 8 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 8 of 18
the di erence between the sensor value of the data and the average value, divided by the standard
deviation (Equation (15)). The average value of x0
iis equal to 0 and standard deviation equal to 1.
=Pn
i=1xi
n(13)
=vt
1
nnX
i=1(xi )2(14)
x0
i=xi 
(15)
3.1.1. Feature Extraction
AE is used to reduce the data dimension and achieve the e ect of feature extraction. As shown
in Figure 4, the encoder will reduce the dimension of the data and transform the original data into a
new space. The features in this space can describe the data more concisely than the original features.
The orange neurons in the middle of the Figure are the features in the new space. The feature value is
obtained by multiplying the weight matrix of the neurons in the hidden layer of the previous layer and
adding the error vector (Equation (16)), where f() is the activation function which is Relu in this model,
Wis the weight matrix, hlis the error vector, bis the bias.
Features :f(Whl)+b (16)
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 𝜇=∑ 𝑥௜௡
௜ୀଵ
𝑛 (13) 
𝜎= ඩ1
𝑛෍ሺ𝑥௜−𝜇ሻଶ௡
௜ୀଵ (14) 
𝑥′௜=𝑥௜−𝜇
𝜌 (15) 
3.1.1. Feature Extraction 
AE is used to reduce the data dimension and ac hieve the effect of feature extraction. As shown 
in Figure 4, the encoder will reduce the dimension of the data and transform the original data into a 
new space. The features in this space can describe the data more concisely than the original features. The orange neurons in the middle of the Figure are the features in the new space. The feature value 
is obtained by multiplying the weight matrix of th e neurons in the hidden layer of the previous layer 
and adding the error vector (Equation (16)), where f() is the activation function which is Relu in this 
model, W is the weight matrix, ℎ
௟ is the error vector, b is the bias. 
𝐹𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠: 𝑓ሺ𝑊∗ℎ ௟ሻ+𝑏 (16) 
 
Figure 4. AE Structure 
The data collected by sensors is a series of continuous data. However, in the general model, it 
only uses the current sensor value to predict the RUL. The change in historical sensor value is not 
considered. In this study, a new data processing method is proposed to take historical information into account. The format of the data will be conv erted from the original two-dimensional (samples, 
features) to three-dimensional (samples, time steps, features). Zero-padding is often used in signal processing or Convolutional Neur al Networks (CNN). The purpose is to keep or increase the 
dimension of the data without affecting the information of the data itself. In this study, when the current sensor record has no hist orical data, the zero-padding method will be used to keep the data 
dimension. 
3.1.2. Maximum RUL Transformation 
Figure 4. AE Structure
The data collected by sensors is a series of continuous data. However, in the general model, it only
uses the current sensor value to predict the RUL. The change in historical sensor value is not considered.
In this study, a new data processing method is proposed to take historical information into account.
The format of the data will be converted from the original two-dimensional (samples, features) to
three-dimensional (samples, time steps, features). Zero-padding is often used in signal processing or
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). The purpose is to keep or increase the dimension of the data
without a ecting the information of the data itself. In this study, when the current sensor record has no
historical data, the zero-padding method will be used to keep the data dimension.

==== Page 9 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 9 of 18
3.1.2. Maximum RUL Transformation
The maximum and minimum life of the engine is 356 and 127 cycles, and the average engine
life is 209. The literature related to the prediction of RUL converts the maximum RUL to a speciﬁc
reasonable value in the experiment. In this study, the transform process refers to the setting of T =130
in Heimes [ 3]. The RUL greater than T will be deﬁned as T, the RUL less than T will not change
(Equation (17)). Figure 5 shows the life transform of one of the engines in the data set. Through this
conversion, the RUL changes from the original linear decline to a nonlinear decline. Both the model
training and the estimation of the RUL have better results in the setting.
RUL0=(
T,i f RULT
RUL ,i f RUL<T(17)
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 The maximum and minimum life of the engine is 356 and 127 cycles, and the average engine life 
is 209. The literature related to the prediction of RUL converts the maximum RUL to a specific 
reasonable value in the experiment. In this study, the transform process refers to the setting of T = 
130 in Heimes [3]. The RUL greater than T will be defined as T, the RUL less than T will not change (Equation (17)). Figure 5 shows the life transform of one of the engines in the data set. Through this conversion, the RUL changes from the original linear decline to a nonlinear decline. Both the model training and the estimation of the RUL have better results in the setting. 
𝑅𝑈𝐿
ᇱ=൜𝑇, 𝑖𝑓𝑅𝑈𝐿 ൒ 𝑇
𝑅𝑈𝐿, 𝑖𝑓𝑅𝑈𝐿 ൏ 𝑇 (1) 
 
 
(a)  
(b) 
Figure 5. Maximum life value transform ( a) original RUL; ( b) RUL after Maximu m useful life 
transform. 
3.2. RUL Prediction Model 
The RUL prediction model of this study combines the advantages of effective feature extraction 
and fast calculation. The RUL prediction model will be  divided into four steps as shown in Figure 6. 
Step 1 is the input layer. 𝑋௧ represents the sensor data collected at the current time, 𝑋௧ିଵ represents 
the sensor data collected at the previous moment, 𝑋௧ିଶ represents the sensor data collected two 
moments earlier. The number of hi storical time points of sensor data to input to the model are 
adjustable. Step 2 is the GRU layer. The number of GR U layers is set to two in this paper. The number 
of GRU neurons will be tuned in the experimental part, and the best parameter combination selected 
for the research. The purpose of this step is to identi fy time series correlation in the input data through 
GRU. However, GRU cannot directly predict the RU L. Therefore, DNN must be added to predict the 
RUL. Step 3 is the DNN layer. DNN will convert the features extracted by GRU to the prediction 
dimension to perform the prediction. The best pa rameter combination from the experiment result 
will be used to decide the number of neurons as in  Step 2. The objective function of DNN is applied 
to calculate the difference between the predicted value and the true value. In this study, Mean Square 
Error (MSE) is used as the objective function (Equation (18)), and the gradient descent method is used to minimize the objective function and train the mode l. Step 4 is the output layer of the model. The 
output is the value of predicted RUL at the curre nt time. The model evaluation is conducted by 
calculating Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). 
𝑀𝑆𝐸 =1
𝑛෍൫𝑦 ௜−𝑦ᇱ
௜൯ଶ௡
௜ୀଵ (18) 
Figure 5. Maximum life value transform ( a) original RUL; ( b) RUL after Maximum useful life transform.
3.2. RUL Prediction Model
The RUL prediction model of this study combines the advantages of e ective feature extraction
and fast calculation. The RUL prediction model will be divided into four steps as shown in Figure 6.
Step 1 is the input layer. Xtrepresents the sensor data collected at the current time, Xt 1represents the
sensor data collected at the previous moment, Xt 2represents the sensor data collected two moments
earlier. The number of historical time points of sensor data to input to the model are adjustable. Step 2
is the GRU layer. The number of GRU layers is set to two in this paper. The number of GRU neurons
will be tuned in the experimental part, and the best parameter combination selected for the research.
The purpose of this step is to identify time series correlation in the input data through GRU. However,
GRU cannot directly predict the RUL. Therefore, DNN must be added to predict the RUL. Step 3
is the DNN layer. DNN will convert the features extracted by GRU to the prediction dimension to
perform the prediction. The best parameter combination from the experiment result will be used to
decide the number of neurons as in Step 2. The objective function of DNN is applied to calculate the
dierence between the predicted value and the true value. In this study, Mean Square Error (MSE) is
used as the objective function (Equation (18)), and the gradient descent method is used to minimize
the objective function and train the model. Step 4 is the output layer of the model. The output is the
value of predicted RUL at the current time. The model evaluation is conducted by calculating Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE).
MSE =1
nnX
i=1
yi y0
i2(18)

==== Page 10 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 10 of 18
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
  
Figure 6. Model structure of AE-GRU for RUL prediction. 
4. Result Evaluation 
4.1. Data Collection 
To validate the proposed AE-GRU, a Turbofan  Engine Degradation Simulation Data Set 
(Prognostics and Management 2008, PHM08) (h ttps://www.nasa.gov/) is  used for performance 
evaluation in this section. It was carried out by a NASA tool C-MAPSS, to simulate the real large 
commercial aircraft turbofan engines. The data consists of a lot of time series cycles, which come from different engines of the same type. Each engine star ts with a different wear level. The first section 
introduces the engine data collected by the sensor, and the second section describes the parameter settings of the model. The performance of different activation functions is compared and performance 
is optimized. Finally, th e number of hidden layers and neurons is compared. In the third section, we 
will extract the best parameters and apply them to  different models, and test the model by analyzing 
the root mean square error (RMSE). 
There are data for 218 turbo engines, and a total of 45,918 records in the dataset. Every record 
has 26 original features and the customized RUL. The experimental design and verification of this 
study adopts k-fold cross validation to ensure the stability of the model. 
Figure 7 is a diagram of the sens or parameters of the turbine engi nes in this study. The sensor 
parameters of Engine 1 are presented visually. The parameter values of the sensors vary in range and 
the parameter trends are not consistent. The RUL of the engine will be predicted by the changes of 
these sensor parameters in this research. 
 
Figure 7. Diagram of turbine engine sensor parameter. 
Figure 6. Model structure of AE-GRU for RUL prediction.
4. Result Evaluation
4.1. Data Collection
To validate the proposed AE-GRU, a Turbofan Engine Degradation Simulation Data Set
(Prognostics and Management 2008, PHM08) (https: //www.nasa.gov /) is used for performance
evaluation in this section. It was carried out by a NASA tool C-MAPSS, to simulate the real
large commercial aircraft turbofan engines. The data consists of a lot of time series cycles, which come
from di erent engines of the same type. Each engine starts with a di erent wear level. The ﬁrst section
introduces the engine data collected by the sensor, and the second section describes the parameter
settings of the model. The performance of di erent activation functions is compared and performance
is optimized. Finally, the number of hidden layers and neurons is compared. In the third section, we
will extract the best parameters and apply them to di erent models, and test the model by analyzing
the root mean square error (RMSE).
There are data for 218 turbo engines, and a total of 45,918 records in the dataset. Every record has
26 original features and the customized RUL. The experimental design and veriﬁcation of this study
adopts k-fold cross validation to ensure the stability of the model.
Figure 7 is a diagram of the sensor parameters of the turbine engines in this study. The sensor
parameters of Engine 1 are presented visually. The parameter values of the sensors vary in range and
the parameter trends are not consistent. The RUL of the engine will be predicted by the changes of
these sensor parameters in this research.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
  
Figure 6. Model structure of AE-GRU for RUL prediction. 
4. Result Evaluation 
4.1. Data Collection 
To validate the proposed AE-GRU, a Turbofan  Engine Degradation Simulation Data Set 
(Prognostics and Management 2008, PHM08) (h ttps://www.nasa.gov/) is  used for performance 
evaluation in this section. It was carried out by a NASA tool C-MAPSS, to simulate the real large 
commercial aircraft turbofan engines. The data consists of a lot of time series cycles, which come from different engines of the same type. Each engine star ts with a different wear level. The first section 
introduces the engine data collected by the sensor, and the second section describes the parameter settings of the model. The performance of different activation functions is compared and performance 
is optimized. Finally, th e number of hidden layers and neurons is compared. In the third section, we 
will extract the best parameters and apply them to  different models, and test the model by analyzing 
the root mean square error (RMSE). 
There are data for 218 turbo engines, and a total of 45,918 records in the dataset. Every record 
has 26 original features and the customized RUL. The experimental design and verification of this 
study adopts k-fold cross validation to ensure the stability of the model. 
Figure 7 is a diagram of the sens or parameters of the turbine engi nes in this study. The sensor 
parameters of Engine 1 are presented visually. The parameter values of the sensors vary in range and 
the parameter trends are not consistent. The RUL of the engine will be predicted by the changes of 
these sensor parameters in this research. 
 
Figure 7. Diagram of turbine engine sensor parameter. 
Figure 7. Diagram of turbine engine sensor parameter.

==== Page 11 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 11 of 18
4.2. Hyperparameters Setting
Based on the experience of adjusting the model, the hyperparameters in the neural network will
signiﬁcantly a ect the results of the model. This section ﬁnds the best parameter combination to apply
in the model to predict the RUL value.
In experiments on neural networks, the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons are
often the most di cult to choose. The training results will also depend on the quality of batch size
and epoch. Batch size means the number of samples to work through in one iteration. Epoch is the
number of times that the model goes through batches to go through the entire training dataset once.
For example, if a training dataset has 3000 records and batch size is set to 500, it takes 6 iterations to
complete an epoch.
4.2.1. Activation Function
The main function of the activation function in the neural network is to introduce nonlinear
characteristics. If there is no activation function in the neural network, the input and output will only
correlate with a simple linear relationship and not able to handle complex issues, so the activation
function is very important in deep learning.
This experiment sets the following parameters to observe the training result of the GRU model
with di erent activation functions:
1. Epochs: 100;
2. Optimizers: Adam;
3. Batch_size: 128;
4. Hidden layer, number of neurons: 1, 50;
5. Inputs: 24.
This experiment uses a 5-fold cross-validation to compare total seven activation functions and
calculate the average loss of each activation function: softmax (3055.5), softplus (517.0), softsign (438.9),
relu (434.8), tanh (445.3), sigmoid (990.7), hard sigmoid (1051.9). According to the training results,
we ﬁnd that the softmax performance is relatively poor, and the relu activation function performs
best (Figure 8). The softmax activation function is a blend of multiple sigmoid, which is relatively
suited to multiclass classiﬁcation problems rather than a regression problem. The advantage of the
Relu activation function is that neuron deactivation will only happen when the output of linear
transformation is zero. The neurons will not be activated at the same time, but a certain number of
neurons will be activated at a time. The objective function of Relu can be express as [41]:
f(x)=max (0,x) (19)
In addition, since the relu activation function does not need to perform exponential calculations,
the convergence speed is fast and the calculation complexity levels are low. So, this study adopted relu
as the activation function.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 4.2. Hyperparameters Setting 
Based on the experience of adjusting the model, the hyperparameters in the neural network will 
significantly affect the results of the model. This section finds the best parameter combination to 
apply in the model to predict the RUL value. 
In experiments on neural networks, the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons are 
often the most difficult to choose. The training resu lts will also depend on the quality of batch size 
and epoch. Batch size means the number of samples to work through in one iteration. Epoch is the 
number of times that the model goes through batche s to go through the entire training dataset once. 
For example, if a training dataset ha s 3000 records and batch size is set to 500, it takes 6 iterations to 
complete an epoch. 
4.2.1. Activation Function 
The main function of the activation function in  the neural network is to introduce nonlinear 
characteristics. If there is no activation function in  the neural network, the in put and output will only 
correlate with a simple linear relationship and not able to handle complex issues, so the activation 
function is very important in deep learning. 
This experiment sets the following parameters to  observe the training result of the GRU model 
with different activation functions: 
1. Epochs: 100; 
2. Optimizers: Adam; 
3. Batch_size: 128; 
4. Hidden layer, number of neurons: 1, 50; 
5. Inputs: 24. 
This experiment uses a 5-fold cross-validation to compare total seven activation functions and 
calculate the average loss of each activation function: softmax (3055.5), softplus (517.0), softsign 
(438.9), relu (434.8), tanh (445.3), sigmoid (990.7), hard sigmoid (1051.9). According to the training results, we find that the softmax performance is relatively poor, and the relu activation function 
performs best (Figure 8). The softmax activation function is a blend of multiple sigmoid, which is relatively suited to multiclass classification pr oblems rather than a regression problem. The 
advantage of the Relu activation function is that neuron deactivation will only happen when the 
output of linear transformation is zero. The neur ons will not be activated at the same time, but a 
certain number of neurons will be activated at a ti me. The objective function of Relu can be express 
as [41]: 
𝑓ሺ𝑥ሻ=m a x  ሺ 0 , 𝑥 ሻ  (19) 
In addition, since the relu activa tion function does not need to perform exponential calculations, 
the convergence speed is fast and the calculation co mplexity levels are low. So, this study adopted 
relu as the activation function. 
 
Figure 8.  Comparison of training result in different activation function 
Figure 8. Comparison of training result in di erent activation function

==== Page 12 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 12 of 18
4.2.2. Optimizer
The purpose of optimizers is to minimize the loss function and the gap between the predicted
value and real value. This experiment sets the following parameters and observes the training result of
the GRU model under di erent optimizers:
1. Epochs: 100;
2. Activation: relu;
3. Batch_size: 128;
4. Hidden layer, number of neuron: 1, 50;
5. Inputs: 24.
This experiment applies 5-fold cross-validation to compare a total of seven optimization algorithms:
SGD (569.8), RMSprop (438.7), Adagrad (4586.9), Adadelta (426.6), Adam (436.6), Adamax (436.8),
Nadam (420.7). The parameter setting of each optimization algorithm is the best result proposed in the
literature. Kingma and Ba [ 42] proposed Adam’s optimization algorithm. Most of the current neural
networks apply Adam to optimize the loss function. The advantage of Adam is quick convergence
and dealing with high noise and the problem of sparse gradients. The Nadam optimization algorithm
proposed by Dozat [ 43] changes the part of Adam’s momentum and accelerates the convergence rate
of the model. The study conﬁrms that in this PHM08 dataset, Nadam will converge faster than Adam
(Figure 9). Therefore, the optimizer used in this study is Nadam.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
 4.2.2. Optimizer 
The purpose of optimizers is to minimize th e loss function and the gap between the predicted 
value and real value. This experiment sets the foll owing parameters and observes the training result 
of the GRU model under different optimizers: 
1. Epochs: 100; 
2. Activation: relu; 
3. Batch_size: 128; 
4. Hidden layer, number of neuron: 1, 50; 
5. Inputs: 24. 
This experiment applies 5-fold cross-validation to compare a total of seven optimization 
algorithms: SGD (569.8), RMSprop (438.7), Adagrad (4586.9), Adadelta (426.6), Adam (436.6), Adamax (436.8), Nadam (420.7). The parameter setting of each optimization algorithm is the best result proposed in the literature. Kingma and Ba [42] proposed Adam’s  optimization algorithm. Most 
of the current neural networks apply Adam to opti mize the loss function. The advantage of Adam is 
quick convergence and dealing with high noise and the problem of sparse gradients. The Nadam optimization algorithm proposed by Dozat [43] changes the part of Adam’s momentum and 
accelerates the convergence rate of the model. The st udy confirms that in this PHM08 dataset, Nadam 
will converge faster than Adam (Figure 9). Theref ore, the optimizer used in this study is Nadam. 
 
Figure 9. Comparison of training result in different optimizer.   
4.2.3. Number of Hidden Layers and Neurons 
This experiment compares three different batch sizes: 32 (Table 2), 64 (Table 3), 128 (Table 4). 
The early stopping function has been adopted in th e experiment; if the MSE of verification does not 
rise for 10 consecutive times, the training will stop  and the previous best model will be used in the 
test dataset. Early stopping is commonly used in the algorithm of gradient descent to avoid 
overfitting. The GRU and DNN layers are set to two layers. The RMSE result of different neurons in 
the training are compared. The input of this experime nt is 24 parameters of the current raw data of 
the sensor, and there is no historical information (time steps = 1). 
Table 2. Comparison of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) result  (batch size = 32). 
Networks Epochs Training Time RMSE 
G(32,32)N(8,8) 33 98.4 s 20.18 
G(64,64)N(8,8) 20 89.3 s 20.24 
G(32,64)N(8,8) 19 76.8 s 20.37 
G(32,64)N(16,16) 28 103.7 s 20.24 
G(96,96)N(8,8) 25 150.3 s 20.20 
G(96,96)N(16,16) 24 151.4 s 20.18 
Figure 9. Comparison of training result in di erent optimizer.
4.2.3. Number of Hidden Layers and Neurons
This experiment compares three di erent batch sizes: 32 (Table 2), 64 (Table 3), 128 (Table 4).
The early stopping function has been adopted in the experiment; if the MSE of veriﬁcation does not
rise for 10 consecutive times, the training will stop and the previous best model will be used in the test
dataset. Early stopping is commonly used in the algorithm of gradient descent to avoid overﬁtting.
The GRU and DNN layers are set to two layers. The RMSE result of di erent neurons in the training
are compared. The input of this experiment is 24 parameters of the current raw data of the sensor,
and there is no historical information (time steps =1).
Table 2. Comparison of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) result (batch size =32).
Networks Epochs Training Time RMSE
G(32,32)N(8,8) 33 98.4 s 20.18
G(64,64)N(8,8) 20 89.3 s 20.24
G(32,64)N(8,8) 19 76.8 s 20.37
G(32,64)N(16,16) 28 103.7 s 20.24
G(96,96)N(8,8) 25 150.3 s 20.20
G(96,96)N(16,16) 24 151.4 s 20.18

==== Page 13 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 13 of 18
Table 3. Comparison of RMSE result (batch size =64).
Networks Epochs Training Time RMSE
G(32,32)N(8,8) 21 52.0 s 20.32
G(64,64)N(8,8) 24 75.8 s 20.25
G(32,64)N(8,8) 23 63.8 s 20.33
G(32,64)N(16,16) 24 66.7 s 20.36
G(96,96)N(8,8) 15 80.1 s 20.44
G(96,96)N(16,16) 14 78.3 s 20.44
Table 4. Comparison of RMSE result (batch size =128).
Networks Epochs Training Time RMSE
G(32,32)N(8,8) 42 60.4 s 20.16
G(64,64)N(8,8) 34 70.1 s 20.07*
G(32,64)N(8,8) 33 60.3 s 20.20
G(32,64)N(16,16) 52 85.6 s 20.19
G(96,96)N(8,8) 42 119.4 s 20.15
G(96,96)N(16,16) 36 115.7 s 20.12
The experimental results show that the larger the batch size, the faster the model training speed.
Therefore, batch size in this study will be set to 128. When the batch size is greater, not only the training
time is fast, but the RMSE results are also better. So, the network architecture of this study will be set
to G(64,64)N(8,8).
4.3. Model Evaluation
4.3.1. Model Comparison
This section uses the 5-fold cross-validation to evaluate the validity of the RUL model of the
AE-GRU in this study, and compares the results of existing models. In total 218 engines are divided
into ﬁve parts as 44, 44, 44, 44 and 42 engines. Four parts are used for training each time, and the
remainder are test data. After distinguishing the data, the AE model reduces the dimension of the data,
and then predicts the RUL of the engine through GRU. The performance of the model is also compared
using the RMSE result. The dimension of the data is reduced from 24 inputs of the original data to 15,
10, 5. AE extracts the characteristics of the original data by non-linear transformation, and through
multiple hidden layers, observing the loss of each feature in the compression and restoration process
(Table 5).
Table 5. Loss of dimension reduction by AE.
Input 15 10 5
Loss 7.710 62.610 53.010 5
The experimental results show that the dimension reduction e ect is the best when the input is
reduced to 15 dimensions. In 10 or 5 dimensions, the e ect of restoration is poor because of the loss
of original data Information. In this study, the AE will reduce the data dimension from 24 to 15 and
compare the performance with other models.
After 5-fold cross-validation, (Tables 6 and 7), it is found that when the input of AE-GRU is
reduced from the original 24 features to 15, the RMSE results are better than those of other models.
This conﬁrms that AE-GRU can e ectively extract features and accurately predict the RUL. Time steps
is the number of historical data points. time steps =5 is the historical information of the current time
point and the previous four-time records. time steps =10 is the current time information and the
previous nine-time points. The results show that when time steps =5, the results of the model are

==== Page 14 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 14 of 18
quite close. When time steps =10, because of the large amount of historical data, the RNN has the
problem of disappearing gradients, while the general DNN has no time series characteristics, and the
prediction results are the worst.
Table 6. RMSE results of di erent models under 5-fold cross-validation (Time steps =5).
DNN
Inputs:24RNN
Inputs:24LSTM
Inputs:24GRU
Inputs:24AE-GRE
Inputs:15
1 18.57 18.06 17.80 17.68 17.64
2 18.76 18.22 18.00 17.88 17.70
3 18.73 18.47 18.19 18.03 17.98
4 19.11 18.44 18.45 18.16 18.20
5 19.12 18.43 18.34 18.12 18.20
Average 18.86 18.32 18.16 17.96 17.94
Table 7. RMSE results of di erent models under 5-fold cross-validation (Time steps =10).
DNN
Inputs:24RNN
Inputs:24LSTM
Inputs:24GRU
Inputs:24AE-GRE
Inputs:15
1 19.21 15.08 11.20 10.31 10.39
2 19.21 14.26 11.52 11.05 10.02
3 19.07 15.86 10.78 10.75 10.70
4 19.77 15.07 11.49 11.33 10.69
5 19.69 17.27 10.81 10.54 11.31
Average 19.39 15.51 11.16 10.79 10.62
4.3.2. RUL Prediction
Figures 10–12 show the test results for the total of ﬁve model methods (DNN, RNN, LSTM, GRU,
and AE-GRU). According to the Figure, it can be seen that the ﬁve models have the problem of unstable
ﬂuctuation. Neither DNN nor RNN are ideal for training or testing. LSTM, GRU and AE-GRU are
good in the training set, but precarious in the testing set, because there is not enough training data.
Deep learning requires a large amount of data identify features. When the RUL is stable for 130 cycles,
the AE-GRU proposed in this study can have more accurate results in predicting the RUL of the engine.
It will not ﬂuctuate like DNN and RNN. When the RUL begins to decline, AE-GRU can predict it
in advance.
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 18 
 problem of disappearing gradients, while the general DNN has no time series characteristics, and the 
prediction results are the worst. 
Table 6. RMSE results of different models under 5-fold cross-validation (Time steps = 5). 
 DNN 
Inputs:24 RNN 
Inputs:24 LSTM 
Inputs:24 GRU 
Inputs:24 AE-GRE 
Inputs:15 
1 18.57 18.06 17.80 17.68 17.64 
2 18.76 18.22 18.00 17.88 17.70 
3 18.73 18.47 18.19 18.03 17.98 
4 19.11 18.44 18.45 18.16 18.20 
5 19.12 18.43 18.34 18.12 18.20 
Average 18.86 18.32 18.16 17.96 17.94 
Table 7. RMSE results of different models under 5-fold cross-validation (Time steps = 10). 
 DNN 
Inputs:24 RNN 
Inputs:24 LSTM 
Inputs:24 GRU 
Inputs:24 AE-GRE 
Inputs:15 
1 19.21 15.08 11.20 10.31 10.39 
2 19.21 14.26 11.52 11.05 10.02 
3 19.07 15.86 10.78 10.75 10.70 
4 19.77 15.07 11.49 11.33 10.69 
5 19.69 17.27 10.81 10.54 11.31 
Average 19.39 15.51 11.16 10.79 10.62 
4.3.2. RUL Prediction 
Figures 10–12 show the test results for the total of five model methods (DNN, RNN, LSTM, GRU, 
and AE-GRU). According to the Figure, it can be  seen that the five models have the problem of 
unstable fluctuation. Neither DNN nor RNN are ideal for training or testing. LSTM, GRU and AE-GRU are good in the training set, but precarious in the testing set, because there is not enough training 
data. Deep learning requires a large amount of data  identify features. When the RUL is stable for 130 
cycles, the AE-GRU proposed in this study can have more accurate results in predicting the RUL of the engine. It will not fluctuate like DNN and RNN. When the RUL begins to decline, AE-GRU can predict it in advance. 
 
Figure 10. Model testing results comparison (Engine 1). 
Figure 10. Model testing results comparison (Engine 1).

==== Page 15 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 15 of 18
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 18 
  
Figure 11. Model testing results comparison (Engine 2). 
 
Figure 12. Model testing results comparison (Engine 3). 
5. Conclusions 
This study proposes the AE-GRU model for RUL prediction. First, pre-processing was applied 
to the sensor data collected by different sensors. Because the scales of different sensors are not the 
same, we standardize the sensor data so that the sensor data can be rearranged to the same scale 
standard while retaining the characteristics of th e data time series. Next, the RUL is defined. The 
purpose of defining the RUL is to allow the user to accurately predict the life value of equipment that the engine can work. Feature extraction finds the ch aracteristics of the sensor data by deep learning. 
The characteristics will directly affect the pr edictive ability of the model. A good model is 
indispensable for characteristics that can fully re present the data. Data dimension conversion takes 
the historical sensor data into account, because th e data has the characteristics of a time series. The 
last step of data pre-processing is the transformati on of the maximum life value. The engine with an 
RUL greater than 130 cycles is set to 130 cycles. When using the RUL prediction, attention focuses on 
the RUL value when it is about to break, and the si tuation where the RUL value is still very large is 
less important. Then the GRU is combined with  the back-propagation algorithm to learn the 
parameters. Because there are a large number of pa rameters to learn, the experiment uses a GPU 
graphics card in parallel operation and increase  the process speed. At the same time, the relu 
activation function and Nadam optimizer are used to make the process of learning parameters 
converge more quickly. Combined with the be st combination of parameters run under the 
experimental design, the prediction of the RUL has better results. 
The contribution of this study is that it applies the optimized version of LSTM, the GRU. GRU 
can effectively capture the characteri stics of the sensor data, and extract the characteristics of the data 
by AE before the RUL model prediction. The GRU model has many fewer parameters than LSTM but 
Figure 11. Model testing results comparison (Engine 2).
Processes 2020 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 18 
  
Figure 11. Model testing results comparison (Engine 2). 
 
Figure 12. Model testing results comparison (Engine 3). 
5. Conclusions 
This study proposes the AE-GRU model for RUL prediction. First, pre-processing was applied 
to the sensor data collected by different sensors. Because the scales of different sensors are not the 
same, we standardize the sensor data so that the sensor data can be rearranged to the same scale 
standard while retaining the characteristics of th e data time series. Next, the RUL is defined. The 
purpose of defining the RUL is to allow the user to accurately predict the life value of equipment that the engine can work. Feature extraction finds the ch aracteristics of the sensor data by deep learning. 
The characteristics will directly affect the pr edictive ability of the model. A good model is 
indispensable for characteristics that can fully re present the data. Data dimension conversion takes 
the historical sensor data into account, because th e data has the characteristics of a time series. The 
last step of data pre-processing is the transformati on of the maximum life value. The engine with an 
RUL greater than 130 cycles is set to 130 cycles. When using the RUL prediction, attention focuses on 
the RUL value when it is about to break, and the si tuation where the RUL value is still very large is 
less important. Then the GRU is combined with  the back-propagation algorithm to learn the 
parameters. Because there are a large number of pa rameters to learn, the experiment uses a GPU 
graphics card in parallel operation and increase  the process speed. At the same time, the relu 
activation function and Nadam optimizer are used to make the process of learning parameters 
converge more quickly. Combined with the be st combination of parameters run under the 
experimental design, the prediction of the RUL has better results. 
The contribution of this study is that it applies the optimized version of LSTM, the GRU. GRU 
can effectively capture the characteri stics of the sensor data, and extract the characteristics of the data 
by AE before the RUL model prediction. The GRU model has many fewer parameters than LSTM but 
Figure 12. Model testing results comparison (Engine 3).
5. Conclusions
This study proposes the AE-GRU model for RUL prediction. First, pre-processing was applied to
the sensor data collected by di erent sensors. Because the scales of di erent sensors are not the same,
we standardize the sensor data so that the sensor data can be rearranged to the same scale standard
while retaining the characteristics of the data time series. Next, the RUL is deﬁned. The purpose
of deﬁning the RUL is to allow the user to accurately predict the life value of equipment that the
engine can work. Feature extraction ﬁnds the characteristics of the sensor data by deep learning.
The characteristics will directly a ect the predictive ability of the model. A good model is indispensable
for characteristics that can fully represent the data. Data dimension conversion takes the historical
sensor data into account, because the data has the characteristics of a time series. The last step of data
pre-processing is the transformation of the maximum life value. The engine with an RUL greater than
130 cycles is set to 130 cycles. When using the RUL prediction, attention focuses on the RUL value
when it is about to break, and the situation where the RUL value is still very large is less important.
Then the GRU is combined with the back-propagation algorithm to learn the parameters. Because
there are a large number of parameters to learn, the experiment uses a GPU graphics card in parallel
operation and increase the process speed. At the same time, the relu activation function and Nadam
optimizer are used to make the process of learning parameters converge more quickly. Combined with
the best combination of parameters run under the experimental design, the prediction of the RUL has
better results.
The contribution of this study is that it applies the optimized version of LSTM, the GRU. GRU can
eectively capture the characteristics of the sensor data, and extract the characteristics of the data by
AE before the RUL model prediction. The GRU model has many fewer parameters than LSTM but still

==== Page 16 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 16 of 18
retains the advantages of LSTM. The AE-GRU model proposed in this study has a shorter training
time, and also takes advantage of the features extracted by AE. The convergence speed of the model is
much faster. The validity of the model is evaluated and veriﬁed through the 5-fold cross-validation.
The results of the root mean square error are better than other deep learning methods, and the research
model can ﬁnd the engine that is about to fail early and in time to maintain the equipment, reducing
unnecessary costs.
The AE-GRU model proposed in this study has good accuracy in the prediction of RUL. With the
improvement of process technology, the cost of equipment will become higher and higher. Therefore,
more complex models may be needed in future research, such as a bi-directional recurrent network.
In this study, only a directional recurrent network is considered. In some cases, the output at the
current moment is not only related to the previous state, but also closely related to the state after it.
The pre-processing method in this study extracts features from the original data. Although the
features can e ectively represent the data set, they may contain a little noise. In the future, the pre-
processing method might also employ an advanced version of AE, such as denoising AE (DAE).
The combination of these two methods can further improve the prediction of RUL.
If the algorithm can be e ectively implemented, predictive maintenance can be widely used in many
applications, providing e ective information for early maintenance of machinery, and self-correcting
parameters can improve the yield to achieve the target of smart factories.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.-W.L. and C.-Y.H.; methodology, C.-Y.H.; software, K.-C.H.;
validation, Y.-W.L. and K.-C.H.; formal analysis, Y.-W.L. and K.-C.H.; investigation, Y.-W.L. and K.-C.H.; resources,
C.-Y.H.; data curation, K.-C.H.; writing—original draft preparation, Y.-W.L.; writing—review and editing, C.-Y.H.;
visualization, Y.-W.L.; supervision, C.-Y.H.; project administration, C.-Y.H.; funding acquisition, C.-Y.H. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research is supported by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 107-2221-E-027-127-
MY2; MOST108-2745-8-027-003).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Wang, S.; Wan, J.; Li, D.; Zhang, C. Implementing Smart Factory of Industrie 4.0: An Outlook. Int. J. Distrib.
Sens. Netw. 2016 ,12, 3159805. [CrossRef]
2. Chien, C.-F.; Hsu, C.-Y.; Chen, P .-N. Semiconductor Fault Detection and Classiﬁcation for Yield Enhancement
and Manufacturing Intelligence. Flex. Serv. Manuf. J. 2013 ,25, 367–388. [CrossRef]
3. Hsu, C.-Y.; Liu, W.-C. Multiple Time-Series Convolutional Neural Network for Fault Detection and Diagnosis
and Empirical Study in Semiconductor Manufacturing. J. Intell. Manuf. 2020 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
4. Fan, S.-K.S.; Hsu, C.-Y.; Tsai, D.-M.; He, F.; Cheng, C.-C. Data-Driven Approach for Fault Detection and
Diagnostic in Semiconductor Manufacturing. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2020 , 1–12. [CrossRef]
5. Shrouf, F.; Ordieres, J.; Miragliotta, G. Smart factories in Industry 4.0: A review of the concept and of energy
management approached in production based on the Internet of Things paradigm. In Proceedings of the
2014 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, Selangor,
Malaysia, 9–12 December 2014; pp. 697–701.
6. Kothamasu, R.; Huang, S.H.; VerDuin, W.H. System health monitoring and prognostics—A review of current
paradigms and practices. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2006 ,28, 1012–1024. [CrossRef]
7. Peng, Y.; Dong, M.; Zuo, M.J. Current status of machine prognostics in condition-based maintenance:
A review. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2010 ,50, 297–313. [CrossRef]
8. Soh, S.S.; Radzi, N.H.; Haron, H. Review on scheduling techniques of preventive maintenance activities
of railway. In Proceedings of the 2012 Fourth International Conference on Computational Intelligence,
Modelling and Simulation, Kuantan, Malaysia, 25–27 September 2012; pp. 310–315.
9. Heimes, F.O. Recurrent neural networks for remaining useful life estimation. In Proceedings of the 2008
International Conference on Prognostics and Health Management, Denver, CO, USA, 6–9 October 2008;
pp. 1–6.

==== Page 17 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 17 of 18
10. Li, Y.; Shi, J.; Gong, W.; Liu, X. A data-driven prognostics approach for RUL based on principle component
and instance learning. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Prognostics and Health
Management (ICPHM), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 20–22 June 2016; pp. 1–7.
11. Murphy, K.P . Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective ; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2012.
12. Cortes, C.; Vapnik, V . Support-Vector Networks. Mach. Learn. 1995 ,20, 273–297. [CrossRef]
13. Breiman, L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 2001 ,45, 5–32. [CrossRef]
14. Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA,
13–17 August 2016; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
15. Han, Z.; Zhao, J.; Leung, H.; Ma, K.F.; Wang, W. A review of deep learning models for time series prediction.
IEEE Sens. J. 2019 . [CrossRef]
16. Bengio, Y.; Courville, A.; Vincent, P . Representation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2013 ,35, 1798–1828. [CrossRef]
17. Schmidhuber, J. Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview. Neural Netw. 2015 ,61, 85–117. [CrossRef]
18. LeCun, Y.; Bengio, Y.; Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 2015 ,521, 436–444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Makridakis, S.; Spiliotis, E.; Assimakopoulos, V . Statistical and Machine Learning Forecasting Methods:
Concerns and Ways Forward. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13, e0194889. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Alfred, R.; Obit, J.H.; Ahmad Hijazi, M.H.; Ag Ibrahim, A.A. A performance comparison of statistical and
machine learning techniques in learning time series data. Adv. Sci. Lett. 2015 ,21, 3037–3041.
21. Hinton, G.E.; Salakhutdinov, R.R. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science 2006 ,
313, 504–507. [CrossRef]
22. Lin, P .; Tao, J. A Novel Bearing Health Indicator Construction Method Based on Ensemble Stacked
Autoencoder. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Prognostics and Health
Management (ICPHM), San Francisco, CA, USA, 17–20 June 2019; pp. 1–9.
23. Yin, C.; Zhang, S.; Wang, J.; Xiong, N.N. Anomaly Detection Based on Convolutional Recurrent Autoencoder
for IoT Time Series. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst 2020 , 1–11. [CrossRef]
24. Hochreiter, S.; Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 1997 ,9, 1735–1780. [CrossRef]
25. Zhang, Y.; Xiong, R.; He, H.; Liu, Z. A LSTM-RNN method for the lithuim-ion battery remaining useful
life prediction. In Proceedings of the 2017 Prognostics and System Health Management Conference
(PHM-Harbin), Harbin, China, 9–12 July 2017; pp. 1–4.
26. Mathew, V .; Toby, T.; Singh, V .; Rao, B.M.; Kumar, M.G. Prediction of Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL)
of turbofan engine using machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Circuits and Systems (ICCS), Batumi, Georgia, 5–8 December 2017; pp. 306–311.
27. Zheng, S.; Ristovski, K.; Farahat, A.; Gupta, C. Long short-term memory network for remaining useful life
estimation. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE international conference on prognostics and health management
(ICPHM), Dallas, TX, USA, 19–21 June 2017; pp. 88–95.
28. Chen, J.; Jing, H.; Chang, Y.; Liu, Q. Gated recurrent unit based recurrent neural network for remaining useful
life prediction of nonlinear deterioration process. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Safe. 2019 ,185, 372–382. [CrossRef]
29. Cho, K.; Van Merriënboer, B.; Gulcehre, C.; Bahdanau, D.; Bougares, F.; Schwenk, H.; Bengio, Y. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. arXiv 2014 ,
arXiv:1406.1078.
30. Chung, J.; Gulcehre, C.; Cho, K.; Bengio, Y. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on
sequence modeling. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1412.3555.
31. Chen, Z.; Liu, Y.; Liu, S. Mechanical state prediction based on LSTM neural netwok. In Proceedings of the
2017 36th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Dalian, China, 26–28 July 2017; pp. 3876–3881.
32. Zheng, J.; Xu, C.; Zhang, Z.; Li, X. Electric load forecasting in smart grids using long-short-term-memory
based recurrent neural network. In Proceedings of the 2017 51st Annual Conference on Information Sciences
and Systems (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, 22–24 March 2017; pp. 1–6.
33. ElSaid, A.; Wild, B.; Higgins, J.; Desell, T. Using LSTM recurrent neural networks to predict excess vibration
events in aircraft engines. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 12th International Conference on e-Science,
Baltimore, MD, USA, 23–27 October 2016; pp. 260–269.

==== Page 18 ====
Processes 2020 ,8, 1155 18 of 18
34. Cenggoro, T.W.; Siahaan, I. Dynamic bandwidth management based on tra c prediction using Deep Long
Short Term Memory. In Proceedings of the 2016 2nd International Conference on Science in Information
Technology (ICSITech), Balikpapan, Indonesia, 26–27 October 2016; pp. 318–323.
35. Bao, W.; Yue, J.; Rao, Y. A deep learning framework for ﬁnancial time series using stacked autoencoders and
long-short term memory. PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0180944. [CrossRef]
36. Zhang, Q.; Wang, H.; Dong, J.; Zhong, G.; Sun, X.J.I.G.; Letters, R.S. Prediction of sea surface temperature
using long short-term memory. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2017 ,14, 1745–1749. [CrossRef]
37. How, D.N.T.; Sahari, K.S.M.; Yuhuang, H.; Kiong, L.C. Multiple sequence behavior recognition on humanoid
robot using long short-term memory (LSTM). In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE international symposium
on robotics and manufacturing automation (ROMA), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 15–16 December 2014;
pp. 109–114.
38. Truong, A.M.; Yoshitaka, A. Structured LSTM for human-object interaction detection and anticipation.
In Proceedings of the 2017 14th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based
Surveillance (AVSS), Lecce, Italy, 29 August–1 September 2017; pp. 1–6.
39. Kuan, L.; Yan, Z.; Xin, W.; Yan, C.; Xiangkun, P .; Wenxue, S.; Zhe, J.; Yong, Z.; Nan, X.; Xin, Z. Short-term
electricity load forecasting method based on multilayered self-normalizing GRU network. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System Integration (EI2), Beijing, China,
26–28 November 2017; pp. 1–5.
40. Zhang, D.; Kabuka, M.R. Combining weather condition data to predict tra c ﬂow: A GRU-based deep
learning approach. IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 2018 ,12, 578–585. [CrossRef]
41. Sharma, S. Activation functions in neural networks. Int. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. Technol. 2020 ,4, 310–316.
[CrossRef]
42. Kingma, D.P .; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1412.6980.
43. Dozat, T. Incorporating nesterov momentum into adam. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Juan, Puerto Rico, 2–4 May 2016; pp. 1–4.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

