==== Page 1 ====
An Introduction to Key Technology in Artificial Intelligence and big
Data Driven e-Learning and e-Education
Peng Gao1,2,3&Jingyi Li1,2,3&Shuai Liu1,2,3
#The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021
1 Editorial
Age of artificial intelligence and big data comes rapidly with
fast increment of computer and communication technology,
and the new technology improvements bring new educational
age [ 1]. Mobile education and fragmentation of education
become new trends. Moreover, artificial intelligence and mo-
bile network technology in education is also becoming a hot
research domain [ 2]. Long distance education is changing the
traditional education and has much benefit. However, here are
many remaining scientific and engineering problems in it. The
problem in education based information technology with mo-
bile networks is a key issue to solve. Besides, the new gener-
ation of mobile networks and IT in education is also an im-
portant research domain now. Meanwhile, the engineering
application of AI and big data driven long distance learning
and education exist lots of problems [ 3,4]. All these need
scholars to put much energy into this area.
In this way, this issue “K e yT e c h n o l o g yi nA Ia n dB i gD a t a
Driven Long-Distance Learning and Education ”aims to pro-
vide an opportunity for educators and scholars to publish their
gifted theoretical and technological studies in this area, as well
as the novel real applications of industrial researchers within
this domain.
This issue received 19 submissions and accepted 8 out of
them with at least 2 rounds of strict reviews, with acceptance
ratio 42.11%. This editorial is divided into two sections,
which aims to the intelligent algorithms for online educationin the first section, as well as models of intelligent learning in
the second section.
2 Intelligent algorithms for online education
The first section of this issue includes four papers, which
focuses on the intelligent algorithms for online education, in-
cluding fuzzy system, man-machine cooperation, index up-
date, and edge computing [ 5–8].
The multi-dimensional charact eristics of public opinion in
online education lead to the difficulty of data cross-dimensional
mining. To solve this problem, the first article, “Cross-
Dimension Mining Model of Public Opinion Data in Online
Education based on Fuzzy Association Rules ”, authored by
Jerry Chun-Wei Lin from the Department of Computer
Science, Electrical Engineering and Mathematical Sciences,
Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Norway, de-
signs a cross-dimensional data mining model of public opinion in
online education based on fuzzy association rules. Their method
uses Yaahp software to calculate the influence factor weight of
public opinion in online education, and clarifies the relationship
between the dimensions of various public opinion data. By in-
troducing the fuzzy set theory into the database, the data is
preprocessed with feature selectio n and text vectorization. The
simulation results show that the model has the advantages of
wide range, fast speed, and high accuracy, and can provide data
support for online education reform.
The rapid development of information technology accelerates
the modernization of distance education. In order to realize the
unified organization and management of learning resources as
well as improve the utilization rate of resources, the second arti-
cle,“The Design of Mobile Distance Online Education Resource
Sharing from the Perspective of Man-Machine Cooperation ”,
authored by Norbert Herencsar from the Department of
Telecommunications, Brno University of Technology,
Czech Republic, proposes the design of a mobile online educa-
tion resource sharing system from the perspective of man-
machine cooperation. This method analyzes the main body and*Shuai Liu
liushuai@hunnu.edu.cn
1College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, China
2Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and
Language Information Processing, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha, China
3Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy, Changsha, Chinahttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-021-01777-7
Published online: 30 April 2021Mobile Networks and Applications (2021) 26:2123–2126

==== Page 2 ====
scope of collaboration, constructs a resource sharing model with
large-scale man-machine cooperation as the main model. The
role access control mechanism is used to manage user rights,and the settlement incentive algorithm is introduced to protect
the intellectual property rights o f distance education resources.
The experimental results show that this system promotes the
development of distance education information, improves the
efficiency of resource sharing, and enhances the enthusiasm of
users to contribute onlin e educational resources.
When using current index update methods of educational
resources, there is no analysis o f the hierarchical association
structure between educational resources, which bring some prob-lems such as too long index construction time, high query time
and low query accuracy. Ther efore, the third article, “Research
on Adaptive Updating Method of Education Resource Index
based on Mobile Computing ”,a u t h o r e db yA r u nK u m a r
Sangaiah from the School of Computing Science andEngineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, India, introduces
mobile computing to study the a daptive updating method of
education resource index. Their method analyzes the structureof the index system of educational resources. The initial queryis expanded by selecting extension words by local co-occurrence
method, and the weight of the extended query is allocated by
genetic algorithm to realize the adaptive updating of the index of
educational resources. The experimental results show that the
average index redundancy rate is only 0.22%, indicating thatthe resource index update performance of the proposed method
is suited for online education application.
In response to the demand for high-quality electronic infor-
mation talents in the mobile network industry, in the situation ofartificial intelligence (AI) to promote technological innovation,
the forth article, “Application and Exploration of Artificial
Intelligence and Edge Computing in Long-distance Educationon Mobile Network ”, authored by Yun Lin from the College
of Information and Communication Engineering, Harbin
Engineering University, China, conducts an overall design in
the target system, curriculum syst em, teaching platform, teaching
mode and teaching case. The practice education mode of teach-
ing, engineering, innovation, an d enterprise, which aims to im-
prove students ’ability to solve complex engineering problems, is
constructed. The modal breaks geographical boundaries betweenschools and enterprises to build the through-through experimen-
tal teaching course system based on artificial intelligence and
edge computing. At the same time, the hardware portability of
the edge computing platform provides good conditions for long-
distance education. This method is a beneficial attempt to online
education.
3 Models of intelligent learning
The second section of this issue includes four papers, whichfocuses on the models of inte lligent learning, includingservice and movie recommendation, evaluation of teaching
quality, and semantic classification [ 9–12].
In view of the problem that the traditional learning service
recommendation does not fully consider the distinct differencesbetween individuals, it is easy to lead to the contradiction be-
tween unchanging learning resources and learners ’personalized
learning requirements that are constantly improving. In this way,
the fifth article, “Improvement of Adaptive Learning Service
Recommendation Algorithm based on Big Data” , authored by
Marcin Wo źniak from Faculty of Applied Mathematics, Silesian
University of Technology, Poland, proposes an improved adap-
tive learning service recommen dation algorithm based on big
data. Their method builds a student demand model by consider-
ing the individual differences, making students as the center, and
collecting students ’personalized learning demand. Then, with
data mining on clustering recommendation service resources in
learning, an adaptive recommendation model is constructed ac-
c o r d i n gt os t u d e n t s ’individual needs. Experimental results show
that the proposed recommendation algorithm has high recom-
mendation accuracy, coverage rate and recall rate, which is of
great significance in the actual learning service recommendation.
In order to enhance the hybrid teaching of physical education
online and offline, a quality evaluation method for online andoffline hybrid teaching based on mobile edge computing is pro-
p o s e di nt h es i x t ha r t i c l e ,“ Evaluation Method of Online and
Offline Hybrid Teaching Quali ty of Physical Education based
on Mobile Edge Computing ”,a u t h o r e db yP i n gY uf r o mt h e
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University,China. Through the evaluation target, index, weight of index andevaluation standard, their method constructs a quality evaluation
index system of hybrid physical education online and offline.
Index items are simplified by analyzing factor and cluster onthe importance evaluation grade data of each index, and the
quality evaluation of hybrid physical education is realized effec-
tively by using the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model. Thesimulation results show that the proposed method can effectively
reduce the cost and error of quality evaluation for online-offline
hybrid teaching, improve the evaluation efficiency, and enhancethe quality of online and offline hybrid teaching.
With rich resources, movies have been applied as instruc-
tional media in the domain of education, such as fields ofSecond/Foreign Language Learning, Communication, and
Media Art. Factorization machine (FM) can effectively simu-
late common matrix factorization models by changing theform of real-value vector, which can be utilized in movies
recommendation under the context of education. In this way,
the seventh article, “Movie Recommendation System for
Educational Purposes Based on Field-aware Factorization
Machine ”, authored by Suxia Zhu from the Research Center
of Information Security and Intelligent Technology, Harbin
University of Science and Technology, China, applies the
field-aware factorization machine (FFM) to solve movie rat-
ing prediction and help users to select appropriate movies for2124 Mobile Netw Appl (2021) 26:2123–2126

==== Page 3 ====
learning purposes. In order to further enhance the availability
of the model, clustering algorithm is also integrated in FFM
for adding new fields. The experimental results demonstratethe effectiveness of the proposed methods in reducing the
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE).
Scholarly articles are a great s ource of knowledge. Learning
from them like E-learning requires automatic approaches to buildconcept-maps, learning paths, etc., as these sources are monoton-
ically increasing and are big too. These sources have multi-do-main, variety, huge volumes, which are, in fact, Big Data ’sc h a r -
acteristics. Thus data from dif ferent domains have to be handled
together, especially in the E-lea rning systems. Therefore, the
eighth article, “Fuzzy Semantic Classification of Multi-Domain
E-Learning concept ”, authored by Omar Almutiry from the
College of Applied Computer Science, King Saud University(Almuzahmiyah Campus), Saudi Arabia, presents a new ap-
proach for concept extraction and semantically clustering and
classification of these e-learning concepts using fuzzy member-ship values. A test on BBC datasets with 100 documents and 650
documents is achieved for testing their fuzzy-based semantic
system by extending the maximum accuracy up to current 94%to 96% for all data sets. In clustering, by using K-Means, their
method gets precision up to 93%. The system can be used to
generate adaptive learning paths, concept map extraction, and big
data based e-learning portals.
Acknowledgements The guest editors are thankful to our reviewers for
their effort in reviewing the manuscripts. We also thank the Edit-in-Chief,
Dr. Imrich Chlamtac for his supportive guidance during the entire pro-cess. This issue was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of
Hunan Province with No.2020JJ4434, Key Scientific Research Projects
of Department of Education of Hunan Province with No.19A312; HunanProvincial Science & Technology Project Foundation (2018TP1018,2018RS3065), Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program of
Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy, Educational Reform
Project of Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy.
References
1. Liu S, Wang S, Liu X, Lin CT, Lv Z (2020) Fuzzy detection aided
real-time and robust visual tracking under complex environments.IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst:1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2020.
3006520
2. Liu S, Guo C, Fadi A et al (2020) Reliability of response region: a
novel mechanism in visual tracking by edge computing for IIoT
environments. Mech Syst Signal Process 138:106537
3. Ke Q, Zhang J, Wozniak M, Wei W (2019) The phase and shift-
invariant feature by adaptive independent subspace analysis for
cortical complex cells. Information Technology And Control 48:58–70
4. Lin Y, Li Y, Yin X, Dou Z (2018) Multisensor fault diagnosis
modeling based on the evidence theory. IEEE Trans Reliab 67(2):
513–5215. Li-Xuan L, Huo Y, Lin JC (2021) Cross-Dimension Mining Model
of Public Opinion Data in Online Education based on Fuzzy
Association Rules. Mobile Networks and Applications
6. Li C, Zhao Q, Herencsar N, et al. The Design of Mobile Distance
Online Education Resource Sharing from the Perspective of Man-Machine Cooperation
7. Liu J, Sangaiah AK (2021) Research on Adaptive Updating
Method of Education Resource Index based on MobileComputing. Mobile Networks and Applications
8. Hou C, Hua L, Lin Y, et al (2021) Application and Exploration of
Artificial Intelligence and Edge Computing in Long-distanceEducation on Mobile Network. Mobile Networks and Applications
9. Yang Y, Zhong Y, Wo źniak M (2021) Improvement of Adaptive
Learning Service Recommendation Algorithm based on Big Data.Mobile Networks and Applications
10. Bao L, Yu P (2021) Evaluation Method of Online and Offline
Hybrid Teaching Quality of Physical Education based on MobileEdge Computing. Mobile Networks and Applications
11. Lang F, Liang L, Huang K, et al (2021) Movie Recommendation
System for Educational Pur poses Based on Field-aware
Factorization Machine. Mobile Networks and Applications
12. Ahmed R, Ahmad T, Almutairi FM, et al (2021) Fuzzy semantic
classification of multi-domain E-learning concept. MobileNetworks and Applications
Publisher ’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Peng Gao is now a master under
postgraduate in College ofInformation Science andTechnology, Hunan Normal
University. His research interests
include computer vision, targettracking, artificial intelligence ap-plication.
Jingyi Li is now a master under
postgraduate in College ofInformation Science andTechnology, Hunan NormalUniversity. Her research interests
include computer vision, target
tracking, artificial intelligence ap-plication.2125 Mobile Netw Appl (2021) 26:2123–2126

==== Page 4 ====
Dr. Shuai Liu received his BS, MS
and PhD e from Jilin University in
2002, 2004, and 2011. He used towork as a full professor in College
of Computer Science, Inner
Mongolia University. Now he actsas a full professor in College of
Information Science and
Technology, and Vice director ofHunan Provincial Key Laboratoryof Intelligent Computing and
Language Information Processing,
Hunan Normal University. He isnow a senior member of ChinaComputer Federation. His research
area contains big data processing, computer vision, and informationprocessing. He has published more than 60 papers, with more than 1900
citations. He serves editor role for many respected journals.
2126 Mobile Netw Appl (2021) 26:2123–2126

