==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1904.03240v2  [cs.CL]  19 Jun 2019An Unsupervised Autoregressive Model for Speech Represent ation Learning
Yu-An Chung, Wei-Ning Hsu, Hao Tang, James Glass
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{andyyuan,wnhsu,haotang,glass }@mit.edu
Abstract
This paper proposes a novel unsupervised autoregressive ne ural
model for learning generic speech representations. In cont rast
to other speech representation learning methods that aim to re-
move noise or speaker variabilities, ours is designed to pre serve
information for a wide range of downstream tasks. In addi-
tion, the proposed model does not require any phonetic or wor d
boundary labels, allowing the model to beneﬁt from large qua n-
tities of unlabeled data. Speech representations learned b y our
model signiﬁcantly improve performance on both phone clas-
siﬁcation and speaker veriﬁcation over the surface feature s and
other supervised and unsupervised approaches. Further ana lysis
shows that different levels of speech information are captu red
by our model at different layers. In particular, the lower la y-
ers tend to be more discriminative for speakers, while the up per
layers provide more phonetic content.
Index Terms : speech representation learning, unsupervised
learning
1. Introduction
Speech signals encompass a rich set of acoustic and linguis-
tic properties, ranging from the individual lexical units, such
as phonemes and words, to the characteristics of the speaker s,
their intent, or even their mental status. However, these hi gh-
level properties of speech are poorly captured by the surfac e
features, such as the amplitudes of a wave signal, log Mel spe c-
trograms, or Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients. The goal o f
speech representation learning is to ﬁnd a transformation f rom
the surface features that makes high-level properties of sp eech
more accessible to downstream tasks.
In this work, we propose an autoregressive model for learn-
ing speech representations that can be transferred to diffe rent
tasks across different datasets. Our model is able to retain much
information from the surface features, allowing a wide rang e of
tasks across different datasets to beneﬁt from the learned r epre-
sentations, while also being unsupervised and able to lever age
large quantities of unlabeled data. As a ﬁrst step, we focus o n
learning general speech representations from log Mel spect ro-
grams, but it is straightforward to extend our approach to th e
amplitudes of the wave signals.
We use linear separability (or separability with a shallow
network) to deﬁne the accessibility of information for the d own-
stream tasks. Others [1] have argued that there are many nui-
sance factors that might affect the performance of linear cl assi-
ﬁers, and have proposed to use a contrastive loss for evaluat ion.
However, there has been evidence [2] and theories [3] suppor t-
ing the idea that low contrastive loss implies the existence of a
linear classiﬁer with low error. In other words, we aim to lea rn
speech representations that allow linear classiﬁers to per form
well on many downstream tasks.When the downstream tasks are known, supervised learn-
ing, speciﬁcally multitask learning [4], is the most succes sful
approach for learning specialized representations of thos e par-
ticular tasks. In general, however, when a transformation i s
trained against a certain set of tasks, information indepen dent
of the tasks (such as noise or speaker variability, dependin g on
the tasks) tends to be discarded after training [5]. We risk d is-
carding useful information for other unseen tasks when lear ning
representations in a supervised fashion. Instead of having tar-
geted tasks in advance, we focus on learning representation s
for a wide range of, potentially unknown, tasks. Due to the
required generality, it is necessary to retain in the repres enta-
tions as much information about the original signal as possi ble.
Two commonly used loss functions, i.e., the autoencoding an d
autoregressive loss functions, satisfy this criterion. Ho wever,
when no additional constraints are imposed, there is a trivi al
solution, the identity mapping, for the autoencoding loss f unc-
tion. This makes the autoregressive loss more appealing, be -
cause no additional techniques, such as denoising [6], are r e-
quired to avoid the trivial solution as for the autoencoding loss.
The autoregressive approach also does not require other typ es of
linguistic constraints, such as phonetic or word boundarie s [7].
The autoregressive loss belongs to a large family of self-
supervised loss functions [8, 9, 10]. There also exists some
work on unsupervised speech representation learning [11, 1 2,
13, 14, 15, 16]. However, none of the studies are able to show
the transferability of the learned representations across differ-
ent datasets. Our work is largely motivated by the recent suc -
cess in transfer learning from large-scale pre-trained lan guage
models [17, 18, 19, 20], and we aim to learn general speech
representations that can be transferred to different tasks across
different datasets.
2. Models
We propose a novel autoregressive architecture, which we
call Autoregressive Predictive Coding (APC), for unsuperv ised
speech representation learning. Predictive coding on wave sam-
ples [21] has a long and inﬂuential history in speech process ing,
and its recent neural version [22] and variants, such as Con-
trastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [23], have also been used t o
learn speech representation [11]. In contrast to these stud ies,
our work mainly focus on predicting the spectrum of a future
frame rather than a wave sample. We will brieﬂy review CPC
here and compare extensively with it in Section 3.
2.1. Autoregressive Predictive Coding
The methodology of the proposed APC model is largely in-
spired by language models (LMs) for text, which are typ-
ically a probability distribution over sequences of Nto-
kens(t1,t2,...,tN). Given such a sequence, an LM assigns a

==== Page 2 ====
probability P(t1,t2,...,tN)to the whole sequence by modeling
the probability of token tkgiven the history (t1,t2,...,tk−1):
P(t1,t2,...,tN) =N/productdisplay
k=1P(tk|t1,t2,...,tk−1). (1)
It is trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood:
N/summationdisplay
k=1−logP(t1,t2,...,tk−1;θt,θrnn,θs), (2)
where the parameters to be optimized are θt,θrnn, andθs.θtis
a look-up table that maps each token into a vector of ﬁxed di-
mensionality. θrnnis a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) used
to summarize the sequence history up to the current time step .
θsis a Softmax layer appended at the output of each RNN time
step for estimating probability distribution over the toke ns. Lan-
guage modeling is a general task that requires the understan ding
of many aspects in language in order to perform well.
Following most of the neural LMs in the literature, we use
an RNN [24] for modeling the temporal information within an
acoustic sequence. For speech data, each token tkcorresponds
to a frame rather than a word or character token, hence we do
not need the look-up table θtas we do in LMs and directly feed
each frame into the RNN θrnn. Since there does not exist a ﬁnite
set of target tokens (such as the vocabulary set as in text), w e
choose to replace the Softmax layer with a regression layer θr.
In other words, the RNN output at each time step attempts to
directly ﬁt the target frame with a linear mapping. The learn able
parameters in APCs are θrnnandθr.
Given the history (t1,t2,...,tk−1), an LM aims to max-
imize the probability of the next token to be the tkin the
data. However, for APCs, exploiting the local smoothness of
the speech signal might be sufﬁcient to predict the next fram e.
To encourage APCs to infer more global structures rather tha n
the local information in the signals, we ask the model to pre-
dict a frame nsteps ahead of the current one. In other words,
given an utterance represented as a sequence of acoustic fea ture
vectors(x1,x2,...,xT), the RNN processes each sequence el-
ementxtone at a time and outputs a prediction yt, wherext
andythave the same dimensionality. The model is optimized
by minimizing the L1 loss (as is done when predicting spec-
tral frames in some speech synthesis models [25, 26].) be-
tween the input sequence (x1,x2,...,xT)and the predicted se-
quence(y1,y2,...,yT):
T−n/summationdisplay
i=1|xi+n−yi|. (3)
2.2. Contrastive Predictive Coding
Instead of learning to predict future frames like APCs, Con-
trastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [23] aims to learn represe n-
tations that separates the target future frame xi+nand ran-
domly sampled negative frames {˜x}, given a context hi=
(x1,x2,...,xi).
Speciﬁcally, CPC consists of three modules: a frame en-
coderEfrm, a uni-directional RNN Ectx, and a scoring func-
tionf. A sequence of frames is ﬁrst encoded to a sequence
of frame representations zi=Efrm(xi)using the frame en-
coder. The encoded sequence is then passed to the recurrent
context encoder to obtain a sequence of context representa-
tions(c1,c2,...,cT), whereciis a ﬁxed-dimensional represen-
tation computed from Ectx(z1,z2,...,zi). The scoring functionassigns a positive scalar to a pair of frame and context, form u-
lated asf(x,h) = exp/parenleftbig
zTWc/parenrightbig
, wherezis the frame repre-
sentation of x, andcis the context representation of h.
Suppose the target frame is nsteps away. Given a con-
texthi, the target future frame xi+n, and a collection of neg-
ative frames ˜X, CPC jointly optimizes the three modules by
minimizing a contrastive loss:
Ln(hi,xi+n,˜X) = logf(xi+n,hi)/summationtext
x∈˜X∪{xi+n}f(x,hi).(4)
As shown in [23], minimizing this loss will result in f(x,h)es-
timating the density ratio pn(x|h)/q(x), wherepndenotes the
conditional distribution of xatnsteps ahead of the given con-
texth, andqis the proposal distribution where negative samples
are drawn from. In other words, the choice of the number of
steps ahead and the proposal distribution would both affect the
estimated target density ratio, and therefore would change what
is learned in the representations zandc. For example, using
a proposal distribution that draws samples from the same se-
quence as the target frame would encourage the model to learn
the phonetic content but not the speaker information, becau se
the latter do not help distinguishing a target frame from neg a-
tive ones. We will study such differences in our experiments .
Both CPC and the proposed APCs consider the sequen-
tial structures of speech, and predict information about fu ture
frames. However, the two models differ signiﬁcantly in the t ype
of information the corresponding loss function enforces th em to
capture. While CPC representations are encouraged to focus on
information that is most discriminative between the target and
negative frames, APCs have to encode information sufﬁcient
for predicting the target frame, and are allowed to only disc ard
information that is common across the train dataset.
3. Experiments
In this section, we empirically demonstrate the effectiven ess
of the learned representations from the proposed APC model.
Since phone and speaker information are two of the most impor -
tant characteristics that differentiate one speech uttera nce from
another, we choose to use phone classiﬁcation and speaker ve r-
iﬁcation to examine how much phone and speaker information
are captured by the representations.
3.1. Datasets
We use the LibriSpeech corpus [27] for training the feature e x-
tractors (all APC and CPC models). Speciﬁcally, the 360-hou r
subset, which contains 921 speakers in total, is used. We use
80-dimensional log Mel spectrograms (normalized to zero me an
and unit variance per speaker) as input features.
An ideal feature extractor should extract representations
that generalize to datasets of different domains. To examin e the
robustness to shift in domains, rather than on the LibriSpee ch
test set, we conduct phone classiﬁcation and speaker veriﬁc a-
tion on the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) [28] and TIMIT cor-
pora. For phone classiﬁcation, we follow the standard split of
WSJ, use 90% of si284 for training, use the rest of the 10%
for development, and report numbers on dev93 . The phone
alignments are generated with a speaker adapted GMM-HMM
model. For speaker veriﬁcation, we follow the standard spli t of
TIMIT, use the training set for training the universal backg round
model, the i-vector extractor [29], a linear discriminant a naly-
sis (LDA) model. We follow the standard practice of speaker
veriﬁcation and only consider female-female and male-male

==== Page 3 ====
pairs in the 50-speaker development set. We note that speake r
veriﬁcation on TIMIT is not common, and we mainly use it to
check if the representations contain speaker information.
3.2. Implementations
We model our APCs with a multi-layer unidirectional
LSTM [30] network with residual connections [31] between
two consecutive layers as is done in [32], and the dimensiona lity
of each layer is 512. For CPC, we follow the implementation fo r
the context encoder and the scoring function in [23], but cha nge
the acoustic feature xfrom a window of 400 samples (25ms) to
a 80-dimensional vector of Mel spectra computed from that se g-
ment, and replace the 5-layer strided Convolutional Neural Net-
work with a 3-layer, 512-dim fully-connected neural networ k
with ReLU activations for the frame encoder. Such modiﬁca-
tion aims for a fairer comparison between APC and CPC mod-
els in terms of their training objectives, while eliminatin g the
source of variation due to the choice of acoustic features. A ll
APC and CPC models (except cpc-ctx-exhaust , which we
will describe more below) are trained for 100 epochs using th e
Adam optimizer [33] with a batch size of 32 and an initial lear n-
ing rate of 10−3.
Note that the proposed approach is unsupervised, and we do
not and should not tune hyperparameters according to the dow n-
stream tasks. The goal of hyperparameter tuning is to show ho w
the hyperparameters affect what is learned in the speech rep re-
sentations. Recall that we deﬁne the accessibility of categ orical
information as the linear separability among classes. For p hone
classiﬁcation, we simply use a linear classiﬁer to predict t he
phoneme classes for each frame. The frame error rates indica te
how much phonetic content is contained in the speech repre-
sentations. Similarly, for speaker veriﬁcation, we train a n LDA
model on top of the speech representations.
3.3. Phone Classiﬁcation
Table 1 compares APCs with a series of CPC models that use
different training variants. Phone error rates (PER) are re ported,
and each of the ﬁrst four rows corresponds to a CPC variant.
We usecpc-n9all to denote a CPC model that draws 9 neg-
ative samples from utterances within the same minibatch, an d
cpc-n9same to denote a CPC model that draws 9 negative
samples from the same utterance. For both cpc-n9all and
cpc-n9same , we take the outputs of the frame encoder (i.e.,
the outputs of the 3-layer fully-connected neural networks ) as
the extracted features and feed them to the linear classiﬁer .
The training approach of cpc-ctx-n9same is the same as
cpc-n9same , except that the RNN outputs are taken as the ex-
tracted features instead of the frame encoder outputs. We us e
ctx, short for context, to indicate such difference. The ﬁnal
CPC variant we try is cpc-ctx-exhaust , which follows the
exact same training procedure in [23] that combines contras tive
losses for all steps k≤nwith equal weights for training (i.e.,/summationtextn
k=1Ln), uses all non-target samples in a minibatch as nega-
tive samples, and are trained with mini-batches of 8 utteran ces
that are randomly chuncked to 128 frames each. For APCs, the
outputs of the last RNN layer are taken as the extracted featu res.
All models in Table 1 consist of one RNN layer, and the effect
of predicting different time steps ahead is also investigat ed.
A comparison of models from the CPC-family. From Ta-
ble 1, we observe that cpc-n9same outperforms cpc-n9all
across all time steps we try. This is an expected outcome, sin ce
forcpc-n9all , the negative samples are drawn from differ-Table 1: Comparing APCs with a series of CPC models on
phone classiﬁcation. PERs are reported.
Method#(step)
2 5 10 20
cpc-n9all 51.3 48.8 50.8 54.6
cpc-n9same 47.5 48.2 50.0 53.0
cpc-ctx-n9same 42.1 46.1 48.8 53.8
cpc-ctx-exhaust 42.9 43.1 45.6 49.1
apc (proposed) 36.5 35.6 35.4 37.7
ent utterances within a minibatch that could possibly be ut-
tered by different speakers, and thus cpc-n9all is not required
to really capture phonetic content to differentiate the pos itive
and negative samples. In contrast, cpc-n9same draws nega-
tive samples from the same utterance, and in such case, speak er
information is identical for each sample and cpc-n9same is
forced to learn other non-trivial features such as phone inf or-
mation so as to differentiate positive and negative samples . In
addition, we ﬁnd that representations extracted from RNN co n-
tain more phonetic content than those extracted from the fra me
encoder, as cpc-ctx-n9same often outperforms cpc-n9same
especially when the number of steps to the target is small. By
using all non-target samples as negative samples from the mi ni-
batch,cpc-ctx-exhaust further lowers the PER, suggesting
that richer phonetic content is learned in the representati ons.
Comparing CPC with APC. Our APCs, as shown in the last
row in Table 1, signiﬁcantly outperform all CPC models in
spite of its much simpler architecture and training approac h.
These results demonstrate that more phonetic content is imm e-
diately accessible from a linear classiﬁer in the represent ations
extracted by APCs compared to CPC models.
There are other aspects of APCs worth investigating. In Ta-
ble 2, we present the phone classiﬁcation results of using de eper
RNNs for APCs and with more target time steps. For all APC
models, we take the outputs of the last RNN layer as the ex-
tracted features. Three supervised baselines, a linear cla ssiﬁer,
a 1-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP), and a 3-layer MLP, a re
implemented, taking the surface features , i.e., spectrograms, as
input features. For MLPs, each layer consist of 512 units wit h
ReLU activations. These three baselines are meant to help us
understand how accessible the phonetic content is from the s ur-
face features, even under some amount of nonlinear transfor -
mations. We also include the best number of CPC models from
Table 1 to bridge the two tables.
Surface features with non-linear phone classiﬁer. From Ta-
ble 2, we observe that incorporating non-linearity in the ph one
classiﬁer does improve PER1. When using a 3-layer MLP as the
classiﬁer, the surface features are transformed into highe r-level
representations that are more linearly separable than the b est
CPC features. However, we can see there is still a signiﬁcant
gap between the transformed spectrogram representations w ith
features extracted by APC models.
A comparison of APC models. Overall, we ﬁnd that deeper
APC models produce better representations especially for s mall
#(steps). There also exists a sweet spot when we vary the
amount of time steps to the target for APC models to predict—
1The best performing supervised 3-layer LSTM with minimal lo oka-
head on this particular task can achieve 16.3 [34].

==== Page 4 ====
Table 2: PERs on phone classiﬁcation. All features are fed to a
linear classiﬁer unless otherwise stated. The number of ste ps to
the target #(steps) is not relevant in the ﬁrst four rows.
Method#(step)
1 2 3 5 10 20
Mel 50.0
Mel + MLP-1 43.4
Mel + MLP-3 41.3
cpc best 42.1
apc 1-layer 39.4 36.5 35.4 35.6 35.4 37.7
apc 2-layer 38.5 34.6 35.9 35.7 34.6 38.8
apc 3-layer 37.2 36.7 33.5 36.1 37.1 38.8
apc 4-layer 36.2 34.4 34.5 35.3 36.9 39.6
the PER continues to drop as we increase #(steps) until a cer-
tain point, which is usually when #(steps) equals 3; after th at
the PER begins to increase as #(steps) increases.
3.4. Speaker Veriﬁcation
For speaker veriﬁcation, we compare APCs with the i-vector
representation. We train a GMM with 256 components as the
universal background model on the TIMIT training set. We the n
extract 100-dimensional i-vectors and project them down to 24
dimensions with LDA trained on the training set. The cosine
similarity is used for evaluation. We also include the best r esults
from all CPC models. The equal error rates (EER) on speaker
veriﬁcation are presented in Table 3. Same as what we do in the
phone classiﬁcation experiments, the outputs of the last RN N
layer are taken as the extracted representations. The repre sen-
tation of the entire utterance is a simple average of the fram e
representations. For the last two rows , i.e., apc 3-layer-1 and
apc 3-layer-2, it means that we take the outputs of the ﬁrst an d
the second RNN layer as the extracted representations. We ex -
plain our motivation of doing so below.
Table 3: EER on speaker veriﬁcation. The number of steps to
the target #(steps) is not relevant for the ﬁrst two rows.
Method#(step)
1 2 3 5 10 20
i-vector 6.64
cpc best 5.00
apc 1-layer 4.71 4.07 4.14 4.14 5.14 5.29
apc 2-layer 4.71 4.64 5.71 4.86 5.57 6.07
apc 3-layer 5.21 4.93 4.43 4.57 5.79 6.21
apc 3-layer-1 3.43 3.86 3.79 3.86 4.07 4.86
apc 3-layer-2 3.79 4.64 4.14 4.29 5.14 5.00
Comparing APC with i-vector and CPC. From Table 3,
we can see that the best CPC model outperforms the i-vector
baseline, and APCs further outperform CPC when #(steps) is
smaller than 10. This demonstrates that representations le arned
by APCs contain not only phonetic information but also speak er
information.
Speaker information across different APC layers. Unlike
phone classiﬁcation, where we ﬁnd increasing the depth of
APCs improve PER, deeper APCs somehow performs worsein speaker veriﬁcation. Studies have shown that in a deep LM,
lower layers tend to focus more on local syntax, while the upp er
layers usually induce more semantic content [35]. Motivate d by
the fact that LMs for text could exhibit different kinds of in for-
mation across different layers, we are interested in invest igating
whether other layers besides the last one contain more infor -
mation of our interest, that is, the speaker information. Sp ecif-
ically, instead of taking the outputs of the last RNN layer of
apc 3-layer, we try using the outputs of the ﬁrst and second
RNN layers of it to perform speaker veriﬁcation, denoted by
apc 3-layer-1 and apc 3-layer-2 in Table 3, respectively. Su rpris-
ingly, for all #(steps), we see that apc 3-layer-1 consisten tly out-
performs apc 3-layer-2, which further outperforms apc 3-la yer.
This indicates that lower layers indeed contain more speake r in-
formation than higher layers, or at least the speaker inform ation
is represented in a more accessible form in lower layers. Add i-
tionally, we observe that apc 3-layer-1 outperforms apc 1-l ayer
and apc 3-layer-2 outperforms apc 2-layer although the repr e-
sentations are extracted from the same RNN depth. Combining
all of our observations from both tasks, we conclude that a de ep
APC is a very powerful speech feature extractor, whose highe r
layers capture phonetic information while more speaker inf or-
mation resides in its lower layers.
4. Discussions
We propose Autoregressive Predictive Coding (APC) for unsu -
pervised speech representation learning. The backbone of A PC
is a deep LSTM network, and the model is trained in an autore-
gressive fashion. We introduce a time shifting factor that a sks
the model to predict further steps ahead of the current frame dur-
ing training in order to encourage it to discover more genera l
structures rather than the local ones within the speech sign al.
Our experimental results show that the number of steps to the
target frame controls what is learned in the representation . How
this hyperparameter is set depends on how the representatio n is
going to be used and can be thought of as a prior.
Transfer learning from large-scale pre-trained LMs has
shown great success recently, and we believe it is promising and
useful to develop similar transfer learning techniques for the do-
main of speech and audio. APC proposed in this work is our
ﬁrst step towards this goal. Despite its simplicity, APCs ha ve
demonstrated a strong capability of extracting useful phon e and
speaker information through our experiments. In the future , we
are interested in training APCs on larger and probably nois-
ier corpora and testing the extracted features on other spee ch-
related tasks. Furthermore, in this work we only take output s
from a speciﬁc layer from APC models as input features for
a downstream task. However, as indicated in our experimen-
tal results that different layers may focus on capturing dif fer-
ent aspects of speech information (e.g., lower layers are sh own
to contain richer speaker information than the upper layers ), it
is potentially beneﬁcial to combine all internal represent ations
across different layers and simultaneously expose all of th em
to a downstream model. This allows the model to select which
the combination (e.g., through a set of learnable weights as in
done in ELMo [17]) of all representations most useful for an
end task. From the point of view of model interpretability, i t is
also important to analyze how the internal representations in a
deep APC are transformed across layers from capturing speak er
information to capturing phonetic information.

==== Page 5 ====
5. References
[1] T. Schatz, V . Peddinti, F. Bach, A. Jansen, H. Hermansky, and
E. Dupoux, “Evaluating speech features with the minimal-pa ir
ABX task: Analysis of the classical MFC/PLP pipeline,” in IN-
TERSPEECH , 2013.
[2] S. Settle and K. Livescu, “Discriminative acoustic word embed-
dings: recurrent neural network-based approaches,” in SLT, 2016.
[3] S. Arora, H. Khandeparkar, M. Khodak, O. Plevrakis, and
N. Saunshi, “A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsuper vised
representation learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09229 , 2019.
[4] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine Learning , vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 41–75, 1997.
[5] N. Tishby, F. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bo ttleneck
method,” arXiv preprint arXiv:physics/0004057 , 1999.
[6] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y . Bengio, and P.-A . Man-
zagol, “Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful r epre-
sentations in a deep network with a local denoising criterio n,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 11, no. Dec, pp.
3371–3408, 2010.
[7] H. Kamper, W. Wang, and K. Livescu, “Deep convolutional
acoustic word embeddings using word-pair side information ,” in
ICASSP , 2016.
[8] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Unsupervised learning of visual re pre-
sentations using videos,” in ICCV , 2015.
[9] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual repre-
sentation learning by context prediction,” in ICCV , 2015.
[10] G. Larsson, M. Maire, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Colorizat ion as a
proxy task for visual understanding,” in CVPR , 2017.
[11] J. Chorowski, R. Weiss, S. Bengio, and A. v. d. Oord, “Uns u-
pervised speech representation learning using wavenet aut oen-
coders,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08810 , 2019.
[12] Y .-A. Chung and J. Glass, “Speech2vec: A sequence-to-s equence
framework for learning word embeddings from speech,” in IN-
TERSPEECH , 2018.
[13] B. Milde and C. Biemann, “Unspeech: Unsupervised speec h con-
text embeddings,” in INTERSPEECH , 2018.
[14] W.-N. Hsu, Y . Zhang, and J. Glass, “Unsupervised learni ng of dis-
entangled and interpretable representations from sequent ial data,”
inNIPS , 2017.
[15] ——, “Learning latent representations for speech gener ation and
transformation,” in INTERSPEECH , 2017.
[16] Y .-A. Chung, C.-C. Wu, C.-H. Shen, H.-Y . Lee, and L.-S. L ee,
“Audio word2vec: Unsupervised learning of audio segment re p-
resentations using sequence-to-sequence autoencoder,” i nINTER-
SPEECH , 2016.
[17] M. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee,
and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word representat ions,”
inNAACL-HLT , 2018.
[18] J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model ﬁne-t uning
for text classiﬁcation,” in ACL, 2018.
[19] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskeve r, “Im-
proving language understanding by generative pre-trainin g,” Ope-
nAI, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[20] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language u nder-
standing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[21] M. Schroeder and B. Atal, “Code-excided linear predict ion
(CELP): high-quality speech at very low bit rates,” in ICASSP ,
1985.
[22] A. v. d. Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyal s,
A. Graves, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Senior, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“WaveNet: a generative model for raw audio,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.[23] A. v. d. Oord, Y . Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation lea rning with
contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 ,
2018.
[24] T. Mikolov, M. Karaﬁ´ at, L. Burget, J. ˇCernock` y, and S. Khudan-
pur, “Recurrent neural network based language model,” in INTER-
SPEECH , 2010.
[25] Y . Wang, R. Skerry-Ryan, D. Stanton, Y . Wu, R. Weiss, N. J aitly,
Z. Yang, Y . Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Bengio, Q. Le, Y . Agiomyrgian-
nakis, R. Clark, and R. Saurous, “Tacotron: Towards end-to- end
speech synthesis,” in INTERSPEECH , 2017.
[26] Y .-A. Chung, Y . Wang, W.-N. Hsu, Y . Zhang, and R. Skerry- Ryan,
“Semi-supervised training for improving data efﬁciency in end-to-
end speech synthesis,” in ICASSP , 2019.
[27] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Lib-
rispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books,”
inICASSP , 2015.
[28] D. Paul and J. Baker, “The design for the wall street jour nal-based
csr corpus,” in Workshop on Speech and Natural Language , 1992.
[29] N. Dehak, P. Kenny, R. Dehak, P. Dumouchel, and P. Ouelle t,
“Front-end factor analysis for speaker veriﬁcation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 788–798, 2011.
[30] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term mem ory,”
Neural Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[31] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learni ng for
image recognition,” in CVPR , 2016.
[32] Y . Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Machere y,
M. Krikun, Y . Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah,
M. Johnson, X. Liu, . Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y . Kato, T. Kudo,
H. Kazawa, K. Stevens, G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young,
J. Smith, J. Riesa, A. Rudnick, O. Vinyals, G. Corrado,
M. Hughes, and J. Dean, “Google’s neural machine translatio n
system: Bridging the gap between human and machine transla-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144 , 2016.
[33] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optim iza-
tion,” in ICLR , 2015.
[34] H. Tang and J. Glass, “On training recurrent networks wi th trun-
cated backpropagation through time in speech recognition, ” in
SLT, 2019.
[35] M. Peters, M. Neumann, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih, “D is-
secting contextual word embeddings: Architecture and repr esen-
tation,” in EMNLP , 2018.

