==== Page 1 ====
energies
Article
Application of Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) Neural
Network for Smart Batch Production Prediction
Xuechen Li
 , Xinfang Ma *, Fengchao Xiao, Fei Wang
 and Shicheng Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Petroleum Resources and Prospecting & MOE Key Laboratory of Petroleum Engineering,
China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing 102249, China; 2019310154@student.cup.edu.cn (X.L.);
2020310175@student.cup.edu.cn (F.X.); wangfei@cup.edu.cn (F.W.); zhangsc@cup.edu.cn (S.Z.)
*Correspondence: maxinfang@cup.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-133-6650-5131
Received: 14 October 2020; Accepted: 19 November 2020; Published: 22 November 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Production prediction plays an important role in decision making, development planning,
and economic evaluation during the exploration and development period. However, applying
traditional methods for production forecasting of newly developed wells in the conglomerate reservoir
is restricted by limited historical data, complex fracture propagation, and frequent operational changes.
This study proposed a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) neural network-based model to achieve batch
production forecasting in M conglomerate reservoir of China, which tackles the limitations of
traditional decline curve analysis and conventional time-series prediction methods. The model
is trained by four features of production rate, tubing pressure (TP), choke size (CS), and shut-in
period (SI) from 70 multistage hydraulic fractured horizontal wells. Firstly, a comprehensive data
preprocessing is implemented, including excluding unﬁt wells, data screening, feature selection,
partitioning data set, z-score normalization, and format conversion. Then, the four-feature model is
compared with the model considering production only, and it is found that with frequent oilﬁeld
operations changes, the four-feature model could accurately capture the complex variance pattern
of production rate. Further, Random Forest (RF) is employed to optimize the prediction results of
GRU. For a fair evaluation, the performance of the proposed model is compared with that of simple
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network. The results
show that the proposed approach outperforms the others in prediction accuracy and generalization
ability. It is worth mentioning that under the guidance of continuous learning, the GRU model can be
updated as soon as more wells become available.
Keywords: GRU; time series; production forecasting; RF; deep learning
1. Introduction
Production prediction plays an important role in decision making, development planning,
and economic evaluation during the exploration and development period. Especially in unconventional
reservoirs, accurate production estimation helps evaluate oil and gas potential and, at the same time,
guides fracturing operation reasonably [ 1–3]. There are several commonly used methods for future
production prediction.
Reservoir numerical simulation is a common method for production rate forecasting because of
its reliable physical background [ 4,5]. However, it is time-consuming and demands many reservoir
features, such as rock mechanical parameters and ﬂuid property parameters [ 6]. Inaccurate or missing
parameters will lead to unbelievable production predictions. Especially in conglomerate reservoirs,
it is di cult to build a robust numerical model due to the e ect of gravel as well as the complicated
fracture propagation mechanism.
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121; doi:10.3390 /en13226121 www.mdpi.com /journal /energies

==== Page 2 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 2 of 22
Decline curve analysis (DCA) is also frequently used in the oilﬁeld, which is based on empirical
production decline [ 7]. It is straightforward and fast compared with reservoir numerical simulation.
Additionally, it does not need many static and dynamic data. However, it has many limitations to
constrain its application [ 8,9]. First, traditional DCA can be utilized when the well has entered the
production decline stage, which means the target well has to produce for at least several months.
However, for wells that are newly put into operation, it is di cult to apply this method for rate
prediction. Further, traditional DCA cannot take operational changes into account, which have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on production. Last but not least, as many production curves ﬂuctuate heavily,
selecting the start of ﬁtting data manually is essential. The analyst’s subjectivity will largely inﬂuence
the analysis results [10].
Machine learning, also known as data mining, is one approach that could extract implicit
knowledge from massive data. With the development of computer technology and intelligent oilﬁeld
construction, it has been widely used for production analysis in the oil and gas industry [ 11–13].
Conventional time-series prediction methods including Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA),
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
with Exogenous Variables (ARIMAX) are successfully applied for production prediction. They perform
well in the production prediction of unconventional gas and oil reservoirs with regular changing
patterns [ 14–16]. As a branch of machine learning, deep learning has shown excellent performance in
various applications, such as refracturing candidate selection [ 17], pressure prediction [ 18–20], history
matching [ 21,22], and production forecasting. Wang et al. established a deep fully connected neural
network model to predict cumulative oil production of 6 and 18 months [ 23]. A total of 18 static
parameters relating to well information, formation property, fractures, and fracturing property are
used as input features, and values of cumulative production at ﬁxed time points are used as output
features. Luo et al. developed a deep learning model for the ﬁrst-year production Barrel of Oil
Equivalent (BOE) in the Bakken ﬁeld and explored the inﬂuence of geology and completion parameters
on BOE [ 24]. He established a data-driven model for Estimated Ultimate Recovery in Marcellus shale,
considering reservoir characteristics and completion strategies [ 25]. However, these studies focus on
the relationship between geological and fracturing features and cumulative production at a ﬁxed time
and do not involve time-series rate prediction.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is an important part of deep learning, which focuses on time-series
problems because of its advantages over sequence dependence. However, due to gradient exploding and
vanishing, there is a length limitation when applying the RNN algorithm [ 26]. Subsequently, variants
of RNN, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [ 27] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [ 28] neural
network, are proposed to deal with long sequence prediction problems. Various researches have been
done in applying RNN and LSTM in tackling time-series problems in recent years. Based on the initial
3-month data, Zhan et al. established a three-layer LSTM model for sequent 700-day oil prediction with
tubing pressure as latency information [ 29]. Lee et al. successfully utilized LSTM to predict monthly
shale-gas production, considering the shut-in period [ 10]. Sun et al. compared LSTM with DCA in wells
that have been producing for over 800 days and found that LSTM showed a better trend and less error
calculation with tubing pressure as an external feature [ 30]. Song et al. combined LSTM with Particle
Swarm Optimization to predict the daily oil rate of the volcanic reservoir [ 31]. The results show that
LSTM could capture the changing patterns of production and outperforms DCA, RNN, and traditional
time series forecasting methods. However, most wells used in the above models have a long production
time with few field operations. Batch production forecasting for newly developed wells with multiple
external features is rarely involved.
In this paper, GRU models with multiple external features and various prediction approaches were
established for oil rate prediction of the M conglomerate oilﬁeld in China for the ﬁrst time. Our objective
is to establish a production prediction model suitable for the whole well block, which enables batch
prediction given limited production data. In the following section, a comprehensive data preprocessing
was introduced in detail ﬁrstly, which is of vital importance to successful prediction. Then, the relevant

==== Page 3 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 3 of 22
mechanism, the architecture, and three prediction approaches of the proposed model were explained.
After model training, model validation, application, and correction with Random Forest (RF) were
employed for future production rate forecasting successively. Additionally, continuous learning was
introduced into prediction with available data increases. Finally, the main conclusions and prospects
were presented.
2. Data Preprocessing
2.1. Data Set
In this study, we focus on the oil wells of X well block in M oilﬁeld, China. M oilﬁeld belonging to
a conglomerate reservoir with a dozen well blocks. Among them, X is one of the earliest regions of
scale development, owning more than 70 multistage hydraulically fractured horizontal wells since
2016. The size of gravel in X well block generally ranges from 2 mm to 8 mm with a maximum value of
16 mm, and the contents of gravel and sand are around 51% and 44%, respectively. According to the
conventional logging test and core analyzing experiment, the permeability varies from 0.05 to 94.8 mD
with an average value of 2.3 mD, and the porosity ranges from 4.3% to 15.3% with an average of 9.23%.
Figure 1 shows the production time of all the available wells. From 2016 to 2019, the number of
fractured wells increases year by year with 2 wells in 2016, 14 wells in 2017, 26 wells in 2018, and 28
wells in 2019 (from January to September). More wells are waiting for drilling and fracturing shortly.
As of the end of September 2019, only 13 wells had produced for more than 2 years, and 32.4% of
the wells are less than 200 days. Short production time will increase the di culty and uncertainty
in applying conventional DCA. Raw data of the above wells are collected from the oilﬁeld database,
including production date, SI, CS, TP , oil production rate (q o), production method (PM), strokes, and so
on (see Supplementary Materials). The ending of the production date is 2 September 2019.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   3 of 24 
 with Random  Forest (RF) were employed  for future production  rate forecasting  successively.  
Additionally,  continuous  learning was introduced  into prediction  with available  data increases.  
Finally, the main conclusions  and prospects  were presented.  
2. Data Preprocessing  
2.1. Data Set 
In this study, we focus on the oil wells of X well block in M oilfield, China. M oilfield belonging  
to a conglomerate  reservoir  with a dozen well blocks. Among them, X is one of the earliest regions of 
scale development,  owning more than 70 multistage  hydraulically  fractured  horizontal  wells since 
2016. The size of gravel in X well block generally  ranges from 2 mm to 8 mm with a maximum  value 
of 16 mm, and the contents of gravel and sand are around 51% and 44%, respectively.  According  to 
the conventional  logging test and core analyzing  experiment,  the permeability  varies from 0.05 to 
94.8 mD with an average value of 2.3 mD, and the porosity ranges from 4.3% to 15.3% with an average 
of 9.23%.  
Figure 1 shows the production  time of all the available  wells. From 2016 to 2019, the number of 
fractured  wells increases  year by year with 2 wells in 2016, 14 wells in 2017, 26 wells in 2018, and 28 
wells in 2019 (from January to September).  More wells are waiting for drilling and fracturing  shortly. 
As of the end of September  2019, only 13 wells had produced  for more than 2 years, and 32.4% of the 
wells are less than 200 days. Short production  time will increase the difficulty  and uncertainty  in 
applying  conventional  DCA. Raw data of the above wells are collected  from the oilfield database,  
including  production  date, SI, CS, TP, oil production  rate (qo), production  method (PM), strokes, and 
so on. The ending of the production  date is 2 September  2019. 
 
Figure 1. Production  time of wells in X well block. 
2.2. Workflow  
The quality of the data set is of utmost importance  because the core of data mining is data itself. 
Figure 2 depicts the workflow  of data preparation  (the blue box) and the modeling  process (the green 
box). There are six steps in the preprocessing  process. 
Figure 1. Production time of wells in X well block.
2.2. Workﬂow
The quality of the data set is of utmost importance because the core of data mining is data itself.
Figure 2 depicts the workﬂow of data preparation (the blue box) and the modeling process (the green
box). There are six steps in the preprocessing process.
Firstly, unﬁt wells, whose production time is less than the history window (HW), are excluded
from the data set. HW refers to the number of days used to predict the production rate at the next day.
If HW is too big, the number of samples will be decreased, resulting in underﬁtting problems. On the
contrary, if HW is too small, some key information hidden in the long time series might be ignored,

==== Page 4 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 4 of 22
which leads to poor prediction performance. As there are numerous newly developed wells, 14 days is
selected as HW in this research, and then 5 wells are excluded from the data set.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   4 of 24 
  
Figure 2. Workflow  of data preprocessing  and model analysis.  
Firstly, unfit wells, whose production  time is less than the history window (HW), are excluded  
from the data set. HW refers to the number of days used to predict the production  rate at the next 
day. If HW is too big, the number of samples will be decreased,  resulting  in underfitting  problems.  
On the contrary,  if HW is too small, some key information  hidden in the long time series might be 
ignored, which leads to poor prediction  performance.  As there are numerous  newly developed  wells, 
14 days is selected as HW in this research,  and then 5 wells are excluded  from the data set. 
Secondly,  data screening  is implemented  on each well by deleting periods before oil production  
appears. These zero values do not contribute  to models but will increase computing  time. 
Remarkably,  as an external feature, zero production  periods caused by shut‐in operation  should not 
be excluded.  
The third step of data preprocessing  is to select appropriate  input features.  The available  features 
obtained  from the oilfield database  include SI, CS, TP, PM, strokes, and qo. By analyzing  the historical  
data, PM and strokes are removed  from available  features because all the wells are gusher wells with 
unchangeable  values. Figure 3 displays a typical production  history with frequent operations.  It is 
obvious that changing  choke size and shut‐in operation  relate to sharp fluctuation  in production  rate 
and tubing pressure.  It is essential  to consider  SI and CS as input features.  The analysis results are 
consistent  with the Pearson correlation  coefficients  heatmap,  as shown in Figure 4. The coefficients  
between every two variables  range from −1 to 1. The number 1 and −1 represent  a completely  positive 
and negative  relation, respectively.  The number 0 means that there is no linear correlation  between 
the two variables.  It can be found that qo has a positive relation with CS and TP, whereas it has a 
negative  relation with SI. The largest absolute Pearson correlation  coefficient  is 0.47, which is between 
qo and TP, suggesting  that TP has a larger impact on qo. 
After the above steps, a total of 65 wells are selected to implement  data set partitioning.  For 
different  purposes,  the data set is generally  divided into the training set, validation  set, and test set. 
The training data allow the model to learn the relationship  between the input sequence  and the 
output for good prediction.  The validation  set is utilized for neural network architecture  optimization  
and hyperparameter  optimization  (i.e., learning rate, drop out ratio, regularization  parameter  of L2 
norm). The test set is used for corroborating  the prediction  ability and robustness  of the trained 
models. In this research,  52 wells are randomly  selected as the training set, which accounts  for 80% 
of the data set. The validation  set and the test set contain 7 wells and 6 wells, respectively.  
 
Figure 2. Workﬂow of data preprocessing and model analysis.
Secondly, data screening is implemented on each well by deleting periods before oil production
appears. These zero values do not contribute to models but will increase computing time. Remarkably,
as an external feature, zero production periods caused by shut-in operation should not be excluded.
The third step of data preprocessing is to select appropriate input features. The available features
obtained from the oilﬁeld database include SI, CS, TP , PM, strokes, and q o. By analyzing the historical
data, PM and strokes are removed from available features because all the wells are gusher wells with
unchangeable values. Figure 3 displays a typical production history with frequent operations. It is
obvious that changing choke size and shut-in operation relate to sharp ﬂuctuation in production rate
and tubing pressure. It is essential to consider SI and CS as input features. The analysis results are
consistent with the Pearson correlation coe cients heatmap, as shown in Figure 4. The coe cients
between every two variables range from  1 to 1. The number 1 and  1 represent a completely positive
and negative relation, respectively. The number 0 means that there is no linear correlation between the
two variables. It can be found that q ohas a positive relation with CS and TP , whereas it has a negative
relation with SI. The largest absolute Pearson correlation coe cient is 0.47, which is between q oand
TP , suggesting that TP has a larger impact on q o.
After the above steps, a total of 65 wells are selected to implement data set partitioning. For di erent
purposes, the data set is generally divided into the training set, validation set, and test set. The training
data allow the model to learn the relationship between the input sequence and the output for
good prediction. The validation set is utilized for neural network architecture optimization and
hyperparameter optimization (i.e., learning rate, drop out ratio, regularization parameter of L2 norm).
The test set is used for corroborating the prediction ability and robustness of the trained models. In this
research, 52 wells are randomly selected as the training set, which accounts for 80% of the data set.
The validation set and the test set contain 7 wells and 6 wells, respectively.
In the ﬁfth step, data standardization is implemented based on z-score normalization to improve
the e ciency of the trained model, as deﬁned in Equation (1). One key point to note is that the
validation set and test set should be normalized based on the mean and standard deviation of the
training set only. The statistical property of input features is summarized in Table 1.
Feanor=Fea Mean tra
Stdtra(1)

==== Page 5 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 5 of 22
where Mean traand Stdtraare the mean and standard deviation of the training set, Feadenotes input
features, and Feanorrepresents input features after z-score normalization.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   5 of 24 
  
Figure 3. Typical production  history in X well block. 
 
Figure 4. Heatmap  of Pearson correlation  coefficients  of various variables.  
In the fifth step, data standardization  is implemented  based on z‐score normalization  to improve  
the efficiency  of the trained model, as defined in Equation  (1). One key point to note is that the 
validation  set and test set should be normalized  based on the mean and standard  deviation  of the 
training set only. The statistical  property  of input features is summarized  in Table 1. 
tra
nor
traFea MeanFeaStd  (1)
where tra Mean and traStd are the mean and standard  deviation  of the training set, Fea denotes 
input features,  and norFea represents  input features after z‐score normalization.   
  
Figure 3. Typical production history in X well block.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   5 of 24 
  
Figure 3. Typical production  history in X well block. 
 
Figure 4. Heatmap  of Pearson correlation  coefficients  of various variables.  
In the fifth step, data standardization  is implemented  based on z‐score normalization  to improve  
the efficiency  of the trained model, as defined in Equation  (1). One key point to note is that the 
validation  set and test set should be normalized  based on the mean and standard  deviation  of the 
training set only. The statistical  property  of input features is summarized  in Table 1. 
tra
nor
traFea MeanFeaStd  (1)
where tra Mean and traStd are the mean and standard  deviation  of the training set, Fea denotes 
input features,  and norFea represents  input features after z‐score normalization.   
  
Figure 4. Heatmap of Pearson correlation coe cients of various variables.
Table 1. Statistical property of input features.
Features Mean Standard Deviation Range
Oil production rate (q o) (m3) 39.58 14.64 0–144.375
Tubing Pressure (TP) (MPa) 16.36 8.57 0–38
Shut-In Period (SI) (h) 0.33 2.68 0–24
Choke Size (CS) (mm) 3.16 0.90 0–10
As shown in Figure 5, the features, having been normalized, will be converted to a three-dimensional
tensor to match the request of layers in the sixth step. As for input, the ﬁrst dimension is the number
of samples (n_samples), the second dimension is the length of HW, and the third dimension is the
number of input features (n_input). HW is an important parameter, determining how many days are
used to predict the output at the next timestep. To explain more clearly, we assume HW is 3 days,

==== Page 6 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 6 of 22
which means that the model will use the input features of the 3 days ahead to predict the oil production
rate of the fourth day. Similar to input, the output is converted to a two-dimensional tensor with
n_samples as the ﬁrst dimension and the length of predictive days as the second dimension. Here,
we just predict 1 day after the HW, so the second dimension is 1.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   6 of 24 
 Table 1. Statistical  property  of input features.  
Features   Mean Standard  Deviation  Range 
Oil production  rate (qo) (m3) 39.58  14.64  0–144.375  
Tubing Pressure  (TP) (MPa) 16.36  8.57  0–38 
Shut‐In Period (SI) (h)  0.33  2.68  0–24 
Choke Size (CS) (mm)  3.16  0.90  0–10 
As shown in Figure 5, the features,  having been normalized,  will be converted  to a three‐
dimensional  tensor to match the request of layers in the sixth step. As for input, the first dimension  
is the number of samples (n_samples),  the second dimension  is the length of HW, and the third 
dimension  is the number of input features (n_input).  HW is an important  parameter,  determining  
how many days are used to predict the output at the next timestep.  To explain more clearly, we 
assume HW is 3 days, which means that the model will use the input features of the 3 days ahead to 
predict the oil production  rate of the fourth day. Similar to input, the output is converted  to a two‐
dimensional  tensor with n_samples  as the first dimension  and the length of predictive  days as the 
second dimension.  Here, we just predict 1 day after the HW, so the second dimension  is 1. 
 
Figure 5. Illustration  of format conversion  of the input and output features.  
3. Methodology  
3.1. RNN, LSTM, and GRU 
Based on RNN, LSTM is designed  to handle long‐term dependency  problems  [27]. Later Cho et 
al. proposed  a simpler variant GRU [28]. Figure 6 shows the cell architecture  of RNN, LSTM, and 
GRU. Compared  with the simple architecture  of RNN, LSTM is more complex.  The core ideas behind 
LSTM are the cell state (i.e., 1Tc, Tc) and three gates, which distinguish  LSTM from RNN [32]. W 
and b represent  the weight matrix and bias matrix of the gates, the subscript  f, i, o denoting  the forget 
gate, input gate, and output gate, respectively.  
Figure 5. Illustration of format conversion of the input and output features.
3. Methodology
3.1. RNN, LSTM, and GRU
Based on RNN, LSTM is designed to handle long-term dependency problems [ 27].Later Cho et al.
proposed a simpler variant GRU [ 28]. Figure 6 shows the cell architecture of RNN, LSTM, and GRU.
Compared with the simple architecture of RNN, LSTM is more complex. The core ideas behind LSTM
are the cell state (i.e., cT 1,cT) and three gates, which distinguish LSTM from RNN [ 32].Wand b
represent the weight matrix and bias matrix of the gates, the subscript f,i,odenoting the forget gate,
input gate, and output gate, respectively.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 24 
 (a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 6. Comparison  of Recurrent  Neural Network  (RNN), Long Short‐Term Memory  (LSTM), and 
Gated Recurrent  Unit (GRU): (a) RNN; (b) LSTM; (c) GRU. 
The cell state (Tc) is a conveyor  belt running through the top of the LSTM cell, which controls 
the flow of information  across multiple  LSTM cells. When the output of timestep  T − 1 (1Th) and input 
of timestep  T (TFea) enters the cell, the forget gate (Tf) will decide what information  are not 
important  and should be forgotten.   
1 f(W [ , ] b )
fTT Tfh F e a   (2)
where the symbol σ represents  a sigmoid layer, outputting  numbers  between 0 and 1, given by
1() ( 1 )xxe , as shown in Figure 7a. 0 means “let nothing through”  while 1 means “let everything  
through”.  It plays an important  role in the three gates. 
 
(a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 7. Diagram  of three popular activation  function:  (a) sigmoid;  (b) tanh; (c) ReLU. 
There is an input gate (Ti) combined  with the input layer ( CT), determining  what new 
information  should be stored in the cell state.  
1 (W [ , ] b )Ti T T iih F e a     (3)
 
1 C tanh(W [ , ] b )TC T T C hF e a     (4)
where tanh denotes a tanh activation  function,  as shown in Figure 7b. WC is the weight matrix of 
the input layer. bC is the bias matrix of the input layer.  
Next, the old cell state (1CT) will be updated to the new cell state (CT) based on Equation  (5). 
The symbol  represents  the Hadamard  product.  
 
1 CCC   TT TT T fi   (5)
Figure 6. Comparison of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM),
and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU): ( a) RNN; ( b) LSTM; ( c) GRU.
The cell state ( cT) is a conveyor belt running through the top of the LSTM cell, which controls the
ﬂow of information across multiple LSTM cells. When the output of timestep T 1 (hT 1) and input of
timestep T(FeaT) enters the cell, the forget gate ( fT) will decide what information are not important
and should be forgotten.
fT=(Wf[hT 1,FeaT] +bf) (2)

==== Page 7 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 7 of 22
where the symbol represents a sigmoid layer, outputting numbers between 0 and 1, given by
(x) = ( 1+e x) 1, as shown in Figure 7a. 0 means “let nothing through” while 1 means “let everything
through”. It plays an important role in the three gates.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 24 
 (a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 6. Comparison  of Recurrent  Neural Network  (RNN), Long Short‐Term Memory  (LSTM), and 
Gated Recurrent  Unit (GRU): (a) RNN; (b) LSTM; (c) GRU. 
The cell state (Tc) is a conveyor  belt running through the top of the LSTM cell, which controls 
the flow of information  across multiple  LSTM cells. When the output of timestep  T − 1 (1Th) and input 
of timestep  T (TFea) enters the cell, the forget gate (Tf) will decide what information  are not 
important  and should be forgotten.   
1 f(W [ , ] b )
fTT Tfh F e a   (2)
where the symbol σ represents  a sigmoid layer, outputting  numbers  between 0 and 1, given by
1() ( 1 )xxe , as shown in Figure 7a. 0 means “let nothing through”  while 1 means “let everything  
through”.  It plays an important  role in the three gates. 
 
(a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 7. Diagram  of three popular activation  function:  (a) sigmoid;  (b) tanh; (c) ReLU. 
There is an input gate (Ti) combined  with the input layer ( CT), determining  what new 
information  should be stored in the cell state.  
1 (W [ , ] b )Ti T T iih F e a     (3)
 
1 C tanh(W [ , ] b )TC T T C hF e a     (4)
where tanh denotes a tanh activation  function,  as shown in Figure 7b. WC is the weight matrix of 
the input layer. bC is the bias matrix of the input layer.  
Next, the old cell state (1CT) will be updated to the new cell state (CT) based on Equation  (5). 
The symbol  represents  the Hadamard  product.  
 
1 CCC   TT TT T fi   (5)
Figure 7. Diagram of three popular activation function: ( a) sigmoid; ( b) tanh; ( c) ReLU.
There is an input gate ( iT) combined with the input layer ( fCT), determining what new information
should be stored in the cell state.
iT=(Wi[hT 1,FeaT] +bi) (3)
fCT=tanh(WC[hT 1,FeaT] +bC) (4)
where tanh denotes a tanh activation function, as shown in Figure 7b. W Cis the weight matrix of the
input layer. b Cis the bias matrix of the input layer.
Next, the old cell state ( CT 1) will be updated to the new cell state ( CT) based on Equation (5).
The symbolrepresents the Hadamard product.
CT=fTCT 1+iTfCT (5)
Ultimately, the output gate ( oT) will decide what information should be output as follows:
oT=(Wo[hT 1,FeaT] +bo) (6)
hT=oTtanh(CT) (7)
where hTis the hidden state in the timestep T, which is equal to the value of Out T.
On the basis of LSTM, GRU combines the forget gate and input gate into the update gate ( zT),
and merges the hidden state with cell state, which makes the architecture simpler and computation
cheaper. There are only two gates in the cell architecture of GRU, reset gate ( rT) and update gate ( zT),
which can be described as Equations (8) and (9) respectively:
rT=(Wr[hT 1,FeaT] +br) (8)
zT=(Wz[hT 1,FeaT] +bz) (9)
where Wris the weight matrix of the reset gate and bris the bias matrix of the reset gate. Wzis the
weight matrix of the update gate and b zis the bias matrix of the update gate.
Subsequently, the new memory cell state will be obtained by Equation (10):
ehT=tanh(Wh[hT 1rT,FeaT] +bh) (10)

==== Page 8 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 8 of 22
where Whis the weight matrix of the new memory cell state, bhis the bias matrix of the new memory
cell state.
The gating signal ( zT) ranges from 0 to 1. The closer the gating signal is to 1, the more data will be
memorized, whereas the closer to 0, the more forgotten. Therefore, one single expression can control
forgetting and inputting, generating output ( hT):
hT= (1 zT)hT 1+zTehT (11)
3.2. “SingleStep”, “Iterative”, and “PartIterative” Prediction Schemes
As the architecture of GRU is flexible and changeable, we explored three prediction schemes:
“SingleStep” (see Figure 8a), “Iterative” (see Figure 8b), and “PartIterative” (see Figure 8c). The three
schemes were proposed for different purposes. The SingelStep approach was used for validating and
evaluating model performance, which eliminating the influence of accumulative errors. The Iterative
approach was carried out for long-term cumulative production prediction in the case of limited data.
With oilfield data dynamically changing, the PartIterative approach was utilized for real-time production
prediction. In Figure 8, the superscripts 1  N of Fearepresent the available input (exogenous) variables,
the subscripts of Fearepresent the sampling time, and qpred
T+1represents the predicted value of oil
production rate at time T+1. To eliminate the influence of HW and prediction length, the HW was set
to 14 days, and the prediction length was set to 1 day. To remove the effect of the number of iterations,
the SingleStep approach was put forward to evaluate the model performance on the single-step error
fairly. The production rate used as “input” was updated daily, which means that the new production
was forecasted based on true values. In other words, given external features Feafrom T n+1 to
T+1 and actual production value qfrom T n+1 toT, we could predict the ( T+1)th production rate
qpred
T+1. When shifting to the next timestep, given external features Feafrom T n+2 toT+2 and actual
production value qfrom T n+2 to T+1, we could predict the ( T+2)th production rate. Without
replacing qT+1with qpred
T+1, the influence of the number of iterations was eliminated, and it was more
straightforward to evaluate the model performance on a single timestep. In this way, the RMSE of a
well throughout the whole production lifecycle could be calculated, which was used for demonstrating
the validity of the model.
In the Iterative scheme, the daily production was not be updated and the predictions were
implemented on the input features of the ﬁrst HW and previously predicted production. Unlike the
SingleStep scheme, when shifting to the next timestep, given external features Feafrom T n+2 to
T+2 and actual production value qfrom T n+2 toT+1, we replaced qT+1with qpred
T+1for forecasting
the ( T+2)th production rate qpred
T+2. Then we moved the timestep to T+3, replace qT+2with qpred
T+2,
predicted the ( T+3)th production rate qpred
T+3, and so on. As shown in Figure 8b, the ﬁrst prediction
generated an error "T+1, and the next timestep generated an error "T+2+G("T+1). After L number of
iterations, the error was accumulated to "T+L+T+L 1P
i=T+1G("i).
To make full use of the dynamic production data, we combined the above two schemes and
proposed the PartIterative approach, as depicted in Figure 8c. The update window represents the
number of qupdated at one time. This scheme starts with an iterative process. Given external features
Feafrom T n+1 to T+1 and actual production value qfrom T n+1 to T, we could predict the
(T+1)th production rate qpred
T+1. Then we moved to the next time step, given Feafrom T n+2 toT+2,
actual production value qfrom T n+1 to Tand qpred
T+1, we predicted the ( T+2)th production rate
qpred
T+2. Repeating the above iterative process for m times (size of update window), we updated the
predicted value qpred
T+1,:::,qpred
T+m+1into qT+1,:::,qT+m+1and started the iterative process again and so
on. Between iterations and updates, there is an adaptive system that compares the predicted values
with the actual ones to judge whether the model should be retrained or not.

==== Page 9 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 9 of 22
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   10 of 24 
  
Figure 8. Diagram  for the SingleStep,  Iterative,  and PartIterative  prediction  schemes:  (a) the 
SingleStep  approach;  (b) the Iterative approach;  (c) the PartIterative  approach.  
3.3. The Architecture  of the GRU Model 
In this paper, we utilized the GRU algorithm  based on the python‐based deep learning library 
Keras [33] configurated  with the TensorFlow  backend.  The model consisted  of the input, GRU, and 
dense layers. Hyperparameter  optimization  was not the focus of this research,  so the neural network 
architecture  was simply tuned according  to the performance  of the validation  set. The number of 
neurons in the GRU layer was 32, big enough to learn the implicit information  behind input and 
output. All the weight matrixes  were initialized  by the Xavier initialization  [34], and the bias matrixes  
were initialized  to zeros. The activation  function of the GRU layer is ReLU, as shown in Figure 7c. 
Figure 8. Diagram for the SingleStep, Iterative, and PartIterative prediction schemes: ( a) the SingleStep
approach; ( b) the Iterative approach; ( c) the PartIterative approach.
3.3. The Architecture of the GRU Model
In this paper, we utilized the GRU algorithm based on the python-based deep learning library
Keras [ 33] configurated with the TensorFlow backend. The model consisted of the input, GRU, and dense
layers. Hyperparameter optimization was not the focus of this research, so the neural network architecture
was simply tuned according to the performance of the validation set. The number of neurons in the
GRU layer was 32, big enough to learn the implicit information behind input and output. All the weight

==== Page 10 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 10 of 22
matrixes were initialized by the Xavier initialization [ 34], and the bias matrixes were initialized to zeros.
The activation function of the GRU layer is ReLU, as shown in Figure 7c. Adaptive moment estimation
(Adam) was used as an optimizer to minimize the loss function. Combining the advantages of AdaGrad
and RMSProp, it calculates the update weights and bias based on the first moment estimation and the
second moment estimation meanwhile [ 35]. Least squares (L2 norm) regularization [ 36] and dropout
technique [ 37] were also used to avoid overfitting. Table 2 shows the parameters of the proposed GRU
models. The models were coded in Python 3.7 and executed on Intel®Corei7-4790 3.60 GHz CPU.
Table 2. The parameters of the trained GRU model.
Parameters Value
Number of neurons 32 for the GRU layer; 1 for the dense layer
HW 14 days
Index of shu e 100
Epoch 50
Batch size 50
Loss function MSE
Optimizer Adam
Activation function ReLU
Regularization parameter of L2 norm ( ) 0.01
Dropout rate 0.1
Learning rate ( ) 0.001
3.4. Random Forest
RF is an ensemble algorithm consisting of a collection of decision trees that calculate ensemble
predicted values by averaging values of terminal nodes for regression problems [ 38]. Numerous
studies have been implemented to prove that RF has high accuracy, good tolerance to noise and
outliers, and the ability to avoid overﬁtting [ 39–41]. Further, it provides a novel method of determining
feature importance, which could help us further understand the mechanism of fracturing stimulation.
There are two straightforward methods for feature importance ranking: mean decrease impurity and
mean decrease accuracy. The ﬁrst method is implemented in the RF of Scikit-learn [ 42] and was adopted
in this research. For every decision tree in the forest, the nodes were split at the most informative
feature to maximize the information gain, as deﬁned in Equation (12). Then the feature importance
was equal to the sum over the number of splits that include the feature, relying on the number of
samples it splits. The detailed implementations of RF can refer to [38,43].
IG(Dp,Fea) =I(Dp) Nle f t
NpI(Dle f t) Nright
NpI(Dright) (12)
where Feais the feature to perform the split, Npis the number of samples in the parent node, Nleftand
Nrightare the number of samples in child nodes separately, Iis the impurity function, which refers to
the variance for regression problems. Dpis the sample at the parent node, Dleftand Drightare samples
at child nodes.
3.5. Evaluation Indices
In this research, we adopted mean square error (MSE), root mean square error (RMSE), and mean
absolute error (MAE) as evaluation indices. MSE can evaluate the di erences between actual values
(ytrue) and predicted values ( ypred), represented as Equation (13), which can be used to measure
the overall performance of the trained model and help reduce forecasting error. Compared with
MSE, RMSE represents the average error of a single sample, which helps to understand the physical

==== Page 11 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 11 of 22
signiﬁcance, as deﬁned in Equation (14). MAE gives a direct measure of the di erence between
predicted outcomes and true values, as deﬁned in Equation (15).
MSE =n_samplesP
i=1(ypred ytrue)2
n_samples(13)
RMSE =p
MSE =vuuuuutn_samplesP
i=1(ypred ytrue)2
n_samples(14)
MAE =1
n_samplesn_samplesX
i=1ypred ytrue (15)
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Veriﬁcation of the GRU Model with the SingleStep Approach
In this research, GRU is conducted for production rate prediction under multiple factors in the
conglomerate reservoir for the ﬁrst time. For a new well, given inputs of the ﬁrst HW, the long-term
production rate can be obtained according to the proposed well-block GRU model. Once the proposed
model is trained with training wells, we can apply it to other wells without extra computational cost.
For ease of understanding, the forecasting results have been denormalized (multiplying the original
RMSE and the standard deviation of the training set).
Figure 9 displays the RMSE of the proposed model on training wells, validation wells, and test
wells. Gray dashed lines represent the area between 25% and 75% quantiles. As can be seen from
Figure 9, RMSE for most wells is in the range of 4 to 6. The mean value of training wells, validation
wells, test wells is 4.89, 4.98, and 4.91, respectively. The RMSE distribution of test wells coincides with
that of the training wells, suggesting the generalization ability of the trained model.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   12 of 24 
 _
2
1()
=_n samples
pred true
iyy
MSEns a m p l e s (13)
_
2
1()
=_
n samples
pred true
iyy
RMSE MSEn samples (14)
_
11
_  n samples
pred true
iMAE y yn samples  (15)
4. Results and Discussion  
4.1. Verification  of the GRU Model with the SingleStep  Approach  
In this research,  GRU is conducted  for production  rate prediction  under multiple  factors in the 
conglomerate  reservoir  for the first time. For a new well, given inputs of the first HW, the long‐term 
production  rate can be obtained  according  to the proposed  well‐block GRU model. Once the 
proposed  model is trained with training wells, we can apply it to other wells without extra 
computational  cost. For ease of understanding,  the forecasting  results have been denormalized  
(multiplying  the original RMSE and the standard  deviation  of the training set).  
Figure 9 displays the RMSE of the proposed  model on training wells, validation  wells, and test 
wells. Gray dashed lines represent  the area between 25% and 75% quantiles.  As can be seen from 
Figure 9, RMSE for most wells is in the range of 4 to 6. The mean value of training wells, validation  
wells, test wells is 4.89, 4.98, and 4.91, respectively.  The RMSE distribution  of test wells coincides  with 
that of the training wells, suggesting  the generalization  ability of the trained model. 
 
Figure 9. Root mean square error (RMSE) of predicted  results with the SingleStep  approach.  
To evaluate the generalization  ability of the proposed  model, we focus on the performance  on 
the test set. Figure 10 shows the prediction  results of the GRU model on six test wells with the 
SingleStep  prediction  approach.  The SingleStep  approach  is used to eliminate  the influence  of 
accumulative  errors caused by iterations.  In other words, every red dot is predicted  based on the 
actual inputs of the previous  14 days before the current prediction  point. RMSE is utilized as an index 
to evaluate the single‐step error. As we can see from Figure 10, most predicted  points are very close 
to actual production  value, especially  when the oil rate changes steadily, such as the oil rate of Well 
2 from the 200th to 1100th day and Well 7 from the 200th to 700th day. However,  the relative errors 
soar when enormous  fluctuations  or sudden variances  occur, such as the oil rate of Well 2 at the 107th 
Figure 9. Root mean square error (RMSE) of predicted results with the SingleStep approach.
To evaluate the generalization ability of the proposed model, we focus on the performance on the
test set. Figure 10 shows the prediction results of the GRU model on six test wells with the SingleStep
prediction approach. The SingleStep approach is used to eliminate the inﬂuence of accumulative
errors caused by iterations. In other words, every red dot is predicted based on the actual inputs of
the previous 14 days before the current prediction point. RMSE is utilized as an index to evaluate
the single-step error. As we can see from Figure 10, most predicted points are very close to actual

==== Page 12 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 12 of 22
production value, especially when the oil rate changes steadily, such as the oil rate of Well 2 from
the 200th to 1100th day and Well 7 from the 200th to 700th day. However, the relative errors soar
when enormous ﬂuctuations or sudden variances occur, such as the oil rate of Well 2 at the 107th day,
Well 7 around the 200th day, and frequent variances of Well 58, Well 22, and Well 31. The sudden drop
or rise could lead to bigger uncertainties and errors for the prediction, which is rarely considered in
previous studies. The prediction results show that the trained model can capture the complex and
ﬂexible variance of production, whereas the ability to capture sharp and sudden variances is limited.
In the future, we can smooth the area when there is a brief and sudden change or extend the forecast
unit from day to month to improve model accuracy.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 24 
 day, Well 7 around the 200th day, and frequent variances  of Well 58, Well 22, and Well 31. The sudden 
drop or rise could lead to bigger uncertainties  and errors for the prediction,  which is rarely considered  
in previous  studies. The prediction  results show that the trained model can capture the complex and 
flexible variance of production,  whereas the ability to capture sharp and sudden variances  is limited. 
In the future, we can smooth the area when there is a brief and sudden change or extend the forecast 
unit from day to month to improve model accuracy.  
 
Figure 10. The predicted  production  of test wells with GRU and the SingleStep  approach.  
The proposed  GRU model takes choke size and shut‐in operation  into account, providing  a 
method to predict the oil rate under variable external features.  The predicted  production  can be 
changed by CS and SI. In total, nine training wells were selected to test the sensitivity  of changing  
external features to the production  rate. As shown in Figure 11, when the CS is changed from 2 mm, 
5 mm to 8mm, the larger the choke size, the higher the production  rate will be. As the SI is modified  
from 0 h, to 12 h to 24 h, the oil rate shows that production  will increase with the shut‐in period 
prolonged  (see Figure 12). It is reasonable  because the pressure  will build up during the shut‐in 
period. The predicted  results are consistent  with field experience  and existing understanding.  
Figure 10. The predicted production of test wells with GRU and the SingleStep approach.
The proposed GRU model takes choke size and shut-in operation into account, providing a method
to predict the oil rate under variable external features. The predicted production can be changed by CS
and SI. In total, nine training wells were selected to test the sensitivity of changing external features to
the production rate. As shown in Figure 11, when the CS is changed from 2 mm, 5 mm to 8mm, the
larger the choke size, the higher the production rate will be. As the SI is modiﬁed from 0 h, to 12 h to
24 h, the oil rate shows that production will increase with the shut-in period prolonged (see Figure 12).
It is reasonable because the pressure will build up during the shut-in period. The predicted results are
consistent with ﬁeld experience and existing understanding.
4.2. Application of the GRU Model with the Iterative Approach
In application, we often need to predict a longtime production provided with limited production
history. In this research, we also explored the Iterative approach, in which we repeat the iterations
using the predicted production. More narrowly, given data of the ﬁrst HW (14 days), we predict the
production rate of the 15th day. Based on the actual rate from the 2nd to the 14th day and the predicted
rate of the 15th day, we can predict the rate of the 16th day. Then based on the actual rate from 3rd to
14th day and the predicted rate from 15th to 16th day, we can predict the rate of the 17th. Repeat the
above iterations, and we can get the predicted production rate at any point in time.

==== Page 13 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 13 of 22
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 24 
  
Figure 11. Effect of the CS on production  rate. 
 
Figure 12. Effect of the SI on production  rate. 
4.2. Application  of the GRU Model with the Iterative Approach  
In application,  we often need to predict a longtime  production  provided  with limited production  
history. In this research,  we also explored  the Iterative approach,  in which we repeat the iterations  
using the predicted  production.  More narrowly,  given data of the first HW (14 days), we predict the 
production  rate of the 15th day. Based on the actual rate from the 2nd to the 14th day and the 
predicted  rate of the 15th day, we can predict the rate of the 16th day. Then based on the actual rate 
Figure 11. Eect of the CS on production rate.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 24 
  
Figure 11. Effect of the CS on production  rate. 
 
Figure 12. Effect of the SI on production  rate. 
4.2. Application  of the GRU Model with the Iterative Approach  
In application,  we often need to predict a longtime  production  provided  with limited production  
history. In this research,  we also explored  the Iterative approach,  in which we repeat the iterations  
using the predicted  production.  More narrowly,  given data of the first HW (14 days), we predict the 
production  rate of the 15th day. Based on the actual rate from the 2nd to the 14th day and the 
predicted  rate of the 15th day, we can predict the rate of the 16th day. Then based on the actual rate 
Figure 12. Eect of the SI on production rate.
The one-feature (q o) model and the four-feature (q o+TP+SI+CS) model were ﬁrstly applied
to two training wells. As shown in Figure 13, Well 11 and Well 36 are selected to show the inﬂuence
of iterations under di erent features. The ﬁrst 14 days serve as HW, and the rest is treated as the
prediction section.
Firstly, we focus on the comparison of the two models. It can be found that the one-feature model
can only capture the descent trend and are not sensitive to oilﬁeld operations, which could lead to
enormous errors. For Well 36 with a stable decline trend production and fewer operations, both models
can predict a reasonable production and the four-feature model shows a better performance. Obviously,
for Well 11 with an undulating production, the predicted points of the four-feature model coincide

==== Page 14 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 14 of 22
with changing choke size and shut-in operation, pointing out the four-feature model can capture the
complex variation pattern under multiple factors.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   15 of 24 
 from 3rd to 14th day and the predicted  rate from 15th to 16th day, we can predict the rate of the 17th. 
Repeat the above iterations,  and we can get the predicted  production  rate at any point in time.  
The one‐feature (qo) model and the four‐feature (qo + TP + SI + CS) model were firstly applied to 
two training wells. As shown in Figure 13, Well 11 and Well 36 are selected to show the influence  of 
iterations  under different  features.  The first 14 days serve as HW, and the rest is treated as the 
prediction  section.  
Firstly, we focus on the comparison  of the two models. It can be found that the one‐feature model 
can only capture the descent trend and are not sensitive  to oilfield operations,  which could lead to 
enormous  errors. For Well 36 with a stable decline trend production  and fewer operations,  both 
models can predict a reasonable  production  and the four‐feature model shows a better performance.  
Obviously,  for Well 11 with an undulating  production,  the predicted  points of the four‐feature model 
coincide with changing  choke size and shut‐in operation,  pointing  out the four‐feature model can 
capture the complex variation  pattern under multiple  factors.  
  
(a)  (b) 
Figure 13. Comparison  of the one‐feature model and the four‐feature model with the Iterative 
approach  under multiple  factors; (a) Well 11; (b) Well 36. 
Figure 14 shows the half boxplot of the mismatch  between the two GRU models on six test wells. 
The difference  between the predicted  and true production  rate of test wells is quantified  by MAE and 
RMSE. The mean value of RMSE from the four‐feature model, 13.84, is much less than that of the one‐
feature model, which is 25.91. Similarly,  the mean value of MAEs from the four‐feature model, 11.21, 
is less than that of the one‐feature model, which is 22.79. Many scholars have corroborated  the 
feasibility  of RNN and LSTM algorithms  in production  prediction,  but few focus on the influence  of 
external variables  on prediction  performance.  In this research,  we compared  the two models and 
found that the ability of the four‐feature model to capture variances  and prediction  accuracy  
outperforms  the one‐feature model. 
Figure 13. Comparison of the one-feature model and the four-feature model with the Iterative approach
under multiple factors; ( a) Well 11; ( b) Well 36.
Figure 14 shows the half boxplot of the mismatch between the two GRU models on six test wells.
The di erence between the predicted and true production rate of test wells is quantiﬁed by MAE and
RMSE. The mean value of RMSE from the four-feature model, 13.84, is much less than that of the
one-feature model, which is 25.91. Similarly, the mean value of MAEs from the four-feature model,
11.21, is less than that of the one-feature model, which is 22.79. Many scholars have corroborated the
feasibility of RNN and LSTM algorithms in production prediction, but few focus on the inﬂuence of
external variables on prediction performance. In this research, we compared the two models and found
that the ability of the four-feature model to capture variances and prediction accuracy outperforms the
one-feature model.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   16 of 24 
  
Figure 14. Half boxplot of mean absolute error (MAE) and RMSE of the one‐feature model and four‐
feature model with the Iterative approach  on test wells. 
Then, we focus on the performance  of the four‐feature model itself. It can be found from Figure 
13 that the production  data are not monotonically  decreasing  but display a complex variation  pattern 
because of frequent operations.  The proposed  model could capture the complicated  changes and 
fluctuate  with changing  choke size and shut‐in operation.  However,  the available  production  history, 
long prediction  section, and frequent  operations  increase the difficulties  of iterative prediction.  
Although  errors of the SingleStep  scheme are small, the errors become bigger if the Iterative approach  
is used. Figure 15 shows some typical prediction  results of training wells with big relative errors. The 
first is partial inconsistency,  which results from oilfield operations.  The ability of the trained model 
to capture sharp and sudden variances  is limited, which leads to predicted  values usually lower than 
actual values when CS is changed.  This phenomenon  is obvious in Well 32. The shut‐in operation  
around the 380th day results in a stable gap between the predicted  and actual values after the 
operation.  The second is the overall trend lower than actual points, such as Well 35, which might be 
caused by the diversity  of formation  and fracturing  conditions.  The changing  trend of predicted  
points is consistent  with the recorded  production  rate, but a stable difference  exists during the whole 
prediction.  Although  all the wells belong to the same well block, the geological  and fracturing  
features change with the distribution  of fault blocks and the advance of stimulation  technologies.  
Another possible explanation  is that the production  of the first 14 days is still on the rise, which will 
provide an inaccurate  baseline for later iterative prediction.  The errors also occur in test wells when 
using the Iterative approach  for prediction.  Although  the accuracy  of single‐point prediction  is pretty 
high, the performance  becomes  worse as the number of iterations  increase.  The mean RMSE of test 
wells with the Iterative approach  is 13.91, 2.8 times of the SingleStep  approach,  which is 4.91. The 
increased  error is the comprehensive  effect of numerous  iterations,  sharp variances,  and diversity  of 
formation  and fracturing.  
Figure 14. Half boxplot of mean absolute error (MAE) and RMSE of the one-feature model and
four-feature model with the Iterative approach on test wells.
Then, we focus on the performance of the four-feature model itself. It can be found from
Figure 13 that the production data are not monotonically decreasing but display a complex variation
pattern because of frequent operations. The proposed model could capture the complicated changes

==== Page 15 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 15 of 22
and ﬂuctuate with changing choke size and shut-in operation. However, the available production
history, long prediction section, and frequent operations increase the di culties of iterative prediction.
Although errors of the SingleStep scheme are small, the errors become bigger if the Iterative approach
is used. Figure 15 shows some typical prediction results of training wells with big relative errors.
The ﬁrst is partial inconsistency, which results from oilﬁeld operations. The ability of the trained model
to capture sharp and sudden variances is limited, which leads to predicted values usually lower than
actual values when CS is changed. This phenomenon is obvious in Well 32. The shut-in operation
around the 380th day results in a stable gap between the predicted and actual values after the operation.
The second is the overall trend lower than actual points, such as Well 35, which might be caused by the
diversity of formation and fracturing conditions. The changing trend of predicted points is consistent
with the recorded production rate, but a stable di erence exists during the whole prediction. Although
all the wells belong to the same well block, the geological and fracturing features change with the
distribution of fault blocks and the advance of stimulation technologies. Another possible explanation
is that the production of the ﬁrst 14 days is still on the rise, which will provide an inaccurate baseline
for later iterative prediction. The errors also occur in test wells when using the Iterative approach for
prediction. Although the accuracy of single-point prediction is pretty high, the performance becomes
worse as the number of iterations increase. The mean RMSE of test wells with the Iterative approach is
13.91, 2.8 times of the SingleStep approach, which is 4.91. The increased error is the comprehensive
eect of numerous iterations, sharp variances, and diversity of formation and fracturing.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   17 of 24 
   
(a)  (b) 
Figure 15. Typical prediction  results of training wells with big relative errors: (a) partial inconsistency;  
(b) overall inconsistency.  
4.3. GRU_RF  Model for Improving  “Iterative”  Accuracy   
To improve  the prediction  accuracy,  we set up an RF model to fit the errors between the 
predicted  and true production  rate. The allocation  scheme of the training set, validation  set, and test 
set is the same as that of the GRU model. Considering  two kinds of errors, the inputs of RF include 
dynamic  and static features relating to production,  operations,  formation,  and fracturing,  as listed in 
Table 3. The number of estimators  is set to 50, and the maximum  depth is 3. 
Table 3. The input and output features of the Random  Forest (RF) model. 
Input Features   Symbol 
Production  predicted  production  by GRU  Predicted  qT 
the predicted  production  of the previous  7 
days by GRU Predicted  qT−1, qT−2, qT−3, qT−4, qT−5, 
qT−6, qT−7 
Cumulative  production  of the first 14 days  Q14 days 
Cumulative  production  of the first 30 days  Q30 days 
Number of iterations  (production  time)  Niter 
Operations  Choke size  CS 
Shut‐in time  SI 
changes of choke size  CS T − CS T−1 
changes of shut‐in time  SIT − SIT−1 
Fracturing  Total sand per well  Total sand 
Total liquid per well  Total liquid 
Well lateral length  Length 
Formation  The minimal horizontal  principle  stress  MHPS 
Oil saturation   Soil 
Porosity  Poro 
Well vertical depth  TVD 
Output the errors between the predicted  and true 
production  rate Error 
The overall workflow  of the GRU_RF  model is illustrated  in Figure 16. The proposed  model in 
the blue dashed box consists of two sub‐models: the GRU model and the RF model. Each step in the 
flowchart  is described  in detail below:  
Figure 15. Typical prediction results of training wells with big relative errors: ( a) partial inconsistency;
(b) overall inconsistency.
4.3. GRU_RF Model for Improving “Iterative” Accuracy
To improve the prediction accuracy, we set up an RF model to ﬁt the errors between the predicted
and true production rate. The allocation scheme of the training set, validation set, and test set is the
same as that of the GRU model. Considering two kinds of errors, the inputs of RF include dynamic
and static features relating to production, operations, formation, and fracturing, as listed in Table 3.
The number of estimators is set to 50, and the maximum depth is 3.
The overall workﬂow of the GRU_RF model is illustrated in Figure 16. The proposed model in
the blue dashed box consists of two sub-models: the GRU model and the RF model. Each step in the
ﬂowchart is described in detail below:
Step 1. Training the GRU model. After data preprocessing (as described in Figure 2), the data set
are split into three parts, and the GRU model is fed by training wells and optimized by
validation wells.

==== Page 16 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 16 of 22
Step 2. Preliminary forecasting with the GRU model and Iterative prediction approach. Based
on historical production data of HW, we can get the time-series predicted production by
continuous iterations.
Step 3. Training the RF model. To revise the GRU model’s predicted errors caused by iterations
and diversity of formation and fracturing, the RF model is trained with the predicted errors
between the predicted production of the GRU model and the true production as output.
Remarkably, the RF model is fed by the same training wells as the GRU model.
Step 4. Second forecasting with the RF model. Given inputs of production, operations, formation,
and fracturing parameters, the correction errors can be predicted by the RF model.
Step 5. Forecasting with the GRU_RF model for test wells. The purpose is to use the trained model
applicable to the whole well block to forecast the long-term production of new wells. Hence,
given inputs of HW, we can directly get the predicted production (Step 2) and the predicted
errors (Step 4) without training the model repeatedly, as shown in the deep red ﬂow line in
Figure 16. The predictions of the GRU_RF model are obtained by subtracting the predicted
errors of the RF model from the predicted production of the GRU model.
Table 3. The input and output features of the Random Forest (RF) model.
Input Features Symbol
Productionpredicted production by GRU Predicted q T
the predicted production of the previous 7 days by GRUPredicted q T 1, qT 2, qT 3, qT 4,
qT 5, qT 6, qT 7
Cumulative production of the ﬁrst 14 days Q14 days
Cumulative production of the ﬁrst 30 days Q30 days
Number of iterations (production time) N iter
OperationsChoke size CS
Shut-in time SI
changes of choke size CS T CST 1
changes of shut-in time SI T SIT 1
FracturingTotal sand per well Total sand
Total liquid per well Total liquid
Well lateral length Length
FormationThe minimal horizontal principle stress MHPS
Oil saturation S oil
Porosity Poro
Well vertical depth TVD
Output the errors between the predicted and true production rate Error
For a fair evaluation, the accuracy of the proposed GRU_RF model is compared with that of the
fully connected RNN, LSTM and the baseline GRU. To be consistent with GRU_RF, data of the ﬁrst
14 days are treated as training data, and the rest are test data. The model architecture, prediction
approach, and external features of RNN and LSTM are the same as GRU. The values of parameters
used to train RNN and LSTM are also the same as GRU, as listed in Table 2. For the RNN /LSTM layer,
the number of neurons is 32. All the models are trained and utilized with the Iterative prediction
approach and four-feature inputs. Figure 17 shows the prediction results of RNN, LSTM, GRU,
and GRU_RF. All of the results are consistent with the trend of the production for the test wells.
However, the results of GRU_RF are with smaller errors, suggesting pretty model generalizability.
Figure 18 compares the prediction performance of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF on test wells.
It is shown that GRU_RF outperforms the other three methods. The mean RMSE of GRU_RF is 10.67,
smaller than the mean RMSE of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 16.82, 13.49, and 13.91, respectively.
The mean MAE of GRU_RF is 7.55, less than that of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 13.51, 10.60,
and 11.29, respectively. In general, the e ect of the GRU_RF is better than RNN, LSTM, and GRU. It is

==== Page 17 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 17 of 22
worth noting that only inputs of the ﬁrst HW are available during the whole prediction. Although the
predicted points are not in perfect agreement with the recorded production curve, it is exciting that the
trained model provides a feasible method to predict long-term production for newly developed wells
with limited production data. The traditional DCA and conventional prediction methods cannot be
applied to new wells with little data easily.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   18 of 24 
 Step 1. Training  the GRU model. After data preprocessing  (as described  in Figure 2), the data set are 
split into three parts, and the GRU model is fed by training wells and optimized  by validation  
wells. 
Step 2. Preliminary  forecasting  with the GRU model and Iterative prediction  approach.  Based on 
historical  production  data of HW, we can get the time‐series predicted  production  by 
continuous  iterations.  
Step 3. Training  the RF model. To revise the GRU model’s predicted  errors caused by iterations  and 
diversity  of formation  and fracturing,  the RF model is trained with the predicted  errors 
between the predicted  production  of the GRU model and the true production  as output. 
Remarkably,  the RF model is fed by the same training wells as the GRU model. 
Step 4. Second forecasting  with the RF model. Given inputs of production,  operations,  formation,  
and fracturing  parameters,  the correction  errors can be predicted  by the RF model.  
Step 5. Forecasting  with the GRU_RF  model for test wells. The purpose is to use the trained model 
applicable  to the whole well block to forecast the long‐term production  of new wells. Hence, 
given inputs of HW, we can directly get the predicted  production  (Step 2) and the predicted  
errors (Step 4) without training the model repeatedly,  as shown in the deep red flow line in 
Figure 16. The predictions  of the GRU_RF  model are obtained  by subtracting  the predicted  
errors of the RF model from the predicted  production  of the GRU model. 
 
Figure 16. The overall workflow  of the proposed  GRU_RF  model. 
For a fair evaluation,  the accuracy  of the proposed  GRU_RF  model is compared  with that of the 
fully connected  RNN, LSTM and the baseline GRU. To be consistent  with GRU_RF,  data of the first 
14 days are treated as training data, and the rest are test data. The model architecture,  prediction  
approach,  and external features of RNN and LSTM are the same as GRU. The values of parameters  
used to train RNN and LSTM are also the same as GRU, as listed in Table 2. For the RNN/LSTM  layer, 
the number of neurons is 32. All the models are trained and utilized with the Iterative prediction  
approach  and four‐feature inputs. Figure 17 shows the prediction  results of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and 
GRU_RF.  All of the results are consistent  with the trend of the production  for the test wells. However,  
the results of GRU_RF  are with smaller errors, suggesting  pretty model generalizability.  
Figure 16. The overall workﬂow of the proposed GRU_RF model.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   19 of 24 
  
Figure 17. The predicted  production  of test wells with RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF.  
Figure 18 compares  the prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test 
wells. It is shown that GRU_RF  outperforms  the other three methods.  The mean RMSE of GRU_RF  
is 10.67, smaller than the mean RMSE of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 16.82, 13.49, and 13.91, 
respectively.  The mean MAE of GRU_RF  is 7.55, less than that of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 
13.51, 10.60, and 11.29, respectively.  In general, the effect of the GRU_RF  is better than RNN, LSTM, 
and GRU. It is worth noting that only inputs of the first HW are available  during the whole prediction.  
Although  the predicted  points are not in perfect agreement  with the recorded  production  curve, it is 
exciting that the trained model provides  a feasible method to predict long‐term production  for newly 
developed  wells with limited production  data. The traditional  DCA and conventional  prediction  
methods  cannot be applied to new wells with little data easily. 
   
(a)  (b) 
Figure 18. Comparison  of prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test wells 
with two evaluation  indices: (a) RMSE; (b) MAE. 
The proposed  model has advantages  over traditional  DCA and conventional  time‐series 
prediction  methods.  Firstly, it can be applied to new wells with production  time of over 2 weeks. For 
Figure 17. The predicted production of test wells with RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF.

==== Page 18 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 18 of 22
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   19 of 24 
  
Figure 17. The predicted  production  of test wells with RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF.  
Figure 18 compares  the prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test 
wells. It is shown that GRU_RF  outperforms  the other three methods.  The mean RMSE of GRU_RF  
is 10.67, smaller than the mean RMSE of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 16.82, 13.49, and 13.91, 
respectively.  The mean MAE of GRU_RF  is 7.55, less than that of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 
13.51, 10.60, and 11.29, respectively.  In general, the effect of the GRU_RF  is better than RNN, LSTM, 
and GRU. It is worth noting that only inputs of the first HW are available  during the whole prediction.  
Although  the predicted  points are not in perfect agreement  with the recorded  production  curve, it is 
exciting that the trained model provides  a feasible method to predict long‐term production  for newly 
developed  wells with limited production  data. The traditional  DCA and conventional  prediction  
methods  cannot be applied to new wells with little data easily. 
   
(a)  (b) 
Figure 18. Comparison  of prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test wells 
with two evaluation  indices: (a) RMSE; (b) MAE. 
The proposed  model has advantages  over traditional  DCA and conventional  time‐series 
prediction  methods.  Firstly, it can be applied to new wells with production  time of over 2 weeks. For 
Figure 18. Comparison of prediction performance of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF on test wells
with two evaluation indices: ( a) RMSE; ( b) MAE.
The proposed model has advantages over traditional DCA and conventional time-series prediction
methods. Firstly, it can be applied to new wells with production time of over 2 weeks. For most
of these new wells, the initial production rate shows an increasing trend because of the wellbore
storage e ect. Traditional DCA is nowhere to be utilized in wells without a declining trend [ 9].
The conventional time-series prediction methods (i.e., ARMA, ARIMA, ARIMAX) are linear models
based on statistics [ 8,44]. Learning from the initial production will obtain a rising prediction trend
contrary to the long prediction section, which will lead to huge errors. Therefore, neither traditional
DCA nor conventional time-series prediction methods can achieve the production prediction of wells
with short production time. Secondly, the proposed model can achieve batch forecasting of multiple
wells. Additionally, it is much faster because it doesn’t need to train the GRU_RF model every
time. However, the other two methods have to tune multiple model hyperparameters (such as initial
decline rate, decline index, autoregression coe cient, moving average coe cient) with wells changed,
which is time-consuming and cumbersome. Thirdly, it takes CS and SI into account, o ering a way to
analyze the e ect of external features on the production rate. As we can see from Figures 11 and 12,
the predicted rate will change with CS and SI changes. However, traditional DCA, ARMA and ARIMA
cannot consider the e ect of CS and SI on production rate. Although ARIMAX can consider external
features, it has many restrictions in application due to strict statistical background [ 45], such as strong
correlations between the dependent feature and external features, which constrain its application in
production prediction. Finally, the proposed model prevents the subjectivity of analysts from a ecting
the predicted results. The same inputs will guarantee the same output. However, the predicted
values of DCA vary with the selection of the starting point, which will result in great uncertainty for
production prediction [10].
Figure 19 shows the feature importance ranking determined by RF. It can be seen from Figure 19a
that the most important features for model revising are the predicted rate 7 days ago, CS and oil
saturation, which account for more than 60% of feature importance. Figure 19b displays the importance
scores of di erent feature types. Production, formation conditions, and oilﬁeld operations play an
important role in revising the production rate. It is consistent with the previous analysis of the cause of
errors, in which the rising trend of initial production, various oilﬁeld operations, and di erences in
formation and stimulation will a ect the single well prediction. This infers that it is essential to take
the geological and completion features into account when building a model for a whole well block.
4.4. Continuous Learning
Production is a dynamic and coupled process, related to fracture propagation, proppant failure,
formation property variation, and oilﬁeld operations. With the production data updated dynamically,

==== Page 19 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 19 of 22
we plan to introduce continuous learning into production prediction. Continuous learning is the
concept of learning continuously and adaptively about the external world and enabling the autonomous
incremental development of ever more complex skills and knowledge [ 46,47]. Here continuous learning
refers to updating the history window and trained models for future production predictions during
the whole production period. For one new well, continuous learning refers to the PartIterative scheme,
as depicted in Figure 8c, in which the HW will be updated as time goes on to make full use of production
data. For multiple wells, continuous learning means that as data streams into the database, the model
is updated as soon as enough new data are available, as shown in Figure 20. Firstly, the currently
available data are divided into the training set and test set. The No.1 model is obtained based on
current data. With new data added into the database, the old data serve as the training set, and new
data become the test set. The No.2 model can be developed and the old data become the training set
and so on. In this way, the well-block model could be updated continuously, similar to the cognitive
process from simple to deep. In the future, we will further explore the continuous prediction to make
full use of available data.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   21 of 24 
  
Figure 19. Feature importance  ranking of RF: (a) sorted by single parameter;  (b) sorted by parameter  
types. 
4.4. Continuous  Learning 
Production  is a dynamic  and coupled process, related to fracture propagation,  proppant  failure, 
formation  property  variation,  and oilfield operations.  With the production  data updated 
dynamically,  we plan to introduce  continuous  learning into production  prediction.  Continuous  
learning is the concept of learning continuously  and adaptively  about the external world and 
enabling  the autonomous  incremental  development  of ever more complex skills and knowledge  
[46,47]. Here continuous  learning refers to updating  the history window and trained models for 
future production  predictions  during the whole production  period. For one new well, continuous  
learning refers to the PartIterative  scheme, as depicted  in Figure 8c, in which the HW will be updated 
as time goes on to make full use of production  data. For multiple  wells, continuous  learning means 
that as data streams into the database,  the model is updated as soon as enough new data are available,  
as shown in Figure 20. Firstly, the currently  available  data are divided into the training set and test 
set. The No.1 model is obtained  based on current data. With new data added into the database,  the 
old data serve as the training set, and new data become the test set. The No.2 model can be developed  
and the old data become the training set and so on. In this way, the well‐block model could be 
updated continuously,  similar to the cognitive  process from simple to deep. In the future, we will 
further explore the continuous  prediction  to make full use of available  data. 
Figure 19. Feature importance ranking of RF: ( a) sorted by single parameter; ( b) sorted by
parameter types.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   22 of 24 
  
Figure 20. The diagram for continuous  learning in production  prediction.  
5. Conclusions  
In this research,  a novel hybrid model GRU_RF  considering  multiple  external factors was 
proposed  for the production  prediction  of the X well block. A thorough  data preprocessing  and 
modeling  procedure  were explained,  which can be migrated  to other reservoirs  for batch production  
prediction.  The prediction  unit and length are changeable  with flexible model architecture.  
The major conclusions  are as follows: 
(1). The proposed  GRU_RF  model provided  a promising  method for predicting  long‐term 
production  of new‐developed  wells with the initial production,  as evidenced  by six test wells. 
Its generalization  ability was satisfactory  when applying  to wells that do not join in the training 
set. 
(2). The model considering  SI and CS provided  a method to explore the effects of variable external 
features.  The four‐feature model outperformed  the conventional  one‐feature model. It could 
accurately  capture the complex variance pattern under multiple  factors. 
(3). In addition  to production  and oilfield operations,  formation  and fracturing  parameters  
significantly  affected production  prediction  of multiple  wells from one well block, as illustrated  
by feature importance  ranking of RF. It was essential  to combine  statistic features with dynamic  
features into the time‐series prediction.  
(4). The proposed  model outperformed  traditional  DCA, conventional  time‐series methods,  simple 
RNN, LSTM, and GRU. Given limited production,  the model could achieve batch processing  
and provide a continuous  learning method for real‐time prediction.  
Author Contributions:  Methodology,  X.L.; validation,  X.L. and X.M.; investigation,  X.L. and F.X.; data curation,  
X.L. and S.Z.; writing—original  draft preparation,  X.L. and F.W. All authors have read and agreed to the 
published  version of the manuscript.  
Funding:  This research was jointly funded by the National  Major Science and Technology  Projects of China 
(2017ZX05049 ‐006), the National  Natural Science Foundation  of China (51974332  and U1762210)  and major 
projects in Karamay  (2018ZD001B).  
Acknowledgments:  The authors would like to express their gratitude  to the support of the National  Major 
Science and Technology  Projects of China, the National  Natural Science Foundation  of China and major projects 
in Karamay.   
Conflicts  of Interest:  The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References  
1. Hennigan,  H.W.; Canon, M.W.; Ziara, B.A. An interactive  production  forecasting  and economic  evaluation  
system. In Proceedings  of the SPE Annual Technical  Conference  and Exhibition,  San Antonio,  TX, USA, 4–
7 October 1981. 
2. Wang, N.; Zhao, Q. China shale gas economic  evaluation  based on Monte Carlo simulation.  In Proceedings  
of the 22nd World Petroleum  Congress,  Istanbul,  Turkey, 9–13 July 2017. 
3. Wright, J.D. Economic  evaluation  of shale gas reservoirs.  In Proceedings  of the SPE Shale Gas Production  
Conference , Fort Worth, TX, USA, 16–18 November  2008; pp. 136–145. 
4. Wilson, K.C.; Durlofsky,  L.J. Optimization  of shale gas field development  using direct search techniques  
and reduced‐physics models. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2013, 108, 304–315. 
Figure 20. The diagram for continuous learning in production prediction.

==== Page 20 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 20 of 22
5. Conclusions
In this research, a novel hybrid model GRU_RF considering multiple external factors was proposed
for the production prediction of the X well block. A thorough data preprocessing and modeling
procedure were explained, which can be migrated to other reservoirs for batch production prediction.
The prediction unit and length are changeable with ﬂexible model architecture.
The major conclusions are as follows:
(1). The proposed GRU_RF model provided a promising method for predicting long-term production
of new-developed wells with the initial production, as evidenced by six test wells. Its generalization
ability was satisfactory when applying to wells that do not join in the training set.
(2). The model considering SI and CS provided a method to explore the e ects of variable external
features. The four-feature model outperformed the conventional one-feature model. It could
accurately capture the complex variance pattern under multiple factors.
(3). In addition to production and oilﬁeld operations, formation and fracturing parameters signiﬁcantly
aected production prediction of multiple wells from one well block, as illustrated by feature
importance ranking of RF. It was essential to combine statistic features with dynamic features
into the time-series prediction.
(4). The proposed model outperformed traditional DCA, conventional time-series methods, simple
RNN, LSTM, and GRU. Given limited production, the model could achieve batch processing and
provide a continuous learning method for real-time prediction.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http: //www.mdpi.com /1996-1073 /13/22/6121/s1,
70 Excel databases containing well data recorded during this study.
Author Contributions: Methodology, X.L.; validation, X.L. and X.M.; investigation, X.L. and F.X.; data curation,
X.L. and S.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, X.L. and F.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was jointly funded by the National Major Science and Technology Projects of China
(2017ZX05049-006), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51974332 and U1762210) and major projects
in Karamay (2018ZD001B).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to express their gratitude to the support of the National Major
Science and Technology Projects of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China and major projects
in Karamay.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Hennigan, H.W.; Canon, M.W.; Ziara, B.A. An interactive production forecasting and economic evaluation
system. In Proceedings of the SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, San Antonio, TX, USA,
4–7 October 1981.
2. Wang, N.; Zhao, Q. China shale gas economic evaluation based on Monte Carlo simulation. In Proceedings
of the 22nd World Petroleum Congress, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 July 2017.
3. Wright, J.D. Economic evaluation of shale gas reservoirs. In Proceedings of the SPE Shale Gas Production
Conference, Fort Worth, TX, USA, 16–18 November 2008; pp. 136–145.
4. Wilson, K.C.; Durlofsky, L.J. Optimization of shale gas ﬁeld development using direct search techniques and
reduced-physics models. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2013 ,108, 304–315. [CrossRef]
5. Yu, W.; Luo, Z.; Javadpour, F.; Varavei, A.; Sepehrnoori, K. Sensitivity analysis of hydraulic fracture geometry
in shale gas reservoirs. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2014 ,113, 1–7. [CrossRef]
6. Nwaobi, U.; Anandarajah, G. Parameter determination for a numerical approach to undeveloped shale gas
production estimation: The UK Bowland shale region application. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 2018 ,58, 80–91.
[CrossRef]
7. Arps, J.J. Analysis of Decline Curves. Trans. AIME 1945 ,160, 228–247. [CrossRef]

==== Page 21 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 21 of 22
8. Olominu, O.; Sulaimon, A.A. Application of time series analysis to predict reservoir production performance.
In Proceedings of the SPE Nigeria Annual International Conference and Exhibition, Lagos, Nigeria, 5–7 August
2014; Volume 1, pp. 569–582.
9. Tan, L.; Zuo, L.; Wang, B. Methods of decline curve analysis for shale gas reservoirs. Energies 2018 ,11, 552.
[CrossRef]
10. Lee, K.; Lim, J.; Yoon, D.; Jung, H. Prediction of shale-gas production at duvernay formation using
deep-learning algorithm. SPE J. 2019 ,24, 2423–2437. [CrossRef]
11. Ma, Z.; Leung, J.Y.; Zanon, S.; Dzurman, P . Practical implementation of knowledge-based approaches for
steam-assisted gravity drainage production analysis. Expert Syst. Appl. 2015 ,42, 7326–7343. [CrossRef]
12. Shaheen, M.; Shahbaz, M.; Ur Rehman, Z.; Guergachi, A. Data mining applications in hydrocarbon exploration.
Artif. Intell. Rev. 2011 ,35, 1–18. [CrossRef]
13. Wang, S.; Chen, S. Insights to fracture stimulation design in unconventional reservoirs based on machine
learning modeling. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2019 ,174, 682–695. [CrossRef]
14. Al-Fattah, S.M. Time series modeling for U.S. natural gas forecasting. In Proceedings of the 2005 International
Petroleum Technology Conference, Doha, Qatar, 21–23 November 2005; pp. 973–975.
15. Gupta, S.; Fuehrer, F.; Jeyachandra, B.C. Production forecasting in unconventional resources using data mining
and time series analysis. In Proceedings of the SPE /CSUR Unconventional Resources Conference–Canada,
Calgary, AB, Canada, 30 September–2 October 2014; Volume 1, pp. 247–254.
16. Morgan, E. Accounting for serial autocorrelation in decline curve analysis of Marcellus shale gas wells.
In Proceedings of the SPE /AAPG Eastern Regional Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 7–11 October 2018.
17. Udegbe, E.; Morgan, E.; Srinivasan, S. From face detection to fractured reservoir characterization: Big data
analytics for restimulation candidate selection. In Proceedings of the SPE Annual Technical Conference and
Exhibition, San Antonio, TX, USA, 9–11 October 2017.
18. Li, Y.; Sun, R.; Horne, R. Deep learning for well data history analysis. In Proceedings of the SPE Annual
Technical Conference and Exhibition, Calgary, AB, Canada, 30 September–2 October 2019.
19. Madasu, S.; Rangarajan, K.P . Deep recurrent neural network DRNN model for real-time multistage pumping
data. In Proceedings of the OTC Arctic Technology Conference, Houston, TX, USA, 5–7 November 2018.
20. Quishpe, A.R.; Alonso, K.S.; Claramunt, J.I.A.; Barros, J.L.; Bizzotto, P .; Ferrigno, E.; Martinez, G. Innovative
artiﬁcial intelligence approach in vaca muerta shale oil wells for real time optimization. In Proceedings of
the SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Calgary, AB, Canada, 30 September–2 October 2019.
21. Azamifard, A.; Rashidi, F.; Ahmadi, M.; Pourfard, M.; Dabir, B. Toward more realistic models of reservoir by
cutting-edge characterization of permeability with MPS methods and deep-learning-based selection. J. Pet.
Sci. Eng. 2019 ,181, 106135. [CrossRef]
22. Etienam, C. 4D seismic history matching incorporating unsupervised learning. In Proceedings of the SPE
Europec featured at 81st EAGE Conference and Exhibition, London, UK, 3–6 June 2019.
23. Wang, S.; Chen, Z.; Chen, S. Applicability of deep neural networks on production forecasting in Bakken
shale reservoirs. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2019 ,179, 112–125. [CrossRef]
24. Luo, G.; Tian, Y.; Bychina, M.; Ehlig-Economides, C. Production optimization using machine learning in
bakken shale. In Proceedings of the Unconventional Resources Technology Conference, Houston, TX, USA,
23–25 July 2018.
25. He, Q. Smart determination of estimated ultimate recovery in shale gas reservoir. In Proceedings of the SPE
Eastern Regional Meeting, Lexington, KY, USA, 4–6 October 2017.
26. Hochreiter, S.; Munchen, T.U. the Vanishing Gradient Problem During Learning. Int. J. Uncertain. Fuzziness
Knowl. Based Syst. 1998 ,2, 107–116. [CrossRef]
27. Hochreiter, S.; Schmidhuber, J. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Comput. 1997 ,9, 1735–1780. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
28. Cho, K.; Van Merriënboer, B.; Gulcehre, C.; Bahdanau, D.; Bougares, F.; Schwenk, H.; Bengio, Y. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), Doha, Qatar, 8 October
2014; pp. 1724–1734.
29. Zhan, C.; Sankaran, S.; LeMoine, V .; Graybill, J.; Mey, D.O.S. Application of machine learning for production
forecasting for unconventional resources. In Proceedings of the SPE /AAPG /SEG Unconventional Resources
Technology Conference, Denver, CO, USA, 22–24 July 2019.

==== Page 22 ====
Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 22 of 22
30. Sun, J.; Ma, X.; Kazi, M. Comparison of decline curve analysis DCA with recursive neural networks RNN for
production forecast of multiple wells. In Proceedings of the SPE Western Regional Meeting, Garden Grove,
CA, USA, 22–26 April 2018.
31. Song, X.; Liu, Y.; Xue, L.; Wang, J.; Zhang, J.; Wang, J.; Jiang, L.; Cheng, Z. Time-series well performance
prediction based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network model. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2020 ,186,
106682. [CrossRef]
32. Olah, C. Understanding LSTM Networks. Available online: https: //colah.github.io /posts /2015-08-
Understanding-LSTMs (accessed on 5 October 2020).
33. Chollet, F. Keras. Available online: https: //github.com /fchollet /keras (accessed on 5 October 2020).
34. Glorot, X.; Bengio, Y. Understanding the di culty of training deep feedforward neural networks. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 2010 ,9, 249–256.
35. Kingma, D.P .; Ba, J.L. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations, San Diego, CA, USA, 7–9 May 2015; pp. 1–15.
36. Grave, É.; Obozinski, G.; Bach, F. Trace Lasso: A trace norm regularization for correlated designs. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 2011 ,24, 2187–2195.
37. Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G.; Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent
Neural Networks from Overﬁtting. Phys. Lett. B 1993 ,299, 345–350.
38. Breiman, L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 2001 ,45, 5–32. [CrossRef]
39. Aulia, A.; Jeong, D.; Saaid, I.M.; Kania, D.; Shuker, M.T.; El-Khatib, N.A. A Random Forests-based sensitivity
analysis framework for assisted history matching. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2019 ,181, 106237. [CrossRef]
40. Biau, G.; Scornet, E. A random forest guided tour. Test2016 ,25, 197–227. [CrossRef]
41. Ishwaran, H.; Malley, J.D. Synthetic learning machines. BioData Min. 2014 ,7, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Varoquaux, G.; Buitinck, L.; Louppe, G.; Grisel, O.; Pedregosa, F.; Mueller, A. Scikit-learn. GetMobile Mob.
Comput. Commun. 2015 ,19, 29–33. [CrossRef]
43. Scornet, E.; Biau, G.; Vert, J.P . Consistency of random forests. Ann. Stat. 2015 ,43, 1716–1741. [CrossRef]
44. Zhang, P .G. Time series forecasting using a hybrid ARIMA and neural network model. Neurocomputing 2003 ,
50, 159–175. [CrossRef]
45. Herui, C.U.I.; Xu, P . Summer short-term load forecasting based on ARIMAX model. Power Syst. Prot. Control
2015 ,43, 108–114.
46. Lomonaco, V . Why Continual Learning is the Key Towards Machine Intelligence. Available online:
https: //www.oreilly.com /radar /why-continuous-learning-is-key-to-ai /(accessed on 5 October 2020).
47. Ben, Y.; Perrotte, M.; Ezzatabadipour, M.; Corporation, O.P .; Ali, I. Real time hydraulic fracturing pressure
prediction with machine learning. In Proceedings of the SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference
and Exhibition, the Woodlands, The Woodlands, TX, USA, 4–6 February 2020.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aliations.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

