==== Page 1 ====
*Corresponding Author : Chandrahas Singh  
Email - chandrahas@ce.iitr.ac.in  APPLICATION OF UAV SWARM SEMI -AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM FOR THE LINEAR PHOTOGRAMMETRIC 
SURVEY  
Chandrahas Singh 1*, Vishal Mishra1,  Harshit  Harshit1, Kamal Jain 12, Martin M okros3 
1 Dept. of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India - 247667 - 
chandrahas@ ce.iitr.ac.in, vmishra1@ce.iitr.ac.in ,harshit@ce.iitr.ac.in  
2Centre of Excellence in Disaster Mitigation and Management (CoEDMM),  Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee , Uttarakhand, 
India - 247667 - kamal.jain@ce.iitr.ac.in  
3 Faculty of Forestry and Wood Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague , Czech Republic - mokros@fld.czu.cz  
 
Commission 1, ICWG I/II 
ABSTRACT:  
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle s (UAVs)  are used as stand -alone systems for a  variety of purposes  from agriculture, and environmental 
monitoring through architecture, and construction to humanitarian missions . The advantage of UAV is high spatial and temporal 
resolution but on the other hand, the disadvantage is the small area of cover and time demanding data collection. As a result of 
technological advancements, the complexity of systems  to unprecedented levels  these disadvantages can be solved by UAV Swarm 
systems.  A UAV Swarm system is defined as the utilization of more than one  UAV  that are cooperating together  in a semi -autonomous  
or autonomous manner to achieve a common  goal. There are numerous factors in play while designing a system as advanced as a UAV 
Swarm. In our experiment, we focused on t he semi -autonomous concept of creating and deploying a UAV Swarm with three Small 
UAVs in master -slave architecture for high -resolution fine -scale mapping. We demonstrate the implementation of collective behaviour 
of UAV swarm for river bed mapping that considers all on -board systems, i ncluding high resolution georeferenced aerial photography 
and navigation using high accuracy GPS. The testing field for this study was a 13.3 ha linear area of Solani River in the Haridwar 
district of the state of Uttarakhand, India. Images were captured b y all three UAVs (one leader and two followers) and 5 ground control 
points (GCP) were used for geo -referencing. Aerial Triangulation and Bundle Block adjustment were processed by photogrammetric 
software Pix4DMapper.  This UAV swarm mapping concept generat es standard accurate geospatial results of 1.24 cm GSD and RMS 
Error 0.023 meter. Assessing the proposed system's efficiency and accuracy after such processes are taken into account reduces the 
time and cost manifolds of the UAV surveying.  
KEYWORDS : UAV , UAV  swarm , Swarm Mapping, UAV Photogrammetry . 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Current advances in remote sensing technology, particularly the 
use of small and efficient unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), are 
transforming aerial mapping, generating vast amounts of data 
that can be used to optimize processes in practically every aspect 
of topographic map generation. Before recent times, high -
resolution satellite photos were regarded as the primary source of 
information, but this is changing owing to the widespread use of 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), which reduce  issues such as 
high level of ground details and restricted availability of satellite 
imagery.  Fixed -wing UAVs become impractical since they can't 
hover and must fly at too high an altitude . Therefore , rotary -wing 
UAVs like quadcopters have become the preferred option  for the 
majority of studies  (Fascista, 2022; Tang and Shao, 2015; Yao et 
al., 2019) . Given the current state of the art, they are restricted in 
flight time, necessitating time and energy -efficient solutions 
(Sampedro et al., 2016). Aerial mapping also nec essitates a 
higher level of autonomy for UAVs than their existing role as 
passive sensors with predetermined mission plans. The 
intelligent, real -time updating of the UAVs sampling strategies 
to reflect the information being acquired allows for greater 
concentration on important regions while avoiding wasting 
resources on less important locations. The principle of precision 
farming , "more production with less input " becomes attainable in 
this method. UAVs can cover a large area by a single flight of a 
swarm  to observe crops, which minimizes human involvement in obtaining information on crop health status. Due to this timely 
detection of vulnerable health areas can save losses by adopting 
proper action  (Velusamy et al., 2021) . Similar techniques may be 
used o n a UAV with more  intelligent autonomy, but they are less 
versatile and efficient in terms of time and energy consumption. 
It's also worth noting that, despite falling hardware prices as the 
drone industry grows, top -end mapping systems with onboard 
autonomy and high accuracy sensors would still be prohibitively 
expensive.  
As a result, an autonomous UAV is a liability that does not scale 
expenses with farm size and does not provide resilience against 
defects during operation execution. The foregoing d iscussion 
motivates the current research, which aims to use a swarm 
robotics approach involving groups of miniaturized low -cost 
UAVs that can provide collectively similar precision to high -end 
solutions, can be scaled to various farm sizes without sacrific ing 
speed , and has intrinsic resilience against individual flaws  (Rizk 
et al., 2020) . That is why we have decided to create an experiment 
focusing on a multi -UAV -based swarm system for mapping the 
river bed.  
2. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM AND 
MOTIVATION  
High -level missions, such as automated target recognition and 
inspection or autonomous area exploration with a UAV  may be  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
407

==== Page 2 ====
 
difficult  tasks . A strong and adaptable architecture is required to 
efficiently accomplish such high -level missions with a high level 
of autonomy  A localization module for estimating the UAV's 
position in the world geodetic system, a mission planner for 
assigning and monitoring the mission's tasks, a projected path 
planner for assigning routes with obstacle avoidance, a trajectory 
control s ystem for relocating the UAV along the desired routes 
given by the trajectory planner, and several modules for error 
checking, environment parameters monitoring, communication, 
and supervision are all required components of this architecture.  
The requireme nt for such architectures is stressed for 
complicated tasks that must be carried out in an industrial setting. 
Missions requiring the use of a complex and coordinated system, 
such as power line inspection, bridge inspection, and so on, 
necessitate the use of a coordinated system to optimize resources 
while fulfilling the objective. Due to the limited durability of the 
real batteries, doing these duties with only one UAV would need 
multiple inspection efforts in most circumstances. In these types 
of settings , the benefits of utilizing a swarm of UAVs can lead to 
more effective resource management and, as a result, cost savings 
for businesses. Furthermore, in a variety of missions where time 
is a vital limitation, a swarm of UAVs can be a very efficient way 
to complete the desired task (Jahan et al., 2020).  
On the other hand, a UAV swarm  is a complex system in which 
numerous units must work together efficiently. To do this, a 
modular and adaptive architecture capable of managing all of the 
elements of such a co mplicated system must be created. Our 
traditional generation has all of the essential capabilities for this 
management, but it lacked a coordinator capable of steering a 
multi -robot swarm of UAVs through the execution of a  mission 
that could be dynamically  re-adapted at any time if an issue 
occurred.  This effort is a step in the right direction in that regard. 
As a result, new  modules have been developed based on all of the 
functionalities of our current semi -autonomous architecture: the 
swarm system in  Mission Planner (MP), which is in charge of 
dynamically and efficiently distributing missions across all of the 
agents in the swarm while monitoring swarm behaviour , and a 
local coordinator using the radio mesh network, who is in charge 
of executing these tas ks with multipoint communication with the 
MP. 
3. MATERIALS AND METHOD  
The present paper intended to provide a real -time framework for 
UAV photogrammetric applications for topographic surveys 
using a UAV swarm system.  
3.1 Study Area  
The study area selected for testing the proposed system is located 
in the northern part of India. Roorkee is a city and municipal 
corporation in Uttarakhand, India, located in the Haridwar 
district. It is located on a level plateau under the Himalayan 
Shivalik Hills. The experimental site is located at an altitude of 
268 meters and part of the district Haridwar,  just 30 kilometers  
distant. It is positioned between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna on 
the banks of the upper Ganga canal. The test field selected for  
this experiment was the Solani riverbed , and the total area 
covered was 0.133 km2, as shown in Figure 1.   
Figure 1. Study area map and UAV swarm testing field.  
3.2 UAV Swarm System  
Yaw, pitch, roll, and thrust  and six degrees of freedom for 
movement and maneuvering  are regulated by an underactuated 
autonomous and adaptive quadcopter and propellers in the UAV 
swarm system   (Erdelj et al., 2017). There are different kinds of 
sensor and control devices  required f or every quadcopter to 
ensure a stable and controllable flight are ESC and IMU. The 
ESC operates the brushless motor while converting the Pulse 
Width Modulation (PWM) data from radio receivers or flight 
controllers by delivering a proper amount of electric  power. 
("https://ardupilot.org/planner/docs/swarming.html ," n.d.). A 
little change in the speeds of the four motors while 
simultaneously providing a constant input signal to the four 
individual ESCs causes quadcopter position drift in the x -y plane. 
This d rift is usually avoided by using flexible feedback control  
techniques .  
 
Figure 2. Three UAVs connected with Mission planner for 
flight together.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
408

==== Page 3 ====
 
An IMU is an electromechanical device that combines an 
accelerometer and a gyroscope into one unit. It aids in 
determining the quadcopter's angular location and altitude. The 
accelerometer is responsible for detecting acceleration forces 
such as gravity (a pplied to each axis) about the Earth, while the 
gyroscope is responsible for measuring the rate of angular 
rotation for each axis. Additional modules like a barometer, 
magnetometer, and altitude sensors may be utilized to provide 
very precise real -time inf ormation on height and direction of 
movement, making high -precision control of a drone much 
easier. Quadcopters frequently use the Global Positioning 
System (GPS). The primary goal of a navigation module like this 
is to enable path planning, tracking, and drone localization  (Tahir 
et al., 2019).  
APM Planner, which is also built on a multiple -vehicle 
architecture, offers more complex swarming/multiple -UAV 
control. However, Mission Planner does this in a restricted 
fashion by concurrently creating several ser ial port MAVLink 
connections and transferring GPS location data from one leader, 
flying in any mode, from manual to auto, to the other followers, 
flying in Guided mode. The leader's GPS position is updated by 
a predetermined offset before being communicate d to the 
followers as a sequence of dynamic waypoints. The followers 
will follow the leader at predetermined X, Y, and Z offset 
distances ( Khan Beigi and Reza Soleymani, 2021). Getting the 
beginning location in a UAV swarm might be difficult. The 
SYSID_THI SMAV  number and COM port are used to identify 
them in the grid. It's a good idea to fix the SYSID _THISMAV  
number to the physical vehicles so you can match the on -screen 
numbers and grid positions to the physical arrangement of the 
vehicles on the ground. M ultiple networks with the same setup 
can be launched at the same time to accommodate additional 
nodes.  
 
Figure 3. Proposed semi -autonomous architecture for UAV 
swarm.  
3.3 Swarm Communication Architecture  
The RFD900X telemetry radio establishes a mesh network by 
linking multiple drones to a single ground station without the 
need for additional radio on the central ground control station 
side. The role of fast -acting network monitoring and 
confi guration software also needs to be included. The centralized 
communications architecture evolved from the development of 
single -UAV systems and was later applied to the creation of UAV swarm technology. As shown in Figure 3, it primarily 
consists of a cent ral point to which all UAVs in the UAV swarm 
are effectively connected and responsible for exchanging 
information (Zhao et al., 2018). Under the system of 
decentralized communication architecture, the UAV operates and 
performs the interactive communication  system in real -time in an 
ad-hoc manner as per the requirement of the mission, eliminating 
the dependency of the central control station and all restrictions 
on the communication system (Skorobogatov et al., 2020).  
To solve the routing problem in multi -radio infrastructure mesh 
networks, in which each mesh node has multiple radio interfaces , 
and a subset of nodes acts as communication gateways. We 
introduce a new interference -aware routing mesh network that 
improves the discovery of pathways with lower interflow and 
intra-flow interference. This statistic  and new capabilities for 
multi -radio networks  are incorporated into the multipoint routing 
protocol to provide an improved mesh topology routing protocol 
(Campion et al., 2019).  
 
Figure 4. Multipoint mesh network using RFD900x 
modules.  
 
Figure 5. UAV swarm flight in leader and follower mode.  
We evaluate the performance of our new routing measure in our 
wireless testbed, which consists of four mesh nodes. There will 
still only be one master node , and all nodes will need to be in the 
range of the master for synchronization. Node 1 on NetworkIDs 
other than 0 will act as normal nodes and need no master node 
setting configurations. Nodes will only see other nodes on the 
same network ( Davoli et al., 20 21). 
3.4 Flight Plan And Data Collection  
The Solani River flowing along the Roorkee City was chosen to 
select a straight line and safe from human reach for testing the 
UAV swarm. The survey process was carried out by keeping the 
front overlap 75 % and the side overlap 75 % out of a total area 
of 0.133 km2 . 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
409

==== Page 4 ====
 
Table 1. Flight parameters for UAV swarm system.  
Parameter  Specification  
Area of interest  0.133 km2 
Flying height  60 meters  
Front overlap  75 %  
Side overlap  75 %  
Master  UAV  Flying Speed  5 m/s  
 
UAV swarm has been deployed in every field of engineering 
mostly in the defense  sector , but one field that remains untouched 
is aerial mapping. As far as UAV photographing is concerned, 
the UAV completes the mission by flying back and forth on its 
path during the mission . Since the task of photogrammetric 
mapping by the UAV swarm is to cover the area of interest in a 
single flight, each member of the UAV swarm must be at such a 
constant distance from the master UAV durin g the flight that the 
required side overlap for the photogrammetric calculation can be 
fully satisfied.  
 
Figure 6.UAV swarm system for aerial mapping.  
3.5 Methodology  
It is conceivable for the UAV to scan a region of interest that is 
too large for a single flight. Because UAVs rely on batteries, their 
lifetime dictates how long they can remain in the air and, in turn, 
how much ground they can cover before they run out o f power. 
In such instances, numerous flights employing two or three 
UAVs in an overlapping way may cover the whole research 
region. This allowed each mission region to be surveyed entirely 
in a single trip. In such instances, mission planning for the 
missi on area is required ( Nesbit et al., 2022). We must first 
establish and configure specific settings in your mission planner 
program before you begin shooting photographs. Figure 7 shows an example of a mission planner interface that you may use to 
schedule your flights. Take -off and landing site identification and 
specifications, flying height, direction, speed, number of flight 
lines, overlap, and other criteria are among them. These variables 
affect the final photographs as well as the entire flying campai gn. 
As a result, it is critical to understand what goes into each of these 
characteristics and what to look out for when choosing them. We 
will need to figure out how high you want your UAV to fly, 
which will be determined by the spatial resolution of the final 
photographs and the focal length of the camera ( Liu et al., 2022). 
The link between spatial resolution and flying height is inverse. 
The spatial resolution decreases as the flying height increases. 
Images are captured with an overlap to ensure the ge neration of 
a height model. Front overlap refers to the overlap between two 
consecutive photographs obtained on the same flight path, while 
side overlap refers to the overlap between two photos acquired 
on adjacent UAV flight tracks.  
 
Figure 7. Flight parameters for UAV swarm flight.  
A flight line is a route that the drone takes while gathering 
images, as the name implies. A shared region is seen on two 
sequential or adjacent pictures th anks to longitudinal and lateral 
overlaps. This allows for the creation of stereo pictures, which 
may then be used to create a height model. The percentage of 
forward and side overlap provided affects the number of flight 
paths  and the number of photograph s per flight path. Higher 
overlaps result in more flight lines and images per flight line, 
whereas smaller overlaps result in fewer  paths  and fewer aerial 
photographs  per flight line. Overlaps of 75 to 7 5% were utilized 
inside the UAV swarm system. If precise height models are to be 
constructed, these overlaps are required ( Rossi et al., 2017).  
Aerial triangulation is a technique for obtaining the coordinates 
of all objects in a picture using geographical co ordinates. The 
images must include 3D coordinates and aerial triangulation to 
determine the correctness of the mapping. The criteria for 
assessing aerial geometry in photogrammetry are now the same 
as in classic photogrammetry (Mugnai et al., 2022).  
To a s ubstantial fraction, the outcome of a UAV operation is 
driven by pre -flight planning. Mission planner programs are 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
410

==== Page 5 ====
 
often included with UAVs, making this step quite simple. This 
step enables you to plan the whole flight mission by choosing and 
defining crit ical criteria for success . However , in the case of a 
UAV swarm flight, each UAV flight path separation is 
determined by the distance between the master UAV in the center  
and two adjacent slave UAVs. Therefore, m ake the best 
selections if you have a deeper grasp of these characteristics. As 
a result, this part will go through some of the key pre -flight 
preparations needed for a successful UAV operation ( Šiljeg et al., 
2022).  
 
Figure 8.Complete methodology for UAV swarm system for 
aerial mapping.  4. RESULTS  
Data acquired from the swarm system was processed in Pix4D 
Mapper pro photogrammetric software. Standard 3D mapping 
workflow was followed in the propriety software to generate 
DSM (Digital surface model) and Ortho -photo as shown below.  
 
 
Figure 9. Data processing in Pix4DMapper 
photogrammetric software.  
The accuracy of DSM (Figure 10) generation requires well-
established  feature points extracted from the image with accurate 
exterior orientation parameters. For this drone -based  IMU  and 
GPS data are utilized  and this information  is recorded in EXIF 
tags for each acquired image . The initialization  of the 
photogrammetric process uses this information for calibration 
and further re -optimization of the solution. The triangulation 
algorithm based on Delauney triangulation is used. This method 
is recommended for flat areas (agriculture fields) and stock piles.  
 
Figure 10.DSM generated by Pix4DMapper.  
The resolution of ortho -photo is related to the resolution of DSM 
used, as a rule of thumb a DSM is generated from a set of images  
that varies in resolution > = 4 times the input image resolution.  
The point cloud, DSM , and, consequently, the ortho -photo  
accuracy are  also affected by the quality of the initial images and 
their visual content. Generated ortho -photo  here provides an 
orthographic overview of the study area consisting of a river bed 
with surrounding agricultural land parcels.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
411

==== Page 6 ====
 
 
Figure 11.Orthomosaic of the area of interest.  
For validation purposes,  well-distributed 11 Ground control 
Points (GCP) were taken in the study area. GCPs were taken 
using Spectra  Precision (SP60) GPS receiver in RTK  mode. For 
accuracy assessment , these GCPs were compared with the 
derived DSM from the above -mentioned  processing using 
Swarm -based  image data. The notable vertical deviations as 
compared with the reference GPS points show  very promising 
results as shown i n the chart below.  
 
Figure 11. Comparison between GCPs and derived 
corresponding elevation values  
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
It's very challenging and hard to integrate mission planning with 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) based Swarm system. To 
achieve the goal of designing adaptable and diversified mission 
planning architecture that can operate in real -time while 
maintaining the desired scalability, researc h and development 
efforts should focus on designing adaptable and dynamic 
architectures for a wide range of missions  and integrated with 
other architecture modules. The present research is a step in that 
direction, with an emphasis on building a multi -UAV swarm 
mission planning architecture that can offer a solid and fully 
operational framework for completely autonomously performing 
different high -level tasks like Locate Targets or Exploring and 
aerial mapping.  
To address the challenge of UAV swarm coordina tion, this study 
provides basic  mission planning architecture for application 
scenarios based on a Mission Planner (MP). The MP can perform 
a low-level  local  mission (Find  ground  object ) into multiple low -
level missions and tasks and distribute them among the various 
UAV nodes that make up the swarm, thanks to its ability to plan 
and supervise  in real -time the tasks that must be accomplished by 
each member in the swarm. A single multi -UAV flight was done 
for Solani Riverbed mapping were done in this study, with a 
swarm of three UAVs undertaking a high -level aerial mapping 
task. To determine the proposed architecture's scalability and adaptability. The suggested mission planning architectu re's 
scalability and adaptability for a variable number of UAVs and 
various types of situations for broad area coverage are shown by 
results gained during flights. The immediate emphasis of future 
development is on the inclusion of numerous functions relat ed to 
the mission management of the swarm's behaviour  in the event 
of failures, such as the disconnection of each member of the 
swarm from the ground control station, and in the case of sensor 
controller failures. Another focus of the research is on examin ing 
various optimization techniques from various perspectives, such 
as optimizing the flight paths that the swarm  group  member  must 
follow, boosting the swarm behaviour  patterns using the time 
required to complete the mission, and ideal conditions based on  
the high level of flight autonomy of each UAV of the swarm 
group . The above -mentioned advancement results in a more 
efficient and resilient architecture for future research.  
REFERENCES  
Campion, M., Ranganathan, P., Faruque , S., 2019. UAV swarm 
communication and control architectures: a review. Journal of 
Unmanned Vehicle Systems 7, 93 –106. 
https://doi.org/10.1139/juvs -2018 -0009  
Davoli, L., Pagliari, E., Ferrari, G., 202 1. Hybrid LoRa -IEEE 
802.11s Opportunistic Mesh Networking for Flexible UAV 
Swarming. Drones 5, 26. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones5020026  
Erdelj, M., Król, M., Natalizio, E., 2017. Wireless Sensor 
Networ ks and Multi -UAV systems for natural disaster 
management. Computer Networks 124, 72 –86. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2017.05.021  
https://ardupilot.org/planner/docs/swarming.html [WWW 
Document ], n.d.  
Jahan, F., Sun, W., Niyaz, Q., Alam, M., 2020. Security 
Modeling of Autonomous Systems. ACM Computing Surveys 
52, 1 –34. https://doi.org/10.1145/3337791  
Khan Beigi, N.A., Reza Soleymani, M., 2021. On t he 
Coordinated Multipoint Joint Transmission in Multi -UAV 
Sensor Networks, in ICC 2021 - IEEE International Conference 
on Communications. IEEE, pp. 1 –6. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC42927.2021.950 0399  
Liu, X., Lian, X., Yang, W., Wang, F., Han, Y., Zhang, Y., 2022. 
Accuracy Assessment of a UAV Direct Georeferencing Method 
and Impact of the Configuration of Ground Control Points. 
Drones 6, 30. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones6020030  
Mugnai, F., Longinotti, P., Vezzosi, F., Tucci, G., 2022. 
Performing low -altitude photogrammetric surveys, a 
comparative analysis of user -grade unmanned aircraft systems. 
Applied Geomatics 14, 211 –223. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12518 -022-00421 -7 
Nesbit, P.R., Hubbard, S.M., Hugenholtz, C.H., 2022. Direct 
Georeferencing UAV -SfM in High -Relief Topography: 
Accuracy Assessment and Alternative Ground Control Strategies 
along Steep Inaccessible Rock Slopes. Remote Sensing 14, 490. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14030490  
Rizk, Y., Awad, M., Tunstel, E.W., 2020. Cooperative 
Heterogeneous Multi -Robot Systems. ACM Computing Survey s 
52, 1 –31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3303848  
250252254256258
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 11Vertical Accuracy
 GPS Elevation(Meter) UAV Elevation(Meter)
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
412

==== Page 7 ====
 
Rossi, P., Mancini, F., Dubbini , M., Mazzone, F., Capra, A., 
2017. Combining nadir and oblique UAV imagery to reconstruct 
quarry topography: methodology and feasibility analysis. 
European Journal of Remote Sensing 50, 211 –221. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/22797254.2017.1313097  
Sampedro, C., Bavle, H., Sanchez -Lopez, J.L., Fernandez, 
R.A.S., Rodriguez -Ramos, A., Molina, M., Campoy, P., 2016. A 
flexible and dynamic mission planning architecture for UAV 
swarm coordination, in: 2016 In ternational Conference on 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS). IEEE, pp. 355 –363. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS.2016.7502669  
Šiljeg, A., Panđa, L., Domazetović, F., Marić, I., Gašparović, M., 
Borisov , M., Milošević, R., 2022. Comparative Assessment of 
Pixel and Object -Based Approaches for Mapping of Olive Tree 
Crowns Based on UAV Multispectral Imagery. Remote Sensing 
14, 757. https://doi.org/10.3390/r s14030757  
Skorobogatov, G., Barrado, C., Salamí, E., 2020. Multiple UAV 
Systems: A Survey. Unmanned Systems 08, 149 –169. 
https://doi.org/10.1142/S2301385020500090  
Tahir, A., Böling, J., Haghbayan, M .-H., Toivonen, H.T., Plosila, 
J., 2019. Swarms of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles — A Survey. J 
Ind Inf Integr 16, 100106. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.100106  
Zhao, J., Gao, F., Ding, G., Zhang, T.,  Jia, W., Nallanathan, A., 
2018. Integrating Communications and Control for UAV 
Systems: Opportunities and Challenges. IEEE Access 6, 67519 –
67527. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2879637  
 
 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
413

