==== Page 1 ====
Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in business management, e-
commerce and ﬁnance
Harikumar Pallathadkaa,⇑, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asisb, Telmo Pablo Loli-Pomac,
Karthikeyan Kaliyaperumald, Randy Joy Magno Ventayene, Mohd Navedf
aManipur International University, Imphal, Manipur, India
bDepartment of Economic and Administrative Sciences Faculty, Universidad San Pedro, Huaraz, Peru
cDepartment of Business and Tourism Faculty Universidad Nacional Santiago Antúnez de Mayolo, Huaraz, Perú
dIT @ IoT – HH Campus, AMBO University, Ethiopia
ePublic Relations, Publication and Information Ofﬁce, Philippines
fDepartment of Business Analytics, Jagannath University, Delhi-NCR, India
article info
Article history:
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Machine learningE-commerceFinancePredictionAnalysisabstract
In the e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries, AI has been deployed to achieve better customer experience,
efﬁcient supply chain management, improved operational efﬁciency, and reduced mate size, with themain goal of designing standard, reliable product quality control methods and the search for new ways
of reaching and serving customers while maintaining low cost. Machine learning and deep learning are
two of the most often used AI approaches. Individuals, businesses, and government agencies utilize thesemodels to anticipate and learn from data. Machine learning models for the complexity and diversity of
data in the food industry are being developed at the moment. This article discusses machine learning
and artiﬁcial intelligence applications in e-commerce, corporate management, and ﬁnance. Sales growth,proﬁt maximization, sales forecast, inventory management, security, fraud detection, and portfolio man-agement are some of the major uses.
/C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Confer-ence on Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics, Nanomaterials, Nanobioscience & Nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence usually refers to the artiﬁcial fabrication of
human minds that can learn natural language, plan it, perceive it or
process it [1]. It is the theory and development of computer sys-
tems that can generally carry out activities requiring human intel-
ligence, such as visual perception, recognition of speech, decision-
making and language translation [3]. Artiﬁcial intelligence is an IT
industry that mostly works with machines which are built to oper-
ate like a human being. John McCarthy (AI’s dad) described AI as
‘‘the scientiﬁc and technical knowledge of developing smart com-puter programs in particular”.
Machine learning and profound learning are two of the most
often utilized AI methods. These models learn from data and areused for predicting by individuals, ﬁrms and government organiza-
tions. Machine learning models for the complexity and diversity of
data in the food business are nowadays being developed [2,3] .
In e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries with a major aim to
design standard, reliable product quality control methods and
the search for new ways of reaching and serving customers, while
at the same time maintaining low cost, has required deployed AI in
order to achieve better customer experience, efﬁcient management
of the supply chain, improved operational efﬁciency, reduced mate
size.
This article presents applications of machine learning and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence in e-commerce, business management and
ﬁnance. Major applications include sales increase, proﬁt maximiza-
tion, sales prediction, inventory management, security, fraud
detection and portfolio management.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.419
2214-7853/ /C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Conference on Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics, Na nomaterials,
Nanobioscience & Nanotechnology.⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: harikumar@miu.edu.in (H. Pallathadka), edwin.ramirez@u-
sanpedro.edu.pe (E.H. Ramirez-Asis), plolip@unasam.edu.pe (T.P. Loli-Poma), rven-
tayen@psu.edu.ph (R.J.M. Ventayen).Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today: Proceedings
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/matpr
Please cite this article as: H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al., Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in bus iness man-
agement, e-commerce and ﬁnance, Materials Today: Proceedings, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.419

==== Page 2 ====
2. Different artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
techniques
Machine learning is the most important AI technique. Relation-
ship between machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence is shown
below in Fig. 1 . This section contains prominent machine learning
techniques.
Machine learning (ML) [4]is a new area of data mining that
allows a computer program to grow increasingly accurate in pre-
dicting outcomes without explicitly programming it. These ML
techniques are often divided into two types: supervised and unsu-pervised learning techniques employ labeled training data for
inference (classiﬁcation, regression), whereas unsupervised learn-
ing techniques employ unlabeled data to identify hidden existing
patterns (clustering).
The act of transforming an input collection of instances P into a
unique collection of characteristics Q, also known as target attri-
butes or labels, is known as classiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation techniques
such as decision tree classiﬁers, bayesian classiﬁers, and artiﬁcial
neural networks, nearest neighbor classiﬁers, random forest, and
support vector machines are used in a variety of applications [5].
We’ll go through each of them brieﬂy. Each strategy is based on
the learning algorithm that it utilizes.
A decision tree is one of the most basic and simple classiﬁers
used to solve classiﬁcation issues. A decision tree is a graph in
which occurrences are classiﬁed by sorting them depending on
their feature values. The decision tree is composed of nodes and
branches, with each node representing a classiﬁcation instance
and each branch representing a value that the node might take
on. In decision, instance categorization starts at the root node,
and instance sorting is done based on feature values.
Predicting the class label for a given collection of input qualities
can be challenging in some situations. Furthermore, even when
utilizing the speciﬁed input attributes set values to match some
of the attributes in the training data set, class variables are non-
deterministic. This is possible due to the presence of some noisy
data and perplexing features that are not considered during analy-
sis. For example, projecting the possibility of heart disease in a
given person based on that individual’s daily activity.
In this instance, it is probable that the majority of people who
consume nutritious foods and exercise on a regular basis are at risk
of acquiring heart disease owing to other variables such as smok-ing, alcohol intake, and potentially inheritance. In such circum-
stances, the categorization model is created based on well
recognized heart disease characteristics, which cannot offer correct
information. In such situations, there is a requirement to describe
probabilistic correlations between the attribute collection and the
class label, and the Bayesian classiﬁer is all about justifying such
duties [6].
An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is based on biological neural
networks, which are used to build animal brains. ANN is also
known as a connectionist system since it is built up of linked nodes
and directed linkages. Each linked connection is assigned a weight
and is responsible for sending a signal from one node to another.
When a node gets a signal, it processes it before passing it through
to another node.
In ordinary ANN implementations, the signal at the link
between artiﬁcial neurons is basically a real number, and the out-
put of each neuron is determined by a non-linear function of the
sum of all its inputs. Because of the weights of artiﬁcial neurons
and the connections between them, the signal intensity rises or
decreases as learning continues [7].
There are two approaches to building a learning model in ML
classiﬁcation. One of them is that the model begins learning as
soon as the training set is available; such models are known as
eager learners. Another model observes all training examples but
only achieves classiﬁcation if the test instance’s properties per-
fectly match any of the training instances. Such pupils are known
as lazy pupils [8].
The Nearest Neighbour (NN) classiﬁer treats each sample as a
data point in a d-dimensional space, where d is the number of
characteristics. It is determined the distance between the provided
test example and all data points in the training set. The data point
X’s k-Nearest Neighbors are the k points nearest to the X.
The data point is then categorised based on the class labels of its
neighbors. If a data point has more than one class labeled neighbor,
the class label with the most class labels is applied to the data
point. The precise value of k’s nearest neighbors should be estab-
lished. If the value of k is too low, it may misclassify owing to noise
in the training data. On the other hand, if the value of k is too big,
there is a risk of misclassiﬁcation since the collection of nearest
neighbors may contain data points that are situated far away from
the test attribute’s neighborhood.
To begin, Random forest is a supervised machine learning tech-
nique composed of a forest of judgments produced by many deci-
sion trees produced using random vectors. This method may be
used to solve classiﬁcation problems as well as regression opera-
tions. The random forest’s outcome is connected to the number
of trees it combines in the forest in such a manner that as the num-
ber of trees in the forest rises, so does the chance of attaining moreaccuracy. It is critical to understand that establishing the forest is
not the same as generating decision trees
[8].
The main difference between decision trees and random forests
is that in random forest classiﬁcation, identifying the root node and
separating the feature nodes happens at random. Random forest
categorization is popular due of its advantages. One of these is that
it may be used for both classiﬁcation and regression. Another
advantage of this strategy is that it avoids the problem of overﬁt-
ting if a sufﬁcient number of trees are available. A random forest
classiﬁer, in addition, can handle missing data and can be modelled
in the case of categorical data.
Random forest classiﬁers are used in medical, ﬁnance, e-
commerce, and the stock market. In banking, random classiﬁers
are used to distinguish between loyal and fraudulent clients. Ran-
dom Forest is used in medicine to discover the optimal mix of med-
ications and to diagnose illness based on a patient’s past medical
information. In the stock market, Random Forest classier is used
to watch a stock’s activity and then detect the loss and proﬁt. Ran-
 Fig. 1. Relationship between Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning.H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al. Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
2

==== Page 3 ====
dom Forest may be used to estimate user product suggestions in
the context of e-commerce.
The Support Vector Machine is the supervised learning model
used for categorization (SVM). It has received a great deal of inter-
est in the categorization sector. A noticeable gap separates
instances of the various categories in vector space in the SVM
model. When a new sample arrives, it is mapped into the speciﬁed
vector space and its label is assigned to a category based on which
side of the gap it falls [9]. An SVM can do non-linear classiﬁcation
effectively by employing the kernel technique.
Clustering, also known as cluster analysis, is the job of arranging
a collection of things so that elements in one group are more sim-
ilar to those in another. As the similarities between things in one
group and the dissimilarities between things in other groups rose,
so did the clustering. Clustering is the cornerstone of data miningand may be employed in a wide range of applications like image
processing, data compression, computer graphics, machine learn-
ing, and many more.
Clustering can be used in combination with other object-
categorization techniques such as classiﬁcation, segmentation,
and partitioning. When comparing Cluster analysis to classiﬁca-
tion, we may state that clustering is an example of unsupervised
learning. Cluster analysis varies from classiﬁcation in that classiﬁ-
cation retains knowledge of classes, but clustering does not main-
tain knowledge of classes. Furthermore, fresh samples are grouped
into established classes in the case of classiﬁcation, whereas
groups are recommended in the case of cluster analysis based on
data patterns [9].
3. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in business
management, e-commerce and ﬁnance
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning in
Business management, e-commerce and ﬁnance are discussed in
this section [10–15] .
/C15Chatbots
Most of the E-commerce and ﬁnancial web sites are using chat-
bots to improve customer satisfaction and provide enhanced ser-
vices to customers. These chatbots are developed using artiﬁcial
intelligence and machine learning techniques. They are capable
of behaving like humans. These chatbots have learning capability;
on the basis of availability of past data they are capable of provid-
ing best recommendation to customers.
/C15Image search
Image search on e-commerce web site is implemented using
artiﬁcial intelligence. It is based on image processing algorithms.
It helps in improving customer services. Customers are able to
search item by images it. There is no need to search item using
the keywords.
/C15Handling Customer Data
E-commerce has a large amount of associated data. Machine
learning algorithms are capable of performing analytical study on
past data related to sales, human resources, marketing, and cus-
tomer purchase pattern. This analytical result can help in proﬁt
maximization, sales maximization, resources optimization. This
helps ecommerce and ﬁntech companies to ﬁnaliz their products
for a particular type of customer.
/C15Recommendation SystemsMachine learning algorithms are able to perform analysis of
customer past data related to customers choice, behavior. They
can predict customer choices effectively and can suggest or recom-
mend most suitable products to customer. It helps e-commerce
and ﬁnancial companies in increasing sales and customer
satisfaction.
/C15Inventory Management
Artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms help e-commerce companies
in managing inventory. These algorithms perform analytical studyon past sales data and they ﬁnd a correlation between the current
sales and future sales. It helps managers in predicting future sales
and maintain inventory accordingly.
/C15Cybersecurity
Machine learning algorithms are capable of detecting vulnera-
bilities in system and provide suitable security solutions to keep
e-commerce platform secure. Financial companies also ﬁnd
machine learning algorithms suitable for fraud detection and
prevention.
/C15CRM
In the past, CRM used the employees to gather a vast quantity of
data to collect the data and to service the customers. Today, how-
ever, artiﬁcial intelligence is able to forecast which clients will buy
and how we can better deal with them. Artiﬁcial intelligence appli-
cations may be used to assist determine trends and plan activities
based on the newest trends. Advanced CRM may learn and improve
over time with the aid of machine learning techniques.
/C15Credit Scoring, Loan Underwriting, Portfolio management
Machine learning algorithms are able to classify past data and
can predict future data on the basis of analysis of past data. These
algorithms help up to a great extent in Credit Scoring, Loan Under-
writing and Portfolio management. It helps companies in cutting
down risk.
/C15
Human Resources
The proper source to obtain the candidate is identiﬁed by AI
Engines. NLP may also assist select applicants using screen
resumes. Today, AI bots are utilized for video interviews, even for
ﬁrst-tier screening. This can save time and enhance the process
of recruiting. But after recruiting and selection, the work of an
HR does not cease. The commitment of employees is also an impor-
tant part that AI can improve. Machine learning can propose inno-
vative training techniques.
/C15Sales
Sales begin with customer acquisition. AI can assess your com-
pany goals together with multiple data sources and then propose
the most relevant client acquisition possibilities. Price optimiza-
tion with the aid of AI and ML may also be achieved to maximize
proﬁt. AI and ML may also contribute to the improvement of con-
sumer suggestions and market basket analysis for improved sales.
4. Conclusion
AI has been used in the e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries to
improve customer experience, efﬁcient supply chain management,H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al. Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
3

==== Page 4 ====
operational efﬁciency, and mate size, with the main goal of design-
ing standard, reliable product quality control methods and the
search for new ways of reaching and serving customers while
keeping costs low. Deep learning and machine learning are two
of the most popular AI techniques. These models are used by indi-
viduals, corporations, and government organizations to predict and
learn from data. At the moment, machine learning models for the
complexity and diversity of data in the food sector are being cre-
ated. This article addresses the uses of machine learning and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence in e-commerce, business management, and
ﬁnance. Some of the most common applications include sales
growth, proﬁt maximization, sales forecasting, inventory manage-
ment, security, fraud detection, and portfolio management.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Harikumar Pallathadka: .:Conceptualization, Methodology.
Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis: Data curation. Telmo Pablo Loli-
Poma: .:Visualization, Investigation. Karthikeyan Kaliyaperu-
mal: Writing - review & editing. Randy Joy Magno Ventayen: Val-
idation. Mohd Naved: .:Writing - original draft, Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] Paulraj Prabhu, Neelamegam Anbazhagan, 2014. Improving Business
Intelligence Based on Frequent Itemsets Using k-Means ClusteringAlgorithm. In: Meghanathan N., Nagamalai D., Rajasekaran S. (eds) Networks
and Communications (NetCom2013). Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering,
vol 284. Springer, Cham, ISSN 1876-1100, ISBN 978-3-319-03691-5, ISBN 978-
3-319-03692-2 (eBook), DOI : 10.1007/978-3-319-03692-2_19, pp 243-254.
[2] P. Prabhu, N. Anbazhagan, FI-FCM Algorithm for Business Intelligence. In:
Prasath R., Kathirvalavakumar T. (eds) Mining Intelligence and Knowledge
Exploration. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8284. Springer, Cham, pp518-528 ISSN 0302-9743(Print ISBN 978-3-319-03843-8), (Online ISBN 978-3-
319-03844-5), 2013. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03844-5_52 December 2013
[3] R. Manne, S.C. Kantheti, Application of artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare:
chances and challenges, Curr. J. Appl. Sci. Technol. 40 (6) (2021) 78–89, https://
doi.org/10.9734/cjast/2021/v40i631320 .
[4] R.S. Ganesh, K.J. Jausmin, J. Srilatha, R. Indumathy, M. Naved, M. Ashok, 2021,
April. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Based Smart Facial Expression Recognition Remote
Control System. In 2021 5th International Conference on Computing
Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC) (pp. 1056-1061). IEEE.
[5] R. Kamal, A. Karan, V.S. Arungalai, ‘‘Investigations on E-commerce Data for
Forecasting the Efﬁcient Promotional Platform Using Supervised MachineLearning,” 2019 4th International Conference on Recent Trends on Electronics,
Information, Communication & Technology (RTEICT), 2019, pp. 939-943, doi:
10.1109/RTEICT46194.2019.9016688.
[6] P. Szabó, B. Genge, ‘‘Efﬁcient Conversion Prediction in E-Commerce
Applications with Unsupervised Learning,” 2020 International Conference on
Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), 2020, pp.
1-6, doi: 10.23919/SoftCOM50211.2020.9238344.
[7] S.C. Bilow, Introduction: AL and machine learning, SMPTE Motion Imaging J.
129 (2) (2020) 14–15, https://doi.org/10.5594/JMI.2020.2964182 .
[8] I.H. Sarker, Machine learning: algorithms, real-world applications and research
directions, SN Comput. Sci. 2 (2021) 160, https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-
00592-x .
[9] M. Ferdous, J. Debnath, N.R. Chakraborty, ‘‘Machine Learning Algorithms in
Healthcare: A Literature Survey,” 2020 11th International Conference on
Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2020, pp.
1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT49239.2020.9225642.
[10] S. Nandhini, J. Marseline K.S., ‘‘Performance Evaluation of Machine Learning
Algorithms for Email Spam Detection,” 2020 International Conference on
Emerging Trends in Information Technology and Engineering (ic-ETITE), 2020,
pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/ic-ETITE47903.2020.312.
[11] N. Soni, E.K. Sharma, N. Singh, A. Kapoor, Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Business:
From Research and Innovation to Market Deployment. Procedia Comput. Sci.
2020, 167, 2200–2210. [CrossRef]
[12] A. Di Vaio, R. Palladino, R. Hassan, O. Escobar, Artiﬁcial intelligence and
business models in the sustainable development goals perspective: A
systematic literature review. J. Bus. Res. 2020, 121, 283–314. [CrossRef]
[13] A. Di Vaio, F. Boccia, L. Landriani, R. Palladino, Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Agri-
Food System: Rethinking Sustainable Business Models in the COVID-19
Scenario. Sustainability 2020, 12, 4851. [CrossRef]
[14] T. Kumar, M. Trakru, The Colossal Impact of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. E-
Commerce: Statistics and Facts. Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol. (IRJET) 2020, 6,
570–572. Available online: https://www.irjet.net/archives/V6/i5/IRJET -
V6I5116.pdf (accessed on 3 December 2020).
[15] N. Soni, E.K. Sharma, N. Singh, A. Kapoor, Impact of Artiﬁcial Intelligence on
Businesses: From Research, Innovation, Market Deployment to Future Shifts in
Business Models. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1905.02092.H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al. Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
4

