==== Page 1 ====
1
Applications of Deep Reinforcement Learning in
Communications and Networking: A Survey
Nguyen Cong Luong, Dinh Thai Hoang, Member, IEEE , Shimin Gong, Member, IEEE , Dusit Niyato, Fellow,
IEEE , Ping Wang, Senior Member, IEEE , Ying-Chang Liang, Fellow, IEEE , Dong In Kim, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —This paper presents a comprehensive literature re-
view on applications of deep reinforcement learning in com-
munications and networking. Modern networks, e.g., Internet
of Things (IoT) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UA V) networks,
become more decentralized and autonomous. In such networks,
network entities need to make decisions locally to maximize the
network performance under uncertainty of network environment.
Reinforcement learning has been efﬁciently used to enable the
network entities to obtain the optimal policy including, e.g.,
decisions or actions, given their states when the state and
action spaces are small. However, in complex and large-scale
networks, the state and action spaces are usually large, and the
reinforcement learning may not be able to ﬁnd the optimal policy
in reasonable time. Therefore, deep reinforcement learning, a
combination of reinforcement learning with deep learning, has
been developed to overcome the shortcomings. In this survey,
we ﬁrst give a tutorial of deep reinforcement learning from
fundamental concepts to advanced models. Then, we review deep
reinforcement learning approaches proposed to address emerging
issues in communications and networking. The issues include
dynamic network access, data rate control, wireless caching,
data ofﬂoading, network security, and connectivity preservation
which are all important to next generation networks such as
5G and beyond. Furthermore, we present applications of deep
reinforcement learning for trafﬁc routing, resource sharing,
and data collection. Finally, we highlight important challenges,
open issues, and future research directions of applying deep
reinforcement learning.
Keywords - Deep reinforcement learning, deep Q-learning, net-
working, communications, spectrum access, rate control, security,
caching, data ofﬂoading, data collection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning [1] is one of the most important
research directions of machine learning which has signiﬁcant
impacts to the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) over
the last 20 years. Reinforcement learning is a learning process
in which an agent can periodically make decisions, observe
the results, and then automatically adjust its strategy to achieve
the optimal policy. However, this learning process, even though
N. C. Luong and D. Niyato are with School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mails:
clnguyen@ntu.edu.sg, dniyato@ntu.edu.sg.
D. T. Hoang is with the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Technology Sydney, Australia. E-mail: hoang.dinh@uts.edu.au.
S. Gong is with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: sm.gong@siat.ac.cn.
P. Wang is with Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
York University, Canada. E-mail: pingw@yorku.ca.
Y .-C. Liang is with Center for Intelligent Networking and Communications
(CINC), with University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China. E-mail: liangyc@ieee.org.
D. I. Kim is with School of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Korea. Email: dikim@skku.ac.kr.proved to converge, takes a lot of time to reach the best policy
as it has to explore and gain knowledge of an entire system,
making it unsuitable and inapplicable to large-scale networks.
Consequently, applications of reinforcement learning are very
limited in practice. Recently, deep learning [2] has been
introduced as a new breakthrough technique. It can overcome
the limitations of reinforcement learning, and thus open a new
era for the development of reinforcement learning, namely
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). The DRL embraces
the advantage of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to train
the learning process, thereby improving the learning speed
and the performance of reinforcement learning algorithms.
As a result, DRL has been adopted in a numerous applica-
tions of reinforcement learning in practice such as robotics,
computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language
processing [2]. One of the most famous applications of DRL
is AlphaGo [3], the ﬁrst computer program which can beat a
human professional without handicaps on a full-sized 19 19
board.
In the areas of communications and networking, DRL
has been recently used as an emerging tool to effectively
address various problems and challenges. In particular, modern
networks such as Internet of Things (IoT), Heterogeneous
Networks (HetNets), and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UA V)
network become more decentralized, ad-hoc, and autonomous
in nature. Network entities such as IoT devices, mobile users,
and UA Vs need to make local and autonomous decisions, e.g.,
spectrum access, data rate selection, transmit power control,
and base station association, to achieve the goals of different
networks including, e.g., throughput maximization and energy
consumption minimization. Under uncertain and stochastic
environments, most of the decision-making problems can be
modeled by a so-called Markov Decision Process (MDP) [4].
Dynamic programming [5], [6] and other algorithms such
as value iteration, as well as reinforcement learning tech-
niques can be adopted to solve the MDP. However, the
modern networks are large-scale and complicated, and thus the
computational complexity of the techniques rapidly becomes
unmanageable. As a result, DRL has been developing to be
an alternative solution to overcome the challenge. In general,
the DRL approaches provide the following advantages:
DRL can obtain the solution of sophisticated network
optimizations. Thus, it enables network controllers, e.g.,
base stations, in modern networks to solve non-convex
and complex problems, e.g., joint user association, com-
putation, and transmission schedule, to achieve the op-arXiv:1810.07862v1  [cs.NI]  18 Oct 2018

==== Page 2 ====
2
timal solutions without complete and accurate network
information.
DRL allows network entities to learn and build knowl-
edge about the communication and networking environ-
ment. Thus, by using DRL, the network entities, e.g., a
mobile user, can learn optimal policies, e.g., base station
selection, channel selection, handover decision, caching
and ofﬂoading decisions, without knowing channel model
and mobility pattern.
DRL provides autonomous decision-making. With the
DRL approaches, network entities can make observation
and obtain the best policy locally with minimum or
without information exchange among each other. This not
only reduces communication overheads but also improves
security and robustness of the networks.
DRL improves signiﬁcantly the learning speed, especially
in the problems with large state and action spaces. Thus,
in large-scale networks, e.g., IoT systems with thousands
of devices, DRL allows network controller or IoT gate-
ways to control dynamically user association, spectrum
access, and transmit power for a massive number of IoT
devices and mobile users.
Several other problems in communications and network-
ing such as cyber-physical attacks, interference manage-
ment, and data ofﬂoading can be modeled as games, e.g.,
the non-cooperative game. DRL has been recently used
as an efﬁcient tool to solve the games, e.g., ﬁnding the
Nash equilibrium, without the complete information.
Although there are some surveys related to DRL, they do
not focus on communications and networking. For example,
the surveys of applications of DRL for computer vision and
natural language processing can be found in [7] and [8].
Also, there are surveys related to the use of only “deep
learning” for networking. For example, the survey of machine
learning for wireless networks is given in [9], but it does not
focus on the DRL approaches. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no survey speciﬁcally discussing the applications
of DRL in communications and networking. This motivates
us to deliver the survey with the tutorial of DRL and the
comprehensive literature review on the applications of DRL
to address issues in communications and networking. For
convenience, the related works in this survey are classiﬁed
based on issues in communications and networking as shown
in Fig. 2. The major issues include network access, data rate
control, wireless caching, data ofﬂoading, network security,
connectivity preservation, trafﬁc routing, and data collection.
Also, the percentages of DRL related works for different
networks and different issues in the networks are shown in
Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), respectively. From the ﬁgures, we observe
that the majority of the related works are for the cellular
networks. Also, the related works to the wireless caching and
ofﬂoading have received more attention than the other issues.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the introduction of reinforcement learning and dis-
cusses DRL techniques as well as their extensions. Section III
reviews the applications of DRL for dynamic network access
and adaptive data rate control. Section IV discusses the ap-
IoT 9%
Cellular
31%
Ad-hoc
19%Space 
communications
13%Congitive 
radio
9%Others
28%(a)
Network access
13%
Rate 
control
8%
Wireless 
caching
19%
Computational 
offloading
13%Network security
12%Connectivity 
prevservation 
8%Traffic 
routing
9%Resource 
scheduling
9%Data collection
9% (b)
Fig. 1: Percentages of related work for (a) different networks and
(b) different issues in the networks.
TABLE I: List of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description
ANN/APF Artiﬁcial Neural Network/Artiﬁcial Potential Field
A3C Asynchronous Advantage Actor- Critic
CRN Cognitive Radio Network
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
DRL/DQL Deep Reinforcement Learning/Deep Q-Learning
DNN Deep Neural Network
DQN/DDQN/DRQN Deep Q-Network/Double DQN/Deep Recurrent Q-
Learning
DASH Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP
DoS Denial-of-Service
ESN Echo State Network
FNN/RNN Feedforward Neural Network/Recurrent Neural Network
FSMC Finite-State Markov Channel
HVFT High V olume Flexible Time
ITS Intelligent Transportation System
LSM/LSTM Liquid State Machine/Long Short-Term Memory
MEC Mobile Edge Computing
MDP/POMDP Markov Decision Process/Partially Observable MDP
NFSP Neural Fictitious Self-Play
NFV Network Function Virtualization
RDPG Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradient
RCNN Recursive Convolutional Neural Network
RRH/BBU Remote Radio Head/BaseBand Unit
RSSI Received Signal Strength Indicators
SPD Sequential Prisoner’s Dilemma
SBS/BS Small Base Station/Base Station
SDN Software-Deﬁned Network
SU/PU Secondary User/Primary User
UDN/UAN Ultra-Density Network/Underwater Acoustic Network
UA V Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
V ANET/V2V Vehicular Ad hoc Network/Vehicle-to-Vehicle
plications of DRL for wireless caching and data ofﬂoading.
Section V presents DRL related works for network security
and connectivity preservation. Section VI considers how to use
DRL to deal with other issues in communications and network-
ing. Important challenges, open issues, and future research

==== Page 3 ====
3
Applications of deep reinforcement learning 
for communications and networking
Network access and rate 
control Miscellaneous issuesSecurity and 
connectivity preservationCaching and offloading 
  Network
 access
Adaptive 
rate controlProactive 
caching
Data  
offloadingNetwork 
security
Connectivity
preservationTraffic 
routing
Resource 
scheduling
Data 
collection
Fig. 2: A taxonomy of the applications of deep reinforcement learning for communications and networking.
directions are outlined in Section VII. Section VIII concludes
the paper. The list of abbreviations commonly appeared in
this paper is given in Table I. Note that DRL consists of two
different algorithms which are Deep Q-Learning (DQL) and
policy gradients [10]. In particular, DQL is mostly used for
the DRL related works. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, we
use “DRL” and “DQL” interchangeably to refer to the DRL
algorithms.
II. D EEPREINFORCEMENT LEARNING : ANOVERVIEW
In this section, we ﬁrst present fundamental knowledge of
Markov decision processes, reinforcement learning, and deep
learning techniques which are important branches of machine
learning theory. We then discuss DRL technique that can
capitalize on the capability of the deep learning to improve
efﬁciency and performance in terms of the learning rate for
reinforcement learning algorithms. Afterward, advanced DRL
models and their extensions are reviewed.
A. Markov Decision Processes
MDP [4] is a discrete time stochastic control process. MDP
provides a mathematical framework for modeling decision-
making problems in which outcomes are partly random and
under control of a decision maker or an agent. MDPs are useful
for studying optimization problems which can be solved by
dynamic programming and reinforcement learning techniques.
Typically, an MDP is deﬁned by a tuple (S;A;p;r)where
Sis a ﬁnite set of states, Ais a ﬁnite set of actions, pis
a transition probability from state sto states0after action
ais executed, and ris the immediate reward obtained after
actionais performed. We denote as a “policy” which is
a mapping from a state to an action. The goal of an MDP
is to ﬁnd an optimal policy to maximize the reward function.
An MDP can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite time horizon. For an inﬁnite
time horizon MDP, we aim to ﬁnd an optimal policy to
maximize the expected total reward deﬁned by1P
t=0rt(st;at),
whereat=(st), and2[0;1]is the discount factor.1) Partially Observable Markov Decision Process: In
MDPs, we assume that the system state is fully observ-
able by the agent. However, in many cases, the agent only
can observe a part of the system state, and thus Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) [11] can
be used to model the decision-making problems. A typical
POMDP model is deﬁned by a 6-tuple (S;A;p;r; 
;O),
whereS;A;p;r are deﬁned the same as in the MDP model, 
andOare deﬁned as the set of observations and observation
probabilities, respectively. At each time step, the system is at
states2S. Then, the agent takes an action a2A and the
system transits to state s02S. At the same time, the agent
has a new observation o2
with probabilityO(ojs;a;s0).
Finally, the agent receives an immediate reward rthat is
equal tor(s;a)in the MDP. Similar to the MDP model, the
agent in POMDP also aims to ﬁnd the optimal policy in
order to maximize its expected long-term discounted reward
1P
t=0rt(st;(st)).
2) Markov Games: In game theory, a Markov game, or
a stochastic game [12], is a dynamic game with proba-
bilistic transitions played by multiple players, i.e., agents.
A typical Markov game model is deﬁned by a tuple
(I;S;fAigi2I;p;frigi2I), where
I,f1;:::;i;:::;Igis a set of agents,
S,fS1;:::;Si;:::;SIgis the global state space of the
all agents withSibeing the state space of agent i,
fAigi2Iare sets of action spaces of the agents with Ai
being the action space of agent i,
p,SA1AI![0;1]is the transition probability
function of the system.
frigi2Iare payoff functions of the agents with
ri,SA1AI!R, i.e., the payoff of agent i
obtained after all actions of the agents are executed.
In a Markov game, the agents start at some initial state
s02 S . After observing the current state, all the agents
simultaneously select their actions a=fa1;:::;aIgand they
will receive their corresponding rewards together with their
own new observations. At the same time, the system will
transit to a new state s02S with probability p(s0js;a). The

==== Page 4 ====
4
procedure is repeated at the new state and continues for a ﬁnite
or inﬁnite number of stages. In this game, all the agents try
to ﬁnd their optimal policies to maximize their own expected
long-term average rewards, i.e.,1P
t=0iri
t(st;
i(st)),8i. The
set of all optimal policies of this game, i.e., f
1;:::;
Igis
known to be the equilibrium of this game. If there is a ﬁnite
number of players and the sets of states and actions are ﬁnite,
then the Markov game always has a Nash equilibrium [13]
under a ﬁnite number of stages. The same is true for Markov
games with inﬁnite stages, but the total payoff of agents is the
discounted sum [13].
B. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning, an important branch of machine
learning, is an effective tool and widely used in the literature
to address MDPs [1]. In a reinforcement learning process, an
agent can learn its optimal policy through interaction with its
environment. In particular, the agent ﬁrst observes its current
state, and then takes an action, and receives its immediate
reward together with its new state as illustrated in Fig. 3(a).
The observed information, i.e., the immediate reward and new
state, is used to adjust the agent’s policy, and this process
will be repeated until the agent’s policy approaches to the
optimal policy. In reinforcement learning, Q-learning is the
most effective method and widely used in the literature. In the
following, we will discuss the Q-learning algorithm and its
extensions for advanced MDP models.
1)Q-Learning Algorithm: In an MDP, we aim to ﬁnd an
optimal policy :S !A for the agent to minimize the
overall cost for the system. Accordingly, we ﬁrst deﬁne value
functionV:S !Rthat represents the expected value
obtained by following policy from each state s2S. The
value functionVfor policyquantiﬁes the goodness of the
policy through an inﬁnite horizon and discounted MDP that
can be expressed as follows:
V(s) =Eh1X
t=0rt(st;at)js0=si
=Eh
rt(st;at) +V(st+1)js0=si
:(1)
Since we aim to ﬁnd the optimal policy , an optimal ac-
tion at each state can be found through the optimal value func-
tion expressed byV(s) = max
atn
E
rt(st;at)+V(st+1)o
.
If we denoteQ(s;a),rt(st;at) +E
V(st+1)
as the
optimalQ-function for all state-action pairs, then the optimal
value function can be written by V(s) = max
a
Q(s;a)	
.
Now, the problem is reduced to ﬁnd optimal values of Q-
function, i.e.,Q(s;a), for all state-action pairs, and this
can be done through iterative processes. In particular, the Q-
function is updated according to the following rule:
Qt+1(s;a) =Qt(s;a)+
th
rt(s;a) +max
a0Qt(s;a0) Qt(s;a)i
:
(2)The core idea behind this update is to ﬁnd the Temporal
Difference (TD) between the predicted Q-value, i.e.,rt(s;a)+
max
a0Qt(s;a0)and its current value, i.e., Qt(s;a). In (2),
the learning rate tis used to determine the impact of new
information to the existing Q-value. The learning rate can
be chosen to be a constant, or it can be adjusted dynami-
cally during the learning process. However, it must satisfy
Assumption 1 to guarantee the convergence for the Q-learning
algorithm.
Assumption 1. The step size tis deterministic, nonnegative
and satisﬁes the following conditions: t2[0;1],1P
t=0t=1,
and1P
t=0(t)2<1.
The step size adaptation t=1
tis one of the most common
examples used in reinforcement learning. More discussions
for selecting an appropriate step size can be found in [14].
The details of the Q-learning algorithm are then provided in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 TheQ-learning algorithm
Input: For each state-action pair (s;a), initialize the table
entryQ(s;a)arbitrarily, e.g., to zero. Observe the current
states, initialize a value for the learning rate and the
discount factor .
fort:= 1 toTdo
From the current state-action pair (s;a), execute action
aand obtain the immediate reward rand a new state s0.
Select an action a0based on the state s0and then update
the table entry for Q(s;a)as follows:
Qt+1(s;a) Qt(s;a) +th
rt(s;a)+
max
a0Qt(s0;a0) Qt(s;a)i (3)
Replaces s0.
end for
Output:(s) = arg max aQ(s;a).
Once either allQ-values converge or a certain number
of iterations is reached, the algorithm will terminate. The
algorithm then yields the optimal policy indicating an action
to be taken at each state such that Q(s;a)is maximized for
all states in the state space, i.e., (s) = arg max
aQ(s;a).
Under the assumption of the step size (i.e., Assumption 1), it
is proved in [15] that the Q-learning algorithm converges to
the optimum action-values with probability one.
2) SARSA: An Online Q-Learning Algorithm: Although the
Q-learning algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal policy for the agent
without requiring knowledge about the environment, this al-
gorithm works in an ofﬂine fashion. In particular, Algorithm 1
can obtain the optimal policy only after all Q-values converge.
Therefore, this section presents an alternative online learning
algorithm, i.e., the SARSA algorithm, which allows the agent
to approach the optimal policy in an online fashion.
Different from the Q-learning algorithm, the SARSA al-
gorithm is an online algorithm which allows the agent to

==== Page 5 ====
5
EnvironmentAgent
Action aImmediate reward r
Observed state sController 
policy π 
Input layer Hidden layer
Output layer
Outputs Inputs Weights θ 
EnvironmentAgent
Action aImmediate reward r
Observed state sController policy π 
features
Weights θ 
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 3: (a) Reinforcement learning, (b) Artiﬁcial neural network, and (c) Deep Q-learning.
choose optimal actions at each time step in a real-time fashion
without waiting until the algorithm converges. In the Q-
learning algorithm, the policy is updated according to the
maximum reward of available actions regardless of which
policy is applied, i.e., an off-policy method. In contrast, the
SARSA algorithm interacts with the environment and updates
the policy directly from the actions taken, i.e., an on-policy
method. Note that the SARSA algorithm updates Q-values
from the quintuple Q(s;a;r;s0;a0).
3) Q-Learning for Markov Games: To apply Q-learning
algorithm to the Markov game context, we ﬁrst deﬁne the
Q-function for agent ibyQi(s;ai;a i), where a i,
fa1;:::;ai 1;ai+1;:::;aIgdenotes the set of actions of all
agents except i. Then, the Nash Q-function of agent iis
deﬁned by:
Q
i(s;ai;a i) =ri(s;ai;a i)+
X
s02Sp(s0js;ai;a i)Vi(s0;
1;:::;
I);(4)
where (
1;:::;
I)is the joint Nash equilibrium strategy,
ri(s;ai;a i)is agenti’s immediate reward in state sunder
the joint action (ai;a i), andVi(s0;
1;:::;
I)is the total
discounted reward over an inﬁnite time horizon starting from
states0given that all the agents follow the equilibrium
strategies.
In [13], the authors propose a multi-agent Q-learning algo-
rithm for general-sum Markov games which allows the agents
to perform updates based on assuming Nash equilibrium
behavior over the current Q-values. In particular, agent iwill
learn itsQ-values by forming an arbitrary guess from starting
time of the game. At each time step t, agentiobserves the
current state and takes an action ai. Then, it observes its
immediate reward ri, actions taken by others a i, others’
immediate rewards, and the new system state s0. After that,
agenticalculates a Nash equilibrium (1(s0);:::;I(s0))for
the state game (Qt
1(s0);:::;Qt
I(s0)), and updates its Q-values
according to:
Qt+1
i(s;ai;a i) = (1 t)Qt
i(s;ai;a i)+t[ri
t+Ni
t(s0)];
(5)
wheret2(0;1)is the learning rate and Ni
t(s0),Qt
i(s0)
1(s0)I(s0).
In order to calculate the Nash equilibrium, agent ineeds to
know (Qt
1(s0);:::;Qt
I(s0)). However, the information aboutother agents’Q-values is not given, and thus agent imust learn
this information too. To do so, agent iwill set estimations
about others’Q-values at the beginning of the game, e.g.,
Qj
0(s;ai;a i) = 0;8j;s. As the game proceeds, agent i
observes other agents’ immediate rewards and previous ac-
tions. That information can then be used to update agent i’s
conjectures on other agents’ Q-functions. Agent iupdates its
beliefs about agent j’sQ-function, according to the same
updating rule in (5). Then, the authors prove that under
some highly restrictive assumptions on the form of the state
games during learning, the proposed multi-agent Q-learning
algorithm is guaranteed to be converged.
C. Deep Learning
Deep learning [2] is composed of a set of algorithms and
techniques that attempt to ﬁnd important features of data and
to model its high-level abstractions. The main goal of deep
learning is to avoid manual description of a data structure (like
hand-written features) by automatic learning from the data. Its
name refers to the fact that typically any neural network with
two or more hidden layers is called DNN. Most deep learning
models are based on an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN), even
though they can also include propositional formulas or latent
variables organized layer-wise in deep generative models such
as the nodes in Deep Belief Networks and Deep Boltzmann
Machines.
An ANN is a computational nonlinear model based on the
neural structure of the brain that is able to learn to perform
tasks such as classiﬁcation, prediction, decision-making, and
visualization. An ANN consists of artiﬁcial neurons and is
organized into three interconnected layers: input, hidden, and
output as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). The input layer contains input
neurons that send information to the hidden layer. The hidden
layer sends data to the output layer. Every neuron has weighted
inputs (synapses), an activation function (deﬁnes the output
given an input), and one output. Synapses are the adjustable
parameters that convert a neural network to a parameterized
system.
During the training phase, ANNs use backpropagation as an
effective learning algorithm to compute quickly a gradient de-
scent with respect to the weights. Backpropagation is a special
case of automatic differentiation. In the context of learning,
backpropagation is commonly used by the gradient descent

==== Page 6 ====
6
optimization algorithm to adjust the weights of neurons by
calculating the gradient of the loss function. This technique is
also sometimes called backward propagation of errors, because
the error is calculated at the output and distributed back
through the network layers.
A DNN is deﬁned as an ANN with multiple hidden layers.
There are two typical DNN models, i.e., Feedforward Neural
Network (FNN) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). In the
FNN, the information moves in only one direction, i.e., from
the input nodes, through the hidden nodes and to the output
nodes, and there are no cycles or loops in the network as shown
in Fig. 4. In FNNs, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is
the most well known model with a wide range of applications
especially in image and speech recognition. The CNN contains
one or more convolutional layers, pooling or fully connected,
and uses a variation of multilayer perceptrons discussed above.
Convolutional layers use a convolution operation to the input
passing the result to the next layer. This operation allows the
network to be deeper with much fewer parameters.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN ) Feed -Forward Neural Network (FNN )
Fig. 4: RNN vs CNN.
Unlike FNNs, the RNN is a variant of a recursive artiﬁcial
neural network in which connections between neurons make
directed cycles. It means that an output depends not only
on its immediate inputs, but also on the previous further
step’s neuron state. The RNNs are designed to utilize sequen-
tial data, when the current step has some relation with the
previous steps. This makes the RNNs ideal for applications
with a time component, e.g., time-series data, and natural
language processing. However, all RNNs have feedback loops
in the recurrent layer. This lets RNNs maintain information
in memory over time. Nevertheless, it can be difﬁcult to train
standard RNNs to solve problems that require learning long-
term temporal dependencies. The reason is that the gradient
of the loss function decays exponentially with time, which is
called the vanishing gradient problem. Thus, Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) is often used in RNNs to address this issue.
The LSTM is designed to model temporal sequences and their
long-range dependencies are more accurate than conventional
RNNs. The LSTM does not use an activation function within
its recurrent components, the stored values are not modiﬁed,
and the gradient does not tend to vanish during training.
Usually, LSTM units are implemented in “blocks” with several
units. These blocks have three or four “gates”, e.g., input gate,
forget gate, output gate, that control information ﬂow drawing
on the logistic function.D. DeepQ-Learning
TheQ-learning algorithm can efﬁciently obtain an optimal
policy when the state space and action space are small.
However, in practice, with complicated system models, these
spaces are usually large. As a result, the Q-learning algorithm
may not be able to ﬁnd the optimal policy. Thus, Deep Q-
Learning (DQL) algorithm is introduced to overcome this
shortcoming. Intuitively, the DQL algorithm implements a
DeepQ-Network (DQN), i.e., a DNN, instead of the Q-table to
derive an approximate value of Q(s;a)as shown in Fig. 3(c).
As stated in [16], the average reward obtained by rein-
forcement learning algorithms may not be stable or even
diverge when a nonlinear function approximator is used.
This stems from the fact that a small change of Q-values
may greatly affect the policy. Thus, the data distribution and
the correlations between the Q-values and the target values
R+maxa0Q(s0;a0)are varied. To address this issue, two
mechanisms, i.e., experience replay and target Q-network, can
be used.
Experience replay mechanism : The algorithm ﬁrst initial-
izes a replay memory D, i.e., the memory pool, with
transitions (st;at;rt;st+1), i.e., experiences, generated
randomly, e.g., through using -greedy policy. Then, the
algorithm randomly selects samples, i.e., minibatches,
of transitions from Dto train the DNN. The Q-values
obtained by the trained DNN will be used to obtain new
experiences, i.e., transitions, and these experiences will
be then stored in the memory pool D. This mechanism
allows the DNN trained more efﬁciently by using both
old and new experiences. In addition, by using the ex-
perience replay, the transitions are more independent and
identically distributed, and thus the correlations between
observations can be removed.
Fixed target Q-network: In the training process, the Q-
value will be shifted. Thus, the value estimations can
be out of control if a constantly shifting set of values
is used to update the Q-network. This leads to the
destabilization of the algorithm. To address this issue,
the targetQ-network is used to update frequently but
slowly the primary Q-networks’ values. In this way,
the correlations between the target and estimated Q-
values are signiﬁcantly reduced, thereby stabilizing the
algorithm.
The DQL algorithm with experience replay and ﬁxed target
Q-network is presented in Algorithm 2. DQL inherits and
promotes advantages of both reinforcement and deep learning
techniques, and thus it has a wide range of applications in
practice such as game development [3], transportation [17],
and robotics [18].
E. Advanced Deep Q-Learning Models
1) Double Deep Q-Learning: In some stochastic envi-
ronments, the Q-learning algorithm performs poorly due to
the large over-estimations of action values [19]. These over-
estimations result from a positive bias that is introduced be-
causeQ-learning uses the maximum action value as an approx-
imation for the maximum expected action value as shown in

==== Page 7 ====
7
Algorithm 2 The DQL Algorithm with Experience Replay
and Fixed Target Q-Network
1:Initialize replay memory D.
2:Initialize the Q-network Qwith random weights .
3:Initialize the target Q-network ^Qwith random weights 0.
4:forepisode=1 to T do
5: With probability select a random action at, otherwise
selectat= arg maxQ(st;at;).
6: Perform action atand observe immediate reward rtand
next statest+1.
7: Store transition (st;at;rt;st+1)inD.
8: Select randomly samples c (sj;aj;rj;sj+1)fromD.
9: The weights of the neural network then are optimized
by using stochastic gradient descent with respect to the
network parameter to minimize the loss:
h
rj+max
aj+1^Q(sj+1;aj+1;0) Q(sj;aj;)i2
:(6)
10: Reset ^Q=Qafter every a ﬁxed number of steps.
11:end for
Eq. (3). The reason is that the same samples are used to decide
which action is the best, i.e., with highest expected reward, and
the same samples are also used to estimate that action-value.
Thus, to overcome the over-estimation problem of the Q-
learning algorithm, the authors in [20] introduce a solution us-
ing twoQ-value functions, i.e., Q1andQ2, to simultaneously
select and evaluate action values through the loss function as
follows:h
rj+Q2
sj+1;arg max
aj+1Q1 
sj+1;aj+1;1
;2
 
Q1(sj;aj;1)i2
.
Note that the selection of an action, in the arg max , is
still due to the online weights 1. This means that, as in Q-
learning, we are still estimating the value of the greedy policy
according to the current values, as deﬁned by 1. However,
the second set of weights 2is used to evaluate fairly the
value of this policy. This second set of weights can be updated
symmetrically by switching the roles of 1and2. Inspired
by this idea, the authors in [20] then develop Double Deep
Q-Learning (DDQL) model [21] using a Double Deep Q-
Network (DDQN) with the loss function updated as follows:
h
rj+^Q
sj+1;arg max
aj+1Q 
sj+1;aj+1;
;0
 Q(sj;aj;)i2
:(7)
Unlike double Q-learning, the weights of the second net-
work 2are replaced with the weights of the target networks
0for the evaluation of the current greedy policy as shown
in Eq. (7). The update to the target network stays unchanged
from DQN, and remains a periodic copy of the online network.
Due to the effectiveness of DDQL, there are some applications
of DDQL introduced recently to address dynamic spectrum
access problems in multichannel wireless networks [22] and
resource allocation in heterogeneous networks [23].2) DeepQ-Learning with Prioritized Experience Replay:
Experience replay mechanism allows the reinforcement learn-
ing agent to remember and reuse experiences, i.e., transitions,
from the past. In particular, transitions are uniformly sampled
from the replay memory D. However, this approach simply
replays transitions at the same frequency as that the agent
was originally experienced, regardless of their signiﬁcance.
Therefore, the authors in [24] develop a framework for prior-
itizing experiences, so as to replay important transitions more
frequently, and therefore learn more efﬁciently. Ideally, we
want to sample more frequently those transitions from which
there is much to learn. As a proxy for learning potential, the
proposed Prioritized Experience Replay (PER) [24] samples
transitions with probability ptrelative to the last encountered
absolute error deﬁned as follows:
pt_rj+max
a0^Q(sj+1;a0;0) Q(sj;aj;)!
;(8)
where!is a hyper-parameter that determines the shape of the
distribution. New transitions are inserted into the replay buffer
with maximum priority, providing a bias towards recent tran-
sitions. Note that stochastic transitions may also be favoured,
even when there is little left to learn about them. Through real
experiments on many Atari games, the authors demonstrate
that DQL with PER outperforms DQL with uniform replay on
41 out of 49 games. However, this solution is only appropriate
to implement when we can ﬁnd and deﬁne the important
experiences in the replay memory D.
3) Dueling Deep Q-Learning: TheQ-values, i.e.,Q(s;a),
used in the Q-learning algorithm, i.e., Algorithm 1, are to
express how good it is to take a certain action at a given state.
The value of an action aat a given state scan actually be
decomposed into two fundamental values. The ﬁrst value is
the state-value function, i.e., V(s), to estimate the importance
of being in a particular state s. The second value is the
action-value function, i.e., A(a), to estimate the importance of
selecting an action acompared with other actions. As a result,
theQ-value function can be expressed by two fundamental
value functions as follows: Q(s;a) =V(s) +A(a).
Stemming from the fact that in many MDPs, it is unnec-
essary to estimate both values, i.e., action and state values of
Q-functionQ(s;a), at the same time. For example, in many
racing games, moving left or right matters if and only if the
agent meets the obstacles or enemies. Inspired by this idea, the
authors in [25] introduce an idea of using two streams, i.e.,
two sequences, of fully connected layers instead of using a
single sequence with fully connected layers for the DQN. The
two streams are constructed such that they are able to provide
separate estimations on the action and state value functions,
i.e.,V(s)andA(a). Finally, the two streams are combined
to generate a single output Q(s;a)as follows:
Q(s;a;;) =V(s;) +
A(s;a;) P
a0A(s;a0;)
jAj
;
(9)
where andare the parameters of the two streams V(s;)
andA(s;a0;), respectively. Here, jAjis the total number
of actions in the action space A. Then, the loss function is
derived in the similar way to (6) as follows:

==== Page 8 ====
8
h
rj+max
aj+1^Q(sj+1;aj+1;0;0)  Q (sj;aj;;)i2
.
Through the simulation, the authors show that the proposed
dueling DQN can outperform DDQN [21] in 50 out of
57 learned Atari games. However, the proposed dueling
architecture only clearly beneﬁts for MDPs with large action
spaces. For small state spaces, the performance of dueling
DQL is even not as good as that of double DQL as shown in
simulation results in [25].
4) Asynchronous Multi-step Deep Q-Learning: Most of the
Q-learning methods such as DQL and dueling DQL rely
on the experience replay method. However, such kind of
method has several drawbacks. For example, it uses more
memory and computation resources per real interaction, and
it requires off-policy learning algorithms that can update from
data generated by an older policy. This limits the applications
of DQL. Therefore, the authors in [26] introduce a method
using multiple agents to train the DNN in parallel. In partic-
ular, the authors propose a training procedure which utilizes
asynchronous gradient decent updates from multiple agents at
once. Instead of training one single agent that interacts with
its environment, multiple agents are interacting with their own
version of the environment simultaneously. After a certain
amount of timesteps, accumulated gradient updates from an
agent are applied to a global model, i.e., the DNN. These
updates are asynchronous and lock free. In addition, to tradeoff
between bias and variance in the policy gradient, the authors
adoptn-step updates method [1] to update the reward function.
In particular, the truncated n-step reward function can be
deﬁned byr(n)
t=n 1P
k=0(k)rt+k+1. Thus, the alternative loss
for each agent will be derived by:
h
r(n)
j+(n)
jmax
a0^Q(sj+n;a0;0) Q(sj;aj;)i2
:(10)
The effects of training speed and quality of the proposed
asynchronous DQL with multi-step learning are analyzed
for various reinforcement learning methods, e.g., 1-step Q-
learning, 1-step SARSA, and n-step Q-learning. They show
that asynchronous updates have a stabilizing effect on policy
and value updates. Also, the proposed method outperforms the
current state-of-the-art algorithms on the Atari games while
training for half of the time on a single multi-core CPU
instead of a GPU. As a result, some recent applications of
asynchronous DQL have been developed for handover control
problems in wireless systems [27]
5) Distributional Deep Q-learning: All aforementioned
methods use the Bellman equation to approximate the expected
value of future rewards. However, if the environment is
stochastic in nature and the future rewards follow multimodal
distribution, choosing actions based on expected value may
not lead to the optimal outcome. For example, we know
that the expected transmission time of a packet in a wireless
network is 20 minutes. However, this information may not be
so meaningful because it may overestimate the transmission
time most of the time. For example, the expected transmission
time is calculated based on the normal transmissions (without
collisions) and the interference transmissions (with collisions).
Although the interference transmissions are very rare to hap-pen, but it takes a lot of time. Then, the estimation about the
expected transmission is overestimated most of the time. This
makes estimations not useful for the DQL algorithms.
Thus, the authors in [28] introduce a solution using distribu-
tional reinforcement learning to update Q-value function based
on its distribution rather than its expectation. In particular,
letZ(s;a)be the return obtained by starting from state s,
executing action a, and following the current policy, then
Q(s;a) =E[Z(s;a)]. Here,Zrepresents the distribution of
future rewards, which is no longer a scalar quantity like Q-
values. Then we obtain the distributional version of Bellman
equation as follows: Z(s;a) =r+Z(s0;a0). For example,
if we use the DQN and extract an experience (s;a;r;s0)from
the replay buffer, then the sample of the target distribution is
Z(s;a) =r+Z(s0;a)witha= arg max
a0Q(s;a0). Al-
though the proposed distributional deep Q-learning is demon-
strated to outperform the conventional DQL [16] on many
Atari 2600 Games (45 out of 57 games), its performance relies
much on the distribution function Z. IfZis well deﬁned, the
performance of distributional deep Q-learning is much more
signiﬁcant than that of the DQL. Otherwise, its performance
is even worse than that of the DQL.
6) DeepQ-learning with Noisy Nets: In [29], the authors
introduce Noisy Net, a type of neural network whose bias
and weights are iteratively perturbed during training by a
parametric function of the noise. This network basically adds
the Gaussian noise to the last (fully-connected) layers of the
network. The parameters of this noise can be adjusted by the
model during training, which allows the agent to decide when
and in what proportion it wants to introduce the uncertainty to
its weights. In particular, to implement the noisy network, we
ﬁrst replace the -greedy policy by a randomized action-value
function. Then, the fully connected layers of the value network
are parameterized as a noisy network, where the parameters
are drawn from the noisy network parameter distribution
after every replay step. For replay, the current noisy network
parameter sample is held ﬁxed across the batch. Since the
DQL takes one step of optimization for every action step, the
noisy network parameters are re-sampled before every action.
After that, the loss function can be updated as follows:
L=Eh
E(s;a;r;s0)sD
r+max
a02A^Q(s0;a0;0;0) Q(s;a; ;)i
;
(11)
where the outer and inner expectations are with respect to
distributions of the noise variables and0for the noisy value
functions ^Q(s0;a0;0;0)andQ(s;a; ;), respectively.
Through experimental results, the authors demonstrate that
by adding the Gaussian noise layer to the DNN, the per-
formance of conventional DQL [16], dueling DQL [25], and
asynchronous DQL [26] can be signiﬁcantly improved for a
wide range of Atari games. However, the impact of noise to
the performance of the deep DQL algorithms is still under
debating in the literature, and thus analysis on the impact of
noise layer requires further investigations.
7) Rainbow Deep Q-learning: In [30], the authors propose
a solution which integrates all advantages of seven aforemen-
tioned solutions (including DQL) into a single learning agent,
called Rainbow DQL. In particular, this algorithm ﬁrst deﬁnes

==== Page 9 ====
9
TABLE II: Performance comparison among DQL algorithms
DQL Algorithms No Operations Human Starts Publish Developer
DQL 79% 68% Nature 2015 [16] Google DeepMind
DDQL 117% 110% AAAI 2016 [21] Google DeepMind
Prioritized DDQL 140% 128% ICLR 2015 [24] Google DeepMind
Dueling DDQL 151% 117% ICML 2016 [25] Google DeepMind
Asynchronous DQL - 116% ICML 2016 [26] Google DeepMind
Distributional DQL 164% 125% ICML 2017 [28] Google DeepMind
Noisy Nets DQL 118% 102% ICLR 2018 [29] Google DeepMind
Rainbow 223% 153% AAAI 2018 [30] Google DeepMind
the loss function based on the asynchronous multi-step and
distributional DQL. Then, the authors combine the multi-step
distributional loss with double Q-learning by using the greedy
action inst+nselected according to the Q-network as the
bootstrap action a
t+n, and evaluate the action by using the
target network.
In standard proportional prioritized replay [24] technique,
the absolute TD-error is used to prioritize the transitions.
Here, TD-error at a time slot is the error in the estimate
made at the time slot. However, in the proposed Rainbow
DQL algorithm, all distributional Rainbow variants prioritize
transitions by the Kullbeck-Leibler (KL) loss because this
loss may be more robust to noisy stochastic environment.
Alternatively, the dueling architecture of DNNs is presented
in [25]. Finally, the Noisy Net layer [30] is used to replace
all linear layers in order to reduce the number of independent
noise variables. Through simulation, the authors show that this
is the most advanced technique which outperforms almost all
current DQL algorithms in the literature over 57 Atari 2600
games.
In Table II, we summarize the DQL algorithms and their
performance under the parameter settings used in [30]. As
observed in Table II, all of the DQL algorithms have been
developed by Google DeepMind based on the original work
in [16]. So far, through experimental results on Atari 2600
games, the Rainbow DQL presents very impressive results over
all other DQL algorithms. However, more experiments need
to be further conducted in different domains to conﬁrm the
real efﬁciency of the Rainbow DQL algorithm.
F . Deep Q-Learning for Extensions of MDPs
1) Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient Q-Learning for
Continuous Action: Although DQL algorithm can solve prob-
lems with high-dimensional state spaces, it can only handle
discrete and low-dimensional action spaces. However, systems
in many applications have continuous, i.e., real values, and
high dimensional action spaces. The DQL algorithms cannot
be straightforwardly applied to continuous actions since they
rely on choosing the best action that maximizes the Q-value
function. In particular, a full search in a continuous action
space to ﬁnd the optimal action is often infeasible.
In [31], the authors introduce a model-free off-policy actor-
critic algorithm using deep function approximators that can
learn policies in high-dimensional, continuous action spaces.
The key idea is based on the deterministic policy gradient
(DPG) algorithm proposed in [32]. In particular, the DPG
algorithm maintains a parameterized actor function (s;)with parameter vector which speciﬁes the current policy
by deterministically mapping states to a speciﬁc action. The
criticQ(s;a)is learned by using the Bellman equation as in
Q-learning. The actor is updated by applying the chain rule to
the expected return from the start distribution Jwith respect
to the actor parameters as follows:
rJt Ests
rQ(s;a;Q)js=st;a=(stj)
t Estsh
raQ(s;a;Q)js=st;a=(st)r(s;)js=sti
:
(12)
Based on this update rule, the authors then introduce
Deep DPG (DDPG) algorithm which can learn competitive
policies by using low-dimensional observations (e.g. cartesian
coordinates or joint angles) under the same hyper-parameters
and network structure. The detail of the DDPG algorithm
is presented in 3. The algorithm makes a copy of the actor
and critic networks Q0(s;a;Q0)and0(s;0), respectively,
to calculate the target values. The weights of these target
networks are then updated with slowly tracking on the learned
networks, i.e., 0 + (1 )0with1. This means
that the target values are constrained to change slowly, greatly
improving the stability of learning. Note that a major challenge
of learning in continuous action spaces is exploration. There-
fore, in Algorithm 3, an exploration policy 0is constructed
by adding noise sampled from a noise process Nto the actor
policy.
2) Deep Recurrent Q-Learning for POMDPs: To tackle
problems with partially observable environments by deep
reinforcement learning, the authors in [33] propose a frame-
work called Deep Recurrent Q-Learning (DRQN) in which an
LSTM layer was used to replace the ﬁrst post-convolutional
fully-connected layer of the conventional DQN. The recurrent
structure is able to integrate an arbitrarily long history to
better estimate the current state instead of utilizing a ﬁxed-
length history as in DQNs. Thus, DRQNs estimate the function
Q(ot;ht 1;)instead ofQ(st;at);), where denotes the
parameters of entire network, ht 1denotes the output of the
LSTM layer at the previous step, i.e., ht=LSTM (ht 1;ot).
DRQN matches DQN’s performance on standard MDP prob-
lems and outperforms DQN in partially observable domains.
Regarding the training process, DRQN only considers the
convolutional features of the observation history instead of
explicitly incorporating the actions. Through the experiments,
the authors demonstrate that DRQN is capable of handling
partial observability, and recurrency confers beneﬁts when the
quality of observations changes during evaluation time.

==== Page 10 ====
10
Algorithm 3 DDPG algorithm
1:Randomly initialize critic network Q(s;a;Q)and actor
(s;)with weights Qand, respectively.
2:Initialize target network Q0and0with weights
Q0 Q, and 0 , respectively.
3:Initialize replay memory D.
4:forepisode=1 to M do
5: Initialize a random process Nfor action exploration
6: Receive initial observation state s1
7: fort=1 to T do
8: Select action at=(st;) +Ntaccording to the
current policy and exploration noise.
9: Execute action atand observe reward rtand new
statest+1.
10: Store transition (st;at;rt;st+1)inD.
11: Sample a random mini-batch of Ntransitions
(si;ai;ri;si+1)fromD.
12: Setyi=ri+Q0 
si+1;0(si+1;0);Q0
.
13: Update critic by minimizing the loss:
L=1
NP
i(yi Q 
si;ai;Q)2
14: Update the actor policy by using the sampled policy
gradient:rJt1
NP
iraQ(s;a;Q)js=si;a=(si)
r(sj)js=si
15: Update the target networks:
Q0 Q+ (1 )Q0
0 + (1 )0
16: end for
17:end for
3) Deep SARSA Learning: In [34], the authors introduce a
DQL technique based on SARSA learning to help the agent
determine optimal policies in an online fashion. As shown
in Algorithm 4, given the current state s, a CNN is used to
obtain the current state-action value Q(s;a). Then, the current
actionais selected by the -greedy algorithm. After that, the
immediate reward rand the next state s0can be observed.
In order to estimate the current Q(s;a), the next state-action
valueQ(s0;a0)is obtained. Here, when the next state s0is
used as the input of the CNN, Q(s0;a0)can be obtained as
the output. Then, a label vector related to Q(s;a)is deﬁned as
Q(s0;a0)which represents the target vector. The two vectors
only have one different component, i.e., r+Q(s0;a0)!
Q(s;a). It should be noted that during the training phase, the
next action a0for estimating the current state-action value is
never greedy. On the contrary, there is a small probability that
a random action is chosen for exploration.
4) DeepQ-Learning for Markov Games: In [35], the
authors introduce the general notion of sequential prisoner’s
dilemma (SPD) to model real world prisoner’s dilemma (PD)
problems. Since SPD is more complicated than PD, existing
approaches addressing learning in matrix PD games cannot be
directly applied in SPD. Thus, the authors propose a multi-
agent DRL approach for mutual cooperation in SDP games.
The deep multi-agent reinforcement learning towards mutual
cooperation consists of two phases, i.e., ofﬂine and online
phases. The ofﬂine phase generates policies with varying co-Algorithm 4 Deep SARSA learning algorithm
1:Initialize data stack Dwith size of N
2:Initialize parameters of the CNN
3:forepisode=1 to M do
4: Initialize state s1and pre-process state 1=(s1)
5: Selecta1by the-greedy method
6: fort=1 to T do
7: Take action at, observertand next state st+1
8:t+1=(st+1)
9: Store data (t;at;rt;t+1)into stack D
10: Sample data from stack D
11: Select action a0by the-greedy method
12: ifepisode terminates at step j+ 1then
13: Setyj=rj
14: else
15: setyj=rj+Q(t+1;a0;)
16: end if
17: Minimize the loss function: (yj Q(t;a0;))2
18: Updateat a0
19: end for
20:end for
operation degrees. Since the number of policies with different
cooperation degrees is inﬁnite, it is computationally infeasible
to train all the policies from scratch. To address this issue,
the algorithm ﬁrst trains representative policies using actor-
critic until it converges, i.e., cooperation and defection baseline
policy. Second, the algorithm synthesizes the full range of
policies from the above baseline policies. Another task is to
detect effectively the cooperation degree of the opponent. The
algorithm divides this task into two steps. First, the algorithm
trains an LSTM-based cooperation degree detection network
ofﬂine, which will be then used for real-time detection during
the online phase. In the online phase, the agent plays against
the opponents by reciprocating with a policy of a slightly
higher cooperation degree than that of the opponent. On one
hand, intuitively the algorithm is cooperation-oriented and
seeks for mutual cooperation whenever possible. On the other
hand, the algorithm is also robust against selﬁsh exploitation
and resorts to defection strategy to avoid being exploited
whenever necessary.
Unlike [35] which considers a repeated normal form game
with complete information, in [36], the authors introduce
an application of DRL for extensive form games with im-
perfect information. In particular, the authors in [36] intro-
duce Neural Fictitious Self-Play (NFSP), a DRL method for
learning approximate Nash equilibria of imperfect-information
games. NFSP combines FSP with neural network function
approximation. An NFSP agent has two neural networks.
The ﬁrst network is trained by reinforcement learning from
memorized experience of play against fellow agents. This
network learns an approximate best response to the historical
behaviour of other agents. The second network is trained by
supervised learning from memorized experience of the agent’s
own behaviour. This network learns a model that averages
over the agent’s own historical strategies. The agent behaves

==== Page 11 ====
11
according to a mixture of its average strategy and best response
strategy.
In the NSFP, all players of the game are controlled by
separate NFSP agents that learn from simultaneous play
against each other, i.e., self-play. An NFSP agent interacts
with its fellow agents and memorizes its experience of game
transitions and its own best response behaviour in two mem-
ories,MRLandMSL. NFSP treats these memories as two
distinct datasets suitable for DRL and supervised classiﬁcation,
respectively. The agent trains a neural network, Q(s;a;Q),
to predict action values from data in MRLusing off-policy
reinforcement learning. The resulting network deﬁnes the
agent’s approximate best response strategy, =-greedy(Q),
which selects a random action with probability and otherwise
chooses the action that maximizes the predicted action values.
The agent trains a separate neural network (s;a;)to
imitate its own past best response behavior by using supervised
classiﬁcation on the data in MSL. NFSP also makes use of
two technical innovations in order to ensure the stability of the
resulting algorithm as well as to enable simultaneous self-play
learning. Through experimental results, the authors show that
the NFSP can converge to approximate Nash equilibria in a
small poker game.
Summary: In this section, we have presented the basics of
reinforcement learning, deep learning, and DQL. Furthermore,
we have discussed various advanced DQL techniques and their
extensions. Different DQL techniques can be used to solve
different problems in different network scenarios. In the next
sections, we review DQL related works for various problems
in communications and networking.
III. N ETWORK ACCESS AND RATECONTROL
Modern networks such as IoT become more decentralized
and ad-hoc in nature. In such networks, entities such as
sensors and mobile users need to make independent decisions,
e.g., channel and base station selections, to achieve their
own goals, e.g., throughput maximization. However, this is
challenging due to the dynamic and the uncertainty of network
status. Learning algorithms such as DQL allow to learn and
build knowledge about the networks that are used to enable
the network entities to make their optimal decisions. In this
section, we review the applications of DQL for the following
issues:
Dynamic spectrum access: Dynamic spectrum access
allows users to locally select channels to maximize their
throughput. However, the users may not have full obser-
vations of the system, e.g., channel states. Thus, DQL
can be used as an effective tool for dynamic spectrum
access.
Joint user association and spectrum access: User asso-
ciation is implemented to determine which user to be
assigned to which Base Station (BS). The joint user
association and spectrum access problems are studied in
[37] and [38]. However, the problems are typically com-
binatorial and non-convex which require nearly complete
and accurate network information to obtain the optimal
strategy. DQL is able to provide distributed solutions
which can be effectively used for the problems.Adaptive rate control: This refers to bitrate/data rate con-
trol in dynamic and unpredictable environments such as
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH). Such
a system allows clients or users to independently choose
video segments with different bitrates to download. The
client’s objective is to maximize its Quality of Experience
(QoE). DQL can be adopted to effectively solve the
problem instead of dynamic programming which has high
complexity and demands complete information.
A. Network Access
This section discusses how to use DQL to solve the spec-
trum access and user association in networks.
1) Dynamic Spectrum Access: The authors in [39] propose
a dynamic channel access scheme of a sensor based on the
DQL for IoT. At each time slot, the sensor selects one of
Mchannels for transmitting its packet. The channel state is
either in low interference, i.e., successful transmission, or in
high interference, i.e., transmission failure. Since the sensor
only knows the channel state after selecting the channel, the
sensor’s optimization decision problem can be formulated as
a POMDP. In particular, the action of sensor is to select
one ofMchannels. The sensor receives a positive reward
“+1” if the selected channel is in low interference, and a
negative reward “-1” otherwise. The objective is to ﬁnd an
optimal policy which maximizes the sensor’s the expected
accumulated discounted reward over time slots. A DQN1using
FNN with experience replay [40] is then adopted to ﬁnd the
optimal policy. The input of the DQN is a state of the sensor
which is the combination of actions and observations, i.e., the
rewards, in the past time slots. The output includes Q-values
corresponding to the actions. To balance the exploration of
the current best Q-value with the exploration of the better
one, the-greedy policy is adopted for the action selection
mechanism. The simulation results based on real data from
[41] show that the proposed scheme can achieve the average
accumulated reward close to the myopic policy [42] without
a full knowledge of the system.
[39] can be considered to be a pioneer work using the DQL
for the channel access. However, the DQL keeps following the
learned policy over time slots and stops learning a suitable
policy. Actual IoT environments are dynamic, and the DQN
in the DQL needs to be re-trained. An adaptive DQL scheme
is proposed in [43] which evaluates the accumulated reward
of the current policy for every period. When the reward is
reduced by a given threshold, the DQN is re-trained to ﬁnd a
new good policy. The simulation results [43] show that when
the states of the channels change, the adaptive DQL scheme
can detect the change and start re-learning to obtain the high
reward.
The models in [39] and [43] are constrained to only one
sensor. Consider a multi-sensor scenario, the authors in [44]
address the joint channel selection and packet forwarding
using the DQL. The model is shown in Fig. 5 in which
one sensor as a relay forwards packets received from its
neighboring sensors to the sink. The sensor is equipped with
1Remind that DQN is the core of the DQL algorithms.

==== Page 12 ====
12
  Relay
(agent )Sensor
(neighbor )
SinkChannels
Sensor
(neighbor )
Buffer
Fig. 5: Joint channel selection and packet forwarding in IoT.
a buffer to store the received packets. At each time slot, the
sensor selects a set of channels for the packet forwarding so
as to maximize its utility, i.e., the ratio of the number of
transmitted packets to the transmit power. Similar to [39], the
sensor’s problem can be formulated as an MDP. The action is
to select a set of channels, the number of packets transmitted
on the channels, and a modulation mode. To avoid packet loss,
the state is deﬁned as the combination of the buffer state and
channel state. The MDP is then solved by the DQL in which
the input is the state and the output is the action selection.
The DQL uses the stacked autoencoder to reduce the massive
calculation and storage in the Q-learning phase. The sensor’s
utility function is proved to be bounded which can guarantee
the convergence of the algorithm. As shown in the simulation
results, the proposed scheme can converge after a certain
number of iterations. Also, the proposed scheme signiﬁcantly
improves the system utility compared with the random action
selection scheme. However, as the packet arrival rate increases,
the system utility of the proposed scheme decreases since the
sensor needs to consume more power to transmit all packets.
Consuming more power leads to poor sensor’s performance
due to its energy constraint, i.e., a shorter IoT system lifetime.
The channel access problem in the energy harvesting-enabled
IoT system is investigated in [45]. The model consists of
one BS and energy harvesting-based sensors. The BS as a
controller allocates channels to the sensors. However, the
uncertainty of ambient energy availability at the sensors may
make the channel allocation inefﬁcient. For example, the
channel allocated to the sensor with low available energy may
not be fully utilized since the sensor cannot communicate later.
Therefore, the BS’s problem is to predict the sensors’
battery states and select sensors for the channel access so as
to maximize the total rate. Since the sensors are distributed
randomly over a geographical area, the complete statistical
knowledge of the system dynamics, e.g., the battery states
and channel states, may not be available. Thus, the DQL is
used to solve the problem of the BS, i.e., the agent. The DQL
uses a DQN consisting of two LSTM-based neural network
layers. The ﬁrst layer generates the predicted battery states
of sensors, and the second layer uses the predicted states
along with Channel State Information (CSI) to determine the
channel access policy. The state space consists of (i) channel
access scheduling history, (ii) the history of predicted battery
information, (iii) the history of the true battery information,
and (iv) the current CSI of the sensors. The action spacecontains all sets of sensors to be selected for the channel
access, and the reward is the difference between the total rate
and the prediction error. As shown in the simulation results, the
proposed scheme outperforms the myopic policy [42] in terms
of total rate. Moreover, the battery prediction error obtained
from the proposed scheme is close to zero.
The above schemes, e.g., [39] and [45], focus on the
rate maximization. In IoT systems such as Vehicle-to-Vehicle
(V2V) communications, latency also needs to be considered
due to the mobility of V2V transmitters/receivers and vital
applications in the trafﬁc safety. One of the problems of each
V2V transmitter is to select a channel and a transmit power
level to maximize its capacity under a latency constraint. Given
the decentralized network, a DQN is adopted to make optimal
decisions as proposed in [46]. The model consists of V2V
transmitters, i.e., agents, which share a set of channels. The
actions of each V2V transmitter include choosing channels
and transmit power levels. The reward is a function of the
V2V transmitter’s capacity and latency. The state observed
by the V2V transmitter consists of (i) the instantaneous
CSI of the corresponding V2V link, (ii) the interference to
the V2V link in the previous time slot, (iii) the channels
selected by the V2V transmitter’ neighbors in the previous
time slot, and (iv) the remaining time to meet the latency
constraint. The state is also an input of the DQN. The output
includes Q-values corresponding to the actions. As shown in
the simulation results, by dynamically adjusting the power
and channel selection when V2V links are likely to violate
the latency constraint, the proposed scheme has more V2V
transmitters meeting the latency constraint compared with the
random channel allocation.
To reduce spectrum cost, the above IoT systems often use
unlicensed channels. However, this may cause the interference
to existing networks, e.g., WLANs. The authors in [47]
propose to use the DQN to jointly address the dynamic channel
access and interference management. The model consists of
Small Base Stations (SBSs) which share unlicensed channels
in an LTE network. At each time slot, the SBS selects one
of channels for transmitting its packet. However, there may
be WLAN trafﬁcs on the selected channel, and thus the SBS
accesses the selected channel with a probability. The actions
of the SBS include pairs of channel selection and channel
access probability. The problem of the SBS is to determine an
action vector so as to maximize its total throughput, i.e., its
utility, over all channels and time slots. The resource allocation
problem can be formulated as a non-cooperative game, and the
DQN using LSTM can be adopted to solve the game. The input
of the DQN is the history trafﬁc of the SBSs and the WLAN
on the channels. The output includes predicted action vectors
of the SBSs. The utility function of each SBS is proved to
be convex, and thus the DQN-based algorithm converges to a
Nash equilibrium of the game. The simulation results based
on real trafﬁc data from [48] show that the proposed scheme
can improve the average throughput up to 28% compared with
the standard Q-learning [15]. Moreover, deploying more SBSs
in the LTE network does not allow more airtime fraction for
the network. This implies that the proposed scheme can avoid
causing performance degradation to the WLAN. However, the

==== Page 13 ====
13
proposed scheme requires synchronization between the SBSs
and the WLAN which is challenging in real networks.
In the same cellular network context, the authors in [22]
address the dynamic spectrum access problem for multiple
users sharing Kchannels. At a time slot, the user selects a
channel with a certain attempt probability or chooses not to
transmit at all. The state is the history of the user’s actions
and its local observations, and the user’s strategy is mapping
from the history to an attempt probability. The problem of the
user is to ﬁnd a vector of the strategies, i.e., the policy, over
time slots to maximize its expected accumulated discounted
data rate of the user.
The above problem is solved by training a DQN. The
input of the DQN includes past actions and the corresponding
observations. The output includes estimated Q-values of the
actions. To avoid the overestimation in the Q-learning, the
DDQN [20] is used. Moreover, the dueling DQN [49] is
employed to improve the estimated Q-value. The DQN is
then ofﬂine trained at a base station. Similar to [47], the
multichannel random access is modeled as a non-cooperative
game. As proved in [22], the game has a subgame perfect
equilibrium. Note that some users can keep increasing their
attempt probability to increase their rates. This makes the
equilibrium point inefﬁcient, and thus the strategy space of
the users is restricted to avoid the situation. The simulation
results show that the proposed scheme can achieve twice the
channel throughput compared with the slotted-Aloha [50]. The
reason is that in the proposed scheme, each user only learns
from its local observation without an online coordination or
carrier sensing. However, the proposed scheme requires the
central unit which may raise the message exchanges as the
training is frequently updated.
In the aforementioned models, the number of users is ﬁxed
in all time slots, and the arrival of new users is not considered.
The authors in [51] address the channel allocation to new
arrival users in a multibeam satellite system. The multibeam
satellite system generates a geographical footprint subdivided
into multiple beams which provide services to ground User
Terminals (UTs). The system has a set of channels. If there
exist available channels, the system allocates a channel to the
new arrived UT, i.e., the new service is satisﬁed. Otherwise, the
service is blocked. The system’s problem is to ﬁnd a channel
allocation decision to minimize the total service blocking
probability of the new UT over time slots without causing
the interference to the current UTs.
The system’s problem can be viewed as a temporal corre-
lated sequential decision-making optimization problem which
is effectively solved by the DQN. Here, the satellite system
is the agent. The action is an index indicating which channel
is allocated to the new arrived UT. The reward is positive
when the new service is satisﬁed and is negative when the
service is blocked. The state includes the set of current UTs,
the current channel allocation matrix, and the new arrived UT.
Note that the state has the spatial correlation feature due to
the co-channel interference, and thus it can be represented
in an image-like fashion, i.e., an image tensor. Therefore,
the DQN adopts the CNN to extract useful features of the
state. The simulation results show that the proposed DQNalgorithm converges after a certain number of training steps.
Also, by allocating available channels to the new arrived UTs,
the proposed scheme can improve the system trafﬁc up to
24.4% compared with the ﬁxed channel allocation scheme.
However, as the number of current UTs increases, the number
of available channels is low or even zero. Therefore, the
dynamic channel allocation decisions of the proposed scheme
become meaningless, and the performance difference between
the two schemes becomes insigniﬁcant. For the future work,
a joint channel and power allocation algorithm based on the
DQL can be investigated.
2) Joint User Association and Spectrum Access: The joint
user association and spectrum access problems are typically
non-convex. DQL is able to provide distributed solutions, and
thus it can be effectively used to solve the problems without
requiring complete and accurate network information.
The authors in [23] consider a HetNet which consists
of multiple users and BSs including macro base stations
and femto base stations. The BSs share a set of orthogonal
channels, and the users are randomly located in the network.
The problem of each user is to select one BS and a channel
to maximize its data rate while guaranteeing that the Signal-
to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) of the user is higher
than a minimum Qualtiy of Service (QoS) requirement. The
DQL is adopted to solve the problem in which each user is
an agent, and its state is a vector including QoS states of
all users, i.e., the global state. Here, the QoS state of the
user refers to whether its SINR exceeds the minimum QoS
requirement or not. At each time slot, the user takes an action.
If the QoS is satisﬁed, the user receives utility as its immediate
reward. Otherwise, it receives a negative reward, i.e., an action
selection cost. Note that the cumulative reward of one user
depends on actions of other users, then the user’s problem can
be deﬁned as an MDP. Similar to [22], the DDQN and the
dueling DQN are used to learn the optimal policy, i.e., the
joint BS and channel selections, for the user to maximize its
cumulative reward. The simulation results from [23] show that
the proposed scheme outperforms the Q-learning implemented
in [15] in terms of convergence speed and system capacity.
The scheme proposed in [23] is considered to be the
ﬁrst work using the DQL for the joint user association and
spectrum access problem. Inspired by this work, the authors
in [52] propose to use the DQL for a joint user association,
spectrum access, and content caching problem. The network
model is an LTE network which consists of UA Vs serving
ground users. The UA Vs are equipped with storage units and
can act as cached-enabled LTE-BSs. The UA Vs are able to
access both licensed and unlicensed bands in the network.
The UA Vs are controlled by a cloud-based server, and the
transmissions from the cloud to the UA Vs are implemented by
using the licensed cellular band. The problem of each UA V is
to determine (i) its optimal user association, (ii) the bandwidth
allocation indicators on the licensed band, (iii) the time slot
indicators on the unlicensed band, and (iv) a set of popular
contents that the users can request to maximize the number
of users with stable queue, i.e., users satisﬁed with content
transmission delay.
The UA V’s problem is combinatorial and non-convex, and

==== Page 14 ====
14
Client
(agent )(Video segment & bitrate )
(Video segment )
Buffer
Content delivery 
networkServerVideo 
segmentsServer
Fig. 6: A dynamic adaptive streaming system based on HTTP
standard.
the DQL can be used to solve it. The UA Vs do not know
the users’ content requests, and thus the Liquid State Machine
approach (LSM) [53] is adopted to predict the content request
distribution of the users and to perform resource allocation.
In particular, predicting the content request distribution is
implemented at the cloud based on an LSM-based prediction
algorithm. Then, given the request distributions, each UA V as
an agent uses an LSM-based learning algorithm to ﬁnd its
optimal users association. Speciﬁcally, the input of the LSM-
based learning algorithm consists of actions, i.e., UA V-user
association schemes, that other UA Vs take, and the output
includes the expected numbers of users with stable queues
corresponding to actions that the UA V can take. After the user
association is done, the optimal content caching is determined
based on the results of [54, Theorem 2], and the optimal spec-
trum allocation is done by using linear programming. Based
on the Gordon’s Theorem [55], the proposed DQL is proved
to converge with probability one. The simulation results using
content request data from [56] show that the proposed DQL
can converge in around 400 iterations. Compared with the Q-
learning, the proposed DQN improves the convergence time up
to 33% . Moreover, the proposed DQL signiﬁcantly improves
the number of users with stable queues up to 50% compared
with the Q-learning without cache. In fact, energy efﬁciency is
also important for the UA Vs, and thus applying the DQL for a
joint user association, spectrum access, and power allocation
problem needs to be investigated.
B. Adaptive Rate Control
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH) becomes
the dominant standard for video streaming [57]. DASH is able
to leverage existing content delivery network infrastructure
and is compatible with a multitude of client-side applications.
A general DASH system is shown in Fig. 6 in which the
videos are stored in servers as multiple segments, i.e., chunks.
Each segment is encoded at different compression levels to
generate representations with different bitrates, i.e., different
video visual quality. At each time slot, the client chooses
a representation, i.e., a segment with a certain bitrate, to
download. The client’s problem is to ﬁnd an optimal policy
which maximizes its QoE such as maximizing average bitrate
and minimizing rebuffering, i.e., the time which the video
playout freezes.
As presented in [58], the above problem can be modeled
as an MDP in which the agent is the client and the action
is choosing a representation to download. To maximize theQoE, the reward is deﬁned as a function of (i) visual quality
of the video, (ii) video quality stability, (iii) rebuffering event,
and (iv) buffer state. Given the reward formulation, the state
of the client should include (i) the video quality of the last
downloaded segment, (ii) the current buffer state, (iii) the
rebuffering time, and (iv) the channel capacities experienced
during downloading of segments in the past time slots. The
MDP can be solved by using dynamic programming, but the
computational complexity rapidly becomes unmanageable as
the size of the problem increases. Thus, the authors in [58]
adopt the DQL to solve the problem. Similar to [45], the
LSTM networks are used in which the input is the state of
the client, and the output includes Q-values corresponding to
the client’s possible actions. To improve the performance of
the standard LSTM, peephole connections are added into the
LSTM networks. The simulation results based on dataset from
[59] show that the proposed DQL algorithm can converge
much faster than Q-learning. Moreover, the proposed DQL
improves the video quality and reduces the rebuffering since
it is able to dynamically manage the buffer by considering the
buffer state and channel capacity.
The network model and the optimization problem in [58]
are also found in [60]. However, different from [58], the
authors in [60] adopt the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-
Critic (A3C) method [26] for the DQL to further enhance
and speed up the training. As presented in Section II-F1,
A3C includes two neural networks, namely, actor network and
critic network . The actor network is to choose bitrates for the
client, and the critic network helps train the actor network.
For the actor network, the input is the client’s state, and the
output is a policy, i.e., a probability distribution over possible
actions given states that the client can take. Here, the action is
choosing the next representation, i.e., the next segment with a
certain bitrate, to download. For the critic network, the input
is the client’s state, and the output is the expected total reward
when following the policy obtained from the actor network.
The simulation results based on the mobile dataset from [61]
show that the proposed DQL can improve the average QoE up
to 25% compared with the bitrate control scheme [62]. Also,
by having sufﬁcient buffer to handle the network’s throughput
ﬂuctuations, the proposed DQL reduces the rebuffering around
32.8% compared with the baseline scheme.
In practice, the DQL algorithm proposed in [60] can be
easily deployed in a multi-client network since A3C is able
to support parallel training for multiple agents. Accordingly,
each client, i.e., an agent, is conﬁgured to observe its reward.
Then, the client sends a tuple including its state, action, and
reward to a server. The server uses the actor-critic algorithm
to update its actor network model. The server then pushes the
newest model to the agent. This update process can happen
asynchronously among all agents which improves quality and
speeds up the training. Although the parallel training scheme
may incur a Round-Trip Time (RTT) between the clients and
the server, the simulation results in [60] show that the RTT
between the clients and the server reduces the average QoE by
only 3.5%. The performance degradation is small, and thus the
proposed DQL can be implemented in real network systems.
In [58] and [60], the input of the DQL, i.e., the client’s

==== Page 15 ====
15
state, includes the video quality of the last downloaded video
segment. The video segment is raw which may cause “state
explosion” to the state space [63]. To reduce the state space
and to improve the QoE, the authors in [63] propose to use
a video quality prediction network. The prediction network
extracts useful features from the raw video segments using
CNN and RNN. Then, the output of the prediction network,
i.e., the predicted video quality, is used as one of the inputs of
the DQL which is proposed in [60]. The simulation results
based on the broadband dataset from [64] show that the
proposed DQL can improve the average QoE up to 25%
compared with the Google Hangout, i.e., a communication
platform developed by Google. Moreover, the proposed DQL
can reduce the average latency of video transmission around
45% due to the small state space.
Apart from the DASH systems, the DQL can be effectively
used for the rate control in High V olume Flexible Time
(HVFT) applications. HVFT applications use cellular networks
to deliver IoT trafﬁc. The HVFT applications have a large
volume of trafﬁc, and the trafﬁc scheduling, e.g., data rate
control, in the HVFT applications is necessary. One common
approach is to assign static priority classes per trafﬁc type, and
then trafﬁc scheduling is based on its priority class. However,
such an approach does not evolve to accommodate new trafﬁc
classes. Thus, learning methods such as DQL should be used to
provide adaptive rate control mechanisms as proposed in [65].
The network model is a single cell including one BS as a
central controller and multiple mobile users. The problem at
the BS is to ﬁnd a proper policy, i.e., data rate for the users,
to maximize the amount of transmitted HVFT trafﬁc while
minimizing performance degradation to existing data trafﬁcs.
It is shown in [65] that the problem can be formulated as
an MDP. The agent is the BS, and the state includes the
current network state and the useful features extracted from
network states in the past time slots. The network state at
a time slot includes (i) the congestion metric, i.e., the cell’s
trafﬁc load, at the time slot, (ii) the total number of network
connections, and (iii) the cell efﬁciency, i.e., the cell quality.
The action that the BS takes is a combination of the trafﬁc
rate for the users. To achieve the BS’ objective, the reward
is deﬁned as a function of (i) the sum of HVFT trafﬁc, (ii)
trafﬁc loss to existing applications due to the presence of
the HVFT trafﬁc, and (iii) the amount of bytes served below
desired minimum throughput. The DQL using the actor and
critic networks with LSTM is then adopted. By using the real
network data collected in Melbourne, the simulation results
show that the proposed DQL increases the HVFT trafﬁc up to
2 times compared with the heuristic control scheme. However,
how the proposed scheme reduces the trafﬁc loss is not shown.
In the aforementioned approaches, the maximum number of
objectives is constrained, e.g., to 3 in [66]. The authors in [67]
show that the DQL can be used for the rate control to achieve
multiple objectives in complex communication systems. The
network model is a future space communication system which
is expected to operate in unpredictable environments, e.g.,
orbital dynamics, atmospheric and space weather, and dy-
namic channels. In the system, the transmitter needs to be
conﬁgured with several transmit parameters, e.g., symbol rateand encoding rate, to achieve multiple conﬂict objectives, e.g.,
low Bit Error Rate (BER), throughput improvement, power
and spectral efﬁciency. The adaptive coding and modulation
schemes, i.e., [68], can be used. However, the methods allow to
achieve only limited number objectives. Learning algorithms
such as the DQL can be thus used. The agent is the transmitter
in the system. The action is a combination of (i) symbol rate,
(ii) energy per symbol, (iii) modulation mode, (iv) number
of bits per symbol, and (v) encoding rate. The objective is to
maximize the system performance. Thus, the reward is deﬁned
as a ﬁtness function of performance parameters including (i)
BER estimated at the receiver, (ii) throughput, (iii) spectral
efﬁciency, (iv) power consumption, and (v) transmit power
efﬁciency. The state is the system performance measured by
the transmitter, and thus the state is the reward. To achieve
multiple objectives, the DQL is implemented by using a set of
multiple neural networks in parallel. The input of the DQL is
the current state and the channel conditions, and the output is
the predicted action. The neural networks are trained by using
the Levenberg-Marquardt backpropagation algorithm [69]. The
simulation results show that the proposed DQL can achieve the
ﬁtness score, i.e., the weighted sum of different objectives,
close to the ideal, i.e., the exhaustive search approach. This
implies that the DQL is able to select near-optimal actions
and learn the relationship between rewards and actions given
dynamic channel conditions.
Summary: This section reviews applications of DQL for
the dynamic network access and adaptive rate control. The
reviewed approaches are summarized along with the references
in Table III. We observe that the problems are mostly modeled
as an MDP. Moreover, DQL approaches for the IoT and DASH
systems receive more attentions than other networks. Future
networks, e.g., 5G networks, involve multiple network entities
with multiple conﬂicting objectives, e.g., provider’s revenue
versus users’ utility maximization. This poses a number of
challenges to the traditional resource management mechanisms
that deserve in-depth investigation. In the next section, we
review the adoption of DQL for the emerging services, i.e.,
ofﬂoading and caching.
IV. C ACHING AND OFFLOADING
As one of the key features of information-centric net-
working, in-network caching can efﬁciently reduce duplicated
content transmissions. The studies on wireless caching has
shown that access delays, energy consumption, and the total
amount of trafﬁc can be reduced signiﬁcantly by caching
contents in wireless devices. Big data analytics [70] also
demonstrate that with limited cache size, proactive caching
at network edge nodes can achieve 100% user satisfaction
while ofﬂoading 98% of the backhaul trafﬁc. Joint content
caching and ofﬂoading can address the gap between the
mobile users’ large data demands and the limited capacities
in data storage and processing. This motivates the study on
Mobile Edge Computing (MEC). By deploying both com-
putational resources and caching capabilities close to end
users, MEC signiﬁcantly improves energy efﬁciency and QoS
for applications that require intensive computations and low

==== Page 16 ====
16
TABLE III: A summary of approaches using DQL for network access and adaptive rate control.
ISSUES REF.MODELLEARNING
ALGORITHMSAGENT STATES ACTIONS REWARDS NETWORKSNetwork access[39]POMDPDQN using
FNNSensorPast channel selections and
observationsChannel selection Score +1 or -1 IoT
[44]MDPDQN using
FNNSensorCurrent buffer state and
channel stateChannel, packets,
and modulation
mode selectionRatio of number of
transmitted packets
to transmit powerIoT
[45]MDPDQN with
LSTMBase stationChannel access history,
predicted and true battery
information history, and
current CSISensor selection
for channel accessTotal rate and
prediction errorIoT
[46]MDPDQN with
LSTMV2V
transmitterCurrent CSI, past
interference, past channel
selections, and remaining time
to meet the latency constraintsChannel and
transmit power
selectionCapacity and latency IoT
[47]GameDQN with
LSTMSmall base
stationTrafﬁc history of small base
stations and the WLANChannel selection
and channel access
probabilityThroughputLTE
network
[22]GameDDQN and
dueling DQNMobile userPast channel selections and
observationsChannel selection Data rate CRN
[51]MDPDQN with
CNNSatellite
systemCurrent user terminals,
channel allocation matrix, and
the new arrival userChannel selection Score +1 or -1Satellite
system
[23]MDPDDQN and
dueling DQNMobile user QoS statesBase station and
channel selectionUtility HetNet
[52]GameDQN with
LSMUA V Content request distributionBase station
selectionUsers with stable
queuesLTE
networkRate control[58]MDPDQN with
LSTM and
peephole
connectionsClientLast segment quality, current
buffer state, rebuffering time,
and channel capacitiesBitrate selection
for segmentVideo quality,
rebuffering even, and
buffer stateDASH
system
[60]MDPDQN with
A3CClientLast segment quality, current
buffer state, rebuffering time,
and channel capacitiesBitrate selection
for segmentVideo quality,
rebuffering even, and
buffer stateDASH
system
[63]MDPDQN with
CNN and RNNClientPredicted video quality,
current buffer state,
rebuffering time, and channel
capacitiesBitrate selection
for segmentVideo quality,
rebuffering even, and
buffer stateDASH
system
[65]MDPDQN using
A3C and
LSTMBase stationCongestion metric, current
network connections, and cell
efﬁciencyTrafﬁc rate
decisions for
mobile usersHVFT trafﬁc, trafﬁc
loss to existing
applications, and the
amount of served
bytesHVFT
application
[67]MDPDQN using
FNNBase stationMeasurements of BER,
throughput, spectral
efﬁciency, power
consumption, and transmit
power efﬁciencySymbol rate,
energy per symbol,
modulation mode,
number of bits per
symbol, and
encoding rateSame as the stateSpace com-
munication
system
latency. A uniﬁed study on caching, ofﬂoading, networking,
and transmission control in MEC scenarios involves very com-
plicated system analysis because of strong couplings among
mobile users with heterogeneities in application demand, QoS
provisioning, mobility pattern, radio access interface, and
wireless resources. A learning-based and model-free approach
becomes a promising candidate to manage huge state space
and optimization variables, especially by using DNNs. In this
section, we review the modeling and optimization of caching
and ofﬂoading policies in wireless networks by leveraging the
DRL framework.
A. Wireless Proactive Caching
Wireless proactive caching has attracted great attentions
from both academia and industry. Statistically, a few pop-
ular contents are usually requested by many users during a
short time span, which accounts for most of the trafﬁc load.Therefore, proactively caching popular contents can avoid the
heavy trafﬁc burden of the backhaul links. In particular, this
technique aims at pre-caching the contents from the remote
content servers at the edge devices or BSs that are close to
the end users. If the requested contents are already cached
locally, the BS can directly serve the end users with small
delay. Otherwise, the BS requests these contents from the
original content server and updates the local cache based on
the caching policy, which is one of the main design problem
for wireless proactive caching.
1) QoS-Aware Caching: Content popularity is the key
factor used to solve the content caching problem. With a
large number of contents and their time-varying popularities,
DQL is an attractive strategy to tackle this problem with
high-dimensional state and action spaces. The authors in [70]
present a DQL scheme to improve the caching performance.
The system model consists of a single BS with a ﬁxed cache

==== Page 17 ====
17
size. For each request, the BS as an agent makes a decision
on whether or not to store the currently requested content in
the cache. If the new content is kept, the BS determines which
local content will be replaced. The state is the feature space of
the cached contents and the currently requested content. The
feature space consists of the total number of requests for each
content in a speciﬁc short-, medium-, and long-term. There
are two types of actions: (i) to ﬁnd a pair of contents and
exchange the cache states of the two contents and (ii) to keep
the cache states of the contents unchanged. The aim of the BS
is to maximize the long-term cache hit rate, i.e., reward.
The DQL scheme in [70] trains the policy by using
the DDPG method [71] and employs Wolpertinger architec-
ture [72] to reduce the size of the action space and avoid miss-
ing an optimal policy. The Wolpertinger architecture consists
of three main parts: an actor network, K-Nearest Neighbors
(K-NN), and a critic network. The actor network is to avoid a
large action space. The critic network is to correct the decision
made by the actor network. The DDPG method is applied
to update both critic and actor networks. K-NN can help to
explore a set of actions to avoid poor decisions. The actor
and critic networks are then implemented by using FNNs.
The simulation results show that the proposed DQL scheme
outperforms the ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out scheme in terms of long-term
cache hit rate.
Maximizing the long-term cache hit rate in [70] implies
that the cache stores the most popular contents. In a dynamic
environment, contents stored in a cache have to be replaced
according to the users’ dynamic requests. An optimization of
the placement or replacement of cached contents is studied
in [73] by a deep learning method. The optimization algorithm
is trained by a DNN in advance and then used for real-
time caching or scheduling with minimum delay. The authors
in [74] propose an optimal caching policy to learn the cache
expiration times, i.e., Time-To-Live (TTL), for dynamically
changing requests in content delivery networks. The system
includes a cloud database server and multiple mobile devices
that can issue queries and update entries in a single database.
The query results can be cached for a speciﬁed time interval
at server-controlled caches. All cached queries will become
invalid if one of the cached records has been updated. A large
TTL will strain cache capacities while a small TTL increases
latencies signiﬁcantly if the database server is physically
remote.
Unlike the DDPG approach used in [70], the authors in [74]
propose to utilize Normalized Advantage Functions (NAFs)
for continuous DQL scheme to learn optimal cache expiration
duration. The key problem in continuous DQL is to select an
action maximizing the Q-function, while avoiding performing
a costly numerical optimization at each step. The use of NAFs
obviates a second actor network that needs to be trained sepa-
rately. Instead, a single neural network is used to output both
a value function and an advantage term. The DQL agent at the
cloud database uses an encoding of a query itself and the query
miss rates as the system states, which allows for an easier
generalization. The system reward is linearly proportional to
the current load, i.e., the number of cached queries divided
by the total capacity. This reward function can encouragelonger TTLs when fewer queries are cached, and shorter TTLs
when the load is close to the system capacity. Considering
incomplete measurements for rewards and next-states at run-
time, the authors introduce the Delayed Experience Injection
(DEI) approach that allows the DQL agent to keep track of
incomplete transitions when measurements are not immedi-
ately available. The authors evaluate the learning algorithm
by Yahoo! cloud serving benchmark with customized web
workloads [75]. The simulation results verify that the learning
approach based on NAFs and DEI outperforms a statistical
estimator.
2) Joint Caching and Transmission Control: The caching
policies determine where to store and retrieve the requested
content efﬁciently, e.g., by learning the contents’ popular-
ities [70] and cache expiration time [74]. Another impor-
tant aspect of caching design is the transmission control of
the content delivery from caches to end users, especially
for wireless systems with dynamic channel conditions. To
avoid mutual interference in multi-user wireless networks,
the transmission control decides which cached contents can
be transmitted concurrently as well as the most appropriate
control parameters, e.g., transmit power, precoding, data rate,
and channel allocation. Hence, the joint design of caching
and transmission control is required to enable efﬁcient content
delivery in multi-user wireless networks.
The authors in [76]–[78] propose a DQL framework to
address the joint caching and interference alignment to tackle
mutual interference in multi-user wireless networks. The au-
thors consider an MIMO system with limited backhaul capac-
ity and the caches at the transmitter. The precoding design for
interference alignment requires the global CSI at each trans-
mitter. A central scheduler is responsible for collecting CSI
and cache status from each user via the backhaul, scheduling
the users’ transmission, and optimizing the resource allocation.
By enabling content caching at individual transmitters, we can
decrease the demand for data transfer and thus save more back-
haul capacity for real-time CSI update and sharing. Using the
DQL-based approach at the central scheduler can reduce the
explicit demand for CSI and the computational complexity in
matrix optimization, especially with time-varying channel con-
ditions. The DQL agent implements the DNN to approximate
the Q-function with experience replay in training. To make the
learning process more stable, the target Q-network parameter
is updated by the Q-network for every a few time instants.
The collected information is assembled into a system state and
sent to the DQL agent, which feeds back an optimal action
for the current time instant. The action indicates which users
to be active, and the resource allocation among active users.
The system reward represents the total throughput of multiple
users. An extended work of [76] and [77] with a similar DQL
framework is presented in [78], in which a CNN-based DQN
is adopted and evaluated in a more practical conditions with
imperfect or delayed CSI. Simulation results show that the
performance of the MIMO system is signiﬁcantly improved
in terms of the total throughput and energy efﬁciency.
Interference management is an important requirement of
wireless systems. The application-related QoS or user experi-
ence is also an essential metric. Different from [76]–[78], the

==== Page 18 ====
18
authors in [79] propose a DQL approach to maximize Quality
of Experience (QoE) of IoT devices by jointly optimizing
the cache allocation and transmission rate in content-centric
wireless networks. The system state is speciﬁed by the nodes’
caching conditions, e.g., the service information and cached
contents, as well as the transmission rates of the cached
contents. The aim of the DQL agent is to minimize continu-
ously the network cost or maximize the QoE. The proposed
DQL framework is further enhanced with the use of PER and
DDQN. PER replays important transitions more frequently so
that DQN can learn from samples more efﬁciently. The use
of DDQN can stabilize the learning by providing two value
functions in separated neural networks. This avoids an over-
estimation of the DQN with the increasing number of actions.
These two neural networks are not completely decoupled as
the target network is a periodic copy of estimation network. A
discrete simulator ccnSim [80] is used to model the caching
behavior in various graph structures. The output data trace of
the simulator is then imported to Matlab and used to evaluate
the learning algorithm. The simulation results show that the
DQL framework by using PER and DDQN outperforms the
standard penetration test scheme in terms of QoE.
The QoE can be used to characterize the users’ percep-
tion of Virtual Reality (VR) services. The authors in [81]
address the joint content caching and transmission strategy
in a wireless VR network, where UA Vs capture videos on live
games and transmit them to small-cell BSs servicing the VR
users. Millimeter wave (mmWave) downlink backhaul links
are used for VR content transmission from the UA Vs to BSs.
The BSs can also cache the popular contents that may be
requested frequently by end users. The joint content caching
and transmission problem is formulated as an optimization to
maximize the users’ reliability, i.e., the probability that the
content transmission delay satisﬁes the instantaneous delay
target. The maximization involves the control of transmission
format, users’ association, the set and format of cached con-
tents. A DQL framework combining the Liquid State Machine
(LSM) and Echo State Network (ESN) is proposed for each
BS to ﬁnd the optimal transmission and caching strategies. As
a randomly generated spiking neural network [82], LSM can
store information about the network environment over time
and adjust the users’ association policy, cached contents and
formats according to the users’ content requests. It has been
used in [83] to predict the users’ content request distribution
while having only limited information regarding the network
and different users. Conventional LSM uses FNNs as the
output function, which demands high complexity in training
due to the computation of gradients for all of the neurons.
Conversely, the proposed DQL framework uses an ESN as the
output function, which uses historical information to ﬁnd the
relationship between the users’ reliability, caching, and content
transmission. It also has a lower complexity in training and
a better memory for network information. Simulation results
show that the proposed DQL framework can yield 25.4%
gain in terms of users’ reliability compared to the baseline
Q-learning.
3) Joint Caching, Networking, and Computation: Caching
and transmission control will become more involved in a Het-Net that integrates different communication technologies, e.g.,
cellular system, device-to-device network, vehicular network,
and networked UA Vs, to support various application demands.
The network heterogeneity raises the problem of complicated
system design that needs to address challenging issues such
as mutual interference, differentiated QoS provisioning, and
resource allocation, hopefully in a uniﬁed framework. Obvi-
ously this demands a joint optimization far beyond the extent
of joint caching and transmission control.
Accordingly, the authors in [84] propose a DQL framework
for energy-efﬁcient resource allocation in green wireless net-
works, jointly considering the couplings among networking,
in-network caching and computation. The system consists
of a Software-Deﬁned Network (SDN) with multiple virtual
networks and mobile users requesting for video on-demand
ﬁles that require a certain amount of computational resource
at either the content server or at local devices. In each virtual
network, an authorized user issues a request to download ﬁles
from a set of available SBSs in its neighborhood area. The
wireless channels between each mobile user and the SBSs
are characterized as Finite-State Markov Channels (FSMC).
The states are the available cache capacity at the SBSs,
the channel conditions between mobile users and SBSs, the
computational capability of the content servers and mobile
users. The DQL agent at each SBS decides an association
between each mobile user and SBS, where to perform the
computational task, and how to schedule the transmissions of
SBSs to deliver the required data. The objective is to minimize
the total energy consumption of the system from data caching,
wireless transmission, and computation.
The DQL scheme proposed in [84] has been applied to
improve the performance of Vehicular Ad doc NETworks
(V ANETs) in [85]–[87]. The network model includes multiple
BSs, Road Side Units (RSUs), MEC servers, and content
servers. All devices are controlled by a mobile virtual network
operator. The vehicles request for video contents that can be
cached at the BSs or retrieved from remote content servers.
The authors in [85] formulate the resource allocation problem
as a joint optimization of caching, networking, and comput-
ing, e.g., compressing and encoding operations of the video
contents. The system states include the CSI from each BS, the
computational capability, and cache size of each MEC/content
server. The network operator feeds the system state to the
FNN-based DQN and gets the optimal policy that determines
the resource allocation for each vehicle. To exploit spatial
correlations in learning, the authors in [86] enhance Q-learning
by using CNNs in DQN. This makes it possible to extract
high-level features from raw input data. Two schemes have
been introduced in [87] to improve stability and performance
of the ordinary DQN method. Firstly, DDQN is designed to
avoid over-estimation of Q-value in ordinary DQN. Hence, the
action can be decoupled from the target Q-value generation.
This makes the training process faster and more reliable.
Secondly, the dueling DQN approach is also integrated in the
design with the intuition that it is not always necessary to
estimate the reward by taking some action. The state-action Q-
value in dueling DQN is decomposed into one value function
representing the reward in the current state, and the advantage

==== Page 19 ====
19
CacheCellular BS
Small cell BS
Cloud
Joint design of caching, networking, 
and transmission control strategies
Fig. 7: Joint caching, networking, and transmission control to
optimize cache hit rate [70], cache expiration time [74], interfer-
ence alignment [76]–[78], Quality of Experience [79], [81], energy
efﬁciency [84], resource allocation [85]–[87], trafﬁc latency, or re-
dundancy [89], [91].
function that measures the relative importance of a certain
action compared with other actions. The enhanced DQL agent
combining these two schemes can achieve better performance
and faster training speed.
Considering the huge action space and high complexity with
the vehicle’s mobility and service delay deadline Td, a multi-
time scale DQN framework is proposed in [88] to minimize
the system cost by the joint design of communication, caching
and computing in V ANET. The policy design accounts for
limited storage capacities and computational resources at the
vehicles and the RSUs. The small timescale DQN is for every
time slot and aims to maximize the exact immediate reward.
Additionally, the large timescale DQN is designed for every
Tdtime slots within the service delay deadline, and used to
estimate the reward considering the vehicle’s mobility in a
large timescale.
The aforementioned DQL framework for V ANETs, e.g.,
[85]–[87], has also been generalized to smart city applica-
tions in [89], which necessitates dynamic orchestration of
networking, caching, and computation to meet different ser-
vicing requirements. Through Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) [90], the physical wireless network in smart cities
can be divided logically into several virtual ones by the
network operator, which is responsible for network slicing
and resource scheduling, as well as allocation of caching
and computing capacities. The use cases in smart cities are
presented in [91], [92], which apply the generalized DQL
framework to improve the security and efﬁciency for trust-
based data exchange, sharing, and delivery in mobile social
networks through the resource allocation and optimization
of MEC allocation, caching, and D2D (Device-to-Device)
networking.
B. Data and Computation Ofﬂoading
With limited computation, memory and power supplies,
IoT devices such as sensors, wearable devices, and handhelddevices become the bottleneck to support advanced applica-
tions such as interactive online gaming and face recognition.
To address such a challenge, IoT devices can ofﬂoad the
computational tasks to nearby MEC servers, integrated with
the BSs, Access Points (APs), and even neighboring Mobile
Users (MUs). As a result, data and computation ofﬂoading can
potentially reduce the processing delay, save the battery en-
ergy, and even enhance security for computation-intensive IoT
applications. However, the critical problem in the computation
ofﬂoading is to determine the ofﬂoading rate, i.e., the amount
of computational workload, and choose the MEC server from
all available servers. If the chosen MEC server experiences
heavy workloads and degraded channel conditions, it may take
even longer time for the IoT devices to ofﬂoad data and receive
the results from the MEC server. Hence, the design of an
ofﬂoading policy has to take into account the time-varying
channel conditions, user mobility, energy supply, computation
workload and the computational capabilities of different MEC
servers.
The authors in [93] focus on minimizing the mobile user’s
cost and energy consumption by ofﬂoading cellular trafﬁc to
WLAN. Each mobile user can either access the cellular net-
work, or the complimentary WLAN as illustrated in Fig. 8(a),
but with different monetary costs. The mobile user also has to
pay a penalty if the data transmission does not ﬁnish before
the deadline. The mobile user’s data ofﬂoading decision can
be modeled as an MDP. The system state includes the mobile
user’s location and the remaining ﬁle size of all data ﬂows.
The mobile user will choose to transmit data through either
WLAN or cellular network, and decide how to allocate channel
capacities to concurrent ﬂows. Without knowing the mobility
pattern in advance, the DQL is proposed for each mobile user
to learn the optimal ofﬂoading policy from past experiences.
CNNs are employed in the DQL to predict a continuous
value of the mobile user’s remaining data. Simulation results
reveal that the DQN-based scheme generally outperforms the
dynamic programming algorithm for the MDP. The reason is
that the DQN can learn from experience while the dynamic
programming algorithm cannot obtain the optimal policy with
incorrect transition probability.
The allocation of limited computational resources at the
MEC server is critical for cost and energy minimization. The
authors in [94] consider an MEC-enabled cellular system, in
which multiple mobile users can ofﬂoad their computational
tasks via wireless channels to one MEC server, co-located with
the cellular BS as shown in Fig. 8(b). Each mobile user has
a computational-intensive task, characterized by the required
computational resources, CPU cycles, and the maximum tol-
erable delay. The capacity of the MEC server is limited to
accommodate all mobile users’ task loads. The bandwidth
sharing between different mobile users’ ofﬂoading also affects
the overall delay performance and energy consumptions. The
DQL is used to minimize the cost of delay and power
consumptions for all mobile users, by jointly optimizing the
ofﬂoading decision and computational resource allocation. The
system states include the sum of cost of the entire system
and the available computational capacity of the MEC server.
The action of BS is to determine the resource allocation and

==== Page 20 ====
20
ofﬂoading decision for each mobile user. To limit the size of
action space, a pre-classiﬁcation step is proposed to check the
mobile users’ feasible set of actions.
In contrast to [94], multiple BSs in an ultra-dense network
is considered in [95] and [96], as shown in Fig. 8(c), with
the objective of minimizing the long-term cost of delay in
computation ofﬂoading. All computational tasks are ofﬂoaded
to the shared MEC server via different BSs. Besides the
allocation of computational resources and transmission con-
trol, the ofﬂoading policy also has to optimize the asso-
ciation between mobile users and the BSs. With dynamic
network conditions, the mobile users’ decision-making can
be formulated as an MDP. The system states are the channel
conditions between the mobile user and the BSs, the states
of energy and task queues. The cost function is deﬁned
as a weighted sum of the execution delay, the handover
delay and the computational task dropping cost. The authors
in [96] ﬁrstly propose a DDQN-based DQL algorithm to learn
the optimal ofﬂoading policy without knowing the network
dynamics. By leveraging the additive structure of the utility
function, the Q-function decomposition combined with the
DDQN further leads to a novel online SARSA-based DRL
algorithm. Numerical experiments show that the new algorithm
achieves a signiﬁcant improvement in computation ofﬂoading
performance compared with the baseline policies, e.g., the
DQN-based DQL algorithm and some heuristic ofﬂoading
strategies without learning. The high density of SBSs can
relieve the data ofﬂoading pressure in peak trafﬁc hours but
consume a large amount of energy in off-peak time. Therefore,
the authors in [97], [98], and [99] propose a DQL-based
strategy for controlling the (de)activation of different SBSs
to minimize the energy consumption without compromising
the quality of provisioning. In particular, in [97], the on/off
decision framework uses a DQL scheme to approximate both
the policy and value functions in an actor-critic method.
The reward of the DQL agent is deﬁned as a cost function
relating to energy consumption, QoS degradation, and the
switching cost of SBSs. The DDPG approach is also employed
together with an action reﬁnement scheme to expedite the
training process. Through extensive numerical simulations, the
proposed scheme is shown to greatly outperform other baseline
methods in terms of both energy and computational efﬁciency.
With a similar model to that in [96], computation ofﬂoading
ﬁnds a proper application for cloud-based malware detection
in [100]. A review of the threat models and the RL-based
solutions for security and privacy protection in mobile ofﬂoad-
ing and caching are discussed in [101]. With limited energy
supply, computational resources, and channel capacity, mobile
users cannot always update the local malware database and
process all application data in time and thus are vulnerable to
zero-day attacks [102]. By leveraging the remote MEC server,
all mobile users can ofﬂoad their application data and detection
tasks via different BSs to the MEC/security server with larger
and more sophisticated malware database, more computa-
tional capabilities, and powerful security services. This can
be modeled by a dynamic malware detection game in which
multiple mobile users interact with each other in resource
competition, e.g., the allocation of wireless channel capacitiesand the computational capabilities of the MEC/security server.
A DQL scheme is proposed for each mobile user to learn its
ofﬂoading data rate to the MEC/security server. The system
states include the channel state and the size of application
traces. The objective is to optimize the detection accuracy of
the security server, which is deﬁned as a concave function
in the total amount of malware samples. The Q-value is
estimated by using a CNN in the DQL framework. The
authors also propose the hotbooting Q-learning technique that
provides a better initialization for Q-learning by exploiting
the ofﬂoading experiences in similar scenarios. It can save
exploration time at the initial stage and accelerate the learning
speed compared with a standard Q-learning algorithm with all-
zero initialization of the Q-value [103]. The proposed DQL
scheme not only improves the detection speed and accuracy,
but also increases the mobile users’ battery life. The simulation
results reveal that compared with the hotbooting Q-learning,
the DQL-based malware detection has the faster learning rate,
the higher accuracy, and the shorter detection delay.
Multiple MEC servers have been considered in [104], [105],
as illustrated in Fig. 8(d). The authors in [104] aim to
design optimal ofﬂoading policy for IoT devices with energy
harvesting capabilities. The system consists of multiple MEC
servers, such as BSs and APs, with different capabilities
in computation and communications. The IoT devices are
equipped with energy storage and energy harvesters. They
can execute computational tasks locally and ofﬂoad the tasks
to the MEC servers. The IoT device’s ofﬂoading decision
can be formulated as an MDP. The system states include the
battery status, the channel capacity, and the predicted amount
of harvested energy in the future. The IoT device evaluates
the reward based on the overall delay, energy consumption,
the task drop loss and the data sharing gains in each time
slot. Similar to [100], the authors in [104] enhance Q-learning
by the hotbooting technique to save the random exploration
time at the beginning of learning. The authors also propose a
fast DQL ofﬂoading scheme that uses hotbooting to initialize
the CNN and accelerates the learning speed. The authors
in [105] view the MEC-enabled BSs as different physical
machines constituting a part of the cloud resources. The cloud
optimizes the MUs’ computation ofﬂoading to different virtual
machines residing on the physical machines. A two-layered
DQL algorithm is proposed for the ofﬂoading problem to
maximize the utilization of cloud resources. The system state
relates to the waiting time of each computational task and the
number of virtual machines. The ﬁrst layer is implemented by
a CNN-based DQL framework to estimate an optimal cluster
for each computational task. Different clusters of physical
machines are generated based on the K-NN algorithm. The
second layer determines the optimal serving physical machine
within the cluster by Q-learning method.
The aforementioned works all focus on data or computation
ofﬂoading in cellular system via BSs to remote MEC servers,
e.g., [93]–[96], [100], [104], [105]. In [107] and [106], the
authors study QoS-aware computation ofﬂoading in an ad-hoc
mobile network. By making a certain payment, the mobile user
can ofﬂoad its computational tasks to nearby mobile users
constituting a mobile cloudlet, as shown in Fig. 8(d). Each

==== Page 21 ====
21
Cloud
Cellular BSMEC Server
(b)
MEC Server
Cloud
(c)Cellular BS
 WLAN APCloud
(a)Mobile userData/Energy 
queue
Cloud
(d)Mobile 
cloudlets
Fig. 8: Data/computation ofﬂoading models in cellular networks: (a)
Ofﬂoading cellular trafﬁc to WLAN [93], (b) Ofﬂoading to a single
MEC-enabled BS [94], (c) Ofﬂoading to one shared MEC server
via multiple BSs [95], [96], [100], (d) Ofﬂoading to multiple MEC-
enabled BSs [104], [105] and mobile cloudlets [106], [107].
mobile user has a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out queue with limited buffer
size to store the arriving tasks arriving as a Poisson process.
The mobile user selects nearby cloudlets within D2D com-
munication range for task ofﬂoading. The ofﬂoading decision
depends on the states including the number of remaining tasks,
the quality of the links between mobile users and the cloudlet,
and the availability of the cloudlet’s resources. The objective
is to maximize a composite utility function, subject to the
mobile user’s QoS requirements, e.g., energy consumption and
processing delay. The utility function is ﬁrstly an increasing
function of the total number of tasks that have been processed
either locally or remotely by the cloudlets. It is also related to
the user’s beneﬁt such as energy efﬁciency and payment for
task ofﬂoading. This problem can be formulated as an MDP,
which can be solved by linear programming and Q-learning
approaches, depending on the availability of information about
the state transition probabilities. This work is further enhanced
by leveraging DNN or DQN to learn the decision strategy
more efﬁciently. A similar model is studied in [108], where the
computation ofﬂoading is formulated as an MDP to minimize
the cost of computation ofﬂoading. The solution to the MDP
can be used to train a DNN by supervised learning. The well-
trained DNN is then applied to unseen network conditions for
real-time decision-making. Simulation results show that the
use of deep supervised learning achieves signiﬁcant perfor-
mance gain in ofﬂoading accuracy and cost saving.
Data and computation ofﬂoading is also used in fog com-
puting. The mobile application demanding a set of data and
computational resources can be hosted in a container, e.g.,
virtual machine of a fog node. With user’s mobility, the
container has to be migrated or ofﬂoaded to other nodes anddynamically consolidated. With the container migration, some
nodes with low resource utilization can be switched off to
reduce power consumption. The authors in [109] model the
container migration as a multi-dimensional MDP, which is
solved by the DQL. The system states consist of the delay,
the power consumption and the migration cost. The action
includes the selection policy that selects the containers to be
emigrated from each source node, and the allocation policy
that determines the destination node of each container. The
action space can be optimized for more efﬁcient exploration by
dividing fog nodes into under-utilization, normal-utilization,
and over-utilization groups. By powering off under-utilization
nodes, all their containers will be migrated to other nodes
to reduce power consumption. The training process is also
optimized by using DDQN and PER which assigns different
priorities to the transitions in experience memory. This helps
the DQL agent at each fog node to perform better in terms
of faster learning speed and more stability. Simulation results
reveal that the DQL scheme achieves fast decision-making and
outperforms the existing baseline approaches signiﬁcantly in
terms of delay, power consumption, and migration cost.
Summary: This section reviews the applications of the
DQL for wireless caching and data/computation ofﬂoading,
which are inherently coupled with networking and allocation
of channel capacity, computational resources, and caching
capabilities, etc. We observe that the DQL framework for
caching is typically centralized and mostly implemented at
the network controller, e.g., the BS, service provider, and
central scheduler, which is more powerful in information col-
lection and cross-layer policy design. On the contrary, the end
users have more control over their ofﬂoading decisions, and
hence we observe more popular implementation of the DQL
agent at local devices, e.g., mobile users, IoT devices, and
fog nodes. Though an orchestration of networking, caching,
data and computation ofﬂoading in one uniﬁed DQL frame-
work is promising for network performance maximization,
we face many challenges in designing highly-stable and fast-
convergent learning algorithms, due to excessive delay and
unsynchronized information collection from different network
entities.
V. N ETWORK SECURITY AND CONNECTIVITY
PRESERVATION
Future networks become more decentralized and ad-hoc in
nature which are vulnerable to various attacks such as Denial-
of-Service (DoS) and cyber-physical attack. Recently, the DQL
has been used as an effective solution to avoid and prevent the
attacks. In this section, we review the applications of DQL in
addressing the following security issues:
Jamming attack: In the jamming attack, attackers as
jammers transmit Radio Frequency (RF) jamming signals
with high power to cause interference to the legitimate
communication channels, thus reducing the SINR at
legitimate receivers. Anti-jamming techniques such as the
frequency hopping [110] and user mobility, i.e., moving
out from the heavy jamming area, have been commonly
used. However, without being aware of the radio channel

==== Page 22 ====
22
TABLE IV: A summary of approaches using DQL for caching and ofﬂoading.
ISSUES REF.MODELLEARNING
ALGORITHMSAGENT STATES ACTIONS REWARDS NETWORKSWireless proactive caching[70]MDPDQN using
actor-critic,
DDPGBase stationCached contents and
requested contentReplace selected
content or notCache hit rate
(score 1 or 0)CRN
[84]MDPDQN using
FNNBase stationChannel states and
computational capabilitiesUser association,
computational
unit, content
deliveryEnergy consumption CRN
[74]MDPDQN using
NAFsCloud
databaseEncoding of a query, query
cache miss rateCache expiration
timesCache hit rates, CDN
utilizationCloud
database
[76]
[77]MDPDQN using
FNNCentral
schedulerChannel coefﬁcients, cache
stateActive users and
resource allocationNetwork throughputMU MIMO
system
[78]MDPDQN using
CNNCentral
schedulerChannel coefﬁcients, cache
stateActive users and
resource allocationNetwork throughputMU MIMO
system
[79]MDP DDQNService
providerConditions of cache nodes,
transmission rates of content
chunksThe content
chunks to cache
and to removeNetwork cost, QoEContent
centric IoT
[81]MDPDQN using
LSM and ESNBase station Historical content requestUser association,
cached contents
and formatsReliabilityCellular
system
[86]
[89]MDPDQN using
CNNService
providerAvailable BS, MEC, and
cacheUser association,
caching, and
ofﬂoadingComposite revenueVehicular
ad hoc
network
[85]MDPDQN using
FNNService
providerAvailable BS, MEC, and
cacheUser association,
caching, and
ofﬂoadingComposite revenueVehicular
ad hoc
network
[87]MDPDDQN and
dueling DQNService
providerAvailable BS, MEC, and
cacheUser association,
caching, and
ofﬂoadingComposite revenueVehicular
ad hoc
network
[91]MDPDQN using
CNNBase stationChannel state, computational
capability, content/version
indicator, and the trust valueUser association,
caching, and
ofﬂoadingRevenueMobile
social
networkData and computation ofﬂoading[93]MDPDQN using
CNNMobile userUser’s location and remaining
ﬁle sizeIdle, transmit via
WLAN or cellular
networkTotal data rateCellular
system
[94]MDPDQN using
FNNBase stationSum of cost and
computational capacity of the
MEC serverOfﬂoading
decision and
resource allocationSum of cost of delay
and energy
consumptionCellular
system
[95]MDPDQN using
FNNMobile userChannel qualities, states of
energy and task queuesOfﬂoading and
resource allocationLong term cost
functionCellular
system
[96]MDPDDQN,
SARSAMobile userChannel qualities, states of
energy and task queuesOfﬂoading
decision and
computational
resource allocationLong term cost
functionCellular
system
[100]GameDQN using
CNN,
hotbooting
Q-learningMobile userChannel states, size of App
tracesOfﬂoading rateUtility related to
detection accuracy,
response speed, and
the transmission costCellular
system
[109]MDP DDQN Fog nodeDelay, container’s location
and resource allocationContainer’s next
locationComposite utility
related to delay,
power consumption,
and migration costFog
computing
model and the jamming methods, it is challenging for
the users to choose an appropriate frequency channel as
well as to determine how to leave and avoid the attack.
DQL enables the users to learn an optimal policy based
on their past observations, and thus DQL can be used to
address the above challenge.
Cyber-physical attack: The cyber-physical attack is an
integrity attack in which an attacker manipulates data
to alter control signals in the system. This attack of-
ten happens in autonomous systems such as Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSs) and increases the risk
of accidents to Autonomous Vehicles (A Vs). The DQL
allows the A Vs to learn optimal actions based on theirtime-varying observations of the attacker’ activities. Thus,
the DQL can be used to achieve robust and dynamic
control of the A V to the attacks.
Connectivity preserving: This refers to maintaining the
connectivity among the robots, e.g., UA Vs, to support
the communication and exchange of information among
them. The system and network environment is generally
dynamic and complex, and thus the DQL which allows
each robot to make dynamic decisions based on its state
can be effectively used to preserve the connectivity in the
system.

==== Page 23 ====
23
BS
AttackerPU
Attacker
PU
SU 
(agent ) ReceiverBS
Move ? Jamming
Jamming
Fig. 9: Jamming attack in cognitive radio network [111].
A. Network Security
This section discusses the applications of DQL to address
the jamming attack and the cyber-physical attack.
1) Jamming Attack: A pioneer work using the DQL for
the anti-jamming is [111]. The network model is a Cognitive
Radio Network (CRN) as shown in Fig. 9 which consists of
one Secondary User (SU), multiple Primary Users (PUs), and
multiple jammers. The network has a set of frequency channels
for hopping. At each time slot, each jammer can arbitrarily
select one of the channels to send its jamming signal, and
the SU, i.e., the agent, needs to choose a proper action based
on the SU’s current state. The action is (i) selecting one of
the channels to send its signals or (ii) leaving the area to
connect to another BS. The jammers are assumed to avoid
causing interference to the PUs, and thus the SU’s current
state consists of the number of PUs and the discretized SINR
of the SU signal at the last time slot. The objective of the
SU is to maximize its expected discounted utility over time
slots. Note that when the SU chooses to leave the area to
connect to another BS, it spends a mobility cost. Thus, the
utility is deﬁned as a function of the SINR of the SU signal
and the mobility cost. Since the number of frequency channels
may be large that results in a large action set, the CNN is
used for the DQL to quickly learn the optimal policy. As
shown in the simulation results, the proposed DQL has a
faster convergence speed than that of the Q-learning algorithm.
Moreover, considering the scenario with two jammers, the
proposed DQL outperforms the frequency-hopping method in
terms of the SINR and the mobility cost.
The model in [111] is constrained to two jammers. As the
number of jammers in the network increases, the proposed
scheme may not be effective. The reason is that it becomes
hard for the SU to ﬁnd good actions when the number
of jammed channels increases. An appropriate solution, as
proposed in [112], allows the receiver of the SU to leave its
current location. Since the leaving incurs the mobility cost, the
receiver, i.e., the agent, needs an optimal policy, i.e., staying
at or leaving the current location, to maximize its utility. In
this scenario, the DQL based on CNN can be used for the
receiver to ﬁnd the optimal action to maximize its expected
utility. Here, the utility and state of the receiver are essentially
deﬁned similarly to that of the agent in [111]. In particular,
the state includes the discretized SINR of the signal measured
by the receiver at the last time slot.The above approaches, i.e., in [111] and [112], deﬁne states
of the agents based on raw SINR values of the signals. In
practical wireless environments, the number of SINR values
may be large and even inﬁnite. Moreover, the raw SINR can be
inaccurate and noisy. To cope with the challenge of the inﬁnite
number of states, the DQL can use a recursive Convolutional
Neural Network (RCNN) as proposed in [113]. By using
the pre-processing layer and recursive convolution layers, the
RCNN is able to remove noise from the network environment
and extract useful features of the SINR, i.e., discrete spectrum
sample values greater than a noise threshold, thus reducing
the computational complexity. The network model and the
problem formulation considered in [113] are similar to those
in [111]. However, instead of directly using the raw SINR, the
state of the SU is the extracted features of the SINR. Also,
the action of the SU includes only frequency-hopping decision.
The simulation results show that the proposed DQL based on
the RCNN can converge in both ﬁxed and dynamic jamming
scenarios while the Q-learning cannot converge in the dynamic
jamming one. Furthermore, the proposed DQL can achieve
the average throughput close to that of the optimal scheme,
i.e., an anti-jamming scheme with completely known jamming
actions.
Instead of ﬁnding the frequency-hopping decisions, the
authors in [114] propose the use of DQL to ﬁnd an optimal
power control policy for the anti-jamming. The model is an
IoT network including IoT devices and one jammer. The
jammer can observe the communications of the transmitter and
chooses a jamming strategy to reduce the SINR at the receiver.
Thus, the transmitter chooses an action, i.e., transmit power
level, to maximize its utility. Here, the utility is the difference
between the SINR and the energy consumption cost due to the
transmission. Note that choosing the transmit power impacts
the future jamming strategy, and thus the interaction between
the transmitter and the jammer can be formulated as an MDP.
The transmitter is the agent, and the state is SINR measured
at its receiver at the last time slot. The DQN using the CNN
is then adopted to ﬁnd an optimal power control policy for the
transmitter to maximize its expected accumulated discounted
reward, i.e., the utility, over time slots. The simulation results
show that the proposed DQL can improve the utility of the
transmitter up to 17.7% compared with the Q-learning scheme.
Also, the proposed DQL reduces the utility of the jammer
around 18.1% compared with the Q-learning scheme.
To prevent the jammer’s observations of communications,
the transmitter can change its communication strategy, e.g., by
using relays that are far from the jamming area. The relays can
be UA Vs as proposed in [115]. The model consists of one UA V ,
i.e., a relay, one jammer, one mobile user and its serving BS
(see Fig. 10). The mobile user transmits messages to its server
via the serving BS. In the case that the serving BS is heavily
jammed, the UA V helps the mobile user to relay the messages
to the server through a backup BS. In particular, depending
on the SINR and Bit Error Rate (BER) values sent from the
serving BS, the UA V as an agent decides the relay power level
to maximize its utility, i.e., the difference between the SINR
and the relay cost. The relay power level can be considered to
be the UA V’s actions, and the SINR and BER are its states. As

==== Page 24 ====
24
Serving BS
Attacker
Jamming
UserRelay UAV 
(agent )
Server (receiver )Backup BS MessagesMessages
Jamming Compromised 
UAV
Messages
Fig. 10: Anti-jamming scheme based on UA V [115].
such, the next state observed by the UA V is independent of all
the past states and actions. The problem is formulated as an
MDP. To quickly achieve the optimal relay policy for the UA V ,
the DQL based on CNN is then adopted. The simulation results
in [115] show that the proposed DQL scheme takes only 200
time slots to converge to the optimal policy, which is 83.3%
less than that of the relay scheme based on Q-learning [116].
Moreover, the proposed DQL scheme reduces the BER of the
user by 46.6% compared with the hill climbing-based UA V
relay scheme [117].
The scheme proposed in [115] assumes that the relay UA V is
sufﬁciently far from the jamming area. However, as illustrated
in Fig. 10, the attacker can use a compromised UA V close
to the relay UA V to launch the jamming attack to the relay
UA V . In such a scenario, the authors in [118] show that the
DQL can still be used to address the attack. The system model
is based on physical layer security and consists of one UA V
and one attacker. The attacker is assumed to be “smarter” than
that in the model in [115]. This means that the attacker can
observe channels that the UA V uses to communicate with the
BS in the past time slots and then chooses jamming power
levels on the target channels. Therefore, the UA V needs to
ﬁnd a power allocation policy, i.e., transmit power levels on
the channels, to maximize the secrecy capacity of the UA V-
BS communication. Similar to [115], the DQL based on CNN
is used which enables the UA V to choose its actions, i.e.,
transmit power levels on the channels, based on its state, i.e.,
the attacker’s jamming power level in the last time slot. The
reward is the difference between the secrecy capacity of the
UA V and BS and the energy consumption cost.
The simulation results in [118] show that the proposed DQL
can improve the UA V’s utility up to 13% compared with the
baseline scheme [119] which uses the Win or Learn Faster-
Policy Hill Climbing (WoLF-PHC) to prevent the attack. Also,
the safe rate of the UA V , i.e., the probability that the UA V
is attacked, obtained by the proposed DQL is 7% higher
than that of the baseline. However, the proposed DQL is
applied only to a single-UA V system. For the future work,
scenarios with multiple UA Vs need to be considered. In such a
AttackerFaulty data Sensing
data
SensorSensor
AV AV(agent )Safe spacing
AVSensor
Sensing
dataFig. 11: Car-following model with cyber-physical attack.
scenario, more computational overhead is expected and multi-
agent DQL algorithms can be applied.
2) Cyber-Physical Attack: In autonomous systems such as
ITSs, the attacker can seek to inject faulty data to information
transmitted from the sensors to the A Vs. The A Vs which
receive the injected information may inaccurately estimate
the safe spacing among them. This increases the risk of
A V accidents. Vehicular communication security algorithms,
e.g., [120], can be used to minimize the spacing deviation.
However, the attacker’s actions in these algorithms are as-
sumed to be stable which may not be applicable in practical
systems. The DQL that enables the A Vs to learn optimal ac-
tions based on their time-varying observations of the attacker’
actions can be thus used.
The ﬁrst work using the DQL for the cyber-physical attack
in an ITS can be found in [121]. The system is a car-
following model [122] of the General Motors as shown in
Fig. 11. In the model, each A V updates its speed based
on measurement information received from the closest road
smart sensors. The attacker attempts to inject faulty data to
the measurement information. However, the attacker cannot
inject the measurements of different sensors equally due to
its resource constraint. Thus, the A V can choose less-faulty
measurements by selecting a vector of measurement weights.
The objective of the attacker is to maximize the deviation, i.e.,
the utility, from the safe spacing between the A V and its nearby
A V while that of the A V is to minimize the deviation. The
interaction between the attacker and the A V can be modeled
as a zero-sum game. The authors in [121] show that the DQL
can be used to ﬁnd the equilibrium strategies. In particular,
the action of the A V is to choose a weight vector. Its state
includes the past actions, i.e., the weight vectors, and the
past deviation values. Since the actions and deviations have
continuous values, the state space is inﬁnite. Thus, LSTM
units that are able to extract useful features are adopted for the
DQL to reduce the state space. The simulation results show
that by using the past actions and deviations for learning the
attacker’s action, the proposed DQL scheme can guarantee
a lower steady-state deviation than the Kalmar ﬁlter-based
scheme [120]. Moreover, by using the LSTM units, the results
show that the proposed DQL scheme can converge much faster
than the baseline scheme.
Another work that uses the LSTM to extract useful features
from the measurement information to detect the cyber-physical

==== Page 25 ====
25
IoT 
deviceLSTMCloud 
LSTMLSTM
IoT 
deviceIoT
deviceSignalProbs . of attacking IoT devices
Actions on 
IoT devices
SignalSignalLSTM
Fig. 12: Cyber-physical detection in IoT systems using DQL.
attack is proposed in [123]. The model is an IoT system
including a cloud and a set of IoT devices. The IoT devices
generate signals and transmit the signals to the cloud (see
Fig. 12). The cloud uses the received signals for estimation and
control of the IoT devices’ operation. An attacker can launch
the cyber-physical attack by manipulating the IoT devices’
output signals that causes control errors at the cloud and
degrades the performance of the IoT system. To detect the
attack, the cloud uses LSTM units to extract stochastic features
or ﬁngerprints such as ﬂatness, skewness, and kurtosis, of
the IoT devices’ signals. The cloud sends the ﬁngerprints
back to the IoT devices, and the IoT devices embed, i.e.,
watermark, the ﬁngerprints inside the signals. The cloud uses
the ﬁngerprints to authenticate the IoT devices’ signals to
detect the attack.
The algorithm proposed in [123] is also called dynamic
watermarking [124] which is able to detect the cyber-physical
attack and to prevent eavesdropping attacks. However, the
algorithm requires large computational resources at the cloud
for the IoT device signal authentication. Consequently, the
cloud can only authenticate a limited number of vulnerable
IoT devices. The cloud can choose the vulnerable IoT devices
by observing their security status. However, this can be im-
practical since the IoT devices may not report their security
status. Thus, the authors in [125] propose to use the DQL that
enables the cloud to decide which IoT devices to authenticate
with the incomplete information. Since IoT devices with more
valuable data are likely to be attacked, the reward is deﬁned
as a function of data values of IoT devices. The cloud’s state
includes attack actions of the attacker on the IoT devices in
the past time slots. The actions of the attacker on the IoT
devices can be obtained by using the dynamic watermarking
algorithm in [123] (see Fig. 12). The DQL then uses an LSTM
unit to ﬁnd the optimal policy. The input of the LSTM unit
is the state of the cloud, and the output includes probabilities
of attacking the IoT devices. By using a real dataset from the
accelerometers, the simulation results show that the proposed
DQL can improve the cloud’s utility up to 30% compared with
the case in which the cloud chooses the IoT devices with equal
probability.
Base stationControl 
signalsConnectivity
Connectivity
 Leader
FollowerFollower
Handover
Base stationFig. 13: Connectivity preservation of a multi-UA V network.
B. Connectivity Preservation
Multi-robot systems such as multi-UA V cooperative net-
works have been widely applied in many ﬁelds such as
military, e.g., enemy detecting. In the cooperative multi-robot
system, the connectivity among the robots, e.g., UA Vs in
Fig 13, is required to enable the communication and exchange
of information. To tackle the connectivity preservation prob-
lem, the Artiﬁcial Potential Field (APF) algorithm [126] has
been used. However, the algorithm cannot be directly adopted
when the robots are undertaking missions in dynamic and
complex environments. The DQL which allows each robot
to make dynamic decisions based on its own state can be
effectively applied to preserve the connectivity in the multi-
robot system. Such an approach is proposed in [127].
The model in [127] consists of two robots or UA Vs, i.e., one
leader robot and one follower robot. In the model, a central
control, i.e., a ground BS, adjusts the velocity of the follower
such that the follower stays in the communication range of the
leader at all time (see Fig 13). The connectivity preservation
problem can be thus formulated as an MDP. The agent is the
BS, and the states are the relative position and the velocity
of the leader with respect to the follower. The action space
consists of possible velocity values of the follower. Taking
an action returns a reward which is +1 if the follower is
in the range of the leader, and -1 otherwise. A DQN using
FNN is used which enables the BS to learn an optimal policy
to maximize the expected discounted cumulative reward. The
input of the DQN includes the states of the two robots, and
the output is the action space of the follower. The simulation
results show that the proposed scheme can achieve better
connectivity between the two robots than that of the APF
method. However, a general scenario with more than one
leader and one follower needs to be investigated.
Considering the general scenario, the authors in [128]
address the connectivity preservation between multiple lead-
ers and multiple followers. The robot system is deﬁnitely
connected if any two robots are connected via a direct link
or multi-hop link. To express the connectivity in such a
robot system, the authors introduce the concept of algebraic
connectivity [129] which is the second smallest eigenvalue
of a Laplacian matrix. The robot system is connected if the
algebraic connectivity of the system is positive. Thus, the

==== Page 26 ====
26
problem is to adjust the velocity of the followers such that the
algebraic connectivity is positive over time slots. This problem
can be formulated as an MDP in which the agent is the ground
BS, the state is a combination of the states of all robots, the
action is a set of possible velocity values for the followers.
The reward is +1 if the algebraic connectivity of the system
increases or holds, and becomes a penalty of -1 if the algebraic
connectivity decreases. Similar to [127], a DQN is adopted.
Due to the large action space of the followers, the actor-critic
neural network [26] is used. The simulation results show that
the followers always follow the motion of the leaders even
if the leaders’ trajectory dynamically changes. However, the
proposed DQN requires more time to converge than that in
[127] because of the presence of more followers.
The proposed schemes in [127] and [128] do not consider
a minimum distance between the leaders and followers. The
leaders and followers can collide with each other if the
distance between them is too short. Thus, the BS needs to
guarantee the minimum distance between them. One solution
is to have the minimum distance in the reward as proposed
in [130]. In particular, if the leader is too close to its follower,
the reward of the system is penalized regarding the minimum
distance. The DQL algorithm proposed in [128] is then used
such that the BS learns proper actions, e.g., turning left and
right, to maximize the cumulative reward.
When BSs are densely deployed, the UA Vs or mobile
users need to trigger a frequent handover to preserve the
connectivity. The frequent handover increases communication
overhead and energy consumption of the mobile users, and
interrupts data ﬂows. Thus, it is essential to maintain an
appropriate handover rate. The authors in [27] address the
handover decision problem in an ultra-density network. The
network model consists of multiple mobile users, SBSs, and
one central controller. At each time slot, the user needs to
decide its serving SBS. The handover decision process can
be modeled as an MDP, and the DQL is adopted to ﬁnd an
optimal handover policy for each user to minimize the number
of handover occurrences while ensuring certain throughput.
The state of the user, i.e., the agent, includes reference signal
quality received from candidate SBSs and the last action of the
user. The reward is deﬁned as the difference between the data
rate of the user and its energy consumption for the handover
process. Given a high density of users, the DQL using A3C
and LSTM is adopted to ﬁnd the optimal policy in short
training time. The simulation results show that the proposed
DQL can achieve better throughput and lower handover rate
than those of the upper conﬁdence bandit algorithm [131] with
similar training time.
To enhance the reliability of the communication between
the SBSs and the mobile users, the SBSs should be able
to handle network faults and failure automatically as self-
healing. The DQL can be applied as proposed in [132] to make
optimal parameter adjustments based on the observation of the
network performance. The model is the 5G network including
one MBS. The MBS as an agent needs to handle network
faults such as transmit diversity faults and antenna azimuth
change, e.g., because of wind. These faults are represented as
the MBS’s state that is the number of active alarms. Based onthe alarms, the MBS can take actions including (i) enabling
the transmit diversity and (ii) setting the antenna azimuth
to default value. The reward that the MBS receives is the
scores, e.g., -1, 0, and +1, depending on the number of faults
happening. The DQL is used to learn the optimal policy. The
simulation results show that the proposed DQL can achieve
network throughput close to that of the oracle-based self-
healing, i.e., the upper-performance bound, but incurs less fault
message passing overhead.
Summary: This section reviews applications of DQL for the
network security and connectivity preservation. The reviewed
approaches are summarized along with the references in Ta-
ble V. We observe that the CNN is mostly used for the DQL to
enhance the network security. Moreover, DQL approaches for
the anonymous system such as robot systems and ITS receive
more attentions than other networks. However, the applications
of DQL for the cyber-physical security are relatively few and
need to be investigated.
VI. M ISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
This section reviews applications of DRL to solve some
other issues in communications and networking. The issues
include (i) trafﬁc engineering and routing, (ii) resource sharing
and scheduling, and (iii) data collection.
A. Trafﬁc Engineering and Routing
Trafﬁc Engineering (TE) in communication networks refers
to Network Utility Maximization (NUM) by optimizing a path
to forward the data trafﬁc, given a set of network ﬂows from
source to destination nodes. Traditional NUM problems are
mostly model-based. However, with the advances of wire-
less communication technologies, the network environment
becomes more complicated and dynamic, which makes it hard
to model, predict, and control. The recent development of
DQL methods provides a feasible and efﬁcient way to design
experience-driven and model-free schemes that can learn and
adapt to the dynamic wireless network from past observations.
Routing optimization is one of the major control problems
in trafﬁc engineering. The authors in [133] present the ﬁrst
attempt to use the DQL for the routing optimization. Through
the interaction with the network environment, the DQL agent
at the network controller determines the paths for all source-
destination pairs. The system state is represented by the
bandwidth request between each source-destination pair, and
the reward is a function of the mean network delay. The DQL
agent leverages the actor-critic method for solving the routing
problem that minimizes the network delay, by adapting routing
conﬁgurations automatically to current trafﬁc conditions. The
DQL agent is trained using the trafﬁc information generated by
a gravity model [134]. The routing solution is then evaluated
by OMNet+ discrete event simulator [135]. The well-trained
DQL agent can produce a near-optimal routing conﬁguration
in a single step and thus the agent is agile for real-time network
control. The proposed approach is attractive as the traditional
optimization-based techniques require a large number of steps
to produce a new conﬁguration. The authors in [136] consider

==== Page 27 ====
27
TABLE V: A summary of approaches using DQL for network security and connectivity preservation.
ISSUES REF.MODELLEARNING
ALGORITHMSAGENT STATES ACTIONS REWARDS NETWORKSNetwork security[111]GameDQN using
CNNSecondary
userNumber of PUs and signal
SINRChannel selection
and leaving
decisionSINR and mobility
costCRN
[112]GameDQN using
CNNReceiving
transducerSignal SINRStaying and
leaving decisionsSINR and mobility
costUnderwater
acoustic
network
[113]MDPDQN using
RCNNSU Signal SINR Channel selectionSINR and mobility
costCRN
[114]MDPDQN using
CNNTransmit
IoT deviceSignal SINR Channel selectionSINR and energy
consumption costIoT
[115]MDPDQN using
CNNRelay UA V Signal SINR and BER Relay power SINR and relay cost UA V
[118]MDPDQN using
CNNTransmit
UA VJamming power Transmit powerSecrecy capacity and
energy consumption
costUA V
[121]GameDQN using
LSTM unitsAutonomous
vehicleDeviation valuesMeasurement
weight selectionSafe spacing
deviationITS
[125]GameDQN using
LSTM unitsCloud Attack actions on IoT devicesIoT device set
selectionIoT devices’ data
valuesIoTConnectivity preservation[127]MDPDQN using
FNNGround
base stationRelative positions and the
velocity of robotsVelocity decision Sore +1 and -1Robot
system
[128]MDPDQN using
A3CGround
base stationRelative positions and the
velocity of robotsVelocity decision Sore +1 and -1Robot
system
[130]POMDPDQN using
A3CGround
base stationInformation of distances
among robotsTurning left and
turning right
decisionsSore +1 and -1Robot
system
[27]MDPDQN using
A3C and
LSTMMobile
usersReference signal received
quality and the last actionServing SBS
selectionData rate and energy
consumptionUltra-dense
network
[132]MDPDQN using
CNNMBS The number of active alarmsEnabling transmit
diversity and
changing antenna
azimuthScore -1, 0, +1, and
+5Self-
organization
network
a similar network model with multiple end-to-end commu-
nication sessions. Each source-destination pair has a set of
candidate paths that can transport the trafﬁc load. Experimental
results show that the conventional DDPG method does not
work well for the continuous control problem in [136]. One
possible explanation is that DDPG utilizes uniform sampling
for experience replay, which ignores different signiﬁcance of
the transition samples.
The authors in [136] also combine two new techniques to
optimize DDPG particularly for trafﬁc engineering problems,
i.e., TE-aware exploration and actor-critic-based PER meth-
ods. The TE-aware exploration leverages the shortest path
algorithm and NUM-based solution as the baseline during
exploration. The PER method is conventionally used in DQL,
e.g., [79] and [109], while the authors in [136] integrate
the PER method with the actor-critic framework for the ﬁrst
time. The proposed scheme assigns different priorities to
transitions in the experience replay. Based on the priority, the
proposed scheme samples the transitions in each epoch. The
system state consists of throughput and delay performance of
each communication session. The action speciﬁes the amount
of trafﬁc load going through each of the paths. By learn-
ing the dynamics of network environment, the DQL agent
aims to maximize the total utility of all the communication
sessions, which is deﬁned based on end-to-end throughput
and delay [137]. Packet-level simulations using NS-3 [138],
tested on well-known network topologies as well as random
topologies generated by BRITE [139], reveal that the proposedDQL scheme signiﬁcantly reduces the end-to-end delay and
improves the network utility, compared with the baseline
schemes including DDPG and the NUM-based solutions.
The networking and routing optimization become more
complicated in the UA V-based wireless communications. The
authors in [130] model autonomous navigation of one single
UA V in a large-scale unknown complex environment as a
POMDP, which can be solved by actor-critic-based DRL
method. The system state includes its distances and orientation
angles to nearby obstacles, the distance and angle between its
present position and the destination. The UA V’s action is to
turn left or right or keep ahead. The reward is composed of
four parts: an exponential penalty term if it is too close to
any obstacles, a linear penalty term to encourage minimum
time delay, the transition and direction rewards if the UA V is
getting close to the target position in a proper direction. In-
stead of using conventional DDPG for continuous control, the
Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradient (RDPG) is proposed
for the POMDP by approximating the actor and critic using
RNNs. Considering that RDPG is not suitable for learning
using memory replay, the authors in [130] propose the fast-
RDPG method by utilizing the actor-critic framework with
function approximation [140]. The proposed method derives
policy update for POMDP by directly maximizing the expected
long-term accumulated discounted reward.
Path planning for multiple UA Vs connected via cellular
systems is studied in [141] and [142]. Each UA V aims to
achieve a tradeoff between maximizing energy efﬁciency and

==== Page 28 ====
28
minimizing both latency and interference caused to the ground
network along its path. The network state observable by each
UA V includes its distances and orientation angles to cellular
BSs, the orientation angle to its destination, and the horizontal
coordinates of all UA Vs. The action of each UA V includes an
optimal path, transmit power, and cell association along its
path. The interaction among UA Vs is cast as a dynamic game
and solved by a multi-agent DRL framework. The use of ESN
in the DRL framework allows each UA V to retain previous
memory states and make a decision for unseen network states,
based on the reward obtained from previous states. ESN is a
new type of RNNs with feedback connections, consisting of
the input, recurrent, and output weight matrices. ESN training
is typically quick and computationally efﬁcient compared with
other RNNs. Deep ESNs can exploit the advantages of a
hierarchical temporal feature representation at different levels
of abstraction, hence disentangling the difﬁculties in modeling
complex tasks. Simulation results show that the proposed
scheme improves the tradeoff between energy efﬁciency, wire-
less latency, and the interference caused to the ground network.
Results also show that each UA V’s altitude is a function of the
ground network density and the UA V’s objective function is
an important factor in achieving the UA V’s target.
Besides networked UA Vs, vehicle-to-infrastructure also con-
stitutes an important part and provides rich application impli-
cations in 5G ecosystem. The authors in [143] adopt the DQL
to achieve an optimal control policy in communication-based
train control system, which is supported by bidirectional train-
ground communications. The control problem aims to optimize
the handoff decision and train control policy, i.e., accelerate or
decelerate, based on the states of stochastic channel conditions
and real-time information including train position, speed,
measured SNR from APs, and handoff indicator. The objective
of the DQL agent is to minimize a weighted combination of
operation proﬁle tracking error and energy consumption.
B. Resource Sharing and Scheduling
System capacity is one of the most important performance
metrics in wireless communication networks. System capacity
enhancements can be based on the optimization of resource
sharing and scheduling among multiple wireless nodes. The
integration of DRL into 5G systems would revolutionize the
resource sharing and scheduling schemes from model-based to
model-free approaches and meet various application demands
by learning from the network environment.
The authors in [144] study the user scheduling in a multi-
user massive MIMO system. User scheduling is responsible for
allocating resource blocks to BSs and mobile users, taking into
account the channel conditions and QoS requirements. Based
on this user scheduling strategy, a DRL-based coverage and
capacity optimization is proposed to obtain dynamically the
scheduling parameters and a uniﬁed threshold of QoS metric.
The performance indicators are calculated as the average spec-
trum efﬁciency of all the users. The system state is an indicator
of the average spectrum efﬁciency. The action of the scheduler
is a set of scheduling parameters to maximize the reward as a
function of the average spectrum efﬁciency. The DRL schemeuses policy gradient method to learn a policy function (instead
of a Q-function) directly from trajectories generated by the
current policy. The policy network is trained with a variant
of the REINFORCE algorithm [140]. The simulation results
in [144] show that compared with the optimization-based
algorithms that suffer from incomplete network information,
the policy gradient method achieves much better performance
in terms of network coverage and capacity.
In [145], the authors focus on dynamic resource allocation
in a cloud radio access network and present a DQL-based
framework to minimize the total power consumption while
fulﬁlling mobile users’ QoS requirements. The system model
contains multiple Remote Radio Heads (RRHs) connected to
a cloud BaseBand Unit (BBU). The information of RRHs
can be shared in a centralized manner. The system state
contains information about the mobile users’ demands and
the RRHs’ working states, e.g., active or sleep. According
to the system state and the result of last execution, the
DQL agent at the BBU decides whether to turn on or off
certain RRH(s), and how to allocate beamforming weight
for each active RRH. The objective is to minimize the total
expected power consumption. The authors propose a two-step
decision framework to reduce the size of action space. In
the ﬁrst step, the DQL agent determines the set of active
RRHs by Q-learning and DNNs. In the second step, the
BBU derives the optimal resource allocation for the active
RRHs by solving a convex optimization problem. Through
the combination of DQL and optimization techniques, the
proposed framework results in a relatively small action space
and low online computational complexity. Simulation results
show that the framework achieves signiﬁcant power savings
while satisfying user demands and is robust in highly dynamic
network environment. The aforementioned works mostly focus
on simulations and numerical comparisons. With one step
further, the authors in [146] implement a multi-objective DQL
framework as the radio-resource-allocation controller for space
communications. The implementation uses modular software
architecture to encourage re-use and easy modiﬁcation for
different algorithms, which is integrated into the real space-
ground system developed by NASA Glenn Research Center.
In emerging and future wireless networks, BSs are deployed
with a high density, and thus the interference among the BSs
must be considered. The authors in [147] propose to use a
DQL scheme which allows the BSs to learn their optimal
power control policy. In the proposed scheme, each BS is
an agent, the action is choosing power levels, and the state
includes interference that the BS caused to its neighbors in
the last time slot. The objective is to maximize the BS’s data
rate. The DQN using FNN is then adopted to implement the
DQL algorithm. For the future work, a joint power control and
channel selection can be considered.
Network slicing [148] and NFV [90] are two emerging
concepts for resource allocation in the 5G ecosystem to
provide cost-effective services with better performance. The
network infrastructure, e.g., cache, computation, and radio
resources, is comparatively static while the upper-layer Vir-
tualized Network Functions (VNFs) are dynamic to support
time-varying application-speciﬁc service requests. The concept

==== Page 29 ====
29
of network slicing is to divide the network resources into
multi-layer slices, managed by different service renderers
independently with minimal conﬂicts. The concept of Service
Function Chaining (SFC) is to orchestrate different VNFs to
provide required functionalities and QoS provisioning.
The authors in [149] propose a DQL scheme for QoS/QoE-
aware SFC in NFV-enabled 5G systems. Typical QoS metrics
are bandwidth, delay, throughput, etc. The evaluation of QoE
normally involves the end-user’s participation in rating the ser-
vice based on direct user perception. The authors quantify QoE
by measurable QoS metrics without end-user involvements,
according to the Weber-Fechner Law (WFL) [150] and expo-
nential interdependency of QoE and QoS hypothesis [151].
These two principles actually deﬁne nonlinear relationship
between QoE and QoS. The system state represents the
network environment including network topology, QoS/QoE
status of the VNF instances, and the QoS requirements of the
SFC request. The DQL agent selects a certain direct succes-
sive VNF instance as an action. The reward is a composite
function of the QoE gain, the QoS constraint penalty, and the
OPEX penalty. A DQL based on CNNs is implemented to
approximate the action-value function. The authors in [152]
review the application of a DQL framework in two typical
resource management scenarios using network slicing. For ra-
dio resource slicing, the authors simulate a scenario containing
one single BS with different types of services. The reward can
be deﬁned as a weighted sum of spectrum efﬁciency and QoE.
For priority-based core network slicing, the authors simulate
a scenario with 3 SFCs demanding different computational
resources and waiting time. The reward is the sum of waiting
time in different SFCs. Simulation results in both scenarios
show that the DQL framework could exploit more implicit
relationship between user activities and resource allocation in
resource constrained scenarios, and enhance the effectiveness
and agility for network slicing.
Resource allocation and scheduling problems are also im-
portant for computer clusters or database systems. This usually
leads to an online decision-making problem depending on
the information of workload and environment. The authors
in [153] propose a DRL-based solution, DeepRM, by em-
ploying policy gradient methods [140] to manage resources in
computer systems directly from experience. The same policy
gradient method is also used in [144] for user scheduling
and resource management in wireless systems. DeepRM is
a multi-resource cluster scheduler that learns to optimize
various objectives such as minimizing average job slowdown
or completion time. The system state is the current allocation
of cluster resources and the resource proﬁles of jobs in
the queue. The action of the scheduler is to decide how
to schedule the pending jobs. By simulations with synthetic
dataset, DeepRM is shown to perform comparably or better
than state-of-the-art heuristics, e.g., Shortest-Job-First (SJF). It
adapts to different conditions and converges quickly, without
any prior knowledge of system behavior. In [154], the authors
use the actor-critic method to address the scheduling prob-
lem in a general-purpose distributed data stream processing
systems, which deal with processing of continuous data ﬂow
in real time or near-real-time. The system model containsmultiple threads, processes, and machines. The system state
consists of the current scheduling decision and the workload
of each data source. The scheduling problem is to assign each
thread to a process of a machine. The agent at the scheduler
determines the assignment of each thread, with the objective of
minimizing the average processing time. The DRL framework
includes three components, i.e., an actor network, an optimizer
producing a K-NN set of the actor network’s output action,
and the critic network predicting the Q-value for each action
in the set. The action is selected from the K-NN set with the
maximum Q-value. The use of optimizer may avoid unstable
learning and divergence problems in conventional actor-critic
methods [155].
C. Power Control and Data Collection
With the prevalence of IoT and smart mobile devices,
mobile crowdsensing becomes a cost-effective solution for
network information collection to support more intelligent
operations of wireless systems. The authors in [156] con-
sider spectrum sensing and power control in non-cooperative
cognitive radio networks. There is no information exchange
between PUs and SUs. As such, the SU outsources the sensing
task to a set of spatially distributed sensing devices to collect
information about the PU’s power control strategy. The SU’s
power control can be formulated as an MDP. The system
state is determined by the Received Signal Strength (RSS)
at individual sensing devices. The SU chooses its transmit
power from the set of pre-speciﬁed power levels based on the
current state. A reward is obtained if both primary and SUs can
fulﬁll their SNR requirements. Considering the randomness in
RSS measurements, the authors propose a DQL scheme for the
SU to learn and adjust its transmit power. The DQL is then
implemented by a DQN by using FNN. The simulation results
show that the proposed DQL scheme is able to converge to a
close-to-optimal solution.
The authors in [157] leverage the DQL framework for
sensing and control problems in a Wireless Sensor and Actor
Network (WSAN), which is a group of wireless devices with
the ability to sense events and to perform actions based on the
sensed data shared by all sensors. The system state includes
processing power, mobility abilities, and functionalities of
the actors and sensors. The mobile actor can choose its
moving direction, networking, sensing and actuation policies
to maximize the number of connected actor nodes and the
number of sensing events.
The authors in [158] focus on mobile crowdsensing
paradigm, where data inference is incorporated to reduce
sensing costs while maintaining the quality of sensing. The
target sensing area is split into a set of cells. The objective of
a sensing task is to collect data (e.g., temperature, air quality)
in all the cells. A DQL-based cell selection mechanism is
proposed for the mobile sensors to decide which cell is a better
choice to perform sensing tasks. The system state includes the
selection matrices for a few past decision epochs. The reward
function is determined by the sensing quality and cost in the
chosen cells. To extract temporal correlations in learning, the
authors propose the DRQN that uses LSTM layers in DQL

==== Page 30 ====
30
to capture the hidden patterns in state transitions. Considering
inter-data correlations, the authors use the transfer learning
method to reduce the amount of data in training. That is, the
cell selection strategy learned for one task can beneﬁt another
correlated task. Hence, the parameters of DRQN can be ini-
tialized by another DRQN with rich training data. Simulations
are conducted based on two real-life datasets collected from
sensor networks, i.e., the Sensor-Scope dataset [159] in the
EPFL campus and the U-Air dataset of air quality readings
in Beijing [160]. The experiments verify that DRQN reduces
up to 15% of the sensed cells with the same inference quality
guarantee. The authors in [161] combine UA V and unmanned
vehicle in mobile crowdsensing for smart city applications.
The UA V cruises in the above of the target region for city-level
data collection. Meanwhile, the unmanned vehicle carrying
mobile charging stations moves on the ground and can charge
the UA V at a preset charging point.
The target region is divided into multiple subregions and
each subregion has a different sample priority. The authors
in [161] propose a DQL-based control framework for the
unmanned vehicle to schedule its data collection, constrained
by limited energy supply. The system state includes infor-
mation about the sample priority of each subregion, the
location of charging point, and the moving trace of the UA V
and unmanned vehicle. The UA V and unmanned vehicle can
choose the moving direction. The DQL framework utilizes
CNNs for extracting the correlation of adjacent subregions,
which can increase the convergence speed in training. The
DQL algorithm can be enhanced by using a feasible control
solution as the baseline during exploration. The PER method
is also used in DQL to assign higher priorities to important
transitions so that the DQL agent can learn from samples more
efﬁciently. The proposed scheme is evaluated by using real
dataset of taxi traces in Rome [162]. Simulation results reveal
that the proposed DQL algorithm can obtain the highest data
collection rate compared with the MDP and other heuristic
baselines.
Mobile crowdsensing is vulnerable to faked sensing attacks,
as selﬁsh users may report faked sensing results to save
their sensing costs and avoid compromising their privacy.
The authors in [163] formulate the interactions between the
server and a number of crowdsensing users as a Stackelberg
game. The server is the leader that sets and broadcasts its
payment policy for different sensing accuracy. In particular,
the higher payment is set for more sensing accuracy. Based
on the server’s sensing policy, each user as a follower then
chooses its sensing effort and thus the sensing accuracy to
receive the payment. The payment motivates the users to put
in sensing efforts and thus the payment decision process can
be modeled as an MDP. In a dynamic network, the server
uses the DQL to derive the optimal payment to maximize its
utility, based on the system state consisting of the previous
sensing quality and the payment policy. The DQL uses a
deep CNN to accelerate the learning process and improve the
crowdsensing performance against selﬁsh users. Simulation
results show that the DQL-based scheme produces a higher
sensing quality, lower attack rate, and higher utility of the
server, exceeding those of both the Q-learning and the randompayment strategies.
Social networking is an important component of smart
city applications. The authors in [164] aim to extract useful
information by observing and analyzing the users’ behaviors in
social networking. One of the main difﬁculties is that the social
behaviors are usually fuzzy and divergent. The authors model
pervasive social networking as a monopolistically competitive
market, which contains different users as data providers selling
information at a certain price. Given the market model, the
DQL can be used to estimate the users’ behavior patterns
and ﬁnd the market equilibrium. Considering the costly deep
learning structure, the authors in [164] propose a Decentralized
DRL (DDRL) framework that decomposes the costly deep
component from the RL algorithms at individual users. The
deep component can be a feature extractor integrated with
the network infrastructure and provide mutual knowledge for
all individuals. Multiple RL agents can purchase the most
desirable data from the mutual knowledge. The authors com-
bine well-known RL algorithms, i.e., Q-learning and learning
automata, to estimate users’ patterns which are described by
vectors of probabilities representing the users’ preferences
or altitudes to different information. In social networking
and smart city applications with human involvement, there
can be both labeled and unlabeled data and hence a semi-
supervised DRL framework can be designed, by combining
the strengths of DNNs and statistical modeling to improve
the performance and accuracy in learning. Then, the authors
in [165] introduce the semi-supervised DRL framework that
utilizes variational auto-encoders [166] as an inference engine
to infer the classiﬁcation of unlabeled data. As a case study,
the proposed DRL framework is customized to provide indoor
localization based on the RSS from Bluetooth devices. The
positioning environment contains a set of positions. Each
position is associated with the set of RSS values from the
set of anchor devices with known positions. The system state
includes a vector of RSS values, the current location, and the
distance to the target. The DQL agent, i.e., the positioning
algorithm itself, chooses a moving direction to minimize the
error distance to the target point. Simulations tested on real-
world dataset show an improvement of 23% in terms of the
error distance to the target compared with the supervised DRL
scheme.
Summary: In this section, we review miscellaneous uses
of DRL in wireless and networked systems. DRL provides
a ﬂexible tool in rich and diversiﬁed applications, conven-
tionally involving dynamic system modeling and multi-agent
interactions. All these imply a huge space of state transitions
and actions. These approaches are summarized along with the
references in Table VI. We observe that the NUM problems
in 5G ecosystem for trafﬁc engineering and resource alloca-
tion face very diversiﬁed control variables, including discrete
indicators, e.g., for BS (de)activation, user/cell association,
and path selection, as well as continuous variables such as
bandwidth allocation, transmit power, and beamforming opti-
mization. Hence, both DQL and policy gradient methods are
used extensively for discrete and continuous control problems,
respectively.

==== Page 31 ====
31
TABLE VI: A summary of applications of DQL for trafﬁc engineering, resource scheduling, and data collection.
ISSUES REF.MODELLEARNING
ALGORITHMSAGENT STATES ACTIONS REWARDS SCENARIOSTrafﬁc engineering and routing[133]MDPDQN using
actor-critic
networksNetwork
controllerBandwidth request of each
node pairTrafﬁc load split
on different pathsMean network delay 5G network
[136]NUMDQN using
actor-critic
networksNetwork
controllerThroughput and delay
performanceTrafﬁc load split
on different paths-fairness utility 5G network
[130]POMDPDQN using
actor-critic
networksUA VLocal sensory information,
e.g., distances and anglesTurn left or right Composite rewardUA V
navigation
[141]
[142]GameDQN using
ESNUA VCoordinates, distances, and
orientation anglesPath, transmit
power, and cell
associationWeighted sum of
energy efﬁciency,
latency, and
interferenceCellular-
connected
UA Vs
[143]MDPDQN using
FNNTrain
schedulerChannel conditions, train
position, speed, SNR, and
handoff indicatorMaking handoff of
connection, or
accelerate or
decelerate the trainTracking error and
energy consumptionVehicle-to-
infrastructure
systemResource sharing and scheduling[145]MDPDQN using
FNNCloud
baseband
unitMUs’ demands and the
RRHs’ working statesTurn on or off
certain RRH(s),
and beamforming
allocationExpected power
consumptionCloud RAN
[149]MDPDQN with
CNNNetwork
controllerNetwork topology, QoS/QoE
status, and the QoS
requirementsSuccessive VNF
instanceComposite function
of QoE gain, QoS
constraints penalty,
and OPEX penaltyCellular
system
[152]MDPDQN using
FNNNetwork
controllerThe number of arrived
packets/the priority and
time-stamp of ﬂowsBandwidth/SFC
allocationWeighted sum of
spectrum efﬁciency
and QoE/waiting
time in SFCs5G network
[154]MDPDQN using
actor-critic
networksCentral
schedulerCurrent scheduling decision
and the workloadAssignment of
each threadAverage processing
timeDistributed
stream data
processingData collection[156]MDPDQN using
FNNSecondary
userReceived signal strength at
individual sensorsTransmit powerFixed reward if QoS
satisﬁedCRN
[158]MDPDRQN, LSTM,
transfer
learningMobile
sensorsCell selection matricesNext cell for
sensingA function of the
sensing quality and
costWSN
[161]MDPDQN using
CNNUA V and
unmanned
vehicleSubregions’ sample priority,
charging point’s location, and
trace of the UA V and
unmanned vehicleMoving direction
of the UA V and
unmanned vehicleFixed reward related
to subregions’
sample priorityUA V and
vehicle
[163]GameDQN using
CNNCrowdsensing
serverPrevious sensing quality and
payment policyCurrent payment
policyUtilityMobile
crowdsens-
ing
[164]Game DDQNMobile
usersCurrent preferencesPositive or
negative altitudeReward or proﬁtMobile
social
network
VII. C HALLENGES , OPEN ISSUES ,AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Different approaches reviewed in this survey evidently show
that DRL can effectively address various emerging issues
in communications and networking. There are existing chal-
lenges, open issues, and new research directions which are
discussed as follows.
A. Challenges
1) State Determination in Density Networks: The DRL
approaches, e.g., [23], allow the users to ﬁnd an optimal ac-
cess policy without having complete and/or accurate network
information. However, the DRL approaches often require the
users to report their local states at every time slot. To observe
the local state, the user needs to monitor Received Signal
Strength Indicators (RSSIs) from its neighboring BSs, and then
it temporarily connects to the BS with the maximum RSSI.However, the future networks will deploy a high density of the
BSs, and the RSSIs from different BSs may not be different.
Thus, it is challenging for the users to determine the temporary
BS [167].
2) Knowledge of Jammers’ Channel Information: The DRL
approach for wireless security as proposed in [118] enables
the UA V to ﬁnd optimal transmit power levels to maximize
the security capacity of the UA V and the BS. However,
to formulate the reward of the UA V , a perfect knowledge
of channel information of the jammers is required. This is
challenging and even impossible in practice.
3) Multi-agent DRL in Dynamic HetNets: Most of the
existing works focus on the customizations of DRL framework
for individual network entities, based on locally observed
or exchanged network information. Hopefully, the network
environment is relatively static to ensure convergent learning
results and stable policies. This requirement may be challenged

==== Page 32 ====
32
in a dynamic heterogenous 5G network, which consists of
hierarchically nested IoT devices/networks with fast changing
service requirements and networking conditions. In such a
situation, the DQL agents for individual entities have to be
light-weighted and agile to the change of network conditions.
This implies a reduce to the state and action spaces in learning,
which however may compromise the performance of the
convergent policy. The interactions among multiple agents also
complicate the network environment and cause a considerable
increase to the state space, which inevitably slows down the
learning algorithms.
4) Training and Performance Evaluation of DRL Frame-
work: The DRL framework requires large amounts of data for
both training and performance evaluation. In wireless systems,
such data is not easily accessible as we rarely have referential
data pools as other deep learning scenarios, e.g., computer
vision. Most of the existing works rely on simulated dataset,
which undermines the conﬁdence of the DRL framework in
practical system. The simulated data set is usually generated
by a speciﬁc stochastic model, which is a simpliﬁcation of the
real system and may overlook the hidden patterns. Hence, a
more effective way for generating simulation data is required
to ensure that the training and performance evaluation of the
DRL framework are more consistent with practical system.
B. Open Issues
1) Distributed DRL Framework in Wireless Networks: The
DRL framework requires large amounts of training for DNNs.
This may be implemented at a centralized network controller,
which has sufﬁcient computational capacity and the capability
for information collection. However, for massive end users
with limited capabilities, it becomes a meaningful task to
design distributed implementation for the DRL framework that
decomposes resource-demanding basic functionalities, e.g.,
information collection, sharing, and DNN training, from rein-
forcement learning algorithms at individual devices. The basic
functionalities can be integrated with the network controller. It
remains an open issue for the design of network infrastructure
that supports these common functionalities for distributed
DRL. The overhead of information exchange between end
users and network controller also has to be well controlled.
2) Balance between Information Quality and Learning
Performance: The majority of the existing works consider the
orchestration of networking, transmission control, ofﬂoading,
and caching decisions in one DRL framework to derive the
optimal policy, e.g., [84]–[89], [91], [92]. However, from a
practical viewpoint, the network system will have to pay sub-
stantially increasing cost for information gathering. The cost
is incurred from large delay, pre-processing of asynchronous
information, excessive energy consumption, reduced learning
speed, etc. Hence, an open issue is to ﬁnd the optimal balance
between information quality and learning performance so that
the DQL agent does not consume too much resources only
to achieve insigniﬁcantly marginal increase in the learning
performance.C. Future Research Directions
1) DRL for Channel Estimation in Wireless Systems:
Massive MIMO will be deployed for 5G to achieve high-speed
communications at Gbps. For this, the channel estimation is
the prerequisite for realizing massive MIMO. However, in a
large-scale heterogeneous cellular network foreseen for 5G or
beyond, the required channel estimation is very challenging.
Thus, DRL will play an important role in acquiring the chan-
nel estimates with regard to dynamic time-varying wireless
channels.
Also, we expect that the combination of Wireless Power
Transfer (WPT) and Mobile Crowd Sensing (MCS), namely
Wireless-Powered Crowd Sensing (WPCS) will be a promising
technique for the emerging IoT services. To this end, a higher
power transfer efﬁciency of WPT is very critical to enable
the deployment of WPCS in low-power wide area network.
A "large-scale array antenna based WPT" will achieve this
goal of higher WPT efﬁciency, but the channel estimation
should be performed with minimal power consumption at a
sensor node. This is because of that the sensor must operate
with self-powering via WPT from the dedicated energy source,
e.g., power beacon, Wi-Fi or small-cell access point, and/or
ambient RF sources, e.g., TV tower, Wi-Fi AP and cellular
BS. In this regard, the channel estimation based on the receive
power measurements at the sensor node is one viable solution,
because the receive power can be measured by the passive-
circuit power meter with negligible power consumption. DRL
can be used for the time-varying wireless channels with
temporal correlations over time by taking the receive power
measurements from the sensor node as the input for DRL,
which will enable the channel estimation for WPT efﬁciently.
2) DRL for Crowdsensing Service Optimization: In MCS,
mobile users contribute sensing data to a crowdsensing service
provider and receive an incentive in return. However, due to
limited resources, e.g., bandwidth and energy, the mobile user
has to decide on whether and how much data to be uploaded
to the provider. Likewise, the provider aiming to maximize its
proﬁt has to determine the amount of incentive to be given.
The provider’s decision depends on the actions of the mobile
users. For example, with many mobile users contributing data
to the crowdsensing service provider, the provider can lower
the incentive. Due to a large state space of a large number of
users and dynamic environment, DRL can be applied to obtain
an optimal crowdsensing policy similar to [168].
3) DRL for Cryptocurrency Management in Wireless Net-
works: Pricing and economic models have been widely ap-
plied to wireless networks [169], [170]. For example, wireless
users pay money to access radio resources or mobile services.
Alternatively, the users can receive money if they contribute to
the networks, e.g., offering a relay or cache function. However,
using real money and cash in such scenarios faces many
issues related to accounting, security, and privacy. Recently,
the concept of cryptocurrency based on the blockchain tech-
nology has been introduced and adopted in wireless networks,
e.g., [171], which has been shown to be a secure and efﬁcient
solution. However, the value of cryptocurrency, i.e., token
or coin, can be highly dynamic depending on many market

==== Page 33 ====
33
factors. The wireless users possessing the tokens can decide
to keep or spend the tokens, e.g., for radio resource access
and service usage or exchange into real money. In the random
cryptocurrency market environment, DRL can be applied to
achieve the maximum long-term reward of the cryptocurrency
management for wireless users as in [172].
4) DRL for Auction: An auction has been effectively
used for radio resource management, e.g., spectrum alloca-
tion [173]. However, obtaining the solution of the auction,
e.g., a winner determination problem, can be complicated and
intractable when the number of participants, i.e., bidders and
sellers, become very large. Such a scenario is typical in next-
generation wireless networks such as 5G highly-dense hetero-
geneous networks. DRL appears to be an efﬁcient approach
for solving different types of auctions such as in [174].
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented a comprehensive survey of the
applications of deep reinforcement learning to communica-
tions and networking. First, we have presented an overview of
reinforcement learning, deep learning, and deep reinforcement
learning. Then, we have introduced various deep reinforce-
ment learning techniques and their extensions. Afterwards,
we have provided detailed reviews, analyses, and compar-
isons of the deep reinforcement learning to solve different
issues in communications and networking. The issues include
dynamic network access, data rate control, wireless caching,
data ofﬂoading, network security, connectivity preservation,
trafﬁc routing, and data collection. Finally, we have outlined
important challenges, open issues as well as future research
directions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction .
MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
[2] I. Goodfellow, Y . Bengio, A. Courville, and Y . Bengio, Deep learning .
MIT press Cambridge, 2016.
[3] (2016, Jan.) Google achieves ai “breakthrough” by beating go
champion. BBC. [Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-35420579
[4] M. L. Puterman, Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dy-
namic programming . John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[5] D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, and D. P. Bertsekas,
Dynamic programming and optimal control . Athena scientiﬁc Bel-
mont, MA, 2005, vol. 1, no. 3.
[6] R. Bellman, Dynamic programming . Mineola, NY: Courier Corpora-
tion, 2013.
[7] Y . Li, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.07274 , 2017.
[8] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath,
“A brief survey of deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Signal Process-
ing Magazine , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 26–38, Nov. 2017.
[9] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Machine
learning for wireless networks with artiﬁcial intelligence: A tutorial on
neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.02913 , 2017.
[10] R. Lowe, Y . Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017,
pp. 6379–6390.
[11] G. E. Monahan, “State of the art-a survey of partially observable
markov decision processes: theory, models, and algorithms,” Manage-
ment Science , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 1982.
[12] L. S. Shapley, “Stochastic games,” Proceedings of the national academy
of sciences , vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1095–1100, 1953.[13] J. Hu and M. P. Wellman, “Nash q-learning for general-sum stochastic
games,” Journal of machine learning research , vol. 4, no. Nov, pp.
1039–1069, 2003.
[14] W. C. Dabney, “Adaptive step-sizes for reinforcement learning,” Ph.D.
dissertation, 2014.
[15] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine learning , vol. 8,
no. 3-4, pp. 279–292, 1992.
[16] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature , vol. 518, no. 7540, p. 529, 2015.
[17] Y . Lin, X. Dai, L. Li, and F.-Y . Wang, “An efﬁcient deep rein-
forcement learning model for urban trafﬁc control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.01876 , 2018.
[18] S. Gu, E. Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine, “Deep reinforcement learn-
ing for robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
2017, pp. 3389–3396.
[19] S. Thrun and A. Schwartz, “Issues in using function approximation
for reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of Connectionist Models
Summer School Hillsdale, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum , 1993.
[20] H. V . Hasselt, “Double q-learning,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2010, pp. 2613–2621.
[21] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning
with double q-learning.” in AAAI , vol. 2, Phoenix, AZ, Feb. 2016, pp.
2094–2100.
[22] O. Naparstek and K. Cohen, “Deep multi-user reinforcement learning
for dynamic spectrum access in multichannel wireless networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.02613 , 2017.
[23] N. Zhao, Y .-C. Liang, D. Niyato, Y . Pei, M. Wu, and Y . Jiang, “Deep
reinforcement learning for user association and resource allocation in
heterogeneous networks,” in IEEE GLOBECOM , Abu Dhabi, UAE,
Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[24] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952 , 2015.
[25] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and
N. De Freitas, “Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement
learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , New
York, NY , Jun. 2016.
[26] V . Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
forcement learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning ,
New York City, New York, Jun. 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[27] Z. Wang, Y . Xu, L. Li, H. Tian, and S. Cui, “Handover control
in wireless systems via asynchronous multi-user deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02077 , 2018.
[28] M. G. Bellemare, W. Dabney, and R. Munos, “A distributional per-
spective on reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06887 ,
2017.
[29] M. Fortunato, M. G. Azar, B. Piot, J. Menick, I. Osband, A. Graves,
V . Mnih, R. Munos, D. Hassabis, O. Pietquin et al. , “Noisy networks for
exploration,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2018.
[30] M. Hessel, J. Modayil, H. Van Hasselt, T. Schaul, G. Ostrovski,
W. Dabney, D. Horgan, B. Piot, M. Azar, and D. Silver, “Rainbow:
Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning,” in The
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[31] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y . Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforce-
ment learning,” San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA, May 2016.
[32] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Ried-
miller, “Deterministic policy gradient algorithms,” in ICML , 2014.
[33] M. Hausknecht and P. Stone, “Deep recurrent q-learning for partially
observable mdps,” CoRR, abs/1507.06527 , vol. 7, no. 1, 2015.
[34] D. Zhao, H. Wang, K. Shao, and Y . Zhu, “Deep reinforcement learning
with experience replay based on sarsa,” in IEEE Symposium Series on
Computational Intelligence (SSCI) , 2016, pp. 1–6.
[35] W. Wang, J. Hao, Y . Wang, and M. Taylor, “Towards cooperation
in sequential prisoner’s dilemmas: a deep multiagent reinforcement
learning approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00162 , 2018.
[36] J. Heinrich and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning from self-play
in imperfect-information games,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01121 ,
2016.
[37] D. Fooladivanda and C. Rosenberg, “Joint resource allocation and
user association for heterogeneous wireless cellular networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 248–257,
2013.

==== Page 34 ====
34
[38] Y . Lin, W. Bao, W. Yu, and B. Liang, “Optimizing user association and
spectrum allocation in hetnets: A utility perspective,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1025–1039,
2015.
[39] S. Wang, H. Liu, P. H. Gomes, and B. Krishnamachari, “Deep rein-
forcement learning for dynamic multichannel access,” in International
Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC) ,
2017.
[40] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D. Wierstra, and M. A. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforce-
ment learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1312.5602, 2013.
[41] R. Govindan. Tutornet: A low power wireless iot testbed. [Online].
Available: http://anrg.usc.edu/www/tutornet/
[42] Q. Zhao, B. Krishnamachari, and K. Liu, “On myopic sensing for multi-
channel opportunistic access: structure, optimality, and performance,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 7, no. 12, pp.
5431–5440, December 2008.
[43] S. Wang, H. Liu, P. H. Gomes, and B. Krishnamachari, “Deep
reinforcement learning for dynamic multichannel access in wireless
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Net-
working , to appear.
[44] J. Zhu, Y . Song, D. Jiang, and H. Song, “A new deep-q-learning-
based transmission scheduling mechanism for the cognitive internet
of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2017.
[45] M. Chu, H. Li, X. Liao, and S. Cui, “Reinforcement learning based
multi-access control and battery prediction with energy harvesting in
iot systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.05929 , 2018.
[46] H. Ye and G. Y . Li, “Deep reinforcement learning for resource
allocation in v2v communications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00968 ,
2017.
[47] U. Challita, L. Dong, and W. Saad, “Proactive resource manage-
ment in lte-u systems: A deep learning perspective,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.07031 , 2017.
[48] M. Balazinska and P. Castro. (2003) Ibm watson research center.
[Online]. Available: https://crawdad.org/ibm/watson/20030219
[49] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and
N. De Freitas, “Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement
learning,” 2015.
[50] H. Li, “Multiagent learning for aloha-like spectrum access in cognitive
radio systems,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking , vol. 2010, no. 1, pp. 1–15, May 2010.
[51] S. Liu, X. Hu, and W. Wang, “Deep reinforcement learning based
dynamic channel allocation algorithm in multibeam satellite systems,”
IEEE ACCESS , vol. 6, pp. 15 733–15 742, 2018.
[52] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Liquid state machine learning for
resource allocation in a network of cache-enabled lte-u uavs,” in IEEE
GLOBECOM , 2017, pp. 1–6.
[53] W. Maass, “Liquid state machines: motivation, theory, and applica-
tions,” in Computability in context: computation and logic in the real
world . World Scientiﬁc, 2011, pp. 275–296.
[54] M. Chen, M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, C. Yin, M. Debbah, and C. S. Hong,
“Caching in the sky: Proactive deployment of cache-enabled unmanned
aerial vehicles for optimized quality-of-experience,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1046–1061,
2017.
[55] I. Szita, V . Gyenes, and A. L ˝orincz, “Reinforcement learning with
echo state networks,” in International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks . Springer, 2006, pp. 830–839.
[56] Tyouku of china network video index. [Online]. Available: http:
//index.youku.com/
[57] T. Stockhammer, “Dynamic adaptive streaming over http–: standards
and design principles,” in Proceedings of the second annual ACM
conference on Multimedia systems . ACM, 2011, pp. 133–144.
[58] M. Gadaleta, F. Chiariotti, M. Rossi, and A. Zanella, “D-dash: A deep
q-learning framework for dash video streaming,” IEEE Transactions on
Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 703–718,
2017.
[59] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, “Evalvid–a framework for video
transmission and quality evaluation,” in International conference on
modelling techniques and tools for computer performance evaluation ,
2003, pp. 255–272.
[60] H. Mao, R. Netravali, and M. Alizadeh, “Neural adaptive video
streaming with pensieve,” in Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM
Special Interest Group on Data Communication . ACM, 2017, pp.
197–210.[61] H. Riiser, P. Vigmostad, C. Griwodz, and P. Halvorsen, “Commute
path bandwidth traces from 3g networks: analysis and applications,” in
Proceedings of the 4th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference . ACM,
2013, pp. 114–118.
[62] X. Yin, A. Jindal, V . Sekar, and B. Sinopoli, “A control-theoretic
approach for dynamic adaptive video streaming over http,” in ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , vol. 45, no. 4. ACM,
2015, pp. 325–338.
[63] T. Huang, R.-X. Zhang, C. Zhou, and L. Sun, “Qarc: Video quality
aware rate control for real-time video streaming based on deep rein-
forcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02482 , 2018.
[64] (2016) Measuring ﬁxed broadband report. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.fcc.gov/reports-research/reports/measuring-broadband-america/
raw-data-measuring-broadband-america-2016
[65] S. Chinchali, P. Hu, T. Chu, M. Sharma, M. Bansal, R. Misra,
M. Pavone, and K. Sachin, “Cellular network trafﬁc scheduling with
deep reinforcement learning,” in National Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI) , 2018.
[66] Z. Zhang, Y . Zheng, M. Hua, Y . Huang, and L. Yang, “Cache-enabled
dynamic rate allocation via deep self-transfer reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11334 , 2018.
[67] P. V . R. Ferreira, R. Paffenroth, A. M. Wyglinski, T. M. Hackett,
S. G. Bilén, R. C. Reinhart, and D. J. Mortensen, “Multi-objective
reinforcement learning for cognitive satellite communications using
deep neural network ensembles,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications , 2018.
[68] D. Tarchi, G. E. Corazza, and A. Vanelli-Coralli, “Adaptive coding and
modulation techniques for next generation hand-held mobile satellite
communications,” in IEE ICC , 2013, pp. 4504–4508.
[69] M. T. Hagan and M. B. Menhaj, “Training feedforward networks
with the marquardt algorithm,” IEEE transactions on Neural Networks ,
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 989–993, 1994.
[70] C. Zhong, M. C. Gursoy, and S. Velipasalar, “A deep reinforce-
ment learning-based framework for content caching,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.08132 , 2017.
[71] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez,
Y . Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1509.02971, 2015. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971
[72] G. Dulac-Arnold, R. Evans, P. Sunehag, and B. Coppin,
“Reinforcement learning in large discrete action spaces,”
CoRR , vol. abs/1512.07679, 2015. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1512.07679
[73] L. Lei, L. You, G. Dai, T. X. Vu, D. Yuan, and S. Chatzinotas, “A deep
learning approach for optimizing content delivering in cache-enabled
HetNet,” in Int’l Sym. Wireless Commun. Systems (ISWCS) , Aug. 2017,
pp. 449–453.
[74] M. Schaarschmidt, F. Gessert, V . Dalibard, and E. Yoneki, “Learning
runtime parameters in computer systems with delayed experience
injection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.09903 , 2016.
[75] B. F. Cooper, A. Silberstein, E. Tam, R. Ramakrishnan, and R. Sears,
“Benchmarking cloud serving systems with YCSB,” in proc. 1st ACM
Sym. Cloud Comput. , 2010, pp. 143–154.
[76] Y . He and S. Hu, “Cache-enabled wireless networks with opportunistic
interference alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.09024 , 2017.
[77] Y . He, C. Liang, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, and H. Yin, “Optimization of
cache-enabled opportunistic interference alignment wireless networks:
A big data deep reinforcement learning approach,” in IEEE ICC , 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[78] Y . He, Z. Zhang, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, H. Yin, V . C. Leung, and
Y . Zhang, “Deep-reinforcement-learning-based optimization for cache-
enabled opportunistic interference alignment wireless networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 10 433–
10 445, 2017.
[79] X. He, K. Wang, H. Huang, T. Miyazaki, Y . Wang, and S. Guo, “Green
resource allocation based on deep reinforcement learning in content-
centric iot,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing , to
appear.
[80] Q. Wu, Z. Li, and G. Xie, “CodingCache: Multipath-aware CCN
cache with network coding,” in proc. ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on
Information-centric Networking , 2013, pp. 41–42.
[81] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Echo-liquid state deep learning for
360 content transmission and caching in wireless vr networks with
cellular-connected uavs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03284 , 2018.
[82] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Machine
learning for wireless networks with artiﬁcial intelligence: A tutorial

==== Page 35 ====
35
on neural networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1710.02913, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02913
[83] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Liquid state machine learning for
resource allocation in a network of cache-enabled LTE-U UA Vs,” in
IEEE GLOBECOM , Dec. 2017.
[84] Y . He, Z. Zhang, and Y . Zhang, “A big data deep reinforcement
learning approach to next generation green wireless networks,” in IEEE
GLOBECOM , 2017, pp. 1–6.
[85] Y . He, C. Liang, Z. Zhang, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, H. Yin, and Y . Zhang,
“Resource allocation in software-deﬁned and information-centric ve-
hicular networks with mobile edge computing,” in IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference , 2017, pp. 1–5.
[86] Y . He, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, H. Yin, and A. Boukerche, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning (drl)-based resource management in software-deﬁned
and virtualized vehicular ad hoc networks,” in Proceedings of the 6th
ACM Symposium on Development and Analysis of Intelligent Vehicular
Networks and Applications , 2017, pp. 47–54.
[87] Y . He, N. Zhao, and H. Yin, “Integrated networking, caching, and
computing for connected vehicles: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 67, no. 1,
pp. 44–55, 2018.
[88] T. L. Thanh and R. Q. Hu, “Mobility-aware edge caching and comput-
ing framework in vehicle networks: A deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , to appear.
[89] Y . He, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, V . C. Leung, and H. Yin, “Software-deﬁned
networks with mobile edge computing and caching for smart cities: A
big data deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Communications
Magazine , vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 31–37, 2017.
[90] B. Han, V . Gopalakrishnan, L. Ji, and S. Lee, “Network function
virtualization: Challenges and opportunities for innovations,” IEEE
Communications Magazine , vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 90–97, 2015.
[91] Y . He, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, and H. Yin, “Secure social networks in
5g systems with mobile edge computing, caching and device-to-device
(d2d) communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 103–109, Jun. 2018.
[92] Y . He, C. Liang, F. R. Yu, and Z. Han, “Trust-based social networks
with computing, caching and communications: A deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engi-
neering , to appear.
[93] C. Zhang, Z. Liu, B. Gu, K. Yamori, and Y . Tanaka, “A deep rein-
forcement learning based approach for cost-and energy-aware multi-
ﬂow mobile data ofﬂoading,” IEICE Transactions on Communications ,
pp. 2017–2025.
[94] L. Ji, G. Hui, L. Tiejun, and L. Yueming, “Deep reinforcement learning
based computation ofﬂoading and resource allocation for mec,” in IEEE
WCNC , 2018, pp. 1–5.
[95] X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Mao, Y . Ji, and M. Bennis, “Perfor-
mance optimization in mobile-edge computing via deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00514 , 2018.
[96] X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Mao, Y . Ji, and M. Bennis, “Optimized
computation ofﬂoading performance in virtual edge computing systems
via deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06146 ,
2018.
[97] J. Ye and Y .-J. A. Zhang, “DRAG: Deep reinforcement learning based
base station activation in heterogeneous networks,” arXiv:1809.02159 ,
Sep. 2018.
[98] H. Li, H. Gao, T. Lv, and Y . Lu, “Deep q-learning based dynamic
resource allocation for self-powered ultra-dense networks,” in IEEE
ICC (ICC Workshops) , 2018, pp. 1–6.
[99] J. Liu, B. Krishnamachari, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Deepnap: Data-driven
base station sleeping operations through deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2018.
[100] X. Wan, G. Sheng, Y . Li, L. Xiao, and X. Du, “Reinforcement learning
based mobile ofﬂoading for cloud-based malware detection,” in IEEE
GLOBECOM , 2017, pp. 1–6.
[101] L. Xiao, X. Wan, C. Dai, X. Du, X. Chen, and M. Guizani, “Security
in mobile edge caching with reinforcement learning,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1801.05915, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.
05915
[102] A. S. Shamili, C. Bauckhage, and T. Alpcan, “Malware detection on
mobile devices using distributed machine learning,” in proc. Int’l Conf.
Pattern Recognition , Aug. 2010, pp. 4348–4351.
[103] Y . Li, J. Liu, Q. Li, and L. Xiao, “Mobile cloud ofﬂoading for malware
detections with learning,” in IEEE INFOCOM Workshops , Apr. 2015,
pp. 197–201.[104] M. Min, D. Xu, L. Xiao, Y . Tang, and D. Wu, “Learning-based
computation ofﬂoading for iot devices with energy harvesting,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.08768 , 2017.
[105] L. Quan, Z. Wang, and F. Ren, “A novel two-layered reinforcement
learning for task ofﬂoading with tradeoff between physical machine
utilization rate and delay,” Future Internet , vol. 10, no. 7, 2018.
[106] D. V . Le and C. Tham, “Quality of service aware computation of-
ﬂoading in an ad-hoc mobile cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology , pp. 1–1, 2018.
[107] D. V . Le and C.-K. Tham, “A deep reinforcement learning based
ofﬂoading scheme in ad-hoc mobile clouds,” in Proceedings of IEEE
INFOCOM IECCO Workshop , Honolulu, USA., apr 2018.
[108] S. Yu, X. Wang, and R. Langar, “Computation ofﬂoading for mobile
edge computing: A deep learning approach,” in IEEE PIMRC , Oct.
2017.
[109] Z. Tang, X. Zhou, F. Zhang, W. Jia, and W. Zhao, “Migration
modeling and learning algorithms for containers in fog computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing , 2018.
[110] P. Popovski, H. Yomo, and R. Prasad, “Strategies for adaptive fre-
quency hopping in the unlicensed bands,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions , vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 60–67, 2006.
[111] G. Han, L. Xiao, and H. V . Poor, “Two-dimensional anti-jamming
communication based on deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings
of the 42nd IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, , 2017.
[112] L. Xiao, D. Jiang, X. Wan, W. Su, and Y . Tang, “Anti-jamming under-
water transmission with mobility and learning,” IEEE Communications
Letters , 2018.
[113] X. Liu, Y . Xu, L. Jia, Q. Wu, and A. Anpalagan, “Anti-jamming com-
munications using spectrum waterfall: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Communications Letters , 2018.
[114] Y . Chen, Y . Li, D. Xu, and L. Xiao, “Dqn-based power control for
iot transmission against jamming,” in IEEE 87th Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC Spring) , 2018, pp. 1–5.
[115] X. Lu, L. Xiao, and C. Dai, “Uav-aided 5g communications
with deep reinforcement learning against jamming,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.06628 , 2018.
[116] L. Xiao, X. Lu, D. Xu, Y . Tang, L. Wang, and W. Zhuang, “Uav relay
in vanets against smart jamming with reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 4087–4097,
2018.
[117] S. Lv, L. Xiao, Q. Hu, X. Wang, C. Hu, and L. Sun, “Anti-jamming
power control game in unmanned aerial vehicle networks,” in IEEE
GLOBECOM , 2017, pp. 1–6.
[118] L. Xiao, C. Xie, M. Min, and W. Zhuang, “User-centric view of
unmanned aerial vehicle transmission against smart attacks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 3420–3430,
2018.
[119] M. Bowling and M. Veloso, “Multiagent learning using a variable
learning rate,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 136, no. 2, pp. 215–250,
2002.
[120] Y . Chen, S. Kar, and J. M. Moura, “Cyber-physical attacks with control
objectives,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 63, no. 5,
pp. 1418–1425, 2018.
[121] A. Ferdowsi, U. Challita, W. Saad, and N. B. Mandayam, “Robust deep
reinforcement learning for security and safety in autonomous vehicle
systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00983 , 2018.
[122] M. Brackstone and M. McDonald, “Car-following: a historical review,”
Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour ,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 181–196, 1999.
[123] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Deep learning-based dynamic watermarking
for secure signal authentication in the internet of things,” in IEEE ICC ,
2018, pp. 1–6.
[124] B. Satchidanandan and P. R. Kumar, “Dynamic watermarking: Active
defense of networked cyber–physical systems,” Proceedings of the
IEEE , vol. 105, no. 2, pp. 219–240, 2017.
[125] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Deep learning for signal authentication
and security in massive internet of things systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.00916 , 2018.
[126] P. Vadakkepat, K. C. Tan, and W. Ming-Liang, “Evolutionary artiﬁcial
potential ﬁelds and their application in real time robot path planning,”
inProceedings of the 2000 Congress on Evolutionary Computation ,
vol. 1, 2000, pp. 256–263.
[127] W. Huang, Y . Wang, and X. Yi, “Deep q-learning to preserve connec-
tivity in multi-robot systems,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Signal Processing Systems . ACM, 2017, pp. 45–50.

==== Page 36 ====
36
[128] W. Huang, Y . Wang, and X. Yi, “A deep reinforcement learning
approach to preserve connectivity for multi-robot systems,” in In-
ternational Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical
Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI) , 2017, pp. 1–7.
[129] H. A. Poonawala, A. C. Satici, H. Eckert, and M. W. Spong, “Collision-
free formation control with decentralized connectivity preservation for
nonholonomic-wheeled mobile robots,” IEEE Transactions on control
of Network Systems , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 122–130, 2015.
[130] C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “Autonomous naviga-
tion of uav in large-scale unknown complex environment with deep
reinforcement learning,” in IEEE GlobalSIP , 2017, pp. 858–862.
[131] C. Shen, C. Tekin, and M. van der Schaar, “A non-stochastic learning
approach to energy efﬁcient mobility management,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3854–3868,
2016.
[132] M. Faris and E. Brian, “Deep q-learning for self-organizing net-
works fault management and radio performance improvement,”
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02329 , 2018.
[133] G. Stampa, M. Arias, D. Sanchez-Charles, V . Muntes-Mulero,
and A. Cabellos, “A deep-reinforcement learning approach for
software-deﬁned networking routing optimization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.07080 , 2017.
[134] M. Roughan, “Simplifying the synthesis of internet trafﬁc matrices,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 93–96, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02913
[135] A. Varga and R. Hornig, “An overview of the OMNeT++ simulation
environment,” in proc. Int’l Conf. Simulation Tools and Techniques for
Communications, Networks and Systems & Workshops , 2008.
[136] Z. Xu, J. Tang, J. Meng, W. Zhang, Y . Wang, C. H. Liu, and D. Yang,
“Experience-driven networking: A deep reinforcement learning based
approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05757 , 2018.
[137] K. Winstein and H. Balakrishnan, “TCP ex Machina: Computer-
generated congestion control,” in ACM SIGCOMM , 2013, pp. 123–134.
[138] R. G.F. and H. T.R., Modeling and Tools for Network Simulation .
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, ch. The ns-3 Network Simulator.
[139] A. Medina, A. Lakhina, I. Matta, and J. Byers, “BRITE: an approach
to universal topology generation,” in IEEE MASCOTS , Aug. 2001, pp.
346–353.
[140] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y . Mansour, “Policy gradient
methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation,” in
proc. 12th Int’l Conf. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. , 1999, pp. 1057–
1063.
[141] U. Challita, W. Saad, and C. Bettstetter, “Deep reinforcement learning
for interference-aware path planning of cellular connected uavs,” in
IEEE ICC , Kansas City, MO, May 2018, pp. 1–6.
[142] U. Challita, W. Saad, and C. Bettstetter, “Cellular-connected uavs over
5g: Deep reinforcement learning for interference management,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.05500 , 2018.
[143] L. Zhu, Y . He, F. R. Yu, B. Ning, T. Tang, and N. Zhao,
“Communication-based train control system performance optimization
using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology , vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 10 705–10 717, 2017.
[144] Y . Yang, Y . Li, K. Li, S. Zhao, R. Chen, J. Wang, and S. Ci, “Decco:
Deep-learning enabled coverage and capacity optimization for massive
mimo systems,” IEEE Access , to appear.
[145] Z. Xu, Y . Wang, J. Tang, J. Wang, and M. C. Gursoy, “A deep
reinforcement learning based framework for power-efﬁcient resource
allocation in cloud rans,” in IEEE ICC , 2017, pp. 1–6.
[146] T. M. Hackett, S. G. Bilén, P. V . R. Ferreira, A. M. Wyglinski, and
R. C. Reinhart, “Implementation of a space communications cognitive
engine,” in Cognitive Communications for Aerospace Applications
Workshop (CCAA) , 2017, pp. 1–7.
[147] Y . S. Nasir and D. Guo, “Deep reinforcement learning for dis-
tributed dynamic power allocation in wireless networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.00490 , 2018.
[148] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashﬁ, and M. K. Marina, “Network
slicing in 5g: Survey and challenges,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 94–100, 2017.
[149] X. Chen, Z. Li, Y . Zhang, R. Long, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Re-
inforcement learning based qos/qoe-aware service function chaining in
software-driven 5g slices,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02099 , 2018.
[150] P. Reichl, S. Egger, R. Schatz, and A. D’Alconzo, “The logarithmic
nature of qoe and the role of the weber-fechner law in qoe assessment,”
inIEEE ICC , Cape Town, South Africa, May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[151] M. Fiedler, T. Hossfeld, and P. Tran-Gia, “A generic quantitative
relationship between quality of experience and quality of service,”
IEEE Network , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 36–41, 2014.[152] Z. Zhao, R. Li, Q. Sun, Y . Yang, X. Chen, M. Zhao, H. Zhang
et al. , “Deep reinforcement learning for network slicing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.06591 , 2018.
[153] H. Mao, M. Alizadeh, I. Menache, and S. Kandula, “Resource man-
agement with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 15th
ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks , 2016, pp. 50–56.
[154] T. Li, Z. Xu, J. Tang, and Y . Wang, “Model-free control for distributed
stream data processing using deep reinforcement learning,” Proceed-
ings of the VLDB Endowment , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 705–718, 2018.
[155] G. D. Arnold, R. Evans, H. v. Hasselt, P. Sunehag, T. Lillicrap, J. Hunt,
T. Mann, T. Weber, T. Degris, and B. Coppin, “Deep reinforcement
learning in large discrete action spaces,” arXiv: 1512.07679 , 2016.
[156] X. Li, J. Fang, W. Cheng, H. Duan, Z. Chen, and H. Li, “Intelligent
power control for spectrum sharing in cognitive radios: A deep rein-
forcement learning approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07365 , 2017.
[157] T. Oda, R. Obukata, M. Ikeda, L. Barolli, and M. Takizawa, “Design
and implementation of a simulation system based on deep q-network
for mobile actor node control in wireless sensor and actor networks,”
inInternational Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications Workshops (WAINA) , 2017, pp. 195–200.
[158] L. Wang, W. Liu, D. Zhang, Y . Wang, E. Wang, and Y . Yang,
“Cell selection with deep reinforcement learning in sparse mobile
crowdsensing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07047 , 2018.
[159] F. Ingelrest, G. Barrenetxea, G. Schaefer, M. Vetterli, O. Couach, and
M. Parlange., “SensorScope: Application-speciﬁc sensor network for
environmental monitoring,” ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks ,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–32, 2010.
[160] Y . Zheng, F. Liu, and H. P. Hsieh, “U-Air: when urban air quality
inference meets big data,” in ACM SIGKDD Int’l Conf. Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining , 2013.
[161] B. Zhang, C. H. Liu, J. Tang, Z. Xu, J. Ma, and W. Wang, “Learning-
based energy-efﬁcient data collection by unmanned vehicles in smart
cities,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
1666–1676, 2018.
[162] L. Bracciale, M. Bonola, P. Loreti, G. Bianchi, R. Amici, and
A. Rabufﬁ. (2014, Jul.) CRAWDAD dataset roma/taxi (v. 2014-07-
17). [Online]. Available: http://crawdad.org/roma/taxi/20140717
[163] L. Xiao, Y . Li, G. Han, H. Dai, and H. V . Poor, “A secure mobile
crowdsensing game with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 35–47,
Jan. 2018.
[164] Y . Zhang, B. Song, and P. Zhang, “Social behavior study under
pervasive social networking based on decentralized deep reinforcement
learning,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications , vol. 86, pp.
72–81, 2017.
[165] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, and J.-S. Oh, “Semisu-
pervised deep reinforcement learning in support of iot and smart city
services,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 624–635,
2018.
[166] D. P. Kingma, S. Mohamed, D. J. Rezende, and M. Welling, “Semi-
supervised learning with deep generative models,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2014, pp. 3581–3589.
[167] G. Cao, Z. Lu, X. Wen, T. Lei, and Z. Hu, “Aif: An artiﬁcial
intelligence framework for smart wireless network management,” IEEE
Communications Letters , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 400–403, 2018.
[168] Y . Zhan, Y . Xia, J. Zhang, T. Li, and Y . Wang, “Crowdsensing game
with demand uncertainties: A deep reinforcement learning approach,”
submitted.
[169] N. C. Luong, P. Wang, D. Niyato, Y . Wen, and Z. Han, “Resource
management in cloud networking using economic analysis and pricing
models: a survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 954–1001, Jan. 2017.
[170] N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han,
“Data collection and wireless communication in internet of things
(iot) using economic analysis and pricing models: A survey,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2546–2590,
Jun. 2016.
[171] F. Shi, Z. Qin, and J. A. McCann, “Oppay: Design and implementation
of a payment system for opportunistic data services,” in IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Distributed Computing Systems , Atlanta, GA,
Jul. 2017, pp. 1618–1628.
[172] Z. Jiang and J. Liang, “Cryptocurrency portfolio management with deep
reinforcement learning,” in Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys) ,
2017, pp. 905–913.
[173] N. C. Luong, P. Wang, D. Niyato, Y .-C. Liang, F. Hou, and Z. Han, “Ap-
plications of economic and pricing models for resource management in

==== Page 37 ====
37
5g wireless networks: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials , to appear.
[174] J. Zhao, G. Qiu, Z. Guan, W. Zhao, and X. He, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning for sponsored search real-time bidding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.00259 , 2018.

