==== Page 1 ====
Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 43 Application of Artificial I ntelligence in Automation of 
Supply Chain Management 
Rupa Dash 
University of Pittsburgh 
Mark McMurtrey
 
University of Central Arkansas 
Carl Rebman 
University of San Diego 
Upendra K. Kar 
University of Pittsburgh 
A well-functioning supply chain is a key to suc cess for every business en tity. Having an accurate 
projection on inventory offers a substantial compe titive advantage. There are many internal factors like 
product introductions, distribution ne twork expansion; and external factors such as weather, extreme 
seasonality, and changes in customer perception or medi a coverage that affects the performance of the 
supply chain. In recent years Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been proved to become an extension of our 
brain, expanding our cognitive abilities to levels that we never thought would be possible. Though many 
believe AI will replace humans, it is not true, rather it wi ll help us to unleash our true strategic and creative 
potential. AI consists of a set of computational technologies developed to sense, learn, reason, and act 
appropriately. With the technological advancement in m obile computing, the capacity to store huge data 
on the internet, cloud-based machine learning and info rmation processing algorithms etc. AI has been 
integrated into many sectors of business and been proved to reduce costs, increase revenue, and enhance 
asset utilization. AI is helping businesses to get almo st 100% accurate projection and forecast the customer 
demand, optimizing their R&D and increase manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality, helping 
them in the promotion (identifying target custom ers, demography, defining the price, and designing the 
right message, etc.) and providing their customers a better experience. These four  areas of value creation 
are extremely important for gaining competitive advantage. Supply-chain leaders use AI-powered 
technologies to a) make efficient designs to eliminate waste b) real-time monitoring and error-free 
production and c) facilitate lower process cycle times . These processes are crucial in bringing Innovation 
faster to the market. 

==== Page 2 ====
44 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 INTRODUCTION 
Supply chain management (SCM) is one of the most  challenging fields which emphasizes interactions 
among different sectors, primarily marketing, logistics, and production. Therefore, success in SCM lies in 
the overall success of any business. However, with th e consistent changes in business practices like lean 
management and just-in-time philosophy both in produc tion and logistics, globalization, adverse events 
i.e. frequent natural disaster, political instability, etc. SCM always need to develop an adequate solution to 
mitigate such challenges. In recent years technol ogies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) is been proved 
immensely valuable to SCM. 
As the name suggests AI defined as the ability of a computer to independently solve problems that 
they have not been explicitly programmed to address. The field of AI came to existence in 1956, in a 
workshop organized by John McCarthy (McCarthy Et  al., 2006). In successive years the pioneering work 
of McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester , and Claude Shannon, Arthur Samuel, Oliver 
Selfridge, Ray Solomonoff, Allen Newell, and Herbert Simon, etc. galvanized the field of “artificial 
intelligence” (Solomonoff, 1985). In his article “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” Alan Turing 
proposed the possibility of designing computers whic h can learn automatically (Turing, 1950). After 
“Shakey” a wheeled robot that was built at SRI, th e field of mobile robotics gained International 
attention1. However, in the late ’90s with the techno logical progress in designing computing power to 
store and process large dataset, the internet having the capacity to gather large amounts of data, and 
statistical techniques that, by design , can derive solutions from these data sets, allowed AI to emerge as 
one of the powerful technologies of the century (Kar  et al, 2018). In the last two decades Technologies 
like Cognitive Computing, Computer Vision, Cont ext-aware Computing, Natural Language Processing, 
Predictive Analytics, Machine Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Supervised Learning, Unsupervised 
Learning, and Deep Learning, etc. have enable d computer’s “thoughts” by providing a conceptual 
framework for processing input and making decisions based on that data (Kar et al, 2018). 
The modern machines enabled with AI platform  are capable to gather information from its 
surroundings; using logic and probability choose to act with the highest likelihood of success. These 
machines are made to learn, and act intelligently based on the big-data sets and recognize objects or 
sounds with considerable precision (Mnih et al, 2015, Esteva et al., 2017). With the technological 
advancement in mobile computing, storage of huge da ta on the Internet and cloud-based machine learning 
and information processing algorithms, etc. applicati ons and benefits of AI technologies are growing 
exponentially (Kar et al, 2018). Machines powered by AI performing many tasks—such as recognizing 
complex patterns, synthesizing information, drawin g conclusions, and forecasting—that not long ago 
were assumed to require human cognition (Zhang et al.,1999, Bughin et al 2017). The best example 
would be Netflix and Amazon. Both companies use AI to personalize recommendations to millions of 
subscribers worldwide. From self-driving cars to impl antable medical devices to electronic trading to a 
robot control of remote sensing are few other ex amples. Using deep learning algorithms, powered by 
advances in computation these machines have even ex ceeded human performance, particularly in visual 
tasks like playing Atari games (Perez et al., 2014), st rategic board games like Go (Silver D et al., 2016) 
and object recognition (Esteva et al., 2017). AI, which enables machines to exhibit human-like cognition, 
therefore wherever a process uses digital data, AI can be applied to use that data more effectively to 
improve the functioning of most digital operati ons, products, and services (Hall DW et al., 2017). 
Applications of AI has helped businesses gain a competitive advantage in a) getting almost 100% 
accurate projection and forecast the customer demand, b) optimizing their R&D, therefore, increase in 
manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality c) helping them in the promotion (identifying target 
customers, demography, defining the price, and designing the right message, etc. d) providing their 
customers a better experience (has been explained in great  detail in a later section). AI already in use in 
various business practices including medicine, law, finance, accounting, tax, audit, architecture, 
consulting, customer service, manufacturing, and trans port, etc. (Hall DW et al., 2017). In this article, we 
have highlighted the recent trends and applications of AI in supply chain management, particularly in 

==== Page 3 ====
Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 45 context to the retail and manufacturing industry. The examples given are the only representative in the 
respective areas.   
Application of AI in Value Creation 
Computer-based forecasting/demand planning is not ne w. It is based on a series of algorithms designed 
which takes various data sets like shipment data, product life cycle data, ordering pattern, manufacturing 
data, etc. over a period of time to forecast. In c ontrast, the AI enabled system knows the best possible 
combinations of algorithms and data sets to consider having an accurate prediction. More importantly, AI 
is helping businesses to a) get almost 100% accurate  projection and forecast the customer demand, b) 
optimizing their R&D, therefore, increase in manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality c) helping 
them in the promotion (identifying target customers, demography, defining the price, and designing the 
right message, etc. d) providing their customers a better experience. These four areas of value creation are 
extremely important for gaining competitive advantage. 
AI Helps to Forecast Demand and Optimization  
AI is been effectively used in projection and for ecasting. Organizations are always keen to balance 
both supply and demand. Therefore, a better forecast is  needed for its supply chain and manufacturing. As 
AI can process, analyze (automatically) and more  importantly, predict data, it provides accurate and 
reliable forecasting demand, which allows businesses to optimize their sourcing in terms of purchases and 
orders processing therefore reducing costs related to transportation, warehousing and supply chain 
administration, etc. In addition, as it discerns tre nds and patterns which help to design better retailing and 
manufacturing strategies. For example; businesses use th is tool in several ways, such as stock only the 
specific quantities (as accurate as each independent unit/product) of specific products they will sell and 
minimizing waste. Similarly; getting accurate sales trends they can order more soon-to-be-popular items. 
As these demand forecasts are so a ccurate they do not lose the sale because of product unavailability. 
National Grid in the United Kingdom uses the platform “DeepMind” developed by Google which predicts 
the best supply and demand variations accurately  even considering variables like weather-related 
exogenous inputs (Yao 2017). Machine learning approaches not only incorporate historical sales data and 
the setup of the supply chains but also rely on near-r eal-time data regarding variables such as advertising 
campaigns, prices, and local weather forecasts (Bughin et al 2017). Otto a German online retailer 
manages to reduce 90% of their inve ntory using such appli cation. The AI forecasts are so reliable that 
Otto building its inventory in anticipation of the orde rs, more interestingly totally relying on AI without 
any human intervention (Burgess, 2018). AI is also been used in R&D departments, to quickly assess 
whether a prototype would be likely to succeed or fail in the market—and if so why. More importantly, it 
delivers more efficient designs by eliminating waste in  the design process. By doing so AI has played an 
important role in smart manufacturing. (Kusiak A, 2018).  
AI Helps in the Production  
AI has played a significant role in  production because a) better optimization of assets and processes, b) 
designing best teams i.e. people and robots, c) improvement in quality and reliability i.e. error-free, and d) 
prevention of downtime for maintenance. Automation process has taken a big stride because of AI 
technologies. Robotics one of the advanced branches of  AI has taken a central role in the production (Bughin 
et al, 2017). Advances in technologies in object recognition and semantic segmentation has transformed the 
behavior of the robots, particularly in context to how they recognize the properties of the materials and objects 
they interact with. The new AI-enhan ced, camera-equipped robots are trained to recognize empty shelf space. 
This leads to a dramatic speed advantage over conventional methods in picking objects (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). Deep learning has also been us ed to correctly identify an object and its position. This 
enables robots to handle objects without requiring the objects to be in fixed, predefined positions. Ocado, the UK supermarket, use one of the AI platforms in its re tailer’s warehouse, where robots steer thousands of 
product-filled bins over a maze of co nveyor belts and deliver them to hum an packers just in time to fill 

==== Page 4 ====
46 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 shopping bags (Dale M., 2018). Similarly, other robots whisk the bags to delivery vans whose drivers are 
guided to customers’ homes by the best route based on traffic conditions and weather (Bughin et al, 2017). 
AI-enhanced logistics robots are also able to integrate disturbances in their movement routines via an 
unsupervised learning engine for dynamics. This capability leads to more precise makeovers and overall improved robustness of processes (Webster, C et al 20 19). Collaborative robots can increase productivity by 
up to 20 percent (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). AI enabled semiconductor chip-production process is a good example of how AI helps in production. The cycle times from the first processing of the wafer to the 
final chip are typically several weeks to months and include various intermediate quality- testing processes. 
Testing costs and yield losses in semiconductor production can constitute up to 30 percent of the total production cost. Semiconductor manufacturers are using AI engines to identify root causes of yield losses that 
can be avoided by changing production processes. Enhanced applications are designed to monitor and adjust 
subprocesses in real time (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). AI techniques help not only determining 
the optimized product operating conditions or process conditions but also to significantly reduce defects in manufacturing. Similarly; in asset-heavy businesses, where complex systems running with minimal downtime, AI provides the perfect solution. Utility companies use AI  for maintenance of their extensive electrical grids. 
Using data from sensors, drones, and other hardware, machine learning applications helps grid operators avoid 
decommissioning assets before their useful lives have ended, while simultaneously enabling them to perform 
more frequent remote inspections and maintenance to keep assets working well (Bughin et al, 2017). Using AI one European power distribution company reduced its cash costs as high as 30% over five years by replacing power transformers. AI is also enabling the “preventive maintenance” as well. Therefore, in a production unit 
where multiple machines are used, it will indicate the possible failure (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). 
AI helps in Pr
omotion and Pricing 
Digital content has already become the norm and bus inesses employ multiple channels to reach their 
customers. About 25 percent of today’s marketing budge ts are devoted to digital channels, and almost 80 
percent of marketing organizations  make technology-oriented capita l expenditures—typically hardware 
and software—according to a recent Gartner survey (Foo et al 2018, Sterne, 2018). AI-supported 
activities include digital advertising buys (progra mmatic buying), website operation and optimization, 
search engine optimization, A/B testing, outbound e-mail marketing, lead filtering and scoring, and many other marketing tasks (Sterne, 2018). 
AI tools like Wordsmith, Articolo and Quill are already being used by the Associated Press and 
Forbes to create news, which leads to clicks on their websites (Seligman 2018). These tools use, 
templates, fill-in-the-blanks to en ter data and keywords to create unique content which gives the readers 
the impression that a human has written it. AI is not only able to generate content; it can curate it. Content curation by AI not only connect the visitors with ce rtain websites but also make recommendations based 
on their personal choice. Personalized email mark eting campaigns based on preferences and user 
behaviors are well known (Sterne, 2018). 
The Machine learning applications analyze millions of data about the behavior of consumer i.e. best 
frequency, what catches their attention the most and best  times and days of the week to contact the user. 
A few of the AI-based applications like Boomtrain, Phrases, and Persado is already been shown their 
value. Phrases claims, the email it  creates surpasses those of a human  by over 95%. The cognitive content 
of Persado demonstrated to exceed what a human could do 100% of the time (Jaidka et al 2018, Gaggioli 2018). Similarly; Facebook, Amazon, and Google are we ll known for using AI enabled digital advertising 
(Deb et al 2018). The AI platform analyzes the info rmation including interests, demographics, and other 
aspects to learn and predict the best audience for th eir brand. Adext (AI platform) can automate the 
handling and optimization of a dvertisements on various platfo rms including Google AdWords and 
Facebook. More importantly, it detects the most likely bu yers and helps them to take the desired action or 
conversion. AI has revolutionized Internet searches and search engine optimization (SEO) (Deb et al 2018, Gaggioli 2018). AI devices like Amazon’s Echo, Google’s Home, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s 
Cortana make it easy for their customers to perform searches by either saying a voice command or just pressing a button (Deb et al 2018). RankBrain devel oped by Google, can interpret the user’s voice 

==== Page 5 ====
Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 47 searches and, provides them the best results based on th e user’s language and context (Sutton et al 2018). 
Therefore, that famous long-tail keywords will be history. Smart marketers will use creative words to 
replace with more conversational keywords, which will increase their traffic and customers. An AI 
platform like Grid has transformed the webpage designing, the best part  is it can customize the website 
for each customer and change the content of the website  based on the preference of the user. Many brands 
already have chatbot powered by AI on their website . They serve clients 24/7, more importantly, as 
they’re fast they solve the problems of the customer  faster than human. For example; Sephora uses an AI 
platform i.e. Visual Artist which identifies facial features and then uses augmented reality to analyze and 
suggest customized cosmetic products like lip sticks, eyeshadows, etc. (Kumar et al 2018). 
Yield management programs were considered as the best system and been used for pricing airline 
seats, hotel rooms, and other perishables for years. However, AI has changed it dramatically. Now every 
business interested to know what price is the cu stomer willing to pay? In a 24X7 connected world 
consumers continuously redefine value by compari ng prices online, even when browsing in a brick-and-
mortar store. The right price at the right time incr eases customer satisfaction and leads to more sales and 
higher profit (Khorram 2019). Defining the optimal pr ice for a product is complicated which is broadly 
depends on many factors including the day of the week , season, time of day, weather, channel and device, 
competitors’ prices, etc. AI is a good tool to determine the price elasticity for every item and automatically adjust prices according to the c hosen product strategy (Khorram 2019). In the retail 
industry, AI is been extensively used to optimize, update, and tailor it to each shopper in real time. AI 
program is been exploited which looked for clu es about what the shopper will like based on previous 
purchases, age, home address, web browsing habits, a nd mounds of other data. This kind of insights-
based selling, including personalized promotions, optim ized assortment, and tailored displays, increase 
sales substantially (Mathur 2019, Bughin et al, 2017) . Aerospace companies are using AI technologies to 
prioritize sales targets and optimize the price of services.  For years, they prioritized maintenance, repair, 
and overhaul (MRO) sales lead manually, a cumbersome , resource-heavy, and not always an efficient 
process. Using AI to improve the accuracy of for ecasting MRO work and focusing on the firm’s sales 
efforts on the most promising leads can have a significan t effect on profitability (Kraus et al 2019, Bughin 
et al, 2017). 
In recent years, artificial inte lligence has enabled pricing soluti ons to track buying trends and 
determine more competitive product prices (Paolanti et al 2018). AI-driven pricing software has been 
included in various sectors including consumer goods, fashion, hospitality, and transportation (Meng et al 
2018). In the future, businesses will progress from absolute  i.e. static pricing to dynamic pricing which 
will offer customers different prices based on external  factors and their individual buying habits. Dynamic 
pricing is based on aggregate available pricing da ta from various sources i.e. across the web, from 
competitors and prices are available in other regions. Dynamic pricing algorithms consider factors such as 
competitors’ pricing, consumer behavior, location, time of day, and seasonality to determine how much 
shoppers are willing to pay for a product or service. Ma ny machine learning programs have been designed 
to collect and analyzing data from a variety of sources like loyalty cards and postal codes, to predict what 
the customer is willing to pay and how responsive they might be to special offers. Most importantly, once the patterns are revealed, they can adjust and determine the best prices for new products that are appropriate for the customer (Kietzmann et al 2018). 
Though dynamic pricing now in its infancy but will grow expone ntially. Pace has developed a 
program that enables hotel management to design pr icing that will match with supply and demand. This 
allows hotels to maximize their profits by offering the best price that customers are willing to pay based on various parameter including demographics, time of y ear, spending pattern, etc. It will help the hotels to 
forecast the demand (De Jesus 2019). Similarly; Sharts is has developed a “Perfect price” program which 
enables companies, such as car rent al companies, to do dynamic pricing. Traditionally, car rental 
companies segment based on time of day, boosting morning prices to match business travelers who are assumed to be more willing to pay (De Jesus 2019). Perfect Price determines if a certain car shows higher demand in a specific area and at a specific time of day, resulting in surge pricing while not affecting other car classes. More importantly, the system needs mi nimal human oversight. In the future, using Google 

==== Page 6 ====
48 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 Tag Manager (GTM) and Perfect Price many busin esses can adjust the product price. Incompetiror, 
developed by Intelligence Node is  a retail product index that gives the user access to competitors’ 
catalogs and pricing, allowing the user to use those prices as a benchmark for their own pricing structure 
(De Jesus 2019). Moreover, based on the application’s product index, it allows businesses to view and 
compare their competitor’s products to  determine if theirs are overpr iced, about equal, or underpriced. 
Similarly, using this information E-commerce bus iness can know exactly which products shoppers want 
(De Jesus 2019). 
They could access rich market data down to individual SKUs, product attributes, categories, and 
brands and gain visibility into product catalogs. Th ere is another program “Wise Athena” which helps 
companies determine the best pricing for their produc ts and trade promotion decisions. Wise Athena also 
claims to have the ability to automatically select a product’s data attributes or specifications, and it 
computes for loss in sales volume, as well as the re venue or market share of a product when the same 
company launches a new product. It also computes for the potential change in the product’s demand when the price for other product changes, as well as comp etition, leading price, and total sales (De Jesus 2019). 
Wise Athena reports that their system updates its machine learning models monthly to maintain or 
increase prediction accuracy. Navette PricePoint controls, manages, and measures pricing (De Jesus 2019). It consists of modules that group similar produc ts, optimize local list prices from sales companies, 
dealers, and distributors, and takes into account in centives, discounts, and payment terms which help the 
businesses optimize prices. Business like Airbus, Tetra Pak, Olympus, Kia, and General Electric 
Healthcare are already using this program to design th e price (De Jesus 2019). However, the role of AI in 
pricing is in its infancy and it will grow exponentially in the future.  
 
AI Helps in the Delivery  
Recently more focus has been given to “user experi ence” i.e. creating richer, more tailored, and more 
convenient for the user. Today’s business is all about making every customer feel special and welcome, 
which is not an easy task. This used to be difficult and expensive and was often reserved for only the most 
lucrative clients. AI technologies like computer vi sion and machine learning has changed it completely. 
For example, a regular supermarket shopper puts a bunch of bananas in hi s cart, cameras or sensors could 
relay the information to an AI application that woul d have a good idea of what the shopper likes based on 
previous purchases. The app could then, via a video screen in the cart, suggest  that bananas would be 
delicious with a chocolate fondue, which the purch ase history suggests the shopper likes, and remind the 
shopper of where to find the right ingredients (Morti mer et al 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). Or a runner could 
download an app from an athletic shoe company,  which would monitor her exercise regimen and 
recommend footwear tailored to her routine and runn ing paths she may like. Amazon has built a retail 
outlet in Seattle that allows shoppe rs to take food off the shelves and walk directly out of the store 
without stopping at a checkout kiosk to pay (Metz 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). The store called Amazon 
Go, relies on computer vision to track shoppers after they swipe into the store and associate them with 
products taken from shelves. When shoppers leave, Am azon debits their accounts for the cost of the items 
in their bag and emails them a receipt (Metz 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). Delivery through drones is now a 
reality. Since Amazon successfully delivered a pilot deliv ery in rural England in 2016 there a surge in this 
area. Google partnered with Chipotle to deliver burr itos at Virginia Tech, Dominos Pizza with Flirtey 
completed a commercial delivery of pizzas in New Zeal and (Druehl et al 2018). UPS has partnered with 
drone company Zipline and governmental organizati ons in Africa to coordi nate emergency medical 
supplies delivery (such as blood) in Rwanda (Druehl et al 2018). Amazon now routinely gathering data 
from drones during home delivery to  target future purchases. From healthcare to education to 
transportation in every sector, AI is providing the ideal tools for operation management (Druehl et al 
2018).  
 
AI in Smart Retailing  
AI enables the retail and manufacturing businesses in  making smarter decisions, with more accurate and 
real-time forecasting, im proving supply management, defining impactful thematic promotions, and 

==== Page 7 ====
 
 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 49 optimizing assortment and pricing. AI also making operations more efficien t, because of robotics and process 
optimization which enhances productivity and reduces ma nual labor costs. Use of interactive Robots in the 
warehouse and store are well known. The advancement in enhanced vision is enabled by more powerful 
computers, new algorithmic models, and large training data sets. Within the field of computer vision, object 
recognition and semantic segmentation—that is, the abilit y to categorize object type, such as distinguishing a 
tool from a component—have recently advanced significa ntly in their performance (Wen et al 2018, Bughin 
et al, 2017). They allow robots to be have appropriately for the context in which they operate, for example by 
recognizing the properties of the materials and objects they interact with. They are flexible and autonomous and capable of safely interacting with the real world and humans (Bughin et al, 2017). Companies like 
Swisslog, DHL, etc. are using these techno logies efficiently (Wen et al 2018). 
However, there are many hurdles yet to be crossed be fore we get the full potential of AI. The first and 
foremost is to gain the confidence of the stakeholders  i.e. managers and employees, and those involved in the 
regulatory and policy-making boards. As  discussed earlier robots are gr adually being adapted to perform 
packaging and delivery. However; we still do not  know how to address technical difficulties. 
AI has enabled retailers to increase both the number of customers and the average amount they spend by 
creating personal and convenient shopping experiences . Retailers now know more about what their shoppers 
want— even before shoppers themselves (Deb et al 2018). AI forecasts from patterns and volumes of data i.e. previous transactions, weathe r forecasts, social media tren ds, shopping patterns, online  viewing history, facial 
expression analysis, seasonal shopping patterns, etc (F ildes et al 2018, Burgess A 2018). The best examples 
are Amazon, Hulu, Netflix etc. Similarly; a European retailer improved its earnings before interest and taxes 
(EBIT) by 1 to 2 the percent by using a machine lear ning algorithm to anticipate fruit and vegetable sales. 
The company automatically orders more products based on this forecast to maximize turnover and minimize 
waste. A German company i.e. Otto cut surplus stock by 20 percent and reduced product returns by more than two million items a year, using deep learning to analyze billions of transactions and predict what customers will buy before they place an order (Burgess A 2018). AI technologies help retailers predict future 
store performance when expanding their physical footprints. Now retailers optimize their storage space and 
location using AI. Another important aspect of The retail industry is merchandising. AI helping in merchandising, with opportunities to  improve assortment efficiency. Using geospatial and statistical 
modeling, they predict and minimize their stock. Amazon has embedded AI at the core of its operations. In the retailer’s warehouse at Seattle, machine learning algorithms steer thousands of products over a maze of 
conveyor belts and deliver them to humans just in tim e to fill shopping bags. Other robots whisk bags to 
delivery vans whose drivers are guided by an AI application that picks the best route based on weather and traffic conditions (Fildes et  al 2018, Burgess A 2018).  
 
AI in Smart Manufacturing  
Use of AI has transformed the manufacturing sector, from virtual assistants to advanced robotics, has 
enabled the manufacturing companies to produce more  with fewer errors to adept demand. Using AI 
helped them in rapid growth as they can shorten development cycles, improve engineering efficiency, 
prevent faults, increase safety by automating risky activities, reduce inventory costs with better supply 
and demand planning, and increase revenue with bette r sales lead identification and price optimization, 
etc. (Patel et al 2018, Bughin et  al, 2017). The new concept i.e. “I ntelligent manufacturing” is a smart 
approach for production where machines are linked to humans i.e. both machine and humans are working 
side-by-side with minimal guidance. The best exam ple of intelligent manufacturing is the manufacturing 
sector of Siemens
2. The employee manages and controls the production of programmable logic circuits 
through a virtual factory that replicates the fact ory floor. Via barcodes, products communicate with the 
machines that make them, and the machines comm unicate among themselves to replenish parts and 
identify problems (Bughin et al, 2017). As high as 75% of  the production process is fully automated, and 
99.99988% of the logic circuits are defect-free. Si milarly, AI and 3D printing have revolutionized 
customization in manufacturing. Intel has develo ped Predictive analytics using machine learning a 
powerful tool to reduce the time required to so lve design problems for semiconductor manufacturers 
(Burgess 2018). Motivo, an artificial intelligence star tup, managed to compress semiconductor design 

==== Page 8 ====
50 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 processes from years to a few weeks, saving chip  makers the cost of iterations and testing3. Using 
machine learning, aerospace manufacturing industries h as developed productivity tools for engineering 
teams i.e. team travel norms, team composition, a nd supplier communication, etc. Machine learning has 
reduced its development costs by unleashing the speed, accuracy, and relevance of products. AI has 
allowed manufacturers to integrate production and clie nt feedback in real time to refine the product 
design. With suppliers, AI-based tools provide bette r accountability throughout the supply chain, which 
helps aerospace manufacturers as well. For example,  manufacturing a jet requires 1000s of parts and 
procurement of these parts from around the world is  a complex challenge. AI technologies like Virtual 
reality in manufacturing link thousands of different parts most importantly, it provides transparency on 
supplier machine availability, performance, and downtime, etc. It helps in balancing the supply chain and 
optimize inventories in real time (Kraus et al 2018). 
Using AI manufacturers are optimizing the key performance indicators and review it in real time. For 
example; tailoring of a model using virtual programs help  to better predict, identify, and prevent material 
and staffing bottlenecks and optimize energy consump tion. More importantly, it alerts the engineers 
before problems arise and recommend solutions. AI enabled manufacturing not only efficiently assembly 
line practices but also cut costs, reduce waste, and speed time to ma rket (O'Reilly et al 2019). Using 
machine learning algorithms, collaborative robots, and self-driving vehicles have been proved to improve 
warehouse costs and reduce inventory levels as well. Th e best example is when General Electrics turned 
to Kaggle, the platform for predictive modeling and an alytics competitions, and invited data scientists to 
design new routing and machine learning algorithms for flight planning that optimized fuel consumption 
by looking at variables such as weather patterns, wind, and airspace restraints. The winning routing 
algorithm showed a 12% improvement in efficiency over actual flight data (Henriques et al 2018). 
The key feature of AI enabled manufacturing is co llaborative agility, which is the ability to adapt 
almost instantly to changes in demand and the evol ution of regulation, input prices, technologies, and 
other parts of the industry landscape. Now smart Robots are working with humans collaboratively for 
mass production of products which is essential fo r customer-centric products. AI has helped 
manufacturing plants around the globe in supply chai ns, and value chains which are more interconnected 
and collaborative (Klumpp 2018). AI is also not far be hind in agriculture. The concept of “e-plants in a 
box” is a reality which is great for small-scale, low-ca pital-expenditure, mobile plants that can produce a 
limited range of products at a competitive cost. Huxl ey combines machine learning, computer vision, and 
an augmented reality interface to essentially allow an yone to be a master farmer. More importantly, these 
e-plants can be transported to markets where demand is temporarily strong and in remote markets where 
production must be the local and low cost (Bughin et al, 2017).  
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The technological advancement in mobile computing, artificial neural networks, robotics, storage of 
huge data on the internet, cloud-based machine lear ning, and information processing algorithms, etc. has 
propelled the use of AI in various business sectors. Many businesses are using AI in major parts of their 
value chain as AI delivers significant competitive adva ntages. Most importantly, AI technologies have 
helped them eliminating many levels of manual activities including promotions, assortments, and supply 
chain. The e-commerce business using AI to predict the trends, optimize warehousing and logistics set 
prices, and personalize promotions etc. Some even go one step ahead like anticipating orders and shipping 
goods without even waiting for purchase confirmation. Similarly, Smart Manufacturing is now a reality. However, there are many changes are needed to fully get the benefit of AI, more  importantly, the changes 
will compel many companies (retail and manufacture ri ng) to adopt new strategies i.e. plant designs, 
reshape their manufacturing footprints, and devise ne w supply chain models. Also, companies need to 
change the way they do business, as there will be a transition from human operators to AI enabled 
machines and robots. It is good to note that the trend in global industrial operation driven by AI is exponentially increasing, which suggests AI has either already or becoming a priority for many corporations around the world. 

==== Page 9 ====
 
 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 51 ENDNOTES 
 
1. Shaky the Robot. https://www.sri.com/work/timeline-innovation/timeline.php?timeline=computing- 
digital#!&innovation=shakey-the-robot. 
2. Artificial intelligence in industry: intelligent production. 
https://new.siemens.com/global/en/company/ stories/industry/ai-in-industries.html 
3. New specialized AI chips may revolutionize the $1.6-plus trillion market cap semiconductor industry. What 
are the implications? https://latest.13d.com/speciali zed-ai-chips-revolutionize-semiconductor- industry-
tech-6b825d292282 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Al-Zahrani, A., & Marghalani, A. (2018, April 25 ). How Artificial Intellig ent Transform Business. 
Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=32262 64 or http://dx.doi.org/ 10.2139/ssrn.3226264 
Bughin, J., Hzan, E., Ramaswamy, S., Chui, M., et al. (2017, June). Artificial intelligence: The next  
digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute. 
Burgess, A. (2018). AI in Action. In: The Executive Guide to Artificial Intelligence. Palgrave Macmillan, 
Cham. 
Burgess, J., Mitchell P., Highfield T. Automating th e digital everyday: an introduction. November 14, 
2017. 
Dale M. (2018). Automating grocery shopping. Imaging and Machine Vision Europe , 85, 16+. 
Davenport, T.H. (2018). The AI Advantage: How to Put the Artificial Intelligence Revolution to 
Work. 
De Jesus, A. (2019). AI for Pricing – Comparing 5 Current Applications . Retrieved from 
https://emerj.com/ai-sector-overviews/ai-for-p ricing-comparing-5-current-applications/2019 
Deb, S.K., Jain, R., & Deb, V. (2018). Artificial Intelligence ―Creating Automated Insights for Customer 
Relationship Management . 8th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Data Science & 
Engineering (Confluence). 
Druehl, C., Carrillo, J., & Hsuan, J. (2018). Innovation and Supply Chain Management Technological 
Innovations: Impacts on Supply Chains . Springer. 
Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R.A., Ko, J., Swetter, S.M., et al. (2017, February 2). Dermatologist-level 
classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature , 542(7639), 115-118. 
Fildes, R.A., Ma, S., & Kolassa, S. (2018, October 25 ) Retail forecasting: research and practice. Working 
Paper. Lancaster , 15, 10. 
Foo, K.L., & Virzi, A.M. (2018, July 19). Marke ting Data and Analytics Survey 2018: Messy Data and 
Mismatched Resources Undermine Marketing Teams. Gartner research. 
Gaggioli, A. (2018). Virtual Personal Assistants : An Emerging Trend in Artificial Intelligence. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 21(12).  
Hall, D.W., & Pesenti, J. (2017). Growing the Artificial Intelligence Industry in the UK . Henriques, R., & 
Feiteira I. (2018). Predictive Modelling: F light Delays and Associated Factors, 
Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport. Procedia Computer Science, 138, 638-645. 
Jaidka, K., Goyal, T., & Chhaya, N. (2018). Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Web Science , 
177-184. 
Kar, U.K., & Dash, R. (2018). The Future of Health  and Healthcare in a World of Artificial Intelligence. 
Archives in Biomedical Engineering & Biotechnology . 
Khorram, M., Faria, P., Abrishambaf, O., & Vale , Z. (2019). Demand Response Implementation in an 
Optimization Based SCADA Model Under  Real-Time Pricing Schemes.  In: Rodríguez S.  et 
al. (eds) Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Special Sessions, 15th  
International Conference . DCAI 2018. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol 
801. Springer, Cham. 

==== Page 10 ====
52 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 Kietzmann, J., Paschen, J., & Treen, E. (2018, September 1). Artificial Intelligence in Advertising: How 
Marketers Can Leverage Artificial Intelligence Along the Consumer Journey .10.2501/JAR-2018- 
035. 
Klumpp, M. (2018). Automation and artificial intelligen ce in business logistics systems: human reactions 
and collaboration requirements. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 
21(3). 
Kraus, J., Lališ, A., Plos, V., Vittek, P., & Stoji ć S. (2018). Utilizing Ontologies and Structural 
Conceptual Models for Safety Data Management in Aviation Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
Organizations. Transportation Research Procedia, 35, 35-43. 
Kumar, K.S., Tamilselvan, S., & Sha B. (2018, Ma rch). Artificial Intelligence Powered Banking Chatbot. 
International Journal of Engineering Science and Computing . 
Kusiak, A. (2018). Smart manufacturing, Volume 56. International Journal of Production Research , 508- 
517. 
Martin, C., & Leurent, H. (2017). Technology and Innovation for the Future of Production: Accelerating 
Value Creation . WEF. 
Mathur, P. (2019). Key Technological Advancements in Retail.  In: Machine Learning Applications Using 
Python . Apress, Berkeley, CA. 
McCarthy, J., Minsky, M.L., Rochester, N., & Shannon, C.E. (2006). A Proposal for the Dartmouth 
Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence. AI Magazine , 27(4). 
Meng, F.J., Xu, J., Zhang, X., Yang, L., et. al. (2018). IEEE Symposium on Service-Oriented System 
Engineering (SOSE). 
Metz, R. (2018). Amazon’s cashier-less Seattle grocery store is opening to the public. MIT tech review . 
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., et. al. (2015, February 26). Human level control 
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540), 529-33. 
Mortimer, G., & Milford, M. (2018, August 31) When AI meets your shopping experience it knows what 
you buy – and what you ought to buy. The Conversation . 
O'Reilly, C., & Binns, A.J.M. (2019). The Three Stages of Disruptive Innovation: Idea Generation, 
Incubation, and Scaling. California Management Review . 
Paolanti, M., Liciotti, D., Pietrini, R. et al. (2018). J Intell Robot Syst , 91, 165. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-017-0674-7 
Patel, P., Ali, M.I., & Sheth, A. (2018). IEEE Intelligent Systems, From Raw Data to Smart 
Manufacturing: AI and Semantic Web of Things for Industry 4.0 . 
Perez, D., Samothrakis, S., & Lucas, S. (2014). K nowledge-based fast evolutionary MCTS for general 
video game playing. IEEE Conference , 978-1-4799-3547-5. 
Seligman, J. (2018). Artificial intelligence and machine learning and marketing management . 
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C.J., Guez, A., et . al. (2016, January 28). Mastering the game of Go 
with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529(7587), 484-9. 
Solomonoff, R.J. (1985). The Time Scale of Artificial Intelligence: Reflections on Social Effects. Human 
Systems Management , 5(2), 149–153. 
Sterne, J. (2018). From programming to sta tistics to machine learning for marketing. Applied Marketing 
Analytics , 3(4), 298-305(8). 
Sutton, M. S., & Griffiths, M. (2018). Using Date Specific Searches on Google Books to Disconfirm Prior 
Origination Knowledge Claims for Par ticular Terms, Words, and Names. Soc. Sci. , 7(4), 66. 
Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing Machiner y and Intelligence. Mind, 59(236), 433–460. 
Webster, C., & Ivanov, S.H. (2019, February 17) Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, and the Evolving 
Nature of Work. In George, B., & Paul, J. (Eds.). Business Transformation in Data Driven 
Societies , Palgrave-MacMillan (Forthcoming). Retrieved from SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336104 
Wen, J., He, L., Zhu, F., et. (2018). al Swar m Robotics Control and Communications: Imminent 
Challenges for Next Generation Smart Logistics. IEEE Communications Magazine , 56(7). 

==== Page 11 ====
 
 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 53 Wodecki, A. (2018). Influence of Artificial Intelligence on Activities and Competitiveness of an 
Organization. Artificial Intelligence in Value Creation, 133-246. 
Yao, W. (2017). Analysis on the Application of the Artificial Intelligence Neural Network on the New 
Energy Micro Grid . Proceedings of the 2017 4th International Conference on Machinery, 
Materials and Computer (MACMC). 
Zhang, G., Hu, M.Y., Patuwo, B.E., & Indro, D.C.  (1999, July 1). Artificial neural networks in 
bankruptcy prediction: General framewo rk and cross-validation analysis. European Journal of 
Operational Research , 116(1), 16-32. 

