==== Page 1 ====
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence  and Big D ata in Entrepreneurship: A New Era Has Begun  
 
 
Martin Obschonka *  
Australian Centre for Entrepreneurship Research, QUT, Australia  
 
David B. Audretsch  
Indiana University, USA  
 
 
April 19, 2019  
 
Doi: 10.1007/s11187 -019-00202 -4 
 
 
 
* Corresponding author: Martin Obschonka, martin.obschonka@qut.edu.au  
 

==== Page 2 ====
2 
 
Abstract  
While the disruptive potential of artificial intelligence ( AI) and Big Data has been receiving 
growing  attention  and concern  in a variety of research and application fields over the last few 
years, it has not receive d much scrutiny in contemporary entrepreneurship research so far. Here 
we present  some reflections and a collection  of papers on the role of AI and Big Data for this 
emerging area in the study and application of entrepreneurship research. While being mindful of 
the potentially overwhelming nature of the rapid progress in machine intelligence and other Big 
Data technologies for co ntemporary structures in entrepreneurship research , we put an emphasis 
on the reciprocity  of the co -evolving fields of e ntrepreneurship research  and practice . How can 
AI and Big Data contribute to a productive transformation of the research field and the real-world 
phenomena (e.g., “smart entrepreneurship ”)? We also discuss , however,  ethical issues as well as 
challenges around a potential contradict ion between entrepreneurial uncertainty and rule -driven 
AI rationality. The editorial gives researchers and practitioners orientation and showcases avenues 
and examples for concrete research in this field . At the same time, however, it is not unlikely that 
we will encounter unforeseeable and currently inexplicable developments in the field soon . We 
call on entre preneurship scholars, educators, and practi tioners to proactively prepare for future 
scenarios.  
 
Keywords:  
Entrepreneurship; Artificial Intelligence; AI; Big Data; Machine Learning; Smart 
Entrepreneurship  
 
JEL classification: L26, M13, B41  

==== Page 3 ====
3 
 
1 Introduction   
 
This essay and editorial for the S pecial Issue on artificial intelligence (AI), Big Data, and 
entrepreneurship is not an attempt to provide a  complete  overview and prospect of the scope and 
potentially disruptive nature of AI and  Big Data  for entrepreneurship research and practice. There 
is of course the “danger” that what we write  and hypothesize here is incomplete or becomes 
obsolete very soon for various reasons. For example, a ny predictions and explications of future 
scenarios might quickly become outdated due to the rapid  progress  in the field s of AI and Big Data  
and the ir potentially far-reaching , yet hard to precisely predict , future implications  for the real 
world  (Grace  et al.  2018).  But there is of course also ongoing change with respect to the nature  of 
entrepreneurship as a real -world phenomenon  influence d by changing and evolving  external 
enablers and institutions (Davidsson 2016; Davidsson  et al.  2018 ; Eesley  et al.  2016) , and new 
generations of entrepreneurs who grew up i n the digital era , the “digital natives”  (OECD 2017 ).  
Nevertheless, since there is growing attention  around AI and Big Data in an increasing  
number of research  and application fields, i ncluding industry , innovation,  and business 
management , but comparably little attention wi th regard to  entrepreneurship , we would like to 
offer some reflections , thereby being well aware of the challenging and uncertain nature of this 
endeavor , particularly with respect to long -term predictions  within such dynamic fields. We write 
this piece from the perspective of entrepreneurship research , and we will try to focus on the near 
future , for example with respect to research priorities, infrastructure changes, and collaborative 
efforts in the coming generation of entrepreneurship research. Or as Alan Turing, one of the fathers 
of AI, once famously put it : “We can only see a short distance ahead, but we can see plenty there 
that needs to be done”  (Turing 1950 : 460).  

==== Page 4 ====
4 
 
AI and Big Data are growing in importance in broader research fields that are often seen 
as foundational for entrepreneurship research, such as economics ( Acemoglu and Restrepo 2 018; 
Brynjolfsson  et al.  2017; Einav and Levin 2014), economic policy (Agrawal  et al.  2019), 
innovation (Aghion  et al.  2017), management (George  et al.  2014 ; Ransbotham  et al.  2017 ), and 
psychology (Kosinski et al. 2016).  Likewise, this data revolution is also disrupting application 
fields associated with entrepreneurship, including industry , business management , and innovation 
(Cockburn  et al.  2018) . These massive transformations are  also coined “the second machine age ”, 
in contrast to  “the first machine a ge”—the Industrial Revolution 200 years ago  (Brynjolfsson and 
McAfee 2014) . So, this “second machine age” is  driven  not by coal  and steam  but by data and AI. 
Likewise, AI  expert Andrew Ng describes AI as some kind of  “new electricity” , transforming 
industry and business in a fundamental way like electricity did 100 years ago  (Burgess  2018) . AI 
is therefore also affecting the concrete role and position of people  in this new AI -infused world of 
work in many ways ( Acemoglu and Restrepo 201 8; Frank et al. 2019).  
How are AI and Big Data  defined ? While there are different and evolving definitions  
available , AI can be broadly defined as intelligence demonstrated by machines —or, in terms of an 
academic field (typically seen as a subdiscipline  of computer science ), the examination of how 
digital computers and algorithms perform tasks and solve complex problems  that would normally 
require (or exceed) human intelligence , reasoning , and prediction power  needed to adapt to 
changing circumstances. This modern definition has been evolving since the first definition of AI 
presented by computer scientist John McCarthy more than 60 years ago as “the science and 
engineering of making intelligent machines” (see Andersen 2002).  Within the AI terminology, a n 
often -used categorization is that machine learning is a subset of AI, and deep learning (e.g., deep 
neural networks) a subset of machine learning. For a broad , general  overview of AI and its 

==== Page 5 ====
5 
 
techniques an often -recommended  work is the textbook by Russell  and Norvig (2016) . Other 
overview  work s that focus particularly on machine learning are Bishop (2006) and Witten  et al.  
(2016).  
Big Data , in turn,  which as an academic  term is typically more loosely defined than AI , 
can mean a large volume of structured, semi -structure d, or unstructured data , and a way to 
collect /produce , process, and analyze these dataset s using non -traditional methods (e.g., AI 
methods). Such data are the fuel, “the new oil” (Agrawal  et al.  2018) for AI and intelligent 
machines. Hence, Big Data and AI are often intertwined  and go hand in hand  as drivers of the 
current digital  transformation  in society  (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014; Zomaya and Sakr 2017) . 
However, it is also notable that AI can also rely on , and work with,  smaller existin g datasets  (e.g., 
neural networks based on smaller amounts of existing data).   
At first glance, the field of entrepreneurship research seems not well -prepared and probably 
overwhelmed by the rapid changes and progress in the field of AI and Big Data . After  all, 
entrepreneurship is not really a subfield of computer science and vice versa. But, interestingly  
enough , when thinking about the topic of AI /Big Data  in the context of entrepreneurship it leads 
us to essential questions such a s rationality  and uncertainty , intelligence and logic, discover y and 
ideation, strategy, and experienced -based pattern recognition —topics that have been  of central 
concern for entrepreneurship researchers for many years.  Moreover, one should probably go a step 
further by, s omewhat radically, declaring that the  era of AI and Big Data in entrepreneurship has 
clearly and inevitably begun , and t his is true for both entrepreneurship research  and practice . 
Intelligent machines and algorithms will not only inspire and empower a new generation of 
research in this field, they will also shape  the actual real -world phenomenon of entrepreneurship, 
be it  for example  the development/recognition of opportunities and business ideas, “smart” 

==== Page 6 ====
6 
 
entrepreneurial strategies, or the nex us and reciprocal interaction  between entrepreneurial people 
and machine intelligence. We do not only assume that AI and Big Data will disrupt both 
entrepreneurship research and practice, it might  also disrupt the way research and practice interact 
with ea ch other . For example , it might change the way how research insights will be applied in the 
real world , and how entrepreneurial activity as a real -world phenomenon will inform future 
research . Finally, it might also help reducing the distance  between entre preneurship research and 
practice (e.g., the research field might apply knowledge and techniques from the practice field 
more quickly and directly , and vice versa ).   
We acknowledge though that these are somewhat bold predictions and that only the future 
can tell us whether we will see more change than stability  at some point . In particular, it will be 
interesting  to observe whether AI and Big Data will lead to a transformation of entrepreneurship 
research and practice in terms of more or less incre mental or radical innovations (e.g., by “carrying 
out new combinations” of elements previously unconnected ; Schumpeter 1934 : 66) or whether it 
will indeed drive a complete paradigm shift and an “explosion of knowledge ” that change the rule 
of the game (Kuh n 1970).  
Notwithstanding these essential questions, in the following we would like to “risk”  some 
concrete suggestions  and reflections for both entrepreneurship research  and practice , thereby 
considering the academic challenge of reflecting on entrepreneurship in terms of a research domain 
and a real -world phenomenon which are interlinked and co-evolving (Davidsson 2016 ).  
Finally, we would like to offer a preliminary conclusion  and out look, before we introduce 
the S pecial Issue papers  as concrete examples of already existing research projects in this field .  
 
2 Research p riorities  

==== Page 7 ====
7 
 
 
The consideration of AI and Big Data in entrepreneurship research is of course not a new 
phenomenon. However, the field could see a new level  of AI -infused research projects . What are 
emerging/potential links between AI/Big Data and the diverse , interdisciplin ary field of 
entrepreneurship research ( Audretsch 2012; Shane 2012)? Arguably, the data revolution might 
bring unprecedented opportunities for entrepreneurship research and practice, but also new 
challenges and open questions. The central opportunity -aspec t could be the promise of a new 
generation of insights into entrepreneurial phenomena revealed by means of new research 
methods, datasets, and study designs. The challenges and open questions, in turn, could range from 
ethical aspects and issues of privacy  protection ( D. Boyd and Crawford 2012), new statistical 
thinking and computational methods (Fan et al.  2014), to an adaptation and transformation of the 
whole research process (e.g., with respect to an open research culture that would not only ensure 
ethical standards but also transparency and reproduction of entrepreneurship research ; Nosek et al. 
2015). Therefore, b oth more conceptual and empirical work on AI, Big Data, and entrepreneurship 
is need ed in future research.   
 
Conceptual work  could addres s the following and other issues:  
 
1) Potential for productive vs. destructive entrepreneurship (Baumol 1990).  
2) In what way does entrepreneurship of the future require the virtue of intelligence 
(Sternberg 2004) and the virtue of prediction power  (Agrawal  et al.  2018) ? 
3) Ways how AI/Big Data can support expert performance in the context of 
entrepreneurship (e.g., via supporting deliberate practice ; Ericsson  et al.  2018).  

==== Page 8 ====
8 
 
4) A practical introduction into  relevant methods , technologies,  and necessary hardware for 
conducting entrepreneurship studies  utilizing  Big Data and AI  (e.g., computerized 
methods and specific software, smartphone methods, data mining, machine learning ; 
Gosling and Mason 2015; Kosinski  et al.  2016;  Zomaya and Sakr 2017).   
5) Issues of prediction vs. explanation ; inductive, data -driven approaches vs. deduction, 
theory -driven approaches; and bigness vs. representativeness ( Mahmoodi  et al.  2017).  
6) Potential dangers and ethical dilemmas associated with Big Data and A I meth ods in 
entrepreneurship research (e.g., with respect to data protection and privacy issues, 
generalizability of results, and the intrusiveness of data collection methods ; D. Boyd and 
Crawford 2012 ).   
7) Computerized language analysis (e.g., to identify entrepreneurial personality 
characteristics or relevant emotional states ; R. L. Boyd and Pennebaker 2017; Eichstaedt 
et al. 2015).  
8) How to  use digital footprints from  social network s and other sources (e.g., Twitter, 
Facebook, Instagram ; Kosinski  et al.  2013 ). 
9) A reflection on Big Data and AI from a perspective of (non -)rationality, uncertainty , and 
risk (Kahneman 2002)  and how this relates to entrepreneurship . 
10) How can Big Da ta and AI methods improve entrepreneurship education and training?  
11) Educating and training entrepreneurship researchers/budding entrepreneurs in Big Data 
and AI methods.  
 
Empirical work , in turn, could address the following and other issues:  
 

==== Page 9 ====
9 
 
1) New Big Data -based metrics of entrepreneurial activity and quality ( Guzman and Stern 
2016).  
2) Empirical research that can u nlock the full potential of social media and other digital 
footprints for entrepreneurship research  (Kosinski  et al. 2013) . 
3) Identifying and predicting entrepreneurial characteristics and performance outcomes of 
people, teams, and organizations ( Chen  et al.  2012).  
4) Formal and informal institutions of entrepreneurial regions (Glaeser  et al.  2016; 
Obschonka 2017).  
5) Entrepreneurship  policy (Audretsch  et al.  2007).  
6) Entrepreneurial education  and training  (Fayolle 2007) . 
7) Networks (Wang  et al.  2017).  
8) Entrepreneurial finance (e.g., crowdfunding, analyses of investors and investment , and 
selection processes of high -potential startup projects ; Block  et al.  2018).  
9) Simulation studies ( Shim & Kim, 2018).  
10) Analyses of populations that are underrepresented  in existing entrepreneurship research 
(e.g., populations from outside of Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic 
countries (WEIRD) or superstar entrepreneurs or entrepreneurial personalities in political 
leadership ; Obschon ka et al.  2017; Obschonka and Fisch 2017).  
11) Business model processes relevant for entrepreneurial organizations and growth (Chen  et 
al. 2017; Garbuio and Lin 2019; Hartmann et al. 2016).  
12) Stress processes , well -being, health,  and social behavior of entrepreneurial people and 
teams (e.g ., using smartphone methods ; Harari  et al.  2017 ; Uy et al.  2010 ). 

==== Page 10 ====
10 
 
13) The study of biological factors and process es in entrepreneurship (e.g., genetics ; 
Nicolaou  et al.  2008).  
14) Ecological sustainable entrepreneurship and the ecological/energy costs of AI and Big 
Data in entrepreneurial practice (Zeng 2017).  
15) Potential future long -term effects on society and people of an AI -driven entrepreneurial 
economy (e.g., similar to research studying the long -term effects of the Industrial 
Revolution and today’s cultural and psychological landscapes ; Obschonka et al. 2018 ). 
 
3 Potential impact  of AI and Big Data on entrepreneurship as a real-world  phenomenon  
 
AI and Big Data might not only enrich  and transform future entrepreneurship research, 
they might also transform at least some aspects of the actual real -world phenomena that 
entrepreneurship researchers usually study when they try to understand determinants and effects 
of the entreprene urial proces s. Similar historical trends were observed in the recent past, such as 
the rise of e -commerce or new entrepreneurial finance “players” such as crowdfunding , which  also 
influenced  the agenda of entrepreneurship research (Block  et al.  2018; Sheph erd et al.  2019). So 
in other words, AI and Big Data might not only influence  the methods but also the target that is 
studied with these methods  in entrepreneurship research . As such, the research domain and the 
real-world phenomenon might co -evolve, or ev en co -transform, towards an AI -infused 
conglomerate of research and practice. This could mean that AI might further close the gap 
between entrepreneurship research and practice, with knowledge spillover s from research to 
practice and vice versa (or even blurring boundaries between research and practice).  

==== Page 11 ====
11 
 
How can AI and Big Data change the way entrepreneurship “happens”  (e.g., how startups 
and intrapreneurial projects  fail or succeed )? What implications are associated with these 
developments?  
 
3.1 Externa l enablers  
 
First, s uch technological change can of course function as an external enabler  for new 
entrepreneurial activity (Davidsson  et al. 2018). It might actually be a prime example of radical 
external changes that empower and “enable” new economic activity that introduces  new products 
and services via entrepreneurial means  (for example AI startups like AIBrain, Banjo, or 
Deep Mind), particularly when large incumbent firms struggle to fully embrace new te chnologies 
(Christensen 1997).  This can also involve social entrepreneurship projects like , for example , 
OpenAI  (cofounded by Elon Musk and not only motivated by the enabling power of AI but also 
by the associated, potentially existential risks  for humanit y).  
On the other hand, startups  in this field, particularly if they are faced with general resources 
constrain ts (including , for example , access to Big Data  and powerful cloud computing ), might also 
be confronted , challenged , and , to some degree , overwhelmed  by the sheer pace of technological 
progress  that transforms society  and its institutions , and by the technological and knowhow 
requirements  that need to be continuously updated to be at the forefront of this development . From 
this perspective,  larger firms and organizations using AI and Big Data for intrapreneurial strategies 
could often  enjoy a certain incumbent advantage over startups in that they might have better 
“economic muscles ” and access to infrastructure and knowhow capital to participate in, benefit 

==== Page 12 ====
12 
 
from, and even drive the ongoing data revolution  (examples are Amazon Web Services (AWS)  or 
Google.ai ).  
 
3.2 AI and Big Data plus humans  
 
 Second, whereas external enablers refer to the more o r less objective  external opportunity 
structure, AI and Big Data might also shape the way entrepreneurial individuals and teams  
participate in the entrepreneurial process . This leads us of course to the somewhat provocative 
question of whether AI and Big D ata might be able to  replace entrepreneurial people someday, or 
whether entrepreneurs and the new technologies will work hand in hand  and form some sort of 
symbiosis.  
 The extreme scenario, where  machines replace entrepreneur s as the central agent in the 
entrepreneurial process , would indeed lead to a complete paradigm shift . Arguably, t his seems like 
an unlikely  utopia though (at least for the near future ; Brynjolfsson and Mcafee 2017) , but similar 
discussion s are currently held with respect to a large variety of jobs and human performance 
domains (Grace  et al.  2018).  If this utopia nevertheless come s to reality  one day , it will disrupt the 
individual –entrepreneurship nexus ( Shane 2003)  and might  basically erase human agency  and 
subjectivity  from the entrepreneurship equation, and thus probably also related research and 
practice fields such as the psychology of entrepreneurship  or entrepreneurship education and 
training for humans . Moreover, maybe in the future one cannot avo id the fundamental question of 
why mankind would leave something as essential as entrepreneurship  (e.g., discovering and 
analyzing opportunities, starting and growing an innovative business)  to human agency, human 
bias, and human intelligence, and not (als o) to powerful AI  that might be able to outperform 

==== Page 13 ====
13 
 
humans . Similar question s are being already (indirectly) asked around the topics of invention s, 
innovation,  and scientific progress in general ( Aghion  et al.  2017; Cockburn  et al. 2018 ; Slezak 
1989 ). For example, recently Springer Nature published its first machine -generate scientific book 
(Writer, 2019). Just like  AI has already started to massively shift the way in which  research and 
practice is done  in various fields such as astrophysics, genetics, and health , it could also shift the 
way entrepreneurship is carried out . However, it seems very unlikely  today that AI will completely 
replace humans as entrepreneurial agents  in the near future . 
Interestingly, researchers  estimate  that jobs like business management (which m ight also 
involve entrepreneurship ) are probably confronted with a relatively  small  likelihood to be replaced 
by machines in the near future because “ generalist occupations requiring knowledge of human 
heuristics,  and specialist occupations involving the development of novel ideas and artifacts, are 
the least susceptible to computerization” (Frey and Osborne 2017 : 266). Indeed, “prototypical ” 
entrepreneurship is often described as some sort of generalist work ( Lazear 2004; Stuetzer  et al.  
2013)  that involve s human heuristics ( Busenitz and Barney 1997) , but it can of course also be 
linked to the more specialized development of novel ideas and artifacts (e.g., in the processes of 
ideation, invention, and innovatio n; Drucker 1985; Schumpeter 1934) .  
In the less extreme scenario, and for the near future the obviously more likely case, AI and 
Big Data do not replace but support  entrepreneurs in perform ing entrepreneurial tasks  and reaching 
their individual and organizational goals . So it would be less a matter of humans against  machines 
than humans plus machines. This symbiotic , collaborative  view seems to be evolving into the 
mainstream practice perspective in the contemporary  business and management literature  (Jarrahi 
2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2018 ) and it should  be a promising avenue for entrepreneurship as 
well.  

==== Page 14 ====
14 
 
Indeed, AI and Big Data have  been supporting business activities and managers (e.g., 
finance, marketing, distribution, business planning, information systems, production, and 
operations) for a long time  (Rajab and Sharma 2018) , but the way and scope  in which  machines 
and humans can interact and collaborate in this field might be new . Wilson and Daugherty (2018) , 
for example,  describe five elements of business process improvement where AI and humans can 
collaborate: flexibility, speed , scale, decision -making, and personalization. The competitive  
advantage of mastering the new generation of AI and Big Data led Brynjolfsson and Mcafee (2017) 
to conclude that “over the next decade, AI won’t replace managers, but managers who use AI will 
replace those who don’t .” Something similar could app ly to entrepreneurs as well  (e.g., “smart 
entrepreneurship”) , particularly if they are operating in AI -relevant business fields  or with 
ambitions where AI can help them to scale.  
However, we see at least t hree fundamental questions associated with such a functional  
nexus between AI and entrepreneurship , and we can only touch the surface of these questions here . 
The first question concerns the very notion of intelligence  itself. If AI is indeed a manifestation of 
intelligence where the latter is defined in a sense of human  intelligence (Turing 1950), we can ask 
whether entrepreneurship really benefits from extremely high levels of  human intelligence . 
Interesting ly, so far research has not show n a clear link between (extremely high) intelligence and 
entrepren eurship. Intelligence researcher Robert J. Sternberg hypothesized that “successful 
entrepreneurship requires a blend of analytical, creative, and practical aspects of intelligence ” 
(Sternberg 2004 : 186).  Hence, successful entrepreneurship might not be “a story about intelligence 
in the traditional sense” (e.g., general human intelligence ; Spearman 1904)  but rather about certain 
facets of intelligence that help entrepreneurs in their analytic, creative, and practical capacities. 
Hence, machine intelligence aiming to support entrepreneurship could focus on these domains, but 

==== Page 15 ====
15 
 
we also have to stress that we clearly need more research on the role of both human and machine 
intelligence in entrepreneurship (and its changing nature) to come to safer conclusions. This could 
also include aspects of social and emotional intelligence (e.g., Bainbridge et al. 1994).  However , 
others argue that it might be less intelligence and instead prediction that is the real promise of AI 
for business ( Agrawal  et al.  2018).  
The second  fundamental question  concerns uncertainty . Entrepreneurship , as least in its 
classic sense,  is often discussed as a context of uncertainty ( McMullen and Shepherd 2006; Parker 
2009) and hence as decision -making  under the condition of uncertainty. Per this definition, and in 
contrast to the condition of risk  for example , the concept of uncertainty implies that there are no 
reliable and complete preexisting data available that would help give orientation with respect to 
entrepreneurial ta sks and causal models that come with  a proven track record of success 
(Sarasvathy 2001).  If this is true though, and if AI basically relies on existing data to learn patterns 
and to make predictions, we can ask whether AI will ever overcome these classic unce rtainty 
challenges in entrepreneurship. Assuming a unique role of intuition , imagination, creativity,  
heuristics, and even cognitive bias in entrepreneurship, we can ask whether the irrational and rule -
breaking nature  many entrepreneurs show ( Baron 1998 ; Obschonka  et al.  2013 ) can indeed be 
imitated, “enhanced ,” or replaced by intelligen t machine s that might rely more  or less  on rules, 
rational logics , and formalized thinking.  It seems that AI is better suited to create a “synthetic 
homo economics” ( Parkes and Wellman 2015) than a rule -breaking, intuitive, and creative 
entrepreneur.  It might contribute to what science historian Lorraine Daston describes as new 
rationalization driven by  algorithms ( that replaces self-critical judgments of reason , decision -
making, and strategic planning ; e.g., Erickson  et al.  2013).  On the other hand, AI under conditions 
of uncertainty is a vibrant research field (e.g., Ghahramani 2015; Tversky and Kahnemann 1974; 

==== Page 16 ====
16 
 
for an overview see also see Russell and Norvig 2016) and we mig ht see major developments in 
this particular  field in the near future as well, including new implications for entrepreneurship as 
effective decision -making under the condition of uncertainty  (as it is discussed in game theory and 
with relation to similar strategy fields like public policy and warfare ; Cummings 2017; Von 
Neumann and Morgenstern 1944).  
These developments could also concern concrete essential entrepreneurial tasks in the very 
early stage of the entrepreneurial process, namely ideation and opportunity discovery/co -creation. 
Can AI help discover and co -creat e opportunities for new economic activity? Can it find its own 
data and make its own experience in the real world to learn how  to be successful in this field? 
Again, this seems more like an unreal utopia at this point (e.g., given the sheer complexity of 
information and dynamics at various levels that might be involved ; and also in view of the 
fundamental  ongoing debate and disag reement in entrepreneurship research about what 
opportunities actually are ; Alvarez  et al.  2017; Davidsson 2017; Foss and Klein 201 7; Ramoglou 
and Tsang 2016) . Nevertheless, also with respect to aspects  of ideation and autonomous learning , 
the field of AI is making incredible scientific progress. For example, recently an AI program  that 
trained itself via reinforcement learning, without any human input and guidance , outperformed 
human experts and other AI programs trained by human experts in highly compl ex tasks (the board 
game  Go and chess ) (Silver et al. 2017; Singh  et al.  2017).  Other AI programs are obviously able 
to help creating  pieces of “real” art ( Cohen  2018) , and economists stress the great potential of AI 
for discovery  and inventions  (Aghion  et al.  2017; Cockburn  et al.  2018).   
The third fundamental question concerns potential limits and risk s associated with AI and 
Big Data. It will be essential for the future  not only  to deal with ethical challenges and to enable 
and regulate access to data  and technological infrastructure  (e.g., for budding entrepreneurs but 

==== Page 17 ====
17 
 
also entrepreneurship researchers) , but also to maintain a critical perspective. For example , 
researchers raise the issue that AI might not always lead to the most  reliable and useful  solutions 
(e.g., Clever Hans effect ; Lapuschkin et al. 2019)  and it is important to ensure transparency and 
critical evaluation of AI performance . For example, in health research , scholars warn that “one of 
the dangers of ready accessibility of health care data and computational tools for data analysis is 
that the process of data mining can become uncoupled from the scientific process of clinical 
interpretation, understanding the p rovenance of the data, and external validation” (Belgrave et al. 
2017). Indeed, there seems to be general danger of a “blind trust” in algorithms (Logg  et al.  2019). 
So, if entrepreneurs rely on, but do not question and critically evaluate, AI results that  might not 
actually deliver the best and smartest solution , it could lead to biased decisions  and negative 
consequences or at least unused potential for the individual business .  
 
 
3.2 Entrepreneurship education and training  
 
 Third  and finally , besides t heir role as objective external enablers and as support for 
entrepreneurial individuals and teams, AI and Big Data might also enrich  the practice field of 
entrepreneurship education and training  in a new way . In an extreme case, where algorithms and 
intelligen t machine s overtake (some) entrepreneurial tasks from humans, this could mean , 
somewhat ironically,  that these algorithms and machines themselves “receive” some sort of 
entrepreneurship education and training (e.g., in the form of real -world data  that help them to 
learn).  On the other hand, educators might want to make use of AI and Big Data to enhance their 
educational practices in the classroom and in other settings (McArthur  et al.  2005). This could of 
course also mean actually  teach ing entrepr eneurship -relevant AI/Big Data techniques  to better 

==== Page 18 ====
18 
 
prepare future entrepreneurs for this new era  (e.g., to critically evaluate and interpret  AI results) . 
This could involve technological  and knowhow aspects, but also ethical, social, and ecological 
issues . If AI and Big Data will indeed change the way entrepreneurs think and behave, the fields 
of education and training should be at the forefront of these developments. This could also involve 
other structures in society that are facilitating an entrepreneur ial culture ( Audretsch 2007).   
 
 
4 A preliminary c onclusion  and outlook  
 
We hope that , despite all the challenges,  entrepreneurship researchers will initiate  new, and 
participate in  already ongoing conversations around the potential and concrete applications of AI 
and Big Data.  The editorial of Nature Machine Intelligence , a recently founded major scientific 
journal that is devoted to AI and Big Data but also seeks : “to stimulate collaborations between 
different disciplines ,” concludes : “The pursuit of intelligent machines will continue to inspire in 
many ways, providing us with insights into human intelligence as well as stimulating technological 
and scientific innovation that could lead to future societal transformations. Now is the time to be 
part of the conversation” ( Nature Machine Intelligence  2019 : 1). We believe entrepreneurship 
research can and should be part of that broader movement . This could entail both intensified 
collaborations  with other  disciplines  (e.g., computer science  and i nformation systems ) and revised 
research structures within entrepreneurship research , be it new types of infrastructure (e.g., new 
research centers  and access to the latest and powerful technologies and knowhow)  or of 
communication channels  and social stru cture  (e.g., new types of conferences, workshop s, data 
depositories and sharing possibilities, and maybe even  academic journals ; Landström and Harirchi 
2018).   

==== Page 19 ====
19 
 
Finally, t o stay within the opportunity -focused terminology of entrepreneurship research 
as “the study of sources  of opportunities; the processes  of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation 
of opportunities; and the set of individuals who discover, evaluate, and exploit them” (Shane and 
Venkataraman 2000 : 218), and to stress the optimistic “promise” -factor that Shane and 
Venkataraman (2000) championed, a next concrete step could be the focus on the sources, 
processes, and individuals associated with opportunities around machine -based intelligence for 
new entrepreneurship research and its application . This at least could be one way to achieve an 
entrepreneurial handling of the dawning AI and Big Data -augmented  era that seems to be in front 
of us . 
 
5 The articles in this Special Issue  
 
The central goal of the Special Issue “Rethinking the entrepreneurial (research) process: 
Opportunities and challenges of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence for entrepreneurship research” 
was to provide an interdisciplinary platform for conceptual and em pirical papers addressing either 
opportunities or challenges (or both) of AI and Big Data for the diverse field of entrepreneurship 
research. Here we present seven articles that showcase examples for concrete research in this field . 
The works illustrate th e usefulness of innovative perspective s and methods,  but also the existing 
challenges and open questions that entrepreneurship researchers are facing when applying AI/Big 
Data to their field. All papers underwent a traditional double -blind peer review proc ess.1 
                                                 
1 We are grateful to all external reviewers, listed in the following, who reviewed papers that were submitted to this 
Special Issue project: Thomas H. Allison, Joern Block, Niels Bosma, Ryan Boyd, Dermot Breslin, Per Davidsson, 
Dimo Dimov, Uwe Dullek , Brent Clark, Graciela Corral de Zubielqui, Christian Fisch, Denise Elaine Fletcher, 
Michael Fritsch, Samuel D. Gosling, Sven Heidenreich, Colin Jones, Michal Kosinski, Edward J. Malecki, Alex 
Maritz, Nicos Nicolaou, Mark D. Packard, Luke Pittaway, Stuart  Read, Enrico Santarelli, Dean Shepherd, Rolf 
Sternberg, Michael Stuetzer, Amulya Tata, Diemo Urbig, Frederik von Briel, Johan Wiklund,  and Michael 
Wyrwich . 

==== Page 20 ====
20 
 
First, t he articles by Coad and Srhoj (in press)  and Obschonka et al. (in press)  present 
empirical analyses that utilize AI and other Big Data technique s to retest phenomena and 
mechanisms  that have already been studied with traditional methods in prior entrepreneurship 
research. Coad and Srhoj’s (in press) article  targets the prediction of high -growth  firms. By means 
of a Big Data technique they identify valid predictors from a relatively large set of potential 
candidate predictors. They also stress though that with 10% explanation power , the prediction of 
high-growth firms remains a challenging endeavor despite the novel method they utilized. The 
article by Obschonka et al. (in press) focuses on entrepreneurial r egions and attempts to measure 
and validate regional differences in entrepreneurial personality by utilizing individual -level large 
datasets and AI methods that extract psychological patterns. Specifically, they utilize large datasets 
collected from social  media and AI -based language -analyses of this social media language from 
the various regions. They show that the AI-based measure of regional entrepreneurial personality 
that is solely based on free ly available social media data is a similarly valid predictor and indicator 
of actual entrepreneurial activity in the region to regional personality measures collected from 
traditional self -reports (e.g., from millions of personality tests).  
 Second, the articles by Liebregts et al. (i n press) and Zhang and Van Burg (in press)  
present conceptual papers  that advance our theoretical thinking and knowledge about methods and 
data sources in the context of AI/Big Data and entrepreneurship. Liebregts et al. (in press) focuses 
on entrepreneuri al decision -making and how behavioral and non -behavioral cues can be utilized 
via Big Data and AI. Zhang and Van Burg (in press) in turn address the question of how a subfield 
of AI —genetic algorithms —can be utilized in entrepreneurship when combining a de sign science 
and effectuation perspective.  

==== Page 21 ====
21 
 
Finally, the empirical articles by Kaminski and Hopp (in press), Pr üfer and Pr üfer (in 
press), and von Bloh et al. (in press) use AI/Big Data techniques to examine relatively new research 
question s. Kaminski and Hopp (in press)  analyze crowdfunding campaign dat a (text, speech, and 
videos) using a neural network and language processing. Their novel analyses deliver interesting 
new implications for successful crowdfunding campaigns . The article by Pr üfer and Pr üfer (in 
press)  examines demand dynamics for entrepreneurial skills by analyzing 7.7 million data points 
collect ed from job vacancies. They show which entrepreneurial skills are particularly important 
for which type of profession  and also consider digital  skills . von Bloh et al. (in press) present a 
novel analysis of news coverage of entrepreneurship and regional entrepreneurial activity , thereby 
addressing the potential link between media and entrepreneurship both from a conceptual and 
empirical perspecti ve.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 22 ====
22 
 
References  
Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2018). Artificial intelligence, automation and work (No.  
w24196). National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Aghion, P., Jones, B. F., & Jones, C. I. (2017). Artificial intelligence and economic growth  (No.  
w23928). National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. (2018). Prediction machines: The simple economics of  
artificial intelligence.  Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.  
Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. (2019). Economic policy for artificial int elligence.  
Innovation Policy and the Economy, 19 (1), 139 –159. 
Alvarez, S., Barney, J., McBride, R., & Wuebker, R. (2017). On opportunities: Philosophical and  
empirical implications. Academy of Management Review, 39 , 227 –231. 
Andersen, S. L. (2002). John McCarthy: Father of AI. IEEE Intelligent Systems ,  
doi:10.1109/MIS.2002.1039837.  
Audretsch, D. B. (2007).  The entrepreneurial society . Oxford University Press.  
Audretsch, D.  B. (2012). Entrepreneurship research.  Management Decision , 50, 755 –764. 
Audretsch, D. B., Grilo, I., & Thurik, A. R. (Eds.). (2007).  Handbook of research on  
entrepreneurship policy . Edward Elgar Publishing.  
Bainbridge, W. S., Brent, E. E., Carley, K. M., Heise, D. R., Macy, M. W., Markovsky, B., &  
Skvoretz, J. (1994). Artificial social intelligence. Annual Review of Sociology, 20 ,  
407–436. 
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and when ent repreneurs  
think differently than other people. Journal of Business Venturing, 13 , 275 –294. 
Baumol, W. J. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. Journal of  

==== Page 23 ====
23 
 
Political E conomy , 98, 893 –921. 
Belgrave, D., Henderson, J., Simpson, A., Buchan, I., Bishop, C., & Custovic, A. (2017).  
Disaggregating asthma: Big investigation versus big data. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 139 , 400 –407. 
Bishop, C. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine lea rning . New York: Springer.  
Block, J. H., Colombo, M. G., Cumming, D. J., & Vismara, S. (2018). New players in  
entrepreneurial finance and why they are there. Small Business Economics, 50 , 239 – 
250. 
Boyd, D., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data: Provocations for a cultural,  
technological, and scholarly phenomenon. Information, Communication & S ociety, 15 , 
662–679. 
Boyd, R. L., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2017). Language -based personality: A new approach to  
personality in a digital world. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 18, 63–68. 
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2014). The second machine age: W ork, progress, and  
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies . WW Norton & Company.  
Brynjolfsson, E., & Mcafee, A. (2017). The business of artificial intelligence. Harvard Business  
Review , https://hbr.org/cover -story/2017/07/the -business -of-artificial -intelligence  
Brynjolfsson, E., Rock, D., & Syverson, C. (2017). Artificial intelligence and the modern  
productivity parado x: A clash of expectations and statis tics (No. w24001). National 
Burea u of Economic Research . 
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in  
large organizations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision -making. Journal of 
Business Venturing, 12 (1), 9 –30. 

==== Page 24 ====
24 
 
Chen, H., Chiang, R. H., & Storey, V. C. (2012). Business intelligence and analytics: From big  
data to big impact. MIS Quarterly, 36 (4), 1165 -1188 . 
Chen, H. M., Schütz, R., Kazman, R., & Matthes, F. (2017). How Lufthansa capitalized on big  
data for busine ss model renovati on. MIS Quarterly Executive , 16(1). 
Christensen,  C. (1997) . The innovator’s dile mma:  When  new technologies cause great  firms
 to fail. Boston, MA: Harvard  Business  School  Press.  
Coad, A. , & Srhoj, S. (in press). Catching gazelles with a lasso. Small Business Economics . 
Cockburn, I. M., Henderson, R., & Stern, S. (2018). The impact of artificial intelligence on  
innovation  (No. w24449). National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Cummings, M. (2017). Artificial intelligence and the future of warfare.  Chatham House for the  
Royal Institute of International Affairs.  
Davidsson, P. (2016). Researching entrepreneurship: Conceptualization and design  (2nd ed.).  
New York: Springer.  
Davidsson, P. (2017). Opportunities, propensities, and misgivings: Some closing comments.  
Journal of Business Venturing Insights, 8 , 123 –124. 
Davidsson, P., Recker, J. C., & von Briel, F. (2018). External enablement of new venture  
creation: A framework. Academy of Management Perspectives . 
Drucker, P. F. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship: Practices and principles . New York:  
Harper & Row.  
Eesley, C., Li, J. B., & Yang, D. (2016). Does institutional change in universities influence high - 
tech entrepreneurship? Evidence from China’s Project 985. Organization Science, 27 , 
446–461. 
Eichstaedt, J. C., Schwartz, H. A., Kern, M. L., Park, G., Labarthe, D. R., Merchant, R. M., ... &  

==== Page 25 ====
25 
 
Weeg, C. (2015). Psychological language on Twitter predicts county -level heart disease 
mortality. Psychological Science , 26, 159 –169. 
Einav, L., & Levin, J. (2014). Economics in the age of big data.  Science , 346, 1243089.  
Erickson, P., Klein, J. L., Daston, L., Lemov, R., Sturm, T., & Gordin, M. D. (2013). How  
reason  almost lost its mind: The strange career of Cold War rationality . University of 
Chicago Press.  
Ericsson, K. A., Hoffman, R. R., Kozbelt, A., & Williams, A. M. (Eds.). (2018). The Cambridge  
handbook of expertise and expert performance . Cambridge Universit y Press.  
Fan, J., Han, F., & Liu, H. (2014). Challenges of big data analysis.  National Science  
Review , 1, 293 –314. 
Fayolle, A. (Ed.). (2007). Handbook of research in entrepreneurship education: A general  
perspective  (Vol. 1). Edward Elgar Publishing.  
Foss, N. J., & Klein, P. G. (2017). Entrepreneurial discovery or creation? In search of the middle  
ground.  Academy of Management Review , 42, 733 –736. 
Frank, M. R., Autor, D., Bessen, J. E., Brynjolfsson, E., Cebrian, M., Deming, D. J., ... & Wang,  
D. (2019). Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on labor.  
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,  201900949.  
Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2017). The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to  
computerisation? Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 114 , 254 –280. 
Garbuio, M., & Lin, N. (2019). Artificial intelligence as a growth engine for health care  
startu ps: Emerging business mod els. California Management Review , 61(2), 59 –83. 
George, G., Haas, M. R., & Pentland, A. (2014). Big data and management.  Academy of  
Management Journal , 57, 321 –332. 

==== Page 26 ====
26 
 
Ghahramani, Z. (2015). Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence. Nature  
521, 452 –459. 
Glaeser, E. L., Kominers, S. D., Luca, M., & Naik, N. (2016). Big data and big cities: The  
promises and limitations of improved measures of urban life. Economic Inquiry . 
Gosling, S. D., & Mason, W. (2015). Internet research in psychology. Annual Review of   
Psychology, 66 , 877 –902. 
Grace, K., Salvatier, J., Dafoe, A., Zhang, B., & Evans, O. (2018). When will AI exceed human  
performance? Evidence from AI experts. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 62 , 
729–754. 
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2016). The state of American entrepreneurship: New estimates of th e  
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship for 15 US states, 1988 –2014  (No. w22095).  
National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Harari, G. M., Müller, S. R., Aung, M. S., & Rentfrow, P. J. (2017). Smartph one sensing  
methods for studying behavior in everyday life. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences ,  
18, 83–90. 
Hartmann, P. M., Hartmann, P. M., Zaki, M., Zaki, M., Feldmann, N., Feldmann, N., ... & Neely,  
A. (2016). Capturing value from big data –a taxonomy of data -driven business models  
used by start -up firms. International Journal of Operations & Production Management ,  
36, 1382 –1406.  
Jarrahi, M. H. (2018). Artificial intelligence and the future of work: Human -AI symbiosis in  
organizational decision making. Business Horizons, 61 , 577 –586. 
Kahneman, D. (2002). Maps of bounded rationality: A perspective on intuitive judgment and  
choice. Nobel Prize Lecture, 8 , 351 –401. 

==== Page 27 ====
27 
 
Kaminski, J., & Hopp, C. (in press). Predicting outcomes in crowdfunding campaigns  
with textual, visual and linguistic signals. Small Business Economics . 
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., & Graepel, T. (2013). Private traits and attributes are predictable  
from digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences , 110, 5802 –5805.  
Kosinski, M., Wang, Y., Lakkaraju, H., & Leskovec, J. (2016). Mining big data to extract  
patterns and predict real -life outcomes. Psychological M ethods , 21, 493.  
Kuhn, T . S. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions  (2nd ed.). University of Chicago  
Press.  
Landström, H., & Harirchi, G. (2018). The social structure of entrepreneurship as a scientific  
field. Research Policy, 47 , 650 –662. 
Lapuschkin, S., Wäldchen, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Samek, W., & Müller, K. R. (2019).  
Unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing what machines really learn. Nature 
Communications, 10 , 1096.  
Lazear, E. P. (2004). Balanced skills and entrepreneurship. American Economic Review, 94 ,  
208–211. 
Liebregts, W., Darnihamedani, P, Postma, E., & Atzmueller, M. (in press). The promise of social  
signal processing for research on decision making in entrepreneurial contexts. Small 
Business Economics.  
Logg, J. M., Minson, J. A., & Moore, D. A. (2019) . Algorithm appreciation: People prefer  
algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 151,  90–103. 
Mahmoodi, J., Leckelt, M., van Zalk, M. W., Geukes, K., & Back, M. D. (2017). Big Data  

==== Page 28 ====
28 
 
approaches in social and beha vioral science: Four key trade -offs and a call for 
integration. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 18, 57–62. 
McArthur, D., Lewis, M., & Bishary, M. (2005). The roles of artificial intelligence in education:  
Current progress and future prospects. Journal of Educational Technology, 1 (4), 42 –80. 
McMullen, J. S., & Shepherd, D. A. (2006). Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in  
the theory of the entrepreneur. Academy of Management Review, 31 , 132 –152. 
Nature Machine Intelligence (2019).  Editorial: More than ma chines. Nature Machine  
Intelligence, 1 , 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256 -018-0014 -z 
Nicolaou, N., Shane, S., Cherkas, L., Hunkin , J., & Spector, T. D. (2008). Is the tendency to  
engage in entrepreneurship genetic? Management Science, 54 , 167 –179. 
Nosek, B. A., Alter, G., Banks, G. C., Borsboom, D., Bowman, S. D., Breckler, S. J., ... &  
Contestabile, M. (2015). Promoting an open r esearch culture. Science , 348, 1422 –1425.  
Obschonka, M. (2017). The quest for the entrepreneurial culture: Psychological Big Data in  
entrepreneurship research. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 18, 69–74. 
Obschonka, M., Andersson, H., Silbereisen, R . K., & Sverke, M. (2013). Rule -breaking, crime,  
and entrepreneurship: A replication and extension study with 37 -year longitudinal data.  
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 83 , 386 –396. 
Obschonka, M., & Fisch, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial personalities in political leadership. Small  
Business Economics , 1–19. 
Obschonka, M., Fisch, C., & Boyd, R. (2017). Using digital footprints in entrepreneurship  
research: A Twitter -based personality anal ysis of superstar entrepreneurs and managers. 
Journal of Business Venturing Insights , 8, 13–23. 
Obschonka, M., Lee, N., Rodríguez -Pose, A., Eichstaedt, J. C., & Ebert, T., (in press). Big data  

==== Page 29 ====
29 
 
methods, social media, and the psychology of entrepreneurial r egions: Capturing cross -
county personality traits and their impact on entrepreneurship in the US. Small Business 
Economics.  
Obschonka, M., Stuetzer, M., Rentfrow, P. J., Shaw -Taylor, L., Satchell, M., Silbereisen, R. K.,  
... & Gosling, S. D. (2018). In t he shadow of coal: How large -scale industries contributed  
to present -day regional differences in personality and well -being. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 115 , 903.  
OECD (2017). Digital natives. In  OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2017 : 
The digital transformation . Paris: OECD Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_scoreboard -2017 -36-en. 
Parker, S. C. (2009). The econo mics of entrepreneurship . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University  
Press.  
Parkes, D. C., & M. P. Wellman (2015). Economic reasoning and artificial intellig ence.  
Science, 349 , 267 –272. doi:10.1126/science.aaa8403.  
Prüfer, J., & Prüfer, P. (in press). Data science for entrepreneurship re search:  
Studying demand dynamics for entrepreneurial skills in th e Netherlands. Small Business 
Economics.  
Rajab, S., & Sharma, V. (2018). A review on the applications of neuro -fuzzy systems in  
business. Artificial Intelligen ce Review, 49 , 481 –510. 
Ramoglou, S., & Tsang, E. W. (2016). A realist perspective of entrepreneurship: Opportunities  
as propensities. Academy of Management Review, 41 , 410 –434. 
Ransbotham, S., Kiron, D., Gerbert, P., & Reeves, M. (2017). Reshaping busine ss with artificial  

==== Page 30 ====
30 
 
intelligence: Closing the gap between ambition and action. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 59 (1). 
Russell, S. & Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial intelligence: A modern approach  (3rd ed .). Upper  
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
Sarasvathy , S. D. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic  
inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26 , 243 –
263. 
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). The theory of economic development: An inquiry into profits, capital,  
credit, interest and the business cycle . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Shane, S. (2003).  A general theory of entrepreneurship: The individual -opportunity nexus .  
Edward Elgar  Publishing.  
Shane, S. (2012). Reflections on the 2010 AMR decade award: Delivering on the promise of  
entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of Management Review, 37 , 10–20. 
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship a s a field of research.  
Academy of Management Review, 25 , 217 –226. 
Shepherd, D. A., Wennberg, K., Suddaby, R., & Wiklund, J. (2019). What are we explain ing?  
A review and agenda on initiating, engaging, performing, and contextualizing 
entrepre neurship. Journal of Management, 45 , 159 –196. 
Shim, J., & Kim, J. (2018). Estimating country -level social network density and supportive  
surroundings by simulation. Journal of Business Venturing Insights, 9,  24-31. 
Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., ... & Lillicrap, T.  
(2017). Mastering chess and shogi by self -play with a general reinforcement learning  
algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815 . 

==== Page 31 ====
31 
 
Singh, S., Okun , A., & Jackson, A. (2017). Artificial intelligence: Learning to play Go from  
scratch. Nature, 550 , 336 –337. 
Slezak, P. (1989). Scientific discovery by computer as empirical refutation of the strong  
programme. Social Studies of Science, 19 , 563 –600. 
Spea rman, C. E. (1904). "General intelligence”, objectively determined and measured.  
American Journal of Psychology, 15 , 201 –293. doi:10.2307/1412107  
Sternberg, R. J. (2004). Successful intelligence as a basis for entrepreneurship. Journal of  
Business Venturing, 19 , 189 –201. 
Stuetzer, M., Obschonka, M., & Schmitt -Rodermund, E. (2013). Balanced skills among nascent  
entrepreneurs. Small Business Economics, 41 , 93–114. 
Burgess, M. (2018, Nov ember  12). Is AI the new electricity? The Guardian . 
https://www.theguardian.com/future -focused -it/2018/nov/12/is -ai-the-new-electricity  
Cohen, G. (2018, Oct ober 25). AI art at Christie’s sells for $432,500 . The New York Times .   
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/25/arts/design/ai -art-sold-christies.html  
Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing machinery and inte lligence. Mind, 59 , 433 –460. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.  
Science, 185 , 1124 –1131.  
Uy, M. A., Foo, M. D., & Aguinis, H. (2010). Using experience sampling methodology to  
advance entrepreneurship theory and research . Organizational Research Methods, 13 , 
31–54. 
von Bloh, J., Broekel, T., Özgun, B., & Sternberg, R. (in press). New(s) data for  
entrepreneurship res earch? An innovative approach to use big data on media coverage. 
Small Business Economics.  

==== Page 32 ====
32 
 
Von Neumann, J., &  Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic beh avior . 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
Wang, F., Mack, E. A., & Maciewjewski, R. (2017). Analyzing entrepreneurial social networks  
with big dat a. Annals of the American Association of Geographers , 107, 130 –150. 
Wilson, H. J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative intelligence: Humans and AI are joining  
forces. Harvard Business Review.   
https://hbr.org/2018/07/collaborative -intelligence -humans -and-ai-are-joining -forces  
Witten, I. H., Frank, E., Hall, M. A., & Pal, C. J. (2016). Data mining: P ractical machine  
learning tools and techniques . Morgan Kaufmann.  
Writer, B. (2019 ). Lithium -Ion Batteries: A Machine -Generated Summary of Current  
Research . Springer: Heidelberg, Germany.  
Zeng, J. (2017). Fostering path of ecological sustainable entrepreneurship within big data  
network system. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal , 1–17. 
Zhang, S. X. , & van Burg, E. (in press). Advancing entrepreneurship as a design sc ience:  
Developing additional design principles for effec tuation. Small Business Economics . 
Zomaya, A. Y., & Sakr, S. (2017). Handbook of big data techn ologies . Springer.  
 
 
 

