==== Page 1 ====
Modgil, S, Singh, RK and Hannibal, C
 Artificial Intelligence for Supply Chain Resilience: Learning from Covid-19
http://researchonline.ljmu.ac.uk/id/eprint/15291/
Article
LJMU has developed LJMU Research Online  for users to access the research output of the 
University more effectively. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by 
the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of 
any article(s) in LJMU Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research.
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or 
any commercial gain.
The version presented here may differ from the published version or from the version of the record. 
Please see the repository URL above for details on accessing the published version and note that 
access may require a subscription. 
For more information please contact researchonline@ljmu.ac.uk
http://researchonline.ljmu.ac.uk/
Citation (please note it is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you 
intend to cite from this work) 
Modgil, S, Singh, RK and Hannibal, C (2021) Artificial Intelligence for Supply
Chain Resilience: Learning from Covid-19. The International Journal of 
Logistics Management. ISSN 0957-4093 LJMU Research Online

==== Page 2 ====
1 
  
Artificial intelligence for supply chain resilience:  Learning  from Covid -19 
 
Abstract  
Purpose:  Many  supply chain s have faced disruption during Covid -19. Artificial intelligence  (AI) 
is one mechanism that can be used to improve supply chain resilience  by developing business 
continuity capabilities . This study examines how firms employ  AI and considers  the opportunities 
for AI to enhance supply chain resilience by develop ing visibility, risk, sourcing and distribution 
capabilities . 
Design/Methodology:  We have  gathered rich data by  conducting  semi -structured  interviews with  
35 experts from  the e-commerce  supply chain. We have adopted a systematic approach of coding 
using open, axial, and selective methods to map and identify  the themes that represent the critical 
elements of AI -enabled supply chain resilience .  
Findings: The results of the study highlight the emergence of five critical areas where AI can 
contribute to enhance d supply chain resilience ; (i) transparency , (ii) ensuring last -mile delivery , 
(iii) offering personalized solutions to both upstream and downstream supply chain stakeholders , 
(iv) minimizing the impact of disruption , and  (v) facilitat ing an agile  procurement strategy.  
Originality:  The study present s the dynamic capabilit ies for supply chain resilience through the 
employment of AI.  AI can contribute to readying supply chain s to reduce the ir risk of disruption 
through  enhanced resilience.  
Implications:  The study offers interesting implications for  bridging the theory -practice gap b y 
drawing on contemporary empirical data to demonstrate how  enhancing  dynamic capabilities via 
AI technologies  further strengthens supply chain resilience. The study also offers suggestions for  
utiliz ing the findings and propose s a framework to strengthen supply chain resilience through AI.  
 
Keywords:  Supply Chain Design; Covid -19; Dynamic Capabilit ies; Supply Chain Resilience  
 
 

==== Page 3 ====
2 
 1. Introduction  
The Covid -19 virus  has rapidly  spread across the world and most countries have struggled to 
contain it. The impact of the Covid -19 pandemic  continues to ricochet across globe despite the 
efforts made by government s, the public sector , and individual businesses  to halt its detrimental 
effect on health and on the economy  (Craven et al., 2020; Sarkis, 2020) . Covid-19 is costing  the 
lives of individuals , and from a business continuity perspective it is  causing significant disruptions 
to the supply chains of countless different  industries  (Handfield et al., 2020) . Many companies 
have reported significant  supply chain disruption and  openly share their stories of  struggling to  
reconfigure  distribution chains and networks  (Mahajan & Tomar, 2021) . Reports indicate how  
companies failed to develop contingency plan s that could address the  types of  supply chain 
disruption s caused by phenomena such as  Covid -19, and hence  firms  across the globe have  
reported the unpredictable delay s experienced  in receiving materials from a particular location  due 
to inadequate supply chain information  (Paul & Chowdhury, 2020) . Other factors including  
consolidation of suppliers, reducing the cost of production and minimizing the risk ha ve decreased 
available inventories and has  led to  the current state of scarcities  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020; Wang -
Mlynek & Foerstl, 2020) .  
It is important to recognize  the challenges in today’s supply chai ns that ha ve led firms to this level 
of crisis. For instance, manufacturing ha s become  extremely  complex in terms of outsourcing 
components from multiple locations to assemble a single produ ct. Consequently there is a 
substantial reliance on logistics, import , and export that in turn poses challenge s in the case of 
disruption  and highlights  the requirement for smart decision making  (Choi, 2020; Wamba et al, 
2020b, Wamba et al., 2020c ). Other challenge s for sourcing organization s include  distribution risk 
and shortages in the network  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020) . Distribution is a critical area where staffing 
of warehouses, direct distribution  (de Koster & Warffemius, 2005) , and responsive allocation ha ve 
become important  considerations  in the era of Covid -19 (Butt, 2021) .  
Retail supply chains have also been impacted, where in the demand for essential items  has 
increased,  but demand  is subdued  in other categories like luxury items , and this further challenges 
operating margins and existing business models  (Pantano et al., 2020) . On the consumer side, 
stocking essential supplies and over -the-counter medicines have stressed supply chains  to their 
limits  (Mahajan & Tomar, 2021 ; Muniz et al., 2020 ). This unnatural  and unpredictable  increase  in 

==== Page 4 ====
3 
 demand and supply , and the continually  fluctuating environment , makes it difficult to  respond 
adequately  to this type of bullwhip effect.  
Hence, our study examine s the capabilities  required  to manage  supply chain s and the learning  
opportunities that the current situation of Covid -19 offers  that can help firms to increase  visibility 
and control in their supply chains. We have chosen  artificial intelligence  (AI) as a technological 
enabler  to help to address problems  associated  with supply chain resilience , and to offer potential 
avenues to assist  organization s in their journey  towards long term sustainability. The reason for 
choosing AI  is that it encompas ses the features of machine learni ng, big data , and deep learning  
(Gupta et al., 2021; Wamba et al., 2020c; Dwivedi et al., 2019; Roh et al., 2019) . For instance, 
machine learning  helps to automate the contractual agreements with suppliers and thus strengthen 
the procurement strategy  of the organization. Big data help s to improve the decision making 
capabilities of an organization and can therefore  avoid redundancy throughout the supply chain  
(Baryannis et al., 2019; Dubey et al., 2020) . Additionally , AI is capable of developing  agent -based 
system s, genetic algorithm s, and expert systems to facilitate demand planning, order fulfilment, 
network desig n, and inventory planning in conjunction  with supplier systems  (Muniz et al., 2020) . 
Covid -19 has forced many organizations to re -think and  transform their supply chain models 
(Ivanov, 2020a) . Dun & Bradstreet  report how  approximately  75 per cent of busines ses, including  
services, manufacturing, wholesale , and retail , are connected to economies  that have been severely 
impacted by the pandemic, such as  China. Retailers around the world are struggling with  how to 
respond  to business es, consumers , and workers. Therefore, business continuity , and longer -term 
economic sustainability, are both major  challenge s for many organizations at present.  In summary, 
Covid -19 ha s exposed a myriad of  weak er elements in  the supply chain  (Queiroz et al., 2020) . We 
suggest that many of these can be addressed by using  intelligent and logical technologies to 
improve existing  supply chain capabilities.   
The dynamic capabilities (DC) of an organization help to strengthen its supply chain . DC is the 
“ability of an organization to integrate, build and reconfigure in -house and outside competences  
to address the environment  that is regularly changing”  (Teece et al., 1997) . However, the re is a 
paucity of  studies that  apply DC as an approach to solve large scale supply chain disruption , for 
example disruption  caused due to Covid -19 (van Hoek , 2020) . Therefore, in this study , we have 
adopted  the theoretical lens of DC to  bridge the research -practice gap that currently exists in supply 

==== Page 5 ====
4 
 chain management.  To do this we gather and analyze  empirical data from supply chain 
professionals  to present a framework that can help in enhancing supply chain capabilities using 
AI. We have developed  the following two research questions to frame the  study:  
RQ1: What AI capabilities should be considered when designing and executing post -Covid -19 
supply c hains?  
RQ2: How can AI capabilities  be leveraged to improve  supply chain resilience?  
The remaining paper is presented in six sections. Section 2 highlight s the related literature, wh ile 
section 3 discuss AI, supply chain resilience and dynamic capabilities . Section 4 presents the 
research design and section 5 displays the findings. Section 6 presents  research propositions and 
develops a  framework  followed by  conclusion s drawn  in section 7.  
2. Literature Review  
Firms have long recognized the importance of contingency planning, mitigating supply shocks, 
demand volatility , and making the workplace safer than ever to derive efficiency and effectiveness 
in supply chains (Ivanov, 2020b). Prior to  the Covid -19 pandemic, supply chain s were often lauded  
for their ultra-efficiency , sourcing  strategies, and just -in-time capabilities ( van Hoek , 2020). 
Further, evidence shows how  pre-Covid -19, many  consumers were  opting for  in-store purchases 
over online  shopping  as they c ould see, touch,  and compare  items.   Unsurprisingly, o nline 
purchases have soared during  Covid -19 and s upply chain visibility is  therefore arguably more  
important than ever (Butt, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . However  many organizations were not 
prepared  for the practicalities of fulfilling on line orders,  and  planning  processes were ill -equipped 
to respon d to the sudden increase in demand as a consequence of  Covid -19.  For many supply 
chains it therefore rapidly became apparent that  an increased level of  supply chain resilience was 
required  (Ivanov, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020; van Hoek , 2020) . Developing supply chain resilience 
in response to disruption poses challenges; on the one hand there is large amount of uncertainty  
and on the other a significant amount of data is generated (Wamba et al ., 2020c). Hence,  due to 
uncertainty  and vast data  it becomes very difficult for supply chains to achieve  their desired degree 
of resilience ( Ivanov, 2021) . In consequence , many firms are making short term predictions and  
focusing on  strengthening their supply chain capabilities  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . To do this 

==== Page 6 ====
5 
 firms need to regularly assess  their levels of  risk across  multiple parameters  (Dolgui & Ivanov, 
2020) .  
Therefore, the application of intelligent technologies like AI can help  firms to strengthen their  
supply chain resilience  position. This is because t he adoption of AI can act as a critical capability 
to devise better control  mechanisms  and to identify areas of disruption  (Gupta et al., 2020 : Wamba 
et al., 2020b; Dwive di et al., 2019 ). AI based innovations  can assist  in real - time coordination and 
collaboration to  enable supply chains to have improved  visibility  (Wamba et al., 2020c; Remko, 
2020) .  
With the visi bility  capability of AI -based technologies, one can generate insights on how the whole 
chain can be affected  by a particular phenomenon over  a certain period of time  (Bock et al., 2020) . 
As there  continue s to be  sudden surge s in demand  patterns  during the pandemic, it become s 
challenging for supply chains to meet  their existing service level agreements  with actors in the 
chain . The se service levels are determined on the basis of  dynamic capabilities, margins , and the 
location from which a company is operating  (Defee & Fugate, 2010) . Another critical issue is 
network planning and mapping in the supply chain , and this is a  further  area in which  AI can assist  
the supply chain in terms of production, routes , and other linking nodes (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). 
AI can further improve th e collaboration  between  contractors and suppliers in shaping the supply 
chain in unprecedented time s. It offers the visibility of routes and accordingly , promises can be 
made to consumers  (Datta, 2017) . AI utilizes  data science principles to handle the volume, 
velocity, variety, veracity, value, variability , and visualization  of data  for critical insights ( Wamba 
et al., 2020 a). Further, AI helps in trac king the performance of warehouses in terms of demand 
and shelf life. Inventory management has become critical in ensuring continuous  supply during 
Covid -19 (Butt, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . AI offer s a robust examination of stock levels and 
align s associated activities accordingly. Supply chains are continuously expanding  their 
geographic reach , particularly into  areas that  they have not served previously  due to the pandemic , 
and therefore the examination of traffic, weather , and the optimal route is also a concern for 
companies. With the help of AI , firms can navigate different markets remotely and can take 
strategic decisions more accurately. The technologies of AI also help top management and 
employee s to be up to date in terms of the skill set ne eded to mitigate emergenc ies and cross -
cultural mana gement in an organization ( Dubey et al., 2018; Dubey  et al., 2016; Dubey & 

==== Page 7 ====
6 
 Gunasekran, 2015). AI facilitate s environmental scanning and endurance in supply chain s at the 
macro level  (Baryannis et al., 2019) and offers  the two -dimensional view presented in Figure 1.  
Literature suggests that c ompanies focusing on supply chain resilience should develop their 
analytical capabilities in order to  enhance the ir knowledge capabilities and decision making in 
extremely complex situations. In applying supply chain ris k analytics , firms can be proactive and 
innovative in managing the risk along their supply chain  (Queiroz et al., 2020) . Disruptions and 
risk in the supply chain should be vi ewed as phenomena  to understand, adapt and analyze ; 
particularly with respect to  the performance param eters required to navigate the current  complex 
environment, advanced cyber threats and complex supply chain design s (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020) . 
Hence, AI based innovati on has potential to  fast-track the decision process by recognizing , 
experimenting,  and analyzing  novel solutions  (Wamba et al., 2020b) . 
 
 
 
Figure 1 : AI impact on different dimensions of S upply Chain  resilience ( Baryannis et al., 2019)  
 
AI facilitatesEnvironmental ScanningSupply Chain Scope 
(macro)
Demand Deliver
SupplyCoordinate
Source
Process Make
Control Infrastructural

==== Page 8 ====
7 
  
3. Critical Factors to Enhance Supply Chain Resilience  
Artificial intelligence can be considered as a fundamental enabler that  strengthens  resilience 
capabilities in the supply chain  (Dwivedi et al., 2019) .  Covid -19 has highlighted the importance 
of supply chain resilience, which  has been clearly evidenced as  companies struggl e to find ways 
to balance demand and supply  (Ivanov, 2021) . This section discusses the critical factors of artificial 
intelligence, supply chain resilience, and dynamic capabilities in terms of their ability to enhance 
supply chain resilience.   
3.1 Artificial Inte lligence  
Many organizations have been trying to adopt digitization of their processes for the last two 
decades , and recently Industry 4.0 has emerged as a business  buzzword  (Wollschlaeger et al., 
2017).  AI has long been recognized  as one of the prominent technolog ies capable of enabl ing 
communication among devices and machines  (Guzman & Lewis, 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2019; 
Schutzer, 1990) . Since the supply chain involve s a series  of complex tasks, AI can simplify 
operations  by solving problems at higher  levels of  speed and accuracy while  simultaneously  
handling large volume s of data (Schniederjans et al., 2020) . AI is not new,  but its potential for vast 
applications , including supply chain management , has only been recognized more recent ly (Huin 
et al., 2003) . AI has the potential to facilitate smart and agile decision making in the supply chain 
to anticipate problems. Hence, a proactive system of AI helps in enhancing the quality of service 
and in delighting custome rs through on -time and undamaged deliveries  (Toorajipour et al., 2021 ; 
Wamba et al., 2020b ). AI facilitate s automated compliance that results in lower costs and  the 
efficient  functioning of a value chain network  (Treleaven & Batrinca, 2017) . AI also has a 
significant impact on enhancing the predicti ve capabilities  required  for demand forecasting in 
today’s  dynamic business environment. AI can be very efficient in the engagement of customers  
as interactions can be personalized by AI -driven bots. These bots c an help in tracking  the delivery  
status  of an item  and are further supported by echo users assisted by a customer support team  
(Huang & Rust, 2020) . AI can help in simplifying tedious tasks  in warehouse operations through 
automation. Companies like Amazon and Alibaba are already using AI -driven robots t o enhance 
the productivity and efficiency of the supply chain  (Ham, 2019) . In the supply chain , every minute 

==== Page 9 ====
8 
 and every mile matter and AI use s algorithm s that  can help in reducing time and costs by 
optimizing routes and deliveries  (Wen et al., 2018) . 
3.2 Supply Chain Resilience  
Supply chain resilience is the capability of a supply chain to cope with unforeseen, disrupting 
events and to recover quickly to its original level of performance, or  to a new level  required  to 
maintain the expected operating, financial , and market performance  (Adobor, 2020; Ponomarov 
& Holcomb, 2009) . To build a resilient supply chain, firms need to identify and assess the nodes 
for risks, their severity, and the likelihood of occurrence , and how these risk s can be detected  
(Dubey et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2015) . Companies do adopt multiple strategies to keep their 
supply chain s resilient. In the initial period of Covid -19, inventory and capacity buffers were 
identified as a source of resilience by  some  supply chains, where as others have used underutilized 
production capacity for medicines and other related products  (Queiroz et a l., 2020; Wong et al., 
2020) . Some  supply chains have  also benefitted from  resilience due to multi -sourcing strategies as 
compared to a single source of supply  (de Sá et al., 2019) . Covid -19 has also highlighted  the 
importance of near -shoring to reduce the  geographical reliance on global networks  (Kano & Oh, 
2020) . In this way , local supply chains facilitate more control over inventory and transfer the 
product to the customer more quickly  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . The more local the network, the 
more  opportunities exist for the technology used in production to be harmonized more effectively  
to facilitate a seamless flow of products across the network  (Singh et al., 2020) . Hence, 
standardization of components for different products , especially those that are not critical and 
visible to the customer , simplify sourcing  and thus enhance the degree of resilience. A side from 
the core components, the supply chain ecosystem partnership s with contract manufactures and 
third -party logistics play a critical role in its resilience.  
3.3 Dynamic Capabilit ies 
Firm resources are a base for developing the capabilities of a firm, whereas capabilities are the 
direct source of competitive edge (Grant, 1991).  This lead s to the development of dynamic 
capabilities that define the ability of a firm to quickly adapt to changing business situations. This 
adaptation happen s by aligning internal and external resources  (Teece et al., 1997).  Hence, 
dynamic capabilities refer to the capacity of a firm to intent ional ly create, extend , or transform its 

==== Page 10 ====
9 
 resource base (Helfat et al., 2007). These capabilities may be internal  or external  and are closely 
related to resilience capabilities in supply chain literature (Kwak et al., 2018). Dynamic 
capabilities are known for scanning, analyzing , and mitigating risks  by enabling resources and 
capabilities to ensure continuity of the business in a dynamic environment. The DC in supply 
chains can be viewed as knowledge processing and employing in strument s to develop, protect , and 
extend the network to create value for customers  (de Moura & Saroli, 2020) . The role of dynamic 
capabilities ha s seen a steady increase in popularity  in supply chains due to the increasing 
complexity  of networks . Dynamic capabilities consider core competencies of a firm to extend the 
short term competitive position to further construct  long term competitive advantage. In an 
emergency like Covid -19 where the wor ld was experiencing significant  uncertaint y, dynamic 
capabilities are particularly  suitable in develop ing supply chain resilience to build the long-term 
sustainability  of an organization.  Whilst there has been a lot of research on AI, its application in a 
SC context has received relative ly limited r esearch attention. Therefore we wish to understand 
how AI has been implemented in practice, and  to highlight what  we can learn from experiences of 
the Covid -19 pandemic in relation to supply chain management.  
4. Research Design  
To investigate  the feasibility of artificial intelligence  to develop  supply chain resilience, our study  
adopted  a qualitative  case study  and used  the theoretical lens of dynamic capabilit ies advocated by 
existing literature ( Gammelgaard, 2017) .  Dynamic capabilities was selected as an appropriate lens 
to examine  supply chain resilience because  AI can be used to improve responsiveness  and agility  
in the supply chain  (Wamba et al., 2020b) . Further, q ualitative research is a powerful tool to 
capture individual perception s as it analyses thoughts and opinion s to identify  trends  and insights  
(Fawcett  et al., 2014; Gligor & Autry, 2012) . The case based research  method  can also help to 
develop and test the theory ( Dubois & Gibbert, 2010; Pagell  & Wu, 2009; Gibbert et al., 2008; 
Eisenhardt , 1989).  Therefore, following a detailed  thematic  analysis, our study develops  five 
propositions leading to a framework representing AI enabled supply chain resilience capabilities.  
A structured research protoco l is followed in our study and is presented in Figure 2. As the practical 
application of AI mechanism to improve supply chain resilience is relatively under -researched, 
our study offers contemporary insights into current practice.   
 

==== Page 11 ====
10 
  
  
 Section 1  
 
 
   Section 3  
 
 
 Section 4  
 
 
 Section 5  
 
 Section 6  
 
 
 Section 7  
  
 
 
 
Figure  2 Research Protocol of the study  
 
 
 
 
 
Start  
 Defining the research questions  
Defining the 
concepts  
Define AI, Supply Chain 
Resilience and Dynamic 
Capabilities  
Methods  
Crafting the  semi-structured 
questionnaire, selecting the 
respondents, data collection  and 
thematic analysis  
Analysis  
Three stage  (open, axial and 
selective) thematic coding and 
cross content analysis  
Theory 
development  
Development of propositions  and 
framework  
Implications  
Delineating the implications of 
study for theory and practice by 
comparing and contrasting the 
existin g literature  
Validation  
Applying triangulation for 
validation of the findings  

==== Page 12 ====
11 
 4.1 Data Collection  
To illicit the views of experienced  professional s working in the supply chain and AI field s, we 
conducted in -depth interviews . We identified and contacted 215 supply chain and AI professionals 
via email and LinkedIn  messages in May 2020 and provided a brief introduction to the research 
topic . After multiple reminders, 5 4 respondents replied and showed interest in sharing their views 
on the topic. However, of these, only 35 respondents finally agreed to be interviewed. Interviews 
were conducted  in October  and November 2020, telep honically and over internet -based calls 
because of the pandemic . To maintain confidentiality, we have  anonymized  the respondents (R1 
to R35, R stands for Respondent, 1 to 35 are respondent number s) and provide full details in Table 
1. 
Table 1 :  Details of Interviewees  
Table 1. 
Interviewee 
Profile  No. Interviewee  
Code  Job title  Nature of work  Years of 
experience  
1 R1 Manager  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  6-10 
2 R2 Senior Manager  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  6-10 
3 R3 Senior Manager  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  1-5 
4 R4 Senior Manager  Supply Chain 
Consulting  >10 
5 R5 Senior Manager  Manufacturing  6-10 
6 R6 Manager  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  6-10 

==== Page 13 ====
12 
 7 R7 Consultant  Operations  1-5 
8 R8 Manager  Operatio ns 1-5 
9 R9 Manager  Operations  6-10 
10 R10 Manager  Sales & Marketing  1-5 
11 R11 Demand Planner  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  1-5 
12 R12 Associate Consultant  Sales and Marketing  6-10 
13 R13 Senior Consultant  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  6-10 
14 R14 Senior Manager  IT services  >10 
15 R15 Manager  Manufacturing  1-5 
16 R16 Supply Planner  Logistics & Supply 
Chain  6-10 
17 R17 Senior Consultant  IT Services  >10 
18 R18 Engineer  Manufacturing  1-5 
19 R19 Senior Consultant  Consulting  6-10 
20 R20 Supply Chain 
Analyst  Logistics & Supply 
chain  >10 
21 R21 Demand Planner  Manufacturing  >10 
22 R22 Manager -Inventory  Warehouse 
Management  6-10 

==== Page 14 ====
13 
 23 R23 Engineer  IT Services  1-5 
24 R24 Senior Engineer  IT Services  6-10 
25 R25 ERP Consultant  IT Services  6-10 
26 R26 Director  Supply Chain  >10 
27 R27 Business Analyst  Strategy  6-10 
28 R28 General Manager  Supply Chain  >10 
29 R29 Senior Vice President  Supply Chain  >10 
30 R30 Consultant  Consulting  1-5 
31 R31 Manager  Sales and Marketing  6-10 
32 R32 Associate Consultant  IT services  6-10 
33 R33 Executive  Sales and Marketing  1-5 
34 R34 Manager  Distribution  6-10 
35 R35 Plant Manager  Manufacturing  >10 
 
4.2 Data Analysis  
All interviews were transcribed verbatim.  To analyze the wealth of qualitative data collected, we 
extracted themes and subthemes using thematic  coding  (Gibbs, 2007)  (see Fig ure 3). Interview 
transcripts were coded multiple times to ensure internal consistency (Miles et al., 2014) Where 
possible, and as themes emerged, they were compared with publicly available secondary source 
material. The method  of triangulation  helped us  to analyze the research problem through different 
angles, provid ing an in -depth analysis of the situation, and enhanc ing data validity (Nightingale, 
2020).  

==== Page 15 ====
14 
  
Figure 3  Research Design  
 
5. Findings  
The section highlights the key findings ,  Five clear  themes emerged from the empirical  data; i) 
transparency, ii) personalized solution s, iii) procurement strategy, iv) last mile delivery and  v) 
disruption  and impact  reduction .  Each  theme is now discussed  in turn  in the context of artificial  
intelligence enabled supply chain resilience .  
5.1 Transparency  
 
Transparency  was identified as critical by respondents of the study, and  refers to the visibility of 
data related to inventory, delivery , etc. across supply chain partners t o ensure efficiency and the 
reduc tion of  the impact of possible disruption. The e xchange of data and timely information 
increases the coordination and trus t among supply chain partners.  The t ransparency and visibility 
of the data are important  and affect the performance of a supply chain, and can be responsible for 
both building and br eaking the  SC relationship ( Murfield & Tate, 2017; Maghsoudi Literature and Practice
Supply chain resilience 
through technologiesInterviews
Employing AI for 
supply chain resilience 
to enhance the dynamic 
capabilitiesThematic coding
Scheme to derive 
themes and sub -themesPropositions and 
Framwork
Mapping the 
identified sub -themes 
and themes to a 
proposed research 
framework  

==== Page 16 ====
15 
 and Pazirand eh, 2016 ). Table 2 displays the related quotes and axial codes pertaining to the theme 
of  transparency.  
Table 2:  Themes and codes identified under “Transparency”  
 
Interviewee 
Code  Axial Code  Supporting indicative quotations from interviews 
and open code  
R4 Sensing the 
demand at 
retailers end   We are focusing on an AI tool that tells the demand of 
the end retailer. From there we can predict the demand 
of our customers and map with our product planning. 
Scanning of barcode data at the retailer can be used f or 
predictive analysis.  
Open Code: Retailers' demand can be mapped using 
smart technology and can be used for better product 
planning.  
R2 Demand 
Forecasting   AI is helping in the supply chain as it can forecast the 
demand in a much accurate way. AI helps in analyzing 
the data and converting it into an intelligent forecast 
and even helps in improving sales strategies.  
Open Code: AI brings an accurate forecast to firms.  
R14 Invoicing   AI is helping to send the invoicing details automatically 
to the customer once the invoice is generated and also 
the customer can see the live status of the truck with the 
delivery time counting various factors like traffic and 
weather in long -distance  
Open Code: Smart technology brings automation in 
invoicing  

==== Page 17 ====
16 
 R29 Tracking 
shipments  Tracking carrier has become easy using the latest 
technologies. AI also helps in predicting the time of 
shipments, variation in shipping time, and if any risk is 
associated b ased on the trend analysis.  
Open Code: Live tracking of shipments and predicting 
risks with the help of AI tool brings better planning and 
coordination among stakeholders.  
 
 
5.2 Personalized solutions  
 
Personalization help s firms in reaching out to  a greater number of market segments and  in 
solidify ing their brand. Customers tend to purchase from firms th at consider their preferences and 
deliver the product of their cho osing . It also develops trust between the buyer and the seller . New 
communication me chanisms  like virtual c hatbots are being deployed t o enhance the 
communication between parties. Brands th at personalize and take into consideration the customer 's 
preferences tend to generate greater return on investment  and 10  per cent more sales than those 
that do not personalize (M cKinsey, 201 8). Table 3 displays the quotes and axial codes  related  to  
personalized solution.  
 
Table 3:  Themes and codes identified under “Personalized solutions”  
 
Interviewee 
Code  Axial Code  Supporting indicative quotations   
from interviews and open code  
R4 Virtual chatbot  
 AI helps in installing a virtual chatbot to 
solve the customer query without being 
engaged with the employee, be it the live 
status of the order, the shipment of an 

==== Page 18 ====
17 
 order, or the tentative delivery time of the 
order. Also, firms take the benefit of 
fetching exact customer requirements and 
preferences using this medium.  
Open Code: Digital communication 
mediums resolve customer queries and 
help firms in understanding c ustomer 
choices.  
R21 Understanding 
consumer 
behavior  AI is giving data to analyze the pattern of 
consumer behaviors on how the market 
behaves for different channels like e -
commerce, general trade, and modern 
trade. This further helps to design supply 
chain strategy in the upcoming time for 
different channels.  
Open Code: Consumer buying pattern 
helps in framing supply chain strategy  
R9 Inventory 
Planning   Personalization is carried out using AI 
helps to understand the next buying 
pattern, whether bulk purc hase to keep 
stock in advance is necessary or smaller 
inventory would suffice.  
Open Code: AI -enabled personalization 
leads to effective inventory planning  
R12 Understating 
market patterns  The future outcomes and market patterns 
can be generated using predictive 
analytics using AI tool., Data can be 
analyzed using unparalleled computing 
power to figure out future demand, or to 
understand the buying behavior of the 
customer base. Accordingly,  effective 

==== Page 19 ====
18 
 manufacturing and supply chain strategy 
can be developed for better performance.  
Open Code: Understanding market 
pattern s with the help of AI leads to better 
supply chain planning.  
 
 
5.3 Procurement Strategy  
 
An e ffective procurement strategy brings  better control o f resources, cost optimization , and 
efficient supplier management. A procurement strategy refers to identifying the right supplier, 
designing supply cont racts, supplier management , etc. An e ffective procurement strategy not on ly 
brings the cost of procurement down (Knudsen, 2003) , but also develop s and enhances trust among 
supply chain partners by managing the relationship with suppliers, and  controls overall inventory. 
Table  4 displays the quotes and axial codes related to the procurement strategy.  
Table 4:  Themes and codes identified under “Procurement Strategy”  
Interviewee 
Code  Axial Code  Supporting indicative quotations from 
interviews and open code  
R24 Spend Analysis   Using AI, spend visibility of the firm 
increases, helps in expediting the decision 
making process by using classified spend 
data, and saves both time and money by 
reducing the human intervention.  
Open Code: Spend analysis saves time 
and cost, hence increases efficiency and 
speed.  
R21 Vendor 
Management   AI helps in the identification of local 
vendors as global vendors are not feasible 
for many items. AI is helping through 
Vendor management tools (vendor 

==== Page 20 ====
19 
 assessment, audit support, credit 
management, etc.) to make an effective 
and resilient supply chain from local 
vendors.  
Open Code: Effective vendor 
management leads to resilience in the 
supply chain.  
R19 Supplier Risk 
Management   AI could be a great help in identifying the 
risk associated at the diffe rent junctures 
of the supply chain and can provide the 
solutions using its ability to analyze the 
data, figure out the source of risk and 
increase transparency across supply 
chain partners.  
Open Code: Identification and mitigation 
of risk leads to transpar ency and 
resilience in the supply chain.  
R17 Contract 
management  Contract management is essential to 
bring the cost of supply down 
significantly. AI helps in analyzing the 
different legal contracts available, reads 
it, and makes a decision appropriately. A 
good contract acceptable to both the 
parties will result in fruitful and long -term 
relations and provide the desired stability 
to the supply chain.  
Open Code: Effective contract 
management enhances the coordination 
among supply chain partners and makes i t 
more stable.  
 

==== Page 21 ====
20 
  
 
5.4 Last mile deli very  
 
Arguably, t he most critical part of logistics is last m ile delivery  wherein  the customer evaluates 
the service quality based on the timely delivery of items (Mangiaracina et al. 2019). The key 
objective of last mile delivery is to  deliver  the product in the fastest  possible way to the consumer.  
Last mile delivery is often  less efficient  and more expensive (Macioszek, 2017) due to maintain ing 
the required services levels and to achieve target set .  Also, consumers always look for alternatives 
if their product is not delivered on time. Table  5 displays the quotes and axial codes related to last 
mile delivery.  
Table 5:  Themes and codes identified under “Last mile delivery”  
Interviewee 
Code  Axial Code  Suppor ting indicative quotations   
from interviews and open code  
R27 Predictive 
analysis   In last mile delivery, AI plays a great role 
by accurately managing the most complex 
data related to routes, network, traffic, 
etc. It may also produce data models 
focused on predictive analysis. This way it 
will help to ensure quick fixes and safe 
last m ile delivery as well.   
Open Code: Predictive analysis model 
helps in route planning and ensures quick 
last mile delivery  
R29 Managing 
workforce   Manage the workforce diligently or 
launch them at closer to operational 
locations to ensure that we do not expose 
them too much and make resources 
available on demand. Deploying the 
workforce smartly concerning the 

==== Page 22 ====
21 
 requirement of the region ensures faster  
delivery.  
Open Code: Management of workforce 
ensures resource availability and quick 
delivery  
R16 Paperless 
technique for 
delivery force  Paperless technique during this pandemic 
time was effective in saving time as well 
as keeping our staff safe from any  
infections. With the help of technology, 
the smooth and timely delivery of items 
was ensured without much human 
interventions.  
Open Code: Paperless process saves time 
and speeds up the delivery.  
 
 
5.5 Disruption and impact reduction  
Supply chain disruption can be caused by various factors  including  delivery delay, demand and 
supply related problems , natural disasters or  a global  pandemic like Covid -19.  Disruption can  lead 
to the poor performance of a supply chain (Alora and Barua,  2020). It is therefore essential to 
identify the  potential  risks and type s of disruptions that may occur in the future and can lead to 
the most sever e outcome s. Reducing the impact of disruption can be achieved  by making the 
system capable of matching marke t demand or supplying  what is demanded (Papadopoulos et al. 
2016). Table 6 displays the quotes and axial codes related to disruption and impact reduction . 
 
Table 6:  Themes and codes identified under “Reduce disruption impact”  
 
Interviewee 
Code  Axial Code    Supporting indicative quotations  
from interviews and open code  

==== Page 23 ====
22 
 R22 Automated 
warehouse   Warehouses with warehouse 
management system installed have robots  
working with full automation and no 
manual intervention. Artificial 
intelligence improves efficiency and 
thereby reduces human error  
Open Code: Automation improves the 
efficiency of wareho use management.  
R35 Robotic process 
automation   RPA/Robots can be assigned to do the 
regular process and thereby, the work for 
the humans can  be more strategic and 
tactical.  
Open Code: AI brings robotic automation 
that enhances the process speed and 
efficiency.  
R32 Supply chain 
flexibility  AI in forecasting, works on historical data 
to create forecasts. To orient it for the 
disruption we need to make sure that it 
has relevant real -time data at all times. 
Many firms outsource the work of doing 
market rese arch and data collection. So 
this sort of preparation makes your supply 
chain flexible and more responsive to 
changing trends and you can handle 
disruptions better.  
Open Code: Flexible supply chains can 
handle disruptions better.  
R 11  Sales and 
Operations  
Planning   AI tools can be used to fetch the exact 
demand from the market by analyzing 
trends, can be helpful in optimization of 
resources, reduce inventory level, and for 

==== Page 24 ====
23 
 enhancing the service level of the 
organization. The real -time update across 
supply chain partners will enhance 
collaborated planning that would lead to 
achieving resilience in the supply chain.  
Open Code: Error -free Demand planning 
and dissemination of information to 
partners lead to better collaboration and 
supply chain resilience.  
 
After follo wing a thematic coding approach, we extracted mu ltiple  open codes from the interview 
data. After careful  analysis  back and forth within and between the codes  we identified axial codes 
that were collapsed to form  selective codes. In summary, our study finds five selective codes  as 
presented in Table 7.  
Table 7 : Summary of Findings  
Selective Code  Axial Code  Combined meaning of Open Codes  
Transparency  Demand forecasting  
A highly complex environment originated 
due to Covid -19 and require d access to real 
time data from multiple stakeholders to 
balance supply and demand . AI can  support 
this re alignment.  Sensing the demand 
at retailer end  
Invoicing  
Tracking shipments  
Personalized 
solutions  Understanding 
consumer behavior  Consumer behavior and changing market 
patterns lead supply chain s to develop 
digital platforms , such as virtual chatbot s, 
and enhance their information processing 
capabilities to improve  supply chain Virtual chatbot  
Understating market 
patterns  

==== Page 25 ====
24 
 Inventory planning  resilience . AI can facilitate firms in 
providing personalized solutions.  
Procurement strategy  Vendor management  Supply chain cost is directly related to the 
strategic sourcing capabilities of an 
organization. AI can assist supply chain  
professionals to develop the robust network 
design that is required to  reduc e supply 
chain  risk. Spend analysis  
Contract management  
Supplier risk 
management  
Last mile delivery  Managing workforce  During Covid -19, firms are exposed to 
multiple constraints ranging from 
maintaining social distancing, paperless 
delivery and managing the supply chain 
operations with minimum workforce. AI 
can facilitate in  developing  predictiv e 
analytics to achieve  the required degree of 
resilience in a supply chain.  Predictive analysis  
Paperless technique 
for delivery force  
Reduce disruption 
impact  Robotic process 
automation  The greatest challenge for many supply 
chains is to adapt and adjust to highly 
uncertain demand scenario s, where by 
dynamic sales and  flexibility in  operations 
planning  are required . Automation can 
reduc e the impact of disruption caused by 
catastrophic event s (e.g. Covid -19). Automated 
warehouse  
Sales and operations 
planning  
Supply chain 
flexibility  
 
 
6. Development of Propositions  

==== Page 26 ====
25 
 Our study adopted a semi -structured interview methodology to collect contemporary empirical 
data. This approach  offered exciting insights and implications for developing dynamic capabilities 
through AI that further assist in strengthening supply chain resilience during periods of 
uncertainty, for example  during  the Covid -19 global pandemic. In drawing on this 
conceptualization, we offer a further contribution by developin g propositions for further research 
based on our study , which are now discussed and presented.  
During the current pandemic, the focus  of organizations  and supply chains has been on ensuring 
that the demand forecast is correct during this period of disruption , demand fluctuation and 
uncertainty . Firms have faced significant  challenges because of a sudden drop in product demand ; 
this unpredictability has impacted on the ability to develop accurate forecasts . According to R 11 
“ In the pre -Covid era the major task use d to be forecast ing the yearly demand, wh ich we use d to 
decide  on at the start of the financial year. But Covid practically hit in March 2020,  especially in 
India, so the demand fell drastically and the previous forecast was useless.  We had to adjust to the 
conditions and do the forecasting process all over again with the help of supply chain partners, 
especially retailers  and accordingly build up inventory.”   Retailers are the  supply chain actors  
who frequently communicate and connec t with customers .  They therefore   play a key role in the 
supply chain by identifying the customer’s preferences and  providing information about  potential 
customer segment ation . Real -time updat ing of such data with the help of AI will speed up  this 
process , and will allow  firms to make changes to their manufacturing and distribution scheduling  
to create transparency throughout the supply chain. According to R 33 “AI technologies help in 
understanding customer demand more precisely and inform the changes in customer requirements 
in uncertain conditions like Covid -19. This can help to cater to large number of customers in short 
span of time. With the help of AI,  the supply chain will get more automated and efficient, which in 
turn would help in the transparenc y of the entire network”. These insights lead us to the following 
proposition:  
P1: Under  extremely  uncertain conditions, for example  Covid -19, it is crucial for  supply chain 
actors to  have access to actual demand  data originating from the retailer and in such situations  
AI can play a critical role  in align ing demand and supply to avoid the impact of disruption.  
Covid -19 has forced firms to reconfigure their supply chain stru ctures due to sudden change s in 
the demand for consumer products i.e. healthcare products, personal protective equipment, toilet 

==== Page 27 ====
26 
 paper, food items etc. (Flynn,  2021).  During the pandemic it  became quite a challenge to maintain 
the right amount of inventory stock (of raw material and finished good s) to fulfil unpredictable  
customer demand. According to R 33 “ Apart from fetching the right forecast, there is a focus on 
demand and purchas ing pattern s, since inventory buildup  and capacity build up could cost 
extensively and firms fear what they will do wi th extra capacity post -Covid  19. Hence, AI can be 
helpful in predicting and maintaining the system and protect ing it from disruption”. The impact 
of disruption can be avoided to a large extent if a mechanism to reach out to customer s in real time 
is availa ble.  Firms are embracing diverse ways to reach out to their existing customers , as well as 
potential customers, to enhance the interaction frequency as well as improve the service level. 
Interaction with customers will result in acquiring demand sets, gaining insights into preference 
changes, and will lead to providing personalized s olutions. In the words of R 26 “ AI-based supply 
chains will facilitate better customer -centric solutions as AI will be studying the personal behavior 
of the client as well as incorporat ing their needs and requirements from their lifestyle and 
provid ing a better solution that is much more personalized.” Therefore, to develop dynamic 
capabilities  the personalized solution approach with identification of key supply chain processes 
and reconfiguration of resources are necessary for firms to quickly adjust the s ystem to instill 
resilience (Chowdhury and Quaddus, 2017). The above discussion leads us to the following 
proposition:  
P2:  During periods of prolonged supply chain disruption, technology such as AI can be used by 
firms to  increase their information proces sing capabilities to improve resilience in the supply 
chain  by synchroniz ing manufacturing and inventory plan ning.  
Supply chain contracts play a vital role in conducting  business  operations  and procuring materials , 
particularly  in highly uncertain and vol atile  environment s because  they reduce the risk of loss for 
any one party. Due to Covid -19, supplier contracts,  and trade contracts have been impacted 
significantly  due to lockdown and travel restrictions. The situation is further exacerbated  as supply 
chain contracts can become a complex legal issue in  highly uncertain periods, for example during  
Covid -19. Identification of the right supplier and maintaining the relationship results in more 
profitable and stable supply chains. Therefore, it is recommen ded by experts to develop and invest 
in local suppliers to achieve more resilience in the supply chain, as R 28 notes  “Procurement is 
more deeply done by connecting to vendors locally by detecting the demand and AI helps in finding 

==== Page 28 ====
27 
 the local vendors meetin g the business requirements. For instance, in the pre-Covid 19 era we 
used to have  a daily supply of raw materials to follow just -in-time. However, in Covid -19 it has 
reversed where rather than us, we were expecting our supplier s to have inventory cap acity, so 
whenever we require the raw material, the supplier is able to provide ”. In terms of dynamic 
capabilities, organizations dynamically make shifts in their procurement strategy to reflect  the 
change in demand patterns. According to R 31 “ AI analyses the market demands and thereafter 
align s to supply operations. During Covid -19, the usage of AI further consider s the capabilities of 
the stakeholders and take the clues from local suppliers to offer superior demand management”. 
These highlights lead us to the  following proposition:  
P3:  Under conditions of uncertainty AI can assist  in identifying the most efficient suppliers in 
local geographies , which in turn reduces supply chain risk  due to the sourcing emphasis on 
resilience .  
The Covid -19 pandemic has incr eased the demand for, and engagement in,  online retailing  and has 
accel erated the shift towards a more digital world. Online shopping has increased  significantly  
during the  various  phase s of Covid -19 lockdown. As a result,  firms have been  forced to change 
their delivery operations either by hiring 3rd party “last mile delivery” service s or by establishing 
new  “last mile delivery” operations in their own organizations .  The challenge has not only been 
the last mile delivery , but also ensur ing the safety of employees a nd delivery partners a s front line 
workers . According to R 12 “ We have developed tracker tools to ensure the safety of our employees 
and these tools  regularly provide  data to the plant that  an employee is healthy to work according 
to the sympto m checker ”.  
With the increase in customer expectation of high -speed delivery, organizations have optimized 
the delivery process and delivery route s consistently to remain competitive. A I and leading -edge  
technologies will be critical to the next generation of supply chain  management  due to their ability  
to respond so quickly . Last -mile delivery is considered the most expensive logistics process and 
accounts for nearly 50 per cent of overall shipment delivery cost (McKinsey, 2018). Predicting  the 
feasible delivery routes with the help of AI -enabled technology based on data related to traffic 
mapping, the resources (workforce, vehicles, etc.) required for delivery, and the fluctuation in 
demand of a particular region reduces supply chain risk  (Sundarakani et al., 2020) . Further , the 
digitization of processes improves  transparency and agility in the delivery process. According to 

==== Page 29 ====
28 
 R 7 “  Due to physical distancing due to Covid 19, we are consistently working towards paperless 
techniques for our del ivery force. Physical data is being converted into the digital forms and 
updated through software applications, which leads to improvements in delivery lead time 
significantly ”. The above discussion leads us to the following proposition:  
P4:  In instances where social distancing is required AI facilitate s the digital delivery of  products 
to  customers  at the right time and in the right quantity which improves customer satisfaction.   
Covid -19 has heightened volatility, uncertainty , and unpredictability (Singh et al. 2020a) .  It has  
forced business units to opt for flexible systems or systems that can change their shape and pace 
according to the situation (Singh et al. 2019) and that the system that can handle business shocks 
(Singh et al. 2020b). Dynamic  capabilities , for example  the automation of different supply chain 
processes (procurement, warehouse, delivery, etc.)  can enhance the efficiency of a system and can 
quickly adjust to change. According to R14 “ The automated supply chain management system and 
location based tracking tools can help firms  to reveal desperately needed end to end information 
about the status of goods and suppliers. Pre -Covid , supply lines were designed keeping stable 
production in mind, but now Covid 19 has exposed the vulnerab ilities of complex global supply 
chains .”  Due to th ese requirements  we need a flexible system that can adapt and mould based on 
the changes in the environment. Adaptability of the system can make it shock -free, or shock 
absorbing , and more resilient. The above discussion leads us to the following  proposition:  
P5: During  periods of uncertainty, for example  Covid -19, AI can offer a  higher degree of flexibility 
and automation that allows firms  to quickly adjust to the changing environment  and enables supply 
chains to improve performance by mitigating the risk of disruption.  
Based on the five propositions, we develop  a framework  presented as  Figure 4  that can be further 
explored and tested through an appropriate organizational and grounded theory appro ach. 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 30 ====
29 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: AI enabled supply chain resilience capabilities  
 
7.0 Discussion  and Implications  
Our study offers  interesting and useful findings  to advance   debates on: supply chain resilience, 
Covid -19 and artificial intelligence from  a dynamic capabilities  perspective . In adopting the lens 
of dynamic capabilities, we offer theoretical advances through the integration of operations 
management and information systems. The importance of theory development in operations 
management through qualitative research ha s been high lighted in earlier studies ( Narasimhan, 
2014; Barratt et al., 2011).  Recent studies have examined  the role of emerging and intelligent AI enabled 
supply chain 
resilience 
capabilitiesTransperency
Personalized 
solutions
Procurement 
strategyReduce 
disruption 
impactLast mile 
delivery
Sensing  demand at 
retailer’s end, Demand 
Forecasting, Invoicing, 
Tracking shipments  
Spend Analysis, Vendor 
management, Supplier 
Risk Management, 
Contract management  
Virtual Chatbot, 
Understanding 
consumer behavior, 
Inventory Planning, 
Understating market 
patterns  
Predictive Analysis, 
Managing Workforce, 
Paperless technique for 
delivery force  
Automated warehouse, 
robotic process 
automation, Supply 
Chain flexibility, Sales 
and Operations 
Planning  

==== Page 31 ====
30 
 technologies in the design and development of  responsive  supply chains , thus  enhanc ing their 
capabilities to ensure business continuity (Russell & Swanson, 2019; Pettit et al., 2013). Hence, 
we conceptualized DC as an appropriate lens to observe  and critique  the implications for theory 
and practice for supply chain management that are emerg ing during Covid -19. 
7.1 Implications for theory  
In this study, we offer a three -fold contribution to existing literature. First, by drawing on the 
insights of  experts in supply chain management with experience of working during the Covid -19 
pandemic, we  have discovered the practical issues faced during uncertain and extremely difficult 
conditions.  Through our discussions with experts we have seen how  firms and  supply chains have 
boosted their resilience by adopting intelligent technologies. We have witnessed a gap between 
the theory and practice of logistics in the Covid 19  context . For instance, most of the supply chain 
managers  we interviewed  were in favour o f holding  inventory not only in their own firms  but also 
with their suppliers , which is in contrast to academic  emphasis on Just in Time (van Hoek , 2020) .  
Second, based on the open, axial, and selective cod ing of the qualitative data , we have developed 
and presented five propositions developed from  the views of supply chain professionals and their 
experience during Covid -19.  These proposition s provide a  state-of-the-art foundation for further 
research . As per our  propositions, the transparency of a supply chain can build resilience when 
supply chain actors  are capable of tracking their shipments , have the  correct invoicing to drive the 
operations and  utilize  AI to forecast demand  (Ivanov, 2021; Queiroz et al., 2020) . Further, AI can 
be viewed as a  tool in understanding market and consumer requirements , which  can assist  in 
designing and offering personalized solutions. As procurement and strategic sourcing are often 
perceived as the  back -bone of a supply chain,  AI can support  in effective contract management, 
thus developing  understand ing and reduc ing the impact of supplier risk management  (van Hoek , 
2020; Sundarakani et al., 2020) . During Covid -19,  one of the most difficult task s for e-commerce 
has been  the last mile delivery, where problems such as workforce  shortages and the requirement 
to adopt digital and paperless delivery  have proven challenging.  AI can be used to  address and 
optimize the workforce to ensure last mile delivery  by developing  AI driven innovation and 
technologies to improve flexibility, automation and strategic planning , thus strengthening  the 
capability of organizations to reduce the impact of risk ( Dolgui & Ivanov, 2020; Wamba et al., 
2020b).  Our study supports  the findings of existing studies  that have utilized DC theory,  which 

==== Page 32 ====
31 
 highlight the role of AI in enhancing organizational performance and supply chain resilience  by 
connecting stakeholders  in real time  (Dubey et al., 2020; Dolgui & Ivanov , 2020). Complementary  
theories such as resource -based view and organizational information processing  can be applied to 
test our propositions  further. Third, by drawing on the five  propositions we have developed a five -
dimensional framework representing the components of AI -enabled supply chain resilience 
capabilities that have gained increasing importance  due to Covid -19. Our study appreciates the 
role of DC in AI facilitated resilience for supply chains in complex situations  of extremely high 
uncertainty (e.g. Covid 19 ). Hence , our study offers interesting avenues for further work examining 
how supply chains  can improve resilie nce by developing  adequate capabilities that can reduce the 
risk and impact of disruption  in uncert ain situations , such as Covid -19. In identifying and 
addressing these key gaps in  practice , we answer  the research question s posed at the outset of our 
study : What AI capabilities should be considered when designing and executing post -Covid -19 
supply chains? How can AI capabilities be leveraged to improve s upply chain resilience?  In 
drawing on our propositions and five -dimensional  framework , businesses can equip and enhance 
their capabilities  to meet the challenges arising  when a pandemic like Covid -19 or other disasters 
strike.  
 
7.2 Implications for practice  
 
The  study offers unique opportunities  for supply chain practitioners to employ AI technologies to 
strengthen the resilience  required to  respond in dynamic situations,  such as Covid -19. These AI -
enabled capabilities can be helpf ul not only to the focal firm but also to supply chain actors as co -
ordination  become s critical in Covid -19 impacted supply chains. However, before deciding to 
employ AI in the supply chain  professionals need to consider  (i) existing sensing capabilities (ii) 
how to capture  the multi -directional information , and  (iii) the degree of re -configuration required 
on the basis of the impact of a Covid -19 like pandemic on their supply chain. Practitioners must  
analyze the logistic al capabilities  required  for ensuring last mile delivery  are consistent with social 
distancing and how AI -driven technologies can enhance effectiveness. Inventories and their 
importance  were discussed in significant detail during our interviews , therefore the appropriate 
level of  inventory for ensuring the continuity  of the supply chain is necessary and AI can help in 

==== Page 33 ====
32 
 offering accuracy and transparency to enhance the overall efficiency at firm, supplier, distributor 
and retailer nodes . Apart from additional  safety and  the pressur e to reduc e costs, supply chain  
professionals may  also consider the application of AI for identifying and analyzing trends  to 
realign the supply chain capabilities that emerged due to Covid -19. As compared to a traditional 
setting, an AI -enabled environmen t offers the scope for enhancing the capabilities of the 
stakeholders upstream as well as downstream to avoid the bullwhip effect ; such capabilities are 
crucial  in a situation like Covid -19. In this way the adoption of AI will not only enhance the 
company readiness and resilienc e to cope with uncertainty  but will also facilitate the customer 
experience that in turn drives business growth even during  situations such as  Covid -19. Supply 
chain professionals can consider the elements highlighted in the proposed  framework and link 
them to their AI adoption approach and continuously assess  against this framework  to gauge the 
benefits in terms of supply chain resilience capabilities during and post -Covid 19 era.  
 
7.3 Limitations and scope for future research  
 
The c oncept of dynamic capabilities is based on two classic systems i.e. strategic management and 
marketing , in the form of resource -based and market positioning. Dynamic capabilities specifically 
develop on the basis of choices that organizations make for thei r internal activities and are 
consider ed based on  external factors such as markets and number of competitors. To develop the 
AI-based infrastructure one needs to check the compatibility of existing infrastructure and scope 
for supply chain resilience capab ility.  Whilst our study offers clear theoretical and managerial 
contributions, it is not without limitations.  For example, our study utilizes a relatively small 
number  of respondents  and hence only their views are captured.  Further work may consider a 
larger sample across a broader range of industries and geographical reach.   From the findings, it is 
evident how AI can influence the different aspects of supply chain resilience  and there is potential 
for future studies to examine and investigate the social media driven AI capabilities that can direct 
the supply chains to align with customer requirements  (Wamba et al., 2019) . Future studies may 
explore the role of AI from the perspective of organizational information processing theory and 
resource -based view to develop the required degree of resilience in uncertain times such as Covid -
19. Addit ionally, future  research  can adopt a mix ed-method s approach to further validate the 

==== Page 34 ====
33 
 findings of our study (Chan et al., 2016). Further work may also  compare pre a nd post -Covid 
changes in supply chain resilience. Our study considers  the region -specific orientation of supply 
chain professionals that can be verified with multi -country studies in the future. Forthcoming  
studies may employ an explanatory  approach to tes t the proposed framework. Further research can 
be conducted to test the different supply chain resilience approaches enabled by intelligent 
technologies in different industries and find the commonalities in terms of how AI facilitates the 
supply chain resi lience capability in a certain  group of industries. In summary, our study provides 
many avenues for interesting, topical and contemporary further work.  
8.0 Conclusion  
Our study  adopts the lens of DC to investigate the  potential of  AI to develop supply chain resilience 
during Covid -19. In considering DC, we have demonstrated  how AI can improve  supply chain  
resilience  and support organization al surviv al in a complex and uncertain environment. Moreover 
our study develops  and presents  a framework de monstrating  supply chain resilience capabilities. 
Our study responds to the underdeveloped debates of the current Covid -19 time period;  debates 
focused on how to  utiliz e AI as a dynamic capability of an organization to strengthen supply chain  
resilienc e. AI can be helpful in addressing  pressing supply chain concerns , such as improving  
transparency through continuous monitoring, ensuring last mile delivery of essential  household 
items, maintaining  a dynamic procurement strategy, offering personalized solutions  and mitigating 
the disruption caused due to Covid -19.  In summary, our study presents in -depth investigation and 
findings of employing AI enabled platforms and systems to improve supply chain resilience during 
extreme events such as Covid -19.  
Declaration:  The authors declare  that there is  no conflict of interest.  
 
Barbieri, D.M., Lou, B., Passavanti, M., Hui, C., Lessa, D.A., Maharaj, B.,  Banerjee, A., Wang, F., Chang, K., Naik, 
B.,Yu, L. , Liu, Z., Sikka, G., Tucker, A., Mirhosseini , A.F., Naseri, S., Qiao, Y., Gupta, A., Abbas, M., Fang, K., 
Ghasemi, N., Peprah, P., Goswami, S., Hessami, A., Agarwal, N., Lam, L ., and Adomako,S.  (2020), “A survey 
dataset to evaluate the changes in mobility and transportation due to COVID -19 travel re strictions in 
Australia, Brazil, China, Ghana, India, Iran, Italy, Norway, South Africa, United States ”, Data in Brief . doi: 
10.1016/j.dib.2020.106459 . 
 
Barbieri et al. , 2020: The article is recently published and therefore p age range is not avliable , therefore DOI 
is given . 

==== Page 35 ====
34 
 Belhadi et al. , 2021: The article is recently published and therefore page range is not avliable, therefore DOI is 
given.  
Braun and Clarke, 2020: The article is recently published and therefore volume, page range is not avliable, 
therefore DOI is given.  
Butt and Ahmad, 2020: The article is recently published and therefore volume, page range is not avliable, 
therefore DOI is given.  
Grida et al. , 2020: The article is recently published and therefore  page range is not avliable, therefo re DOI is 
given.  
Handfield, R.B., Graham, G. and Burns, L. (2020), “Corona virus, tariffs, trade wars and supply chain  
evolutionary design”, International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 40 No. 10, pp. 
1649 -1660.  
Jabbour et al. , 2020:  The article is recently published and therefore page range is not avliable, therefore DOI is 
given.  
 
Khan et al., 2020: The article is recently published and therefore page range is not avliable, therefore DOI is 
given.  
 
Norouzi et al. , 2020: The article is recently published and therefore page range is not avliable, therefore DOI is 
given.  
 
Paul, S.K. and Chowdhury, P. (2020), “A production recovery plan in manufacturing supply chains for  a high -
demand item during COVID -19”, Internatio nal Journal of Physical Distribution and  Logistics Management,Vol. 
51 No. 2, pp. 104 -125.  
 
Sarkis, J. (2020), “Supply chain sustainability: learning from the COVID -19 pandemic”, International  
Journal of Operations and Production Management., Vol. 41 No. 1,  pp. 63 -73. 
 
Sharma et al. , 2020: The article is recently published and therefore page range is not avliable, therefore DOI is 
given.  
 
Sodhi, M.S. and Tang, C.S. (2020), “Supply chain management for extreme conditions: research  
opportunities”, Journal of S upply Chain Management, Vol. 57 No1,pp. 7 –16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 36 ====
35 
 References  
Adobor, H. (2020). Supply chain resilience: an adaptive cycle approach.   International Journal of 
Logistics Management,  31(3), 443 -463. 
Alora, A.  and Barua, M.K.  (2020). The effect of supply chain disru ptions on shareholder wealth 
in small and mid -cap companies.  Supply Chain Management , https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM -
05-2020 -0200  
Alvesson, M., & Sandberg, J. (2011). Generating research questions through problematization. 
Academy of Management Review , 36(2), 247 -271. 
Barratt, M., Choi, T. Y., & Li, M. (2011). Qualitative case stu dies in operations management: 
Trends, research outcomes, and future research implications. Journal of Operations 
Management , 29(4), 329 -342. 
Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2019). Supply chain risk management and 
artificial intelligence: state of the art and future research directions.  International Journal of 
Production Research,  57(7), 2179 -2202.  
Butt, A. S. (2021). Strategies to mitigate the impact of COVID -19 on supply chain disruptions: a 
multiple case analysis of buyers  and distributors. International Journal of Logistics 
Management.  DOI: 10.1108/ IJLM -11-2020 -0455  
Chan, H. K., Wang, X., Lacka , E., & Zhang, M. (2016). A mixed‐method approach to extracting 
the value of social media data. Production and Operations Management , 25(3), 568 -583. 
Chang, W., Ellinger, A. E., & Blackhurst, J. (2015). A contextual approach to supply chain risk 
mitigation . International Journal of Logistics Management , 26(3), 642 -656. 
Choi, T. M. (2020). Innovative “Bring -Service -Near -Your -Home” Operations under Corona virus 
(COVID -19/SARS -CoV -2) Outbreak: Can Logistics Become the Messiah?. Transportation 
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review . DOI:  10.1016/j.tre.2020.101961  
Chowdhury, M. M. H., & Quaddus, M. (2017).  Supply chain resilienc e: Conceptualization and 
scale development using dynamic capability theory. International Journal of Production 
Economics , 188, 185 –204.  

==== Page 37 ====
36 
 Craven, M., Liu, L., Mysore, M., & Wilson, M. (2020). COVID -19: Implications for 
business.  McKinsey & Company . Available at –https://  
www.aedcr.com/sites/default/files/docs/mckinsey -full_article.pdf.pdf.pdf  (Accessed  on 5th 
Jan, 2021).  
Datta, P. (2017). Supply network re silience: a systematic literature review and future 
research.  International Journal of Logistics Management , 28(4),  1387 -1424.  
de Koster, M. D., & Warffemius, P. M. J. (2005). American, Asian and third‐party international 
warehouse operations in Europe.  International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management , 25(8),  762-780. 
de Moura, G. B., & Saroli, L. G. (2020). Sustainable value chain management based on dynamic 
capabilities in small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs).  International Journal of Logistics 
Management . DOI:  10.1108/IJLM -01-2020 -0044  
de Sá, M. M., de Souza Miguel, P. L., de Brito, R. P., & Pereira, S. C. F. (2019). Supply cha in 
resilience: the whole is not the sum of the parts.  International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management , 40(1), 92 -115. 
Defee, C. C., & Fugate, B. S. (2010). Changing perspective of capabilities in the dynamic supply 
chain era.  International Jour nal of Logistics Management , 21(2),  180-206. 
Dolgui, A., & Ivanov, D. (2020). Exploring supply chain structural dynamics : New disruptive 
technologies and disruption risks. International Journal of Production Economics . DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107886  
Dubey, R., & Gunasekaran, A. (2015). Education and training for successful career in big data and 
business analytics. Industrial and Commercial Training,  47(4),174 -181  
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Understanding 
employee turnover in humanitarian organizations. Industrial and Commercial Training , 48(4), 
208-214. 
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., & P apadopoulos, T. (2018). Skills needed in supply 
chain -human agency and social capital analysis in third party logistics. Management Decision , 
56(1), 143 -159. 

==== Page 38 ====
37 
 Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Bryde, D. J., Giannakis, M., Foropon, C.  & Hazen, B. 
T. (2020). Big data analytics and artificial intelligence pathway to operational performance 
under the effects of entrepreneurial orientation and environmental dynamism: A study of 
manufacturing organizations . International Journal of Productio n Economics . DOI:  
10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107599  
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., & Fosso -Wamba, S. (2017). World 
Class Sustainable Supply Chain Management: critical review and further research directions. 
International Journal of Logistics Management , 28(2), 332 -362. 
Dubois, A., & Gibbert, M. (2010). From complexity to transparency: managing the interplay 
betwe en theory, method and empirical phenomena in IMM case studies. Industrial Marketing 
Management , 39(1), 129 -136. 
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., Duan, Y., Dwivedi, 
R., Edwards, J., Eirug, A., Galanos, V., Ilavarasan, P. V., Janssen, M., Jones, P., Kar, A. K., 
Kizgin, H., Kronemann, B., Lal, B., Lucini, B., … Williams, M. D. (2019). Artificial 
Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and 
agenda for research, pr actice and policy. International Journal of Information 
Management.  DOI: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.002  
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Acade my of Management 
Review , 14(4), 532 -550. 
Fawcett, S. E., Waller, M. A., Miller, J., Schwieterman, M., Hazen, B., & Overstreet, R. (2014). 
A Trail Guide to Publishing Success: Tips on Writing Influential Conceptual, Qualitative, and 
Survey Research. Journal  of Business Logistics , 35(1), 1 -16. 
Flynn  B., Cantor D, Pagell D., Dooley KJ and Azadegan A. (2021). From the Editors: Introduction 
to Managing Supply Cha ins Beyond Covid‐19 ‐ Preparing for the Next Global Mega‐
Disruption” Journal of Supply Chain Management , 57 (1), 3 –6 
Gammelgaard, B. (2017). The Qualitative Case Study. International Journal of Logistics 
Management , 28(4), 910 -913. 

==== Page 39 ====
38 
 Gibbert, M., Ruigrok , W., & Wicki, B. (2008). What passes as a rigorous case study?. Strategic 
Management Journal , 29(13), 1465 -1474.  
Gibbs, G. R. (2007). Thematic coding and categorizing.  Analyzing Qualitative Data , 703, 38 -56. 
Gligor, D. M., & Autry, C. W. (2012). The role of personal relationships in facilitating supply 
chain communications: A qualitative study.  Journal of Supply Chain Management,  48(1), 24 -
43. 
Grant, R. M. (1991). The resource -based theory of competitive advantage: implications for 
strategy formulation.  California management review , 33(3), 114 -135. 
Gupta, S., Modgil, S., Bhattacharyya, S., & Bose, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence for decision 
support systems in the field of operations research: review and future scope of research.  Annals 
of Operations R esearch . DOI: 10.1007/s10479 -020-03856 -6 
Gupta, S., Modgil, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Bag, S. (2020). Dynamic capabilities and institutional 
theories for Industry 4.0 and digital supply chain. Supply Chain Forum: An International 
Journal,  21(3), 139 -157. 
Guzman, A. L., & Lewis, S. C. (2020). Artificial intelligence and communication: A Human –
Machine Communication research agenda.  New Media & Society , 22(1), 70 -86. 
Handfield, R. B., Graham, G., & Burns,  L. (2020). Corona virus, tariffs, trade wars and supply 
chain evolutionary design.  International Journal of Operations & Production Management , 
40(10), 1649 -1660.  
Helfat, C. E., Finkelstein, S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M. A., Singh, H., Teece, D. J. and Wi nter, S. 
G. (2007) Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.  
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2020). Engaged to a Robot? The Role of AI in Service.  Journal of 
Service Research . DOI:  10.1177/1094670520902266  
Huin, S. F., Luong, L. H. S., & Abhary, K. (2003). Knowledge -based tool for planning of enterprise 
resources in ASEAN SMEs.  Robotics and Computer -Integrated Manufacturing , 19(5), 409 -
414. 

==== Page 40 ====
39 
 Ivanov, D. (2020a). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A 
simulation -based analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID -19/SARS -CoV -2) case. 
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review , 136, 101922.  
Ivanov, D. (2020b). Viable supply chain model: integrating agility, resilience and sustainability 
perspectives —lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID -19 pandemic. Annals of 
Operations Research . DOI: 10.1007/s10479 -020-03640 -6. 
Ivanov, D. (2021). Lean resilience: AURA (Active Usage of Resilience Assets) framework for 
post-COVID -19 supply chain management. International Journal of Logistics 
Management.  DOI: 10.1 108/IJLM -11-2020 -0448  
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020). Viability of intertwined supply networks: extending the supply 
chain resilience angles towards survivability. A position paper motivated by COVID -19 
outbreak. International Journal of Production Resear ch, 58(10), 2904 -2915.  
Kano, L., & Oh, C. H. (2020). Global value chains in the post‐COVID world: Governance for 
reliability.  Journal of Management Studies , 57(8), 1773 -1777.  
Knudsen, D.  (2003). Aligning corporate strategy, procurement strategy and e‐procurement 
tools.  International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management , 33(8), 720 -734 
Kwak, D. W., Seo, Y. J., & Mason, R. (2018). Investigating the relationship between supply chain 
innovation, risk management capabilities and competitive advantage in global supply 
chains.  International Journal of Operations & Production Management , 38(1), 2 -21. 
Macioszek, E. (2017). First and last mile delivery – problems and issues. Scientific and Technical 
Conference Transport Systems Theory and Practice, Springer, Cham and Katowice, pp. 147 -
154 
Maghsoudi, A.  and Pazirandeh, A. (2016). Visibility, resource sharing and performance in supply 
chain relationships: insights from humanitarian practitioners. Supply Chain Management , 
21(1), 125 -139 
Mahajan, K., & Tomar, S. (2021). COVID‐19 and Supply Chain Disruption: Evidence from Food 
Markets in India.  American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 103(1), 35 -52. 

==== Page 41 ====
40 
 Mangiaracina, R. , Perego, A. , Seghezzi, A.  and Tumino, A.  (2019). Innovative solutions to 
increase last -mile delivery efficiency in B2C e -commerce: a literature review.  International 
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management , 49(9), 901 -920. 
McKinsey (2018). Thinking inside the subscription box: New research on e -commerce consumers. 
Available at - https:// www.mckinsey.com/industries/technology -media -and-
telecommunications/our -insights/thinking -inside -the-subscription -box-new-research -on-
ecommerce -consumers#  (Accessed on 1st Dec, 2020)  
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M. & Saldana, J., (2014), Qualitative data analy sis: A methods 
sourcebook  Sage: Thousand Oaks, CA.  
Min, H. (2010). Artificial intelligence in supply chain management: theory and 
applications.  International Journal of Logistics: Research and Applications , 13(1), 13 -39. 
Muniz, L. R., Conceição , S. V., Rodrigues, L. F., de Freitas Almeida, J. F., & Affonso, T. B. 
(2020). Spare parts inventory management: a new hybrid approach.   International Journal of 
Logistics Management . DOI: 10.1108/IJLM -12-2019 -0361  
Murfield, M. L., & Tate, W. L. (2017). Buyer and supplier perspectives on environmental 
initiatives.  International Journal of Logistics Management , 28(4),  1319 -1350.  
Narasimhan, R. (2014) . Theory development in operations management: Extending the frontiers 
of a mature discipline via qualitative research. Decision Sciences , 45(2), 209 -227. 
Pagell , M., & Wu, Z. (2009). Building a more complete theory of sustainable supply chain 
management using case studies of 10 exemplars. Journal of Supply Chain Management , 45(2), 
37-56. 
Papadopoulos, G.A., Zamer, N., Gayialis, S.P. and Tatsiopoulos, I.P. (2016).  Supply chain 
improvement in construction industry. Universal Journal of Management , 4(10), 528 -534. 
Paul, S. K., & Chowdhury, P. (2020). A production recovery plan in manufacturing supply chains 
for a high -demand item during COVID -19. International Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics Management . DOI:  10.1108/IJPDLM -04-2020 -0127  

==== Page 42 ====
41 
 Pettit, T. J., Croxton, K. L., & Fiksel, J. (2013). Ensuring supply chain resilience: development 
and implementation of an assessment tool.  Journal of Business Logistics , 34(1), 46 -76. 
Ponomarov, S. Y., & Holcomb, M. C. (2009). Understanding the concept of supply chain 
resilience.  International Journal of L ogistics Management , 20(1), 124 -143. 
Queiroz, M. M., Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2020). Impacts of epidemic 
outbreaks on supply chains: mapping a research agenda amid the COVID -19 pandemic through 
a structured literature review. Annals of Op erations Research . DOI: 10.1007/s10479 -020-
03685 -7 
van Hoek, R. (2020). Research opportunities for a more resilient post -COVID -19 supply chain – 
closing the gap between research findings and industry practice. International Journal of 
Operations and Production Management , 40(4), 341 –355.  
Russell, D. M., & Swanson, D. (2019). Transforming information into supply chain agility: an 
agility adaptation typology.   International Journal of Logistics Management , 30(1),  329-355. 
Sandberg, J., & Alvesson, M. (2011). Ways of constructing research questions: gap -spotting or 
problematization?. Organization , 18(1), 23 -44. 
Sarkis, J. (2020). Supply chain sustainability: learning from the COVID -19 
pandemic.  International Journal of Opera tions & Production Management, 41(1), 63 -73. 
Schniederjans, D. G., Curado, C., & Khalajhedayati, M. (2020). Supply chain digitization trends: 
An integration of knowledge management.  International Journal of Production Economics . 
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012  
Singh R.K., Modgil, S. and Acharya P (2019). Assessment of flexible supply chain using system 
dynamics modelling: A case of Ind ian soap manufacturing firm. Global Journal of Flexible 
System Management , 20(1), 39 -63. 
Singh R.K., Modgil, S. and Acharya P (2020). A Template Based Approach to Measure Supply 
Chain Flexibility: A case study of Indian Soap Manufacturing firm. Measuring B usiness 
Excellence , 24(2),161 -181. 

==== Page 43 ====
42 
 Singh R.K., Modgil, S. and Acharya P (2020). Identification and Causal Assessment of Supply 
Chain Flexibility. Benchmarking: An International Journal , 27(2), 517 -549. 
Sundarakani, B., Pereira, V., & Ishizaka, A. (2020). R obust facility location decisions for resilient 
sustainable supply chain performance in the face of disruptions.  International Journal of 
Logistics Management.  DOI: 10.1108/ IJLM -12-2019 -0333  
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic 
management.  Strategic Management Journal , 18(7), 509 -533. 
Toorajipour, R., Sohrabpour, V., Nazarpour, A., Oghazi, P., & Fischl, M. (2021). Artificial 
intelligenc e in supply chain management: A systematic literature review.  Journal of Business 
Research , 122, 502 -517. 
Treleaven, P., & Batrinca, B. (2017). Algorithmic regulation: automating financial compliance 
monitoring and regulation using AI and blockchain.  Journ al of Financial Transformation , 45, 
14-21. 
Wamba, S. F., Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Akter, S. (2020a). The performance effects of big 
data analytics and supply chain ambidexterity: The moderating effect of environmental 
dynamism.  International Journal o f Production Economics , 222, 107498.  
Wamba, S. F., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved 
emergency services operations: the case of the NSW SES.  Annals of Operations 
Research , 283(1-2), 225 -245. 
Wamba, S.F, Queiroz, M. M., Wu, L., & Sivarajah, U. (2020c). Big data analytics -enabled sensing 
capability and organizational outcomes: assessing the mediating effects of business analytics 
culture. Annals of Operations Research.  DOI: 10.1007/s10479 -020-03812 -4 
Wamba, S.F., Bawack, R. E., Guthrie, C., Queiroz, M. M., & Carillo, K. D. A. (2020b). Are we 
preparing for a good AI society? A bibliometric review and research agenda. Technologi cal 
Forecasting & Social Change.  DOI:  10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120482  
Wang -Mlynek, L., & Foerstl, K. (2020). Barriers to multi -tier supply chain risk management.  
International Journal of Logistics Management , 31(3), 465 -487. 

==== Page 44 ====
43 
 Wen, J., He, L., & Zhu, F. (2018). Swarm robotics control and communications: imminent 
challenges for next generation smart logistics.  IEEE Communications Magaz ine, 56(7), 102 -
107. 
Wong, C. W., Lirn, T. C., Yang, C. C., & Shang, K. C. (2020). Supply chain and external 
conditions under which supply chain resilience pays: An organizational information processing 
theorization.  International Journal of Production Economics . DOI:  
10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107610  
 
 
 
 

