==== Page 1 ====
39Artificial Intelligence in Underwater Digital Twins
Sensor Networks
ZHIHAN LV ,Department of Game Design,Faculty of Arts,UppsalaUniversity,Sweden
DONGLIANG CHEN ,Collegeof Computer Science andTechnology, Qingdao University,China
HAILIN FENG ,School of InformationEngineering,Zhejiang A& FUniversity,China
WEIWEI ,School of ComputerScience andEngineering, Xi’an Universityof Technology, China
HAIBINLV ,NorthChinaSeaOffshoreEngineeringSurveyInstitute,MinistryofNaturalResourcesNorth
Sea Bureau,China
The particularity of the marine underwater environment has brought many challenges to the development
ofunderwater sensor networks (UWSNs) . This research realized the effective monitoring of targets by
UWSNs and achieved higher quality of service in various applications such as communication, monitoring,
anddatatransmissioninthemarineenvironment.Afteranalysisofthearchitecture,the marineintegrated
communicationnetworksystem(MICNsystem) isconstructedbasedonthe maritimewirelessMesh
network (MWMN) by combining with the UWSNs. A distributed hybrid fish swarm optimization al-
gorithm (FSOA) based on mobility of underwater environment and artificial fish swarm (AFS) theory is
proposed in response to the actual needs of UWSNs. The proposed FSOA algorithm makes full use of the
perceptual communication of sensor nodes and lets the sensor nodes share the information covered by each
other as much as possible, enhancing the global search ability. In addition, a reliable transmission protocol
NC-HARQisputforwardbasedonthecombinationof networkcoding(NC) andhybridautomaticrepeat
request (HARQ) . In this work, three sets of experiments are performed in an area of 200 ×200×200 m.
The simulation results show that the FSOA algorithm can fully cover the events, effectively avoid the blind
movement of nodes, and ensure consistent distribution density of nodes and events. The NC-HARQ proto-
col proposed uses relay nodes for retransmission, and the probability of successful retransmission is much
higher than that of the source node. At a distance of more than 2,000 m, the successful delivery rate of data
packetsisashighas99.6%.BasedontheMICNsystem,theintelligentshipconstructedwiththedigitaltwins
framework can provide effective ship operating state prediction information. In summary, this study is of
great value for improving the overall performance of UWSNs and advancing the monitoring of marine data
information.
CCSConcepts:• Computersystems organization →Embeddedsystems ;
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases:Marinemonitoring,underwatersensornetworks,digitaltwins,artificial
intelligence
This work wassupported byNationalNaturalScienceFoundation of China (No.61902203).
Authors’ addresses: D. Chen, College of Computer Science and Technology, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China;
email:cdlord@qq.com;W.Wei,SchoolofComputerScienceandEngineering,XianUniversityofTechnology,Xian710048,
China; email: weiwei@xaut.edu.cn; H. Lv, North China Sea Offshore Engineering Survey Institute, Ministry of Natural
Resources North SeaBureau, Qingdao,China;email:lvhaibinsoa@gmail.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2022Copyright held bytheowner/author(s). Publicationrights licensed toACM.
1550-4859/2022/04-ART39$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3519301
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.


==== Page 2 ====
39:2 Z.Lv et al.
ACM Reference format:
ZhihanLv,DongliangChen,HailinFeng,WeiWei,andHaibinLv.2022.ArtificialIntelligenceinUnderwater
Digital Twins Sensor Networks. ACMTrans.Sen.Netw. 18, 3,Article 39 (April 2022), 27pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3519301
1 INTRODUCTION
Asscholarsfromallovertheworldpaymoreattentiontomarinetechnologytoanunprecedented
strategic height, marine resource survey, marine environmental monitoring, and sea area secu-
ritycanberealizedthroughsatellites,ships,andsubmarines[ 1].Butthesemethodsareunableto
completethesetasksoveralongtime,atcloserange,seamless,andinreal-time.Asanunderwater
monitoring network system composed of acoustic communication sensor nodes, UWSN has now
become an important part of ocean informatization [ 2–4]. The use of sensor networks can obtain
marinedataforalongtime,monitorthemarineenvironment,andcooperatewithtraditionalship
platforms to jointly complete more complex tasks [ 5]. In recent years, the research of UWSNs
mainly involves underwater communication technology, layout and networking, routing proto-
cols,andlocationtracking[ 6].Communicationandpositioningarethetwocorekeytechnologies
that support UWSNs. Underwater acoustic communication provides a link channel for informa-
tionexchangeamongdifferentnodes.Ontheonehand,underwateracousticpositioningprovides
positioncalibrationforthenodes;ontheotherhand,asthedynamicnodeoftheunderwatersen-
sor network, the underwater unmanned submarine can carry a variety of equipment to perform
underwatertasks,anditsmaneuverabilitygreatlyexpandstheapplicationfieldoftheUWSNs[ 7].
The digital twins is considered to be an effective means to realize the interactive integration
of the manufacturing information world and the physical world. It makes full use of the physical
models,sensorupdates,andoperatinghistorytocompletethemappingofphysicalentitiesinthe
virtualspace,therebyreflectingthelifecycleprocessofphysicalentities[ 8–10].Asthecoretech-
nologyforcreatingandrunningdigitaltwins,simulationtechnologyisthebasisfordigitaltwinsto
realizedatainteractionanddatafusion.Onthisbasis,thedigitaltwinshastorelyonandintegrate
othernewtechnologiestobeonlinewiththesensor,soastoensureitsfidelity,instantaneity,and
closed-loop characteristics. The Internet of Things (IoT) allow to access the information about
thephysicalworld,anddigitaltwinscanuse,analyze,optimize,andtestthisinformation[ 11].Data
miningandIoTtechnologyarethemaindrivingfactorsofdigitaltwins.Withthegradualmaturity
of technology, digital twins has begun to be applied in fields other than manufacturing [ 12]. By
continuously integrating the latest information, digital twins technology can bring the greatest
value, and combine the real data with virtual models for analysis, thereby reducing production
interruptions and costs. For example, engineers can access real-time data, simulation results, and
solutionsusingthedigitaltwins,efficientlyperforminghundredsofoperationaltasksfromalong
distance[ 13].
The sensor industry is showing explosive growth in the world, but it is also facing more new
challengeswiththevigorousdevelopmentofintelligentmanufacturing.Fortheunderwaterenvi-
ronmentwithhighcomplexity,theunderwateracousticchannelwillhaveaseriousimpactonthe
communication among the sensor nodes, and the existing underwater routing strategy is greatly
affected by the underwater environment [ 14]. Therefore, more in-depth research is needed in the
fieldofreliabletransmissionandroutingtechnologyforunderwateracousticsensornetworks.In
addition, when the multiple access mechanism of UWSNs is explored, it is not only necessary to
consider the competing access requirements of nodes within the network, but also to avoid harm
toothernetworkusers,achievingparalleltransmissionofmultiplecommunicationsandmaximize
network capacity and increasing the spatial reuse rate of spectrum. After the sensor data of the
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 3 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:3
underwater site collected by the current sensor are obtained, the sensor data is processed by the
digital twins inference model. In this way, the status data of the underwater station is obtained,
therebyimprovingtheaccuracyandefficiencyofobtainingtheoperatingstatusofthestationand
reducinglaborcosts.Moreover,afterthestatusdataoftheunderwaterstationisobtained,thedig-
italtwinsdisplaymodelfurthervisualizestheoperatingstatusofthestation,whichisconvenient
for users to intuitively obtain the operating status of the station and is beneficial to improve the
userexperience.
At present, various countries in the world have been making breakthroughs in the field of
UWSNsresearch.ThemorerepresentativeprojectsincludeSeaweb,Ocean-TUNEoftheUSNavy,
and SUNRISE and CommsNet 12 of Europe.They have accumulated a lot of experience in the ex-
periment,andhavetriedtoaddmobilenodessuchasAUVtothenetwork,achievinggoodresults.
But there is no research on fully self-organized underwater mobile cluster networking. The key
torealizingunmannedmobileclusternetworkingiswhetherthenodesaresufficientlyintelligent,
which requires a large number of intelligent algorithm support. The research of underwater mo-
bileclustershastoconsidernotonlytheintelligenceofclusters,butalsoaseriesofcomplexissues
that affect network performance. The marine monitoring network is explored, and the informa-
tiontransmissionmechanismandnetworkcoverageofUWSNsarediscussedinthisstudy.Taking
sensor nodes as agents, a multiple access mechanism based on the propagation characteristics of
underwater acoustic signals is put forward with the guidance of the power allocation strategy of
network node game. Furthermore, a reliable underwater data transmission protocol is proposed
to enhance the reliability and robustness of underwater data transmission, and its performance
is verified by simulation experiments. Finally, the digital twins of the ship are generated through
data-driven and physical model-driven methods to realize the prediction of ship navigation. The
relatively systematic research in this study compensates the lack of information transmission ef-
ficiencyinthefieldofunderwatersensors,therebypromotingtheconstructionandimprovement
of MICNsystem.
2 EXPERIMENTAL AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
2.1 Design of MICN System
2.1.1 Architecture Design of the MICN System. The collection, analysis, processing, and effec-
tivetransmissionofmarineinformationisthecoreofmarinetechnology.Themarinenetworksys-
temismainlydividedintothemarinenetworkandtheunderwaternetwork.Themarinenetwork
assists marine users to expand more marine services by obtaining monitoring data, and the
underwater network is mainly to monitor and transmit various marine data [ 15,16]. For the
transmission of marine data information, it is necessary to cross the water-air interface, and
the efficient integration of the underwater acoustic network and the radio network is required
inthedatainformationtransmissionnetworkarchitecture.Thecurrentsingleunderwaterormar-
itime network system mainly relies on the Internet and satellite communication technology to
transmit the collected marine data information to the land. The marine users only can obtain the
required information from transmission by a land data center. The MICN system leads to very
hightransmissioncosts,highenergyconsumptionofthenetwork,andobviousdelay[ 17].There-
fore,anewmarinenetworkarchitecturehastobedesignedtocollecttheunderwatermonitoring
data and the efficient acquisition of UWSNs data effectively by sea users. Based on MWMN, an
MICN system integrating the offshore and underwater networks is proposed by combining with
the UWSNs. The overall architecture is shown in Figure 1. The MICN system consists of three
parts: the MWMN and intelligent data gateway (IDG) and theunderwater wireless sensor
network (UWWSN) .
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 4 ====
39:4 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.1. Architectureof MICN System.
In a traditional wireless local area network (WLAN) , each client accesses the network
through a wireless link connected to an access point (AP) . Users have to first visit a fixed AP to
realize communication with each other. Such network structure is called the single-hop network
[18–20].InanMWMN,anywirelessdevicenodecanactasanAPandaroutersynchronously,each
node has the ability of sending and receiving signals and directly communicates with one node
or more peer nodes. The robustness of the Mesh network is more in contrast to the single-hop
network, because it does not depend on the performance of a single node. Failure of any node in
asingle-hopnetworkcancausethebreakdownoftheentirenetwork.Thereisoneorseveraldata
transmission paths for each node in the Mesh network [ 21–23]. Mesh adopts the standard 802.11
standard protocol, which can be widely compatible with wireless client terminals. The maritime
Meshnetworkismainlycomposedofcommunicationnodes.Thedatacollectedbythesensornet-
workcanbetransmittedandsharedamongdifferentnodesthrough voiceoverInternetprotocol
(VoIP).
UWSNismainlyaself-organizingnetworkconstructedbyunderwatersensornodeswithcom-
munication and computing capabilities. Using the underwater acoustic communication method
basedonhigh-speedmulti-carriertransmissiontechnology,thenoderealizesthecollectionofun-
derwaterresourcesandenvironmentalinformationbycarryingdifferentsensors.Furthermore,the
collecteddataistransmittedtotheunderwatersinknode,andthenuploadedtothemarinesmart
data gateway [ 24]. The node concept of UWWSN has been expanded from traditional sensors to
newconceptnodeformsincludingautonomousunderwaterrobots,ships,submarines,torpedoes,
mines, and surface buoys. The sensor network system usually is composed of sensor nodes, sink
nodes (receivers), and management nodes (servers). The data under the monitor of sensor nodes
aretransmittedinmultiplehopsalongthesensorbackbonenodes(clusterheads).Themonitored
datamaybeprocessedbymultiplenodes,thenroutedtothesinknodeaftermultiplehops,andfi-
nally reach the management node through the Internet or satellite [ 25–27] .T h es e n s o rc a nb e
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 5 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:5
Fig.2. Thestructureof UWSNs and theinternalstructureof nodes.
configured and managed through the management node, the monitoring tasks can be issued,
and the monitoring data can be collected. Underwater sensor nodes are mainly composed of a
maincontrolleror centralprocessingunit(CPU) ,andthecontrollerisconnectedtothesensor
through an interface circuit. The controller receives the sensor data and stores it in the memory,
and then sends the data to other network nodes through the underwater acoustic modem after
processing.ThestructureofUWSNsandtheinternalstructureofnodesareshownin Figure 2.
Since UWSNs and the maritime Mesh network use different communication signals, the net-
working and access methods of the network are different, and the network protocols are not
compatible. The corresponding gateway is designed for different networking to realize the in-
tercommunication between the underwater network and the maritime network. The main part
of the gateway is composed of three parts: underwater acoustic modem, very high frequency
(VHF)module,andBeidou +GPSpositioningmodule.Theunderwateracousticmodemadopts or-
thogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) modem, which realizes communication,
networking,andpositioningsynchronously.TheVHFmoduleadoptsawirelessdatatransmission
station, and the Beidou +GPS positioning module adopts a dual-mode positioning module. The
gateway has to make a data upload decision before the sensor nodes upload the collected data.
Sensor nodes realize the energy-saving and efficient transmission of collected data by executing
theuploaddecisionof thegateway.
2.1.2 Network Functional Architecture. CorrespondingtotheMICNsystem,thenetworksystem
functional architecture also includes three modules. The marine Mesh network is responsible for
sea surface information service and underwater data transmission; the intelligent gateway is to
collect and upload the underwater data, completing protocol conversion and data transfer; and
UWSNsisto collecttheunderwaterdatainformation [ 28].
The marine underwater environment (Figure 3) includes various types of artificial and natural
underwateracousticsystems,whichsimultaneouslyshareonlyafewhundredkilohertzofunder-
water acoustic channel bandwidth. The sound waves emitted and received by marine organisms
will affect the acoustic sensor system. Therefore, the sensor network in the MICN system should
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 6 ====
39:6 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.3. Themarine underwater environment.
have the ability to perceive the spectrum of other underwater acoustic systems, and can realize
multi-userspectrumsharingandmulti-channelspectrumaccessandmanagement.Spectrumsens-
ing is to detect the underwater spectrum occupancy. In the UWSNs where underwater mammals
arethemainusers,ifthedistributiondensityofsensingusersistoolarge,itmaynotbepossibleto
obtainsufficientandaccuratesensingdata.Thepositioningalgorithmisasub-linkinthespectrum
sensingmodule,whichcanpositiontheunderwatermammalsfoundinthespectrumdetectionand
pass the position information to the power control module [ 29–31]. The operation result of spec-
trum sensing is undertaken as the basis, and the channel quality measurement index is finally
set by describing the different characteristics of the idle frequency band. In UWSNs, interference
amongsensornodescanbeavoidedbythepowercontrolonly,whichreducestheinterferenceand
impactsof underwatermammals on themain userand improving thenetworkthroughput.
In sensor nodes, the sensor is responsible for data collection; the processor stores and process
the data, realizing control of the entire node; and the wireless communication module is for
transmitting data and control information. The battery is generally deemed as an energy supply
module and is mainly to provide energy for the first three modules. Since the data collected by
UWSNs usually does not change for a long time, it is necessaryto implement a data compression
strategy to reduce the energy consumption during transmission of a large amount of redundant
data. When the underwater node uploads the collected data to the gateway, the gateway makes
the decision with the best energy saving effect based on the data upload decision mechanism at
this time. In the MICN designed in this study, the gateway will send the data to the MWMN for
transmission after the data collected underwater is received. There will be a big difference for
marineWMNduetothewirelesschannelcharacteristicsoftheUWWSN,andthecommunication
protocol different from VHF-WMN is required. In general, there are differences between marine
WMNs and underwater sensors in terms of transmission media and communication protocols.
Therefore, the MICN system should be equipped with a protocol conversion intelligent gateway
to realize themonitor of datainformation and management of UWSNsbyseausers.
2.2 Intelligent Coverage and Transmission Optimization of 3D UWSNs
2.2.1 Topological Structure Model of UWSNs. At present, the more common UWSNs include
twostructures:a two-dimensional(2D) networkforstaticmonitoringanda three-dimensional
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 7 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:7
Fig. 4. UWSNs under dynamicmonitoring.
(3D)network for dynamic monitoring [ 32,33]. The 2D network structure is formed based on the
fuzzyperceptionmodelandisgenerallycomposedofnodesdeployedonthesealeveloranchored
on the seabed, as shown in Figure 4. In the 2D network structure, there are lots of sensor nodes
to detect the surrounding area of interest on the seafloor plane. Each sensor node is connected to
thejointpointoftheunderwaternetworkthroughtheacousticlinkaccordingtothecorrespond-
ing clustering algorithm, and the gateway node further transmits the collected data to the data
processing base station on the surface. The underwater gateway node can directly communicate
with the surface base station in the shallower ocean area; while the underwater gateway node
has to communicate with the surface base station through a transducer that can support long-
distance communication in the deep ocean area. When the amount of underwater data is large
and the coverage area is wide, the data between the gateways is fused based on the fuzzy data
fusionmechanism,andthenthefuseddataistransmittedtothemaingatewaynodethroughrelay
multi-hoptransmission[ 34].
Comparedwiththe2Dnetwork,the3DUWSNsaremorepowerfulwithmorecomplexnetwork
structure.ThenetworkarchitectureisshowninFigure 5.Inthe3Dnetworkstructure,sensornodes
are distributed in sea areas of different depths. They are fixed sensor nodes on the anchor on the
seabedorontheplatformonthewatersurfacethroughcables,andthelattermethodiseasier.Itis
preciselybecausesensornodesaredeployedatdifferentseadepthsthatthe3Dnetworkmonitors
theunderwaterareamoreextensivelyandcomprehensively.Intermsofdatatransmission,routing
algorithms are generally adopted to determine a reliable path from sensor nodes to surface base
stations [ 35–37]. If the distance between the node and the surface base station is relatively long,
datacan betransmittedbyusinga multi-hoprelay.
2.2.2 Network Smart Coverage based on Swarm Intelligence Algorithm. The coverage control
of UWSNs can be described as by determining the coverage deployment strategy or topological
structure of sensor nodes, so that the sensor nodes can cooperate with each other to realize the
comprehensive management of the monitoring area. The influence of underwater environment
characteristics, channel bandwidth, and node energy supply will hinder the effective coverage of
the network. In addition, special underwater environmental factors make it difficult to substitute
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 8 ====
39:8 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.5. UWSNs under 3D monitoring.
the battery of sensor nodes, and the network coverage loopholes caused by energy consumption
problemswillcontinuetoincrease.Reducingtheenergyconsumptionofsensornodescanprolong
the life cycle of the network. It can avoid the premature end of the life cycle of the network by
keeping the balance of energy consumption of the nodes in the network due to the premature
disappearanceof theenergy consumptionof some nodes.
According to the mobility of underwater sensor nodes, network coverage deployment algo-
rithms can currently be classified into three categories: static deployment, self-adjusting deploy-
ment, and mobile-assisted deployment. The static deployment assumes that all sensor nodes are
staticaftertheinitialdeploymentandfixedontheseasurfacebuoyoranchoredontheseabed[ 38].
The strategy of static deployment is more energy-efficient and easy to operate, but such manual
deploymentofsensornodesistoodifficulttooperateunderwaterandisnotsuitableforscenarios
wherethenetworkscaleisexpandedorthetopologychanges.Ifthedeploymentofsensornodesis
achievedbyadjustingthedepthoftheautomaticinflatablebuoy,thenetworkcoveragecanadopt
the self-adjusting deployment to achieve better coverage of the monitoring area by the network.
3D random deployment does not require the coordination of ground base stations. The sensor
nodes are randomly deployed at the bottom of the target area, and then the depth is randomly
selected.Thedifferencebetweenthebottomrandomdeploymentandthe3Drandomdeployment
is that the location of each sensor node will be informed by the ground base station [ 39]. Sen-
sor nodes can adjust the depth by applying repulsive force until the sensor monitoring overlap
area among nodes disappears. If there are other portable underwater mobile sensor nodes in the
monitoring area, the nodes in UWSNs can communicate with the mobile nodes and cooperate to
complete underwater monitoring tasks. Compared with ordinary sensor nodes, underwater sen-
sor nodes are more flexible, and they can move autonomously and collect data as needed, but its
energy consumptionisthemost obvious.
It can effectively avoid the energy loss caused by blind movement of sensor nodes while the
range of sensing and monitoring is expanded to enable connected nodes to share information.
Thedeploymentofsensornodesintheunderwatermonitoringareaisdescribed,andadistributed
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 9 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:9
hybrid FSOA that allows sensor nodes to move autonomously toward the monitored object is
proposedinthisstudy[ 40].
Ifthereare nsensornodesintheunderwatermonitoringareaA, siisthei-thsensornodeinthe
network.Iftheevent eisdescribedasthedynamicpointofthemonitoringobject,thesetofevents
inAcan be expressed as E={ei|ei∈A,i=1,2...m}. Any sensor node is able to sense, move, and
communicate,whichcanbedescribedas B=(rs
j,rc
j,lj,Pj),ofwhich rs
jandrc
jrepresentthesens-
ing radius and communication radius of sensor node sj, respectively, ljrepresents the maximum
moving step length, and Pjrefers to the current position of sensor node. Sensor nodes can sense
surroundingevents and obtain the number of covered events of surrounding nodesby communi-
catingwithneighboringnodes.Itisassumedthatthecoveragemodelofeachsensornodein Acan
be regarded as a sphere, the node coordinates are at the center of the sphere, the sensing radius
isexpressedas rs
j,andthecommunicationradiusisrepresentedby rc
j.Thecommunicationradius
is set to two times or more of the sensing radius to ensure network connectivity. The Euclidean
distanced(ei,sj)betweentheevent eiandsensornode sjcanbeexpressedasEquation( 1)below:
d(ei,sj)=/radicalBig
(xj−x/prime
i)2+(yj−y/prime
i)2+(zj−z/prime
i)2(1)
In the equation above, (xj,yj,zj)are the coordinates of sensor node sjand (x/prime
i,y/prime
i,z/prime
i)are the
coordinatesoftheevent ei.Iftheprobabilityof eibeingcoveredby sjisrepresentedby p(ei,sj),it
canbe expressedas abinaryfunctionusingtheBooleansensorcoverage model, asfollows:
p(ei,sj)=/braceleftBigg1d(ei,sj)≤rs
0other(2)
Similar to the calculation of the coverage area of a 2D sensor network, the probability P(ei,S)
ofeibeingcoveredby sjina 3Dnetworkis expressedas Equation( 3):
P(ei,S)=p(ei,s1)∨p(ei,s2)∨...∨p(ei,sN)=1−N/productdisplay
i=1(1−P(ei,si)) (3)
For an event ei, its relative effectiveness is set as the coverage degree and can be described as
follows:
DA(ei)=/summationdisplay
sj∈Sp(ei,sj)
1+/summationtext
ej∈EI(d(ei,sj))≤rs(4)
In the equation above, I(/squaresmallsolid)represents the indicator function, and/summationtext
ej∈EI(d(ei,sj))≤rsis the
numberof adjacentevents ei.
The effective coverage D/prime
A(ei)and network coverage η(E)of the event set can be calculated to
assesstheperformanceofthenode deploymentalgorithmproposedinthisstudy.
D/prime
A(ei)=DA(ei)/summationtext
ej∈EDA(ej)(5)
η(E)=αHA(E)
logm+β∼n
n(6)
In the above Equations ( 4) and (5),HA(E)is the coverage entropy of the event set, and∼nrefers
tothenumber of eventscoveredby sensornodes.
HA(E)=/summationdisplay
ej∈ED/prime
A(ei)log1
D/prime
A(ei)(7)
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 10 ====
39:10 Z.Lv et al.
The objective of sensor node is to place the sensor nodes, reaching the maximal value η(E).
WhenHA(E)reachesthemaximal value log m,η(E)can be1.
AFSA adopts a bottom-up optimization idea to design the perceptionand behavior mechanism
of a single individual, and then place one entity or a group of entities in the environment, allow-
ing them to solve problems in the interaction of the environment [ 41]. Artificial fish have four
behaviors: foraging, clustering, rear-end collision, and random. Each fish will try before moving
to decide which action can be taken. The steps of the AFS algorithm are summarized as follows.
Thesettingsareinitialized,includingthesizeofthepopulation,theinitialpositionoftheartificial
fish, thefield of view (FOV) of the artificial fish, the step length, and the crowding factor. The
fitnessvalueofeachindividualintheinitialfishschooliscalculated,andtheoptimalartificialfish
stateanditsassignmentareselectedtothebulletinboard.Eachindividualisevaluatedtoselectthe
behaviortobeperformed,includingforaging,clustering,rear-endcollision,andrandombehavior.
The behavior of artificial fish is implemented and a new fish school is generated. All individuals
areevaluatedtocheckifanyindividualisbetterthanthebulletinboard,whichshouldbereplaced
withtheindividualifyes.Whentheoptimalsolutiononthebulletinboardreacheswithinthesat-
isfactoryerrorrangeorwhentheupperlimitofthenumberofiterationsisreached,theoperations
of thealgorithmiscompleted,orotherwisestep3 canbe repeated.
Forthedeploymentofnetworkareacoverage,sensornodescanbedeemedastheartificialfish
in AFSA, and events can be considered as food. According to the principle of fish school system
operationmode,adistributedhybridFSOAisproposedforUWSNs.InthemonitoringareaA,the
allowable congestion σ(si)atsensornode sjis definedasfollows:
σ(si)=ψ×Ne(si) (8)
IntheEquation( 8)abo v e ,ψreferstotheexpectedcoverage ofasingle event,and Ne(si)refers
to thenumberof eventscovered,whichcanbeexpressedasfollows:
Ne(si)=/summationdisplay
ej∈Ep(ei,sj) (9)
Thenumberofnodeswithinthecommunicationrangeandsensingrangeofsensornode sjare
Ns
ne(si)andNs
co(si),respectively,whichcanbe writtenas follows:
Ns
ne(si)=card (λ(sj)) (10)
Ns
co(si)=card (γ(sj)) (11)
Intheaboveequations, λ(sj)andγ(sj)arethesetsofnodes sjwithinthecommunicationradius
and sensingrange, respectively.
Ifthenumberofpartnersinthevisibledomainof sjissettoNs
ne(si)>0,theoptimalnode sopt
in theinformationpool Csumcanbedetermined:
sopt=argmax
sk∈Csum/braceleftbigNs
ne(sk)/bracerightbig(12)
If there are more events covered at sopta n di ti sn o tt o oc r o w d e d ,t h e ni tc a nm o v et ot h e
directionof partner sopt:
Xnext=Xi+rand (l)×Xopt−Xi
/bardblXopt−Xi/bardbl(13)
In the Equation ( 13)a b o v e ,lrefers to the value of the moving step, and XiandXoptare the
positionvectorsof siandsopt,respectively.
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 11 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:11
Table 1. Overall Descriptionof FSOA Algorithm
FSOA
Input:B=(rs
j,rc
j,lj,Pj),IterNum
Output:Pi+1
j
S={s1,s2...sn}←therandom deployment nodes in UWSNs
fork=1,2...Tmaxdo
Ne(si)←event covered by si
Ne(si)←number of nodes within the sensingrangeof si
ifNs
ne(si)>0then
then, the set Csumcan beobtained;
The nodes in the set Csumare sorted according to the number of events covered to find the collection ψ;
sopt=argmax
sk∈Csum{Ns
ne(sk)}
The rear-end collision isperformed tomove closer to sopt;
else
forNprey=1,2...Nmaxdo
Theforagingisperformed tomove randomly;
ifNe(s/prime
i)>Ne(si)thenbreak ;
end for
end if
Ifthe end condition ismet, the iteration isstopped.
endfor
Foragingreferstothesearchactivityforsensornodeswithinthecommunicationradius,which
is to ensure that the node status is continuously optimized. In the initial stage, a larger step size
is used to improve the convergence speed of the algorithm, and then the step size is reduced in a
gradual way to transform the global search into a local search. Finally, a fine search is performed
neartheoptimalpositiontoimprovetheoptimizationaccuracyofthealgorithm.Inthisstudy,the
dynamic adjustmentidea of lisexpressedasfollows:
lIter=lIter−1×a+lmin (14)
a=exp/parenleftBigg
−k×/parenleftbiggIter
IterNum/parenrightbiggд/parenrightBigg
(15)
In the two equations above, Iterrepresents the current iteration number, IterNumrefers to the
maximum iteration number, and lis the maximum movement step. The movement step size de-
pends on the value a. The FSOA algorithm proposed keeps the maximum step size at the initial
stage of operation, gradually changes from large to small, and then maintains the minimum. The
descriptionof theAFS-basedFSOAisgiven in Table 1.
2.2.3 Multiple Access Mechanism for Sensor Networks. Since the communication system of
UWSNs may cause harm to marine mammals, the environmental perception and dynamic power
controlareintegratedintoUWSNs[ 42–44].Amongthem,theenvironmentalperceptionmoduleis
todetectandlocateunderwatermammals,usingthe passivepositioningalgorithm(PLA) ;and
thedynamicpowercontrolmoduleistoschedulethedatatransmission,usingthe powercontrol
algorithm (PoCA) .Next, theabovetwo algorithmsproposedwillbeexplained in detail.
In the environment perception module, the passive positioning algorithm on the basis of dis-
tance measurement adopts the distance between the target node and anchor node to solve the
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 12 ====
39:12 Z.Lv et al.
Fig. 6. Keyelements of PLA algorithm.
location information of the target. The distance measurement of the existing positioning algo-
rithm depends on the signal received by the anchor node, and it has to feed back a signal with a
time stamp when the target receives the signal. As the target node, mammals can’t provide the
above parameters through interaction [ 45]. Therefore, a target search algorithm based on the re-
ceived signal strength is proposed in this study to passively locate mammals. The algorithm can
search for the possible sound power of animals, and screen the sound power, and finally obtain
themost likely soundpowerina limited space.
In the signal detection stage, it is assumed that the anchor node has detected the signal and
completed the classification of mammals, and PLA will enter the information interaction stage.
Each anchor node sends an information packet containing its received signal information and its
own position information. In the final target positioning stage, each anchor node independently
solves the position information of mammals through the PLA algorithm. In the localization algo-
rithm, it has to consider the sound power range of the target first, and then search for the sound
sourcesoundpoweraccordingtoacertainstep.Foreachsoundsourceundertest,thecalculation
equationforthedistancebetweentheanchornodeandthepositioningtargetisgivenasfollows:
10logPs
Pr=A(d,f) (16)
A(d,f)=10k·logd+d
1000·logα(f) (17)
In the above equations, the distance between the anchor node and the positioning target is
denotedas d;freferstotheacousticsignalfrequency; Areferstothechannelgain; kreferstothe
propagation coefficient, which is set to 1.5; αis the absorption coefficient; and PsandPrare the
soundpowerandthereceivedpowerofthemeasuredsoundsource,respectively.
ThekeyelementsandmainprocessesofthePLAalgorithmareshowninFigures 6and7,respec-
tively. After the distance between the target and the anchor node is obtained, any two distances
should satisfy d1+d2>dABaccording to the relationship theorem of the three sides of the trian-
gle. Forthisalgorithm,ithasto calculatethedifferenceof thedistancebetweenthesoundsource
target and different anchor nodes, and each difference can establish a hyperboloid equation. Any
threehyperboloidequationsareselected,andtheintersectionpointisthelocationoftheposition-
ingtarget.Finally,ithastoverifywhethertheintersectionpointcorrespondstothesoundpower,
so astoobtaintheaccuratesoundsourcepositioninformation.
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 13 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:13
Fig. 7. Mainprocessof PLA algorithm.
Forthelocation P(xs,ys,zs)ofthetargetsoundsource,ifthereisonlyone Pscorrespondingto
it, it is taken as the target sound source location. If there are more than one Ps, the distance error
betweentheanchornodeand thetargetis calculatedwiththeequationsbelow:
/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex/radicalBig
(xs−xa)2+(ys−ya)2+(zs−za)2−d1/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex=εa (18)
/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex/radicalBig
(xs−xb)2+(ys−yb)2+(zs−zb)2−d2/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex=εb (19)
/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex/radicalBig
(xs−xc)2+(ys−yc)2+(zs−zc)2−d3/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex=εc (20)
/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex/radicalBig
(xs−xd)2+(ys−yd)2+(zs−zd)2−d4/barex/barex/barex/barex/barex=εd (21)
The PLA algorithm adopts the coordinate of the minimal εas the position coordinate of the
soundsourcetarget,whichmeansthatthepositioncoordinatehasthesmallestpositioningerror.
SensornodescanobtainthereasonabledatapacketsusingthePoCAalgorithmproposedbased
on the gain information of the channel and the position information of underwater mammals.
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 14 ====
39:14 Z.Lv et al.
Animals do not always appear in the coverage of UWSNs, so the power control mechanism can
work in two different modes: shared mode and exclusive mode. In the sharing mode, each node
hopes to get the fastest response to its own request in order to maximize utility. Therefore, the
transmissionpowerallocationcanberegardedasacompetitiveoptimization.Theutilityfunction
is defined as Equation ( 22), so as to achieve the goal of PoCA. The function includes two aspects:
maximizingthroughputandavoidingexcessiveenergyconsumption.Ifeachnodesharesthesame
bandwidth(B),it canbeignored whentheutilityfunctionis constructed.
ui(pi,P−i)=log/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtA1+hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA−αi (22)
In the Equation ( 22)a b o v e ,hiandpiare the channel gain and transmission power on link I,
respectively; P−irefers to the transmission power of other links except link i;σ2represents the
noisepower;and αirefersto thecostrequiredfor transmissionpower.
Thepowerallocationcanbe expressedas follows:
maxui(pi,P−i)=log/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtA1+hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA−αi·pi (23)
s.t.
pi∈[0,Pmax](1≤i≤N)
hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2≥SINRth(1≤i≤N) (24)
N/summationdisplay
i=1hmi·pi≤T
In the above equation, Pmaxrefers to the maximum transmit power; SINRthis the acoustic
modem decoding threshold; Tis the mammalian behavior influence threshold; and SINRthis the
channelgain betweenthesendingnodeand theanimal.
If the game theory is adopted to understand the transmission power allocation, the optimal
transmissionpowerofeachsendingnodecanbetakenasaresponsefunctionoftheplayersinthe
game, whichcanbeexpressedasfollows:
∂ui
∂pi=−hi/parenleftBig
hi·pi+/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2/parenrightBig−α=0 (25)
pi=1
αi−/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2
hi(26)
αi=1/Pmaxisassumedtoensure pi≤Pmax.Allsendingnodescanobtaintheirownoptimaltrans-
mission powers through the PCA algorithm. After piis obtained, the following matrix equation
can beobtained:
P∗=H−1·G (27)
In the above equation, Hrefers to a square matrix of N×N;P*refers to the solution of Nash
equilibrium,and Gis aN×1vector.
Thenodecantransmitdatapacketsinexclusivemodewhennoanimalsaredetectedwithinthe
UWSNs. At this time, the main task of the PoCA algorithm is to lower the energy consumption
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 15 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:15
whilemaximizingthethroughputofthenetwork.Intheexclusivemode,thepowerallocationop-
timizationcanbeexpressedasEquation( 28),andthetwoconstraintscanbeexpressedasEquation
(29):
maxui(pi,P−i)=log/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtA1+hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA−αi·pi (28)
s.t.
pi∈[0,Pmax](1≤i≤N)
hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2≥SINRth(1≤i≤N)(29)
Comparedwiththesharedmode,theexclusivemoderemovesthethirdconstraintusedtolimit
theimpactsonanimals, and thenode cansenddata packetsatthemaximum power.
The Bellhop model is adopted to describe the underwater acoustic propagation characteristics,
so as to verify the performance of the PLA and PoCA algorithms proposed in the underwater
environment. The experimental data come from the Ocean-TUNE underwater network test bed
(located in the Long Island Strait) deployed in a real environment. The reflection coefficients of
thebottomandwatersurfacearesetto1and −1,respectively,andfouranchornodesaredeployed
ata waterdepthof50m.
2.2.4 Reliable Transmission Protocol for Underwater Acoustic Sensors Based on Coding. Under-
waterinformationtransmissionwillcausehighbiterrorrateduetospecialenvironmentalfactors,
so it is necessary to design a reliable transmission protocol based on error control strategies. The
traditionalerrorcontrolstrategiesaremainlyclassifiedintofourtypes: errordetection(ED),au-
tomaticretransmissionrequest(ARQ),forwarderrorcorrectioncoding(FEC) ,andHARQ
[46–48]. In HARQ, the number of retransmission and the bit error rate can be lowered using the
FEC, and the packet data transmission is guaranteed by the ARQ retransmission. Therefore, the
HARQmechanismcanbedeterminedasacompromisesolution,whichcancorrecttheerrorsau-
tomaticallyduetothecapabilityoferrorcorrection.Thesenderisrequiredtoretransmitthedata
undertheconditionofoutoftherangeoftheerrorcorrection.Itnotonlyimprovesthereliability
of thesystem,butalsoelevatesthetransmissionefficiencyof thesystem.
A reliable transmission protocol NC-HARQ is proposed based on the combination of NC and
HARQ, which makes full use of the cooperative nodes and the hierarchical gains of multi-node
transmissionin thenetwork,and finally obtainstheoptimaltransmissionsystem.Thedata send-
ingprocessandreceivingprocessofNC-HARQprotocolareshowninFigure 8.Duringtheretrans-
mission,ifthesendingnodereceivesthesuccessfullydecodedinformation,buttherelaynodedoes
not receive the next hop node confirmation, the sending node will terminate the retransmission,
andtherelaynodewithbetterchannelconditionswillperformthedataretransmission.Basedon
the automatic feedback of ARQ, the NC-HARQ protocol can reduce transmission failures caused
by randomburstpacketloss,therebyimprovingthereliabilityof thesystem.
In this study, the routing protocols are divided into energy-balanced and non-energy-balanced
routing protocols. According to the different selection methods of the route candidate node set,
the non-energy-balanced routing is divided into sending-based and receiving-based hybrid rout-
ing, and energy-balanced routing is divided into variable power and fixed power routing accord-
ing to whether the node has variable transmission power. For underwater routing based on the
receivingend,theselectionofthenexthopsendingnodesetisdeterminedbythereceivingnode
that receives the data packet. Under this system, the sender no longer stores the information of
neighbornodes.Atthebeginningofdatatransmission,thesendingnodepackspartofthecontrol
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 16 ====
39:16 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.8. Thedata sendingprocessand receiving process of NC-HARQprotocol.
information into the packet header. This control information is generally the status information
of thecurrentsendingnode.
In a simple three-node scenario, the node R is located between the node S and the node D, and
the node D can directly send data packets to the node D; pSD,pSR,a n dpRDare the packet loss
ratesofthechannels S→D,S→R,andR→D,respectively.ForARQ,ithastowaitforfeedback
confirmation after a data packet is sent, and it will be resent without feedback confirmation. In
this study, the maximum number of retransmissions is set to 1. The redundancy of ARQ can be
expressedasEquation( 30)belo w:
ηARQ=(1−pSD)+2pSD=1+pSD (30)
Thesuccessfuldelivery rateof ARQ canbecalculatedwiththeequationbelow:
PDRARQ=(1−pSD)+pSD (1−pSD)=1−p2
SD (31)
Theequationbelowcan beobtainedaftertheenergyconsumptionisnormalized:
ENARQ=ηARQ
PDRARQ=1
1−pSD(32)
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 17 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:17
Theaverage end-to-enddelay canbe writtenas Equation( 33)belo w:
DEARQ=ηARQ×/parenleftBiggL
R+2dSD
ν/parenrightBigg
/PDRARQ (33)
InNC-HARQ,thenodeSsendsdatapacketstothenodeDandtherelaynodeRsynchronously,
and the data retransmission is completed by the node R, so it only needs to ensure that the node
S correctlyreceivesthedataofthenodeR.
Theredundancyof NC-HARQ canbeexpressedasfollows:
ηNC−HARQ=1
K/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtAN1p1+6/summationdisplay
m=2K/summationdisplay
i=1Nm(i)pm(i)+8/summationdisplay
a=7K/summationdisplay
b=1K/summationdisplay
c=1(p7(i,j))/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA(34)
Thesuccessrateof NC-HARQ couldbe writtenas follows:
PDRNC−HARQ=p1+K/summationdisplay
i=1/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtAp3(i)+p4(i)+p6(i)+K/summationdisplay
c=1(p7(i,j))/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA(35)
ThenormalizedenergyconsumptionofNC-HARQcouldbecalculatedwithEquation( 36)below.
ENNC−HARQ=ηNC−HARQ
PDRNC−HARQ(36)
Theaverage end-to-enddelay canbe definedastheequationbelow.
DENC−HARQ=T1p1+/summationtext6
m=2/summationtextK
i=1Tm(i)pm(i)+/summationtext8
a=7/summationtextK
b=1Ta(b)pa(b)
K·PDRNC−HARQ(37)
TheclassicThropmodelisundertakenastheunderwateracousticwaveabsorptionmodel,and
the noise spectrum measured by Wenz is taken as the noise model to prove the effectiveness of
theNC-HARQprotocoldesignedinthisstudy.Theacousticvelocity(v) =1500m/s,thelengthof
datapacket(L) =225Bytes,andthechannelbandwidth(B) =15kHz.Forthetransmissionsystem
with deletion codes, two cases (K =4 and K=8) are simulated to compare the performances of
thethreeprotocols,whichare FEC,HARQ,and NC-HARQ.
2.3 Marine Monitoring Based on Digital Twins Ship-Based Sensors
2.3.1 Framework of Digital Twins Network. The goal is to build a marine information service
system from the perspective of multidimensional data visualization by taking the marine space
resources,marineenvironmentaldataresources,andmarineintegratedbusinessmanagementdata
resources as the core under the support of digital twins technology. The marine business results
data are presented in the form of “a picture” to promote the centralization of marine business
management and intelligent application services, so that the marine business management and
naturalresourceauxiliarymanagementcanbesupportedbetter[ 49,50].Themarineenvironment
iscomplexandchangeable,sothemonitoringandpredictionoftheship’sconditionrequiresmulti-
disciplinary knowledge integration. The physical model of the ship in the digital twin system
can generate the state prediction information. The goal of safe navigation can be achieved by
providingearlywarningofpotentialdangeroussituationsofships.Basedon virtualreality(VR)
andcomputergraphics,avirtualmarineenvironmentisconstructedandtheshipoperationprocess
issimulated inreal time.
Asadynamicvirtualrepresentationofarealship,digitaltwinsusescomprehensiveknowledge
fromsensordataandphysicalmodelstosimulatetheship’soperatingstatus.Ashipdigitaltwins
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 18 ====
39:18 Z.Lv et al.
frameworkbasedonavirtualrealitysystemisproposed.Therealseaareadatabaseandhydrody-
namicdatabasearefirstdevelopedtoensuretheconsistencyofthemarineenvironmentandship
motion characteristics with physical entities. Then, a virtual ship based on the sensor data and
physical model is built, and the real sea environment and the virtual ship are finally rendered in
thesimulator.Aframeworkofdigitaltwinsbasedonshipsimulatorisproposedinthisstudy.First,
a real sea area database and a hydrodynamic database are established for the reproduction of the
realoceanenvironmentandthepredictionofshipmotion.Thesensordatacontainsthereal-time
motion state and control equipment information of the real ship, which are directly transmitted
to the navigation virtual reality system for driving the virtual ship. The fluid data information
obtained from the sensing equipment is introduced into the physical model for state prediction,
and the data collected by the actual ship can support the comparison and verification. The real
sea area database is to render the marine environment information to realize the digital twins
ofships.
2.3.2 Ship-Based Sensors and Virtual Ship. The ship simulator realized by VR technology can
simulate the marine environment and the operation process of the ship. The modeling of ships
and the marine environment includes not only 3D digital models such as port buildings, various
typesofships,andnavigationaids,butalsovariousphysicalmodelssuchasshipmotion,weather
conditions, wind, and waves. Based on the six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) motion equation of
a rigid body,thedynamic modeloftheshipcanbe establishedas theequationsbelow:
η=[x,y,z,φ,θ,ϕ]T(38)
v=[u,v,w,p,q,r]T(39)
ηrefers to the 3D position and three-axis heading angle in the geographic coordinate system;
andvrefers to the three-axis speed and the three-axis angular velocity in the ship coordinate
system.
Basedonthetheoryoftimedomainunificationandmodularization,theshipkinematicsmodel
constructedis describedasfollows:
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩Mv=fH+fP+fR+fwind+fcurrent+fexc+fdrift
fH=−A(∞)v−B(∞)v−/integraltextt
0K(t−τ)[v(τ)−Ue1]dτ
−Cη+fNL−Hull (v)(40)
In the Equation ( 40)a b o v e ,wind, current, exc ,a n ddriftrefer to the environmental interference
force caused by wind, ocean current, first-order waves, and second-order waves, respectively; fH,
fP,a n dfRrefer to the forces generated by hull, propeller,and rudder, respectively; A, B,a n dKare
theadditionalmassmatrix,dampingcoefficientmatrix,andimpulseresponsefunctionofthehull,
respectively; Cisthehullradiationforcematrix;and fNL−Hull (v)representsthenonlinearviscous
force ofthehull.
ThemarineenvironmentisnumericallysolvedbasedontheWAVEWATCH-IIImodeltoensure
that the real marine environment is consistent with the marine environment in the digital twins.
Theenvironment vectorfieldis given as follows:
∂N
∂t+∇x(cд+U)N+∂
∂k∧
kN+∂
∂θ∧
θN=S
σ(41)
∧
k=−∂σ
∂d∂d
∂s−k∂U
∂s(42)
∧
θ=−1
k/parenleftBigg∂σ
∂d∂d
∂m−k∂U
∂m/parenrightBigg
(43)
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 19 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:19
Fig. 9. Node deployment based on theFSOA.
In the equation,∇xis the Hamilton operator, Nrefers to the wave action density spectrum,
cдrepresents the wave group velocity; Urefers to the flow velocity; k and θare the number and
directionofthewave,respectively;sandmarethecoordinatesof θintwodirectionsperpendicular
toeachother.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Performance of UWSNs Node Deployment Algorithm
In this study, multiple sets of Monte Carlo simulation experiments are carried out on the deploy-
ment of marine (3D) nodes on the Matlab platform. The experimental processing platform is In-
tel(R) Core(TM) i7-4785T CPU 2.6GHz. Three sets of experiments are performed in an area of
200×200×200mtochecktheeffectivenessoftheFSOAalgorithmproposedinastaticenviron-
ment.Thesettingsofthethreegroupsofexperimentsareasfollows: 1/circlecopyrt5nodesand35eventsare
unevenly T-type distributed; 2/circlecopyrt5 nodes and 35 events are randomly distributed; and 3/circlecopyrt5n o d e s
and35eventsarelinearlyunevenlydistributed.TherunningresultsoftheFSOAalgorithminthe
three sets of experiments are shown in Figures 9(a)∼9(c), respectively. In the Figure 9, the blue
sphere represents the 3D coverage of sensor nodes, and the distributed stars represent events. It
can be seen that the FSOA algorithm can comprehensively cover the events, while ensuring that
thedistributiondensityof nodesand eventsis basicallytheconsistent.
The traditional particle swarm optimization (PSO) - based underwater sensor self-
deploymentalgorithmandtheFSOAalgorithmproposedareadoptedforthedeploymentofsensor
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 20 ====
39:20 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.10. Thecomparisonofthecoverageofnodeeventsandthetotalmovingdistanceofthetwoalgorithms.
nodes.Inthethreesetsofexperiments,thecomparisonofthecoverageofnodeeventsandtheto-
tal moving distance of the two algorithms in the running process is shown in Figure 10(a) and
Figure10(b), respectively. In the first set of experiments, the coverage of the FSOA algorithm can
reach 0.78 after five iterations when 35 events are distributed in a T-shape. The dynamic adjust-
ment capability of the PSO algorithm is relatively good, but the FSOA algorithm realizes more
stability throughout the deployment. In the second and third sets of experiments, the FSOA algo-
rithm is better than the PSO algorithm in terms of event coverage and total movement distance.
Therefore, the FSOA algorithm not only exhibits a wider coverage capability, but also overcomes
the blindness of the traditional algorithm for random search, with fast convergence speed and
betterstability.
In summary, both algorithms require to move significantly in the initial deployment phase, so
theinitialtotalnodemovementdistanceisrelativelylarge.Asthedeploymentfurtherdeepens,the
rangeofmovementgraduallydecreases.TheFSOAalgorithmrealizesinformationsharingamong
different nodes on the basis of the information pool, so that the blind movement of nodes can be
avoided effectively. Compared with the PSO algorithm, the FSOA can obviously reduce the total
movement distanceofnodes duringthedeployment.
3.2 Evaluation on Multiple Access Performance of UWSNs
Two anchor node deployment scenarios are set, and 1,000 points in the monitoring range are
randomlyselectedasthepossiblelocationsforanimalstocomprehensivelyassesstheperformance
ofthePLApositioningalgorithm.AUWSNsimulationsoftwareAqua-SimbasedonNS2isadopted
tocompletethesimulation,andsomeofthephysicallayermodulesaremodifiedtomeettheneeds
of transmission power adjustment. The coordinates of the four anchor nodes in scene one are:
A (0,0,0), B (2000,0,0), C (0,2000,0), and D (2000,0,0), respectively. Standard triangular pyramid
structure is set in the scene two. With reference to the speed range of mammals, four unequal
speeds are set as v1 =5m / s ,v 2 =10 m/s, v3 =15 m/s, and v4 =20 m/s, respectively. The actual
positionoftheanimaliscomparedwiththepositionresultobtainedbythepositioningalgorithm
to assess the performance of the PLA algorithm. The magnitude and direction of the movement
speedofunderwatermammalswillaffectthepositioningsuccessrate,butthespeeddoesnothave
a functional relationship. In the PLA determination algorithm proposed, the absolute frequency
deviation of the received signal increase to varying degrees as the movement speed of mammals
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 21 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:21
increases. The calculated average positioning success rate is 89.4% in scenario one and 87.3% in
scenario two. Therefore, the deployment of anchor nodes will have an impact on the positioning
success rate. The average positioning error of mammals at different speeds in the two scenes is
illustratedinFigure 11below.
Furthermore, the performance of the PoCA algorithm is evaluated through simulation experi-
ments, including the throughput of the network under different v values and the influence of the
detectedmammalianmotiononthenetworkperformance.Thecurvesoftheeffectivethroughput
of the network at different v values in the two scenarios are shown in Figure 12. When there are
several mammals, the sensor node will switch to shared mode; and in the exclusive mode where
nomammalsaredetected,noderequeststhatallowparalleltransmissionwillbepostponed.Inthe
casewheremammals aremostseverelyaffected(v =v1),theeffectivethroughputofthenetwork
can still reach 85% of the throughput without mammals. At different speeds (v values), the effec-
tivethroughputofnetworkofthePoCAalgorithmcanbeincreasedby30% ∼50%comparedwith
the classic underwater medium access control (MAC) protocol and slotted floor acquisition
multiple access (SFAMA) protocol. Therefore, the PoCA algorithm can effectively improve the
capacityof multiplexing space,allowingmore paralleltransmission.
End-to-end delay is an important indicator for evaluating the network performance. It is eval-
uated in different speed scenarios through simulation experiments in this study, and the results
are shown in Figure 13. It can be found that the presence of underwater mammals enhances the
end-to-endtimedelay.Whenthemovingdirectionisthesame,themovingspeedofthemammalis
lower,whichcausesalongertimedelay.Thereasonisthattheslowmovementspeedofthemam-
malmeansthattheimpactonthenetworklastsforalongtime,duringwhichthetransmissionof
many data packetsisdelayed,resultinginan increaseinend-to-end delay.
3.3 Performance Analysis of NC-HARQ Reliable Transmission Protocol
The comparison results of the transmission redundancy of the three transmission protocols at
different distances are shown in Figure 14(a). Due to the impacts from integer quantization, the
redundancy is higher when the distance between nodes is shorter and K =4; the change of the
value of K has less influence on the redundancy when the distance between nodes increases. As
thedistanceincreases,theredundancyoftheFECprotocolincreasesmore.Figure 14(b)illustrates
thecomparisonresultofthesuccessrateofthedatapackettransmissionofthethreeprotocolsat
different distances. The FEC protocol encodes K original data packets and sends them, and all K
datapacketsfailtobesentwhenthenumberofencodingscan’tresistthehighpacketlossratein
thechannel,sotheoveralltransmissionsuccessrateislow.HARQaddsafeedbackretransmission
link,whichimprovesthetransmissionsuccessrateincontrasttotheFEC.Butonlyonedatapacket
isretransmitted,soallerrorscan’tbecorrected.TheNC-HARQprotocolproposedappliesarelay
node for retransmission, and the probability of successful retransmission is obviously higher in
contrast to that of the source node. When the distance is larger than 2,000 m, the success rate of
datapacketsis ashighas 99.6%.
Therelationshipbetweenthenormalizedenergyconsumptionofdatapackettransmissionand
thecommunicationdistanceisanalyzedunderthethreeprotocols,asshowninFigure 15(a).HARQ
improvesthesuccessfuldeliveryrateofthesystemcomparedtoFEC,thenormalizedenergycon-
sumption is slightly reduced. In contrast to the other two protocols, the NC-HARQ protocol pro-
posed increases the redundancy, but improves the successful delivery rate of the system greatly,
sotheenergyconsumptionrequiredforthesuccessfuldeliveryofadatapacketisrelativelylower.
Therefore, the efficiency of the system has been effectively improved. The end-to-end time delay
under the three protocols is shown in Figure 15(b). It can be found that the FEC protocol can re-
duce the delay in the feedback propagation process by increasing the transmission redundancy.
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 22 ====
39:22 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.11. The average positioningerrorof mammals at different speeds inthetwoscenes.
Fig.12. Comparison of effective throughputof thenetwork at different vvalues.
Theaverageend-to-enddelayundertheNC-HARQprotocolisthelowestamongthethreeproto-
cols,whichmaybebecausethatthesystemshowsahighertransmissionsuccessrateandashorter
data packettransmissionpath,whichimproves theoveralldelay of thesystem.
Performance of the data transmission system is tested in the NS-3 underwater simulation sys-
tem to further analyze the reliability of the NC-HARQ protocol. The transmission success rate of
data packet and end-to-end delay under the three protocols are shown in Figures 16(a) and16(b),
respectively. In the underwater simulation environment, the NC-HARQ protocol can adjust the
redundancy based on the current state of the channel according to the feedback, and can realize
thedataretransmissionusingtherelaynode.Iteffectivelyguaranteesthereliabilityofthesystem
in contrastto theothertwo protocols.
3.4 Ship Navigation Analysis based on Digital Twins
Therealpurposeoftheseaareadatabaseistorealizethereproductionofthemarineenvironment
in the sea area and time period, and the actual measurement data of the sensor is taken as
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 23 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:23
Fig. 13. Comparison of end-to-end delay at different vvalues.
Fig. 14. The transmission redundancy and success rate of the three transmission protocols at different
distances.
input to keep the control signals of the virtual ship and the real ship consistent. Different marine
environmentsaresetinthisstudytopredict,soastoverifythefeasibilityofapplyingdigitaltwins
technologyinrealseas.Thecomparisonresultbetweentherealsensordataandthepredictednav-
igationtrajectoryisshowninFigure 17.Thecontrolinputofalldataiskeptconsistent,thelineT
inthefigurereferstotherealtrajectorydatarecordedby globalpositionsystem(GPS) ;andthe
lineIisthetrajectorypredictionwithoutconsideringtheenvironmentalfactors.LinesII ∼IVare
thetrajectorypredictionresultswhenthewind,oceancurrent,andwavesareconsideredonly;and
lineVisthetrajectorypredictionresultwhenthethreeenvironmentalfactorsarecomprehensively
considered. The Figure 17indicates that the trajectory V considers all environmental impacts, so
it can simulate an environment closer to the real marine environment, thereby more accurately
predicting the trajectory of the ship. From the above information, it can be concluded that under
theinfluenceofasinglefactor,theerrorofthepredictedtrajectoryquicklyaccumulatesduetothe
inaccurate description of the environment, resulting in a complete deviation from the true value.
Inthecaseofconsideringallenvironmentalfactors,theaccuracyofpredictingthetrajectoryisthe
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 24 ====
39:24 Z.Lv et al.
Fig. 15. Normalized energy consumption and end-to-end delay of three transmission protocols at different
distances.
Fig. 16. Comparison of performances of three transmission protocols under NS-3 underwater simulation
system.
highest. This result illustrates the importance of the marine environmental field for accurate
prediction. Since the prediction accuracy is the highest in the fully coupled environment, the
prediction of the heading, speed, and sway is based on the prediction value in the fully coupled
environment.
4 CONCLUSIONS
In UWSNs, coverage preservation technology only exists in the static deployment framework.
The full coverage of target events is realized by sensor nodes based on the theoretical basis
of AFS in consideration of the mobility of the underwater environment. Artificial FSOA not
only shows a wider coverage capability, but also overcomes the blindness of traditional random
search algorithms, with fast convergence speed and better stability. The environment perception
and dynamic power control are integrated into UWSNs, the underwater mammals are detected
and located using the PLA algorithm, and the data transmission is scheduled with the PoCA
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 25 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:25
Fig.17. The comparisonresultbetween thereal sensordataandthepredicted navigation trajectory.
algorithm. The PoCA algorithm can effectively improve the capacity of multiplexing space, al-
lowing more parallel transmission. A decision-making mechanism for underwater network data
uploadthatoptimizesenergyconsumptionisproposed,aimingattheenergylimitationofUWSNs.
The NC-HARQ protocol uses the advantages of ARQ automatic feedback to reduce transmission
failures caused by random burst packet loss, thereby improving reliability of the system. The av-
erageend-to-enddelayundertheNC-HARQprotocolisgenerallylow,whichmaybebecausethat
thesystemshowsahighertransmissionsuccessrateandashorterdatapackettransmissionpath,
whichimprove theoveralldelay of thesystemgreatly.
The marine communication network is analyzed from the overall level in this study, and it
is found that optimizing the network coverage and data transmission of data sensors will help
improve the efficiency of the network. However, the technology discussed in this study has not
beenappliedinalargearea,andthedefensemoduleofintruderdetectionhasnotbeenintegrated
intoUWSNs,whichwill bediscussedin detailin thefollowing research.
REFERENCES
[1] T.Wilberforce,Z.ElHassan,A.Durrant,etal.2019.Overviewofoceanpowertechnology. Energy175(2019),165–181.
[2] G.Han,X.Long,C.Zhu,etal.2019.Ahigh-availabilitydatacollectionschemebasedonmulti-AUVsforunderwater
sensor networks. IEEETransactions onMobileComputing 19,5(2019),1010–1022.
[3] S. Li, W. Qu, C. Liu, et al. 2019. Survey on high reliability wireless communication for underwater sensor networks.
Journal ofNetwork andComputer Applications 148(2019),102446.
[4] S.Karim,F.K.Shaikh,B.S.Chowdhry,etal.2021.GCORP:Geographicandcooperativeopportunisticroutingprotocol
forunderwater sensor networks. IEEEAccess 9(2021),27650–27667.
[5] B.C.Renner,J.Heitmann,andF.Steinmetz.2020.ahoi:Inexpensive,low-powercommunicationandlocalizationfor
underwatersensor networks and μAUVs.ACMTransactions on SensorNetworks (TOSN) 16,2(2020),1–46.
[6] H. Huang and Y. R. Zheng. 2018. Node localization with AoA assistance in multi-hop underwater sensor networks.
AdHoc Networks 78,(2018),32–41.
[7] J. Yan, Z. Xu, X. Luo, et al. 2018. Feedback-based target localization in underwater sensor networks: A multisensor
fusionapproach. IEEETransactions onSignal andInformation Processing overNetworks 5,1(2018),168–180.
[8] F.Tao,M.Zhang,Y.Liu,etal.2018.Digitaltwindrivenprognosticsandhealthmanagementforcomplexequipment.
CIRPAnnals 67,1 (2018),169–172.
[9] R.B.Roy,D.Mishra,S.K.Pal,etal.2020.Digitaltwin:Currentscenarioandacasestudyonamanufacturingprocess.
TheInternational Journal ofAdvanced Manufacturing Technology 107,9(2020),3691–3714.
[10] K. Ding, F. T. S. Chan, X. Zhang, et al. 2019. Defining a digital twin-based cyber-physical production system
for autonomous manufacturing in smart shop floors. International Journal of Production Research 57, 20 (2019),
6315–6334.
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 26 ====
39:26 Z.Lv et al.
[11] Y. He, J. Guo, and X. Zheng. 2018. From surveillance to digital twin: Challenges and recent advances of signal pro-
cessing forIndustrial Internetof Things. IEEESignal Processing Magazine 35,5(2018),120–129.
[12] M. Jacoby and T. Usländer. 2020. Digital twin and Internet of Things—current standards landscape. Applied Sciences
10,18(2020),6519.
[13] C. Koulamas and A. Kalogeras. 2018. Cyber-physical systems and digital twins in the Industrial Internet of Things
[cyber-physical systems]. Computer 51,11(2018),95–98.
[14] N.Goyal,M.Dave,andA.K.Verma.2019.Protocolstackofunderwaterwirelesssensornetwork:Classicalapproaches
andnew trends. Wireless Personal Communications 104,3(2019),995–1022.
[15] A. Zolich, D. Palma, K. Kansanen, et al. 2019. Survey on communication and networks for autonomous marine sys-
tems.Journal ofIntelligent& Robotic Systems 95,3 (2019),789–813.
[16] T. C. Smythe and J. McCann. 2018. Lessons learned in marine governance: Case studies of marine spatial planning
practiceinthe US. Marine Policy 94,(2018)227–237.
[17] C. A. Trasviña-Moreno, R. Blasco, Á. Marco, et al. 2017. Unmanned aerial vehicle based wireless sensor network for
marine-coastalenvironmentmonitoring. Sensors17,3(2017),460.
[18] R.K.Garg,M.V.D.Nair,S.Singhal,etal.2021.CompactCPW-fedasymmetricUWBantennawithsufficientWLAN-
bandrejection. Progress In Electromagnetics Research C 108,(2021),201–210.
[19] R.M.GomathiandJ.M.L.Manickam.2018.Energy-efficientshortestpathroutingprotocolforunderwateracoustic
wirelesssensor network. WirelessPersonal Communications 98,1 (2018),843–856.
[20] S.Karim,F.K.Shaikh,B.S.Chowdhry,etal.2021.GCORP:Geographicandcooperativeopportunisticroutingprotocol
for underwatersensor networks. IEEEAccess 9,(2021),27650–27667.
[21] A. Aydoğdu, T. J. Hoar, T. Vukicevic, et al. 2018. OSSE for a sustainable marine observing network in the Sea of
Marmara. NonlinearProcesses inGeophysics 25,3(2018),537–551.
[22] C. Günther, A. Temming, J. Santos, et al. 2021. Small steps high leaps: Bio-economical effects of changing cod end
mesh size inthe North Sea brownshrimp fishery. Fisheries Research 234(2021),105797.
[23] J. Berli,M.Bunel,andC. Ducruet. 2018.Sea-land interdependenceinthe globalmaritimenetwork: The caseof Aus-
tralianport cities. Networks and Spatial Economics 18,3(2018),447–471.
[24] Y.JoandS.Lim.2019.Designandimplementationofheterogeneoussurfacegatewayforunderwateracousticsensor
network. International Journal ofElectrical and Computer Engineering 9,2(2019),1226.
[25] J.Liu,W.Guan,G.Han,etal.2019.Adynamicsurfacegatewayplacementschemeformobileunderwaternetworks.
Sensors19,9(2019),1993.
[26] N.Goyal,M.Dave,andA.K.Verma.2019.Protocolstackofunderwaterwirelesssensornetwork:Classicalapproaches
andnew trends. Wireless Personal Communications 104,3(2019),995–1022.
[27] N.Goyal,J.K.Sandhu,andL.Verma.2019.Machinelearningbaseddataagglomerationinunderwaterwirelesssensor
networks. International Journal ofManagement, Technologyand Engineering 9,6 (2019),240–245.
[28] J. E. Smith and N. Pinter-Wollman. 2021. Observing the unwatchable: Integrating automated sensing, naturalistic
observationsandanimalsocialnetworkanalysisintheageofbigdata. JournalofAnimalEcology 90,1(2021),62–75.
[29] E.Yalcin,O.Arslan,andM.Aymelek.2020.Developingapolicymanagementalgorithmforshipprovision:ADelphi
technique integrated with hesitant fuzzy set (DTIHFS) approach. Maritime Policy & Management 47, 8 (2020), 1097–
1118.
[30] D. Nikolic, N. Stojkovic, and N. Lekic. 2018. Maritime over the horizon sensor integration: High frequency surface-
wave-radarandautomaticidentificationsystemdataintegrationalgorithm. Sensors18,4(2018),1147.
[31] T. Yang, J. Chen, and N. Zhang. 2020. AI-empowered maritime Internet of Things: A parallel-network-driven ap-
proach.IEEENetwork 34,5(2020),54–59.
[32] G. Santana Sosa, J. Santana Abril, J. Sosa, et al. 2020. Design of a practical underwater sensor network for offshore
fish farm cages. Sensors20,16(2020),4459.
[33] Y.Zhang,M.Wang,J.Liang,etal.2017.Coverageenhancingof3Dunderwatersensornetworksbasedonimproved
fruitfly optimizationalgorithm. SoftComputing 21,20(2017),6019–6029.
[34] Z.Wan,S.Liu,W.Ni,etal.2019.Anenergy-efficientmulti-leveladaptiveclusteringroutingalgorithmforunderwater
wirelesssensor networks. ClusterComputing 22,6 (2019),14651–14660.
[35] Y. Guo, Q.Han, and X. Kang.2020.Underwater sensor networks localization basedon mobility-constrained beacon.
Wireless Networks 26,4(2020),2585–2594.
[36] Y.Zhuang,C.Wu,H.Wu,etal.2020.Eventcoverageholerepairalgorithmbasedonmulti-AUVsinmulti-constrained
three-dimensional underwaterwireless sensor networks. Symmetry 12,11(2020),1884.
[37] J. Zhang, M. Cai, G. Han, et al. 2020. Cellular clustering-based interference-aware data transmission protocol for
underwater acousticsensor networks. IEEETransactions onVehicular Technology 69,3(2020),3217–3230.
[38] S.MehtaandA.Malik.2020.Aswarmintelligencebasedcoverageholehealingapproachforwirelesssensornetworks.
EAIEndorsedTransactions onScalable InformationSystems 7(2020),26.
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

==== Page 27 ====
Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:27
[39] J. P. Devarajan and T. P. Robert. 2020. Swarm intelligent data aggregation in wireless sensor network. International
Journal ofSwarm IntelligenceResearch (IJSIR) 11,2(2020),1–18.
[40] Y.Feng,S.Zhao,andH.Liu.2020.Analysisofnetworkcoverageoptimizationbasedonfeedbackk-meansclustering
andartificialfish swarm algorithm. IEEEAccess 8,(2020)42864–42876.
[41] M. Neshat, G. Sepidnam, M. Sargolzaei, et al. 2014. Artificial fish swarm algorithm: A survey of the state-of-the-art,
hybridization, combinatorialand indicativeapplications. Artificial Intelligence Review 42,4(2014),965–997.
[42] Z.Jin,J.Wang,andY.Su.2017.Aroutingprotocolofunderwatercognitiveacousticnetworksformarinemammals.
Journal ofXi‘an Jiaotong University 51,2(2017),33–39.
[43] N.Saeed,A.Celik,T.Y.Al-Naffouri,etal.2018.Energyharvestinghybridacoustic-opticalunderwaterwirelesssensor
networks localization. Sensors18,1(2018),51.
[44] Z.Jin,Y.Ma,Y.Su,etal.2017.AQ-learning-baseddelay-awareroutingalgorithmtoextendthelifetimeofunderwater
sensor networks. Sensors17,7 (2017),1660.
[45] B.MishachandarandS.Vairamuthu.2021.Anunderwatercognitiveacousticnetworkstrategyforefficientspectrum
utilization. AppliedAcoustics 175,(2021),107861.
[46] R.M.GomathiandJ. M.L.Manickam.2018.Energy efficientshortest pathrouting protocol forunderwater acoustic
wirelesssensor network. Wireless Personal Communications 98,1(2018),843–856.
[47] J. Zhang, M. Cai, G. Han, et al. 2020. Cellular clustering-based interference-aware data transmission protocol for
underwateracoustic sensor networks. IEEETransactions onVehicular Technology 69,3(2020),3217–3230.
[48] A. Khasawneh, M. S. B. Abd Latiff, O. Kaiwartya, et al. 2018. A reliable energy-efficient pressure-based routing pro-
tocolfor underwater wirelesssensor network. Wireless Networks 24,6 (2018),2061–2075.
[49] V.ArrichielloandP.Gualeni.2020.Systemsengineeringanddigitaltwin:Avisionforthefutureofcruiseshipsdesign,
productionandoperations. InternationalJournalonInteractiveDesignandManufacturing(IJIDeM) 14,1(2020),115–
122.
[50] T. Y. Pang, J. D. Pelaez Restrepo, C. T. Cheng, et al. 2021.Developinga digitaltwin and digital thread framework for
an‘Industry 4.0’Shipyard’. AppliedSciences 11,3(2021),1097.
Received April 2021; revised October 2021; accepted December 2021
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.

