==== Page 1 ====
sustainability
Article
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Industry 4.0, and Its Impact on
Poverty, Innovation, Infrastructure Development, and the
Sustainable Development Goals: Lessons from
Emerging Economies?
David Mhlanga
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Mhlanga, D. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in the Industry 4.0, and
Its Impact on Poverty, Innovation,
Infrastructure Development, and the
Sustainable Development Goals:
Lessons from Emerging Economies?
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13115788
Academic Editors: Sanghyo Lee and
Luigi Aldieri
Received: 13 April 2021
Accepted: 12 May 2021
Published: 21 May 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Department of Accountancy, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park,
P .O. Box 524, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa; dmhlanga@uj.ac.za
Abstract: Artiﬁcial intelligence in the fourth industrial revolution is beginning to live up to its
promises of delivering real value necessitated by the availability of relevant data, computational abil-
ity, and algorithms. Therefore, this study sought to investigate the inﬂuence of artiﬁcial intelligence
on the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals with a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal
one, industry, innovation, and infrastructure development goal 9, in emerging economies. Using
content analysis, the result pointed to the fact that artiﬁcial intelligence has a strong inﬂuence on the
attainment of Sustainable Development Goals particularly on poverty reduction, improvement of the
certainty and reliability of infrastructure like transport making economic growth and development
possible in emerging economies. The results revealed that Artiﬁcial intelligence is making poverty
reduction possible through improving the collection of poverty-related data through poverty maps,
revolutionizing agriculture education and the ﬁnance sector through ﬁnancial inclusion. The study
also discovered that AI is also assisting a lot in education, and the ﬁnancial sector allowing the
previously excluded individuals to be able to participate in the mainstream economy. Therefore, it is
important that governments in emerging economies need to invest more in the use of AI and increase
the research related to it so that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) related to innovation,
infrastructure development, poverty reduction are attained.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence; Industry 4.0; innovation; infrastructure development poverty;
Sustainable Development Goals
1. Introduction
Industry 4.0 or the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) is gaining a lot of attention
particularly on its potential impact on humanity [ 1]. Schwab [ 1] argued that 4IR will
change how human beings live, work and how the economies work as well as how we
are governed. It is also believed that the industrial revolutions began as far as the 17th
century with Britain being the major player with what came to be known as the ﬁrst
industrial revolution [2,3]. The word “industrial revolution can be described as economic
upheaval” which necessitated the changes in the “livelihood of the people from agrarian
rural livelihood to city and town livelihood” [ 3]. According to Blinov [ 2] before the coming
in of the ﬁrst industrial revolution championed by Britain, economic activities were limited
and as a result, many people were poor and human livelihood was sustained by what
people get from the small farms which made life for an average person to be difﬁcult [4].
During this period production was mainly for their consumption, as a result, people
were using basic tools which were mainly hand tools for production and production was
mainly conﬁned in people’s homes [ 3,4]. The coming in of the ﬁrst industrial revolution
marked the replacement of animal power to the steam engine which marked the “shift from
agrarian livelihood” to industrialization where “special-purpose machinery” was now used
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13115788 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 2 of 16
kickstarting the ﬁrst industrial revolution in Britain at the beginning of the 18th century [ 5].
The steam engine allowed the production of goods and services to be mechanized for the
ﬁrst time deriving social change as people became increasingly urbanized [ 5]. Products
like textiles, iron rail transport, coal among others became common in the ﬁrst industrial
revolution. On the other hand, the second industrial revolution started with the expansion
of electricity steel industries and petroleum industries and other scientiﬁc achievements
that led to mass production [6,7].
Around the 1950s, the third industrial revolution began with the inventions of comput-
ers and digital technology allowing the manufacturing sector to be automated. However,
the inventions of the third industrial revolution came fourth with disruptions in various
industries which include banking, energy, and communications. Ooi et al. [7] argued that
despite the disruptions, the technologies opened some doors in areas of space research
and biotechnology opening opportunities for many people who were affected by the dis-
ruptions. Various scholars such as Schwab [ 6], Ooi et al. [ 7] (2018), Radziwill [ 8] 2018
believe that we are currently in the 4IR or Industry 4.0 also known as the fourth industrial
revolution. The three industrial revolutions became the basis or the foundation of Industry
4.0 which was deﬁned by Schwab [6] as:
“The blurring of boundaries between the physical, digital, and biological worlds. It
is also viewed as the fusion of advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), robotics, the
Internet of things (IoT), 3D printing, genetic engineering, quantum computing, and
other technologies Industry 4.0 is the collective force behind various products that are
fast becoming indispensable to modern life through the application of AI and machine
learning. Products like the GPS systems that suggest the fastest route to a destination,
the ability of Facebook to recognize human faces as well as your face and tag a person in a
friend’s photo”.
Nations all over the world are preparing and make serious plans for the impact of this
revolution on humanity, economies and even businesses and the literature of the inﬂuence
of Industry 4.0 on society through the l is developing, this area has not been deeply
researched especially the impact of AI on poverty reduction, infrastructure development
and the general attainment of the SDGs [ 8–10]. All the previous industrial revolutions led
society to go: “through painful processes of adaptation, for example from rural, largely
agricultural societies, to urban, industrial societies, and then to post-industrial societies
dealing with the loss of traditional industries and sources of employment” [ 2]. At the same
scholars argue that the impact of the 4IR on society will result not only in the loss of jobs
but a marginal shift in how public and private goods and services are delivered [3,11].
Smith [ 12] in a study getting value from artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture, stated
that AI is beginning to live up to its promises of delivering real value due to the availability
of relevant data, computational ability, and algorithms. Smith [ 12] also argued that AI
applications can help to improve productivity in farming by improving the detection of
diseases and the precision of measurements about what is happening on the farm. Eli-
Chukwu [ 13] in another study indicated that the usefulness of AI applications has been
evident in the agricultural sector. In the study, Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated that AI plays critical
role to solve some of the challenges affecting the agricultural sector especially the ability
of farmers to maximize yields. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to investigate the
inﬂuence of AI on the attainment of SDGs with a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal
one, industry, innovation, and infrastructure development goal 9, in emerging economies.
The Industry 4.0 the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Industry 4.0 is unique when it is compared to other previous Industrial Revolutions [ 1].
According to Schwab [ 6], Industry 4.0 has dramatic differences from the other three indus-
trial revolutions due to the scale, scope, complexity, and its transformation, which will be
unique to all other revolutions. Schwab [ 6] argued that the revolution will be something
humankind has never experienced before because it is not just an extension of the previous
industrial revolution, but it is a new distinct revolution [6,10]. The ﬁrst notable difference

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 3 of 16
of Industry 4.0 to other past revolutions is the production of information where people
can come up with new information as well as generating new knowledge in the mining
of information [6,10] This is enhanced by the possibilities available for many people to be
connected by mobile gadgets with strong processing power, storage capacity, and unlimited
access to knowledge [ 14,15]. In a way, the continuous data accumulation and analysis is
permitting the intelligence of machines to improve.
The other issue which makes Industry 4.0 to be unique from other industrial revolu-
tions is the fact that Industry 4.0 is not just massive advances in technology but it will also
come with a transformation of the existing relationships in the production process [ 16,17].
Industry 4.0 is also allowing the manufacturing sector to be in the class of the information
age through permitting communication at all the stages of production. Some scholars also
believe that Industry 4.0 is coming up with new economic formations in various sectors of
the economy such as the sharing economy where services like transport, toys, basketballs
are being shared [15,18].
On the other hand, some researchers believe that Industry 4.0 will result in more
inequality due to its threat of disrupting labour markets. It is argued that the continuous
growth in automation, robots and computers will take the jobs of workers in many indus-
tries with the most worrying factor being the increased danger of the disappearance of
low-skill/low-pay jobs which will cause a lot of challenges for the poor which will lead to a
rise in social tensions [ 10,19]. However, Schwab, [ 6] argued that in its strict sense, the issue
of inequality is not unique to Industry 4.0, in history, all other previous revolutions always
started with huge inequality followed by periods of political and institutional change.
However, the most worrying fact is that in Industry 4.0 it is not only the movement of
labour from one sector of the economy to another but the existence of robots and com-
puters that will replace human capital in short, taking the jobs of people [ 1,6]. The other
aspects the technological revolution will have an impact on are issues related to material or
ideological changes caused by the introduction of new devices or new systems which will
have an impact on reshaping the culture of humankind. Figure 1 below explains the four
industrial revolutions from the ﬁrst to the current revolution.
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
industrial revolutions due to the scale, scop e, complexity, and its transformation, which 
will be unique to all other revolutions. Schwab [6] argued that the revolution will be some-
thing humankind has never experienced before because it is not just an extension of the 
previous industrial revolution, but it is a new distinct revolution [6,10]. The first notable difference of Industry 4.0 to other past revo lutions is the production of information where 
people can come up with new information as well as generating new knowledge in the 
mining of information [6,10] This is enhanced by the possibilities available for many peo-
ple to be connected by mobile gadgets with strong processing power, storage capacity, 
and unlimited access to knowledge [14,15]. In  a way, the continuous data accumulation 
and analysis is permitting the intelligence of machines to improve. 
The other issue which makes Industry 4.0 to be unique from other industrial revolu-
tions is the fact that Industry 4.0 is not just massive advances in technology but it will also 
come with a transformation of the existing re lationships in the produc tion process [16,17]. 
Industry 4.0 is also allowing the manufacturing sector to be in the class of the information 
age through permitting communication at all the stages of production. Some scholars also 
believe that Industry 4.0 is coming up with new economic formations in various sectors 
of the economy such as the sharing economy wh ere services like transport, toys, basket-
balls are being shared [15,18]. 
On the other hand, some researchers believe that Industry 4.0 will result in more in-
equality due to its threat of disrupting labour  markets. It is argued that the continuous 
growth in automation, robots and computers will take the jobs of workers in many indus-
tries with the most worrying factor being the increased danger of the disappearance of low-skill/low-pay jobs which will cause a lot of challenges for the poor which will lead to 
a rise in social tensions [10, 19]. However, Schwab, [6] argued that in its strict sense, the 
issue of inequality is not unique to Industry 4.0, in history, all other previous revolutions 
always started with huge inequality followed by periods of political and institutional 
change. However, the most worrying fact is that in Industry 4.0 it is not only the move-ment of labour from one sector of the econom y to another but the existence of robots and 
computers that will replace human capital in sh ort, taking the jobs of people [1,6]. The 
other aspects the technological revolution will have an impact on are issues related to material or ideological changes caused by th e introduction of new devices or new systems 
which will have an impact on reshaping the culture of humankind. Figure 1 below ex-
plains the four industrial revolutions fr om the first to the current revolution. 
 
Figure 1. The Four Industrial Revolutions. Source: [9,20]. 
The four industrial revolutions are clearly shown in the diagram above from the first 
industrial revolution to the last  industrial revolution of today. The first industrial revolu-
tion started towards the end of the 18th century followed by the second industrial revo-
lution which happened between 1870 and 1914. In the early 1970s, the third industrial 
revolution happened. The fourth industrial revolution is happening today with various 
technologies that are driving it such as AI, robotics, blockchain, distributed ledger tech-
nology among several other technologies. 
Figure 1. The Four Industrial Revolutions. Source: [9,20].
The four industrial revolutions are clearly shown in the diagram above from the ﬁrst
industrial revolution to the last industrial revolution of today. The ﬁrst industrial revolution
started towards the end of the 18th century followed by the second industrial revolution
which happened between 1870 and 1914. In the early 1970s, the third industrial revolution
happened. The fourth industrial revolution is happening today with various technologies
that are driving it such as AI, robotics, blockchain, distributed ledger technology among
several other technologies.
2. Literature Review
2.1. A Brief History and Deﬁnition of AI
The Idea behind the subject of AI began in 1955 with John McCarthy who assumed
that all the aspects of learning and the notable domains of intelligence can be simulated

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 4 of 16
by a machine [ 8,20]. On the other hand, Haenlein and Kaplan [ 21] stated that “although
it is difﬁcult to pinpoint the roots of AI, however, it is possible to trace back to the 1940s,
speciﬁcally 1942, when the American Science Fiction writer Isaac Asimov published his
short story Run around. The plot of Run around a story about a robot developed by
engineers. The word “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” was then ofﬁcially coined in 1956 Marvin
Minsky and John McCarthy one of the computer scientists at Stanford”.
The term artiﬁcial intelligence is explained as:
“The investigation of intelligent problem-solving behaviour and the creation of intelligent
computer systems. In other words, AI describes the work processes of machines that
would require intelligence if performed by humans” [20].
As outlined by Wisskirchen et al. [ 20] AI has two kinds which are weak AI and
strong AI. With weak AI “the computer is merely an instrument for investigating cognitive
processes the computer simulates intelligence”. Strong AI, on the other hand, entails
“the processes where computers are intellectual, self-learning processes. Computers can
understand through the right software/programming and can optimize their behavior
based on their former behaviour and their experience” [ 20]. Strong AI includes automatic
networking with other machines, which leads to a dramatic scaling effect [ 22]. The most
notable economic disciplines of AI are deep learning, robotization, dematerialization, the
gig economy and autonomous driving cars among others [20].
Benko and Sik L ányi [ 23] insinuates that even though AI has been studied for decades
but it is still one of the most elusive subjects in computer science because the subject
is large and nebulous. It is believed that AI ranges from machines that can think to
search algorithms used to play board games. In other words, it is insinuated that AI has
applications in nearly all ways humans use computers in society. AI is used in subtler ways
which include examining purchase histories as well as inﬂuencing marketing decisions [ 23].
According to Buchanan [ 22] robots have always been part of the public’s perception of
intelligent computers, but early robotics efforts had more to do with mechanical engineering
than with intelligent control. However, through the power of AI robots are becoming
more powerful vehicles for the testing idea across the world about intelligent behaviour.
However, it has been argued that AI is not just about robots. It is also about understanding
the nature of intelligent thought and action using computers as experimental devices [ 22].
2.2. The Theoretical Deﬁnitions of Poverty
Poverty over the years has been deﬁned with a bias towards monetary aspects, how-
ever, with time scholars are beginning to shift the deﬁnition of poverty to multidimensional
issues like political participation and social exclusion showing that poverty is a multidi-
mensional phenomenon [ 24] (Davis and Sanchez-Martinez, 2014). This means that poverty
is not a direct result of one factor but a combination of factors. As a result, the United Na-
tions (UN) deﬁned poverty in two aspects which are absolute poverty and overall poverty.
Absolute poverty is deﬁned as a condition where people are deprived of basic human
needs like food, health, shelter, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, education, and
information [ 25,26]. As a result, poverty is because of many factors, not only income [ 26].
Overall poverty is deﬁned as a condition where people are not able to have access to
income and other productive resources. Overall poverty is characterized but not limited
“to hunger and malnutrition, ill-health, inability to access education, a rise in morbidity
and mortality from illness, shortage of housing, unsafe environments, social exclusion and
discrimination” [ 24]. Overall poverty also “involves a lack of participation in decision
making in civil, social and cultural life” [27].
The UN also came up with another deﬁnition of poverty, the multidimensional poverty
index [ 26]. The deﬁnition by the UN in 2010 involves many issues such as education, health,
standards of living and many other variables. In 2013, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation
(JRF) deﬁned poverty as a condition where people’s material resources are not enough to
satisfy the minimum needs with social participation is included [ 26,28] (Mhlanga, 2020b,
Mhlanga, and Ndhlovu). The World Bank stressed much on consumption and income

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 5 of 16
of individuals as major variables which can render a person to be poor especially if the
individual fails to reach a prescribed income or consumption threshold commonly known
as the poverty datum line [ 26]. From the various deﬁnitions of poverty, the study will
investigate how AI can have an impact on poverty from various dimensions.
2.3. Poverty Statistics in The World
The battle against poverty is going on the world over, although there was a decline
in global extreme poverty, the pace is slow. The portion of the population in the world
living in extreme poverty declined to 10% in 2015, down from 16% in 2010 and 36% in
1990 [ 29,30] (Guterres, 2019; World Bank, 2019). The statistics show that the world is not on
track in attaining the goal of reducing the world’s population living in extreme poverty
by 2030 [ 30]. However, the baseline projections suggest that 6%of the world population
will still be living in extreme poverty in 2030, missing the target of ending poverty [ 29]
(Guterres, 2019; World Bank, 2019). People who live in extreme poverty continue to face
deeply entrenched deprivation which is sometimes exacerbated by violent conﬂicts and
vulnerability to disasters. It is argued that tough social protection systems and massive
government spending on key services can help those in poverty to come out of the poverty
brackets. However, there is a need for strengthening and scaling up these services [ 29]
(Guterres, 2019). According to Guterres [ 29] despite having a job 8 per cent of households
are still living in extreme poverty in the year 2018 [ 29]. The situation is worse in Sub-
Saharan Africa where a portion of the poor working population is approximately 38 pecent
in 2018 [29].
The World Bank also supported the fact that poverty is still concentrated in Sub-
Saharan Africa. In 2019 the World bank Indicated that despite a decline in poverty rates
in all the regions in the world, but the rate of progress was uneven [ 30]. The World Bank
estimated that approximately more than half of the extremely poor people live in Sub-
Saharan Africa [ 30]. In 2015, it was also estimated that the portion of poor households in
Sub-Saharan Africa rose by 9 million, while 413 million people are surviving on less than
US$ 1.90 a day. This was more than all other regions in the world combined [ 26,30]. It is
also believed that if the trend continues, by 2030, nearly 9 out of 10 extreme poor will be
in Sub-Saharan Africa [ 31]. The other worrying aspect is that the bulk of poor people in
the world reside in rural areas. Most of these people are poorly educated, employed in the
agricultural sector, and under 18 years of age as articulated by the World Bank [ 30,32]. The
World Bank also indicated that the work to end extreme poverty is still in progress with
many challenges present due to slow growth rates in many parts of the world [ 30,31]. This
study, therefore, intends to investigate how can the use of AI help to address the problem
of poverty which is affecting the whole world.
2.4. Empirical Literature Review
The subject of AI and poverty is relatively new because the empirical literature on the
impact of AI on poverty is still scarce. Smith [ 12] in a study getting value from artiﬁcial
intelligence in agriculture reasoned that AI is beginning to live up to its promises of
delivering real value due to the availability of relevant data, computation, and algorithms.
In the study, Smith [ 12] discusses the value of agriculture from AI in the next decade. In
the study, it was discovered that AI applications can help to improve productivity on
the farm through improving the detection of diseases and the precision of measurements
about what is happening on the farm. The study also indicated that in many cases robotics
and automated systems will remove much of the need for human decision-making and
improve farm efﬁciencies and farm health. AI also helps the farmers to harness the value
of information distributed throughout supply chains, including farm data.
In another study, Dharmaraj and Vijayanand [ 33] argued that the fact that the popula-
tion is increasing estimated to increase by 2 billion in 2050, means that AI is important to
improve the efﬁciency of farming practices. Dharmaraj and Vijayanand [ 33] also indicated
that a direct application of AI or machine intelligence across the farming sector could act to

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 6 of 16
be an epitome of the shift in how farming is practiced today. The study also highlighted
that farming solutions that are AI-powered, on many occasions, enable a farmer to do more
with less, which enhances the quality, also ensuring that farmers will go to markets very
fast that enhancing quick GTM (go-to-market strategy) strategy for crops.
Again Vincent et al. [ 34] argued that the world population is expected to increase
to 2 billion in 2050, while the arable area is expected to grow by only 5%. As a result,
smart and efﬁcient farming techniques powered by AI and machine learning are necessary
to improve agriculture productivity. The study also highlighted that the suitability of
agricultural land is among several critical tools that drive agricultural development. As a
result, AI performs a big role in agriculture an alternative in the collection and processing of
information through wireless sensor networks. The availability of wireless sensor networks
is also allowing the development of low-cost sensor devices with the Internet of Things
(IoT) with the power of being appropriate tools for automation and decision making in
agriculture. Vincent et al. [ 34] believe that integrating sensor networks with AI systems
Like neural networks and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) can help assess the appropriate
land for agricultural purposes.
Eli-Chukwu [ 13] in another study indicated that the application of AI has been evident
in the agricultural sector. In the study, Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated that AI plays critical roles to
solve some of the challenges affecting the agricultural sector in their endeavor to maximize
yields. Some challenges affecting the agricultural sector where AI can play a critical role is
to ensure that there are proper soil treatment, disease, and pest infestation control, ensuring
that big data requirements are solved, problems of low output can also be addressed, and
knowledge gap between farmers and technology can be reduced. Eli-Chukwu [ 13] stated
that AI can help to solve some of these challenges in agriculture due to its ﬂexibility, high
performance, accuracy, and cost-effectiveness.
Zavadskaya [ 35] investigated the application of AI ﬁnance particularly issues to do
with portfolio management, bankruptcy prediction, credit rating, exchange rate prediction
and trading. The main idea objective of the study was the stock market prediction, and
whether Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) as proxies for AI, could offer an investor more
accurate forecasting result. Zavadskaya [ 35] discovered that ANN performed well in the
prediction of results for investors compared to many models. The study also discovered
that combining AI with the concept of big data, Google Trends search as a measure of
market sentiment is valuable in the modelling of returns. Cossy-Gantner et al. [ 36] also
stated that the ﬁeld of AI has been developing in the last 60 years and various applications
of AI have been utilized in high-income countries and their use in poor countries is still
a huge challenge. Cossy-Gantner et al. [ 36] went on to argue that even though AI still
has problems in its application in low-income countries it is present huge promises in the
transformation of healthcare in poor nations.
Kliestik et al. [ 37] also empirically examined the fourth industrial revolution manufactur-
ing systems with data collected from various companies such as Deloitte, McKinsey among
others at the same time Peters et al. [ 38] carried an empirical study to evaluate and analyze
sustainable Industry 4.0. The study made use of data collected from various companies just
like Kliestik et al. [ 37] and all the studies did find the importance of AI. Just like Kliestik
et al. [ 37] and Peters et al. [ 38]. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] discovered that urban innovation through
AI is growing smart cities where urban locations are being enabled by the community , tech-
nology, and policy to influence productivity, innovation, sustainability, good governance,
and good planning powered by AI. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] also found out that research on AI
from the perspective of smart cities is still emerging and more researchers are focusing on
AI technologies, algorithms, and their prospective applications. Yigitcanlar et al. [ 39] also
discovered that there is limited research on the risks of the utilization of AI and the future
disruptions of AI on cities has not been investigated fully .
How et al. [ 40] also came up with a study to assess the no-coding human-centric
AI-based approach in the analysis or prediction of the intentions of the ﬁnancial products
offered. How et al. [ 40] found that ﬁnancial service providers must understand the na-

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 7 of 16
ture and behaviour of the underserved communities for them to save them successfully.
How et al. [ 40] believed that applying AI on legacy data is critical to assist ﬁnancial service
providers to anticipate how prospective customers respond when they are approached with
products. The study by How et al. [ 40] found out that a key factor in poverty reduction is ﬁ-
nancial inclusion powered by AI, but it has been discovered that ﬁnancial service providers
who do not know about computer programming to implement AI projects continue to
experience challenges.
3. Research Methodology
The study used secondary research to investigate the inﬂuence of AI on the attainment
of SDGs with a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal one, industry, innovation, and
infrastructure development goal 9, in emerging economies. To analyze the impact of AI
on the attainment of the SDGs objectively the study used unobtrusive research techniques.
Elo et al. [ 41] deﬁned unobtrusive research as the methods of data collection where the re-
searcher does not interfere with the subjects under investigation. This is mainly because the
methods are not obtrusive [ 42]. The study made use of content analysis which is the study
recorded information in texts, media, or physical items. In other words, content analysis is
a research technique used in the determination of the availability of certain words, themes,
or concepts within some given qualitative data text or data. The content analysis allowed
the study to quantify and analyze the presence, meanings and relationships of such certain
words, themes, or concepts that acted as the basis for the arguments and conclusion of
the study. Secondary sources of data like governments reports, international statistics,
media articles, peer-reviewed journal articles, books were critically reviewed to inform the
discussions in the paper. The main limitation of the current study is the fact that some of the
ofﬁcial complex hard data and peer-reviewed journal articles and books on the inﬂuence
of AI on poverty, innovation, infrastructure development and sustainable development is
still developing. However, the author tried to utilize the available information that was
published by scholars, private organizations, and governments through various organiza-
tions. The advantage of content analysis is its non-invasive nature when analyzing a social
phenomenon [ 42]. Content analysis is used in speciﬁcally three different approaches which
include the conventional, directed, and summative. According to Elo et al. [ 41], the three
approaches help in the interpretation of meaning from the content of text data permitting
them to conform to the naturalistic paradigm. The current study was mainly premised
on the summative content analysis involves the counting and comparisons of keywords
and interpret the context in the keywords or content, followed by the interpretation of the
underlying context [42].
3.1. Discussion of the Impact of AI on Poverty, Innovation, and Infrastructure Development
AI technologies can play a central role in the achievement of the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals (SDGs). This study is assessing the impact of AI on poverty, which is goal
one of the Sustainable development goals, end poverty in all its manifestations and goal 9
Industry, innovation, and infrastructure development.
3.2. The Role of AI in Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure Development
One of the critical components of economic growth and development is an investment
in infrastructure and innovation [ 43]. It is estimated that over half of the world’s population
is living in cities, making infrastructure development and innovation in mass transport
and renewable energy very critical [ 44]. Conde and Twinn, [ 44] went on to argue that
the massive growth in the population in cities also makes the growth of new industries,
the growth of information and communication technologies (ICT) and AI very critical.
The other stubborn fact is that more than 4 billion people do not have internet access and
over 90 per cent of these people are found in the developing world [ 45]. The only way to
bridge this digital divide is to make sure that there is massive infrastructure development,
a massive increase in access to information and knowledge as well as fostering innovation

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 8 of 16
and entrepreneurship powered by AI [ 45]. It is also believed that 2.3 billion people the
world over cannot access basic sanitation due to infrastructure constraints which cut
business productivity in many low-income African countries by approximately 40% [ 46].
The United Nations also reported that approximately 2.6 billion people in developing
nations do not have access to constant electricity and the renewable energy sectors currently
employ more than 2.3 million people which is predicted to rise to 20 million by 2030 [ 47].
The other serious problem that manifests because of the lack of proper infrastructure is that
barely 30 per cent of agricultural products in developing countries went through industrial
processing as compared to 98% in high-income countries [46,47]
According to Conde and Twinn, [ 44] AI is now changing the world economy and it
is estimated that advances in AI could add approximately 13 trillion to global economic
output by 2030. In the transport sector, the global market for transport-related AI tech-
nologies reached $1.2 to 1.4 billion and it is estimated to grow to 3.1 and 3.5 billion by
2023 which is a 12 to 14.5 growth from 2017 to 2023 [ 44]. Various AI interventions can be
applied to various sectors to improve the infrastructure, for instance, the transport sector,
agriculture which can transform these sectors towards the attainment of the SDGs. The
World Bank stated that the applications of AI in the transport sector go beyond driverless
vehicles but can solve various problems related to safety for drivers and pedestrians. Road
trafﬁc accidents are one of the health hazards especially in developing countries Conde
and Twinn, [ 44] (2019) reported that road trafﬁc-related deaths reached 1.35 million in 2016
up from 1.25 million in 2013 and most of the accidents happened in low-income nations.
Some of the reasons given are inadequate infrastructure, poor roads, and vehicles without
modern safety equipment as well as human error.
One of the reports by Conde and Twinn, [ 44] reported stated that in the European
Union (EU) human error, speeding, distraction, and drunk driving contributes to more than
90 per cent of all the accidents on roads. In 2017 alone approximately 25,000 people lost
their lives in these accidents in the EU. Research is pointing to the fact that the application of
AI through autonomous vehicles can help to reduce trafﬁc accidents by approximately 90%
by 2050 in some developed nations. The ﬁrst attempt by Tesla at an autonomous vehicle
reduced accident rates by 40 per cent the moment self-driving technologies were activated.
It is a fact that though autonomous vehicles will bring some beneﬁts, the deployment in
emerging markets will take a long time, but some researchers project that there will be
1 driverless car in every 4 cars in 2030.
The other aspect where AI is doing a lot is the improvement of the certainty and
reliability of infrastructure, especially in the transport sector. The World Bank reported
that one enabler of the safe and efﬁcient movement of goods and people the ability to be
able to forecast arrival and departure times. Companies such as Uber and Lyft are using
AI applications in different ways to offer the much-needed reliability pickup and drop-off
times for their routes. So, these AI applications can be applied to improve the quality of
public transport solutions globally. One example is Via a company in New York city in
America which is giving licenses to its technology to the New York City Department of
Education to come up with designs of smart bus routes which will provide transparency
on pickups and drop-offs. AI is also playing a crucial role in maintaining the environment,
for instance, in the transport sector AI technology can reduce the number of inefﬁcient
trips at sea and on the road through the optimization of routes to improve fuel efﬁciency
and reduction of greenhouse gases emissions. It was estimated that the world over 23% of
total energy-related carbon dioxide emissions. One of the eco-friendly AI application is
well known as truck platooning which is a technique that can successfully connect several
trucks wirelessly to a lead truck permitting them to operate much closer to each other
safely, realizing fuel efﬁciency.
In emerging markets, we have several case studies where AI is being used to improve
industries and infrastructure. Many cities in the world are using AI to assist solve trafﬁc
ﬂow challenges. In India, a city called Bengaluru Siemens mobility came up with a
monitoring system that makes use of AI through trafﬁc cameras to detect and calculate the

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 9 of 16
density of trafﬁc on the road and then through the power of AI the trafﬁc lights will be
altered based on real-time road congestion. The other example is Alibaba one of China’s
e-commerce companies introduced the City Brain to try and improve efﬁciency and reduce
road congestion through utilizing data from trafﬁc lights, closed-circuit television (CCTV)
camera as well as video recognition to suggest trafﬁc ﬂow management. The other case
study is of the two Chinees companies China Post and Deppon Express that are in logistics,
they are using AI driving technology from Fabu to introduce autonomous trucks on
Chinee’s roads. These trucks were tested, and they become successful on level 4 autonomy
which implies that they can operate on selected conditions without human input.
Drones are also another classical example of the application of AI especially in places
where there is no infrastructure like Sub-Saharan Africa where drones are being used in
healthcare. Rwanda is one of the countries where the commercial drone was launched
for commercial drone delivery service. Drones are used to ﬂy medical supplies such as
blood. One example is An American start-up Zipline which partnered with the government
of Rwanda to lunch the ﬁrst commercial drone delivery service, ﬂying medical supplies
faster than road transport. The other example that was given is the China start-up Sichuan
Tengden Technology which developed a drone with the capacity to carry 20 tons of cargo
and it can ﬂy up to 7500 km. Apart from drones, many countries are developing smart
airports that are making use of intelligent navigation systems with the ability to do facial
recognition and big data analysis for a paperless and more efﬁcient experience.
3.3. Poverty Mapping and Poverty Data Collection
The World Bank estimates that 736 million people live in extreme poverty worldwide,
and half of them are in just ﬁve countries which are India, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Ethiopia, and Bangladesh. The World Bank and the UN in their ﬁght against
poverty rely heavily on research and data to measure progress towards this goal [ 48].
Strusani and Houngbonon [ 43] in their study indicated that AI technologies are coming
up with new and efﬁcient ways of monitoring and evaluating development interventions
that are meant to target the poor and those in need. One of the problems that affect
emerging economies is the fact that they lack the data which is critical to ﬁne-tuning the
development interventions [ 43] (Strusani and Houngbonon, 2019b). AI is now coming in
with the capacity to make use of unstructured data such as images, texts as well as audio o
come up with the information required to improve the various outcomes of development.
The Decentralized AI Alliance in 2020 reported that the impossibility to collect data is
a consequence of poverty itself. The organization went on to report that the location of
the people that are in poverty or need is a fundamental variable that needs to be taken
seriously in the objective to end poverty in all its forms everywhere [ 49]. It is believed that
countries are not collecting as much data and scaling up traditional household surveys to
identify the number of poor people and the regions where these people are located. This
is also worsened by the fact that traditional household surveys are expensive to many
nations [49].
However, AI can assist to change this. A recent study by a team at Stanford University
is using satellite images to provide an alternative to map poverty [ 50]. The study focused
on ﬁve Africana countries namely, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi and Rwanda social
scientists and computer expert came up with the idea of using high-power satellites to
detect poverty through an analysis of their images. In a way to corroborate the predictions
from the study, the researchers used accurate survey data [ 50]. In a way to effectively map
poverty, AI can combine high-resolution satellite imagery with powerful machine learning
algorithms and predict how rich or poor speciﬁc locations around the world are. AI can
help to effectively provide information like the distance from the nearest water sources,
the nearest urban market or where the agricultural ﬁelds are, and many other important
variables used when measuring poverty [49].
The Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI), which is part of Hamad Bin Khalifa
University, is also collaborating with several organizations such as the World Bank and

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 10 of 16
UN to tackle poverty among other global problems using AI [ 48]. QCRI also developed the
AI for Digital Response (AIDR) platform, which analyses data during disasters, such as
the hurricanes like Hurricane Dorian. These analyses help a lot to map the areas where
help is needed the most and the level of effort needed to respond to a disaster [ 48]. The
QCRI also work directly with relief organizations in the development of technologies used
in the analysis of big data in times of disaster in a way to analyze the conditions for the
allocation of resources [ 48]. With machine learning, the QCRI is producing poverty maps
by utilizing anonymous advertising data from Facebook [ 48]. In India, there was the use of
machine learning on value-added tax data to improve the targeting of ﬁrms for audits. AI
application was also used in predicting travel demands after the hurricane in India and to
assess where food insecurity will mostly occur to improve target interventions.
3.4. The Impact of AI on Agriculture in Rural Areas
The deﬁnition of poverty as highlighted before is a multifaceted phenomenon in other
words poverty is multidimensional. It manifests itself in lack of income, lack of education
and sometimes lack of social assistance and even food insecurity [ 49]. This mostly affects
rural areas where most of the poor people reside. According to the World Bank, agriculture
is the source of livelihood in areas where poverty is more prevalent [ 51]. Strusani and
Houngbonon [ 43] reported that AI application can address the various challenges that are
faced by the people at the bottom of the income distribution especially the bottom 40%.
Even though most of the poor people cannot purchase AI-enabled equipment, it has been
argued that these people can directly beneﬁt from AI through AI service solutions through
their mobile devices. The practical example is the machine learning application, Nuru that
was used in the agricultural sector in Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania. This application
was used in farms in the identiﬁcation of leaf damage in photos taken by farmers that were
sent to authorities to assist in monitoring the presence of one of the evasive pests that have
been threatening the revenue of farms and food security across East Africa.
The other importance of AI is the fact that the data generated from mobile phones can
be highly correlated with the ﬁnancial status, education level as well as health status. This
can allow mobile applications to deliver microlending, the establishment of personalized
tutoring, the diagnosis of health and medication advice. The critical use of AI applications
is the removal of literacy barriers among the poorest individuals through AI speech recog-
nition and speech to text functionalities, especially when accessing text-based applications.
In most rural areas that are far from the urban areas AI through image recognition can be
used in the assessment of microinsurance claims of farmers. All these AI application among
the farmers help to improve productivity which will allow them to improve their revenue
and to become food secure. The Decentralized AI Alliance in 2020 also reported that AI can
address the problem of poverty through improving farming soil cultivation for growing
crops and the rearing of animals as a way of providing food and other important products.
Through AI applications robots can now help farmers to harvest crops and predicting the
best ways for farmers to grow different crops [49].
Schmidt [ 50] also stated that using robotics, AI is becoming an important variable in
solving world hunger. Schmidt [ 50] believes that there is progress being made by corpo-
rations and university programs such as Google and Stanford University’s Sustainability
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab. These organizations are coming forth with AI programs
in agriculture which are doing a lot to improve farming, helping in the identiﬁcation of
diseases, prediction of crop yields and location of areas prone to scarcity. One example
where AI is being applied is through FarmView programme created by researchers from
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) to help farmers to grow more food using the same
number of crops. This effort is being applied to come up with rapid solutions to the critical
problem of paid rise in population. It is estimated that by the year 2050, approximately
9.8 billion people will live on the planet, and this will increase food scarcity making this
topic very critical. However, the availability of AI will help to improve farming methods
sensing and robotics technologies to improve plant breeding and crop management [ 50].

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 11 of 16
Researchers are busy collecting a lot of information using drones, robots, and stationary sen-
sors to increase yields of drought and heat resistant crops that can thrive in famine-stricken
nations [ 49,50]. Through AI technology researchers and machine learning technologies
data is analyzed to determine what factors yield more sorghum [49,50].
Another example of where AI is helping a lot in agriculture is through industry
PlantMD. PlantMD is an application created by high school students Shaza Mehdi and Nile
Ravanell in Georgia United States of America. This application allows a farmer to detect
plant diseases [ 50]. This application was built using Google’s TensorFlow, an open-source
machine learning library [ 50]. The PlantMD application was inﬂuenced by Nuru one of the
applications built by a research team at Penn State University Pennsylvania called Plant
Village alongside the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture. The application (Nuru)
as highlighted before was created to combat disease and pest susceptibility in cassava,
one of the crops that feed half a billion Africans daily [ 49,50]. Farmers had difﬁculties
in inspecting and managing every crop. As a result of the availability of AI, machine
learning is now used to increase efﬁciency in the process of disease and pest control. “A
machine learning model was trained using thousands of classiﬁed cassava images and
the model was turned into an application where farmers can send images of their crop
and receive information which gives them the ability to identify diseases with options
available to manage the diseases” [ 49]. In this way, AI is assisting African agriculture to be
sustainable which can help agriculture to feed the people. Similarly, Stanford University is
utilizing machine learning to understand and predict crop yields in soybeans. Moreover,
it is believed that machine learning can also assist in discovering places in developing
and underdeveloped nations with food insecurity issues through satellite technology. The
next section is outlining how AI can help in the education sector. All these developments
are supported by various scholars who investigated the importance of AI in growth and
development of economies for instance, Vincent et al. [ 34] argued that the world population
is expected to increase to 2 billion in 2050, while the arable area is expected to grow by
only 5%. As a result, smart and efﬁcient farming techniques powered by AI and machine
learning are necessary to improve agriculture productivity. Eli-Chukwu [ 13] in another
study also indicated that the application of AI has been evident in the agricultural sector.
In the study where AI plays critical roles in solving some of the challenges affecting the
agricultural sector in their endeavor to maximize yields. For instance, ensuring that there
are proper soil treatment, disease, and pest infestation control, ensuring that big data
requirements are solved, problems of low output can also be addressed, and knowledge
gap between farmers and technology can be reduced.
3.5. The Impact of AI on Education
Poverty is usually associated with the inability of households to have formal educa-
tion. The World Bank estimates that about 39% of the world poorest do not have formal
education. Aspects that hinder access to education for many households is purely the
cost factor and capacity of the institutions of higher learning. Many institutions have a
prescribed number of people they can accommodate [ 52]. AI can assist in raising the levels
of education for the poor children the various methods which include adapted learning
techniques using computer algorithms to encourage interaction with the learner as well as
coming up with an education that is tailor-made for the needs of each learner [ 49]. Using
AI, it is highly possible to discover the speciﬁc learning need s of each learner and be able
to satisfy these requirements using various methods of learning. In other unique circum-
stances, intelligent chat boards are used as tutors breaking the money barrier to education
to pupils who come from poor areas which will help to address access issues ﬁnally be able
to address inequality at the same time. One study by Mhlanga and Moloi [ 18] revealed that
technology related to Industry 4.0 helped a lot during the COVID-19 social distancing for
learners to be able to move on with education even during the lockdown. The study also
found that technology can even increase access to education especially online education
where space is not a limiting factor. One of the education projects where AI is assisting in

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 12 of 16
education is through the social enterprise Eneza Education where AI is used in tutoring
millions of rural students in Kenya, Ghana, and C ôte d’Ivoire. In this way, AI is helping a
lot in the achievement of quality education [ 49]. This also enables education to be inclusive
and equitable creating and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all [ 49,53]. Just
like Mhlanga and Moloi [ 18], Chua and Valencia, [ 54] documented the importance of AI
in education during the lockdown necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Chua and
Valencia, [ 54] found out that AI will play a signiﬁcant role in education especially during
the COVID-19 pandemic even though they argued that it will be difﬁcult for AI to replace
humans in administrating education.3.6. AI and Digital Financial inclusion.
Digital ﬁnancial inclusion is viewed as a way of reaching out to the households who
are not ﬁnancially active, that is those who are not able to enjoy formal ﬁnancial services
that are designed to meet their needs [ 8,55]. Mhlanga, [ 8] argued that people who are
excluded from the formal ﬁnancial sector are women, youth, and the poor especially those
staying in rural areas. Strusani and Houngbonon [ 43] argued that the traditional ways
of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity are being subjected to technological
disruptions where AI is changing the cost of access to products and services, changing how
information is gathered, how products are made as well as how people interact. Strusani
and Houngbonon [ 43] went on to argue that the challenges associated with development are
increasingly becoming intertwined with technology where the goals of ending poverty and
boosting shared prosperity are becoming critically dependent on harnessing the power of
technologies like AI and at the same time looking for ways to minimize the risks associated
with these technologies.
It has been established that in emerging markets countries are beginning to use
basic AI to come up with solutions to critical challenges of development especially in the
provision of ﬁnancial services to underserved and unserved population [ 43]. The massive
progress in basic machine learning algorithms and the growth in the number of technology
users made it possible for emerging markets to use AI solutions like credit scoring and
targeted advertising. Some early examples of AI being delivered in ﬁnancial markets
include the MoMo Kash in Cote d’Ivoire, M-Kajy in Madagascar, M-Shwari in East Africa,
and Ant Financial in East Asia. M-Shwari made use of machine learning to come up with a
prediction of the probability of default of potential borrowers making it possible for small
loans to be delivered to 21 million Kenyans by the end of 2017.
Better data processing, a massive increase in access to credit is making AI drive inno-
vation in ﬁnancial services through relying on non-traditional data like mobile phone call
records, mobile money transactions data, text messages and address books. Another im-
portant aspect of AI is that it reduces information asymmetry in contexts where borrowers
lack credit history like ﬁrst-time borrowers and the unbanked. In addition, AI is making
ﬁnancial services more affordable due to the automation of credit scoring which is one
of the processes that was devoted to human resource in traditional ﬁnancial institutions.
Through machine learning algorithms, a large amount of mobile phone data can be parsed
in delivering instantaneous credit scores to users in emerging economies. The scoring
algorithm improves once the user is offered a loan by absorbing credit history data. Branch
one of the ﬁntech companies is one example where this approach is being used through
offering microloans to ﬁrst-time borrowers and customers without banking accounts in
countries like Kenya, Nigeria, India, and Mexico.
In Africa, the popularity of digital ﬁnancial inclusion increased when M-Pesa become
one of the success stories in the payment innovations that started in Kenya [ 56]. M-Pesa is
a mobile banking service lunched in 2007 by Safaricom the largest mobile phone operator
in Kenya that allows users to store and transfer money through their mobile phones. In
Asian countries like China digital ﬁnancial inclusion is viewed as more than payment
innovations which include digital investment, payments, and investment [ 56,57]. The
importance of digital ﬁnance is its ability to utilize information communication technology
(ICT) in increasing the scale and use of ﬁnancial service by the poor and those excluded
from the formal ﬁnancial market [ 8,58]. The coming in of ICT and AI allowed ﬁnancial

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 13 of 16
inclusion to become digital and to allow groups of vulnerable people to be able to access
ﬁnance [ 59]. Mhlanga, [ 8] agree with Wang and He, [ 56] that for business to be the
activity to be successful when it is done with people at the bottom of the pyramid, radical
innovations such as the use of AI is one of the requirements. The application of AI in
digital ﬁnancial inclusion makes it different from traditional ﬁnancial inclusion because
with digital ﬁnancial inclusion, there is a massive reduction in transaction costs, especially
in the rural areas because of lower marginal costs since with digital ﬁnancial inclusion
service provider necessarily do not need to have physical outlets [ 56]. The use of T AI and
various ICT tools overcomes the major problem of traditional ﬁnancial inclusion which is
information asymmetry [8,60].
Various online services and products provide a vast amount of information to cus-
tomers which could not be accessible without the use of digital services [ 8]. Peric, [ 61]
stated that the beneﬁts of digital ﬁnancial inclusion access to formal ﬁnancial services by
the poor people who were ﬁnancially excluded, the other beneﬁt is that digital ﬁnancial
inclusion helps to preserve the disposable incomes of the households because digital ﬁnan-
cial services and products are usually offered at a lower cost to the customer and the service
provider. The use of AI also allows customers to be able to transact in irregular small
amounts to assist them to manage their uneven incomes [ 8,62]. The other beneﬁt of digital
ﬁnancial services is that it helps to reduce the risks of loss, theft, and other ﬁnancial crimes
posed by cash-based transactions [ 8,63]. Digital ﬁnancial inclusion promotes economic
empowerment by allowing the accumulation of assets for women, the youth, and the rural
people which increases their economic participation [8,64].
4. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
Industry 4.0 is gaining a lot of attention particularly on its potential impact on hu-
manity and the potential it has in changing how human beings live, work and how the
economies work as well as how we are governed. This study investigated the inﬂuence of
Industry 4.0 particularly AI on the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
with a direct focus on poverty reduction, industry, innovation, and infrastructure develop-
ment in emerging economies. The study used content analysis and the results indicated that
AI has a strong inﬂuence on the attainment of SDGs particularly poverty reduction in areas
of relevant data collection through poverty maps, its ability to revolutionize agriculture,
education, as well as the ﬁnancial sector through digital ﬁnancial inclusion. The study
also found out that AI is equipping researchers to use satellite images to map poverty, to
identify the regions where poverty is more concentrated. These initiatives are assisting
in the identiﬁcation of the number of poor people and the regions where these people
are located making the poverty reduction initiatives more successful. Researchers are
also using various robotics and AI programs like the “Google and Stanford University’s
Sustainability and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab”, to come up with AI programs in agriculture
that are helping to improve farming, through effective diseases detection, prediction of crop
yields, and location of areas prone to a scarcity. In education, AI is improving education
through various methods which include adapted learning techniques using computer
algorithms to encourage interaction with the leaner among several other notable signs of
progress in the sector. AI is also enabling massive infrastructure development, increase in
access to information and knowledge as well as fostering innovation and entrepreneurship.
The other aspect where AI is doing a lot is the improvement of the certainty and reliability
of infrastructures like the transport sector making economic growth and development
possible since one of the critical components of economic growth and development is
an investment in infrastructure and innovation. Therefore, the study recommends that
Governments in emerging economies, development institutions and other organizations
that are striving in the achievement of the SDGs do invest more in AI as well as adopting
and scaling up its use as it presents unlimited beneﬁts.
The main limitation of the current study is the fact that some of the ofﬁcial complex
hard data and peer-reviewed journal articles and books on the inﬂuence of AI on poverty,

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 14 of 16
innovation, infrastructure development and sustainable development is still developing,
and the study mainly focused on the inﬂuence of AI on the attainment of SDGs with
a direct focus on poverty reduction, goal one, industry, innovation, and infrastructure
development goal 9, in emerging economies. It will be interesting for future studies to
investigate more on the differences between the inﬂuence of AI on SDGs in advanced
economies and emerging economies in the Industry 4.0 debate.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data available in a publicly accessible repository that does not issue
DOIs. Publicly available datasets were used in this study.
Acknowledgments: We would like to extend our much appreciation to the University of Johannes-
burg and the Department of Accountancy for the administrative support for the work to be completed.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Schwab, K. The Fourth Industrial Revolution. What It Means and How to Respond? 2016. Available online: https://www.weforum.
org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/ (accessed on 28 June 2020).
2. Blinov, S. Causes of the British Industrial Revolution ; Munich Personal RePEc Archive: Munich, Germany, 2014.
3. Dunga, H. The Impact of Technological Revolution on Poverty: A Case of South Africa ; IDEAS, 2019. Available online: Ideas.repec.org
(accessed on 20 January 2021). [CrossRef]
4. Allen, R.C. Explaining the British Industrial Revolution from the Perspective of Global Wage and Price History, helsinki.ﬁ. 2006.
Available online: http://www.helsinki.ﬁ/iehc2006/papers2/Allen52.pdf (accessed on 17 July 2020).
5. Crafts, N.F.R. The First Industrial Revolution: A Guided Tour for Growth Economists. Am. Econ. Rev. 1996 ,86, 197–201.
[CrossRef]
6. Schwab, K. The Fourth Industrial Revolution. 2016. Available online: https://law.unimelb.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0005
/3385454/Schwab-The_Fourth_Industrial_Revolution_Klaus_S.pdf (accessed on 28 June 2020).
7. Ooi, K.B.; Lee, V .H.; Tan, G.H.W.; Hew, T.S.; Hew, J.J. Cloud computing in manufacturing: The next industrial revolution in
Malaysia? Expert Syst. Appl. 2018 ,93, 376–394. [CrossRef]
8. Mhlanga, D. Industry 4.0 in ﬁnance: The impact of artiﬁcial intelligence (ai) on digital ﬁnancial inclusion. Int. J. Financ. Stud.
2020 ,8, 45. [CrossRef]
9. Deloitte. The Fourth Industrial Revolution Is Here Are South African Executives Ready? 2018. Available online:
https://www2.deloitte.com/za/en/pages/about-deloitte/articles/gx-preparing-tomorrow-workforce-for-the-fourth-
industrial-revolution.html (accessed on 15 October 2020).
10. Berce, P . The fourth industrial revolution. Acad. J. Manuf. Eng. 2016 , 5. [CrossRef]
11. Radziwill, N. The Fourth Industrial Revolution: Klaus Schwab ; World Economic Forum: Geneva, Switzerland, 2016.
12. Smith, M.J. Getting value from artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture. Anim. Prod. Sci. 2020 ,60, 46. [CrossRef]
13. Eli-Chukwu, N.C. Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Review. Eng. Technol. Appl. Sci. Res. 2019 ,9, 4377–4383.
[CrossRef]
14. Banwari, V . Fourth Industrial Revolution: Role of Education and Government. Int. J. Res. Eng. 2018 ,8, 47–51.
15. Kravchenko, A.; Kyzymenko, I. The Fourth Industrial Revolution: New Paradigm of Society Development or Posthumanist
Manifesto. Philos. Cosmol. 2019 ,22, 120–128. [CrossRef]
16. Brown-Martin, G. Education & the Fourth Industrial Revolution. In Proceedings of the 4th Industrial Revolution and its Impact
on Education (ICERI), Seville, Spain, 1 August 2018; p. 7270. [CrossRef]
17. Soh, C.; Connolly, D. New Frontiers of Proﬁt and Risk: The Fourth Industrial Revolution’s Impact on Business and Human Rights.
New Political Econ. 2020 . [CrossRef]
18. Mhlanga, D.; Moloi, T. COVID-19 and the Digital Transformation of Education: What Are We Learning on 4IR in South Africa?
Educ. Sci. 2020 ,10, 180. [CrossRef]
19. Davis, N. What Is the Fourth Industrial Revolution? World Economic Forum, World Economic Forum. 2016. Available online:
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/what-is-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/ (accessed on 5 May 2020).
20. Wisskirchen, G.; Biacabe, B.T.; Bormann, U.; Muntz, A.; Niehaus, S.; Soler, G.J.; von Brauchhitsch, B. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Robotics and Their Impact on the Workplace ; IBA Global Employment Institute: London, UK, 2017; p. 120.
21. Haenlein, M.; Kaplan, A. A brief history of artiﬁcial intelligence: On the past, present, and future of artiﬁcial intelligence. Calif.
Manag. Rev. 2019 ,61, 5–14. [CrossRef]
22. Buchanan, B.G.; Sarangi, S.; Armendariz, B.; Modruch, J. A (very) brief history of artiﬁcial intelligence. AI Mag. 2005 ,26, 53–60.

==== Page 15 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 15 of 16
23. Benko, A.; Sik L ányi, C. History of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology , 2nd ed.; IGI Global:
Hershey, PA, USA, 2011; pp. 1759–1762. [CrossRef]
24. Davis, P .; Sanchez-Martinez, M. Economic Theories of Poverty the Research. 2015. Available online: https://www.bl.uk/
britishlibrary/~{}/media/bl/global/social-welfare/pdfs/non-secure/e/c/o/economic-theories-of-poverty.pdf (accessed on 17
July 2020).
25. Davids, Y.D.; Gouws, A. Explaining Poverty: A Comparison between Perceptions and Conditions of Poverty in South Africa.
2010. Available online: http://scholar.sun.ac.za/handle/10019.1/5318 (accessed on 1 May 2020).
26. Mhlanga, D. Financial Inclusion and Poverty Reduction: Evidence from Small Scale Agricultural Sector in Manicaland Province
of Zimbabwe. 2020. Available online: http://repository.nwu.ac.za/handle/10394/34615 (accessed on 1 August 2020).
27. Davis, P .; Sanchez-Martinez, M. A Review of the Economic Theories of Poverty. National Institute of Economic and Social Science.
2014. Available online: http://bura.brunel.ac.uk/handle/2438/10008 (accessed on 17 July 2020).
28. Mhlanga, D.; Ndhlovu, E. Socio-economic Implications of the COVID-19 for Smallholder Livelihoods in Zimbabwe. Preprints 2020 .
[CrossRef]
29. Guterres, A. Report of the Secretary-General on SDG Progress 2019: Special Edition ; United Nations Publications: Herndon, VA, USA,
2019; pp. 1–64. Available online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/24978Report_of_the_SG_on_
SDG_Progress_2019.pdf (accessed on 10 January 2021).
30. World Bank. Poverty Overview ; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2019. [CrossRef]
31. Mofﬁtt, R.A.; Danziger, S.H.; Haveman, R.H. Understanding Poverty. Ind. Labour Relat. Rev. 2019 ,57, 469. [CrossRef]
32. Mhlanga, D. Industry 4.0: The Challenges Associated with the Digital Transformation of Education in South Africa. In The
Impacts of Digital Transformation ; Aydın, O., Ed.; Efe Academy: ˙Istanbul, Turkey, 2020; pp. 13–26; ISBN 978605-06499-1-8.
e-ISBN: 978-605-06499-0-1344230555_.
33. Dharmaraj, V .; Vijayanand, C. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in Agriculture. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,7, 2122–2128.
[CrossRef]
34. Vincent, D.R.; Deepa, N.; Elavarasan, D.; Srinivasan, K.; Chauhdary, S.H.; Iwendi, C. Sensors drove ai-based agriculture
recommendation model for assessing land suitability. Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Zavadskaya, A. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Finance: Forecasting Stock Market Returns Using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks ; Hanken School of
Economics: Helsinki, Finland, 2017; pp. 1–154.
36. Cossy-Gantner, A.; Germann, S.; Schwalbe, N.R.; Wahl, B. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and global health: How can AI contribute to
health in resource-poor settings? BMJ Glob. Health 2018 ,3, 798. [CrossRef]
37. Kliestik, T.; Nica, E.; Musa, H.; Poliak, M.; Mihai, E.A. Networked, smart, and responsive devices in Industry 4.0 manufacturing
systems. Econ. Manag. Financ. Mark. 2020 ,15, 23–29. [CrossRef]
38. Peters, E.; Kliestik, T.; Musa, H.; Durana, P . Product decision-making information systems, real-time big data analytics, and deep
learning-enabled smart process planning in sustainable Industry 4.0. J. Self Gov. Manag. Econ. 2020 ,8, 16–22. [CrossRef]
39. Yigitcanlar, T.; Desouza, K.C.; Butler, L.; Roozkhosh, F. Contributions and Risks of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in Building Smarter
Cities: Insights from a Systematic Review of the Literature. Energies 2020 ,13, 1473. [CrossRef]
40. How, M.-L.; Cheah, S.-M.; Khor, A.C.; Chan, Y.J. Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Enhanced Predictive Insights for Advancing Financial
Inclusion: A Human-Centric AI-Thinking Approach. Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 8. [CrossRef]
41. Elo, S.; Kääriäinen, M.; Kanste, O.; Pölkki, T.; Utriainen, K.; Kyngäs, H. Qualitative Content Analysis. SAGE Open 2014 ,4.
[CrossRef]
42. Colorado State University. An Introduction to Content Analysis Writing@CSU: Writing Guide. 1997. Available online: http:
//writing.colostate.edu/references/research/content/pop2a.cfm (accessed on 4 January 2021).
43. Strusani, D.; Houngbonon, G.V . The Role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Supporting Development in Emerging Markets. 2019.
Available online: www.ifc.org/thoughtleadership (accessed on 20 October 2020).
44. Conde, M.L.; Twinn, I. How Artiﬁcial Intelligence is Making Transport Safer, Cleaner, More Reliable and Efﬁcient in Emerging
Markets. 2019. Available online: www.ifc.org/thoughtleadership (accessed on 10 January 2021).
45. Falah Al-Aroud, S. The Impact of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies on audit evidence. Acad. Acc. Financ. Stud. J. 2020 ,24, 1–11.
46. United Nations. Goal 9 Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2021. Available online: https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal9
(accessed on 10 January 2021).
47. United Nations Development Programme. Goal 9: Industrial Innovation and Infrastructure UNDP . 2021. Available on-
line: https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals/goal-9-industry-innovation-and-
infrastructure.html (accessed on 20 September 2020).
48. Weber, I. How AI Is Being Used to Map Poverty. 2019. Available online: https://www.electronicspeciﬁer.com/products/artiﬁcial-
intelligence/how-ai-is-being-used-to-map-poverty (accessed on 11 July 2020).
49. Decentralized AI Alliance Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Global Challenges—No Poverty by DAIA DAIA Medium. 2020. Available
online: https://medium.com/daia/artiﬁcial-intelligence-and-global-challenges-a-plan-for-progress-fecd37cc6bda (accessed
on 11 July 2020).
50. Schmidt, L. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Poverty the Borgen Project, the Borgenp Project. Available online: https://borgenproject.
org/tag/artiﬁcial-intelligence-and-poverty/ (accessed on 11 July 2020).

==== Page 16 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 5788 16 of 16
51. Larson, K. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016, Imagining Equality in Nineteenth-Century American Literature ; The World Bank:
Washington, DC, USA, 2010. [CrossRef]
52. Wong, M. Using Satellites and AI to Help Fight Poverty in Africa Stanford News. Available online: https://news.stanford.edu/
2020/05/22/using-satellites-ai-help-ﬁght-poverty-africa/ (accessed on 11 July 2020).
53. Bennington-Castro, J. AI Is a Game-Changer in the Fight Against Hunger and Poverty. Here’s Why, NBC News. 2017. Avail-
able online: https://www.nbcnews.com/mach/tech/ai-game-changer-ﬁght-against-hunger-poverty-here-s-why-ncna774696
(accessed on 11 July 2020).
54. Chua, C.; Valencia, L. The Role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education Amidst of the COVID-19 Pandemic. 2020. Available
online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343691393_The_Role_of_Artiﬁcial_Intelligence_in_Education_Amidst_of_
the_COVID-19_Pandemic (accessed on 17 May 2021).
55. Alameda, T. Data, Ai and Financial Inclusion: The Future of Global Banking—Responsible Finance Forum, Responsible Finance
Forum BBVA 2020. Available online: https://responsibleﬁnanceforum.org/data-ai-ﬁnancial-inclusion-future-global-banking/
(accessed on 12 May 2020).
56. Wang, X.; He, G. Digital ﬁnancial inclusion and farmers’ vulnerability to poverty: Evidence from rural China. Sustainability 2020 ,
12, 1668. [CrossRef]
57. Van Hove, L.; Dubus, A. M-PESA and ﬁnancial inclusion in Kenya: Of paying comes saving? Sustainability 2019 ,11, 568.
[CrossRef]
58. Lauer, K.; Lyman, T. Digital Financial Inclusion: Implications for Customers, Regulators, Supervisors, and Standard-Setting Bodies ;
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI): Seoul, Korea, 2015.
59. Visser, W.; Prahalad, C.K. The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty trough Proﬁts ; Wharton School Publishing:
Wharton, PA, USA, 2013; pp. 200–203. [CrossRef]
60. Gomber, P .; Koch, J.A.; Siering, M. Digital Finance and FinTech: Current research and future research directions. J. Bus. Econ.
2017 ,87, 537–580. [CrossRef]
61. Peric, K. Digital ﬁnancial inclusion. J. Paym. Strategy Syst. 2015 ,9, 212–214. Available online: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/
content/hsp/jpss/2015/00000009/00000003/art00001 (accessed on 11 May 2020).
62. Koh, F.; Phoon, K.F.; Ha, C.D. Digital Financial Inclusion in South East Asia. In Handbook of Blockchain, Digital Finance, and
Inclusion ; Elsevier: London, UK, 2018; pp. 387–403. [CrossRef]
63. Muneeza, A.; Arshad, N.A.; Ariﬁn, A.T. The Application of Blockchain Technology in Crowdfunding: Towards Financial Inclusion
via Technology. Int. J. Manag. Appl. Res. 2018 ,5, 82–98. [CrossRef]
64. David-West, O. The Path to Digital Financial Inclusion in Nigeria: Experiences of Firstmonie, Journal of Payments Strategy &
Systems. Henry Stewart Publications. 2015. Available online: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/hsp/jpss/2016/00000
009/00000004/art00007 (accessed on 18 May 2020).

