==== Page 1 ====
  Working Papers  
on Education Policy
07
Artificial Intelligence in Education:
Challenges and Opportunities for
Sustainable DevelopmentEducation 
Sector
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

==== Page 2 ====
Artificial Intelligence in Education:
Challenges and Opportunities for
Sustainable Development

==== Page 3 ====
Published in 2019 by the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific a nd Cultural 
Organization, 7, place d e Fontenoy, 75352 
Paris 07 S P, France
© UNESCO 2019
DMS: 292_19      ED-2019/W S/8   
The designations employed  and the 
presentation of materia l throughout this 
publication do not impl y the expression of any 
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO 
concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or 
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or 
boundaries.  The ideas and opinions expressed in this 
publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
This paper belongs to a series which is designed 
to nurture the international debate about a wide range of education policy issues.
More details about the series of UNESCO Working 
Papers on Education Policy can be obtained from:
Francesc Pedró
Education PolicyUNESCO Education SectorEmail: f.pedro@unesco.orghttps://en.unesco.org/themes/education-policy-planning/
Designed and printed by UNESCOPrinted in FranceUNESCO Education SectorEducation is UNESCO’s top priority because it 
is a basic human right and the foundation on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through education with a special focus on gender equality and Africa.The Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized 
agency for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides guidance  
for the implementation of this ambitious goal and commitments.

==== Page 4 ====
Table of contents
Acknowledgments  ......................................................................................................................................................... 4
A
bstract
 
.......................................................................................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary
 
....................................................................................................................................................... 5
Introduction
 
.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7
Section I: Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
 ...................................................................................... 11
(1) AI t
o promote personalisation and better learning outcomes
 
................................................................................................... 12
(2) Da
ta analytics in Education Management Information Systems (EMIS)
and the evolution to Learning Management Systems (LMS)
 
...................................................................................................... 15
Section II: Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI 
 
.............................................................................................. 17
(1) A new curriculum for a digital and AI-powered world
 
...................................................................................................................... 18
(2)  Strengthening AI capacities through post-basic education and training
 
.................................................................................  22
Section III: AI in education - challenges and policy implications 
 
............................................................................ 25
First challenge: a comprehensive public policy on AI for sustainable development
 
.................................................................... 26
Second challenge: Ensuring inclusion and equity in AI in education
 ................................................................................................. 28
T
hird challenge: Preparing teachers for AI-powered education and preparing AI to understand education
 
...................... 28
Fourth challenge: Developing quality and inclusive data systems 
 
.................................................................................................... 30
Fifth challenge: making research on AI in education significant
 
......................................................................................................... 31
Sixth challenge: ethics and transparency in data collection, use and dissemination
 
................................................................... 32
CONCLUSIONS   
............................................................................................................................................................. 34
ANNEX  
.......................................................................................................................................................................... 37
AI definition and related concepts
 
................................................................................................................................................................. 37
REFERENCES  
................................................................................................................................................................................. 41

==== Page 5 ====
4
Acknowledgments 
This Working Paper was produced by the Division for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems in UNESCO’s Education 
Sector in partnership with ProFuturo. It was drafted by Francesc Pedro and Miguel Subosa (UNESCO), Axel Rivas (Udesa) 
and Paula Valverde (ProFuturo, Telefonica), with contributions from Sara Bin-Mahfooz and Satoko Yano (UNESCO), Richard 
Benjamins (LUCA, Telefonica),  Edson Prestes (UFRGS) and Javier Martinez Elicegui.
The paper also benefited from the inputs of the following experts: Borhene Chakroun, Keith Holmes, Valtencir Mendes, 
and Mark West (UNESCO), Javier Gonzalez Casado (ProFuturo), Pedro Antonio de Alarcon and  Javier Carro (LUCA, 
Telefonica), Manuel Martin-Merino (UPSA),  Massa Mufti (Sonbola),  Lars Stalling (Alpha, Telefonica), Susan Teltscher, and 
Kemal Huseinovic (ITU), Alexa Joyce (Microsoft),  Lauren Dawes (GSMA) and Andrea Naletto.
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence is a booming technological domain capable of altering every aspect of our social interactions. In 
education, AI has begun producing new teaching and learning solutions that are now undergoing testing in different 
contexts. This working paper, written for education policymakers, anticipates the extent to which AI affects the education 
sector to allow for informed and appropriate policy responses. This paper gathers examples of the introduction of AI in 
education worldwide, particularly in developing countries,  discussions in the context of the 2019 Mobile Learning Week 
and beyond, as part of the multiple ways to accomplish Sustainable Development Goal 4, which strives for equitable, 
quality education for all.
First, this paper analyses how AI can be used to improve learning outcomes, presenting examples of how AI technology 
can help education systems use data to improve educational equity and quality in the developing world. Next, the 
paper explores the different means by which governments and educational institutions are rethinking and reworking 
educational programmes to prepare learners for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human activity. The 
paper then addresses the challenges and policy implications that should be part of the global and local conversations 
regarding the possibilities and risks of introducing AI in education and preparing students for an AI-powered context.
Finally, this paper reflects on future directions for AI in education, ending with an open invitation to create new 
discussions around the uses, possibilities and risks of AI in education for sustainable development.

==== Page 6 ====
5Executive
Summary

==== Page 7 ====
6
Executive Summary    
Artificial Intelligence is a booming technological domain 
capable of altering every aspect of our social interactions. 
In education, AI has begun producing new teaching and 
learning solutions that are now undergoing testing in 
different contexts. AI requires advanced infrastructures and 
an ecosystem of thriving innovators, but what about the 
urgencies of developing countries? Will they have to wait 
for the “luxury” of AI? Or should AI be a priority to tackle as 
soon as possible to reduce the digital and social divide?
These are some of the questions guiding this document. 
In this regard, this urgent discussion should be taken up 
with a clear picture of what is happening and what can 
be done. This document gathers examples of how AI has 
been introduced in education worldwide, particularly in 
developing countries. It also sows the seeds of debates 
and discussions in the context of the 2019 Mobile 
Learning Week and beyond, as part of the multiple ways to 
accomplish Sustainable Development Goal 4, which targets 
education.
This document was drawn up for education policymakers 
and anticipates the extent to which AI affects the education 
sector so that informed and appropriate policy responses 
can be made in this regard.
The first section of this document analyses how AI can be 
used to improve learning outcomes. It presents examples of 
how AI technology can help education systems use data to 
improve educational equity and quality in the developing 
world. The section is divided into two topics that address 
pedagogical and system-wide solutions:
i) AI to promote personalisation and better learning 
outcomes, exploring how AI can favour access to education, 
collaborative environments and intelligent tutoring systems 
to support teachers. We briefly introduce cases from 
countries such as China, Uruguay, Brazil, South Africa and 
Kenya as examples experimental solutions conceived from 
public policies, philanthropic and private organisations. 
ii) Data analytics in Education Management Information 
Systems (EMIS). Here we present opportunities for 
improving a state’s capacity to manage large-scale 
educational systems by increasing data from schools and 
learning, presenting cases from United Arab Emirates, 
Kenya, Bhutan, Kyrgyzstan and Chile.
The second section “Preparing learners to thrive in an AI-
saturated future” explores the different means by which 
governments and educational institutions are rethinking 
and reworking educational programmes to prepare learners for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity. Based on examples from different contexts, the 
section is also divided into two main parts: 
i) “A new curriculum for a digital and AI powered world” 
elaborates further on the importance of advancing 
in digital competency frameworks for teachers and 
students. Some current initiatives are presented such as 
the “Global Framework to Measure Digital Literacy” and 
“ICT Competencies and Standards from the Pedagogical 
Dimension” . The discussion of the curricular dimension 
is broadened to include new experiences for developing 
computational thinking in schools with examples from 
the European Union, United Kingdom, Estonia, Argentina, 
Singapore and Malaysia.
ii) The second part is more focused on strengthening AI 
capacities through post-basic education and training. How 
can each country prepare the conditions for an AI-powered 
world? Here we present some of the most advanced 
cases from developed countries who are generating 
comprehensive plans to tackle this question, namely France, 
South Korea and China. We also present some cases from 
the technical and vocational education and training sector 
and some opportunities from non-formal and informal 
learning scenarios.
The last section addresses the challenges and policy 
implications that should be part of the global and local 
conversations regarding the possibilities and risks of 
introducing AI in education and preparing students for an 
AI-powered context. Six challenges are presented: 
The first challenge lies in developing a comprehensive 
view of public policy on AI for sustainable development. 
The complexity of the technological conditions needed 
to advance in this field require the alignment of multiple 
factors and institutions. Public policies have to work in 
partnership at international and national levels to create an 
ecosystem of AI that serves sustainable development. 
The second challenge is to ensure inclusion and equity 
for AI in education. The least developed countries are at 
risk of suffering new technological, economic and social 
divides with the development of AI. Some main obstacles 
such as basic technological infrastructure must be faced 
to establish the basic conditions for implementing new 
strategies that take advantage of AI to improve learning.
The third challenge is to prepare teachers for an AI-powered 
education while preparing AI to understand education, 
though this must nevertheless be a two-way road: teachers 

==== Page 8 ====
7   Executive Summary
must learn new digital skills to use AI in a pedagogical and 
meaningful way and AI developers must learn how teachers 
work and create solutions that are sustainable in real-life 
environments. 
The fourth challenge is to develop quality and inclusive 
data systems. If we are headed towards the datafication of 
education, the quality of data should be our chief concern. 
It´s essential to develop state capabilities to improve data 
collection and systematisation. AI developments should 
be an opportunity to increase the importance of data in 
educational system management.
The fifth challenge is to make research on AI in education 
significant. While it can be reasonably expected that 
research on AI in education will increase in the coming 
years, it is nevertheless worth recalling the difficulties that 
the education sector has had in taking stock of educational 
research in a significant way both for practice and policy-
making.
The sixth challenge deals with ethics and transparency 
in data collection, use and dissemination. AI opens many 
ethical concerns regarding access to education system, 
recommendations to individual students, personal data 
concentration, liability, impact on work, data privacy and 
ownership of data feeding algorithms. AI regulation will 
thus require public discussion on ethics, accountability, 
transparency and security.
The document ends with an open invitation to create new 
discussions around the uses, possibilities and risks of AI in 
education for sustainable development. 
Introduction
In this age of big data, we all leave behind individual 
information footprints, resulting in an abundance of data, 
allowing human and societal behaviour to be objectively 
quantified and, therefore, easily tracked, modelled and, to 
a certain extent, predicted. This phenomenon surrounding 
information footprints is referred to as ‘datafication’ 
(Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2014) and also affects the 
education sector. While datafication certainly raises some 
ethical concerns, which also require a concerted policy 
response, it also brings a world of possibilities in terms 
of individualising learning and education governance. To 
date, little has been discussed about the possibilities and 
limitations of AI in education in the developing world, 
particularly regarding the extreme problems of the least 
developed countries. With a view to helping bridge this gap, this paper will discuss AI technologies that education 
systems worldwide are beginning to use and also explore 
how they have helped or can help improve learning 
outcomes.
In this context, this paper aims to identify the education 
policy implications of AI by examining four main 
challenges:
1 Ensuring inclusive and equitable use of AI in 
education
2 Leveraging AI to enhance education and learning
3 Promoting skills development for jobs and life in the 
AI era 
4 Safeguarding transparent and auditable use of 
education data
This paper was drawn up to assist education policymakers, 
specifically in developing countries, in understanding and 
anticipating the extent to which AI impacts the education 
sector so they can determine appropriate policy responses. 
By examining the education sector’s response to AI in 
various countries, this paper suggests critical considerations 
for public policies in developing countries to integrate 
AI-powered technologies. The overall goal is to ensure 
that learners acquire the competencies to thrive in an 
AI-powered society. In doing so, this paper also elaborates 
on the key risks and challenges that countries are facing in 
steering the use and development of AI. 
This document was also drawn up to open urgent 
discussions on the role of AI in education in developing 
countries. To do so, this document is broad and simple in 
its style, open and careful in its suggestions, and full of 
examples to tackle these discussions in dialogue with real-
world applications as they unfold in the present.
Given the complexity of the topic with changes happening 
at an exponential and unpredictable rate, public policy 
discussions have been elicited but postponed by the 
surrounding urgencies educational systems face worldwide. 
Nevertheless, in a world that is becoming AI-powered, 
education must prioritise this discussion for the public 
policy agenda in every context.
This paper is divided into three sections. 
Section I, “Leveraging AI towards improving learning 
outcomes” , presents examples of how AI technology can 
help education systems use data to improve teaching 
in the developing world. This section comprises two 
sub-sections that address pedagogical and system-wide 

==== Page 9 ====
8Executive Summary    
solutions, namely (1) AI to promote personalisation 
and better learning outcomes, and (2) Data analytics in 
Education Management Information Systems (EMIS).
Section II, “Preparing learners to thrive in an AI-
saturated future” , explores different means by which 
governments and educational institutions are rethinking 
and reworking learning programmes to prepare learners 
for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity. It is based on examples from different contexts 
and also divided in two subsections, namely (1) A new 
curriculum for a digital and AI-powered world, and 
(2) Strengthening AI capacities through post-basic 
education and training.
Section III, “Challenges and policy implications “ . 
The last section addresses the challenges and policy 
implications that need to be part of the global and local 
conversations surrounding the possibilities and risks of 
introducing AI in education and preparing students for 
an AI-powered context.
A brief introduction to AI
Since its ‘birth’ at the 1956 Dartmouth Conference, the 
field of artificial intelligence (AI) has continued garnering the interest of a and industries alike. Few technological 
developments in recent history have been as polarising 
as AI. While AI has be en around for nearly 60 years, it 
nevertheless remained a fringe technology until only 
recently because of sweeping changes in recent years 
(referred to as “the big leap”), entailing the abundance of 
data (big data), economic access to computing power and 
advances in Machine Learning. The present paper uses 
terms such as AI and Big Data, the two main technology 
buzzwords of the current decade, and other concepts such 
as machine learning, learning analytics, etc. as technologies 
that work well together. It should be borne in mind that 
these terms are sometimes used interchangeably in the 
news and articles, thus creating confusion. With a view to 
avoiding such confusion, this subsection contains a brief 
explanation of these concepts, clarifying their differences 
and how they work together (there is also a complementary 
definition in the annex hereto).
While there is no straightforward and consensual definition 
of AI, several classic definitions of AI are nevertheless 
provided from the different literature, including McCarthy 
(2006), Zhong (2006), ITU (2018).
In this paper, AI is best understood considering different 
dimensions (see Figure 1)
Thinking Humanly
‘The exciting new effort to make computers think… 
machines with minds, in the full and literal sense. ’ 
(Haugeland, 1985)
‘[The automation of] activities that we associate with 
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, 
problem-solving, learning… ’ (Bellman, 1978)Thinking Rationally
‘The study of mental faculties through the use of 
computational models. ’ (Charniak & McDermott, 1985)
‘The study of the computations that make it possible 
to perceive, reason, and act. ’ (Winston, 1992)
Acting Humanly
‘The art of creating machines that perform functions 
that require intelligence when performed by people. ’ 
(Kurzweil, 1990)
‘The study of how to make computers do things at 
which, at the moment, people are better. ’ (Rich & 
Knight, 1991)Acting Rationally
‘Computational Intelligence is the study of the design 
of intelligent agents. ’ (Poole, et al., 1998)
‘AI… is concerned with intelligent behavior in 
artifacts. ’ (Nilsson, 1998)Figure 1. Different dimensions of AI

==== Page 10 ====
9   Executive Summary
The table above contains some definitions of AI by Stuart J. 
Russell and Peter Norvig in their book “Artificial Intelligence: 
A Modern Approach (2010)” (Refer to the Annex for further 
details).
Research in AI has focused chiefly on the following 
components of intelligence: learning, reasoning, problem 
solving, perception and using language. There are two 
types of AI, namely data-driven AI through Machine 
Learning (see below) and knowledge-based AI, based on 
an explicit representation of domain knowledge that a 
machine reason about. The current success of AI is mostly 
due to advances in data-driven AI.
In 1959, Arthur Samuel coined the term machine learning  
only a few years after AI’s birth, defining the concept as 
“the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed” . 
At its core, machine learning is simply a way to achieve AI. 
It is important to remark that you can get AI without using 
machine learning, but this would require building millions 
of lines of codes with complex rules and decision-trees. 
Refer to the annex for additional definitions.
Deep learning is another widely used term that is also 
one of the many approaches to machine learning. The 
long list of further approaches includes decision tree 
learning, inductive logic programming, clustering, 
reinforcement learning and Bayesian networks. Deep 
learning is a specific subfield of machine learning, viz. a 
new take on learning representations from data that puts 
an emphasis on learning successive layers of increasingly 
meaningful representations. In deep learning, these layered 
representations are (nearly always) learned via models 
called neural networks structured in literal layers stacked on 
top of each other. See annex for additional definitions.
AI thrives on data. AI application outcomes become 
more accurate with more data. AI needs data to build its intelligence (e.g., using machine learning). Given that big 
data enables AI to reach its full potential, it would be fair 
to say that there is no data-driven AI without big data. A 
modern definition of the term big data is: “Datasets whose 
size is beyond the ability of typical database software 
tools to capture, store, manage and analyse” (Manyika et 
al., 2011). Those datasets are a combination of structured 
and unstructured data, and big data is often said to be 
characterised by 3 Vs, namely Volume (of data), Variety (of 
types of data) and Velocity (at which data are or should be 
processed). Refer to the annex for additional definitions.
Educational data mining and learning analytics are two 
specific areas in which big data can be used for education:
Data mining: In computer science, data mining is the 
process of discovering interesting and useful patterns and 
relationships in large volumes of data. Refer to the annex 
for additional definitions. Educational Data Mining (EDM) 
develops methods and applies techniques from statistics, 
machine learning and data mining to analyse data collected 
during teaching and learning. EDM tests learning theories 
and informs on educational practice (US Department of 
Education, 2012).
Learning analytics: Learning Analytics (LA) is an emerging 
discipline seeking to improve teaching and learning by 
critically evaluating raw data and generating patterns to 
characterise learner habits, predict learner responses and 
provide timely feedback. Moreover, LA supports decision-
making, tailors readable content, simplifies realistic 
assessments and provides personal supervision of learners’ 
progress. The goal is to scale the real-time LA exploitation 
by learners, teachers/academics and educational computer-
based systems to enhance learners’ accomplishments at 
both course and individual levels. Refer to the annex for 
references.

==== Page 11 ==== : 텍스트 추출 실패 또는 페이지가 비어 있음.

==== Page 12 ====
 Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity       Section I
11
Section I:
Leveraging AI towards
improving learning
and equity

==== Page 13 ====
Section I        Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
12While part of Artificial Intelligence (Clancey, 1987) since its 
very outset, AI in education has nevertheless faced many 
difficulties to grow because education systems around the 
world are more reluctant to technological changes in their 
traditional organisation. AI was part of the vision promising 
to transform education by creating tutor systems that could 
personalise learning. This promise is starting to unfold as 
present technology has begun experimenting with different 
models worldwide, bringing many questions to the field of 
education.
This first section focuses on the ways in which AI could be 
used to improve learning and equity in education in the 
developing world. The section addresses two main topics: 
one dedicated to improving personalisation through AI 
(pedagogical scale) and the other focused on education 
management information systems (systemic management 
scale).
Before discussing real experiences, a brief reference to 
a key technology that applies to the two main topics in 
this section: Learning analytics, while still a young field, is 
a powerful resource for informed decisions and getting 
better learning results. Learning analytics applies different 
areas of knowledge such as sociology, psychology, ethics, 
pedagogy, etc. and can now access the digital revolution to 
collect a lot of data that can be analysed to extract insights 
or even develop helpful smart tools for educational or 
administrative tasks.
Analysing and getting the most out of data is no easy 
task. For this purpose, advanced data analysis techniques 
are used, which in turn relay on other disciplines such as 
statistics-based big data technologies to efficiently handle 
large data volumes, machine learning algorithms that 
learn from the data and visualisation tools for efficient 
communication with people who must ultimately make 
decisions. 
All these software layers for intelligent data processing will 
allow us to draw insights, detect learning patterns, predict 
future situations or give recommendations to optimise 
available resources. Analysis is also a very important step 
in developing future AI solutions that, with the help of 
powerful libraries, including yet not limited to natural 
language recognition, language translation and game 
theory, will enable us to, for instance, create avatars that 
simulate the behaviour of a virtual teacher for students 
or an assistant for teachers. The bright prospects of the 
future allow us to visualise an AI ecosystem that can help 
us overcome the different challenges in learning analytics. Although the future of AI solutions is very promising in the 
medium term, current solutions are more focused on taking 
full advantage of data mining/analysis technologies.
The section hereunder provides examples of public policies, 
philanthropic engagements and private sector initiatives 
in developing countries as a glimpse into the first stages of 
implementation of AI-based interventions in education.
(1) AI to promote personalisation and 
better learning outcomes
In light of the existing initiatives and technologies to 
come, different studies (Laanpere et al., 2014; Luckin et 
al., 2016; Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2014; Montebello, 
2017) have recently contributed to the ways in which AI 
can help improve learning opportunities for students and 
management systems. 
Sustainable Development Goal 4 aims to ensure inclusive 
and equitable quality education and promote lifelong 
learning opportunities for all. It emphasises equal learning 
opportunities for all throughout life. AI technologies are 
used to ensure equitable and inclusive access to education. 
It provides marginalised people and communities, people 
with disabilities, refugees, those out of schools, and those 
living in isolated communities with access to appropriate 
learning opportunities. For example, telepresence robotics 
allow students with special needs to attend schools at 
home or hospital, or maintain continuity of learning in 
emergencies or crises. In this way, it is able to support 
inclusion and ubiquitous access. 
AI can help advance collaborative learning. One of the most 
revolutionary aspects of computer-supported collaborative 
learning is found in situations where learners are not 
physically in the same location. It provides students variable 
choices insofar as when and where they wish to study. In 
respect to computer-supported collaborative learning, 
online asynchronous discussion groups play a central role. 
Based on AI techniques such as machine learning and 
shallow text processing, AI systems are used to monitor 
asynchronous discussion groups, thus affording teachers 
with information about learners’ discussions and support 
for guiding learners’ engagement and learning.
AI can help personalise learning through various ways. 
AI can help create a better professional environment 
for teachers to work more on students with difficulties. 
Teachers spend plenty of time on routine and 
administrative tasks such as making assignments and 

==== Page 14 ====
 Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity       Section I
13
answering frequently asked questions over and over 
again in school settings. A dual-teacher model entailing 
a teacher and a virtual teaching assistant, which can take 
over the teacher’s routine task, frees up teachers’ time, 
enabling them to focus on student guidance and one-to-
one communication. Teachers have already started working 
together with AI assistants for the best outcomes for their 
learners.
The Computer Assisted Learning (CAL) field creates 
alternatives to support students´ learning strategies with 
digital and AI technology (Schittek Janda et al., 2001). AI 
can help map each student’s individual learning plans 
and trajectories, their strengths and weaknesses, subjects 
that cost more and are easily assimilated or learned, and 
learning preferences and activities. Using algorithms to 
help students navigate through different content paths, 
AI can personalise learning and improve opportunities 
for students with the help of their teachers and schools. 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems are part of the new 
technological possibilities to expand educational learning 
in developing countries as shown in recent reviews (Nye, 
2015).
Moreover, when considering the tremendous amount 
of time spent on grading tests and homework, AI as an 
assessment tool can be applied to learn how a teacher 
grades and thus free up the teacher’s time. AI is not only 
being used to grade multiple choice tests, but also to assess 
essays1. 
These opportunities are starting to unfold in developed 
countries. There is a myriad of applications presently 
undergoing tests across public and private initiatives 
alike2. This section presents some examples from 
developing countries to open a discussion regarding the 
possibilities and risks involved in bringing AI-powered 
software to personalise learning. We will begin with the 
case of China, unique in its scope, dimension and level of 
comprehensive perspective with cutting-edge technology 
and public-private partnerships, followed by Uruguay, 
a small developed country that became a bellwether in 
Latin America. Next, we will present some other state-
based, philanthropic and private initiatives in developing 
countries. These cases have been included as examples 
to illustrate the state of the art in this field in developing 
1 For example, in the United States, the Educational Testing Service developed automatic an NLP assessment system to co-grade essays in 
standardised tests.
2 Refer to the examples presented during Mobile Learning Week 2019: https://en.unesco.org/mlw/2019.countries and do not aim to be an exhaustive list of every 
initiative worldwide.
China is a good country to start with, since it is in many 
ways unique insofar as its size and recent technological 
development, and also in its recent economic growth 
(although it remains a developing country in formal 
definitions). China has 730 million internet users. In 2016, 
the government launched a plan to become the largest 
pole of AI development in the world by 2030. China 
set its national AI strategy for education as part of this 
technological vision (Jing, 2018).
The state-centred initiative will rely on private pillars. 
Hujiang, a private digital education company, is 
developing image and voice recognition software capable 
of understanding student facial expressions to give AI 
feedback online. Liulishuo is an adaptive platform that 
teaches English to 600,000 students at the cost of a single 
teacher. Master Learner is developing a “Superteacher” 
capable of answering 500 million simultaneous questions 
from students preparing for the Gaokao university entrance 
examination. 
In 2016, China’s Ministry of Education established that every 
educational branch of local governments must allocate at 
least 8% of its budget to the digitisation of education. With 
95% of schools connected to the internet, the country is 
ready for the largest digital education experiment in the 
world. One of the biggest breakthroughs so far in China 
is the experimental design to correct essays with AI. The 
country started to work with 60,000 schools for automatic 
essay correction with a level of precision matching humans 
in 92% of the cases. The essay grading machine is based on 
neural network AI and is improving its ability to understand 
human language by using deep learning algorithms 
to plough through essays written by Chinese students 
and compare notes with human teachers’ grading and 
comments. “It has evolved continuously and become so 
complex, we no longer know for sure what it was thinking 
and how it made a judgment, ” said one of the project 
researchers (Chen, 2018).
In Latin America, several initiatives have been pushing 
the introduction of computers in education at a large 
scale in recent years (Sunkel & Trucco, 2012). Plan Ceibal  
in Uruguay is probably the most advanced state agency 

==== Page 15 ====
14Section I        Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
devoted to digital education from the region. One of its 
main initiatives is an online adaptive learning solution 
called “Mathematics Adaptive Platform” (PAM for its Spanish 
acronym). PAM’s content has been adapted to the national 
curriculum and it is a tool that provides personalised 
feedback according to each student’s skill level based on an 
analysis of student experiences. Some studies have already 
shown how the program has already had a positive impact 
on learning (Perera & Aboal, 2018). 
PAM was developed by the German company Bettermarks 
and began to be used in 2013 as part of the One Laptop 
Per Child program, offering students over 100,000 activities 
to give personalised assistance to students according to 
their level of knowledge. PAM provides students with help 
through a set of over 25 thousand step-by-step exercises 
and 2800 feedback patterns to explain the solutions of each 
exercise. 
According to Plan Ceibal’s official website, the PAM platform 
offers the following advantages for learning: immediacy of 
the response; student independence; ease of correction; 
learning personalisation; classroom gamification; 
promoting group work; adaptation to the rhythms of class 
and each student, and a large number of activities.
Some other cases of public endeavours to promote the 
use of AI in education also come from Latin America3. 
In Brazil, the federal government created Mec Flix as a 
state educational platform. It is a video content platform 
designed to prepare students for the national higher 
education examination (ENEM). It has some emergent 
elements of AI: students have to log in and they can 
create personalised playlists of video-lessons and get 
recommendations based on their preferences. 
Projects with AI elements in education also come from 
philanthropic initiatives that work in the developing world. 
IBM is using technology to make an impact on eradicating 
poverty through the ’Simpler Voice: Overcoming Illiteracy’ 
project. This project uses AI to help adult learners who are 
illiterate or have low literacy skills, navigate texts with more 
confidence by translating texts and presenting the basic 
meaning through visuals or simple spoken word. This will 
help users overcome difficult obstacles in their day-to-day 
lives.
3 In Guayaquil, Ecuador, the project “Más Tecnología” introduced computers for students with a software that personalises curriculums based 
on the results of assessments in language and mathematics. The project was accompanied by a teacher training plan to implement computer-
based lessons three hours per week. A study by the IDB showed that after two years the programme had a positive impact on mathematics 
test scores (Carrillo, Onofa & Ponce, 2010).Learning Equality is a non-profit initiative that started 
as an extension of the Kahn Academy to use the contents 
of the platform in developing countries. Learn Equality 
launched Kolibri, an open-source educational platform and 
toolkit designed for low-resource communities.
Other philanthropic international initiatives use prizes 
as a way to innovate. The $15 million Global Learning 
XPRIZE (XPrize Foundation, 2019) challenges teams 
from around the world to develop open-source, scalable 
software that will enable children in developing countries 
to teach themselves basic reading, writing and arithmetic 
within 15 months. One of the solutions, RoboTutor (XPrize 
Foundation, 2019) was developed by Carnegie Mellon 
specialists to create a learning machine based on AI with 
robot tutors, voice recognition and data driven algorithms 
to personalise learning at a large scale. 
Finally, many of these “first-generation AI initiatives in 
education in developing countries” come from the private 
sector with a lucrative perspective or in partnership with 
public authorities. In Brazil, an EdTech company Geekie 
– the adaptive learning platform in Brazil accredited by 
the country’s Ministry of Education – is used by over 5,000 
schools across the country to provide customised learning 
experiences for students (WISE, 2011; Rundle, 2015; Rigby, 
2016). Through machine learning, the software provides 
more personalised content as the student uses it more 
often. It also becomes better at flagging learning difficulties 
encountered by students, which human educators can then 
use to determine the necessary interventions. 
Daptio is a South African solution that uses deep analytics 
and provides personalised learning to teachers, students 
and content creators in Africa and other emerging markets 
through its online software service. Founded in 2013 and 
based in Cape Town, Daptio uses artificial intelligence 
to help students, mentors and teachers to understand 
the proficiency level of each student and then match the 
relevant content. Daptio’s key local competitors are Get 
Smarter, Funda and ReThink Education. 
M-Shule was launched in Kenya  in 2016 as a mobile 
platform filled with lessons based on national curriculum 
standards delivered via SMS that adapt to each student’s 
skills and abilities using AI technology. As students use the 

==== Page 16 ====
15
 Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity       Section I
platform, M-Shule tracks and analyses learner performance 
to empower parents and schools with insights and 
recommendations.
Some further EdTech initiatives in developing countries also 
promise to use some elements of AI in education, although 
they are no strictly AI based, e.g. SkoolDesk (Uganda), 
Siyavula (South Africa and Nigeria), Virtual Learning 
Africa and TopDog (South Africa), private companies that 
develop educational content for students of all levels in 
Africa; and Zaya Learning Labs (India). 
(2)  Data analytics in Education Manage-
ment Information Systems (EMIS) and 
the evolution to Learning Management 
Systems (LMS)
An Education Management Information System (EMIS) is 
an organised group of information and documentation 
services that collects, stores, processes, analyses and 
disseminates information for educational planning and 
management. It is widely used for education leaders, 
decision-makers and managers at the regional, local and 
school levels and for the generation of national statistics. 
Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) applied to student 
achievement testing data is a central focus of many school 
and district reform efforts, in part because of federal and 
state test-based accountability policies. With massive data 
collected from EMIS, AI algorithms are able to make data-
driven decisions to improve school education.
A well-designed and well-functioning EMIS lets members 
across all levels of the education community access 
useful information for managing and administering an 
education system more efficiently, developing feasible 
and cost-effective plans, formulating responsive policies, 
and monitoring and evaluating educational outcomes. 
In countries where data are complete, reliable, regularly 
collected, and can be aggregated and disaggregated, 
AI-enhanced EMIS would have a much stronger capacity 
to automatically analyse the data and generate data 
dashboards at both the school and national levels. Moving 
forward, EMIS even opens up a potential for developing 
predictive decision-making algorithms. While this 
remains a very nascent area in EMIS development, more 
countries, both developed and developing, are interested 
in transforming their current EMIS from a school-based 
aggregated administrative data management system 
into an integrated and dynamic learning management 
systems that can effectively support real-time decision-
making in every aspect of education sector management.In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the Ministry of 
Education rolled out an advanced data analytics platform 
with over 1,200 schools and over 70 higher education 
institutions, totalling over 1.2 million students. This data 
analytics system contains data on curricula, teachers’ 
professional development, learning resources, financing, 
operations, performance reports, teacher, student and 
parent feedback, and scores from international assessments 
like PISA and TIMSS (Leading Countries of the World, 2018). 
UAE has a data analytics section in its Ministry of Education, 
dedicated to developing machine learning algorithms in 
support of strategic studies on the country’s education 
system.
Middle and lower-income countries are also exploring the 
potential of AI-enhanced EMIS. For instance, iMlango is an 
educational technology program delivered by a partnership 
of public and private sector organisations in Kenya. Schools 
measure daily attendance using sQuid’s digital attendance 
system, enabling quick and easy attendance monitoring, 
real-time data reporting and high reliability and insight 
into complex student data patterns. Class and school 
attendances are tracked and reported using advanced 
analytics, which are then used by teachers and a field team 
to identify low-attending pupils. sQuid’s interactive learning 
platform delivers learning content in multiple formats for 
students and teachers. Pupils can access Maths Whizz, 
the personalised virtual math tutor that tailors the pupils’ 
learning experiences depending on their ability, and other 
content such as Africa-focused stories, the world’s first 
children’s encyclopaedia, and curriculum-aligned revision 
guides. 
While still at a very nascent stage, countries such as Bhutan 
and Kyrgyzstan are aspiring to create integrated education 
information management systems based on individual 
student tracking that can allow for personalised learning 
support, and efficient and effective school and sector 
management. This opens the possibilities of introducing 
AI-enhanced learning analytics in their systems in the near 
future.
The school mapping initiative UNICEF Innovation is 
exploring the potential of Deep Learning (DL) algorithms 
in collaboration with academic institutions and private 
companies. Their studies show that DL algorithms are useful 
for example to recognise schools in satellite imagery, thus 
rendering unmapped schools visible.
AI has begun unveiling its potential in research for 
sustainable development. The contest “New debates. 

==== Page 17 ====
16
Section I:    Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
Data for development” organised by the Inter-American 
Development Bank financed the study “Big Data for public 
policy in education: the Chilean case” . In this study, Chilean 
researchers used open data published by the government 
regarding social, geographical and educational contexts. 
The study was able to predict student dropout by localising 
the geographical distances from houses to schools. Using 
127 characteristics of students and their geographical 
locations, researchers created an algorithm to develop a 
“geography of educational opportunities” , with a detailed 
map of schools, access, academic results and dropout 
predictions.

==== Page 18 ====
17Section II: 
Preparing learners to
thrive in the future with AI

==== Page 19 ====
18
Businesses are generally quick to adopt AI-based solutions. 
This means an increasing demand for new types of jobs 
and skills that are linked to the use of AI in industry. As 
such, there is strong imperative for the education sector 
to respond in that curricula must be reworked and 
policies reformulated. However, no country in the world is 
genuinely ready for intelligent automation; not even those 
traditionally conceived as leaders in the field as policy 
response to intelligent automation remains nascent (The 
Economist Intelligence Unit, 2018). Nevertheless, there is 
exemplary work being done by countries across the world 
to ensure that their education systems are promoting the 
acquisition of competencies required by an AI-powered 
society. Their efforts can serve as starting points towards 
the development of a concerted policy framework for 
education’s response to AI.
(1)  A new curriculum for a digital and 
AI-powered world 
Education plays a critical role in efforts to make future 
workforces AI-ready. Bridging the AI skills gap goes beyond 
the adoption of increasingly powerful technologies to 
facilitate learning. It also means rethinking the content 
and methods used to deliver instruction at all levels of 
education. The curricular reform efforts cited in this paper 
show a clear need to define ‘AI competencies’ beyond 
basic ICT competencies, which is how many countries 
defined them when incorporating 21st century skills in 
their respective educational programs, towards skills that 
would allow learners to identify and solve problems using 
computing techniques, methods and technologies. 
In the context of a near future society empowered by AI, 
it is important to develop new skills to create and decode 
digital technologies. To approach this topic, we will focus on 
new frameworks that characterise digital skills for students 
and teachers and some cases from different countries. The 
objective is to reveal the power of digital competencies 
that can analyse, use and decode Artificial Intelligence as a 
powerful technology, to which we must necessarily think in 
a context to understand its scope, limitations, potential and 
challenges.
Digital competencies frameworks
The need to collect data for the SDG 4 Education indicators 
sets the table for a collective work of developing a 
Global Framework to Measure Digital Literacy. This has 
4 The corresponding publication can be accessed via this link: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000213475been the priority of a task force of experts and country 
representatives established by the Global Alliance to 
Monitor Learning (GAML) and chaired by the GEM Report. 
The main definition of digital literacy is: “the ability to 
access, manage, understand, integrate, communicate, 
evaluate and create information safely and appropriately 
through digital devices and networked technologies 
for participation in economic and social life. It includes 
competencies that are variously referred to as computer 
literacy, ICT literacy, information literacy, and media literacy” 
(Antoninis & Montoya, 2018). The following table shows the 
set of competencies defined as part of this framework. 
As a parallel initiative, the Information and Communication 
Technologies Competency Framework for Teachers (ICT-
CFT) was developed by UNESCO (2011) in consultation 
with major private actors such as ISTE, Cisco, Intel and 
Microsoft, and has been regularly updated since. The 
framework was updated in 2018.4 This framework specifies 
the competencies that teachers need to integrate in their 
professional practices to develop critical knowledge and 
awareness with their students in the digital era. 
The framework emphasises the role that digital 
technologies have in supporting six key areas of 
knowledge: 1-Understanding ICT in education; 
2-Curriculum & Assessment; 3-Pedagogy; 4-ICT; 
5-Organisation & Administration; 6-Teacher Professional 
Learning. The framework sets three phases of knowledge 
acquisition: 1-technology literacy; 2-knowledge deepening; 
3-knowledge creation.
This framework underlines that it´s not enough for teachers 
to have certain skills to manage digital technologies and 
to teach them to their students, but also that teachers 
must help their students be capable of collaborating, 
solving problems and being creative in the use of digital 
technologies. In a growing technological world, these skills 
become part of their citizenship training to participate in 
the digital society where they will live.
Another framework along this same line of support to 
teachers in the integration of digital technologies to their 
practices is “ICT Competencies and Standards from the 
Pedagogical Dimension” , developed by UNESCO Santiago 
and the Universidad Javeriana (2016).
This framework was created to contribute in the vision 
of teacher training to face the challenge of teaching in Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI

==== Page 20 ====
19
Competency area Competencies
0.   Fundamentals of hardware 
and software0.1  Basic knowledge of hardware such as turning on/off and  charging,  locking 
devices
0.2  Basic knowledge of software such as user account and password 
management, login and how to do privacy settings, etc.
1.   Information and data 
literacy
 1.1  Browsing, searching and filtering data, information and digital 
content
1.2  Evaluating data, information and digital content
1.3  Managing data, information and digital content
2.  Communication and 
collaboration2.1  Interacting through digital technologies
2.2  Sharing through digital technologies
2.3  Engaging in citizenship through digital technologies
2.4  Collaborating through digital technologies
2.5  Netiquette
2.6  Managing digital identity
3.  Digital content creation 3.1  Developing digital content
3.2  Integrating and re-elaborating digital content
3.3  Copyright and licenses
3.4  Programming
4.  Safety 4.1  Protecting devices
4.2  Protecting personal data and privacy
4.3  Protecting health and well-being
4.4  Protecting the environment
5. Problem solving 5.1  Solving technical problems
5.2  Identifying needs and technological responses
5.3  Creatively using digital technologies
5.4  Identifying digital competency gaps
5.5  Computational thinking
6. Career-related 
competencies6.   Career-related competencies refers to the knowledge and skills 
required to operate specialised hardware/software for a particular 
field such as engineering design software and hardware tools, or 
the use of learning management systems to deliver fully online or 
blended courses.
Source: A Global Framework for Reference on Digital Literacy Skills for Indicator 4.4.2 (UIS, 2018a) Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI       Section II
Table 1: Proposed digital literacy competency areas and competencies

==== Page 21 ====
20
an information and knowledge society. This aims to be a 
benchmark in training for the improvement of educational 
quality in educational institutions at any level of training 
base on an approach of levels of appropriation of ICT 
and its educational uses. This framework describes the 
contextual elements where the proposal is framed. The ICT 
Competencies and Standards model is presented from the 
pedagogical dimension based on levels of appropriation of 
ICT, its meaning and use from the training route.
The relevance of this proposal is its constitution as a guiding 
base for any teacher and educational institution facing 
the appropriation of ICT in their practices and educational 
strategies. The educational institution or the teacher in 
particular can evaluate their practices and educational 
strategies with use of ICT regarding the expected standards 
and, from this process of identification and recognition, 
continue with a process of training, support and evaluation 
based on their level of ICT appropriation.
Finally, another framework is DigComp (Joint Research 
Centre, 2018), designed by the European Union to support 
the development of digital skills of individuals.5 The 
framework describes what competencies are needed today 
to use digital technologies in a critical, reliable, collaborative 
and creative way, so that individuals can achieve their goals 
related to work, learning, leisure, inclusion and participation 
in the digital society.
This framework is structured in five competency areas that 
describe the key components of digital competencies, 
namely Information and data literacy; Communication 
and collaboration; Digital content creation; Safety; and 
Problem solving. The framework takes these dimensions 
and maps them through four proficiency levels: foundation, 
intermediate, advanced, highly specialised.
Computational thinking
Computational Thinking (CT) has emerged as one of the key 
competencies to enable learners to thrive in an AI-powered 
society. There is clear acknowledgement of the importance 
of CT skills: The countries examined in this paper have 
either laid out plans to incorporate CT in their educational 
curricula or have already done so. The Computer Science 
Teachers Association (USA) defines CT as a problem-
solving process possessing the following characteristics 
(International Society for Technology in Education and 
Computer Science Teachers Association, 2011):
5 See also https://schools-go-digital.jrc.ec.europa.eu/.●●Formulating problems in a way that enables us to use a 
computer and other tools to help solve them;
●●Logically organising and analysing data;
●●Representing data through abstractions such as models 
and simulations;
●●Automating solutions through algorithmic thinking (a 
series of ordered steps);
●●Identifying, analysing and implementing possible 
solutions with the goal of achieving the most efficient 
and effective combination of steps and resources; and
●●Generalising and transferring this problem-solving 
process to a wide variety of problems.
While distinctly belonging to the domain of computer 
science, CT is therefore a competency that finds 
applications in other disciplines. Given the increasing 
presence of AI in the workplace, CT becomes a critical 
competency if learners are to cope with changing labour 
market demands. Many countries have thus begun 
incorporating CT in their respective educational curricula.
A survey conducted by the European Commission shows 
that while European Union (EU) Member States are 
at different stages of integrating CT in their respective 
educational curricula, each one has begun working on 
it (European Commission, 2016). The survey found three 
clusters in terms of the level of CT integration in curricula:
1 countries that have started a curriculum review and 
redevelopment over the past three to five years such 
as the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Portugal and 
Finland
2 countries that are planning to introduce CT into their 
curricula such as Greece, Sweden, Norway and the 
Czech Republic; and
3 countries that have a longstanding tradition 
of computer science education, particularly in 
secondary school such as Austria, Poland and 
Lithuania.
4 In other words, there is universal recognition across 
the EU of the importance of integrating CT in 
educational programs.
In the United Kingdom (UK), for instance, the Royal 
Society published a report in 2012 that described the Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI

==== Page 22 ====
21
shortcomings of computing instruction in the country. This 
report described how instruction on ICT at the time merely 
aimed for students to acquire basic digital literacy skills, i.e. 
the general ability to use computers, and recommended a 
curricular shift towards information technology, computer 
science, programming and computing (The Royal Society, 
2012). The Royal Society argued for the importance of CT 
and its applications to natural and artificial systems. They 
posited that CT skills were also useful and applicable to 
domains outside computer science (The Royal Society, 
2012). Based on the findings of this report, the UK 
redesigned and implemented a new computing curriculum 
in 2014, whose aims were more oriented towards fostering 
an understanding of fundamental principles and concepts 
in computer science and their applications, and the ability 
to analyze problems in computational terms and to create 
computer programs that would solve those problems (UK 
Department for Education, 2013). Instruction proceeds 
along four key stages, spanning preschool, primary school, 
lower secondary school and upper secondary school, with 
well-defined target competencies for each stage (Yadav, 
2016). Computer science and computing instructors are 
able to share ideas and resources through communities of 
practice like “Computing at School” , an affiliate organisation 
of the British Computer Society, the Chartered Institute for 
IT (Heintz, Mannila & Färnqvist, 2016).
Estonia launched a similar initiative in 2012 called 
the “ProgeTiger Programme” , which aims to introduce 
programming and robotics in educational curricula 
(HITSA, n/d), spanning pre-school, primary and vocational 
education (HITSA, n/d). This programme is managed by the 
Education Information Technology Foundation (Hariduse 
Infotehnoloogia Sihtasutuse, HITSA), which is in turn funded 
by the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research. The 
Government of Estonia set HITSA’s objective of “[ensuring] 
that sufficient age-appropriate digital competency 
necessary for further studies and to succeed in society is 
acquired at all levels of education by integrating the use 
of digital solutions into the entire process of teaching 
and learning” (HITSA, 2015). The ProgeTiger Programme 
approach has three axes, two of which directly relate to 
the development of AI-related competencies: Engineering 
Sciences, encompassing programming, robotics and 
electronics; and Information and Communications 
Technology, encompassing computer science and digital 
communications (HITSA, 2015). 
The push to integrate CT in educational curricula 
from as early as preschool is not exclusive to Europe. Argentina’s Ministry of Education, for instance, recently 
announced a plan called ‘Aprender Conectados’ , which 
aims to incorporate digital learning across all levels of 
compulsory education. One component of this plan is 
to integrate programming and robotics in the country’s 
educational program, beginning from preschool all the way 
to secondary school, in all schools by 2019. The learning 
curriculum prescribes specific, age-appropriate learning 
competencies at each level of education, from preschool 
to secondary school, building towards full competency in 
using computing methods and techniques, individually and 
collaboratively, to solve problems (Ministerio de Educación, 
2017).
Singapore also starts young in its effort to develop CT 
competencies amongst learners. In 2016, the country’s 
Info-communications Media Development Authority 
(IMDA) launched the PlayMaker Programme, which 
introduced robots to 160 preschool centres to develop very 
young learners’ appetite for and competency in robotics, 
programming and computer science through play (Graham, 
2018). A mid-test and post-test study involving a sample 
of preschool children using KIBO – one of the robotics kits 
used in the PlayMaker Programme – showed high success 
in developing foundational programming concepts among 
children in the sample group (Sullivan & Bers, 2017). The 
PlayMaker Programme is part of a broader movement, 
called CODE@SG, to integrate coding and CT in Singapore’s 
formal education system through Infocomm clubs, student 
competitions, enrichment programmes and gamified 
approaches to learning (Infocomm Media Development 
Authority, 2017). This initiative aims to build a “Smart 
Nation for the future” , whose citizens are “familiar with 
tech skills and … also sensitive to how tech can be applied 
to improve living” , acknowledging that CT is “[becoming] 
an increasingly essential part of our lives and careers” 
(Infocomm Media Development Authority, 2017).
Malaysia has also embedded CT in its educational 
programme. During the launch of Malaysia’s 
#mydigitalmaker movement in 2016, Malaysia Digital 
Economy Corporation (MDEC) CEO Yasmin Mahmood 
emphasised that the integration of CT in educational 
curricula meant “embedding thinking skills – not IT skills 
– […] to then apply to problem-solving” (Singh, 2016). 
The #mydigitalmaker Movement is a partnership across 
the private sector, public sector and academia to “help 
create and encourage the development of digital making 
curriculums that are mapped to the objectives set by the 
Ministry of Education” (Ministry of Education & Malaysia  Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI       Section II

==== Page 23 ====
22
Digital Economy Corporation, 2017). In 2018, 22 schools in 
Malaysia have been selected as #mydigitalmaker Champion 
Schools, i.e. schools funded by MDEC to implement the 
#mydigitalmaker framework, including the establishment 
of a Digital Maker Hub, which is a key feature of the 
#mydigitalmaker Movement (My Digital Maker, 2018). A 
Digital Maker Hub functions like a workshop or laboratory 
with a structured learning programme, whereby students 
have access to various tools to create and collaborate on 
tech projects (Ministry of Education & Malaysia Digital 
Economy Corporation, 2017). All Digital Maker Hubs contain 
a ‘creative lab’ where students can convert their ideas into 
code in any programming language, and a prototyping 
studio, where they can test and see their products at work.
It must be noted, though, that the examples provided 
are only illustrative and are in no way exhaustive. The 
incorporation of CT in educational curricula is a reform that 
pervades across several countries and regions worldwide. 
This shows a clear shift from basic digital literacy to higher-
order (computational) thinking skills. While the push to 
integrate ‘ICT competencies’ into educational curricula has 
long existed, particularly since the movement towards 21st 
century skills, ‘ICT competencies’ were defined so broadly 
that their incorporation into educational curricula across 
countries ranged from basic digital literacy to algorithmic 
skills. The increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity clearly conveys a need to operationalise ‘ICT 
competencies’ as being more than digital literacy, in which 
regard CT becomes critical.
Beginning CT-related instruction from early education is a 
common thread across these countries. The acquisition of 
CT skills thus becomes a cumulative process with well-
defined target competencies for learners as they progress 
through a ladder of proficiency levels. These proficiency 
levels need not necessarily have to be associated with 
specific grade levels such as the case with Estonia, since 
educators may simply use proficiency levels as a framework 
to identify learners’ individual progress in acquiring CT 
skills and subsequently provide individual interventions as 
needed, regardless of a learner’s formal grade level.
(2)  Strengthening AI capacities through 
post-basic education and training
The number of countries that have developed a national AI 
strategy is increasing. France in Europe, China in Asia and 
lately the United States in North America are examples of 
the kind of comprehensive strategies that, despite a huge 
focus on R&D, assign a major role to the development of an AI-capable workforce. In all these three cases, most 
attention is given to higher education, because of its 
obvious links with R&D, but also to technical and vocational 
education. Yet Finland has chosen a different pathway by 
creating a national platform to rapidly achieve the goal of 
1% of the total population being AI-literate.
Higher education
The pressing need to adapt to rapid developments in AI 
exerts itself on post-compulsory educational institutions 
as well. Building AI expertise through higher education 
and research is one of the main approaches used by 
governments to address their respective skill gaps. In an 
effort to boost their respective capacities in AI and become 
leaders in the field, many countries are seeking to make 
professions in AI research and practice more attractive.
France , for example, published a report that laid out a 
strategic framework for AI domestically and in Europe. 
Research and human resource development are key 
components of this strategy, with France envisioning, 
among others:
●●the creation of research laboratories to study how AI 
transforms the workplace;
●●increased incentives for AI researchers to attract both 
domestic and international talent; and
●●the development of AI programmes at the bachelor’s, 
master’s and doctoral levels, as well as in technical and 
vocational education and training (TVET) (Villani, 2018).
The country also aims to build more academia-industry 
collaborations and forge more partnerships between 
universities and other research institutes, in effect creating 
a university network for AI studies. Towards this end, French 
President Emmanuel Macron committed €1.5 billion, which 
will be managed by the Institut National de Recherche en 
Informatique et en Automatique (Campus France, 2018).
South Korea also published a master plan to prepare the 
country for what it calls the ‘Fourth Industrial Revolution’ . 
Education forms an important part of this master plan: 
The Government of the Republic of Korea aims to produce 
5,000 new graduates trained in AI every year, beginning 
in 2020, thus adding 50,000 new AI specialists to its talent 
pool by 2030 (Government of the Republic of Korea, 
2016). Moreover, the country also intends to provide 
10-year support to ‘topnotch graduate-schools-turned-
research-centres to lead the development of intelligent 
IT, including AI’ through Research Innovation Grants, Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI

==== Page 24 ====
23
resource provision and subsidies for hiring scholars and 
professors internationally. The government has committed 
around 4.3 million USD to fund this research initiative 
(Sharma, 2018). Furthermore, the country aims to allocate 
2 billion USD towards the establishment of six new AI 
graduate institutions, the strengthening of academia-
industry partnerships and the creation of 4,500 domestic 
scholarships for AI students (Sharma, 2018).
China has also developed a Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Plan, which was launched in 2017. This plan sets 
out a vision for the country to be the world’s centre of AI 
innovation by 2030 (Government of the People’s Republic 
of China, 2017). Education and training play a huge part in 
the realisation of this plan, with the government aiming to 
accelerate the cultivation of top-tier talent in the field of 
AI (Government of the People’s Republic of China, 2017). 
The government intends to achieve this by developing AI 
majors in university, increasing enrolment in master’s and 
doctorate programmes in AI, and integrating AI content 
in the study of other disciplines such as mathematics, 
biology, psychology, sociology and law, among others 
(Government of the People’s Republic of China, 2017). In 
line with the objectives of this plan, the country launched 
an International AI Training Programme for Chinese 
Universities, which began operating at Peking University in 
2018 (China Daily, 2018). Through this programme, China 
aims to train at least 500 teachers and 5,000 students in 
AI in the country’s top universities over the next five years 
(China Daily, 2018). The government has also invested 
in vocational training with the Ministry of Education 
collaborating with three robotics enterprises to co-establish 
10 public vocational training hubs and 90 vocational 
training centres within Chinese vocational schools by 2020 
(He, 2017). Towards this end, the Ministry of Education has 
allocated 5 million RMB (≈726,427 USD) to each training 
hub and 3 million RMB (≈435,856 USD) to each training 
centre, as well as supplementary resources for training 
teachers and procuring equipment (He, 2017).
Technical and Vocational Education 
and Training (TVET) 
TVET institutions should also be capable of offering 
programmes that incorporate AI-related competencies, 
especially if they intend to produce graduates whose skills 
are attuned to changes in the labour market. In some 
countries, lifelong learning is understood as referring 
to basic skills education and adult literacy programmes 
(Chakroun & Daelman, 2018). However, while lifelong learning certainly includes these aforesaid initiatives, it 
encompasses a broader spectrum. The International Labour 
Organisation (ILO) defines lifelong learning as including 
“all learning activities undertaken throughout life for 
the development of competencies and qualifications” 
(ILO, 2004). The ILO argues that “the renewed interest in 
lifelong learning is partly due to the interest by industry 
which considers lifelong learning as the appropriate skill 
formation strategy for the ‘new economy” (ILO, 2004). 
Germany and Singapore have similar individual training 
account schemes. In the former, eligible individuals, 
either unemployed or employed workers in specific 
circumstances, can receive education vouchers from 
their respective employment agency or job centre to 
pursue relevant training; these vouchers are redeemed 
at educational institutions that have been accredited to 
provide continued training and education (Federal Ministry 
of Labour and Social Affairs, 2012). Similarly, the latter 
launched its SkillsFuture initiative in 2016 to provide 500 
SGD worth of credits (topped up periodically) to every 
citizen aged 25 and up to pay for courses at any of the 500 
government-sponsored training providers (Skills Future, 
n/d). Data analytics is one of eight training streams that 
Singaporeans can follow.
The UNESCO Education Sector is also developing initiatives 
that harness AI to achieve SDG 4, with a particular focus 
on TVET. For instance, in partnership with Ericsson, 
UNESCO’s ICT in Education Unit is launching the initiative 
‘Artificial Intelligence for Youth’ that focuses on scaling up 
AI skill development for young people. This project aims 
to support and foster the capacities of master trainers to 
empower youth in developing innovative AI applications. 
It will also create a repository of curated AI-related training 
courses, and mobilise AI hub centres and hackathons to 
cascade training for youth across a broader scale.
The examples herein emphasise the importance of 
collaborating with industry in bolstering the effectiveness 
of TVET when it comes to filling in AI competency gaps. 
Constant coordination with industry is needed to ensure 
that the instructional content of TVET programmes are 
aligned with the needs of the labour market. Since AI 
technologies evolve very quickly, this coordination must 
be regular and systematic; it should not be surprising 
that instructional programmes might need to be 
constantly rethought and revisited, given the rapid pace of 
development in AI technologies. Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI       Section II

==== Page 25 ====
24
However, coordination is not the only way by which TVET 
institutions can collaborate with industry. Ministries of 
education and labour can partner with industry players 
to share the training ‘burden’ of bridging the AI skills gap. 
Since industry stands to benefit from a larger AI-capable 
talent pool, it should also invest in training and upskilling, 
recognising that bridging the AI skills gap is not the 
education sector’s sole responsibility.
Governments indeed recognise the important role of TVET 
in bridging the AI skills gap, with some even installing 
welfare mechanisms to support the upskilling and 
retooling of individuals holding jobs that are vulnerable to 
automation such as the cases of Singapore and Germany. 
However, bridging the AI skills gap should not be confined 
to reforms in formal education.
Non-formal and informal learning
‘Schooling’ must be distinguished from ‘learning’: While 
schooling happens within structured learning environments 
contained within a fixed time and place, learning occurs 
in a continual fashion, regardless of time and place. With 
the existence of mobile technologies, for instance, it has 
even become more apparent that learning can occur 
well outside the bounds of traditional, brick-and-mortar 
educational institutions (Woolf et al., 2013). Massively 
open online courses (MOOCs) and online learning 
platforms such as Khan Academy are alternative channels 
by which individuals can access training on AI-related 
skills, with various universities offering online courses on 
programming, data science and machine learning, for 
instance. There have also been grassroots initiatives such as 
Code.org and EU Code Week, whose outreach only continues 
to grow over time (European Commission, 2016).
 MOOC platforms are in fact good examples of learning 
systems that contribute to bringing training on AI-
related skills and use AI techniques to make the most 
of themselves. This is because of their inherent digital 
character. Coursera, edX, iversity, Future Learn, Udacity, 
CognitiveClass.ai, etc. are examples of such platforms 
which, in some cases, say that they are applying NLP 
(Natural Language Processing) and Machine Learning in 
combination with Crowdsourcing, for example, to grade 
short answers, coding exercises, vocabulary and even 
automatically generate ‘wh’ (who/what/when/where/why) 
questions. 
The impact of these kind of platforms lies in the virtuous 
circle that they can generate among four factors: (i) Global 
Reach, which produces a big amount of usage data as they reach the whole World, (ii) they can combine Synchronous 
and Asynchronous learning, which means flexibility for 
students, (iii) they offer an opportunity for “career changers” 
for lifelong learners, and (iv) they let the owners and 
teachers research and experiment.
It must be noted, though, that given the relatively recent 
appearance of these informal learning platforms, data 
and research on their overall effectiveness still have a 
long way to go insofar as they must be well measured and 
contrasted. When it comes to measuring the effectiveness 
of these platforms, in fact for any learning system at scale, 
the definition of relevant key performance indicators is of 
course a very complex task. It is easy to start using simple 
indicators like participation, persistence, completion, 
satisfaction and activity. But more sophisticated metrics 
should arise, ranging from correlations between different 
measures of activity to non-trivial successful/unsuccessful 
patterns that can be discovered using the power of AI. 
MOOCs may be considered to fall within a wider category 
of “Large-scale Learning Environments” . Apart from the 
examples of formal MOOC platforms given above, other 
less formal systems, usually based on communities, have a 
relevant impact in how many people learn: citizen science 
communities, YouTube channels by volunteer teachers, 
collaborative programming communities (Scratch, GitHub), 
community tutorial and forums systems (StackOverflow), 
shared critique communities (DeviantArt), informal 
communities of learners (“Explain It Like I’m Five” sub-
Reddit), etc. 
It remains important to invest in such non-formal and 
information learning programmes. The aforementioned 
case of the national Finnish strategy to make 1% of the 
total population AI literate provides a good example of how 
informal and non-formal capacity development initiatives 
can also be fostered through ICT-based platforms. Given the 
rapid pace at which AI technologies are evolving, constant 
and continuous upskilling will always be needed. Moving 
forward, however, when there is more data available 
regarding the results of these lifelong learning initiatives, 
governments can begin to monitor and evaluate and 
therefore make the necessary adjustments to render those 
initiatives more effective.Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI

==== Page 26 ====
25Section III:
AI in education - challenges
and policy implications

==== Page 27 ====
26
AI-powered services have already become prevalent in 
human lives in many places, including the least developed 
countries. For instance, bots in Kenya  now give answers 
to questions about reproductive health in a safe and 
confidential way, thus dispensing with a visit to the doctor’s 
office. The bots rely on AI technology to process and reply 
to questions concerning sexual and reproductive health 
securely and confidentially. Several AI applications have 
also emerged in the agriculture sector across several African 
countries. In Kenya , Vital Signs collects and integrates data 
on Agriculture, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being. It uses 
satellite imagery data to estimate rainfall and drought 
patterns. In Nigeria, Zenvus is a data-driven platform that 
provides farmers with insights based on data collected 
from sensors and other means. Their mission is to eliminate 
poverty in developing countries by improving overall 
farming productivity. 
Financial and public transportation sectors are further 
examples of where AI-powered technologies are changing 
people’s lives. Tala is Kenya’s number one finance 
application. It provides credit with low fees and easy 
repayment schedules. Their target customers have no 
credit history. Through the application, the company can 
assess excluded customers by analysing Facebook and 
SMS data to determine the customer’s risk of failure to pay. 
Another example in Nigeria is Kudi.ai, a system that lets 
users improve the use of money transfers by using natural 
languages and AI to make peer-to-peer payments easier 
using a chatbot that works on popular messaging apps.
These examples prove that radical innovation is possible 
under extreme conditions. Some authors have developed 
a framework to analyse frugal innovations as solutions 
conceived through needs under difficult conditions 
(Leadbeater & Wong, 2010). New discussions both in the 
field of international aid and within national policies are 
starting to unfold. Is education a field in which technology 
can help leapfrog inequalities (Winthrop, Barton & 
McGivney, 2018)? How can developing countries with 
severe social problems address the complex ecosystem 
needed to develop AI solutions in education? How can 
public policies empower teachers so they are key actors in 
this process and not mere spectators? 
Recent systematic reviews show that AI in Education 
has been a field of research concentrated in developed 
countries (Roll & Wylie, 2016). As part of an advance 
technological discussion that builds upon firmly developed 
infrastructure and knowledge ecosystems, AI in Education 
is a neglected topic in the developing world. This document intends to bring the discussion to the least developed and 
developing countries, recognising the multiple limitations 
these countries face while uncovering the need for 
structural innovation to leapfrog education as a human 
right using technological opportunities to advance at a 
large scale in new learning scenarios. 
This final section presents the six main future challenges 
regarding the incorporation of AI in education as a way to 
improve the equity and quality of learning and to promote 
the realisation of SDG 4. It combines the two main topics 
of this document, namely the new opportunities of AI to 
improve learning and the way education should prepare 
students and future workers in an AI-powered world.
First challenge: a comprehensive 
public policy on AI for sustainable 
development
The education sector is both customer and actor in the face 
of sweeping developments in AI-powered technology. In 
this regard, the education component becomes key when 
countries develop national AI strategies, as we’ve seen in 
the cases of Australia, China, Estonia, France, Singapore, 
South Korea and, albeit more recently, the United States.
On one hand, AI holds great potential for improving 
education systems: How can AI help learners, teachers, 
administrators and policymakers? On the other hand, 
education systems are expected to form learners who 
possess the skills needed to thrive in a society surrounded 
by AI. Currently, most of the AI developments in education 
come from the private sector. Companies such as Pearson, 
McGraw-Hill, IBM, Knewton, Cerego, Smart Parrow, 
Dreambox, LightSide or Coursera are advancing in the 
introduction of adaptive learning through intelligent 
algorithms that use Big Data to personalise learning. Most 
governments are struggling to manage this serge in private 
sector engagement with AI in education.
Recent studies show that the digital education market will 
increase 5% annually until 2021 (Docebo, 2016). Experts 
forecast a 50% growth in the artificial intelligence market 
between 2017 and 2021 (HTF Market Intelligence, 2018). 
What is the role of the state in this context? Can it cope 
with the velocity of technological change driven by private 
markets?Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications

==== Page 28 ====
27
The best way to approach these initial questions for 
developing countries is through a comprehensive 
perspective on the topic. AI works within complex 
ecosystems of knowledge, innovation, business and 
new regulations. State policies should be capable of 
simultaneously addressing multiple questions to generate 
solutions and regulations, and create or support innovation 
ecosystems to bring the opportunities of AI to the field of 
education. 
The development of public policies regarding AI in 
education is still in its infancy, but it is a field that will most 
likely grow exponentially in the next ten years. It is difficult 
to find some common components at such an early stage, 
but some issues are starting to emerge as key factors shown 
by the study cases:
●● Public policies will not be able to cope with the speed 
of innovation in the field of AI with its traditional 
institutions. New agencies and institutions within the 
public sector are key to creating the AI intellectual and 
material context of sustainable development.
●●As part of this strategy, countries are developing labs and 
incubators with public funds to unfold initiatives in AI 
that promote public goods.
●●The state must create partnerships with the private sector 
to enlarge the AI ecosystem because the public sector will 
not be able to innovate at such a complex technological 
level alone.
●●To address ethical issues, it´s essential to consult experts 
and form teams to create blueprints and roadmaps in the 
uncertainty of the near future development of AI.
●●As part of the ecosystem, it´s essential to create new 
funding opportunities to develop academic and research 
facilities for the formation and training of AI specialists. 
●●The initiatives from these countries are unleashing the 
potential of AI in education with experiments of adaptive 
learning platforms, online assessments, automatic essay 
correction, specially design in context of large-scale 
technological penetration.
●●Some of these countries are also concerned with the 
ethical consequences of AI in education. Therefore, new 
regulations are being introduced to secure the use of AI 
by private companies in terms of data uses, privacy and 
the transparency of the ways in which algorithms are 
designed. ●●As part of the commitment to develop a complex 
ecosystem of AI as a common good, some governments 
are starting to enlarge the public understanding and 
public debate regarding these issues within the context 
of a new democratic ideal.
As presented in this paper, many countries have 
programmed significant budgetary commitments towards 
the creation of AI research centres and the recruitment 
and training of AI professionals. Indeed, strengthening AI 
training and research through higher education is seen as 
critical for building national expertise in AI. Governments 
are investing in research and advanced training in AI, which 
primarily occur at higher education institutions, through 
the establishment of academic centres of excellence in AI, 
university and research institute networks and scholarships 
to attract more talent into the field of AI. 
Public-private partnership is another important aspect of 
strengthening AI training and research. Countries cited in 
this paper have forged partnerships between industry and 
academia not only to share material and financial resources 
but also to ensure that educational programmes are well-
aligned with labour market needs. Partnerships should not 
be limited to industry and academia, though; intra-sector 
partnerships prove just as important as academia-industry 
partnerships. Partnerships between universities and 
research institutes foster collaborative research, which can 
accelerate the development of expertise in AI.
For these efforts to be effective, however, they must be 
aligned with a broader national strategy for AI, with a clear 
vision and clearly defined objectives. This is the case for 
all three examples described above. The elaboration of 
such strategies can be seen as anticipatory responses to AI: 
Rather than passively responding to developments in AI, 
the cited countries have chosen to build national expertise 
so they can lead the development and dialogue in this 
regard. An effective education sector response to AI should 
not be merely ‘palliative’ . The education sector is well-placed 
to shape a country’s vision for AI since it is, after all, the 
cradle of future expertise in the field.
At this point, we promote the creation of an AI Observatory 
to look at relevant initiatives of AI in education and inform 
on national and international AI strategy plans (see 
Conclusions).
To understand the potential of these initiatives and the 
situation of other countries, attention needs be shifted 
towards benchmarking parameters. This will allow 
initiatives to compare themselves and identify where they  AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III

==== Page 29 ====
28
stand in the journey. This could even allow countries to 
compare themselves on becoming AI ready. For instance, 
the Automation Readiness Index: Who is ready for the 
coming wave of automation? Government AI Readiness 
(Stirling, Miller & Martinho-Truswell, n/d). 
With this comprehensive view in mind, what are the 
possibilities for introducing AI in education in developing 
countries? Technology has open new opportunities for 
countries facing large social challenges. In Africa, access 
to mobile phones has grown exponentially in the last 15 
years, driving economic growth (Aker & Mbiti, 2010). New 
discussions are emerging in developing countries to use the 
power of AI to promote social equality (BID, 2018).
Second challenge: Ensuring inclusion and 
equity in AI in education
While AI can open numerous possibilities as presented 
in this paper, it can also be a disruptive technology and 
may deepen the existing inequalities and divides as the 
marginalised and disadvantaged population are more likely 
to be excluded from AI-powered education. The result is a 
new kind of digital divide: a divide in the use of data‐based 
knowledge to inform intelligent decision‐making (Hilbert, 
2015).
Equity and inclusion should be core values when designing 
policies for AI in education. Policy makers should thus ask 
several inclusion and equity questions when developing 
their policies. For instance, what infrastructure conditions 
are urgent in developing countries to make AI in education 
possible? What have we learned from previous experiences 
to build sustainable and equitable conditions to digital 
rights in terms of internet access? How can AI serve 
the education provided to disadvantaged groups and 
populations? How can digital education and AI grow faster 
in developing countries to close the educational gap 
between rich and poor students of the world? What are the 
good practices on AI for women and girls to close gender 
gaps?
Recent studies have mapped the obstacles for introducing 
AI in education in developing countries. The main ones 
include 1-ICT hardware availability, 2-Electrical availability, 
3-Internet reliability, 4-Data costs, 5-Students´basic ICT 
skills, 6-Language and 7-Lack of culturally appropriate 
content (Nye, 2015). Further reviews on the introduction 
of Big Data in developing countries show that the lack of 
basic infrastructures creates a new digital divide in the use of data-based knowledge for informed intelligent 
decision-making (Hilbert, 2015). To remove these obstacles, 
multiple policies must be put in place. It is essential to start 
by defining the internet as a human right and creating 
multiple international alliances to build infrastructure in 
the poorest sectors of the developing world (Mutoni, 2017). 
The work carried out by the United Nations Broadband 
Commission is one clear example of this.
Third challenge: Preparing teachers for 
AI-powered education and preparing AI to 
understand education
There are no indications of a system-wide adoption of 
AI-based applications for teaching and learning or system 
management, even though the educational technology 
industry has yet to cease production on new developments. 
Their fundamental flaw is that, rather than addressing 
the existing problems and issues that teachers face, they 
promote new ways of organising teaching that collide with 
mainstream traditional practices, often without rigorous 
evaluations supporting the claimed benefits of new 
solutions. Not surprisingly, teachers hear what vendors 
have to say, but do not necessarily buy into it. Against this 
context, some countries have already designed policies that 
support the national EdTech industry’s efforts to promote 
innovation, intensify efforts and modalities of qualifying 
and empowering the demand (teachers and schools), while 
supporting their innovative practices and, finally, exploring 
how AI can contribute to a richer, more evidence-informed 
policy and planning environment in education.
The examples presented herein show how learning 
analytics platforms can use predictive algorithms to help 
teachers diagnose and anticipate learning difficulties 
faced by learners and thus implement personalised 
interventions to respond to those difficulties. However, 
while predictive algorithms certainly facilitate data analysis 
and interpretation, these algorithms are not what make 
learning analytics systems powerful. The effectiveness 
of learning analytics systems lies in their usefulness and 
relevance to learners and educators. Real-time data 
processing should translate into real-time feedback, 
quicker intervention and individualised instruction. As 
such, educators continue to play the primary role. Teachers 
and head teachers should be given sufficient autonomy to 
manage their respective classrooms and schools, founded 
on the notion that they are most familiar with the needs 
of their learners. Automated analyses only serve that Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications

==== Page 30 ====
29
autonomy if teachers and head teachers are empowered 
to manage learning provision in their respective schools. If 
not, the implementation of any AI-powered tool can only 
do so much.
Teachers will therefore remain at the frontline of education; 
it is misinformed to say that AI can replace teachers. 
Arguments to the contrary reduce the teaching profession 
to the performance of solely cognitive and routine tasks, 
ignore the research that stresses the importance of a 
human mentor to support the learning process and 
neglect the creative and socio-emotional aspects of 
teaching, which go beyond mere knowledge transmission 
(Bali, 2017). Furthermore, teachers will decide how and 
when it would be appropriate to use AI-enabled tools. 
As such, the development of these AI-enabled tools 
and their integration into the delivery of educational 
programmes must be a participatory process, designed 
to “deliver the support that educators need – not the 
support that technologists or designers think they need” 
(Luckin et al., 2016). That said, AI-enabled technologies 
do provide opportunities to automate certain routine and 
administrative tasks such as grading and recordkeeping, 
which teachers are currently performing. Automating 
such tasks can free up teachers’ time, effectively allowing 
teachers to devote more energy to the creative, empathetic 
and inspirational aspects of their profession.
Given the eventual widespread use of AI in the classroom, 
teacher training is therefore a critical aspect of empowering 
teachers to use educational data to improve pedagogy. To 
be able to use AI-enabled technologies effectively, teachers 
would also need assimilate new competencies, specifically 
(Luckin et al., 2016):
●●A clear understanding of how AI-enabled systems can 
facilitate learning provision, so that they can make 
sound value judgments on new AI-enabled educational 
products;
●●Research and data analytical skills, so that they can 
interpret data provided by AI-enabled systems, ask useful 
questions about the data and provide students with 
feedback based on insights that arise from the data; and
●●New management skills, so that they can effectively 
manage both human and AI resources at their disposal.●●A critical perspective on the ways Ai and digital 
technologies affect human lives and new frameworks of 
computational thinking and digital skills can increment 
students´ capacities to understand the power, the 
dangers and the possibilities of AI.
●●Enable teachers to take advantage of AI taking over 
repetitive tasks to bring in more human capabilities they 
may not have had time for before: mentorship, emotional 
support, interpersonal skills, etc.
●●Help learners acquire those skills and competencies that 
are likely not to be replaced by machines.
Teacher training programmes should therefore account for 
these new competencies, both at the in-service and pre-
service level. 
Not only teachers have to prepare to understand and grasp 
the new technological possibilities digital and AI-powered 
education are developing. The history of innovations in 
education is full of lost promises that fail to understand how 
teachers work and the culture of schools. To create new 
educational possibilities, AI developers have to participate 
in a new dialogues with educators, content designers and 
cross-disciplinary specialists. 
At present, two distinct communities have evolved, namely 
learning analytics (LA) and Educational Data Mining (EDM). 
These two communities significantly overlap in terms of 
objectives and techniques, but they differ in that EDM 
researchers, originating from the community of intelligent 
tutoring systems, work on very small-scale cognition. EDM 
methods are drawn from a variety of disciplines, including 
data mining, machine learning, psychometrics of statistics, 
information visualisation and computational modelling. 
The field of learning analytics is more focused on learning 
content management systems and large-scale test results. 
To do so, they combine institutional data, statistical analysis 
and predictive modelling to identify which learners need 
help and how instructors can change academic behaviour. 
Future developments in AI-powered software in education 
must build strong bridges between cognition, classrooms 
and large-scale test scores. The challenge is to create 
new pedagogical dialogues at micro and macro levels of 
understanding education. For instance, we should analyse 
systems thinking, critical thinking, self-regulation and active 
listening. Data analysis should move across individual 
tutoring systems and evaluate students’ skills for the 21st 
Century (Woolf et al. 2013). AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III

==== Page 31 ====
30
Fourth challenge: Developing quality and 
inclusive data systems 
Given that data fuel AI, complete, reliable and timely data 
constitute an important prerequisite for installing AI-
enhanced data analytics systems. A fully functional data 
analytics system with comprehensive and up-to-date data 
opens possibilities for AI-enabled predictive and machine 
learning algorithms. Data enable intelligent systems. 
Without the needed data, no sort of algorithm, no matter 
how sophisticated, can function properly. As such, a data-
rich environment is a prerequisite to AI-enabled systems. 
However, data availability is a necessary yet insufficient 
condition. It follows that any AI-enabled system is only 
as good as the data it contains. After all, inaccurate data 
are likely to make machine learning algorithms generate 
incorrect outputs. Indeed, predictive algorithms can only 
make complete and accurate predictions if the data they are 
handling are itself complete and accurate.
However, many countries still struggle with collecting 
basic yet critical educational data. The UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics (UIS) cites the many hindrances to the efficient 
and effective collection and use of educational data (UIS, 
2018b). Educational data should be open and usable at the 
school level. An EMIS should be able to generate analyses 
that are granular enough to help teachers and education 
administrators understand the key challenges while also 
being able to aggregate data to reveal trends that can 
inform policy development.
Furthermore, data must also account for inequities, 
providing insights, for example, on learning outcomes 
disaggregated according to demographic factors 
such as age, gender and socio-economic background 
(UNESCO, 2018). The ability to generate such analyses 
allows education systems to determine the educational 
disadvantage experienced by specific marginalised or 
vulnerable populations. However, data on disadvantaged 
groups still currently tend to be incomplete and even 
absent. For instance, a 2016 study by UNICEF showed 
that, out of 40 countries surveyed, 19 had no data at all on 
children with disabilities; for many countries that did have 
data, it was only specified that the child was on a special-
needs programme but failed to indicate the disability 
(UNICEF, 2016). Data on refugees and internally displaced 
populations (IDPs) also remain limited, with most of those 
data coming from camps and camp-like settings (UNESCO & UNHCR, 2016). Refugees studying in national schools 
are also frequently not identified as refugees in national 
education statistics, thus making it more difficult to monitor 
and evaluate their learning outcomes. Furthermore, since 
the collection and analysis of education data usually 
happens on a once-a-year basis, the data are often unable 
to convey accurate information on transient populations.
It is also important to note that the education system 
itself is not the only source of data relevant to learning 
provision. Household data, as specifically mentioned by the 
UIS, can also provide insights on exogenous factors that 
might account for learning difficulties at school. The same 
can be said of data coming from other ministries, e.g. the 
ministry of health. Data on nutrition can be used to report 
on, for instance, the design of school meal programmes. 
This speaks to the importance of data integration: When 
government systems are integrated, more data become 
shared and available across all sectors. This data sharing 
means that more data can be used by the education sector 
to run AI algorithms and consequently, more possibilities to 
generate analyses, models or predictions. 
The understanding that data are capable of yielding direct 
value and are useful across all levels of the education 
system is critical to ensuring data quality. In fact, the extent 
of data use at least partly determines data quality (Orr, 
1998). After all, the more useful data is to a stakeholder, 
the more incentive there is for that stakeholder to ensure 
that the data is produced in an accurate and timely 
manner. Open data can also be an impetus for data use. 
The ability to access data and metadata does not only allow 
intermediaries (e.g. NGOs) and community stakeholders 
to draw direct value and mine insights from education 
data, but this transparency also creates a greater sense 
of accountability on the part of ministries of education 
for the improvement of educational outcomes (UNESCO, 
2018). Open data are anchored on the discourse of data 
‘prosumption’ , i.e., stakeholders do not only consume data 
but are also involved in data production and interpretation 
(Williamson, 2015). Stakeholders must have access to data 
analytics if they are to be involved in the improvement of 
the education system. 
AI-powered technologies provide opportunities to make 
educational data more useful at each level of the education 
system. Learning analytics, for instance, as demonstrated 
in the examples provided in this paper, provide educators 
with real-time insights about students’ individual progress Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications

==== Page 32 ====
31
and learning patterns, thus allowing the former to make 
real-time adjustments to their instructional approach. 
Furthermore, the real-time generation of data could also 
mean that student-level data are constantly updated, i.e., 
if the learning analytics systems used at the school level 
directly feed into a system-level EMIS. This real-time data 
capture also provides opportunities to expand data sets 
on refugees and IDPs, given how traditional annual data 
collection schedules have produced insufficient data on 
such populations. Automated analytics also make it easier 
to disaggregate data according to various demographic 
factors, thus also making it relatively easier to identify 
sources of educational inequality. Of course, having an 
adequate amount of data is a prerequisite to producing 
such analyses. As such, countries with weak or incomplete 
data systems should focus on strengthening their data 
systems and bridging their data gaps.
It must be acknowledged, however, that while technologies 
for capturing data are indeed becoming more and 
more powerful, their costs could be prohibitively high, 
particularly for low- and middle-income countries. As 
such, the costs of such data systems need to be carefully 
examined and weighed against the potential benefits. 
While numerous governments are able to produce large 
amounts of education data to inform decision-making, 
many countries are still unable to do so (Custer et al., 
2018). Many efforts to remedy this problem have fallen 
short since they focused on the procurement of more 
sophisticated data reporting technologies, even when the 
issue lay in weak institutional processes that would result 
in faulty, incomplete and unused data. This harks back to 
strong institutional and organisational processes being 
a prerequisite to the installation of any data-dependent 
system, including AI technology. As such, institutional 
capacity-building becomes a crucial investment, particularly 
for countries whose data processes remain ad hoc and thus 
unable to produce consistent, relevant and timely data.
Fifth challenge: making research on AI in 
education significant
While we can reasonably expect increased research on AI 
in education in the coming years, it is also worth recalling 
the difficulties that the education sector has in taking stock 
of educational research in a significant way for practice 
and policy-making. The particular domain of research on 
educational technology clearly demonstrates that what researchers state as key research questions are quite often 
unrelated to teachers’ needs.
Technology’s potential to transform education has often 
been stated, though it is widely accepted that, for various 
reasons, this potential has yet to be harnessed as expected 
in developed countries (Conlon & Simpson, 2003; Cuban, 
2001; OECD, 2015; Sandholtz, 2001) or developing countries 
(Power, Gater, Grant, & Winters, 2014). When reviewing how 
decisions about technology use in education are made, 
it is striking how little is known about the effects of using 
technology on the quality of school education, and, more 
specifically, which particular uses of technology can result 
in better learning. Current developments regarding AI in 
education seem to be yet another instance of this well-
known phenomenon. This is a far from optimal state of 
affairs in poorer, resource-constrained developing contexts, 
where technology-based reforms are being pushed as the 
remedy for poor economic and social conditions. As the 
emphasis of many national initiatives in this context is 
usually put on granting access to technology as an intrinsic 
added-value, not much research has been conducted on 
the actual effects on learning.
There is a great need to sustain AI applications in 
education in ways that contribute to making schools 
better suited to the needs and activities of an AI-
empowered society. To do so effectively is not just 
a matter of financing, but also of monitoring and 
assessing what works in education, disseminating it 
in ways that are meaningful for teachers and suitable 
for scaling up. The pending issue of how AI use 
relates to educational performance can be explored 
through correlations and will be done even more in 
the future, but accompanying empirical research and 
experiments will have to be carried out so as to build 
a useful knowledge base. Rather than claiming that 
more research must be done, the conclusion is that 
research must be oriented differently.
It is well known that the adoption of an innovation 
essentially depends on end users perceptions of the 
advantages of applying a new strategy in relation 
to what they are currently using (Rogers, 2003). 
Applying this principle to the concrete example of 
technology in education, it might be expected that AI 
can support the design of new strategies to achieve 
the following: AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III

==== Page 33 ====
32
●●learn better, e.g. in a more personalised manner
●●learn more, i.e. achieve better outcomes from learning
●●learn different things, i.e. achieve learning goals that only 
technology can enable
Research should ascertain the strategies that will make this 
possible, the conditions in which they would be feasible 
and, ultimately, capable of being applied widely. The 
feasibility issue is extremely important for school learning 
because there may be many strategies that could prove to 
be incompatible with the current configuration of schools 
and even the teaching profession.
Education research, relating to technology and also in 
general, is complicated by the very nature of its subject 
matter and because contextual conditions limit its capacity 
to provide results from which generalisations can be drawn, 
thereby affecting its ability to contribute to the creation of 
universally valid theories. 
In education, there is an omnipresent problem of these 
so-called “ubiquitous interactions” , i.e. the sheer number 
of variables that increase the difficulty of isolating impacts 
or combining the results of different studies (Lederman, 
2003). As it is very difficult to isolate the influence of 
instructional strategies, any example relating to strategies 
to improve learning would serve student skills and abilities, 
socioeconomic status, motivation and the interaction 
between all these variables. 
Finally, there is also a need for a localised and decentralised 
examination of what is taking place in classrooms, 
particularly in the context of developing countries. 
Despite that the international agenda for education seems 
to suggest that AI may bring only benefits, there is an 
understanding of “local needs in local contexts” in order to 
find more broad strategies that could be supported by AI, 
replicated and also capable of being scaled up. There is no 
such thing as a universal technology-based solution for the 
current educational challenges of small developing states, 
which will not be the case with AI either. Well-oriented, local 
research can help recognise teachers as actors and not mere 
beneficiaries or users of well-packed technology solutions. 
No doubt, research has a role to play in investigating further 
into the role that technology solutions play in improving 
the quality of education, including developing countries. 
However, the right research questions must be asked. Given that educational phenomena are quite complex and multi-
faceted, the right questions are not about whether or not 
to use AI in education at all, but about which AI solutions 
can best suit the evolving learning requirements that 
each individual teacher has to manage in the classroom 
considering the reality of teaching conditions and 
opportunities. AI may shine and speak by itself, but unless 
it is properly embedded into sound teacher practices no 
educational effects will ever be seen.
Sixth challenge: ethics and transparency in 
data collection, use and dissemination
The ethical quandaries that come with the large-scale 
collection, production, analysis and dissemination of data 
about persons are another important consideration in 
the development of any concerted policy framework for 
AI. It must be noted, though, that seeking to understand 
the ethical implications of new technologies is by no 
means a new pursuit. Over the past 30 years, scholars and 
practitioners have sought to define some form of computer 
or information ethics that can be summarised as a question 
“What does the ethical use of technology look like?” (Floridi 
& Taddeo, 2016). However, the emergence of data science as 
the “latest phase of the information revolution” has shifted 
the discourse from information ethics to data ethics. Experts 
have forwarded the notion that “it is not the hardware that 
causes ethical problems… [I]t is what the hardware does 
with the software and the data that represents the source of 
our new difficulties” (Floridi & Taddeo, 2016). 
While AI has many positive applications, there are also 
societal and ethical concerns that should be addressed. 
Most people have at least read something about AI systems 
discriminating unfairly (ProPublica, 2016; Mic, 2016; Reuters, 
2018), taking life-impacting decisions in a non-transparent 
way (Cathy O’Neil, 2016), ready to take all our jobs 
(McKinsey Global Institute, 2017) and set to wrest control 
from humans (The Register, 2018). While there is no need to 
panic, all those concerns should nevertheless be considered 
when AI becomes massively applied in our societies and 
especially because the technology is improving quickly 
insofar as what is impossible today could be possible 
tomorrow. There is much work going on today that tries 
to come up with answers to such concerns (The European 
Commission, 2018; Dillon, 2018; Future of Humanity, 2018; 
Nuffield 2018).Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications

==== Page 34 ====
33
How are those AI concerns impacting education and 
especially digital education?
The following is an explanation on how these concerns may 
arise from an educational perspective.
●●Access to educational systems. Increasingly more 
educational institutions are using Machine Learning 
algorithms to accept or reject students. Two potential 
problems with this approach include:
 −Lack of explainability. Some ML techniques (e.g. Deep 
Learning) cannot easily explain why certain students 
are accepted while others are rejected. Should a 
rejected student have the right to understand those 
reasons? 
 −Unfair discrimination. When Machine Learning 
algorithms are trained on a certain data set (let’s say 
with students from a Western European country), 
then the result might not be directly applicable to 
students from other parts of the world. The training 
data set might be biased towards a certain group and 
therefore might discriminate unfairly when used on a 
different group. 
●●Recommendations to individual students. Like the 
previous point, if recommendations are “machine-
learned” based on a large set of previous data, the 
resulting recommendation might not be adequate for 
students from a different target group. Of course, if the 
recommendations are based on the individual learning 
history of the student, then this problem does not exist. 
●●Personal data concentration. In the case that -like in the 
digital world- educational platforms will be owned by a 
few major players in the world, two concerns arise
 −The concentration of personal (student and teacher) 
information, which might create a privacy risk. Large 
concentrations of personal data are an attractive 
target for cyber criminals.
 −Dominating platforms could forge data monopolies 
cornering the market on the ability to develop 
the best algorithms. This would give them a great 
degree of power and also increase the “explainability” 
concern when those “best” algorithms take the 
majority of educational decisions for student learning 
paths. ●●Liability. What happens if the automated decisions that 
guide students in their learning process turn out to be 
wrong? Who or what is responsible and accountable? The 
platform owner? The assigned teacher? The algorithm?
●●Impact on work. If AI systems automate increasingly more 
tasks that are normally performed by teachers, what 
happens to their jobs? AI systems can assess the student’s 
initial level, guide the student through the course based 
on collective intelligence combined with individual 
experience, automatically evaluate test results and even 
automate the student-teacher interaction using chatbots 
and NLP techniques. 
While those concerns need to be dealt with, we should not 
forget that without using AI for education, the outcome 
might be much worse. For one thing, AI can automate 
many mechanical, repetitive and boring tasks and this 
gives human teachers more time for more complex cases, 
leveraging the human interaction and make sure that more 
students become successful. Another positive aspect is that 
AI in Education can help scale up upskilling the workforce 
to become AI-ready. The workers whose jobs will be mostly 
affected by AI automation have an opportunity to get 
trained in skills needed to work alongside AI systems. 
Data privacy and security almost immediately come up 
in discussions regarding data ethics. The main challenge 
lies in being able to use personal data while ensuring that 
personally identifiable information and individual privacy 
preferences are protected. Installing necessary safeguards 
to prevent data theft is also critical. In education, this 
becomes even more challenging in the context of young 
learners, who, in legal terms, cannot yet provide express 
consent regarding the collection and use of their personal 
data.
Despite these important concerns, however, less than 30% 
of countries across all regions, excluding Europe, have 
comprehensive data protection laws in place (UNCTAD, 
2016). This is at least partly due to a lack of understanding 
of legal issues in data privacy among policymakers and law 
enforcement entities (UNCTAD, 2016). While the increase 
in global, regional and national frameworks concerning 
the protection of personal data certainly marks a growing 
understanding of how urgent the issue is, many of these 
frameworks still do not offer adequate protection to  AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III

==== Page 35 ====
34
citizens, both in policy and practice – particularly in 
developing countries (World Wide Web Foundation, 2017).
A 2016 study by the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD) reveals growing public distrust 
in systems that use and collect personal data. People are 
often uncertain about how their data will be used after 
giving their consent (UNCTAD, 2016). Governments should 
be particularly concerned about this growing distrust, 
especially given the generally increasing amount of data 
being collected by the public sector with the rise, for 
instance, of digital identification systems (World Wide 
Web Foundation, 2017). While it may be true that these 
digitisation efforts contribute to improved service delivery, 
concerns about potential data breaches and expanded 
government surveillance are nonetheless abound – and 
reasonably so. Given these concerns, legal frameworks 
therefore need to not only ensure that personal data 
are strongly protected against cyber-attacks; they must 
also reassure citizens that their data will not be used for 
unwarranted surveillance (World Wide Web Foundation, 
2017).
Governments must clearly communicate the scope and 
purpose of any data collection exercise: what sort of data 
will be collected, for what end the data will be used, and 
what consequences, intended or unintended, might occur 
within the data model. This not only increases citizen 
willingness to participate in the exercise, but it also allows 
citizens to weigh its benefits against its potential risks, 
thus allowing them to make more informed decisions 
about consenting to the use of their data. This is yet again 
grounded on the notion of data ‘prosumption’ . As sources of 
data, citizens must know why their data are being collected 
and be able to provide their consent in an informed 
manner. Furthermore, data collection should be anchored 
on the minimisation principle, i.e. to use the minimum 
amount of data required to achieve public benefit (World 
Wide Web Foundation, 2017).
The ethical issues discussed above convey a clear need 
for policy frameworks for the use of AI in education to 
incorporate an ethical orientation. The collection and use 
of individual data, even when used for improving learning, 
should always be anchored on express and informed 
consent, transparency, equity and fairness.Conclusions
To date, non-State actors, particularly the private sector, 
have principally led the response to AI in most countries. 
Tech giants, concentrated largely in the United States and 
China, for instance, are dominating the development of 
AI-enabled technologies. The rise of tech startups has also 
played a significant role in accelerating AI penetration. 
The rapid expansion of the EdTech industry is particularly 
notable, with AI-enabled learning technologies seeing 
increasing use in the classroom. 
Nonetheless, given the increasing ubiquity of AI in all 
aspects of human activity, more and more governments 
are beginning to actively implement concrete responses to 
AI. Some countries such as France, Australia, Estonia, South 
Korea, China and the United States have even released 
national AI strategies. In all such responses, education is an 
comprehensive element. However, in developing countries, 
these discussions are far off and limited by structural 
obstacles (basic technological infrastructure, high profile 
trained human resources in the field of AI, etc.). What are 
the possible paths to unfurling comprehensive strategies 
in developing countries to integrate AI in education? What 
is the international community’s role in helping bridge the 
digital gap between countries that is increasing their social 
divide?
This paper discussed these questions using examples and 
reflections on two main axes through which the education 
sector can leverage and adapt to AI: (1) using AI to 
generate real-time insights towards improving educational 
outcomes; and (2) rethinking and redeveloping educational 
programmes to make them more responsive to changes 
brought about by AI.
Some countries are taking advantage of the abundance 
of educational data that came with the advent of the 
Information Age. These countries and their respective 
educational institutions have begun harvesting insights 
from large masses of data to provide more personalised 
learning experiences. Of course, the elephant in the room 
begs noticing, i.e. the ethical implications of collecting and 
mining data from learners. As such, any concerted policy 
framework regarding the use of AI in education needs to 
address this issue; education systems must clearly delimit Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications

==== Page 36 ====
35
how learner data are used and be expressly based on 
learners’ consent to their data being used.
Education systems have also been actively reforming 
themselves to ensure that learners are acquiring the skills 
required by an AI-enabled future workplace. These reforms 
are happening across all educational sub-sectors, from the 
early years to continuing education. This lifelong learning 
orientation is of course appropriate in light of how fast AI 
technologies evolve. As such, this process of rethinking and 
redeveloping educational programmes in response to AI 
might need to become a regular and continuous process.
Since these reforms are taking place in light of an AI 
skills gap, there also needs to be more dialogue and 
collaboration between industry and the education sector. 
Bridging this skills gap is not the sole responsibility of the 
education sector; if educational institutions are to produce 
a workforce that satisfies the needs of industry, it would be 
in the best interests of industry to be more involved in the 
development and delivery of learning programmes.
UNESCO, given its leadership role in the SDG 4-Education 
2030 Agenda, has the mandate to coordinate with national 
governments and mobilise non-State actors, including 
NGOs and private enterprises. Furthermore, UNESCO’s 
extensive network of businesses, policymakers and 
practitioners working within the education sector, allows 
the Organisation to broker partnerships between learning 
solution providers. Moreover, the Organisation’s normative 
function allows it to define fundamental criteria and 
standards for the selection of appropriate AI technologies, 
in light of SDG 4 objectives. Moreover, UNESCO’s mandate 
makes the Organisation competent to provide technical 
assistance to countries seeking to move towards AI-enabled 
education systems.
Inevitably, AI is a field that spurs innovation and, by doing 
so, increases countries’ competitiveness. Countries will 
continue competing in such a rich and rapidly evolving 
arena. Yet, at least when it comes to education, there is also 
room for cooperation, whose basis is knowledge sharing. 
To promote the discussion and the relevance of adopting 
comprehensive perspectives of AI in education there is a 
need of more information about how countries are moving 
forward in this uncertain and constantly changing territory. 
The creation of an Observatory of AI in education to look 
at relevant initiatives of AI in education and to inform on national and international AI strategy plans may be seen 
as a platform for knowledge sharing and peer learning. 
This observatory (with strong emphasis on developing 
countries) will help increase the evidence-based dialogue 
among decision makers.
Indeed, there have been multiple responses to the changes 
accompanying the rise of AI in various areas of human 
activity as shown by the examples provided in this paper. 
However, these responses remain independent of a holistic 
and concerted policy framework for AI in education. 
Nonetheless, it is important to note that the initiatives 
presented are worthwhile starting measures that can guide 
the creation of a coherent policy framework. It is of course 
critical to engage different sectors in the development of 
such a framework, since the impact of AI sweeps across 
sectors. AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III

==== Page 37 ==== : 텍스트 추출 실패 또는 페이지가 비어 있음.

==== Page 38 ====
37
The future of EMIS    ANNEX   
ANNEX 
AI definition and 
related concepts

==== Page 39 ====
A reference book on the AI domain: Russell, Stuart J. &  Peter 
Norvig called Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach  
(2010) . Refer to the figure below for definitions based on 
different dimensions.
The definitions in the top quadrants address thought 
processes and reasoning while the ones in the bottom 
quadrants address behaviour. The definitions on the left 
measure success in terms of fidelity to human performance 
while the ones on the right measure success against an 
ideal performance measure, referred to as rationality. A 
system is rational if it does the “right thing” , given what 
it knows. A human-centred approach must be, at least 
partly, an empirical science, involving observations and 
hypotheses about human behaviour. A rationalist approach 
involves a combination of mathematics and engineering.
The full references in the image are:
 − Haugeland, John. Artificial intelligence: The very 
idea. MIT press, 1989.
 − Bellman, Richard. An introduction to artificial 
intelligence: Can computers think? Thomson 
Course Technology, 1978.
 − Charniak, Eugene. Introduction to artificial 
intelligence. Pearson Education India, 1985.
 − Winston Patrick. Henry. Artificial Intelligence (Third 
edition). Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1992. − Kurzweil, Ray, et al. The age of intelligent machines. 
Vol. 579. Cambridge, MA: MIT press, 1990.
 − Rich, Elaine, and Kevin Knight. Artificial intelligence. 
Tata McGraw-Hill, 1991.
 − Poole, David Lynton, Alan K. Mackworth, and Randy 
Goebel. Computational intelligence: a logical 
approach. Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1998.
 − Nilsson, Nils J., and Nils Johan Nilsson. Artificial 
intelligence: a new synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann, 
1998.
Different proposed definitions for:
Machine Learning
i)  The field of Machine Learning seeks to answer the 
question “How can we build computer systems that 
automatically improve with experience, and what 
are the fundamental laws that govern all learning 
processes?
 − Mitchell, Tom Michael. The discipline of machine 
learning. Vol. 9. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon 
University, School of Computer Science, Machine 
Learning Department, 2006.
ii)   Machine learning algorithms can figure out how to 
perform important tasks by generalising from examples.
Thinking Humanly
‘The exciting new effort to make computers think… 
machines with minds, in the full and literal sense. ’ 
(Haugeland, 1985)
‘[The automation of] activities that we associate with 
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, 
problem-solving, learning… ’ (Bellman, 1978)Thinking Rationally
‘The study of mental faculties through the use of 
computational models. ’ (Charniak & McDermott, 1985)
‘The study of the computations that make it possible 
to perceive, reason, and act. ’ (Winston, 1992)
Acting Humanly
‘The art of creating machines that perform functions 
that require intelligence when performed by people. ’ 
(Kurzweil, 1990)
‘The study of how to make computers do things at 
which, at the moment, people are better. ’ (Rich & 
Knight, 1991)Acting Rationally
‘Computational Intelligence is the study of the design 
of intelligent agents. ’ (Poole, et al., 1998)
‘AI… is concerned with intelligent behavior in 
artifacts. ’ (Nilsson, 1998)ANNEX       AI definition and related concepts

==== Page 40 ====
39 − Domingos, Pedro. A few useful things to know about 
machine learning. Communications of the ACM 
55.10 (2012): 78-87.
iii)  Machine Learning is the science (and art) of 
programming computers so they can learn from data.
 − Géron, Aurélien. Hands-on machine learning with 
Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow: concepts, tools, and 
techniques to build intelligent systems. O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2017.
iv) Machine learning tools are concerned with endowing 
programs with the ability to “learn” and adapt.
 − Shalev-Shwartz, Shai, and Shai Ben-
David. Understanding machine learning: From 
theory to algorithms. Cambridge university press, 
2014.
Deep Learning 
i)   Deep learning is a specific subfield of machine 
learning: a new take on learning representations from 
data that puts an emphasis on learning successive 
layers of increasingly meaningful representations. 
The “deep” in deep learning isn’t a reference to any 
kind of deeper understanding achieved by the 
approach; rather, it stands for this idea of successive 
layers of representations. The depth of the model is 
the amount of layers contributing to a data model. 
Perhaps more suitable names for the field could have 
been layered representations learning and hierarchical 
representations learning. Modern deep learning often 
involves tens or even hundreds of successive layers of 
representations, which are all learned automatically 
from exposure to training data. Meanwhile, other 
approaches to machine learning tend to focus on 
learning only one or two layers of representations of the 
data and sometimes referred to as shallow learning.
In deep learning, these layered representations are 
(nearly always) learned via models called neural networks, 
structured in literal layers stacked on top of each other.
 − Chollet, Francois. Deep learning with python. 
Manning Publications Co., 2017.
ii)   The true challenge to artificial intelligence proved to 
be solving tasks that are easy for people to perform but 
hard for people to describe formally, e.g. problems that 
we solve intuitively and feel automatic like recognising 
spoken words or faces in images.Deep learning allows computers to learn from experience 
and understand the world in terms of a hierarchy of 
concepts, with each concept defined in terms of its 
relation to simpler concepts. By gathering knowledge 
from experience, this approach avoids the need for 
human operators to formally specify all the knowledge 
that a computer needs. The hierarchy of concepts allows 
computers to learn complicated concepts by building them 
out of simpler ones. A graph showing how these concepts 
are built on top of each other would be deep (with many 
layers). For this reason, this approach to AI is referred to as 
sdeep learning.
 − Goodfellow, Ian, et al. Deep learning. Vol. 1. 
Cambridge: MIT press, 2016.
Big Data
i)   Big data is a combination of data-management 
technologies that have evolved over time. Big data lets 
organisations store, manage and process vast amounts 
of data at the right speed and at the right time to gain 
the right insights. The key to understanding big data is 
that data should be managed so that they can meet the 
business requirement that a given solution is designed 
to support.
 − Hurwitz, Judith S., et al. Big data for dummies. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013.
ii)  Big data is a blanket term for any collection of data sets 
so large or complex that it becomes difficult to process 
them using traditional data management techniques 
such as, for example, the RDBMS (relational database 
management systems).
The characteristics of big data are often referred to as the 
three Vs:
●●Volume — How much data are there?
●●Variety — How diverse are different types of data?
●●Velocity — At what speed are new data generated?
Often these characteristics are complemented with a 
fourth V, Veracity: How accurate are the data? These four 
properties make big data different from the data found in 
traditional data management tools.
 −Cielen, Davy, Arno Meysman, and Mohamed 
Ali. Introducing data science: big data, machine 
learning, and more, using Python tools. Manning 
Publications Co., 2016. AI definition and related concepts       ANNEX

==== Page 41 ====
40
Data Mining
i)  Data mining is the process of discovering interesting 
patterns and knowledge from large amounts of 
data. The data sources can include databases, data 
warehouses, the Web, other information repositories or 
data dynamically streamed into the system.
 − Han, Jiawei, Jian Pei, and Micheline Kamber. Data 
mining: concepts and techniques. Elsevier, 2011.
ii)   Data mining is the process of discovering insightful, 
interesting and novel patterns, and descriptive, 
understandable and predictive models from large-scale 
data
 − Zaki, Mohammed J., Wagner Meira Jr, and Wagner 
Meira. Data mining and analysis: fundamental 
concepts and algorithms. Cambridge University 
Press, 2014.
iii)  Data mining is the analysis of (often large) observational 
data sets to find unsuspected relationships and 
summarise the data in novel ways that are both 
understandable and useful to the data owner
 − Hand, David J., Heikki Mannila, and Padhraic 
Smyth. Principles of Data Mining. MIT press, 2001.
Data Analytics
i)   Big Data An alytics is a way of extracting value from 
these huge volumes of information, and it drives 
new market opportunities and maximises customer 
retention.
 − Zakir, Jasmine, Tom Seymour, and Kristi Berg. Big 
Data Analytics. Issues in Information Systems 16.2 
(2015).
ii)   Data analytics is the science of drawing insights from 
raw information sources. https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/d/data-analytics.aspiii)  Data analytics is the pursuit of extracting meaning 
from raw data using specialised computer systems. 
These systems transform, organise and model the data 
to draw conclusions and identify patterns. https://
www.informatica.com/ca/services-and-training/
glossary-of-terms/data-analytics-definition.
html#fbid=ETHvIPIs4QM
iv)  Data Analytics (DA) is the method of examining 
and analysing raw data so that conclusions 
can be drawn. Data analytics is a valuable part 
of science-centred industries in verifying or 
disproving current theories or models. The 
purpose of DA is to sort through data to arrive at 
a conclusion.  https://study.com/academy/lesson/
what-is-data-analytics-definition-tools.html
Learning Analytics
In this context, learning Analytics (LA) is an emerging 
discipline that pursues improvement in teaching and 
learning by a critical evaluation of raw data and the 
generation of patterns that characterise learner hab -
its, predict learner responses and provide timely feed -
back. Moreover, LA supports decision-making, tailors 
readable content, simplifies realistic assessments and 
provides personal supervision of learners’ progress. 
The goal is to scale the real-time exploitation of LA by 
learners, teachers/academics and educational com-
puter-based systems to enhance learners’ accomplish -
ments at course and individual levels.
 − Peña-Ayala, Alejandro, Learning Analytics: 
Fundaments, Applications, and Trends: A View 
of the Current State of the Art to Enhance 
e-Learning. Vol. 94. Springer, 2017.ANNEX       AI definition and related concepts

==== Page 42 ====
41REFERENCES

==== Page 43 ====
REFERENCES
42
Aker, J.C. & Mbiti, I.M. (2010). “Mobile phones and 
economic development in Africa”. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives , Volume 24, number 3, 
pp. 207-232. 
Antoninis, M. & Montoya, S. (2018). A Global 
Framework to Measure Digital Literacy. UIS, 
UNESCO. Available at: http://uis.unesco.org/
en/blog/global-framework-measure-digital-
literacy
Azoulay, A. (2018). ‘Making the Most of Artificial 
Intelligence’. The UNESCO Courier, issue no. 3 .
Bali, M. (2017). ‘Against the 3A’s of EdTech: AI, 
Analytics, and Adaptive Technologies in 
Education’. The Chronicle of Higher Education . 
Available at: https://www.chronicle.com/
blogs/profhacker/against-the-3as-of-edtech-
ai-analytics-and-adaptive-technologies-in-
education/64604
BID (2018). Algoritmolandia. Inteligencia artificial para 
una integración predictiva e inclusiva para América 
Latina. Editorial Planeta, Barcelona, Spain.
Campus France (n/d). ‘Intelligence artificielle: un plan 
national à 1,5 milliard d’euros’ . Available at: https://
www.campusfrance.org/fr/intelligence-artificielle-
plan-macron-Ai-for-humanity
Carrillo, P ., Onofa, M. & Ponce, J. (2010). Information 
Technology and Student Achievement: Evidence 
from a Randomised Experiment in Ecuador. IDB 
Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP-223.
Cathy O’Neil (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction: 
How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens 
Democracy
Chakroun, B. & Daelman, K. (2018). ‘Lifelong Learning 
Examined from a Rights-Based Perspective: The 
Road Not Yet Travelled’. Norrag Special Issue , 
no 1.
Chen, S. (2018). China’s schools are quietly using AI 
to mark students’ essays… but do the robots 
make the grade? Society,  South China Morning 
Post. Available at: https://www.scmp.com/
news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-
schools-are-quietly-using-ai-mark-students-
essays-do
China Daily (2018). ‘China Launches First University 
Program to Train International AI Talents’. 
Available at: http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/m/beijing/zhongguancun/2018-04/04/
content_35979394.htm
Clancey, W.J. (1987). Intelligent Tutoring Systems: 
A tutorial Survey. Department of Computer 
Science, Stanford University. Available at: 
https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/
a187066.pdf
Custer, S. et al. (2018). ‘Towards Data-Driven 
Education Systems: Insights into Using 
Information to Measure Results and Manage 
Change’. Brookings Center for Universal 
Education .
Department for Education (2013) Statutory Guidance 
– National Curriculum in England: Computing 
Programmes of Study . Available at: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/
national-curriculum-in-england-computing-
programmes-of-study
Dillon R. & Jason S. & Kate C. & Meredith Whittaker 
(2018). Algorithmic Impact Assessment: 
A practical framework for public agency 
accountability. Available at: https://
ainowinstitute.org/aiareport2018.pdf
Docebo (2016). Elearning market trends and forecast 
2017-2021. Toronto: Canada.
European Commission (2016) Developing 
Computational Thinking in Compulsory 
Education: Implications for Policy and Practice. 
Joint Research Center . Available at: http://
publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/
handle/JRC104188
European Commision (2018). DigComp into Action. 
Get inspired, make it happen. Joint Research 
Center . DOI: 10.2760/112945
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (2012). 
‘Support for Continuing Vocational Education 
and Training’. Available at: https://www.bmas.
de/EN/Our-Topics/Initial-and-Continuing-
Training/support-for-continuing-vocational-
education-and-training.html
Floridi, L. & Taddeo, M. (2016). ‘What is Data Ethics?’. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.
Future of Humanity Institute (2018). Center for the 
governance of AI. Available at: https://www.
fhi.ox.ac.uk/governance-ai-program/

==== Page 44 ====
43
REFERENCES  
Government of the People’s Republic of China (2017). 
Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Plan.
Government of the Republic of Korea (2016). Mid- to 
Long-Term Master Plan in Preparation for the 
Intelligent Information Society: Managing the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution . 
Graham, J. (2018). ‘The Game is On for PlayMaker’, 
Info-communications Media Development 
Authority . Available at: https://www.imda.
gov.sg/infocomm-and-media-news/buzz-
central/2018/10/the-game-is-on-for-playmaker
Haugeland, J. (1989). Artificial intelligence: The very idea. 
MIT Press.
He, Y . (2017). ‘How China is Preparing for an AI-
Powered Future’, Wilson Briefs. Available 
at: https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/
default/files/how_china_is_preparing_for_ai_
powered_future.pdf
Heintz, F., Mannila, L. & Färnqvist, T. (2016). ‘A Review 
of Models for Introducing Computational 
Thinking, Computer Science, and Computing 
in K-12 Education’. Frontiers in Education 
Conference.
Hilbert, M. (2015). Big Data for Development: 
A Review of Promises and Challenges. 
Development Policy Review, Volume 34, 
Issue1, pp. 135-174. Available at: https://doi.
org/10.1111/dpr.12142
HITSA (2015). ProgeTiger Programme 2015-2017 . 
Available at: https://www.hitsa.ee/it-
education/educational-programmes/progetiger
HTF Marketing Intelligence (2018). Artificial 
Intelligence Market in the US Education 
Sector to grow at a CAGR of 47.50% including 
key players: ALEKS, Blackboard, DreamBox 
Learning. HTF Market Report, New Jersey, USA.
ILO (2004). Recommendation 195 concerning Human 
Resources Development: Education, Training 
and Lifelong Learning. Available at: http://
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLE
XPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_
ID:312533’Infocomm Media Development Authority (2017). 
‘CODE@SG Movement – Developing 
Computational Thinking as a National 
Capability’. Available at: https://www.imda.
gov.sg/industry-development/programmes-
and-grants/startups/programmes/code-
sg-movement-developing-computational-
thinking-as-a-national-capability
International Society for Technology in Education and 
Computer Science Teachers Association (2011). 
Operational Definition of Computational Thinking 
for K-12 Education . 
ITU (2018). Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Development 
Series Module on AI . Ethics and Society. 
Switzerland.
Jing, M. (2018). China wants to bring artificial 
intelligence to its classrooms to boost its 
education system. Science & Research, South 
China Morning Post. Available at: https://
www.scmp.com/tech/science-research/
article/2115271/china-wants-bring-artificial-
intelligence-its-classrooms-boost
Laanpere, M., Pata, K., Normak, P . & Põldoja, H. 
(2014). Pedagogy-driven Design of Digital 
Learning Ecosystems. Computer Science 
and Information Systems, 11(1):419–442. 
DOI:10.2298/CSIS121204015L
Leadbeater, C. & Wong, A. (2010). Learning from 
the Extremes. Cisco Systems, Inc . Cisco Public 
Information.
Leading Countries of the World (n/d). Lessons 
from Using Advanced Learning Analysis in 
the Education Sector, p. 10. Available at: 
https://www.leadingcountries.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/19498_MSEdu_
LearningAnalytics12ppBrochure_V2.pdf
Luckin, R., Holmes, W., Griffiths, M. & Forcier, L.B. 
(2016). Intelligence Unleashed: an argument 
for Al in Education . London: Pearson.
Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, 
R., Roxburgh, C. & Byers, A.H. (2011). Big Data: 
The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition, 
and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute. 
Available at: http://www.mckinsey.com/
Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_
Innovation/Big_data_The_next_frontier_for_
innovation

==== Page 45 ====
REFERENCES
44
Mayer-Schönberger, V. & Cukier, K. (2014), Big Data: 
A revolution that will transform how we live, 
work, and think. Eamon Dolan/Mariner Books, 
USA.
Mayer-Schönberger, V. & Cukier, K. (2014). Learning 
with Big Data: the future of education . Boston/
New York: Eamon Dolan Book.
McCarthy, J., Minsky, M.L., Rochester, N. & Shannon, 
C.E. (2006). A proposal for the Dartmouth 
summer research project on artificial 
intelligence: August 31, 1955. Al Magazine , 
27(4), 12-14. http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.
org/10.1609/aimag.v27i4.1904
McKinsey Global Institute (2017). Jobs lost, jobs 
gained: What the future of work will mean for 
jobs, skills, and wages. Available at: https://
www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-
work/jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-future-of-
work-will-mean-for-jobs-skills-and-wages
Mic, Jack Smith IV, (2016). Available at: https://
mic.com/articles/156286/crime-prediction-
tool-pred-pol-only-amplifies-racially-biased-
policing-study-shows#.a6MI6I6xc
Ministerio de Educación Nacional de la República 
Argentina (2017). Programación y Robótica: 
Objetivos de Aprendizaje para la Educación 
Obligatoria. Plan Nacional Integral de 
Educación Digital . Available at: http://www.
bnm.me.gov.ar/giga1/documentos/EL005855.
pdf
Ministry of Education & Malaysia Digital Economy 
Corporation (2017), Digital Maker Playbook. 
Montebello, M. (2017). AI injected e-learning: the 
future of Online Education. Berlín, Germany: 
Springer.
Mutoni, D. (2017). A revolutionary connectivity: 
internet access as the ultimate human right 
and socioeconomic force. Washington DC: New 
Degree Press. 
My Digital Maker (n/d). ‘#mydigitalmaker 
Champion Schools’. Available at: https://
www.mydigitalmaker.com/programmes/
mydigitalmaker-champion-schools
Nuffield Foundation (2018). Ada Lovelace Institute. 
Available at: https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.
org/Nye, B.D. (2015). Intelligent Tutoring Systems by and 
for the Developing World: a review of trends 
and approaches for Educational Technology 
in a Global Context. International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education, Volume 25, 
Issue 2, pp. 177-203.
Orr, K. (1998). ‘Data Quality and Systems’, 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 41, no. 2.
Perera, M. & Aboal, D. (2018). The impact of a 
Mathematics Computer-Assisted Learning 
Platform on Students’ Mathematics Test 
Scores. Fundación CEIBAL. Available at: 
https://digital.fundacionceibal.edu.uy/jspui/
handle/123456789/225
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana - Cali (2016). 
Competencias y Estándares TIC desde la 
dimensión pedagógica: una perspectiva 
desde los niveles de apropiación de las TIC 
en la práctica educativa docente. UNESCO. 
Available at: http://www.unesco.org/new/
fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/FIELD/Santiago/pdf/
Competencias-estandares-TIC.pdf
Prinsloo, P . (2017). Guidelines on the Ethical Use of 
Student Data: A Draft Narrative Framework .
ProPublica (2016). Machine Bias. Available at: https://
www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-
risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
Reuters, 2018. Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool 
that showed bias against women
Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight/
amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-
tool-that-showed-bias-against-women-
idUSKCN1MK08G
Rigby, C. (2016). ‘How Software that Learns as It 
Teaches is Upgrading Brazilian Education’ . 
The Guardian. Available at: https://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/10/
geekie-educational-software-brazil-machine-
learning
Roll, I. & Wylie, R. (2016). Evolution and Revolution 
in Artificial Intelligence in Education. 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Education, Volume 26, Issue 2, pp. 582-599.

==== Page 46 ====
Rundle, M. (2015). ‘How Geekie’s Adaptive Education 
Shattered ‘Centuries’ of Pain in Brazil’ , Wired. 
Available at: https://www.wired.co.uk/arti cle/
claudio-sassaki-wired-2015 
Russel, S. & Norvig, P . (2010). Artificial Intelligence: 
A modern approach. Pearson Education, Inc. 
New Jersey, USA. 
Samuel, A. L. (1959). Some studies in machine 
learning using the game of checkers. IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, 3(3), 
210-229.
Schittek Janda, M., Mattheos, N., C. Lyon, H & 
Attström, R. (2001). Computer assisted 
learning. A Review. European journal of dental 
education: official journal of the Association 
for Dental Education in Europe. DOI: 5. 93-100. 
10.1034/j.1600-0579.200
Sharma, Y . (2018). ‘Boost to university-industry AI 
research collaboration’. University World News. 
Available at: http://www.universityworldnews.
com/article.php?story=20181012084845359
Singh, K. (2016). ‘Computational Thinking Comes to 
the Fore in Malaysian Schools’. Digital News 
Asia. Available at: https://www.digitalnewsasia.
com/digital-economy/computational-thinking-
come-fore-malaysian-schools
SkillsFuture (n/d), http://www.skillsfuture.sg/Credit. 
Accessed 15 November 2018.
Stirling, R., Miller, H. & Martinho-Truswell, E. 
(n/d). Government AI Readiness Index. 
Oxford Insights.  Available at: https://www.
oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readiness-
index/
Sullivan, A. & Bers, M.U. (2017). ‘Dancing Robots: 
Integrating Art, Music, and Robotics in 
Singapore’s Early Childhood Centers’. 
International Journal of Technology and Design 
Education , vol. 1, no. 22.
Sunkel, G. & Trucco, D. (2012). Las tecnologías 
digitales frente a los desafíos de una educación 
inclusiva en América Latina. Algunos casos de 
buenas prácticas. Santiago de Chile: CEPAL. 
Available at: https://repositorio.cepal.org/
bitstream/handle/11362/35386/S2012809_
es.pdfThe Economist Intelligence Unit (2018). The 
Automation Readiness Index: Who Is Ready for 
the Coming Wave of Automation?  Available at: 
https://www.automationreadiness.eiu.com/
The European Commission (2018). High-Level Expert 
Group on Artificial Intelligence. Draft Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI. Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/system/
files/ged/ai_hleg_draft_ethics_guidelines_18_
december.pdf
The Register (2018). US gov quizzes AI experts about 
when the machines will take over.Available at: 
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/06/26/
congres_ai_hearing/
The Royal Society (2012) Shut Down or Restart? The 
Way Forward for Computing in UK Schools . 
Available at: https://royalsociety.org/~/media/
education/computing-in-schools/2012-01-12-
computing-in-schools.pdf
UIS (2018). ‘A Global Framework for Reference 
on Digital Literacy Skills for Indicator 4.4.2.’ 
Information Paper, no. 51.
UIS (2018). Concept Note: The Investment Case for 
SDG 4 Data. 
UNCTAD (2016). Data Protection Regulations and 
International Data Flows: Implications for 
Trade and Development.
UNESCO (2018). ‘Re-orienting Education 
Management Information Systems towards 
Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and 
Lifelong Learning’. UNESCO Working Papers on 
Education Policy , no. 5. 
UNESCO (n/d). What is the ICT CFT? UNESCO 
Communication and Information. Available 
at: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
communication-and-information/access-to-
knowledge/unesco-ict-competency-framework-
for-teachers/what-is-the-ict-cft/  
UNESCO & UNHCR (2016). ‘No More Excuses: Provide 
Education to All Forcibly Displaced People’. 
Global Education Monitoring Report: Policy 
Paper no. 26.
UNICEF (2016). Technical Guidance: Guide for 
Including Disability in Education Management 
Information Systems. 

==== Page 47 ====
REFERENCES
46
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational 
Technology (2012). Enhancing Teaching and 
Learning Through Educational Data Mining and 
Learning Analytics: An Issue Brief. Washington, 
D.C.
Villani, C. (2018). Donner un sens à l’intelligence 
artificielle: pour une stratégie nationale 
et européenne . Available at: https://www.
aiforhumanity.fr/pdfs/9782111457089_
Rapport_Villani_accessible.pdf
Williamson, B. (2015). ‘Governing Software: 
Networks, Databases, and Algorithmic Power 
in the Digital Governance of Public Education’. 
Learning, Media and Technology , vol. 40, no. 1, 
pp. 83-105.
Winthrop, R., Barton, A. & McGivney, E. (2018). 
Leapfrogging Inequality: Remaking Education 
to Help Young People Thrive. Brookings 
Institution Press.
WISE (n/d). ‘Geekie: Personalized Learning for All’. 
WISE Initiative . Available at: https://www.
wise-qatar.org/geekie-personalized-learning-
all-brazilWoolf, B. P . et al. (2013). ‘AI Grand Challenges for 
Education’, AI Magazine, Special Issue on 
Intelligent Learning Technologies. Version 10. 
XPrize Global Learning (n/d). Empowering children to 
take control of their own learning. Available at: 
https://www.xprize.org/prizes/global-learning
XPrize Global Learning (n/d). RoboTutor. Available at: 
https://www.xprize.org/prizes/global-learning/
teams/robotutor
Yadav, A. et al. (2016). ‘Computational Thinking as 
an Emerging Competence Domain’, in M. 
Mulder (ed.), Competence-Based Vocational 
and Professional Education: Bridging the 
Worlds of Work and Education . Cham, Springer 
International Publishing AG, pp. 1051-1067.
Zhong, Y . (2006). A Cognitive Approach to Artificial 
Intelligence Research. Interna  tional Conference 
on Cognitive Informatics. http://doi.
org/10.1109/COGINF.2006.365682

==== Page 48 ====
Education 
Sector
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
Sustainable 
Development
GoalsArtificial Intelligence in Education:
Challenges and Opportunities for 
Sustainable Development
Artificial Intelligence is a booming technological domain capable of altering every aspect 
of our social interactions. In education, AI has begun producing new teaching and learning 
solutions that are now undergoing testing in different contexts. This working paper, written 
for education policymakers, anticipates the extent to which AI affects the education sector 
to allow for informed and appropriate policy responses. This paper gathers examples 
of the introduction of AI in education worldwide, particularly in developing countries,  
discussions in the context of the 2019 Mobile Learning Week and beyond, as part of the 
multiple ways to accomplish Sustainable Development Goal 4, which strives for equitable, 
quality education for all.
First, this paper analyses how AI can be used to improve learning outcomes, presenting 
examples of how AI technology can help education systems use data to improve 
educational equity and quality in the developing world. Next, the paper explores the 
different means by which governments and educational institutions are rethinking and 
reworking educational programmes to prepare learners for the increasing presence of 
AI in all aspects of human activity. The paper then addresses the challenges and policy 
implications that should be part of the global and local conversations regarding the 
possibilities and risks of introducing AI in education and preparing students for an AI-
powered context.
Finally, this paper reflects on future directions for AI in education, ending with an open 
invitation to create new discussions around the uses, possibilities and risks of AI in 
education for sustainable development.

