==== Page 1 ====
 1 Artificial intelligence for decision making in the era of Big Data – evolution, 
challenges and research agenda  
(An opinion  paper for International Journal of Information Management)  
 
Yanqing Duan*  
University of Bedfordshire  
Yanqing.duan@beds.ac.uk 
 
John S. Edwards  
Aston University  
j.s.edwards@aston.ac.uk  
 
Yogesh K Dwivedi  
School of Management, Swansea University  
y.k.dwivedi@swansea.ac.uk  
 
*- corresponding author  
 
Abstract  
Artificial intelligence (AI) has be en in existence for over six decades and has experienced AI 
winters and springs. The rise of super computing power and Big Data technologies appear to 
have empowered AI in recent years. The new generation of AI is rapidly expanding and has again become an attractive topic for research. This paper aims to identify the challenges 
associated with the use and impact of revitalised AI based systems for decision making and 
offer a set of research propositions for information systems (IS) researchers. The paper fi rst 
provides a view of the history of AI through the relevant papers published in the International Journal of Information Management (IJIM). It then discusses AI for decision making in general and the specific issues regarding the interaction and integrat ion of AI to support or 
replace human decision makers in particular. To advance research on the use of AI for decision making in the era of Big Data, the paper offers twelve research propositions for IS researchers in terms of conceptual and theoretical development, AI technology -human 
interaction, and AI implementation.  
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence; AI; Big Data; Cognitive Computing; Decision Making; 
Expert System; Machine Learning; Recommender System; Research Agenda 

==== Page 2 ====
 2 1. Introduction 
The rise of Artificial Intelligence in recent years has attracted numerous controversial 
remarks. For example, CEO of IBM, Ginni Rometty, argues that AI technologies  are 
“technologies to  augment human intelligence …By and large we see a world where this is a 
partnership between man and machine and this is in fact going to make us better and allow us 
to do what the human condition is best able to do.”1 . Stephen Hawking, on the other hand, 
remarked that “the development of full artificial intelligence could s pell the end of the human 
race” (Cellan -Jones, 2014) , and Bill Gates has also said that humans should be worried about 
the threat posed by Artificial Intelligence (Rawlinson, 2015) . 
These very different views from leading experts call for further investigation on how human 
beings can co -exist with AI and how to minimise the negative impact of the technology.  
There is no commonly accepted definition of AI. It  is normally referred to  as the ability of a 
machine to learn from experience, adjust to new inputs and perform human- like tasks . The 
terms AI and AI systems were first introduced in the 1950s . Since then, AI has experienced 
its ups (“AI springs”) and downs (“AI winters”). With the rapid advancement of Big Data 
technologies, e.g. improved computing storage capability and super -fast speed of data 
process ing machines, AI is being revitalised with the availability and power of Big Data.  
Therefore, after years of hope and promise, AI is gaining meaningful traction within top 
corporations (Bean, 2018) . It is reported that the take -up of AI -enabled systems in 
organisations is expanding rapidly (Miller, 2018a)  and AI is transforming business 
(Daugherty & Wilson, 2018) . The new wave of AI systems has improved an organisation’s 
ability to use data to make predictions and has substantially reduced the cost o f making 
predictions (Agrawal, Gans, & Goldf arb, 2018) . According to Gartner’s 2018 technology 
trend survey (Panetta, 2018) , AI is listed as the No. 1 strategic technology. The ability to use 
AI to enhance decision making, reinvent business models and ecosystems, and remake the customer experience will drive the payoff for digital initiatives through 2025. The  Gartner 
survey showed that 59% of organizations are st ill gathering information to build their AI 
strategies, while the remainder have already made progress in piloting or adopting AI solutions (Panetta, 2018) . 
Organisations that are engaged in using the new generation of AI systems “will find that AI faces the usual obstacles to progress of any unproven and unfamiliar technology,” says Whit Andrews, Vice President and disting uished analyst at Gartner (Pettey, 2018) . “However, 
early AI projects offer valuable lessons and perspectives for enterprise architecture and technology innovation leaders embarking on pilots and more formal AI efforts.” (Pettey, 2018) . 
Overall, there are many white papers and reports from leading technology providers and articles in top management magazines, e.g. Harva rd Business Review  and MIT Sloan 
Management Review , that provide corporates with strategic and practical guidelines on how 
to benefit from AI. However, it appears that there are very limited academic research papers 
focusing on understanding the use and im pact of the new generation of AI from the 
technology application perspective with rigorous academic investigation and theorisation. 
                                                           
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNEQsl1 -iZs 

==== Page 3 ====
 3 Moreover, much current academic writing seems ignorant of what happened from 1970 to 
2000 despite the availability of extens ive publications. 
This research position paper aims to understand the challenges associated with the use and impact of the new generation of AI based systems for decision making and identify research opportunities for information systems (IS) researchers. The paper first provides a view of the history of AI through the relevant papers published in the International Journal of Information Management (IJIM) . It then discusses AI for decision making in general and the 
specific issues regarding the interaction and integration of AI techniques to support or replace human decision makers in particular. To advance research on the use of AI for decision 
making in the era of Big Data, the paper offers twelve research propositions for IS 
researchers in terms of concep tual and theoretical development, AI technology -human 
interaction, and AI implementation.  
2. A view of the history of AI through IJIM papers  
In this section, we present an historical perspective on the history and development of AI based on a review of relevant papers published in the International Journal of Information Management (IJIM) , including those under its former title of Social Science Information 
Studies (SSIS) . To achieve this, we carried out full -text searches on the SSIS/IJIM  archive for 
the terms artificial intelligence  and intelligent, plus  the list of 25 more specific terms related 
to AI shown in Table 1. To develop that list, we began with selected terms from the list of categories of papers at AI conferences in Cantu -Ortiz (2014). We excluded those not specific 
to AI such as bioinformatics  and planning and scheduling, and added a few other terms such 
as recommender system  that emerged in the course of our search as alternative keywords in 
relevant papers.  
Table 1 Terms used in the full -text search of the SSIS/IJIM archive  
1. case-based reasoning  
2. computer vision 
3. cognitive computing 
4. cognitive science  
5. data mining  
6. data science  
7. expert system  
8. fuzzy linguistic modeling  
9. fuzzy logic  
10. genetic algorithm  
11. image recognition  
12. k-means  
13. knowledge -based system  14. logic programming  
15. machine learning  
16. machine vision 
17. natural language processing 
18. neural network  
19. pattern recognition  
20. recommendation system  
21. recommender system  
22. semantic network  
23. speech recognition  
24. support vector machine/SVM  
25. text mining  
 
A preliminary screening removed papers where the term intelligent had nothing to do with AI, 
and papers where the term that had been found appeared only in a cited reference and the 
citation did not refer to any AI aspect. This gave a total of 123 SSIS/IJI M papers. We 
categorised these into those in which AI was a substantive part of the paper (52 in total) and those in which AI was mentioned only in passing (71). The latter category comprised papers 

==== Page 4 ====
 4 ranging from those mentioning an AI system as just one ty pe of system in a list of those 
systems an organization does or might use, or as one example system in the literature review 
part of a paper, to those in which one of the search terms simply appeared in an author affiliation or as a research interest. We b elieved that even the articles from second category 
were worth including in the counts, both as an indication of the visibility of the subject, and because even a single sentence can be of great interest, as we will see shortly.  
Fig. 1 shows the breakdown of the 52 substantive AI papers and the other 71 that mention AI in passing, in four -year periods from the first mention of AI in passing, by Seeger (1983)  
when discussing the future of information professions, up to the end of 2018. 
051015202530354045
1983 to 1986 1987 to 1990 1991 to 1994 1995 to 1998 1999 to 2002 2003 to 2006 2007 to 2010 2011 to 2014 2015 to 2018
YearsNumber of papersIn passing
Substantive
 
Fig. 1. AI papers published in SSIS/IJIM by year  
 
As may be seen, the number of papers published remained fairly constant from 1983 to 2010, 
at roughly two papers per year (57 papers in 28 years). Fewer than half of these were 
substantive AI papers. However, the period 2011- 2014 showed a considerable increase, to 24 
papers against the previous average of 8.1, and the most recent period, 2015- 2018, shows a 
larger increase still, to 42 papers. Even more significantly, 25 of those 42 were substantive AI 
papers, the same number as had appeared from 1983 to 2013 inclusive. This is a very clear indication of the rapid recent growth in research in AI in the era of Big Data. 
We will now look in more detail at the techniques that make the AI systems work, the 
domains to which they have been applied, and the changing terminology used to describe them. In order to do this, we look most closely at the 52 substantive papers, though we triangul ate those findings with the other IJIM papers and the wider literature. Table 2 
categorizes these 52 according to the type of paper; note that six papers fitted into two categories. For techniques, we focus especially on the 22 of the 52 papers that concentrate on a specific example of an AI system (21 pilot studies and one fielded application), as these 
give the most precise evidence on the techniques actually in use. While other types of paper 

==== Page 5 ====
 5 may mention AI techniques, especially review papers, it is oft en not clear whether those other 
papers are describing systems that had been developed, were being developed, or simply that 
might possibly exist someday.  
Table 2. Substantive AI papers categorized by type  
Type of paper  Number  
Conceptual paper  12 
Theoretical development  3 
Pilot study/proof of concept  21 
Fielded application  1 
Survey  7 
Management/organizational issues  3 
Review  11 
 
2.1. Techniques  
In this section we consider the techniques that comprise the forms of knowledge 
representation and/or the algorithms used to build the AI systems described. We only include 
those techniques mentioned and discussed by name. It is important to note that this does not necessarily measure how widely th ey are used, even in IJIM’s research domain, as some 
papers use terms like knowledge -based system or machine learning without describing the 
specific techniques employed.  
2.1.1. Rule-based inference  
Despite that caveat, the most common technique used in the AI sy stems reported is definitely 
rule-based inference. The very first system described in detail in IJIM  (Lu & Mooney, 1989)  
was a rule- based expert system. In addition, the first mention in IJIM of an AI system in 
practical everyday use was also a rule- based system. This came in a paper by Bowonder and 
Miyake (1992) , discussing information management in Japan’s Nippon Steel Corporation. 
They noted tha t Nippon Steel had been the first in the world to use an AI system for blast 
furnace control (see Yui, Watanabe, Amano, Takarabe, & Nakamori, 1989) . 
Nearly all of the AI systems mentioned up to year 2000 use rule -based inference, and this 
element of AI techniques remains with us t oday; three of the specific AI systems in articles 
from 2017 and 2018 (Araujo & Pestana, 2017; Kao et al., 2017; Rekik, Kallel, Casillas, & Alimi, 2018)  are also rule- based.  
The main change over time is that originally the rules were usually elicited from human experts by a human knowledge engineer, whereas now they are more likely to have been developed using an automated method such as CART (Classification and Regression Tre es) 
(Kao et al., 2017)  or association rule mining (Rekik et al., 2018) . 

==== Page 6 ====
 6 2.1.2. Semantic linguistic analysis  
Almost as pervasive are the various methods of semantic linguistic analysis. The use of maps 
to help understand natural language in documents for infor mation retrieval was one of the 
techniques identified in a review by Wormell (1984) . These soon afterwards became known 
as semantic networks. More recent systems such as those by Tadeusiewicz, Ogiela, and 
Ogiela (2008)  for medical diagnosis and Ogiela and Ogiela (2014)  for analysing financial 
data use versions of this approach, sometimes with theoretical extensions such as the  latent 
semantic analysis used by Ahmad and Laroche (2017) . 
2.1.3. Bayesian networks  
Bayesian networks are based on probabilistic inference, with the conditional probabilities associated with each path between nodes in the network adapting in the light of new data, thus encompassing learning. Specific use of this term is relatively recent, with papers such as Zhao, Tang, Darlington, Austin, and Culley (2008)  on evaluat ing information in engineering 
documents and Ramírez -Noriega, Juárez -Ramírez, and Martínez -Ramírez (2017)  using a 
Bayesian network as the design for an intelligent tutoring system. However, it is likely that some of the unspecified inference methods in earl ier expert systems or knowledge -based 
systems papers used this approach.  
2.1.4. Similarity measures  
The concept of identifying examples that are similar or close to a new observation is at the 
heart of case- based reasoning, which has been an active area for most of the period (Tseng, 
Chen, Hu, & Lin, 2017; Zantout & Marir, 1999) . Similarity measures are the metrics for 
similarity/closen ess. Bouakkaz, Ouinten, Loudcher, and St rekalova (2017)  compare several 
similarity measures for textual analysis, and find that the k -means approach produced the best 
results in their experiment.  The k -means approach also has the advantage of being 
conceptually very simple. It divides a set o f observations into a predetermined number  of 
clusters (k)  by an iterative process . First a random set of k points are chosen to be  the centres 
of the clusters, then each observation is assigned to its closest centre. Once all observations have been  clust ered, the mean point of each cluster is recalculated and these become the new 
set of cluster centres. The process is repeated until no observation changes cluster.  
Support vector machines (Ragini, Anand, & Bhaskar, 2018)  are another commonly used 
similarity measure approach; in this case examples are categorized by maximizing the width 
of the gaps between the clusters . 
2.1.5. Neural networks  
Neural networks, more precisely artificial neural networks (ANN), are intended to mimic the way the human brain works, and are at the forefront of the current expansion in AI even though applications can be found as far back as the 1980s (Ford, 1989) . Inte restingly, few 
papers in IJIM address specific applications of ANN, exceptions including Liébana-
Cabanillas, Marinković, and Kalinić (2017); Mostafa and El -Masry (2013) . ANN are more 
likely to be discussed in general summary and review articles (Frias -Martinez, Magoulas, 

==== Page 7 ====
 7 Chen, & Macredie, 2006; Gottschalk, Filstad, Glomseth, & Solli -Sæther, 2011; Yaqoob et al., 
2016) .  
2.1.6. Other techniques  
Techniques discussed in IJIM  that have also been commonly used elsewhere include frame -
based representation (Dugdale, 1996) , and genet ic algorithms (Lebib, Mellah, & Drias, 2017) . 
Frames allow richer forms of knowled ge representation than rules, but the inferencing 
process is more complex, so less straightforward and harder to understand. Genetic 
algorithms mimic the process of Darwinian natural selection, with a population of solutions 
undergoing processes equivalent  to inheritance, reproduction, mutation, and cross -over, until 
the best solution emerges. Neural networks and genetic algorithms are both examples of techniques inspired by biology: a review of those and others may be found in Kar (2016) .  
2.2. Domains  
Some of the domains in which AI systems were being applied, or at least considered, have 
featured throughout the period. This is most likely  because of the potential economic rewards 
from a successful system. These include: manufacturing, such as the 1992 Nippon Steel 
example discussed above and clothes manufacturing (Ying, Pee, & Jia, 2018) ; health care, 
from Thornett (2001)  looking at computer support for general practice to Kao et al. (2017)  on 
risk factors for cardiac arrest survival; and legal practice (du Plessis & du Toit, 2006) . 
Recommender/recommendation systems have also been common throughout the period, but 
with a change in emphasis. Earlier systems tended to tackle major investments such as  
property (Lu & Mooney, 1989)  or stocks and shares (Dugdale, 1996) , but the ir practical use 
was limited. Systems addressing higher -volume but lower -value decisions are now in 
everyday use, and central to the success of organizations such as Amazon and Netflix, who have capitalized on the Big Data that they acquire. IJIM papers si milarly now cover topics 
such as which books to read (Kim, Kim, Oh, & Ryu, 2010) , which videos t o watch (Choi, Oh, 
Kim, & Ryu, 2016)  or which kitchen appliances to purchase (Ahmad & Laroche, 2017) . 
Often these are offering technical improvements in the methods used. 
As is fitting given the scope of SSIS/IJIM, intelligent information retrieval has been a concern 
since the earliest days (Wormell, 1984) . Improvements in natural language understanding 
have facilitated progress here, wh ich continues with articles such as those by Chung (2014)  
and Bouakkaz et al. (2017) . 
Some domains reflect changes in the wider world and its technology, such as the appearance of papers on website quality (Heradio, Cabrerizo, Fernández -Amorós, Herrera, & Herrera -
Viedma, 2013; Rekik et al., 2018) . 
Other domains reflect the technology finally reaching the tipping point for practical usefulness, such as the work of Araujo and Pestana (2017)  on employee health and well -
being, and of Ragini et al. (2018)  on disaster response and recovery.  
In a different direction, Mostafa and El -Masry (2013)  is the first IJIM  paper to use AI as a 
research tool, with various data mining methods being used to analyse a survey about e -

==== Page 8 ====
 8 government in Egypt. Other pap ers using AI to analyse results include (Liébana -Cabanillas et 
al., 2017; Rekik et al., 2018) . 
Nevertheless, some domains remain at the “potential” level.  As far back as 1997, Martinsons 
(1997)  was discussing the potential for using knowledge -based systems in human resource 
management, and commenting that it “rema ins unrealized” (p.35). Many systems have been 
developed and indeed implemented for job matching and screening applications, but there 
continues to be scepticism about their use. This extends to the latest development; the use of chatbots to respond to que ries from applicants, for example by L’Oréal (Thibodeau, 2019) ; 
and use of AI based interviews for London City j obs particularly in financial sectors. This is 
posing a new challenge to job appli cants as training for AI -based interviews is costing them 
about £9k (Blunden, 2018) . 
2.3. Terminology  
We can identify three overlapping eras in the IJIM literature. Broadly speaking, the central 
terms in each era are r espectively expert systems, knowledge -based systems, and a 
combination of artificial intelligence/machine learning/data mining.  
2.3.1. Expert systems rule! (Up to 2000)  
The three systems described in IJIM  in detail up to 2000 (Dhaliwal & Tung, 2000; Dugdale, 
1996; Lu & Mooney, 1989)  were all expert systems. Examining the other SSIS/IJIM  papers 
over that period confirms that AI was more or less synonymous with expert systems.  
Since 2000, the term expert system has become far less important as a label. It may still be a 
phrase mentioned in the text, but it does not appear in IJIM  paper titles, abstracts or keywords.  
2.3.2. Knowledge is power -  but only in business and management? (1983 onwards)  
This era overlaps both of the others. The term knowledge -based system (KBS) began to 
become popular with the launch of the UK Government’s Alvey Programme of IT research in 
1982/3, and was used in early SSIS  papers (Ingwersen, 1984a, 1984b; Nicholas & Harman, 
1985) . Some saw expert systems as a subset of KBS; others regarded the two terms as 
equivalent.  
The start of the 21st century saw the term expert systems decline in popul arity in business 
and management in favour of knowledge -based systems. There were three reasons for this:  
1. The bad reputation that some expert systems projects achieved, meaning that “expert 
system” was not an attractive label.  
2. An increasing realization tha t the system often served to assist or support a human 
decision -maker, rather than as an expert telling the human what to do.  
3. A shift in emphasis from “the expert” to “the knowledge”, with the growth in popularity of knowledge management in the late 1990s. 
 
Ironically, systems using the rule -based technology common in early expert systems 
proliferated in the 21st century. They were simply embedded in other systems, for example as 

==== Page 9 ====
 9 “wizards” in software packages, and now as an engine powering recommendations , so that 
the user would not be confronted with the “cursed” term.  
KBS was the most common term in use for an AI system in IJIM during the 2000s, and many 
business/management academics and practitioners still regard it as the most appropriate term 
to use. A s Bimba et al. (2016, p.857)  put it, “A system which represents knowledge is 
normally referred to as a knowledge based system.” Interestingly, this only seems to be true in business and management. In other domains, especially science and engineering, expert system is still the more common term. Web Of Science lists more than 10,000 publications 
since the year 2000 that include the term expert system(s) , as opposed to fewer than 2,000 
including knowledge -based system(s) . 
2.3.3. The rise of the intelligent machine -  and data mining (during the 2010s)  
During the 2010s, the term AI has come back into popularity as the overall label. This may in part be the result of the fact that deep learning systems such as multi -layer neural networks do 
not produce explanations that humans can understand easi ly, or indeed at all. Arguably, 
therefore, these systems do not represent knowledge as in the definition in the previous subsection. They certainly do not represent human knowledge.  
Within AI, the terms machine learning and data mining are also in much mor e common use 
nowadays. In part, this reflects technological developments. Machine learning used to be seen as highly -technical  jargon , but the success of machine learning systems widely reported in 
news stories such as the AlphaGo system defeating one of t he best human players of the 
game Go  (Koch, 2016)  and IB M’s Watson system beating the human champions on the US 
TV quiz show “Jeopardy” (Gabbatt, 2011)  has done much to improve its image. Data mining 
is a newer term than any of the others. Its original mean ing in the field of economics was 
trying various models to see which fitted the data best. The more general usage did not become widespread until the mid -1990s. 
More confusingly, these changes also overlap with another area of terminological change, relati ng to the rise of the term analytics. Some authors now regard machine learning as a form 
of analytics (for example Lismont, Vanthienen, Baesens, & Lemahieu, 2017) , while some of 
the techniques discussed in section 2.1 are now referred to as data mining when in the 1990s they would simply have been called statistical techniques.  
It can be argued that there are subtle differences between expert systems, knowledge -based 
systems and AI systems, but some of the changes in terminology are surely no more than simply “fashion”. For example, what were  often referred to in the 1980s or 1990s as 
production rules are now called business rules or just rules. Similarly, Kao et al. (2017)  refer 
to the CART decision tree approach used to develop their rules as a data mining technique, whereas in the 1990s it would have been referred to as a rule induction algorithm. 
3. An overview of using AI for decision making  
The promises made to develop machines capable of outperforming humans i n several tasks in 
a few years and the real accomplishments achieved have been reported widely (McCorduck, 
2004). Despite what can now be thought of as excessively optimistic promises for AI 

==== Page 10 ====
 10 outcomes during the 1950s and 1960s, steady progress has been sus tained over the last four 
decades in the main areas of AI (Cantu -Ortiz, 2014) . 
Using AI for decision making has been one of the most important applications in AI history. 
The roles of AI have been classified in various way s. Broadly speaking, AI systems can be 
used either to support/assist the human decision makers, or to replace them (Edwards, Duan, & Robins, 2000) . More specifically, the early publication by Bader, Edwards, Harris -Jones, 
and Hannaford (1988)  identified six roles for knowledge based systems: Assistant, critic, 
second opinion, expert consultant, tutor, and automaton. 
Edwards et al. (2000)  conducted  an analysis of expert systems for business decision making 
at different levels and in different roles based on experiments carried out two decades ago. 
The roles of AI (e.g. expert systems) are examined using the three organisational decision making level s, i.e. strategic, tactical and operational decisions. Their findings show that:  
• Expert systems in a replacement role are effective at the operational and tactical decision levels, but have limitations at the strategic level.  
• Expert systems in a support role can help users make better decisions at all three decision making levels, but their effectiveness can only be fulfilled through their users.  
• An expert system acting in a support role does not necessarily save a user’s time, but an expert system in a replacement role does improve the efficiency of decision making.  
• The users of expert systems in a support role did not believe that they had learned 
from using the system.  
The role of AI systems, e.g. expert systems, for decision making is also discussed bas ed on 
the structure of decisions that is named by Simon (1987)  as structured, semi -structured and 
unstructured decisions. The findings by Edwards et al. (2000)  suggest that AI (e.g. expert 
systems) can be used to replace human decision makers for structured or semi -structured 
decisions, but it would be better to be used as a decision support tool for dealing with unstructured deci sions at the strategic level in organisations.  
In a relevant assessment on the potential use of AI in organisations in 1985, Lee (1985)  (p.8) 
commented “Because mechanical inference relies on a stable, fixed semantics, the utility of an idealized, fully integrated, knowledge -based inference system will be limited to 
organizations in completely stable environments.” and “integrated information systems will only be of use for those aspects of the organization’s ac tivities where semantic stability can 
be maintained. This conclusion corresponds to the empirical observations made by Gorry and Scott -Morton (1971) .” This indicates that with the limitations of early AI technologies in 
dealing with dynamic environments, AI for organisational decision making was more 
effective in working in stable and familiar conditions.  
In a recent joint research with Deloitte, Davenport (2018) examined 152 AI deployment 
projects that are making use of AI-based systems across a wide range of business functions 
and processes. Based on the survey results, Davenport categorises AI system applications into 
three categories:  

==== Page 11 ====
 11 • Cognitive Process Automation: Automation of back office administrative and 
financial activities using ‘Robotic Process Automation’.  
• Cognitive Insights: Detecting patterns in data and interpreting their meaning using statistically -based machine learning algorithms.  
• Cognitive Engagement: Engaging employees and/or customers using natural lang uage 
processing chatbots, intelligent agents and machine learning.  
As the progress of AI technology enables researchers to create advanced machines, it is possible for AI to undertake more complex tasks that require cognitive capabilities such as making ta cit judgements, sensing emotion and driving processes which previously seemed 
impossible (Mahroof, 2019) . As a result, an increasing number of jobs are autonomously 
performed by AI systems without human control and supervision (Złotowski, Yogeeswaran, & Bartneck, 2017) . There are many reports on the benefits of AI for decision making because 
AI is believed to be ab le to help organisational employees to reach better decisions, to boost 
our analytic and decision -making abilities and heighten creativity (Wilson & Daugherty, 
2018) . However, “with t he resurgence of AI, a new human -machine symbiosis is on the 
horizon and a question remains: How can humans and new artificial intelligences be 
complementary in organizational decision making?” (Jarrahi, 2018 p. 579) . 
4. Research Propositions for addressing challenges and opportunities  
This section discusses the challenges and research opportunities of AI based systems for 
decision making in the era of Big Data from the use and impact perspective. As AI 
development and applications cover a wide range of areas, future research directions can be diverse. To help IS researchers in their endeavour to advance our knowledge and understanding on how to maximise the benefit of the new ge neration AI systems for decision 
making, twelve research propositions are offered, based on three areas: conceptual and theoretical development, AI technology -human interaction, and AI implementation. 
4.1. Conceptual and theoretical development  
4.1.1. Defining the key concepts and terms  
AI has been applied in many different domains and numerous terms are used to describe AI based systems for decision making, such as: expert systems, knowledge -based systems, 
intelligent decision support systems, intelligent software age nt systems, intelligent executive 
systems, etc. However, as AI is constantly evolving and advancing, names of AI based systems for decision making have changed over the years as shown in our review of IJIM  
papers in section 2. Many names for AI based decis ion systems have disappeared or have 
been replaced with new names. It can be argued that defining AI and its related terms has become a moving target.  
To clarify any conceptual confusion and controversy, there is a need to have a systematic review of AI re lated definitions and terms and to re -define them to reflect the new generation 
of AI in the era of Big Data. We make the following proposition:  

==== Page 12 ====
 12 Proposition 1 –  Defining AI can be difficult, so it is necessary and beneficial to re -define the 
concept of AI and related terms to reflect the changing nature of AI development and 
applications in the era of Big Data. 
4.1.2. Understanding, theorising and measuring AI use and impact  
With the rapid increase in AI applications, many claims are made by AI developers and larg e 
corporates about its substantial benefits and impact. For example, according to Davenport and 
Ronanki (2018), a survey of 250 executives who are familiar with their companies’ use of cognitive technology (a term Davenport and Ronanki explain as “next -generation AI”) shows 
that three -quarters of them “believe that AI will substantially transform their companies 
within three years” (p.110). 
As most similar claims are not substantiated by measurable empirical evidence and rigorous 
academic research, it is di fficult to know how, why and to what extent AI systems are being 
used and impacting on individual and organisational decision making and transforming 
organisations. This raises a challenge on how to measure the benefits and impact of AI for 
decision making  from short to long term, and from social, economic and political 
perspectives. What would be the implications for future business executives in making strategic decisions?  
Therefore, the following proposition is offered:  
Proposition 2 – Measuring the bene fit of AI and its impact is very difficult, but possible. 
Therefore, there is a need to develop and test theoretically sound and practically feasible AI 
impact indicators to measure its benefits. 
Overall, to have a systematic understanding on how and why A I based systems are being 
used and affecting individual and organisational performance, an appropriate theoretical 
framework should be developed.  
Proposition 3 – It is necessary to theorise the use of AI and its impact on decision making, 
therefore an inte grated conceptual framework is needed to provide a systematic 
understanding of AI for decision making.  
4.2. Technology -human interaction 
4.2.1. The role of AI for decision making 
For the early applications of AI in business and management field, Edwards (1992)  points out 
that the spread of expert systems (representing and applying expert knowledge using AI) into 
management and administrative applications from the scientific/technical domains of the early systems was very slow. The view put forward in his paper was that for expert systems 
to be applied to problems in management or administration, the traditional ‘closed- world’ 
picture of an expert system was usually inadequate. The real manifestation of the expert system’s role (and indeed that of the human exper t) in management involves much more 
negotiation and interaction than in scientific/technical domains. The consequences for the 
resulting system are that it looks much more like the traditional picture of a decision support 
system than a classic standalone expert system.  

==== Page 13 ====
 13 In an early published paper in IJIM, Seeger (1983, p.205)  voiced a concern that is still current 
“complex progra mmes of the kind developed in the field of artificial intelligence may lead to 
information system designs where the intellectual procedures of information work will be 
performed by machines. This could make a significant part of human information input obsolete.”  
In the era of AI and Big Data, Miller (2018a)  argues the imperative of a new human -machine 
symbiosis and calls for the rethink of “how humans and machines need to work symbiotically to augment and enhance each other’s capabilities.” (page 2).  
There has been an increased interest in examining the role of AI in recent years, i.e. automation or augmentation. Some AI practitioners and researchers argue that AI should be used to augment the human judgement rather than automation (Miller, 2018a; Wilson & Daug herty, 2018)  and “AI systems should be designed with the intention of augmenting, not 
replacing, human contributions” (Jarrahi, 2018 p. 584) , but this assertion should be  further 
supported with rigorous research and investigation with empirical evidence on how and why AI is best at providing augmentation in supporting human judgement r ather than decision 
automation. 
Wilson and Daugherty (2018)  argue that companies that deploy AI mainly to displace 
employees will see only short -term productivity gains. What is the evidence for this claim? If 
this is true, why and how will using AI for replac ing employees not deliver the long term 
gains and how can this shortcoming be overcome?  
Wilson and Daugherty (2018)  also claim that companies can benefit from optimizing 
“collaboration between humans and artificial intelligence” and develop employees’ “fusion 
skills” that enable them to work effectively at the human -machine interface. However, some 
AI systems don’t have the capability to explain the reasoning process of dec ision making, 
how to solve the Blackbox issue, i.e. knowing why decisions are made in a certain way 
(Davenport, 2018) and provide explanations to AI users?  To address this issue, Miller (2018b)  
observes that t here has been a recent resurgence in the area of explain able AI because  
researchers and practitioners seek to make AI  algorithms more understandabl e. 
Many previous studies have examined the roles of AI before the era of Big Data. However, considering the super power of the new generation AI and the overwhelming ly mixed views 
and debate on the role of AI in decision making, it is imperative that the role of AI should be revisited and redefined, therefore we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 4 – AI can play multiple roles in decision making, but AI will be mostly accepted 
by human decision makers as a decision support/augmentation tool rather than as the automation of decision making to replace them.  
4.2.2. System design criteria for supporting decision making 
As the effectiveness of AI systems for decision maki ng can only be realised through its 
acceptance and use by the end users (Edwards et al., 2000) , the system design criteria for AI 
based systems has been an issue since the early applications of AI. For example, system design criteria have been an issue since the days of SSIS, before it became IJIM (Pejtersen, 
1984) . Based on our understanding of  the roles of AI, whether for supporting, augmenting, 

==== Page 14 ====
 14 replacing, or automating decision making, IS researchers need to propose the design criteria 
from technology -human inter action perspective for system developers to create ideal AI 
systems for human decision makers. For example, what are the ergonomic design issues for developing AI systems that are suitable for decision making? Therefore, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 5 – The ergonomic design of AI systems is important for their success, but the 
ergonomic issues are different between supporting, augmenting, replacing, or automating systems.  
4.2.3. Refining and improving AI system performance while in use by decision makers  
The unique strength of human intelligence is its ability to learn and adapt to new environment and challenges. Refining and improving performance through continuing learning has been a challenge for advancing AI until the recent advances in deep l earning and Big Data. Deep 
learning, as a subset of machining learning, has been one of the essential enablers for the 
renewed AI success. Can AI systems be refined and improved by deep learning while they 
are in use by decision makers? This question needs  to be addressed by further research, so we 
make the following proposition:  
Proposition 6 – AI systems performance for decision making can be refined and improved by 
deep learning while the systems are in use by decision makers.  
4.2.4. AI users’ behaviour issues  
Why do human decision makers accept/reject using AI for decision making? Previous 
research show when people use AI as a supporting tool for decision making, different people 
may take different attitudes and actions on implementing the decisions recommended  by AI 
system. For example, Davenport (2018) and Miller (2018) identify  the need for employees to 
adapt to the smart machines being used to partially or fully automate cognitive work. Davenport and Kirby (2016)  introduce a model of ‘Five Ways of Stepping’ to help people 
renegotiate their relationship to machines and to co -exist with smart machines by aligning 
their contributions in the age of AI.  
For example, senior managers’ attitudes towards using AI can be critical as Ransbotham, Gerbert, Reeves, Kiron, and Spira (2018)  suggest that scaling AI in the enterprise demands 
new ways to engage business experts with technology. Considering the importance of users’ beha viour towards using AI, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 7 –AI users’ personal traits and knowledge and understanding of AI will significantly affect the use and success of AI.  
4.3. AI systems implementation  
4.3.1. Understanding the critical success fact ors 
AI has been revitalised with Big Data and is becoming ever more powerful than before. However, while technology advancement may have no limit, its applications may encounter 
bottlenecks and unprecedented barriers. Although there may be many factors aff ecting the 

==== Page 15 ====
 15 success of AI applications, it is important to identify what are the most critical success factors 
based on the empirical evidence collected from the real -world AI applications. These critical 
success factors will help organisations to be more f ocused by addressing the most critical 
issues. The critical success factors can also offer valuable guidelines for AI designers and developers in their effort to overcome challenges in order to provide the most effective and acceptable systems for decision  makers.  
Based on the work by Duan, Ong, Xu, and Mathews  (2012)  before the era of Big Data, the 
technical challenges related to supporting executive decision making using AI (intelligent software agents in this case) are the agents’ capability to understand a business executive as 
an individual user with specific doma in of work and information, and to fit the intelligence 
activities into the right content and context. They call for alleviating the limitations and 
bottlenecks of AI applications in terms of representing human intuition and judgement.  
For example, underst anding the technology can be critical for adoption success. Davenport 
and Ronanki (2018)  argues that before embarking on an AI initiative, companies must 
understand which technolog ies perform what types of tasks, and the strengths and limitations 
of each.  
Overall, factors affecting the use,  impact, success and failure of information systems have 
been studied extensively (Dwivedi et al. 2015; 2017ab; Hughes et al. 2016; 2017; 2019).  
There has been some work on critical success factors for implementing data mining systems (Bole, Popovič, Žabkar, Papa, & Jaklič, 2015) , but across the board there is a lack of research 
on identifying the critical success factors affecting the current use of AI and its impact in the era of Big Data. Therefore, the f ollowing proposition is offered:  
Proposition 8 –  There are a set of critical factors that will significantly affect AI’s success for 
decision making.  
4.3.2. Understanding the synergy of AI and Big Data  
It can be argued that it is Big Data that has empowered AI f or its current boom and the 
domain of cognitive computing will be incomplete without harnessing the benefits of Big Data analytics (Gupta, Kar, Baabdullah, & Al -Khowaiter, 2018) . The Big Data era has added 
types of data that were not previously used in analysis, such as that from social media (Martínez -Rojas, Pardo- Ferreira, & Rubio -Romero, 2018; Ragini et al., 2018) . On the other 
hand, AI makes Big Data meaningful through cognitive computing because analysis of Big Data by humans can be extremely time- consuming and thus the utilisation of AI techniques 
help to make sense of Big Data (Gupta et al., 2018) . Yet AI is only one of many ways in 
which Big Data can be used (Yaqoob et al., 2016) . Thus there is still a strong need to further 
explore and understand the synergy of AI and Bi g Data. More research is needed to establish 
the unique advantages obtained by the combination of these technologies and understand how AI can be further improved with the increasing availability of Big Data with its volume, variety and velocity. Therefore, we make the following proposition:  
Proposition 9 –There is a necessary to fully understand the synergy of AI and Big Data and its implications for AI research and practice.  

==== Page 16 ====
 16 4.3.3. Culture and AI applications  
Culture has been recognised as an important influential factor in technology acceptance by 
many studies in the past. Does culture, such as national  or organisational culture , and 
personal and religious  values , also play a critical role in acceptance/adoption and use of AI 
applications? For example, Gerbert, Reeves, Ransbotham, Kiron, and Spira (2018)  examine 
“Why Chinese companies approach AI differently”. Liu, Chan, Zhao, and Liu (published 
online 2018)  also find a significant influence of both organisational and Chinese national 
culture on knowledge management. If culture does play a role, how, why and to what extent 
does it affect the AI success? Thus, we formulate the following proposition:  
Proposition 10 – The acceptance of AI for decision making can be affected by different 
cultures and personal values. On the other hand, will the wide use of AI for supporting and automating human decision 
making change culture? This is an area that has not been well explored so far, thus requir ing 
further investigation with the following research proposition:  
Proposition 11 – The acceptance and successful application of AI for decision making may 
result in a change of culture in organisations and in individual behaviour. 
4.3.4. Ethical and legal issues  
Rapid advances in AI are raising serious ethical concerns. Remenyi and Williams (1996)  was 
an early example of consideration of the ethics of  an AI system published in IJIM  over two 
decades ago. Ethical and legal concerns surrounding the applications of AI have become a 
major challenge. As this topic has received a substantial amount of attention and debate, a 
separate full paper would be more appropriate to this topic. However, as the role of government is critical for addressing the ethical concerns and legal challenges, particularly around responsibility for and explainability of decisions made by an automaton AI system, it is imperative that more research must be carried out on the role of the government in shaping 
the future of AI (Galston, 2018). How can the government develop adequate policy, regulations, ethical guidance and legal framework to prevent misuses of AI and their potential 
disastrous consequences on both individual and societal levels? Therefore, this paper m akes 
the following proposition:  
Proposition 12 – Government plays a critical role in safeguarding the impact of AI on society.  
5. Conclusion  
As AI has become more popular toda y due to Big Data, advanced algorithms, and improved 
computing power and storage, AI systems are becoming an embedded element of digital 
system s, and more specifically , are making  a profound impact on human decision making. As 
a result, there is an increas ing demand for information systems researchers to investigate and 
understand the implications of AI for decision making and to contribute to the theoretical advancement and practical success of AI applications. This paper aims  to address this need 
by analy sing and highlighting the critical challenges and opportunities for IS researchers. 
Twelve research propositions are provided focusing on the use and impact  of AI for decision 
making in terms of: theoretical development, technology -human interaction and AI  

==== Page 17 ====
 17 implementation. Table 3 provides a summary of research propositions. Although the 
propositions are specifically for research in AI for decision making, most of them can also 
provide relevant directions for research on the use and impact of AI in general. 
Table 3. A summary of research propositions  
Theoretical development  Technology -human 
interaction  AI implementation  
1. Proposition 1 – Defining AI 
can be difficult, so it is 
necessary and beneficial to 
re-define the concept of AI 
and related terms to reflect 
the changing nature of AI 
development and 
applications in the era of 
Big Data.  
2. Proposition 2 – Measuring 
the benefit of AI and its 
impact is very difficult, but 
possible. Therefore, there is 
a need to develop and test 
theoretically sound and 
practically feasible AI 
impact indicators to 
measure its benefits.  
3. Proposition 3 – It is 
necessary to theorise the 
use of AI and its impact on 
decision making, therefore 
an integrated conceptual 
framework is needed to 
provide a systematic 
understanding of AI for 
decision making.  
 4. Proposition 4 – AI can play 
multiple roles in decision 
making, but AI will be 
mostly accepted by human 
decision makers as a 
decision 
support/augmentation tool 
rather than as the 
automation of decision 
making to replace them.  
5. Proposition 5 – The 
ergonomic design of AI 
systems is important for 
their success, but the 
ergonomic issues are 
different between 
supporting, augment ing, 
replacing, or automating 
systems.  
6. Proposition 6 – AI systems 
performance for decision 
making can be refined and 
improved by deep learning 
while the systems are in use by decision makers.
 
7. Proposition 7 –AI users’ 
personal traits and 
knowledge and 
under standing of AI will 
significantly affect the use 
and success of AI.  8. Proposition 8 – There are a 
set of critical factors that 
will significantly affect 
AI’s success for decision 
making.  
9. Proposition 9 –There is a 
necessary to fully 
understand the synergy of 
AI and Big Data and its 
implications for AI 
research and practice.  
10. Proposition 10 – The 
acceptance of AI for 
decision making can be 
affected by different 
cultures and personal 
values.  
11. Proposition 11 – The 
acceptance and successful 
application of AI for 
decision making may result 
in a change of culture in 
organisations and in 
individual behaviour.  
12. Proposition 12 – 
Government plays a critical 
role in safeguarding the 
impact of AI on society.  
 
 
Like any publication, this opinion paper has certain limitations. First, it only reviews and 
discusses the history of AI through IJIM  papers  and so our findings may not be 
comprehensive and representative. Second, the paper only focuses on identifying the 
challenges and opportunities from the applications of AI for decision making; it does not cover issues related to advancing AI techniques and systems. Third, as an opinion paper, no primary data was collected or used to support the development of the resea rch propositions. 
 
References  
Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. (2018). Prediction Machines: The simple economics of 
artificial intelligence : Harvard Business Press.  

==== Page 18 ====
 18 Ahmad, S. N., & Laroche, M. (2017). Analyzing electronic word of mouth: A social 
commerce construct. International Journal of Information Management, 37(3), 202-
213. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.08.004  
Araujo, J., & Pestana, G. (2017). A framework for soci al well -being and skills management 
at the workplace. International Journal of Information Management, 37(6), 718- 725. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.07.009 
Bader, J., Edwards, J., Harris -Jones, C., & Hannaford, D. (1988). Practical engineering of 
knowledge -based systems. Information and Software Technology, 30(5), 266 -277.  
Bean, R. (2018). How Big Data and AI Are Driving Business Innovation in 2018. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, Februray 2018.  
Bimba, A. T., Idris, N., Al -Hunaiyyan, A., Mahmud, R. B., Abdela ziz, A., Khan, S., & Chang, 
V. (2016). Towards knowledge modeling and manipulation technologies: A survey. 
International Journal of Information Management, 36 (6), 857- 871. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.022 
Blunden, M. (2018, 2 October). Graduates are taking £9k courses to help beat AI interviews 
for City jobs.  Evening Standard. Retrieved from https://www.standard.co.uk/tech/ai -
interviews -city-jobs-graduates -a3951296.html  
Bole, U., Popovič, A., Žabkar, J., Papa, G., & Jaklič, J. (2015). A case analysis of embryonic 
data mining success. International Journal of Information Management, 35(2), 253 -  
259. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2014.12.001  
Bouakkaz, M., Ouinten, Y., Loudcher, S., & Strekalova, Y. (2017). Textual aggregation 
approaches in OLAP context: A survey. International Journal of Information Management, 37(6), 684- 692. doi:10.1016/j .ijinfomgt.2017.06.005  
Bowonder, B., & Miyake, T. (1992). Creating and sustaining competitiveness: Information 
management strategies of Nippon Steel Corporation. International Journal of Information Management, 12(1), 39 -  56. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0268-
4012(92)90051- Q 
Cantu -Ortiz, F. J. (2014). Advancing artificial intelligence research and dissemination 
through conference series: Benchmark, scientific impact and the MICAI experience. Exper t Systems with Applications, 41(3), 781- 785. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.08.008
 
Cellan -Jones, R. (2014). Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind.   
Retrieved fro m https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology -30290540  
Choi, I. Y., Oh, M. G., Kim, J. K., & Ryu, Y. U. (2016). Collaborative filtering with facial 
expressions for online video recommendation. Intern ational Journal of Information 
Management, 36(3), 397- 402. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.01.005  
Chung, W. (2014). BizPro: Extracting and categorizing business intelligence factors from 
textual news articles. International Journal of Information Management, 34(2), 272-284. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2014.01.001  
Daugherty, P. R., & Wilson, H. J. (2018). Human+ Machine: Reimagining Work in the Age 
of AI : Harvard Business Press.  
Davenport, T. H., & Kirby, J. (2016). Only humans need apply: winners and losers in the  age 
of smart machines : Harper Business New York, NY.  
Davenport, T. H., & Ronanki, R. (2018). Artificial Intelligence for the Real World. Harvard 
Business Review, 96 (1), 108- 116.  
Dhaliwal, J. S., & Tung, L. L. (2000). Using group support systems for devel oping a 
knowledge -based explanation facility. International Journal of Information 
Management, 20(2), 131- 149. doi:10.1016/s0268- 4012(99)00061- 4 

==== Page 19 ====
 19 du Plessis, T., & du Toit, A. S. A. (2006). Knowledge management and legal practice. 
International Journal of I nformation Management, 26(5), 360 -  371. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2006.06.003  
Duan, Y., Ong, V. K., Xu, M., & Mathews, B. (2012). Supporting decision making process 
with “ideal”  software agents –What do business executives want? Expert Systems with 
Applications, 39(5), 5534- 5547.  
Dugdale, J. (1996). A cooperative problem -solver for investment management. International 
Journal of Information Management, 16(2), 133 -  147. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0268- 4012(95)00074- 7 
 
Dwivedi, Y.K., Wastell, D., Laumer, S., Henriksen, H.Z., Myers, M.D., Bunker, D., Elbanna, 
A., Ravishankar, M.N., & Srivastava, S.C. (2015). Research on Information Systems Failures and Successes: Status Update and Future Directions. Information Systems Frontiers , 17(1), 143- 157. 
Dwivedi, Y.K., Rana, N.P., Janssen, M., Lal, B., Williams, M.D. & Clement, R.M. (2017a). 
An Empirical Validation of a Unified Model of Electronic Government Adoption (UMEGA). Government Information Quarterly , 34(2), 211- 230.  
Dwive di, Y.K., Rana, N.P.,  Jeyaraj, A., Clement, M. & Williams, M.D. (2017b). Re -
examining the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT): Towards a Revised Theoretical Model. Information Systems Frontiers . DoI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796- 017-9774- y 
Edwards, J. S. (1992). Expert systems in management and administration- Are they really 
different from decision support systems? European Journal of Operational Research, 61(1-2), 114- 121.  
Edwards, J. S., Duan, Y., & Robins, P. (2000). An analysi s of expert systems for business 
decision making at different levels and in different roles. European Journal of Information Systems, 9(1), 36 -46.  
Ford, N. (1989). From Information- Management to Knowledge -Management - the Role of 
Rule Induction and Neural  Net Machine Learning Techniques in Knowledge 
Generation. Journal of Information Science, 15(4 -5), 299- 304.  
Frias -Martinez, E., Magoulas, G., Chen, S., & Macredie, R. (2006). Automated user 
modeling for personalized digital libraries. International Journal of Information 
Management, 26(3), 234- 248. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2006.02.006  
Gabbatt, A. (2011, 17 Februrary). IBM computer Watson wins Jeopardy clash. The Guardian. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/feb/17/ibm -computer -
watson -wins -jeopardy  
Gerbert, P., Reeves, M., Ransbotham, S., Kiron, D., & Spira, M. (2018). Global Competition 
With AI in Business: How China Differs. MIT Sloan Management Review, July 2018.  
Gorry, A., & Scott -Morton, M. S. (1971). A Framework for Information Systems. Sloan 
Management Review, 13(1), 56- 79.  
Gottschalk, P., Filstad, C., Glomseth, R., & Solli -Sæther, H. (2011). Information 
management for investigat ion and prevention of white -collar crime. International 
Journal of Information Management, 31(3), 226 -  233. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2010.07.002  
Gupta, S., Kar, A. K., Baabdullah, A., & Al -Khowaiter, W. A. A. (2018). Big data with 
cognitive computing: A review for the future. International Journal of Information Management, 42, 78- 89. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.06.005
 
Hughes, D.L., Rana, N.P. & Dwivedi, Y.K. (2019). Elucidation of IS project success factors - 
an Interpretive Structural Modelling Approach. Annals of Operations Research, DoI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479- 019-03146- w  

==== Page 20 ====
 20 Hughes, D.L., Dwivedi, Y.K., & Rana, N.P. (2017). Mapping IS Failure Factors on 
PRINCE2® Stages: An Application of Interpretive Ranking Process (IRP). 
Production Planning & Control , 28(9), 776- 790. 
Hughes, D.L., Dwivedi, Y.K., Rana, N.P. & Simintiras, A.C. (2016). Information systems 
project failure –analysis of causal links using interpretive structural modelling. 
Production Planning & Control , 27(16), 1313- 1333. 
Heradio, R., Cabrerizo, F. J., Fernández -Amorós, D., Herrera, M., & Herrera -Viedma, E. 
(2013). A fuzzy linguistic model to evaluate the quality of Library 2.0 functionalities. International Journal of Information Management, 33(4), 642 -  654. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ijinfomgt.2013.04.001
 
Ingwersen, P. (1984a). Information technology —Which applications? Social Science 
Information Studies, 4(2), 185- 196. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0143- 6236(84)90075-
9 
Ingwe rsen, P. (1984b). Psychological aspects of information retrieval. Social Science 
Information Studies, 4(2), 83- 95. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0143- 6236(84)90068- 1 
Jarrahi, M. H. (2018). Artifici al intelligence and the future of work: Human- AI symbiosis in 
organizational decision making. Business Horizons, 61(4), 577- 586. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.03.007  
Kao, J.- H., Chan, T.-C., Lai, F., Lin, B.- C., Sun, W.- Z., Chang, K.- W., . . . Lin, J.- W. (2017). 
Spatial analysis and data mining techniques for identifying risk factors of Out -of-
Hospital Cardiac Arrest. International Journal of Information Management, 37(1), 1528- 1538. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.04.008 
Kar, A. K. (2016). Bio inspired computing –A review of algorithms and scope of applications. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 59, 20- 32. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2016.04.018 
Kim, J. K., Kim, H. K., Oh, H. Y., & Ryu, Y. U. (2010). A group recommendation system for 
online communities. International Journal of Information Management, 30(3), 212 -  
219. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2009.09.006
 
Koch, C. (2016). How the Computer Beat the Go Master.   Retrieved from 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how -the-computer -beat-the-go-master/  
Lebib, F. Z., Mellah, H., & Drias, H. (2017). Enhancing information source selection using a 
genetic algorithm and social tagging. International Journal of Information Management, 37(6), 741- 749. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.07.011  
Lee, R. M. (1985). On information system semantics: Expert vs. decision support systems. 
Social Science Information Studies, 5(1), 3 -10. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0143-
6236(85)90002- X 
Liébana- Cabanillas, F., Marinković, V., & Kalinić, Z. (2017). A SEM -neural network 
approach for predicting antecedents of m -commerce acceptance. International 
Journal of Information Management, 37(2), 14 -  24. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.10.008  
Lismont, J., Vanthienen, J., Baesens, B., & Lemahieu, W. (2017). Defining analytics maturity 
indicators: A survey approach. International Journal of Information Management, 37(3), 114- 124. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.12.003 
Liu, Y., Chan, C., Zhao, C., & Liu, C. (published online 2018). Unpacking knowledge 
management practices in China: do institution, national and organizational culture matter? Journal of Knowledge Management . doi:
https://doi.org/10.1108/JKM -07-
2017- 0260  
Lu, M. T., & Mooney, S. P. (1989). Assessing expert system applications -  a case- study. 
International Journal of Information Management, 9(4), 267- 273. doi:10.1016/0268-
4012(89)90050- 9 

==== Page 21 ====
 21 Mahroof, K. (2019). A human- centric perspective exploring the readiness towards smart 
warehousing: The case of a large retail distribution warehouse. International Journal 
of Information Management, 45, 176- 190. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.11.008  
Martínez -Rojas, M., Pardo- Ferreira, M. d. C., & Rubio- Romero, J. C. (2018). Twitter as a 
tool for the management and analysis of emergency situations: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Information Management, 43, 196 -  208. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.07.008
 
Martinsons, M. G. (1997). Human resource management applications of knowledge -based 
systems. International Journal of Information Management, 17(1), 35 - 53. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0268- 4012(96)00041- 2 
Miller, S. (2018a). AI: Augmentation, mor e so than automation. Asian Management Insights, 
5(1), 1 -20.  
Miller, T. (2018b). Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. 
Artificial Intelligence .  
Mostafa, M. M., & El -Masry, A. A. (2013). Citizens as consumers: Profiling e -government 
services’ users in Egypt via data mining techniques. International Journal of 
Information Management, 33(4), 627 -  641. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.03.007  
Nicho las, D., & Harman, J. (1985). The end- user: An assessment and review of the literature. 
Social Science Information Studies, 5(4), 173- 184. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0143-
6236(85)90026- 2 
Ogiela,  L., & Ogiela, M. R. (2014). Cognitive systems for intelligent business information 
management in cognitive economy. International Journal of Information 
Management, 34(6), 751 - 760. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2014.08.001  
Panetta, K. (2018). Gartner Top 10 Strategic Technology Trends for 2018.   Retrieved from 
https://ww w.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/gartner -top-10-strategic -technology -
trends -for-2018/  
Pejtersen, A. M. (1984). Design of a computer -aided user -system dialogue based on an 
analysis of users' search behaviour. Social Science Information Studies, 4(2), 167- 183. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0143- 6236(84)90074- 7 
Pettey, C. (2018). Lessons From Artificial Intelligence Pioneers. Smart with Gartner: Digital 
Business.   Retrieved from https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/lessons -from -
artificial- intelligence -pioneers/  
Ragini, J. R., Anand, P. M. R., & Bhaskar, V. (2018). Big data  analytics for disaster response 
and recovery through sentiment analysis. International Journal of Information Management, 42, 13- 24. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.05.004
 
Ramíre z-Noriega, A., Juárez -Ramírez, R., & Martínez -Ramírez, Y. (2017). Evaluation 
module based on Bayesian networks to Intelligent Tutoring Systems. International Journal of Information Management, 37 (1, Part A), 1488 -  1498. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.007
 
Ransbotham, S., Gerbert, P., Reeves, M., Kiron, D., & Spira, M. (2018). Artificial 
Intelligence in Business Gets Real. MIT Sloan Management Review, Fall 2018.  
Rawlinson, K. ( 2015). Microsoft's Bill Gates insists AI is a threat.   Retrieved from 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/31047780  
Rekik, R., Kallel, I., Casillas, J., & Alimi, A. M. (2018). Assessing web sites quality: A 
system atic literature review by text and association rules mining. International 
Journal of Information Management, 38(1), 201 -  216. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.06.007  

==== Page 22 ====
 22 Remenyi, D.,  & Williams, B. (1996). Some aspects of ethics and research into the silicon 
brain. International Journal of Information Management, 16(6), 401 -  411. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0268- 4012(96)00029- 1 
Seeger, T. (1983). Changes in the occupation and profession of information work: The impact 
of the new communication technologies. Social Science Information Studies, 3(4), 
199-208. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0143- 6236(83)90046- 7 
Simon, H. A. (1987). Making Management Decisions: the Role of Intuition and Emotion. 
Academy of Management Executive, 1(1), 57 -64. doi:10.5465/ame.1987.4275905 
Tadeusiewicz, R., Ogiela, L., & Ogiela, M. R. (2008). T he automatic understanding approach 
to systems analysis and design. International Journal of Information Management, 28(1), 38 -  48. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2007.03.005
 
Thibode au, P. (2019). L'Oréal boosts candidate experience with recruitment chatbots.   
Retrieved from https://searchhrsoftware.techtarget. com/feature/LOreal -boosts -
candidate- experience -with-recruitment- chatbots  
Thornett, A. M. (2001). Computer decision support systems in general practice. International 
Journal of Information Management, 21(1), 39 -  47. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0268- 4012(00)00049- 9 
Tseng, S.- S., Chen, H.- C., Hu, L.- L., & Lin, Y.- T. (2017). CBR -based negotiation RBAC 
model for enhancing ubiquitous resources management. International Journal of Information Management, 37(1), 1539- 1550. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.009 
Wilson, J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). COLLABORATIVE INTELLIGENCE Humans and 
Al Are Joining Forces. Harvard Business Review, 96(4), 115- 123.  
Wormell, I. (1984). Co gnitive aspects in natural language and free -text searching. Social 
Science Information Studies, 4(2), 131- 141. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0143-
6236(84)90071- 1 
Yaqoob, I., Hashem, I. A. T., Gani, A., Mokhtar, S., Ahmed, E., Anuar, N. B., & Vasilakos, 
A. V. (2016). Big data: From beginning to future. International Journal of Information Management, 36(6, Part B), 1231 -  1247. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.07.009
 
Ying, W., Pee, L. G., & Jia, S. (2018). Social informatics of intelligent manufacturing 
ecosystems: A case study of KuteSmart. International Journal of Information 
Management, 42, 102- 105. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.05.002 
Yui, K., Watanabe, S., Amano, S., Takarabe, T., & Nakamori, T. (1989). Application of an 
expert system to blast furnace operation. Future Generation Computer Systems, 5(1), 137-142. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0167- 739X(89)90032- 0
 
Zantout, H., & Marir, F. (1999). Document management systems from current capabilities 
towards intelligent information retrieval: an overview. International Journal of 
Infor mation Management, 19(6), 471- 484. doi:10.1016/s0268- 4012(99)00043- 2 
Zhao, Y., Tang, L. C. M., Darlington, M. J., Austin, S. A., & Culley, S. J. (2008). High value 
information in engineering organisations. International Journal of Information 
Management, 28(4), 246 - 258. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2007.09.007  
Złotowski, J., Yogeeswaran, K., & Bartneck, C. (2017). Can we control it? Autonomous 
robots threaten human identity, unique ness, safety, and resources. International 
Journal of Human- Computer Studies, 100, 48- 54. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2016.12.008  
 

