==== Page 1 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 1 
Abstract—Due to various limitations i.e., computational 
complexity and more delay in cloud computing is overtaken by 
edge computing for efficient and fair resource allocation such as, 
power and battery lifetime in internet of things (IoT) base d 
industrial applications. In the meantime intelligent and accurate 
resource management by artificial intelligence (AI) has become the 
center of attention especially in industrial applications. With the 
coordination of AI at the edge will remarkably enhance the range 
and computational speed of IoT based devices in industries. But 
the challenging issue in these power hungry, short battery lifetime 
and delay intolerant portable devices is inappropriate and 
inefficient classical trends of fair resource allotment. Also, it is 
interpreted through extensive industrial data sets that dynamic 
wireless channel could not be supported by the typical power 
saving and battery lifetime techniques for example, predictive 
transmission power control (PTPC) and Baseline. Thus, this paper 
proposes i) a forward central dynamic and available approach 
(FCDAA) by adapting the running time of sensing and 
transmission processes in IoT-based portable devices ii) a system-
level battery model by evaluating the energy dissipation in IoT 
devices iii) a data reliability model for edge artificial intelligence 
based IoT devices over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network. Two 
important cases for instance, sta tic (i.e.,product processing) and 
dynamic (i.e., vibration and fault diagnosis) are introduced for 
proper monitoring of industrial platform . Experimental test-bed 
reveals that proposed FCDAA enhances energy efficiency and 
battery lifetime at acceptable reliability (~ 0.95)  by appropriately 
tuning duty-cycle and TPC unlike conventional methods.  
 
Index Terms —Industrial IoT, Edge Computing,  AI,  Duty-cycle, 
Mobile devices , PTPC, FCDAA, Battery Model 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
ndustrial revolution has caught the attention of IoT-enabled 
smart world by integrating edge AI mechanism with  mobile 
technologies while transmitting multimedia (i.e., text, 
images and video, etc) content. An integration of the 
heterogeneous networks and wearable devices on the one hand 
can facilitate the each and every corner of the world, while on 
the other-hand several challenges are faced by customers or 
users. With the advancement in mobile devices industrial  
sector is revolutionized at large extent. At present the AI driven 
edge computing mechanism for industrial applications is very 
vital for the entire world to solve most the relevant issues at 
global level. 
   Ali Hassan Sodhro is with IDA-Computer and Information Science 
Department, Linkoping University, Linkoping, SE-58183, Sweden. 
Email: ali.hassan.sodhro@liu.se  
   *Sandeep Pirbhulal is with the CAS Key Laboratory of Human-Machine 
Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology 
(SIAT), Shenzhen, 518055, China. He is also with Institute of Biomedical and 
Health Engineering, SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shenzhen 
518055, China. Email: sandeep @siat.ac.cn . 
   Victor Hugo C. de Albuquerque is with the University of Fortaleza , Brazil, 
Email: victor.albuquerque@unifor.br Main  challenging problem which most of the industrial 
applications are facing is the resource -constr ained  (i.e., power 
hungry and short battery lifetime) nature of the IoT enabled 
portable devices in the integrated platform . Artifiical 
Intelligence (AI) has become the center of attention to several 
applications [1].  In industrial platforms IoT  devices continuously 
monitor event triggered  information which is further transmitted 
to a remote server, so apprehending monitoring of the industrial 
outcome  [3]. However, for providing ease and comfort through  
IoT enabled portable devices , there are  problem s high energy 
drain,  shorter battery lifetime and complex computational 
process  [4,5]. There is a requirement for conventional batteries to 
be regularly recharged/replaced in IoT  based sensor devices. One 
of the examples is that in the fault diagnosi s and recovery se nsors, 
it is very cumbersome to frequently change their batteries. 
Therefore, energy drain optimization and battery lifetime 
extension in IoT based sensor devices are the challenging task to 
be focused [1]. Fig.1, shows the proposed AI -enab led 
framework for industrial applicaations. It comprises four 
sections with different functionaliteis such as, adaptive edge 
node, adaptive network node, adaptive application node and 
service node. First, Edge node which contains six key blocks 
(power cont roller, dudy -cycle optimizer, reliability optimizer, 
sensors & actuators, microcontroller & ADC, and connectors) 
collects data, stores in cloud, process, analysis and monitors 
with the help of edge intelligence which is based on cognotive 
knowledge of the entire industrial mechanism. Second, 
Adaptive network node gets information from adaptive node 
and manages that data with router, repeater, satellite system, 
access point, router and wireless local area networks. Third, 
adaptive application node gets infor mation from upper layers 
by hnadling the fault diagnosis and monitoring of the entire 
platform to the last service node. Forth, service node deals with 
the duty -cycle  and energy optimization in the overall industrial 
system. Currently, most of the research ers show their concerns 
over the energy depletion in edge AI based IoT devices due to 
power hungry , tiny size, and poor performance of conventional 
approaches [7 ][6][1]. Nevertheless, few researchers 
comprehend optimization of duty-cycle and energy  drain  in 
industrial sector  via energy harvesting. In general, energy in the 
IoT based industrial platforms  is scavenged by different 
methods such as, wireless power transfer, wind -turbines, and 
vibration etc [1][8].But due to their unsteady , random results  
and  inappropriate load cannot be used for real -time industrial 
applications [9][10]. Wireless power transfer benfits to industrial 
application by  scavenging  energy from wind, RF sources [11]. 
Also, the  simultaneous wireless information and power transfer 
(SWI PT) is not the viable solution to fix the issues of fair resource 
allocation  and energy drain optimization. It is discussed and 
examined by [12][13] that wireless power transfer (WPT) can be 
suitable option for the current industrial applications due t o 
emerging wireless technological trends and practices . Actually , Artificial Intelligence  Driven Mechanism for 
Edge Computing based Industrial Applications    
                  Ali Hassan Sodhro , Member , IEEE , Sandeep Pirbhulal *,  Victor Hugo C. de Albuquerque , Member , IEEE 
 
I 

==== Page 2 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 2 
the miniaturized and resource-confined nature of the IoT-based 
edge AI devices results in a significant proportion of energy 
dissipation during sensing and transmission phases, and it is 
apparently impossible to neglect energy depletion of these tasks. 
Traditional sensor networks cannot be re-energized due to static 
node distribution mechanism and battery’s empty level, thus 
huge amendment is needed to bring these up to current needs of 
the industrial world [15]. Thus, to meet the required needs of 
each application, a hybird adaptive TPC and duty-cycle has become potential candidate for AI-based edge computing in 
industrial applications. Our proposed FCDAA optimizes the 
power , extedn the battery lifetime with high reliability in AI 
based edge computing industrial application for the first time as 
per author’s knowledg e. The proposed FCDAA tunes 
transmission power level and duty-cycle of IoT devices in 
industrial applications by adopting static (product processing) 
and dynamic (vibration and fault diagnosis) platform at 
acceptable reliability or packet loss ratio (PLR). 
Adaptive Power Controller Connectors
Adaptive Duty-cycle 
OptimizerMicrocontroller and 
ADCAdaptive Edge Node
Adaptive Network Node  
Service NodeAdaptive Application Node  Adaptive Reliability 
OptimizerSensors & Actuators
RouterWLANAccess pointWireless Router SatelliteGatewayRepeater
Industrial Data Cloud
Data process and 
control
Data AnalysisData 
MonitoringEdge 
Intelligence
Duty-cycle Energy Reliability
 
Fig. 1. Proposed Architecture of  AI based Edge computing platform for Industrial Applications                        
  The contribution of this paper is three-fold.  
 First, a foraward central dynamic and avilable approach 
(FCDAA)  is proposed for managing the execution time 
of sensing and transmission tasks in AI-based IoT   
devices for industrial applications. 
 Second, system-level battery model of edge AI-enabled 
IoT devices for industrial applications is proposed by 
examining the duty-cycle and energy optimization.  
 Third, data reliability model of IoT based hand-held 
devices over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network is 
proposed to effectively monitor the industrial IoT.  The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 rigorously 
reviews the existing works . Forward Central Dynamic and 
Available Approach and battery model are developed in Section 
3. Data reliability model is proposed for hybird TPC and duty-
cycle industrial networks in section 4. Experimental test-bed is 
developed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper. 
II. EXISTING WORKS  
 This section provides the rigorous literature about duty-cycle 
based techniques, and power-aware algorithms, architectures, 
reliability models for AI-based industrial applications. 
 

==== Page 3 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 3 
 
Because of the high inspiration from every domain sensor 
networks have caught the attention in the industrial corner to 
examine and observe the processing, monitoring and outcome . 
But these heterogeneous networks are facing the critical 
challenges due to the power hungry and limited battery lifetime, 
hence are not offering accurate and timely services at 
economical level. Energy harvesting has been employed t o 
increase the lifetime of nodes as a substitute to supplement 
batteries.  Hybird TPC and duty-cycle based approach plays the 
critical role for energy-aware industrial system with distinct 
methods. For example, modulation level control, duty-cycle 
optimization, network scheduling at physical, MAC and 
network layers accordingly. Energy neutral operation (ENO) is 
widely accepted mechanism during harvesting the energy and 
manages the power by typically adjusting the duty-cycle or 
wake-up duration of the sensor nodes.   
In this paper, for the first time a  FCDAA and data reliability 
models are proposed for AI-based industrial application over 
hybird TPC and duty-cycle network to save energy . TPC levels 
and duty-cycle i.e., wake-up and sleep periods of IoT based 
devices are adapted while taking into account the deviations of  
  
the wireless channel i.e., static (product processing) and 
dynamic (vibration and fault diagnosis) cases. 
III. PROPOSED FORWARD CENTRAL DYNAMIC AND 
AVAILABLE APPROACH  
This section describes in detail the two key parts first 
proposed FCDAA and second system level battery model by 
integrating both TPC and duty-cycle   for AI driven industrial 
applications . One of the vital energy and battery lifecycle 
management methods in IoT based industrial applications is 
presented in [14]. The key purpose of the proposed FCDAA is 
to extend the battery lifetime and save the power in AI based 
edge computing platforms for industrial application. Besides, 
the transmission power control and duty-cycle entities of the 
IoT based portable devices are optimized by properly following 
energy neutral operation during sensing, processing and 
transmission of industrial data. Assume that,
()txTP and 
FC
are the battery charge depletion at adopted power levels and 
CPU’s extra energy drain by forward central consequently  as 
depicted in Fig. 2. Besides, the duty-cycle management 
mechanism is presented in Fig. 3. In duty-cycle analysis 
harvesting energy from access point to nodes is playing 
remarkable role in examining the overall network performance. TABLE I. RELATED WORK 
Ref. No   Applications  Proposed Solution  Merits        Demerits  
[1,3,4]  AI, Energy Energy optimization, delay  TPC based   Energy and Charge efficient  Complex and inefficient  
[2,5,8]  IoT signal for industrial system  TPC, Channel and battery -aware   Duty -cycle, data rate  High  energy and battery 
drain during media 
transmission  
[6,7]  Edge and AI based industrial platforms  Cloud and battery enabled    Fairy and battery efficient   Less power -aware and 
battery -efficient  
[9,10]  Energy -aware IoT for Industrial 
platform  Frameworks  and protocols  Extensive survey for AI -based 
industrial application  Not focused on Industrial 
applications  
[11,12]  AI based edge computing and WSN    Energy -aware and routing protocols  Energy optimization and 
efficient routing  Complex and less battery -
efficient  
[13] WPT and Industrial WSN  Energy harvesting and duty -cycle 
enabled  Battery and energy -aware  Inappropriate for industrial 
platform  
[14] IIoT , AI, Adaptive methods  QoS optimization based  Efficient QoS management  Less Battery and energy -
efficient for Industrial IoT  
[15] Machine Learning and Cellular 
networks  TPC and relay selection based  Novel Architecture and resource 
allocation method  High battery and energy 
drain in industrial system  
[16] WSN and communication systems   TPC and resource allocation  Energy optimization in wireless 
and sensor networks  Complex and less reliable 
for dynamic industrial 
platform  
[17] Industrial IoT, WSN  Energy and battery -based frameworks 
and method  Efficient resource allocation  Complex and less battery -
aware for Industrial  
services  
[18] WPT and Radio networks   TPC and radio -aware  Intelligent resource monitoring 
in radio networks  Unsuitable for IIoT system  
[19] Future Networks, WSN  QoS and Energy Scavenging  Novel energy and QoS efficient   Complex and less reliable 
for Industrial system  
[20] WPT  for IIoT  TPC and QoS -aware framework  Detailed survey  Not focus at joint duty -
cycle and TPC  
[21] IoT for Edge computing  Energy and battery -oriented  Novel Physical layer and 
framework for industrial 
applications   Complex, less reliable 
without duty cycle  
[22] Industrial platforms  Fuzzy based secure  Secure home monitoring  High energy drain  
[23] Energy -aware and secure WSN  TPC and battery -based  Efficient media transmission  More battery drain  
[24] IoT based edge platform  Framework and battery -aware  Efficient lifecycle management  Less energy saving  
[25] QoS-aware IIoT and CPS  Optimal resource allocation  QoS monitoring and 
management  More energy  and battery 
drain  
[26] Ubiquitous and Smart IIoT  TPC based and framework  Novel process monitoring 
algorithm and framework  More battery drain  
[27] AI, QoS, IoT,  Routing protocols and framework  Routing and battery -based  More energy dissipation  
[28] Power allocation in Industrial systems  AI-aware  Novel Framework and methods  High energy drain  

==== Page 4 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 4 
When harvesting energy rate is greater than the threshold 
amount (
th ) than next active period can be predicted by 
using (4) and Fig. 2. 
 
     Fig.2.  Proposed forward central dynamic and available approach 
 
 Otherwise, negative energy state will be obtained by proposed 
FCDAA when sufficient energy is not harvested . Besides, 
FCDAA’s key functionality is to optimize the sleeping time, 
transmission power level at zero-energy interval time duration. 
Also, a deviation factor (
 ) is introduced for achieving the 
targeted threshold by rectifying the problem during battery 
lifetime  maximization. A transmission time is then calculated 
and be suitable for full-cycle as in Fig. 3. The running time of 
the forward central control (
FCT ) is adopted according to the 
next transmission task and
n  accordingly. The tradeoff between 
forward central control , CPU’s overhead bits and sensitivity 
will be established by tuning associated parameters [14]. In the 
last node will be in sleep mode before the FCDAA’s new 
assignment with active duration (
ONT ) appears. Energy drain 
can be rectified with the use of duty-cycle and dynamic 
transmission power. With efficient and accurate energy 
scavenging mechanism less transmission power is used with 
acceptable PLR. It is analyzed that 
ONT  is non-linearly related 
to battery lifetime. The proposed system level battery model 
comprises two periodic functions such as, sensing and 
transmission in industrial applications . In each task IoT 
device’s active time is represented by 
ONT . Various tasks lies 
in the active duration such as, processing, sensing and 
transmission, while more energy is saved and hence less battery 
charge consumed during inactive i.e., sleep mode . Battery charge dssipation (
 ) and 
ONT of the nodes provides Current 
(
i) value as presented in (1). 
i
i
ONT
          (1) 
Average Current value is obtained either by monitoring task 
load (
i ) or execution time (
ONT ). Hence, duty-cycle of  IoT 
based sensor devices 
S is given in (2) and Fig. 3.  
                                
TONDCSTTON OFF

        (2) 
Time(sec)Energy Consumption(mJ)
OFF StateON State
OFF StateON State
TOFF TON
TD
  
Fig.3. Dutycycle management in IoT devices for Industrial Applications 
 Whereby,
ONT , and 
TOFF are the active and sleep time of 
nodes acordingly. The energy deletion of sensing and 
transmission tasks  of IoT devices in industrial applications is 
analysed by operation of transmitter and base station . Industrial 
data is measured, recorded and communicated to the intende d 
destination with the help of the sensor eanbled devices, but the 
key problem is their power hungry and resource-constrained 
nature. To remedy these issues the duty-cycle of the transciever 
must be properly managed and monitored. For instance, the 
time- period of sensor ‘
i ’ where 
1, 2,......,iS  is computed 
merely during the sensing and transmission tasks. Energy 
dissipation of former and later tasks while transmitting 
b bits at 
distance 
dij for sensor 
j is 
() Ebseni and 
( , )E b dtx iji
consequently. So battery charge level or state of charge (SoC) 
of these miniaturized sensor nodes is measured according to the 
energy (sensing and transmission) depletion level as in eq. (4). 
Besides, SoC heavily depends upon the current consumption 
during sensing (
sense ) and transmission (
tx ) respectively 
and the energy scavenging (
 ) entities. Battery SoC for the 
next active slot (
ONT ) can be predicted according to the (4). 


==== Page 5 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 5 
 
  ( ) ( , )
1S
E E b E b dsen tx iji i i
                    (3)                                              
 
1()SS
E C Tleak ONiBatteryLifetime DC   
             (4) 
IV. DATA RELIABILITY MODEL FOR HYBIRD  TPC  AND 
DUTY-CYCLE NETWORKS  
  A novel data reliability model for the AI-based industrial 
applications over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network is 
proposed. In these networks, received signal strength indicator 
(RSSI) and packet loss ratio (PLR) are the key performance 
indicators for examining the entire system. 
                                                                                                      
     
1, 1
Re , 11
,11RSSI TPCth
liability RSSI RSSI TPCi th
RSSI RSSI TPCi th  
  
  

              (5)
( ) ( )
11Renn
RSSI TP RSSI TPth thiiliability DC
n   


 (6) 
  Fig. 4 reveals the framework of the reliability optimization in 
the AI based edge comuting platform for indusrial application 
by adopting case1 (static:product processing) and case2 
(dynamic:vibration and fault diagnosis) self-adaptive 
mechanisms. In addition, TPC and RSSI level are taken at the 
physical layer while duty-cycle is considered at the MAC layer. 
TPC is adapted according to the variation in the wireless 
channel which impacts a lot on the RSSI level, PLR, and hence 
the reliability.  The case 1 and case 2 are given as the inputs to 
the wireless channel, which feeds to the adaptive TPC 
techniques from where signal’s level is examined and then 
transmission is started to monitor and manage the power by 
adopting the IEEE 802.15.4. Besides, Case 1 and Case 2 in 
Fig.4 are very vital for accuretly analyzing the behavior of the 
IoT-based portable devices in industrial platform..Relationship 
between modulation level, duty-cycle and energy drain is drawn 
in Fig.5 (a) and (b) accordingly for proposed FCDAA, PTPC 
and Baseline by adopting AI based edge computing mechanism 
in industrial applications. Modulation level or data rate varies 
with respect to the requirement of sensors and static, dynamic 
industrial scenarios  then there will be change in the energy 
dissipation level. Increase of data rate  makes the power draina 
and battery lifetime in IoT based portable devices for industrial 
applications as a critical challenge. In industrial applications 
large data rate consumes significant amount of power in both 
processing and transmission phases as shown in Table III. 
While Fig. 5 (b), shows the interconnection between the duty-
cycle and the energy drain for the proposed FCDAA and the 
traditional methods i.e., Baseline and PTPC. Fig. 6 (a) reveals 
the trade-off between the time and the standard deviation of 
proposed FCDAA, and conventional i.e., PTPC and Baseline 
methods. It is observed that there is more deviation in the later 
than the former due to unstable nature of the wireless channel 
which affects a lot to the overall performance of the industrial 
environment . Fig. 6 (b) reveals the relationship between sensor nodes and the energy drain for the proposed FCDAA and the 
conventional i.e. PTPC and Baseline. It is examined that as the 
number of sensor nodes are increasing the energy dissipation 
increases too, which is higher for the traditional methods and 
less for the proposed FCDAA. Besides, it is analyzed that 
network congestion is linearly related to the delay and hence the 
energy drain in the traditional techniques unlike the proposed 
FCDAA. 
V.     EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
  An extensive experimental test-bed for AI based industrial 
applications is established with the support of IoT devices. 
Adopted industrial data sets show the impact power and battery 
lifetime of the IoT-driven portable devices product monitoring 
and process with high reliability. There are several 
experimental parameters as shown in Table II. 
TABLE II. E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS   
 
TABLE III. R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERFORMNCE METRICS  
 
Several  key issues are examined during industrial process  and 
monitoring by gathering large data sets  [25] and developing 
novel mechanisms to manage the power and extend the battery 
lifetime of portable  industrial devices. Moreover, overall test -
bed consists of transmitter sensor node and BS with static  and Parameter  Value  
RSSIth  -85 dBm  
Standard deviation (
 ) 5dBm  
Harvesting rate (
 ) 
Dutycycle  1000 Hz  
1% 
Carrier frequency  5 GHz  
 Bandwidth  5 MHz  
TP levels  {-5,-4, -3, 2, 1,0,1,2,3,4,5}  
Maximum Transmission Power  0 dBm  
Minimum Transmit power  -20 dBm  
Operation time (T)   5 mints  
 Delay  300 sec  
Data packet length  200 bytes  
Data packet  interval  100 sec  
Data Rate  250 Kbps  
Noise figure  7 dB  
Noise PSD  -174 dBm/Hz  
Wireless Channel  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY and MAC)  
Processing delay  2 mints  
X/Y Axis  Standard 
Deviation(dBm)  Energy 
Consumption(mJ)  
FCDAA  PTPC  Baseline  FCDAA  PTPC  Baseline  
Sensor Nodes  low moderate  high low high high 
Modulation 
Level  low high high low moderate  high 
Duty -cycle  low high high low high high 
Time  low high high low high high 

==== Page 6 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 6 
dydamic mechanisms, operation time 
T  
of 5 minutes, and delay
0t of 200 ms. 
Fig.7 reveals the relationship between 
time (in sec) and the RSSI (in dBm) 
value or reliability of proposed FCDAA 
and conventional methods i.e., Baseline 
and PTPC over hybird TPC and duty-
cycle network. It is examined that there 
is less variation in the RSSI level of the 
proposed FCDAA unlike the traditional 
methods at the pre-defined RSSI target 
value. Stable RSSI level shows high 
reliability and reasonable energy drain. 
It must be noted that RSSI deviation is 
linearly proportional to the channel 
characteristics i.e., case 1:static (product 
processing) and case 2: dynamic 
(vibration and fault diagnosis) cases . 
Faster the vibration and fault diagnosis 
process, higher the channel deviation 
and less stable the RSSI values, hence 
less reliability and vice versa. Hence, it 
can be said that proposed FCDAA 
shows high reliability unlike orthodox 
methods i.e., Baseline and PTPC..In 
addition, the connection between data 
packet size w and energy depletion rate 
is established for different sensor 
platforms with clear representation . 
Besides, high deviation and unstable nature of the  channel 
dissipates more energy in Baseline and PTPC than the proposed 
FCDAA. We observed that with the increase of the duty-cycle 
more energy is depleted for the conventional methods unlike 
the proposed FCDAA. In addition, the high sleep time of the 
sensor nodes strengthen the energy saving but the large wakeup 
time leads to more energy consumption for the traditional methods than the proposed FCDAA in industrial environment. 
Moreover, duty-cycle or wireless channel utilization, is merely 
concerned with the data traffic generation i.e., discrete or 
continuous mechanism in the industrial applications. With the 
increase of the duty-cycle PLR will increase at large extent in 
the conventional methods unlike in the proposed FCDAA. We 
analyzed that distance and energy drain are linearly Fig. 4.  Framework of Reliable data transmission in AI based edge computing platform  over hybird TPC and duty -cycle network  
(a) 
Fig. 6.a) Number of sensor nodes vs.Energy Consumption , b) Relationship between time and standard 
deviation  
(b) 
Fig. 5. a) Duty-cycle vs.Energy depletion , b) Tradeoff between M odulation level and Energy drain  
(a) 
 (b) 
Dynamic Channel Self-adaptive Mechanism TPC IEEE 802.15.4RSSI Transmission
InputsO/P
Static Sceanrio
Adaptive ScenarioCase 1:
Case 2:Production 
Processing
Vibration and Fault 
Diagnosis

==== Page 7 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 7 
proportional i.e., more energy is consumed by Baseline and 
PTPC and less with proposed FCDAA. But there is less energy 
drain in the proposed FCDAA, more in Baseline, and slightly 
more in the PTPC. Let’s assume the threshold  distance 
dth is 
1kilometer, where energy consumption can be reduced by using 
some resource scheduling algorithms with the condition
ddth
, whereby distance between IoT devices in industrial 
application is denoted by 
d (which is 100m). 
VI.   CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH                        
 Power and battery-aware communication through portable 
IoT devices is very vital for industrial application due to rapid 
progress in the technological trends and practices. Also, 
industrial sector has revolutionized the entire landscape to boost 
the societal and economical needs. The challenging issue with 
today’s industrial evolution is the resource -constrained nature 
of IoT-based portable devices. To remedy these challenegs  this 
research contributes in three distinct ways. First proposes 
FCDAA by tuning duty-cycle and transmission power levels of 
the IoT based portable devices during sensing, processing and 
transmission tasks by considering large number of real-time 
datase ts. Second, system-level battery model of IoT based 
portable devices is proposed . Third, data reliability model is 
proposed for IoT devices in AI driven edge computing platform 
for industrial platform. Through theoretical analysis with 
extensive real-time data sets and Monte Carlo simulation in 
MATLAB we concluded that significant amount of 
transmission power is dissipated at relatively less PLR and 
stable RSSI by Baseline (with very low energy saving) , 
acceptable by proposed FCDAA (with high energy saving) and 
medium by PTPC (low energy saving). It has also been 
examined and interpreted that FCDAA fulfills the main 
requirement of RSSI and PLR by adopting AI driven edge 
computing platform for industrial applications. Hereafter, it can be claimed that proposed FCDAA is the potential candidates for 
energy saving in AI driven edge computing mechanism for 
industrial applications . Following are the limitations of the 
proposed FCDAA  
 Relatively more complexity in integrating TPC and 
duty-cycle for AI driven IoT devices .  
 hybird duty-cycle and TPC mechanism saves more 
energy with larger delays at base station or receiver 
side in AI-driven IoT devices .  
  In near future machine learning based self-adaptive joint 
wireless power transfer, modulation and coding  techniques for 
big data management in industries will be focused. Besides, AI-
driven Use-case for the smart industrial city will be proposed. 
DISCLOSURES  
There is no conflict of interest between all authors. 
REFSERENCES  
[1] W.Zhang,Z.Zhang, S.Zeadally, H.Chao, V.Leung, “ MASM: A Multiple-
algorithm Service Model for Energy-delay Optimization 
in Edge Artificial Intelligence”, IEEE Transactions 
on Industrial Informatics , vol.xx, no.1, pp.1-10, 2019. 
[2] S.Sureddy, K. Rashmi, R. Gayathri, A.S. Nadhan,” Flexible Deep 
Learning in Edge Computing for IoT”, International Journal of Pure and 
Applied Mathematics, vol.119, no. 10, pp.531-543, 2018. 
[3] M.Lavassani, S.Forsström,U.Jennehag, T.Zhang , “Combining Fog 
Computing with Sensor Mote Machine Learning for Industrial IoT”, 
Sensors,vol.18, no.5, pp.1532, 2018  
[4] A.H.Sodhro, S.Pirbhulal,  “Power Control Algorithms for Media 
Trans mission in Remote Healthcare Systems”, IEEE Access,vol.6, no.1, 
pp. 42384-42393, 2018 
[5] E.Oyekanlu, K.Scoles, Towards Low- Cost, “Real -Time, Distributed 
Signal and Data Processing for Artificial Intelligence Applications at 
Edges of Large Industrial and Internet Networks ”, 2018 IEEE First 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence  and Knowledge 
Engineering , 2018, pp.66 -167. 
[6] K.C.Shekar, P.Chandra, K.V.Rao, “ Fault Diagnostics in industrial 
application domains using data mining and artificial 
intelligence technologies and frameworks ”, 2014 IEEE International 
Advance Computing Conference (IAC C), 2014, pp.538-543. 
[7] A.H.Sodhro, S.pibhulal, A.Kumar, “An Energy -Efficient Algorithm for 
Wearable Electrocardiogram Signal Processing in Ubiquitous 3 
Healthcare Applications”, MDPI Sensors Vol.8, No.3, pp.923, 2018  
[8] H.Xu , W.Yu , D.Griffith , N.Golmie , A Survey on Industrial Internet of 
Things: A Cyber-Physical Systems Perspective, IEEE Access, vol.6, 
no.2018, pp.78238-78259, 2018. 
[9] J.Wang, D.Li, Adaptive Computing Optimization in Software-Defined 
Network-Based Industrial Internet of Things with Fog Computing, 
Sensors, vol.18, no.8, pp.   2509, 2018. 
[10] A.H.Sodhro, Z.Luo, A.K.Sangaiah, S.W.Ba ik, “Mobile Edge Computing 
based QoS Optimization in Medical Healthcare Applications”, 
International Journal of Information Management (IJIM), Elsevier,pp.1-
20, 2018 
[11] Y.Hao, Y.Miao,Y.Tian, L.Hu, M. S.Hossain, G.Muhammad, S.U.Amin, 
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo: AI-Enabled Smart Edge with Joint Computation, 
Caching, and Communication in Heterogeneous IoT, IEEE Network, vol. 
XX, no. YY, pp.1-8, 2019. 
[12] A.H.Sodhro, S.Pirbhulal, “A Joint Transmission Power Control and Duty -
Cycle Approach for Smart Healthcare System”, IEEE Sensor 
Journal,vol.PP, no.99, pp.1-8, 2018. 
[13] F.Minfan, et al. "Loading and Power Control for a High -Efficiency Class 
E PA -Driven Megahertz WPT System."  IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Electronics  vol. 63, no.11, pp.6867 -6876, 2016.  
Fig. 7. Reliability optimization in hybird  TPC and duty -cycle  network  

==== Page 8 ====
1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 8 
[14] C.Andrea, et al. "A joint  duty-cycle and transmission power management 
for energy harvesting WSN."  IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Informatics , vol. 10, no.2, pp.928 -936, 2014 
[15] Y.Huseyin U.B.Tavli, H.Yanikomeroglu. "Transmission power control 
for link -level handshaking in wireless s ensor networks."  IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 16, no..2, pp.561 -576, 2016.  
[16] A.H.Sodhro, S.Pirbhulal, F.K.Shaikh, M.A.Shah, “Medical -QoS 
Telemedicine Service Selection using Analytic Hierarchy Process”,  
Handbook on Smart Healthcare, Springer , Handbook of Large-Scale 
Distributed Computing in Smart Healthcare  pp 589-609, 2017 
[17] C.K.Won et al, "Stochastic optimal control for wireless powered 
communication networks."  IEEE Transact ions on Wireless 
Communications, vol.  15, no.1, pp.686 -698, 2016.  
[18] G.Yuyu, Z.Yang,  "Optimization of dual side control strategy for wireless 
power transfer system in light rail vehicle."  Emerging Technologies: 
IEEE PELS Workshop on Wireless Power Transfer,  2016, pp.1 -8. 
[19] A.H.Sodhro, A.Sekahri, Y.Ouzrout, “Energy -efficiency Comparison 
between Data Rate Control and Transmission Power Control Algorithms 
for Wireless Body Sensor Networks”, International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks (IJDSN), Vol.14, No.1, pp.1-18, 2018 
[20] H.Magsi, A.H.Sodhro, G.H.Sodhro,S.Pirbhulal. "Evolution of 5G in 
Internet of medical things." IEEE International Conference on 
Computing, Mathematics and Engineering Technologies (iCoMET), , pp. 
1-7. 2018 . 
[21] D.Yanjie, M.J.Hossain, J.Cheng. "Joint power control and time switching 
for SWIPT systems with heterogeneous QoS requirements."  IEEE 
Communications Letters , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 328 -331, 2016.  
[22] H.Li, K.Ota,  M.Dong, Learning IoT in Edge: Deep Learning for the 
Internet of Things with Edge Computing, IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 1, 
pp.96-101, 2018. 
[23] A.H.Sodhro, Y.Li, M.A.Shah,”Energy -efficient Adaptive Transmission 
Power Control in Wireless Body Area Networks”, IET Communications, 
Vol.10, No.1, pp.81-90, Jan.2016 
[24] M.H.Rehman, E.Ahmed,  I.Yaqoob , I.Abaker, “ Big Data Analytics 
in Industrial IoT Using a Concentric Computing Model ”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine , vol. 56 ,no.2, pp.37-43, 2018.  
[25] Engineeringmanagement, 
https://bigml.com/gallery/datasets/automotive_engineering_and_manufa 
cturing. 
[26] V. T. Cheremisin , A. A. Komyakov “Simulation of power consumption 
in railway power supply systems with of AI aids ”, 2017 International 
Conference on Industrial Engineering, Applications and Manufacturing , 
2017, pp.1- 5. 
[27] A.H.Sodhro, G.H.Sodhr o, L.Zongwei, “ Artificial Intelligence based QoS 
optimization for multimedia communication in IoV systems ”, ms, 
Elsevier, vol.95, No.2019, pp. 667-680,2019.  
[28] D.Wang,Z.Wang, C.Wen,W. Wang, Second-Order Continuous-Time 
Algorithm for Optimal Resource Allocation in Power Systems, IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol.15, no.2, pp.626-637, 2019. 
 
 
Dr. Ali Hassan Sodhro  at present  
works as the Postdoctoral Research 
Fellow in IDA-Computer and 
Information Science Department, 
Linkoping University, Linkoping, 
Sweden and Assistant Professor in 
Electrical Engineering Department at 
Sukkur IBA University, Sukkur, Sindh, 
Pakistan. Before that Dr. Sodhro worked 
as Erasmus Mundu’s Postdoctoral Fellow under SMARTLINK 
Project at University Lumiere Lyon 2, France (Aug.2017 to 
Aug.2018). Dr. Sodhro completed his PhD from University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) China in 2016. His main research domains are, Green and Battery-aware 
Biomedical Systems, Medical IoT, and Machine Learning for 
Healthcare Applications. Dr. Sodhro is the author of 45 
Research Journal & International conference Proceeding 
Papers, 7 Book Chapters. Dr. Sodhro is recipient of several 
research awards, i.e., Third Best Paper Award with Cash Prize 
& Certificate at Guangzhou Annual Report Competition at 
Guangzhou, China, 2015, Best Graduate Award 2016 etc.  He 
has 10 years of research and teaching experience. 
Email: ali.hassan.sodhro@liu.se 
 
Dr. Sandeep Pirbhulal received his 
Ph.D. degree in Pattern Recognition 
and Intelligent Systems with the 
University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences in 2017. He is currently 
working as Postdoc Fellow at CAS 
Key Laboratory of Human-Machine 
Intelligence-Synergy Systems, 
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SIAT-CAS). Dr. 
Pirbhulal has a vast experience of 6 years in Academia & 
Research. His current research focus on wireless body sensor 
networks (WSNs), privacy and security for WSNs, 
Bioinformatics, Greenness and Security Solutions, and Internet 
of Things. He has published more than 20 international journal 
articles including IEEE TBME, IEEE Sensor Journal, and IEEE 
JBHI among others, over 5 international conference proceeding 
papers, and 4 book chapters. He received Best Student 
Presentation Award with Cash Prize at 11th IEEE-EMBS 
International Summer School & Symposium.  
Email:  sandeep@siat.ac.cn 
 
Prof. Victor Hugo C. de 
Albuquerque  has a PhD in 
Mechanical Engineering with 
emphasis on Materials from the 
Federal University of Paraíba 
(UFPB, 2010), an MSc in 
Teleinformatics Engineering from 
the Federal University of Ceará 
(UFC, 2007), and he graduated in 
Mechatronics Technology at the 
Federal Center of Technological Education of Ceará 
(CEFETCE, 2006). He is currently Assistant VI Professor of 
the Graduate Program in Applied Informatics, and coordinator 
of the Laboratory of Bioinformatics at the University of 
Fortaleza (UNIFOR). He  has experience in Computer Systems, 
mainly in the research fields of: Applied Computing, Intelligent 
Systems, Visualization and Interaction etc. He has authored or 
coauthored over 160 papers in refereed international journals, 
conferences, 4 book chapters, and 4 patents. 
Email: victor.albuquerque@unifor.br  
 
 
 


