==== Page 1 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MANUFACTURING 
COMPANIES  AND BROADER : AN OVERVIEW  
 
BUCHMEISTER , B., PALCIC , I. & OJSTERSEK , R. 
 
Abstract:  The workplace as we know it and production systems as a whole will not be 
recognizable in a decade’s time. In this chapter an overview of expected future changes 
in manufacturing systems is given. Artificial intelligence (AI) is the key driver in this 
change and it is critical to prepare us for a future do minated by AI. Robots and AI will 
prove far more disruptive than anything we have seen before. The most effective AI 
systems will be designed around the concept of intelligent augmentation. They will 
handle the math and basic analysis, relieving skilled op erators of a tedious burden, 
absorb data, classify and prioritize information, conduct simulations and ultimately 
leave it to the human operator to decide the course of action. In the AI future, jobs 
requiring human creativity and management expertise will  enjoy the greatest job 
security. This is our competitive advantage as humans. Those who understand the 
collaboration with other humans while working with AI tools to enhance their 
organization’s effectiveness will create maximum value. An energy - and reso urce-
friendly production is an important key performance indicator for industrial 
companies to work economically and remain competitive.  
 
Key words: Intelligent manufacturing , Artificial intelligence , Robots , Sustainability, 
Jobs 
 
  
 
 
Authors´ data:  Prof. Dr. Sc. Buchmeister , B[orut] ; Assoc. Prof. Dr. Sc. Palcic , 
I[ztok]; M. Sc. Ojstersek , R[obert] , University of Maribor, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering, Laboratory for Production  Management, Smetanova 17, 2000  Maribor, 
Slovenia , borut.buchmeister@um.si, iztok.palcic@um.si, robert.ojstersek@um.si  
 
This Publication has to be referred as:  Buchmeister, B[orut]; Palcic, I[ztok] & 
Ojstersek, R[obert] (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing Companies and 
Broader: An Overview, Chapter 07 in DAAAM International Scientific Book 2019, 
pp.081 -098, B. Katalinic (Ed.), Published by DAAAM Int ernational, ISBN 978 -3-
902734 -24-2, ISSN 1726 -9687, Vienna, Austria  
DOI: 10.2507/daaam.scibook.2019.07
081

==== Page 2 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 1. Introduction  
 
The development of Artificial Intelligence  (AI) is one to the most important 
events in recent human history. Human activity has long become the most defining 
influence on our global ecosystem. The pace of change has rapidly accelerated in the 
last 250 years since the invention of the steam engine and t he resulting first industrial 
revolution.  
Now, we are at the brink of a new revolution, which is driven by the 
transformative power of emerging technologies. Technologies like Artificial 
Intelligence, genetic engineering, virtual reality, robotics, and 3D printing will 
fundamentally change our lives in the future. They are incomparably more powerful 
and develop at a much faster pace than any technology before.  
Over the last few hundred years, technology and innovation have led to a vast 
improvement of our l iving conditions. While surely, technology is also among the 
culprits of many of our problems, it is clear that technological development and 
innovation will be at the heart of moving towards a sustainable future.  
The possibilities of machine or artificial  intell igence  were already recognized and 
discussed in the mid -1940s by Turing. Technology enthusiast and AI researcher 
Tegmark (2017) talks about the opportunities of AI and is convinced we can grow the 
world’s prosperity through automation, without leavi ng people lacking income or 
purpose; according to Tegmark, when AI is utilized in this manner, humanity does not 
have to fear an arms race. Rather than worry about an unlikely existential threat, the 
consideration of how AI will enhance human life  is neede d. Intelligent machines can 
fail in ways that are different from human error patterns, ways we do not expect or are 
prepared for and that call for holding on ever tighter to human values and ethics. 
Important questions address the relation between AI and s ustainability, as well as 
sustainable development, in terms of a technology impact assessment.  
In our study  (related and limited with existent reports) , we provide an overview 
of the major future changes in the production branch (and more broadly in the so cial 
sense) triggered by the use of artificial intelligence. We also discuss the critical points, 
opportunities and threats that new technologies and anticipated changes can cause.  
 
2. AI Tools - Technology  
 
AI can play an important role in forwarding sustainable development. The hopes 
are based on the application of some key capabilities within the domain of AI. These 
are capabilities in the area of Natural Language Processing, like Speech Recognition, 
or Machine Translation; or in Computer Vision, wit h Image Recognition and 
Classification.  
AI has been a constant theme in computing research and many researchers, 
including Turing, have conducted research on AI. The study of Artificial Intelligence 
began back in 1956 when a group of researchers got togeth er in New Hampshire to 
discuss how machines could perform “intelligent actions”. Since then the landscape 
has gradually evolved, thanks to technological changes such as increased 
computational power and new discoveries in neuroscience (Silva, 2018). With o ver 60 
082

==== Page 3 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 years of research, much progress has been made in AI, and especially, different types 
of AI are accelerating together with their related technologies. Not to mention, the 
invention of intelligent machines have further accelerated the development of AI 
(Müller, 2014).  
How then should we describe AI today? AI refers to “any computer system able 
to perform tasks that generally require human intelligence”, according to the 
dictionary. How is that possible in practice? AI capabilities today derive from th ree 
major sources:  
• First, data – the huge amount of information provided by the Internet of Things.  
• Second, perception – that is, the ability to recognise voice and images.  
• Third, cognition and problem solving – that is, the ability to continuously learn  and 
improve.  
AI is a pervasive technology, the application and impact of which span all sectors 
of the economy, from manufacturing and media to education to healthcare. The four 
types of intelligences are as follows (Huang & Rust, 2018):  
• mechanics (minimal degree of learning or adaption),  
• analytical (learns and adapts systematically based on data),  
• intuitive (learns and adapts intuitively based on understanding),  
• empathetic (learns and adapts empathetically based on experience).  
The activities may i nclude creativity, the ability to understand spoken language, 
rational inference, and making judgments based on insufficient and conflicting data as 
well as previous experiences. Such activities may have both benefits and disadvantages 
in today’s society. Pavaloiu and Kose (2017) suggest that outsourcing ethics is 
impossible in AI, even though there is algorithmic responsibility since every other 
system, cannot always perform the right things in the correct manner and for the proper 
reasons. Systems such as  robots are unreliable and cannot be fully trusted due to their 
unreliability. Fear exists in our minds of these robots doing the right thing, becoming 
autonomous, and rebelling against humans one day. Ethical laws must be considered 
when designing and dep loying robots.  
Most of the recent advances in AI are based on the application of different   
 machine learning techniques. Deep -learning AI is becoming ever more capable. Using 
such algorithms, computers are equipped with the ability to learn without being 
explicitly programmed. You need a suitable set of training data, and you need sufficient 
computational resources to do the training. Such systems are ideal for classification 
tasks, but the person using AI algorithms of this sort is in the dark about how the system 
actually makes its decisions.  
A gener al, deep -learning AI routine  could, some time from now, be trained  with 
a company’s data, automatically run simulations of the feasible futures and create 
algorithms needed to deliver the desired business efficiencies. The AI might use 
already known operat ions research algorithms, apply them to new situations and 
constantly adjust and recalculate to maintain optimal efficiency. It could develop 
algorithms to optimize the shipment of consumer products for a single device 
manufacturer, identifying the most ef ficient way to deliver each item from the factory 
to the store shelf or the consumer’s doorstep. It would gradually expand capabilities to 
083

==== Page 4 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 ensure an optimized delivery of the raw materials needed to produce the devices and 
every other logistical task neede d to cut costs and boost factory productivity. This AI 
application might then optimize marketing efforts, ensuring the product design meets 
customer expectations, as well as ensuring that advertising accurately targets those 
most interested in the product.  It might adapt to help retailers in optimizing product 
placement on store shelves, and then provide support for logistics, marketing, 
accounting and all the other common business tasks (Byrum, 2018).  
AI’s negative side:  AI looks like incredibly promising technology. It is inspiring 
and exciting but that is  probably also, what makes it partially terrifying. There is  still 
too much vagueness around it. A fair and varied amount of criticism has been raised in 
relation to what extent AI can be used to promote development, touching upon the 
human elements that a machine lacks such as the ability to understand ethical and 
philosophical questions. AI can compute, but cannot judge, as it inevitably lacks crucial 
human qualities such as wisdom, empathy, compassion a nd so on. Without a political 
and societal environment to support its development, AI alone certainly cannot foster 
sustainable transformation.  
The type of AI we are dealing with today is known as “narrow” AI. This is 
different to the much referenced “stro ng” AI which is thought to mimic the general 
human consciousness. Each of these existing systems can be brilliant in specifically 
defined, constrained tasks, where they can deal with uncertainty better than humans 
do. In the real industrial world, nothing is ever fully known (Zavalishina, 2017).  
AI can bring some daunting impressions. Widespread job losses and apocalyptic 
scenarios of super intelligence confronting mankind are just two of topics that the 
media like to focus on. The ethical responsibility ar ound algorithmic decisions tends 
to command much attention but mostly overlooking  the benefits of AI.  
As data processing and storage costs drop, and computing power and algorithms 
become readily available, AI occupies unique spot. It cannot only bring tang ible 
business returns in a very short term but also positively impacts energy consumption, 
and related environmental aspects in global production.  
By 2020, there will be 30 billion connected devices on earth. This is leading to 
the Big Data mountain growin g beyond recognition. Machines communicating with 
people and other machines are creating so much data that we have generated more in 
the past two years than in the previous 5,000 years of human history (Hall, 2017).  
There is  no doubt that the manufacturing  sector is leading the way in the 
application of AI technology. From significant cuts in unplanned downtime to better 
designed products, manufacturers are applying AI -powered analytics to data to 
improve efficiency, product quality and the safety of employees (Kushmaro, 2018).  
AI algorithms formulate estim ations of market demands by looking for patterns 
linking location, socioeconomic and macroeconomic factors, weather patterns, 
political status, consumer behaviour and more. This information is invaluable to 
manufacturers as it allows them to optimize staff ing, inventory control, energy 
consumption and the supply of raw materials.  
AI technology is now making its way into manufacturing, and the machine -
learning technology and pattern -recognition software at its core could hold the key to 
transforming factorie s of the near future.  
084

==== Page 5 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 There is also no question that AI holds the key to future growth and success in 
manufacturing. In a recent Forbes Insights survey on artificial intelligence, 44 % of 
respondents from the automotive and manufacturing sectors classified  AI as “highly 
important” to the manufacturing function in the next five years, while 49 % said it was 
“absolutely critical to success” (Forbes, 2018).  
AI in manufacturing promises massive leaps forward in productivity, 
environmental friendliness and quali ty of life, but research shows that while 58 % of 
manufacturers are actively interested, only 12 % are implementing it (Puittinen, 2018).  
 
3. Industrial Sector , Manufacturing  
 
The industrial sector is responsible for one third of the world’s GDP and half of 
the world’s energy consumption. It is a major user of freshwater and other natural 
resources, as well as a mass generator of waste and emissions. With such a large impact 
on the environment, the efficiency improvements of industrial processes are pivota l to 
the world’s sustainable future (Zavalishina, 2017).  
There is a tremendous opportunity for manufacturers. However, it can only be 
realised by using emerging information technologies like social, mobile, analytics, and 
cloud alongside operational technologies like sensors, machine -to-machine 
communication, additive manufacturing, and robotics.  
Much of the emphasis has been put on the replacement of the old technologies 
with new renewable energy sources and a variety of “green” production initiative s. It 
is inconceivable to think that these could be implemented short term across the world. 
Particularly when you consider that, the heavy industries – that contribute most to the 
waste and resource consumption – operate in a slim -margin sector that is st ruggling to 
remain competitive. Instead, businesses are focusing on their survival rather than 
investments into a sustainable future.  
For manufacturers, growth in an Industry 4.0 environment will be intrinsically 
linked with a business’s ERP system. Certai nly, the boundaries between production 
and management must disappear, and ERP and manufacturing execution systems 
(MES) must form an integrated unit if businesses are to realise the growth opportunities 
presented by this new age of intelligent manufacturin g (Fig. 1) , involves intelligent 
products, intelligent manufacturing processes, and intelligent services . 
 
 
Fig. 1. AI solutions are  revolutionizing manufacturing (Kushmaro, 2018) . 
085

==== Page 6 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Intelligent manufacturing is a constantly evolving concept, which can be 
summarized into three basic paradigms: digital manufacturing (1st generation 
intelligent manufacturing), digital -networked manufacturing (2nd generation), and 
new-generation intelligent manufacturing (Zhou et al., 2018) . By analysing  the 
evolution of intelligent manufacturing,  it is evident , that the process of developing from 
traditional manufacturing to intelligent manufacturing is also a process of developing 
from the original human -physical systems (HPS) to human -cyber -physical systems 
(HCPS). An HCPS r eveals the basic principles of intelligent manufacturing 
development and is the t heoretical basis for supporting the development of new -
generation  intelligent manufacturing , which is shown in Fig. 2 (Wang et al., 2018) . 
 
 
Fig. 2. Intelligent manufacturing : from human -physical systems (HPS) to huma n-
cyber -physical systems (HCPS)  (Wang et al., 2018 ). 
086

==== Page 7 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 3.1 Product Design  
Artificial intelligence is also changing the way we design products. One method is to 
enter a detailed brief defined by designers and engineers as input into an AI algorithm 
(generative design).  
The brief can include data describing restrictions and various parameters such as 
material types, available production methods, budget limitations and time constraints. 
The algorithm explores every possible configuration, until an optimal design solution 
is reached  (Buchmeister  & Palcic, 2017) . One of the major advantages of this approach 
is that an AI algorithm is completely objective.  
 
3.2 Digital Twins 
A digital twin is a virtual model of a process, product or service. The digital twin 
leverages the Internet of Things (IoT) but requires the skills of machine learning and 
AI. Digital twins are especially useful when working with equipment from a remote 
distance.  
 
3.3 Virtual Reality  
Virtual Reality will enable new tools that help to perform testing in the virtual world. 
It allows people, remotely located, to connect and jointly work on situations that 
require trouble shooting. Simulation and product -creati on can help reduce the 
manufacturing time drastically.  
 
3.4 Automation  
Automation will help the manufacturing industry reach a high level of accuracy and 
productivity, a level that is even beyond human ability  (Haskovic et al. , 2018) . It can 
even work in e nvironments that are otherwise dangerous, tedious or complicated for 
humans. Robotics, which is expected in the future, will have capabilities like voice and 
image recognition that can be used to re -create complex human tasks.  
 
3.5 Quality  
Quality involves  the use of AI algorithms to notify manufacturing teams of emerging 
production faults that are likely to cause product quality issues.  
Machine -vision tools can find microscopic defects in products at resolutions well 
beyond human vision, using a machine -learning algorithm trained on remarkably small 
volumes of sample images. When integrated with a cloud -based data processing 
framework, defects are instantly flagged and a response is automatically coordinated  
(Xue et al., 2018) . 
 
3.6 Smart Maintenance  
In man ufacturing, ongoing maintenance of production line machinery and equipment 
represents a major expense, having a crucial impact on the bottom line of any asset -
reliant production operation. Therefore, predictive maintenance has become a must -
have solution f or manufacturers. Predictive maintenance uses advanced AI algorithms 
in the form of machine learning and artificial neural networks to formulate predictions 
regarding asset malfunction. This allows for drastic reductions in costly unplanned 
087

==== Page 8 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 downtime, as we ll as for extending the Remaining Useful Life of production machines 
and equipment.  
Predictive maintenance saves businesses valuable time and resources, including 
labour costs, while guaranteeing optimal manufacturing performance. With digital 
twins, senso rs and advanced analytics embedded in manufacturing equipment this is  
possible. They enable predictive maintenance by responding to alerts and resolving 
machine issues.  
 
3.7 Other Possibilities  
Cloud -based machine learning is allowing manufacturers to streamline communication 
between their many branches. Data collected on one production line can be interpreted 
and shared with other branches to automate material provision, maintenance and other 
previously manual undertakings. AI in manufacturing is reach ing a wider and wider 
level of adoption, and for good reason. McKinsey predicts that ‘smart factories’ will 
drive $37 trillion in new value by 2025 (Puittinen, 2018).  
AI facilitates to conquer many internal challenges that have been around in the 
industry:  from expertise shortage to complexity in decision -making, issues related to 
integration, and overloaded information. Making use of AI in manufacturing plants 
enables businesses to completely transform their proceedings (Plant Automation, 
2019):  
• Robots are  capable to work for 24/7 in the production line. Businesses can be 
witnessed to expand in terms of production capabilities and meet the high demand 
of customers worldwide.  
• A step towards AI means less human resources have to carry out dangerous and 
overly  laborious work. As robots replace humans and perform normal and risky 
activities, the number of workplace accidents will decrease all across.  
• Although, bringing AI onto the manufacturing industry would necessitate a huge 
capital investment, the ROI is sig nificantly high – businesses can enjoy 
considerably lower operating cost.  
 
4. Energy Sector  
 
In the energy sector, a lot excitement is around the implementation of intelligent 
networks that connect producers, consumers, and storage, and supply energy just in 
time when needed. AI is used to predict energy consumption peaks and help with real -
time optimization of operations settings.  
An energy - and resource -friendly production is an important key performance 
indicator for industrial companies to work economic ally and thus remain competitive. 
For this software systems are necessary for analysis, evaluation, diagnosis and 
planning. Thanks to intensive research efforts in the field of AI a number of AI based 
techniques such as machine learning, deep learning and artificial neural networks 
(ANN) have already been established in industry, business and society. Willenbacher 
et al. (2018) addressed the problem of energy - and resource efficiency in production 
processes of manufacturing companies. They present an approa ch to improve energy - 
and resource efficiency by methods of AI. An integrated database of measures was 
088

==== Page 9 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 designed to support sustainable production. The investigations were carried out 
prototypically using an ANN in combination with fuzzy logic and evolution ary 
algorithms (EA).  
Thanks to increased energy use and requirements, we’re going to need more 
power. Resources are growing scarcer despite the focus on climate change and 
sustainability, and there will be continued reliance on fossil fuels. This could 
potentially be mitigated by innovative recycling technologies, and using technology 
platforms to streamline processes and improve efficiency  (Hall, 2017) . 
 
5. Societal Impact  
 
It is unclear what implications AI will have on society now and in the long term. 
Sure, there is a significant impact, with positive and negative consequences, and value, 
collaboration, sharing responsibilities and ethics will play a vital role in any future 
sustainable development of AI in society.  
Academic studies and books have vario usly examined the potential of intelligent 
machines to disrupt labour markets (Brinjolfsson & McAfee, 2011; Ford, 2015), re -
define social interaction and relations (Carr, 2014), and even detailed, serious -minded 
study of its potential threat to human exist ence (Bostrom, 2014).  
The expansion of computing and machine intelligence is likely to affect 
healthcare, education, privacy and cybersecurity, and energy and environmental 
management. It will imply an education system shifting from a focus on mathematics 
and reading to a different set of personal and intellectual skills that facilitate working 
in tandem with intelligent machines  (Brinjolfsson & McAfee, 2014) . 
Other concerns lie in the field of digital ethics, which tries developing guidelines 
to make sure that autonomous agents comply with our moral and ethical standards. 
Data privacy will become even more important as we need to protect individuals from 
the growing desire from corporations and intelligence agencies for data as the most 
valuable resource fo r the development of more powerful algorithms. Widespread AI 
education and accessibility is crucial in order to prevent that AI will increase the global 
divide and lead to an unfair advantage in the hands of very few countries and 
organizations.  
We are see ing population growing in some nations and shrinking in others, a 
growing middle class, consumer markets shifting from the west to the east and an 
ageing population with fewer people entering the manufacturing field.  
Three major societal trends (Berry, 201 9) are:  
1) The value of personal data is increasing.  
People have a right from forced disclosure. They have a right to privacy. Like many 
rights, we make choices, either collectively or individually, to relax that right. More 
people value their right from f orced disclosure and adopt technologies that protect 
their personal data. The trend toward encryption and ad blocking are in part related 
to the reassessment of the value of their own data. More firms are able to augment 
the value of personal data they get  by mixing it with additional data sources. For 
instance, your CV, by itself, has value.  
089

==== Page 10 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Information technology (IT) has become much better at generating new data, in 
particular from sensors embedded in wearable and connected devices. The value of 
personal  data is increasing because it is more valuable to the people who own it, 
and to the organizations that lease the privilege to use it.  
2) The demand for equity is increasing.  
Equity is a strategy of enabling people to have an equal opportunity to succeed. It 
should not be confused with equality, which is a strategy for causing equal 
outcomes. This trend also applies to recommendation engines. Sometimes the 
biases that are inherent in society appear in the data that society produces. This has 
led to increase d interest in fairness, accountability and transparency in machine 
learning and greater regulatory demand for the explainability of the decisions 
produced by a recommendation engine.  
3) The sense of polarization is increasing.  
For many reasons, people are more polarized. In spite of an increase in connectivity 
and wealth, our political and economic systems appear to be increasingly polarized 
too. 
The three societal trends are fuelling new regulation. State regulation on data 
collection, processing and use i s heterogeneous. For instance, under GDPR, data about 
ethnic origin, health, sexual orientation and political, philosophical and religious 
beliefs is prohibited.  
In order for the society to benefit from AI, one way of reducing the negative 
impacts within t he sustainability dimension is through aligning the values of all 
stakeholders during the design process of AI -enabled applications so that their goals 
and behaviours resemble the human values.  
 
5.1 Availability of Jobs 
Manufacturers will feel the challenges of a decreasing talent pool. There will not be 
enough skilled people to perform the jobs of the future. The available pool of workers 
will likely come from developing countries as we see greater percentages of the 
population earning post -seconda ry degrees in their more developed counterparts. An 
ever-increasing mobile workforce will continue to present challenges to employers and 
may lead to a global struggle for talent. Their wants and needs are very different to 
those of the generation before  (Hall, 2017) . 
The present and coming wave of artificial intelligence will displace humans faster 
than we can adapt, through the acquisition of new skills and education. The robots are 
going to win the race. On the other hand, there are those who seek to emp hasise that 
the introduction of technologies tends to lead to aggregate growth in employment, as 
the economy adjusts and demand is created in new sectors (Autor, 2015).  
Since the end of 2018, there are more than 1.3 million industrial robots at work in 
factories all over the world (Kushmaro, 2018). In theory, as more and more jobs are 
taken over by robots, workers will be trained for more advanced positions in design, 
maintenance, and programming. In this interim phase, human -robot collaboration will 
have t o be efficient and safe as more industrial robots enter the production floor 
alongside human workers. Automation will render obsolete as many as 800 million 
jobs worldwide by 2030 (Byrum, 2018).  
090

==== Page 11 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 Aggregate employment remains stable, even as sectors are disr upted and replace 
by new ones. Suppose that the human want for new things (goods or services) is 
essentially unlimited. The desire for new products drives technological innovation. 
More technology leads to yet more new possibilities for products and servic es, 
entailing as yet unfathomed employment possibilities for workers. Expansion driven 
by intelligent machines, which produce like skilled workers but do not consume, would 
disrupt the process of labour absorption.  
As AI takes over the manufacturing plant and automates boring and ordinary 
human tasks, workers will get to focus on complex and innovative tasks. Automation 
does substitute for labour, but it also complements labour and raises output in ways 
that lead to a higher demand for labour. The expansion  in high -skill employment can 
be explained by the falling price of carrying out routine tasks by means of computers, 
which complements more abstract and creative services. In manufacturing, AI is more 
likely to change your job than eliminate it (Fig. 3). If it is true that workers are in a race 
against technology, the question is how long education can keep giving them an edge.  
 
 
Fig. 3. AI changes manufacturing jobs . 
 
Jobs with a high share of tasks involving judgement, creativity and persuasion, 
which are not easily quantified and codified, are less suitable for automation. Jobs 
requiring visual and language recognition, adaptability and in -person interactions, are 
also not susceptible to automation.  
Automation changes the types of employment, with sign ificant dislocation in 
some sectors, with job gains disproportionately going to high -skilled and low -skilled 
workers, coupled with a hollowing -out of routine middle -income jobs. Automation will 
continue to put downward pressure on the wages of the low skil led and is starting to 
impinge on the employment prospects of middle -skilled workers. By contrast, the 
potential returns to highly skilled and more adaptable workers are increasing.  
Managerial, professional and technical occupations have benefited from 
computerization – the surge of technology into their workplaces has complemented the 
work of those engaged in abstract jobs, with less time on acquiring and calculation and 
091

==== Page 12 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 more time on interpretation and application (Autor, 2015). Workers in these abstract -
intensive occupations have made wage gains due to:  
• combination of complementarity of information technology with these occupations,  
• growing demand for their services, and  
• relatively scarce labour supply.  
The same has not been true for workers in occupations  that are intensive in manual 
skills, which are only weakly complimented by computerization, do not benefit from a 
rising demand, and where there is a relatively large labour pool. The dynamics of 
employment are also influenced by globalization and trade a greements. Given that 
capital is highly mobile, but labour is not, employment in tradable sectors can be eroded 
by unfavourable terms of trade.  
The likelihood that a job will in the future be automated depends on:  
• certain attributes of a job, such as wheth er it entails creativity or persuasion,  
• the capability of technology, in other words the degree to which machines acquire 
or can mimic human intelligence, and  
• social and cultural norms.  
The future of automation is difficult to predict, as is society’s will ingness to guide 
and steer its adoption. Some of the issues that should be considered by policymakers 
could include:  
• strengthening social protection systems,  
• implementing education policies that foster the skills required for a flexible work 
force,  
• policies that promote shifting the labour force from low to higher skilled jobs, with 
enhanced retraining and safety nets for workers affected by trade agreements, and  
• policies that promote investment in R&D, fostering innovation in developed 
countries and  emulation in developing countries.  
AI tools will provide a competitive advantage to the companies that use them, 
meaning operations research (OR) will be in more demand , too; the OR jobs would 
grow 27 % over the next decade (U. S. Bureau of Labor Statisti cs, 2018).  
With growing intelligence of robots, robots will soon replace the workforce in 
factories. Every stage can be closely monitored with the help of sensors and data can 
be shared with AI and analytics software. Increased output, defect detection and  
corrective action are much faster and the entire production cycle is much more efficient 
(Khanna, 2018).  
In the AI future, jobs requiring human creativity and management expertise will 
enjoy the greatest job security. Those who understand how to collabora te with other 
humans while working with AI tools to enhance their organization’s effectiveness will 
create maximum value. The power of AI makes optimization techniques more 
generalized and easier to use. The key to professional survival will be in understa nding 
the big picture of business optimization. No particular outcome is guaranteed, of 
course.  
Some fear that as AI improves, it will supplant workers, creating an ever -growing 
pool of unemployable humans who cannot compete economically with machines.  This 
092

==== Page 13 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 concern, while understandable, is unfounded. In fact, AI will be the greatest job engine 
the world has ever seen.  
 
6. AI under  a Sustainability Analysis Perspective  
 
Using AI brings not only opportunities but also risks for negative impacts for 
sustainability. The sustainability dimensions are defined as follows (Khakurel et al., 
2018):  
• The individual dimension covers individual freedom and agency (the ability to act 
in an environment), human dignity, and fulfilment.  
• The social dimension covers r elationships between individuals and groups (trust, 
communication, and balance  between conflicting interests).  
• The economic dimension covers financial aspects and business value (capital 
growth and liquidity, investment questions, and financial operations) . 
• The technical dimension covers the ability to maintain and evolve artificial systems 
over time.  
• The environmental dimension covers the use and stewardship of natural resources 
(waste production, energy consumption, balance of local ecosystems, climate 
changes).  
Fig. 4 shows the sustainability analysis diagram of the AI field according to the 
five dimensions of sustainability.  
 
 
Fig. 4. Sustainability analysis diagram of the artificial intelligence field according to 
the five dimensions of sustainability (Khakurel et al., 2018) . 
093

==== Page 14 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 6.1 Economic Dimension  
Governments of countries with advanced economies and large technology 
companies are investing in the implementation of AI to create a competitive advantage. 
Such investments give a competitive advantage at the national level for advanced 
economies; however, they also have negative impacts on the globalization of 
production and services. AI's capabilities will reduce or stop the outsourcing in the 
emerging market and bring services in -house. These will disrup t local businesses and 
the job markets of emerging economies, resulting in a rise in unemployment and a 
decrease in individuals’ spending power. This will eventually affect the global 
economy. AI is already a major industry and can displace low -skilled wor kers.  
 
6.2 Technical  Dimension  
Deep learning allows models that are composed of multiple processing layers to 
learn representations of data that have multiple levels of abstraction. This will lead to 
progress in AI being able to code AI (Simonite, 2018) ca using disruption towards jobs 
in the IT industry. In terms of the positive impact, we can expect more capable systems 
that can take over tasks that are more complex. In terms of the negative impacts, we 
can perceive the necessity of stronger engineering et hics as more and more 
responsibilities are placed into the hands of the developers who engineer the systems 
upfront and hence must foresee many wanted and unwanted usage scenarios.  
 
6.3 Environmental  Dimension  
AI may be useful in helping us take better care of the planet in terms of supporting 
waste and pollution management, but also, predictive systems can be used for 
earthquakes and weather forecasting to better recognize the likelihood of extreme event 
occurrences.  
The adoption of autonomous vehicles could be a possible turning point for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions through less fuel consumption (Iglinski & Babiak, 
2017).  
AI can also have negative impact towards environmental dimension especially 
due to the contribution it makes towards further ac celeration, and consumption of 
technological devices. The increased production and consumption of technological 
devices will have two adverse effects, namely planned obsolescence and depletion of 
natural resources.  
 
6.4 Individual  Dimension  
We have become increasingly more productive in the last 50 years (Lightman, 
2018). However, due to job requirements and inflation, individuals are working more 
than before. A person working more than normal working hours has a significantly 
higher risk of poor self -rated  health and that this affects mental and emotional well -
being.  
AI-powered digital assistants, chatbots, analytical tools, and robots could help 
individuals in terms of working less hours, increase work efficiency, improve workers’ 
physical well -being and r educe work -related injuries (Khakurel et al., 2018).  
094

==== Page 15 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 The individual will have more interaction with machines. This will subsequently 
reduce the meaningfulness of the human -to-human interactions that we have with 
others, disconnecting us from the world arou nd us, creating more social isolation and 
limiting us with digital emotions.  
Additional questions raise on how much privacy individuals really have in the era 
of AI when data are collected intentionally or unknowingly.  
 
6.5 Social  Dimension  
AI can take a minor role in assisting in communities, managing social media and 
automating routine tasks that are commonly outsourced. We can see benefits, as well 
as the dangers; there is the chance to strengthen communities, but also a requirement 
to develop legal fra meworks around AI, and all of the strengths and weaknesses here 
come with the threat of turning over too much power to AI (Wisskirchen et al., 2017). 
A mistaken interpretation of a real -world event by an AI system could lead to serious 
conflicts. We live i n a world of limited resources, including time, energy, money and 
the great transitions. In this context, nations, organizations compete to design AI 
enabled system to gain power and to have influence over others. All European Union 
members have signed a D eclaration of Cooperation on AI to put forward the European 
approach to Artificial Intelligence based on three pillars (EU Commission , 2018):  
• being at the forefront of technological developments and encouraging their uptake 
by the public and private sectors,  
• preparing for socio -economic changes brought about by AI, and  
• ensuring an appropriate ethical and legal framework.  
 
7. Conclusion  
 
This chapter discusses influence of intelligent manufacturing from the 
perspectives of the problems and challenges of the manufacturing industry, major 
opportunities and core technologies of the new round of industrial revolution , from 
current status to future trends . 
In today’s fast moving global markets, manufacturers need to respond quickly to 
changing demands and m aximise new market opportunities. From all indications, we 
are in an era of significant convergence, where information technology, operational 
technology, and global megatrends are on a collision course. This will drive changes 
in how we do business and ho w we interact with customers and suppliers.  
Today’s students ought to pay close attention to AI trends. They would be best 
served by focusing on developing general skills that are highly adaptable, such as 
mathematical modelling, statistics and science. Th at way, they will be prepared to use 
increasingly powerful AI tools.  
AI can and will make an impact in many different cases. The key to making AI 
contribute to a smarter, greener world is to take action now in order to visualise and 
direct how this technol ogy could look like in 5 to 10 years. The outcomes of our 
investment in AI must be in line with a sustainable future and a better place for all of 
us. AI has become an innovative and revolutionary assistant in a wide range of 
applications and fields.  
095

==== Page 16 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Exist ing manufacturing systems and manufacturing levels can hardly meet the 
needs of value -added upgrades to high -end, personalized, intelligent products and 
services.  New -generation intelligent manufacturing will bring revolutionary changes 
to the manufacturin g sector, set the stage for a real fourth industrial revolution.  The 
manufacturing sector is a perfect fit for the application of AI. Even though the Industry 
4.0 revolution is still in its early stages, we are  already witnessing significant benefits 
from AI. From the design process and production floor, to the supply chain and 
administration, AI is destined to change the way we manufacture products and process 
materials forever.  
AI may be efficient at creating things, improving them, and making them cheaper. 
Nevertheless, there is no replacement for human ingenuity in dealing with the 
unanticipated changes in tastes and demands or in deciding whether to make things at 
all. We have to significantly shift our thin king towards a transformation mind -set for a 
joint sustainable vision of the future.  
We analyse the rapid development of core technologies in the new AI era, which 
is triggering a great change in the models, means, and ecosystems of the manufacturing 
indus try. Our findings show that new technologies are urgently needed to resolve the 
key problems in knowledge generation, efficient utilization, and large -scale application 
in the manufacturing processes and further realize the capability and value in the enti re 
manufacturing system. Of course, broader social influence should not be ignored too.  
The key technology of new -generation intelligent manufacturing systems, that is, new -
generation AI technology, provides the systems with the ability to learn and discov er 
relevant knowledge and mechanisms and achieve human -machine collaboration 
through big data intelligence, human -machine hybrid enhancement intelligence, crowd 
intelligence, and other means.  
The wide application of intelligent manufacturing will push the new round of the 
industrial revolution to its culmination, bringing revolutionary changes to the 
manufacturing industry and human society in the direction of people -oriented, 
intelligent, harmonious, green, and safe development.  
In our future research, we will focus on the introduction requirements of AI in key 
areas of production and at essential technologies in connection with the appropriate 
support of production management, likewise supported with AI.  
 
8. Acknowledgement  
 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Slovenian Research 
Agency (research core funding No. P2 -0190).  
 
9. References  
 
Autor, D. (2015). Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace 
automation. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 3 -30, ISSN 0895 -
3309  
Berry, C. (2019). Societal trends create new challenges for data scientists. Analytics, 
Jan/Feb Issue, in Forum (published online), doi:10.1287/LYTX.2019.01.07  
096

==== Page 17 ====
DAAAM  INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC BOOK 2019  pp. 081 -098 Chapter 07  
 
 Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies, Oxfo rd University 
Press, ISBN 978 -0-19-873983 -8, New York  
Brynjolfsson, E.; McAfee, A. (2011). Race Against the Machine, Digital Frontier 
Press, eISBN 978 -0-9847251 -0-6, Lexington  
Brynjolfsson, E.; McAfee, A. (2014). The Second Machine Age, W. W. Norton & Co.,  
ISBN 978 -0-393-23935 -5, New York  
Buchmeister, B. & Palcic, I. (2017). Product development using an intelligent 
supporting system,  In: DAAAM International Scientific Book 2017, Katalinic , B. 
(Ed.), pp. 43 -54, DAAAM International, ISBN 978 -3-902734 -12-9, Vienna  
Byrum, J. (2018). Preparing for an AI future, ORMS Today, Vol. 45, No. 6, pp. 24 -26, 
ISSN 1085 -1038  
Carr, N. (2014). The Glass Cage: Automation and Us, W. W. Norton & Co., ISBN 978 -
0-393-24076 -4, New York  
EU Commission  (2018). Digital single market EU member states sign up to cooperate 
on artificial intelligence. Available from:  https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -
market/en/news/eu -member -states -sign-cooperate -artificialintelligence. Accessed on 
2018 -11-18 
Forbes. Insights Team (2018). How AI builds a better manufacturing process. 
Available from: https://www.forbes.com/sites/insights -intelai/. Accessed on 2019 -03-
06 
Ford, M. (2015). Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future, 
Basic Books, ISBN 978 -0-465-05999 -7, New York  
Hall, S . (2017). Manufacturing Global: Megatrends pushing manufacturers towards 
Industry 4.0, Available from: https://www.manufacturingglobal.com/lean -
manufacturing/. Accessed on 2019 -03-05 
Haskovic, D.; Katalinic, B.; Zec, I. & Kukushkin, I. (2018). Contribution  of intelligent 
adviser module proposals in bionic assembly system , Proceedings of the 29th DAAAM  
International Symposium, Katalinic , B. (Ed.), pp. 1299 -1305, ISBN 978 -3-902734 -20-
4, Zadar, Croatia, October 2018, DAAAM International, Vienna  
Huang, M. -H. & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in service. Journal of Service 
Research, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 155 -172, ISSN 1094 -6705  
Iglinski, H. & Babiak, M. (2017). Analysis of the potential of autonomous vehicles in 
reducing the emissions of greenhouse gase s in road transport. Procedia Engineering, 
Vol. 192, pp. 353 -358, ISSN 1877 -7058  
Khakurel, J.; Melkas, H. & Porras, J. (2018). Tapping into the wearable device 
revolution in the work environment: A systematic review. Information Technology & 
People, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 791 -818, ISSN 0959 -3845  
Khakurel, J.; Penzenstadler, B.; Porras, J.; Knutas, A. & Zhang, W. -L. (2018). The rise 
of artificial intelligence under the lens of sustainability . Technologies, Vol. 6, No. 4, 
Paper 100, 18 pages, e -ISSN 2227 -7080  
Khanna, R. (2018). ISHIR: How is artificial intelligence changing the manufacturing 
industry in 2018? Available from:  https://www.ishir.com/blog/4654/artificial -
intelligence -in-manufacturing -industry.htm. Accessed on 201903 -06 
Kushmaro, P. (2018). CIO: 5 w ays industrial AI is revolutionizing manufacturing. 
Available from: https://www.cio.com/article/3309058/. Accessed on 2019 -03-07 
097

==== Page 18 ====
Buchmeister, B.; Palcic, I. & Ojstersek, R.: Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing...  
 Lightman, A. (2018). In Praise of Wasting Time, Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978 -1-
5011 -5436 -2, New York  
Müller, V. C. (2014). Risk s of general artificial intelligence. Journal of Experimental 
& Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 297 -301, ISSN 0952 -813X  
Pavaloiu, A. & Kose, U. (2017). Ethical artificial intelligence – An open question. 
Journal of Multidisciplinar y Developments, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 15 -27, e -ISSN: 2564 -
6095  
Plant Automation (2019). Technology: The future of artificial intelligence in 
manufacturing industries, Available from:  https://www.plantautomation -
technology.com/articles. Accessed on 2019 -03-10 
Puittinen, M. (2018). Nordcloud: 10 examples of AI in manufacturing to inspire your 
smart factory. Available from:  https://nordcloud.com/10 -examples -of-ai-in-
manufacturing -to-inspire -your-smart -factory/. Accessed on 2019 -03-15 
Silva, L. (2018). Cognifide: How can we use AI to drive the sustainability agenda? 
Available from:  https://www.cognifide.com/our -blogs/. Accessed on 2019 -03-20 
Simonite, T. (2018). AI software learns to make AI software. Available from: 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603381/ai -software -learns -to-make -ai-
software/. Accessed on 2018 -09-20 
Tegmark, M. (2017). Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, A. 
A. Knopf, ISBN 978 -1-101-97031 -7, New York  
U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of Occupational Statistics and  Employment 
Projections (2018). Occupational Outlook Handbook (Operations Research Analysts). 
Available from: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/math/operations -research -analysts.htm. 
Accessed on 2019 -04-13 
Wang, B.; Zang, J.; Qu, X.; Dong, J. & Zhou, Y. (2018). Rese arch on new -generation 
intelligent manufacturing based on human -cyber -physical systems. Strategic Study of 
Chinese Academy of Engineering, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 29 -34, ISSN 1009 -1742  
Willenbacher, M.; Kunisch, C. & Wohlgemuth, V. (2018). Application of metho ds of 
artificial intelligence for sustainable production of manufacturing companies, In: From 
Science to Society, Otjacques, B.; Hitzelberger, P.; Naumann, S. & Wohlgemuth, V. 
(Eds.), pp. 225 -236, Springer, ISBN 978 -3-319-65686 -1, Cham  
Wisskirchen, G.; Biacabe, B. T.; Bormann, U.; Muntz, A.; Niehaus, G.; Soler, G. J. & 
von Brauchitsch, B. (2017). Artificial intelligence and robotics and their impact on the 
workplace, IBA Global Employment Institute, London  
Xue, P.; Jiang, C. H.; Wei, W. & Lin, J. (2018).  Optimization of the intelligent 
workshop control based on the improved group leadership optimization al gorithm. 
International  Journal of Simulation Modelling, Vol. 17, No. 4, p p. 690 -701, ISSN 
1726 -4529  
Zavalishina, J. (2017). Manufacturing Global: AI and  sustainability: go green and get 
paid for it. Available from: https://www.manufacturingglobal.com/technology/. 
Accessed on 2019 -03-11 
Zhou, J.; Li, P .; Zhou, Y .; Wang , B.; Zang, J. & Meng, L. (2018). Toward new-
generation intelligent manufacturing . Engine ering, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp.  11-20, ISSN 
2095 -8099  
 
098

