==== Page 1 ====
sustainability
Review
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications for Increasing Resource
Efﬁciency in Manufacturing Companies—A
Comprehensive Review
Lara Waltersmann *
 , Steffen Kiemel
 , Julian Stuhlsatz, Alexander Sauer and Robert Miehe
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Waltersmann, L.; Kiemel,
S.; Stuhlsatz, J.; Sauer, A.; Miehe, R.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications for
Increasing Resource Efﬁciency in
Manufacturing Companies—A
Comprehensive Review. Sustainability
2021 ,13, 6689. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su13126689
Academic Editors: Vinit Prida and
Wiebke Reim
Received: 30 April 2021
Accepted: 9 June 2021
Published: 12 June 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Engineering and Automation IPA, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany;
steffen.kiemel@ipa.fraunhofer.de (S.K.); jstuhlsatz@web.de (J.S.); alexander.sauer@ipa.fraunhofer.de (A.S.);
robert.miehe@ipa.fraunhofer.de (R.M.)
*Correspondence: lara.waltersmann@ipa.fraunhofer.de; Tel.: +49-711-970-1756
Abstract: Sustainability improvements in industrial production are essential for tackling climate
change and the resulting ecological crisis. In this context, resource efﬁciency can directly lead to
signiﬁcant advancements in the ecological performance of manufacturing companies. The application
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) also plays an increasingly important role. However, the potential
inﬂuence of AI applications on resource efﬁciency has not been investigated. Against this background,
this article provides an overview of the current AI applications and how they affect resource efﬁciency.
In line with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
guidelines, this paper identiﬁes, categorizes, and analyzes seventy papers with a focus on AI tasks,
AI methods, business units, and their inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency. Only a minority of papers
was found to address resource efﬁciency as an explicit objective. Subsequently, typical use cases
of the identiﬁed AI applications are described with a focus on predictive maintenance, production
planning, fault detection and predictive quality, as well as the increase in energy efﬁciency. In general,
more research is needed that explicitly considers sustainability in the development and use phase of
AI solutions, including Green AI. This paper contributes to research in this ﬁeld by systematically
examining papers and revealing research deﬁcits. Additionally, practitioners are offered the ﬁrst
indications of AI applications increasing resource efﬁciency.
Keywords: sustainability; energy efﬁciency; material efﬁciency; water efﬁciency; greenhouse gas
emissions; Green AI; AI; machine learning
1. Introduction
The results of the latest assessment reports of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change (IPCC) unambiguously reveal the need for action concerning the diminution of
human-caused environmentally harmful emissions [ 1]. Based on the year 2010, the industry
sector accounts for approximately 21% of the global emissions of greenhouse gases [ 1].
These emissions occur due to the consumption of resources during production. The
emission intensity of resources increases with every subsequent step in the upstream supply
chain. Consequently, the saving of every quantity unit of resources prevents upstream
ecological impacts. Hence, the reduction in energy and material inputs directly results
in signiﬁcant advancements concerning the ecological performance of the manufacturing
industry. Therefore, the increase in resource efﬁciency is of pivotal relevance in addressing
ecological challenges of current and future times. Nevertheless, this progress needs to be
accompanied by the widespread implementation of sufﬁciency and consistency approaches
in economy and society [2]. Whatever the reasons for this may be—regulations becoming
more stringent or the intrinsic motivation of decision makers, employees, and customers—
an increasing number of companies are facing the challenge of becoming more sustainable
and, consequently, of reducing their environmental impact.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13126689 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 2 of 26
After an age of economic growth, in which industrial pollution was widely accepted as
an accompanying effect, the focus of many companies in recent years did not shift towards
reducing environmental impacts [ 2–4]. Due to this inactivity, the ﬁrst improvements could
easily be obtained when analyzing existing processes by taking the objective of increasing
sustainability into account [ 5]. Many measures identiﬁed during such evaluations are
commonly referred to as “low hanging fruits”, as the necessary effort and investment
for implementation is comparably low, while the implications can be signiﬁcant. After
implementing ﬁrst measures for reducing the ecological footprint of companies, the identi-
ﬁcation of further potential for improvement often becomes more complex. Here, targeted
data acquisition as well as efﬁcient data processing serve as enablers for the holistic and
effective optimization of manufacturing environments. Hence, digitization is widely seen
as a powerful enabler for improving the economical, ecological and societal performance
of the industrial sector. The adoption of information technology in the monitoring of
manufacturing systems bears the potential to increase the overall sustainability perfor-
mance [ 6]. Apart from basic digitization approaches, such as big data analytics and digital
twins, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) represents another promising enabling technology for a
sustainable transformation of the manufacturing industry.
While not solely focusing on sustainability in the context of industrial production,
Figure 1 illustrates the increasing visibility of “artiﬁcial intelligence” in combination with
the concept of sustainability in the scientiﬁc community. The number of respective scientiﬁc
publications has nearly exponentially increased during the last 30 years. A prominent
example is the work of Vinuesa et al. [ 7], who assesses potential impacts of AI regarding
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), proving both positive and negative effects.
Di Vaio et al. [ 8] explore the inﬂuences of AI on business models in the context of the
SDGs identifying a research gap for SGD 12 “sustainable consumption and production
patterns”. Nishant et al. [ 9] see the potential beneﬁt of AI in enabling effective and efﬁcient
environmental governance with a focus on developing resilient sustainable systems. Their
comprehensive literature review summarizes the applications of AI in societal matters
and aspects of national economics and the design of energy systems. In conclusion, they
mention the improvement in “industrial environmental performance” as one out of four
promising practical applications of AI [ 9]. Without a detailed description or speciﬁc
examples, the optimization of resource consumption in industrial processes is assessed as
being beneﬁcial for operations at every scale [ 9]. The present article addresses these issues
by identifying the utilization of AI in this regard by a thorough literature review.
Figure 1. Number of articles containing terms “artiﬁcial intelligence” and “sustainability” on Google Scholar since 1990.
While the correlation between general sustainability and AI is discussed extensively
in the literature (Figure 1), a holistic review of the implications of AI utilization on resource
use in the manufacturing industry does not exist to date. Thus, this paper addresses
the research gap by examining the (potential) inﬂuence and the current state of AI for

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 3 of 26
improving resource efﬁciency and answers the following research question: What is the
current state of AI used for improving resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies?
By providing a comprehensive meta-analysis of existing applications described in the
scientiﬁc literature and identifying current research deﬁcits, this article contributes to the
research ﬁeld of AI and resource efﬁciency. Additionally, the identiﬁcation of typical use
cases helps practitioners and researchers to determine possible use cases for increasing
resource efﬁciency within production.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides deﬁnitions for AI and resource
efﬁciency, which are essential for the literature review. Section 3 describes the proceedings
and method used in this paper. For the literature review, the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines were chosen. The papers
identiﬁed are listed and described according to AI tasks, AI methods, resource efﬁciency,
and business unit in Section 4. In Section 5, the results are discussed, analyzed, and typical
use cases are identiﬁed. Section 6 concludes the ﬁndings, states the limitations of this
papers and gives an outlook for future research directions.
2. Fundamentals of AI and Resource Efﬁciency
By deﬁning AI and resource efﬁciency, this section is the basis for the following
analysis. Additionally, the link between AI and resource efﬁciency is explored, clarifying
the possible impact of AI application on resource efﬁciency.
2.1. Deﬁnition of AI
Although AI is seen as a technology with disruptive potential in companies and
research, it lacks a universally valid deﬁnition and is not clearly distinguished from general
IT [10]. Broadly speaking, systems that incorporate AI possess analytical capabilities that
emulate human cognition. Nilsson [ 11] deﬁnes AI as “that activity devoted to making
machines intelligent, and intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to function
appropriately and with foresight in its environment.” Various scientiﬁc publications discuss
the complexity of determining the research domain of AI in detail and provide overviews
of different deﬁnitions [12–14].
While often falsely equated with AI, machine learning is a subset of AI, comprised
of various sub-branches such as deep learning [ 15,16]. Although various other meth-
ods and branches of AI (e.g., expert systems) exist, machine learning is one of the more
popular in the public and scientiﬁc dialogue [ 10]. Machine learning deploys statistical
methods for advancing the analytical abilities of the respective system [ 17,18]. This is
done autonomously in a predeﬁned framework and without detailed instructions in the
form of human programming [ 10]. Generally, three main categories of learning methods
are applied for state-of-the-art AI agents with machine learning algorithms (supervised,
unsupervised and reinforcement learning). Supervised learning, as the least autonomous
method, utilizes expert knowledge or given regularities to verify hypotheses derived from
data analyzation [ 19,20]. Humans predeﬁne and label the utilized data beforehand [ 21].
Based on derivations calculated from the correct result, the AI model learns systematically
by adjusting parameters [ 22]. Unsupervised learning lacks this kind of testing circle. Re-
spective models learn without comparing the potential solution to a desired result. Sathya
and Abraham [ 19] describe the operating principle as the identiﬁcation of “hidden patterns
in unlabeled input data”. While applicable to use cases where data quality does not allow
the implementation of supervised learning, the performance of unsupervised learning
models is often difﬁcult to quantitatively evaluate, as the comparison to an ideal result is
not possible [ 21]. Reinforcement learning is also known as semi-supervised learning as
it is a mixture of the two learning methods described above. The input data are labelled
beforehand; however, it might occur that the labelling is changed over the course of the
learning process [ 20]. The reinforcement is obtained from rewards emitted from the af-
fected environment. The system achieves a maximization of cumulated positive feedback
through a systematic and iterative approach [ 21]. The superordinate task of models based

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 4 of 26
on reinforcement learning is to identify an equilibrium between the exploration of new
information and exploitation of existing information [21,23].
Generally, individual or combinations of various AI methods in manufacturing en-
vironments are able to analyze unstructured data such as audio or image signals. Conse-
quently, patterns are identiﬁed and deviations from the regular conditions of the monitored
system are detected rapidly and, in some cases, proactively [ 24]. These irregularities are
informationally processed and provided to decisional entities. Subsequently, measures
for improvement are automatically or manually derived and commissioned, depending
on the grade of autonomy of the AI solution. The effects of the implementation of AI in
manufacturing environments are mostly related to operational efﬁciencies. However, the
potential implications for resource efﬁciency have not been investigated in detail.
2.2. Deﬁnition of Resource Efﬁciency
According to VDI 4800 [ 25], resource efﬁciency is deﬁned as “the ratio of a speciﬁc
beneﬁt or result to the resource input required to achieve it”. A beneﬁt or result can be
the production of a product or the execution of a production process [ 26]. Resource input
in this context can be deﬁned as natural and operational input for production systems.
Natural resources represent a “resource that is part of nature. These include renewable
and non-renewable primary raw materials, physical space (surface area), environmental
media (water, soil, air), ﬂowing resources (e.g., geothermal, wind, tidal and solar energy)
and biodiversity.” [ 27]. Examples include operational input covers, operating and auxiliary
materials, materials, energy, capital, personnel, know-how, and time. As is common in the
context of environmental science, the present article focusses on the potential contribution
of AI to reducing the use of natural resources in manufacturing systems [ 28]. Therefore,
renewable and non-renewable primary raw materials are of special interest, with energy,
material and water being used as a resource input in this article.
Consequently, various operational inputs such as, for example, capital, human re-
source and know-how-related aspects are not considered in particular [ 26]. Other impact
categories, such as, for example, system and product efﬁciency [ 29] are neglected due to the
focus on natural resources as well as the system boundary of the manufacturing system.
2.3. Link between AI and Resource Efﬁciency
By identifying patterns and suggesting measures for improving the performance of
the observed system, AI bears the potential to play a relevant role in transforming the
industry to a sustainable, competitive and future-proof production. An optimized man-
ufacturing system utilizes its infrastructure and inputs to a perfect extent. In the context
of industrial manufacturing, the implementation of AI and the associated possibilities for
data analysis can, for example, result in optimized production planning. Thus, by taking
the introduced deﬁnition into account, all impact categories are potentially affected. By
reducing attrition and production waste through improved simulation and planning, the
material efﬁciency of the manufacturing system is improved. The same is true for water
usage, which often serves as the auxiliary and operating supply. Optimized production
planning reduces energy consumption, for example, through schedule and capacity plan-
ning. The improved coordination of various production processes and steps bears a large
potential to increase energy efﬁciency. AI supports decision makers in a holistic analysis of
the manufacturing system and, thus, in the identiﬁcation of potential correlations between
singular production entities.
AI thus provides support for the evaluation, identiﬁcation and implementation of
improvement measures in manufacturing companies. In this context, digitized knowledge
is very important in order to utilize the knowledge that is already available in a company
for AI applications and, thus, to create an enhanced knowledge base [ 30]. However, a
sole focus on AI to increase resource efﬁciency is not reasonable; rather, it should be seen
as a promising technology that could be a building block for enhanced sustainability.
This technology, however, can only fully contribute to increasing resource efﬁciency if this

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 5 of 26
objective is clearly formulated during the development and use of AI. In this sense, resource
efﬁciency is a sub-goal of sustainability and the SDG 12 and can, therefore, only make a
limited contribution to improving sustainability, but it is nonetheless an essential aspect.
3. Materials and Methods
Figure 2 presents the research process of this paper. By identifying AI methods,
relevant business divisions, and relevant resource efﬁciency terms, it was possible to
create a search string for a literature review according to the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and a framework for
an analysis of the included papers. The results of the literature review were analyzed to
identify their potential to increase resource efﬁciency within a manufacturing company.
Figure 2. Research process of this paper.
3.1. Identiﬁcation of AI Methods
The identiﬁcation of AI methods is based on [ 19,20,31], focusing on machine learning.
Here, various methods were assigned to different tasks and clusters (Table 1) for application
as the basis for the subsequent analysis. In total, 21 AI methods were assigned to the AI
clusters of supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning, as described in Section 2 ,
and to AI tasks. Thus, this paper focuses on machine learning and other AI paradigms,
such as expert systems and generic algorithms, are not explicitly included. However, this
selection of AI methods is not meant to be conclusive, but rather represents the selection of
common AI methods. To include other papers, to which none of the identiﬁed AI methods
apply, the subordinate term of Artiﬁcial Intelligence was integrated in the search string.
Table 1. Identiﬁed AI Cluster, Tasks and Methods used for this research paper.
Cluster Task Method
Supervised
learningTrend analysisLinear regression
Non-linear regression
ClassiﬁcationDecision trees
Logistic regression
Naive Bayes classiﬁcation
Support Vector Machines (SVM)

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 6 of 26
Table 1. Cont.
Cluster Task Method
Supervised
learningAnomaly detectionIsolation Forest
Local Outlier Factor
Image recognition Convolutional neural networks (CNN)
Modeling, language processingMarkov chain
Pattern recognition
Recurrent neural networks (RNN)
Transformer
Long short-term memory (LSTM)
Unsupervised learningClusteringHierarchical clustering
K-means
Dimension reduction Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
Reinforcement learning Learning tasksState–action–reward–state–action (SARSA)
Deep Q-Network (DQN)
Double Deep Q Network (DDQN)
Q-Learning
Linear regression examines a linear relationship between a so-called dependent vari-
able and an independent variable (bivariate regression) and maps this relationship with
a linear function or regression line [ 32]. In non-linear regression, functions are stud-
ied that cannot be written as linear functions in the parameters [ 33]. Decision trees are
used, especially for the classiﬁcation of data, and consist of nodes, edges, and leaves [ 34].
(Binary) logistic regression analysis is used for testing whether a relationship exists be-
tween a dependent binary variable and one or more independent variables [ 35]. Naïve
Bayes classiﬁcation is a probabilistic classiﬁer derived from Bayes’ theorem. It assigns
each object to the class to which it is most likely to belong, or for which the lowest costs
are incurred [ 36]. SVM is a mathematical method of pattern recognition [ 37]. Isolation
forest is an approach in which anomalies in datasets are detected and isolated instead of
removed, as occurs in most other machine learning algorithms. [ 38]. Local Outlier Factor
is an algorithm for detecting density-based outliers. It compares the density of the point
itself with that of its nearest neighbor to rank the individual datapoints and ﬁnd anomalies
or outliers [ 39]. CNNs consist of different convolutional layers and one pooling layer,
representing a biologically inspired approach. It is most commonly applied for image
recognition [ 40]. Markov chain is a stochastic model describing a sequence of processes
in which the probability of each state can be calculated and simulated in relation to the
previous states [ 41]. Pattern Recognition is the ability to recognize regularities, repetitions,
or similarities in a set of data [42]. In contrast to feedforward networks, RNNs are charac-
terized by connections from neurons in one layer to neurons in the same or a previous layer.
Thus, temporally encoded information in datasets can also be processed [ 43]. Transformers
are applied similar to RNNs in the classiﬁcation and traversal of ordered datasets and are
particularly suitable for recognizing and generating language [ 44]. LSTM is a speciﬁc RNN
architecture, which is well-suited to processing times series data [45].
Hierarchical clustering is a method of grouping objects into optimally homogenized
sets based on empirical similarity measures and sorting them into hierarchically arranged
structures [ 46]. K-means is suitable for the classiﬁcation of data into a known number of k
groups. It is one of the most frequently used algorithms for the clustering of objects [ 47].
PCA is used to reduce the dimensionality of datasets, making them easier to interpret with-
out losing information content. This is achieved by adding new, uncorrelated datapoints
until the maximum variance is successively reached [48].
SARSA is an algorithm for learning an action-value function. In contrast to Q-learning,
however, the agent remains true to its strategy when calculating its subsequent action.
DQN and DDQN are variants of Q-Learning [49,50].

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 7 of 26
3.2. Identiﬁcation of Relevant Business Divisions
Since this paper focusses on AI applications within manufacturing companies, the
deﬁnition of business divisions was based on the value chain according to [ 51]. The
following divisions were thus identiﬁed:
- Procurement;
- Product development;
- Production planning and optimization;
- Facility management;
- Logistics (internal/external).
3.3. Identiﬁcation of Relevant Resource Efﬁciency Terms
To evaluate the inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies,
this paper focuses on operational input which directly affects natural resources, including
material (including operating and auxiliary materials), energy, and water. This proceeding
is in line with the above-stated deﬁnition of resource efﬁciency. Hence, material efﬁciency,
energy efﬁciency, and water efﬁciency are of interest in this paper. Additionally, the two
terms of resource efﬁciency, as well as efﬁciency itself, were identiﬁed as superordinate
terms and included in the search string.
3.4. Literature Review according to the PRISMA Guidelines
The literature review, following PRISMA guidelines, was conducted at the end of
September 2020. There were no time restrictions, and it was searched up to the latest issue
available. The databases Scopus and Web of Science were searched, with the following
search string, consisting of the identiﬁed AI methods, business divisions, and resource
efﬁciency terms: (“Artiﬁcial Intelligence” OR “Linear Regression” OR “Nonlinear Regres-
sion” OR “Support Vector Machines” OR “Logistic Regression” OR “Decision Trees” OR
“Naive Bayes Classiﬁcation” OR “K-means” OR “Hierarchical Clustering” OR “Principal
Component Analysis” OR “Isolation Forest” OR “Local Outlier Factor” OR “Convolutional
Neural Network” OR “Pattern Recognition” OR “Recurrent Neural Networks” OR “Long
short-term Memory” OR “Transformer” OR “Markov chain” OR “ State–action–reward–
state–action” OR “ Deep Q-Network”, “ Double Deep Q Network” OR “Q-Learning”)
AND (“manufacturing” OR “industrial” OR “procurement” OR “product development”
OR “logistics” OR “warehouse management” OR “facility management”) AND (“efﬁ-
ciency” OR “resource efﬁciency” OR “material efﬁciency” OR “energy efﬁciency” OR
“water efﬁciency”)
Figure 3 shows that 1347 papers were identiﬁed through database searching within
Scopus and Web of Science. Additionally, 49 papers were identiﬁed through other sources,
including expert recommendations, citations, and cross-references. Subsequently, dupli-
cates were removed, and the title and abstracts of the identiﬁed papers were screened.
Here, only papers using an AI method for an industrial application were included. A total
of 1012 papers not meeting these criteria were excluded, e.g., AI applications, used for en-
vironmental monitoring of landscapes, as this application is not suitable for manufacturing
companies. The resource efﬁciency aspect was still of secondary importance in this step and
not an exclusion criterion, since resource efﬁciency potentials were conceivable in many
approaches, but these were not explicitly described in the title or abstract. Subsequently,
151 articles were assessed for eligibility. In this step, papers were excluded if no (potential)
impact on at least one resource efﬁciency aspect could be found. At the end of the PRISMA
process, 70 papers were identiﬁed as relevant to this literature review and for subsequent
analysis. In accordance with the exclusion criteria, relevant, in this context, means that
these papers address AI applications in manufacturing companies and can potentially
impact at least one of the identiﬁed resource efﬁciencies (material, energy, or water).

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 8 of 26
Figure 3. Literature review according to PRISMA guidelines.
3.5. Analysis of the Identiﬁed Literature
The included papers were then analyzed regarding the identiﬁed AI tasks, AI methods,
business divisions, and their (potential) inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency aspects. Due to the
high urgency of tackling climate change and reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions,
a potential reduction in the latter was analyzed alongside the (potential) improvement
in energy, material and water efﬁciency. To objectify the evaluation of the inﬂuences on
resource efﬁciency, a scale was developed. This scale includes:
- High inﬂuence, if a paper states an improvement in a resource efﬁciency aspect of 1%
or more;
- Potential inﬂuence, if the AI application is able to improve a resource efﬁciency
aspect, e.g., by optimizing a process and decreasing product errors. However, no
quantiﬁcation of the improvement is given, or the improvement is below 1%;
- None, if the AI application does not inﬂuence any of the resource efﬁciency aspects;
- N/A, if not enough information is available to evaluate the potential inﬂuence.
Furthermore, the papers were categorized according to AI tasks, AI methods, and
business divisions.
3.6. Identiﬁcation of Typical Use Cases of AI Application Increasing Resource Efﬁciency
When analyzing the identiﬁed papers, it became clear that many addressed similar
use cases, especially within the business division production. To provide practitioners
and applied research with possible starting points for the promising implementation of AI
regarding resource efﬁciency, typical use cases were derived from the approaches. Here,
the AI applications itself, their aim of improvement, the addressed resource efﬁciency
aspects, and the improvement object (product or process) were analyzed and, thus, suitable
clusters were determined.
4. Results
The 70 research papers identiﬁed were analyzed and classiﬁed according to their
inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency. Table 2 shows the results of the respective classiﬁcation
regarding AI tasks, AI methods, business divisions, and the assessment of the inﬂuence on
resource efﬁciency and GHG emissions.

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 9 of 26
Table 2. Research papers found following the literature research process (green = high inﬂuence; yellow = potential inﬂuence; grey = no inﬂuence; white = N/A).
Business Divison Ressource Efﬁciency + GHG
AI Tasks AI Methods Source Procurement Development ProductionFacility
Mgmt.Logistics Energy Material Water GHGEemissions
Trend analysisLinear
regressionRentz et al. (2006) x none pot. none none
Irrek and Barthel 2010) x pot. none none pot.
Bartusch et al. (2012) x pot. pot. none none
Hofbauer et al. (1983) x pot. none none pot.
Gebbe et al. (2014) x pot. none none pot.
W ehle and Dietel (2015) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Youssef et al. (2019) x pot. pot. none pot.
Adamczak et al. (2020) x pot. pot. none pot.
Kuhlmann and Sauer
(2019)x x pot. none none pot.
Non-linear
regressionJohnson et al. (2004) x x pot. none N/A pot.
Wohlgemuth (2008) x none pot. none none
Trend analysis;
dimension
reductionLinear
regression; PCAFlick et al. (2017) x pot. none none pot.
Trend analysis;
dimension
reductionLinear
regression;
SVM; PCAGhaedi et al. (2014) x none pot. none none
ClassiﬁcationDecision treesEvans et al. (2013) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Ronowicz et al. (2015) x pot. pot. none pot.
Hsu and Wang (2005) x x pot. pot. none pot.
Antosz et al. (2020) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Logistic
regressionYan and Lee (2005) x pot. pot. none pot.
Li et al. (2015) x pot. pot. none pot.
Schmid (2017) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Yan et al. (2004) x pot. pot. none pot.
Naive Bayes
classiﬁcation;
decision treesDoreswamy (2012) x pot. pot. none pot.
Naive Bayes
classiﬁcationAdam et al. (2011) x pot. pot. none pot.
Ferreira and Borenstein
(2012)x none none none pot.
Prasetiyo et al. (2019) x pot. N/A N/A N/A

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 10 of 26
Table 2. Cont.
Business Divison Ressource Efﬁciency + GHG
AI Tasks AI Methods Source Procurement Development ProductionFacility
Mgmt.Logistics Energy Material Water GHGEemissions
Classiﬁcation SVMDecker (2008) x x x x x pot. pot. none pot.
Freitag et al. (2015) x none pot. none none
Zendehboudi et al. (2018) x pot. none none pot.
Wanner et al. (2019) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Deng et al. (2017) x pot. pot. none pot.
Golkarnarenji et al. (2019) x high pot. none high
Classiﬁcation;
dimension
reductionSVM; PCA Pai et al. (2009) x pot. pot. none pot.
Classiﬁcation;
modeling,
language
processingNaive Bayes
classiﬁcation;
LSTMZhang et al. (2018) x pot. none none pot.
RNN; LSTM Cheng et al. (2019) x pot. pot. none pot.
SVM; RNN Yu et al. (2017) x high none none high
Anomaly
detectionIsolation forest Susto et al. (2017) x pot. pot. N/A pot.
Image
recognitionCNNWeimer et al. (2016) x pot. pot. none pot.
Bechtsis et al. (2017) x x pot. pot. none pot.
Scime and Beuth (2018) x pot. pot. N/A pot.
Willenbacher et al. (2017) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Choi and Kim (2020) x high none none pot.
Liang et al. (2019) x high none none high
Lee et al. (2019) x pot. pot. none pot.
Cui et al. (2020) x none pot. none none
Li et al. (2018) x none pot. none none
Wang et al. (2020 a) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Image
recognition;
clusteringCNN;
hierarchical
clusteringWang et al. (2020 b) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Image
recognition;
modeling,
language
processingCNN; LSTM Liu et al. (2019) x pot. none none pot.

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 11 of 26
Table 2. Cont.
Business Divison Ressource Efﬁciency + GHG
AI Tasks AI Methods Source Procurement Development ProductionFacility
Mgmt.Logistics Energy Material Water GHGEemissions
Modeling,
language
processingLSTM Zhang and Ji (2020) high pot. none high
Markov chain;
pattern
recognitionReger et al. (2015) x pot. none none pot.
Markov chainAbedi et al. (2010) x pot. none none pot.
Jónás et al. (2014) x pot. pot. none pot.
Xu and Cao (2014) x pot. none none pot.
Tsiliyannis (2018) x pot. pot. none pot.
Pattern
recognitionChin (1982) x pot. pot. none pot.
Bhagat (2005) x pot. none pot. high
Dong and Burton (2009) x high none pot. high
O’Driscoll et al. (2013) x pot. none none pot.
RNN; LSTM Wang et al. (2017) x pot. none none pot.
RNN Meyes et al. (2019) x pot. pot. none pot.
ClusteringHierarchical
clusteringAlper Selver et al. (2011) x none pot. none none
Kain (2018) x x none pot. none none
K-meansYiakopoulos et al. (2011) x pot. pot. none pot.
Park et al. (2013) x pot. none none none
Moll et al. (2019) x pot. pot. N/A N/A
Gould et al. (2017) x pot. pot. pot. pot.
Clustering;
anomaly
detectionK-means; Local
Outlier FactorKanyama et al. (2017) x none none pot. none
Dimension
reductionPCA Lane et al. (2003) x pot. pot. none pot.
Dimension
reduction;
classiﬁcationPCA; linear
regressionJagadish and Ray (2016) x pot. pot. N/A pot.
Learning tasks Q-learning Yang et al. (2020) x pot. none none pot.

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 12 of 26
Rentz et al. [ 52] applied a regression-based calculation model to the utilization pro-
cesses of waste products in the metal processing industry. Plans of metallurgical recycling
processes were developed and implemented in software tools that drew on problem-
adequate mapping the underlying processes. Irrek and Bunse [ 53] used a regression analy-
sis to select more efﬁcient lighting for a manufacturing plant. The calculation model com-
pares several options and simulates the results, without having to replace the entire lighting
of the manufacturing facility contributing to essential energy savings. Bartusch et al. [54]
presented an AI-supported intra- and inter-company material ﬂow analysis, which is in-
tended to increase resource efﬁciency while explicitly considering energy efﬁciency and
CO 2emissions. Hofbauer et al. [ 55] analyzed measures for increasing energy efﬁciency in
the heat-intensive industry with the help of linear regression. Gebbe et al. [ 56] developed a
method to estimate the electricity consumption of machines within a factory, although only
the aggregated electricity consumption of multiple machines is available. The method uses
linear regression to disaggregate the electricity consumption, enabling the consumption
to be easily monitored, and thus identifying potential savings [ 56]. Wehle and Dietel [ 57]
describe a procedure to optimize maintenance processes by evaluating images of possi-
ble errors in production in real time. Such a procedure allows for errors to be corrected
as efﬁciently as possible, thus saving scrap and making production more efﬁcient [ 57].
Youssef et al. [ 58] developed a model to improve the data-based prediction quality of
properties of different materials. By improving this prediction quality, it is possible to
ﬁnd (quasi-)optimal solutions to manufacturing processes, enabling an improvement in
material and energy efﬁciency [ 58]. Adamczak et al. [ 59] examined a regression model
that analyses data from a ball bearing sensor. Minimization of vibrations can reduce ma-
terial wear in the long term, as well as energy and, thus, CO 2emissions, through lower
friction [ 59]. Kuhlmann and Sauer [ 60] developed a model with linear regression to eval-
uate energy measures and increase the energetic agility within a manufacturing plant.
Johnson et al. [61] used non-linear regression to create a more reliable meta-model and
optimize various factors, such as efﬁciency in manufacturing semiconductors. Wohlge-
muth [ 62] derived analytical equations by applying non-linear regression to test the acoustic
compliance of a separation membrane in the galvanic manufacturing process. Thus, more
efﬁcient separation membranes can be manufactured [ 62]. Flick et al. [ 63] analyzed the
energy efﬁciency of manufacturing systems within the automotive industry. By applying
regression analysis and PCA, aspects inﬂuencing energy consumption, such as product
size or shop area, are identiﬁed [ 63]. By combining SVM, PCA, and linear regression,
Ghaedi et al. [64] predicted the adsorption of methylene blue dye.
With the help of a decision tree, Evans et al. [ 65] created a system that supports the
selection of the manufacturing method for a certain manufacturing process. Using histori-
cal data, the model is trained to simulate experience and intuition from past decisions [ 65].
Ronowicz et al. [ 66] investigated the characteristics of produced pellets using a decision-
tree-based model. In this way, the perfect formula per chemical used can be found, in which
the respective ingredients can be used as efﬁciently as possible. As research and develop-
ment in the chemical industry can be very time-, cost- and energy-intensive, savings in
these areas are possible [ 66]. Hsu and Wang [ 67] used a decision tree to classify size patterns
of the human body for clothing and calculated the amount of fabric needed for garment
patterns based on a database of measured data. Applying decision trees, Antosz et al. [ 68]
improved the maintenance approach of manufacturing companies. Yan and Lee [ 69] used
logistic regression for the real-time monitoring of the health status of industrial components.
A logistic regression analysis was used by Li et al. [ 70] to analyze the sound of rotating
cutting tools. In this way, even minor inaccuracies can be detected, which prevent increased
reject products due to imprecise cutting performance at an early stage [ 70]. Through a com-
bination of model-based control methods and machine learning procedures, Schmid [ 71]
attempted to improve resource efﬁciency in process control of industrial printing processes.
Yan et al. [ 72] developed a method for predictive maintenance using logistic regression.
Naive Bayes clusters and decision trees are used by Doreswamy [ 73] to classify datasets

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 13 of 26
of different manufacturing materials. The information gained from these data models
enables decisions regarding the use of different materials for speciﬁc tasks or manufac-
turing pieces [ 73]. Adam et al. [ 74] applied a Hybrid Artiﬁcial Neural Network-Naive
Bayes classiﬁer in the identiﬁcation of reject products in the semiconductor manufacturing.
Thus, these products are prevented from being further processed and waste is avoided [ 74].
Based on a database of past decisions on supplier selections, Ferreira and Borenstein [ 75]
trained a data model. Thus, they developed a system for evaluating suppliers on the basis
of a Bayes cluster, also considering resource efﬁciency and sustainability [ 75]. Prasetiyo
et al. [ 76] analyzed the energy efﬁciency of a building with a Naive Bayes cluster. SVM was
applied by Decker [ 77] in order to compensate for variances in process sequences. Freitag
et al. [ 78] trained an SVM model to predict the effects of different process designs, and to
evaluate these with regard to logistical performance and technical feasibility. A calculation
model based on SVM was applied by Zendehboudi et al. [ 79] to predict the yield of solar
and wind plants. Companies can use this calculation model to plan their own Photo voltaic
or wind plant, integrate it into production, or optimize their existing plants [ 79]. Wanner
et al. [ 80] analyzed machine data to improve maintenance and simplify fault detection,
localization and identiﬁcation. This can ensure smooth production, which, in the long
term, reduces the energy costs caused by constant downtimes associated with shutting
down and restarting machines [ 80]. Deng et al. [ 81] improved the fault detection within
manufacturing processes using SVM. By applying SVM, Golkarnarenji et al. [ 81] increased
the product quality and energy efﬁciency of the production of carbon ﬁber. Energy savings
of almost 45% were realized. Pai et al. [ 82] applied SVM and PCA to the detection of
errors during the production of LCD monitors. Zhang et al. [ 83] applied LSTM and Naïve
Bayes Classiﬁcation to the prediction of system degradation and the remaining lifetime
of a machine. Cheng et al. [ 84] proposed a model applying RNN and LSTM to optimize
the predictive maintenance of machines. By applying SVM, Yu et al. [85] extrapolated the
energy consumption of individual tools in production. Moreover, energy savings can be
estimated with the help of further simulations.
Susto et al. [ 86] applied Isolation Forest in a semiconductor manufacturing process,
detecting product anomalies and identifying the process which causes the latter.
Weimer et al. [ 87] designed a CNN for defect detection in industrial inspection. Thus,
the feature extraction is automated. In the context of automated guided vehicles, a solution
with CNN was described by Bechtsis et al. [ 88]. Through this approach, the position and
possible routes of autonomous vehicles are determined by the data collected at all times,
using the Light Detected And Ranging (LIDAR) technology [ 88]. A CNN is applied by
Scime and Beuth [ 89] to additive manufacturing, to detect anomalies and defects in the
interaction of the deposition blade and the powder bed in selective laser melting or laser
powder bed fusion. Willenbach et al. [ 90] combined different AI methods, mainly CNN,
to improve the operational material ﬂow management. Choi and Kim [ 91] developed an
“edge AI” using CNN to control the defrosting operation of industrial mobile terminals
in logistics. Hence, the energy consumption can be decreased signiﬁcantly [ 91]. Liang
et al. [ 92] optimized the machining processes by detecting potential errors with CNN for a
dynamic prognosis. The energy efﬁciency was improved by about 29% [ 92]. Lee et al. [ 93]
applied CNN for product quality control of steel. Thus, defects can be detected early
on within the manufacturing system, and processes can be adapted. Using CNN, Cui
et al. [ 94] analyzed the product quality of additive manufactured metal parts, considering
the lack of fusion, crack, and porosity. Li et al. [ 95] applied CNN to evaluate the product
quality during the assembly process. Wang et al. [ 96] proposed a model for identifying the
optimal operation model of manufacturing processes with CNN. Wang et al. [ 97] designed a
method with CNN and hierarchical clustering, enhancing the prediction models of chemical
processes. Liu et al. [ 98] improved human–machine interaction within manufacturing with
CNN and LSTM.
Zhang and Ji [ 99] developed an LSTM method for production error detection and
energy-efﬁcient scheduling. Thus, an increase in both energy efﬁciency, of 21.3%, and

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 14 of 26
in product quality were achieved in a case study [ 99]. Reger et al. [ 100] used pattern
recognition and Markov chain to classify electric drives in manufacturing plants. Hence,
the energy consumption of speciﬁc machines can be derived using fewer sensors, and
energy efﬁciency is calculated more easily [ 100]. Waiting time models (e.g., queues of
products in processing lines) were modelled as Markov chains by Abedi et al. [ 101]. Thus,
waiting times at production lines can be reduced or production time can be predicted [ 101].
Jonas et al. [ 102] used Markov Chains for the repair process in the industrial electronic
sector. Hence, the probability of speciﬁc process steps and process time required for the
repair can be determined, improving process planning and product quality, and saving
resources [ 102]. Xu and Cao [ 103] evaluated the energy efﬁciency and productivity of
machine tools based on a Markov chain. Thus, the scheduling of maintenance operations
can be optimized [ 103]. By applying Markov chain, Tsiliyannis [ 104] improved the forecast
of the return of products, which can be used for remanufacturing. Another approach is the
Pattern Recognition, used by Chin [ 105] for automated visual inspection in manufacturing.
Bhagat [ 106] applied pattern recognition to the prediction of heat transfer fouling and to
increase tube bundle heat transfer efﬁciency. Consequently, operation and maintenance
times can be adjusted. In order to simulate occupant behavior and usage patterns, Dong
and Burton [ 107] used pattern recognition to evaluate data collected by sensor networks,
e.g., temperature and humidity. O’Driscoll et al. [ 108] applied pattern recognition to
characterize different machine components according to their energy consumption. Wang
et al. [ 109] optimized heating systems within buildings, especially ofﬁces, in terms of
comfort and energy efﬁciency, using RNN and LSTM. Meyes et al. [ 110] analyzed the
product quality during production by predicting component defects with an RNN.
Alper Selver et al. [ 111] applied Hierarchical Clustering to evaluate the quality of
marble and, thus, automatically sort out unsuitable slabs during the production process.
Kain [ 112] determined the characteristics of biogenic wood ﬁlaments produced via ad-
ditive manufacturing using hierarchical clustering. A k-means clustering was used by
Yiakopoulos et al. [ 113] to automatically inspect ball bearing manufacturing parts and
check for defects. When optimizing a sensor network, e.g., to digitize a manufacturing
plant, Park et al. [ 114] used k-means. Thus, the battery life of sensors can be extended,
and energy consumption can be reduced [ 114]. Moll et al. [ 115] developed a method for
investigating the fabrication of workpieces in the Fiber Injection Molding Process with
k-means, and hence preventing errors in mold ﬁlling. Gould et al. [ 116] used k-means
to optimize the assembly process. By doing this, they achieved improvements regarding
assembly time, energy, water and auxiliary material consumption. Water consumption is
measured by smart meters by Kanyama et al. [ 117]. The collected data are analyzed for
anomalies using a k-means and Local Outlier Factor [ 117]. Lane et al. [ 118] used PCA to
monitor a polymer production process and detect anomalies preventing a low product
quality. Jagadish and Ray [ 119] optimized the process parameters of electrical discharge
machining using PCA and linear regression, considering aerosol concentration, energy and
dielectric consumption. Yang et al. [ 120] used Q-Learning for a warehouse management
system by improving the scheduling system of picking operations.
5. Discussion
This section is divided into two subsections. The ﬁrst section analyses the identiﬁed
papers in detail, identifying the applied AI methods and differences within these clusters
when addressing resource efﬁciency aspects. Derived from the identiﬁed papers and the
analysis, the second subsection determines typical use cases of AI applications, increasing
resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies.
5.1. Analysis of the Identiﬁed Research Papers
In total, 70 research papers published between 1982 and September 2020 were iden-
tiﬁed during the literature research process. Figure 4 presents the distribution of the
identiﬁed sources over time. In general, the number of publications increased over time.

==== Page 15 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 15 of 26
The most publications were found for 2017 and 2019. As only the literature from before
September 2020 was considered, the lower number in 2020 can be explained. However,
the signiﬁcant decrease in publications in 2016 cannot be explained by the authors. As AI
applications become more frequent and available within research as well as industry, and
the need for manufacturing companies to improve resource efﬁciency increases, the trend
of relevant sources increasing over time is not surprising.
Figure 4. Distribution of sources found by year of publication.
In addition, the distribution of the identiﬁed sources can be analyzed regarding the
AI method used, and, thus, the AI tasks. Figure 5 illustrates the proportion of methods
and tasks. The majority of papers apply CNN (12 papers) or linear regression (12 papers),
followed by SVM (9 papers). This result is especially unsurprising regarding linear regres-
sion, as linear regression has been used in this context since 1983, by [ 55]. However, linear
regression is also a frequently applied method in current sources.
Figure 5. Proportion of research papers with speciﬁc AI Tasks and AI Methods.

==== Page 16 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 16 of 26
Other AI methods are not used as frequently, as only ﬁve papers apply Naive Bayes
classiﬁcation, decision trees, LSTM, pattern recognition, Markov chain, k-means, and
PCA. Isolation forest, Local Outlier Factor and Q-Learning were only used once, while
SARSA, DQN, DDQN, and Transformer were not applied at all. Therefore, the most
frequently employed AI tasks are classiﬁcation, with 23 papers, followed by modelling
and language processing, with 17, trend analysis, with 13, and image recognition, with
12 papers. Only one paper addressed learning tasks and, thus, reinforcement learning.
From the literature review, it appears that papers dealing with reinforcement learning
applications are more frequently developed for scheduling problems, robot collaboration,
or supply chain problems [ 121–123]. However, as these papers neglect the aspect of resource
efﬁciency, they are beyond the scope of this literature review and were not further analyzed.
Figure 6 presents the number and distribution of research papers addressing resource
efﬁciency within a speciﬁc business unit. The majority of papers look at inﬂuences on
resource efﬁciency in production planning and optimization, while only a few papers focus
on facility management, development, logistics, or procurement.
Figure 6. Number of research papers addressing resource efﬁciency in a speciﬁc business unit.
Table 2 also analyzes the inﬂuence on resource efﬁciency within manufacturing com-
panies. As stated in Figure 7, the majority of papers, in total, 60 papers, conﬁrm the impacts
on energy efﬁciency. Papers dealing with inﬂuences on GHG emissions are also numerous,
due to the fact that GHG emissions and energy are closely related. Only for the latter two
aspects could a high potential be determined, meaning an improvement of 1%. A high
inﬂuence could be found for neither material efﬁciency nor water efﬁciency. Furthermore,
only 46 papers show a potential inﬂuence on material efﬁciency and 12 papers show an
inﬂuence on water efﬁciency. This can be explained by the fact that energy savings count
among the resource efﬁciency improvements that are most frequently addressed by com-
panies. Energy management systems, in particular, make companies more aware of their
energy consumption and of potential measures [ 124]. By contrast, material and water
saving measures are usually neither approached nor implemented, due to their having
more complex solutions and the nonexistence of comparable management systems.

==== Page 17 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 17 of 26
Figure 7. Number of research papers with inﬂuence on the different aspects of resource efﬁciency.
On average, one research paper addresses roughly 2.5 of the predeﬁned resource
efﬁciency aspects. This means that if a source deals with resource efﬁciency, it usually takes
several aspects directly into account. Even if GHG emissions are not considered because
of their close relation to energy sources, there is still an average of 1.7 aspects of resource
efﬁciency being addressed.
The identiﬁed papers were also examined for the use of AI tasks, AI methods and
the potential impact they had. On average, 60% of the resource efﬁciency aspects are
potentially inﬂuenced by the identiﬁed papers (Figure 8). Small differences between
AI tasks can be observed. While papers with AI task classiﬁcation address 73% of the
resource efﬁciency aspects, trend analysis and learning tasks only address around 50% of
the resource efﬁciency aspects. A possible interpretation of this is that the AI classiﬁcation
task is applied in a wider context, and mostly addresses three out of the four resource
efﬁciency aspects (incl. GHG emissions) at the same time. In contrast, the applications of
trend analysis and learning tasks mainly inﬂuence two of the four aspects.
Figure 8. Distribution of identiﬁed inﬂuences on resource efﬁciency by AI tasks (the number of identiﬁed papers with this
AI task is indicated in brackets).
As can be seen in Figure 9, the share of addressed resource efﬁciency aspects differs
more signiﬁcantly among AI methods than among AI tasks. Only SVM, CNN, Pattern
recognition, RNN, and LSTM showed a high potential to inﬂuence resource efﬁciency.

==== Page 18 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 18 of 26
Furthermore, the application of some AI methods addresses all four predeﬁned resource
efﬁciency aspects, such as Isolation Forest, while the found AI application of Local Outlier
Factor only addresses one of these aspects. However, due to the small sample size of the two
AI methods, it is better to interpret these extreme features with caution. It can still be noted
that some AI methods seem to be better-suited to improving resource efﬁciency within
manufacturing companies. However, more research is needed to prove this assumption.
Figure 9. Distribution of identiﬁed inﬂuences on resource efﬁciency by AI method (the number of identiﬁed papers with
this AI method is indicated in brackets).
Although most of a product’s environmental impact is determined at the development
phase and although there is a high potential for AI applications in materials science
(particularly due to the high variability and data availability), this review did not ﬁnd an
AI application which highly impacts resource efﬁciency during development. However,
supporting activities, such as facility management and logistics, seem to use more AI
applications that highly impact resource efﬁciency (see Figure 10).
Figure 10. Distribution of identiﬁed inﬂuences on resource efﬁciency by business division.
The identiﬁed research papers were analyzed with a focus on the objective of intended
improvement. It was investigated whether improving resource efﬁciency is an explicit goal
of an AI application, or whether it is only viewed as a side effect by the authors. In total,
only 23 papers address resource efﬁciency improvements as an explicit goal, although only
papers related to resource efﬁciency were included. Within 47 papers, this was just seen as
a positive side effect. Energy efﬁciency is by far the most explicitly considered resource

==== Page 19 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 19 of 26
efﬁciency aspect (Figure 11). This also supports the ﬁndings of Figure 7, as well as the
relevance and focus of manufacturing companies on energy savings. Only ﬁve papers
speciﬁcally address material efﬁciency, while three relate to water efﬁciency. However,
material and water efﬁciency are mainly considered to be part of a holistic approach to
improving resource efﬁciency in general [ 54,71,116]. Thus, AI applications used solely for
improving material or water efﬁciency are extremely rare, and were only found once by this
literature review, in the approach of [ 52]. The analysis of studies with an explicit objective
of reducing GHG emissions is to be viewed with caution, as this was not speciﬁcally
searched for.
Figure 11. Share of papers having the improvement in an aspect of resource efﬁciency as an essential objective.
5.2. Identiﬁcation of Typical Use Cases of AI Application Increasing Resource Efﬁciency
In general, a high variety of AI applications was found during the literature review;
for example, papers dealing with human–machine interaction, material science, or route
optimization in logistics. By clustering the identiﬁed papers according to their application,
typical use cases for AI improving resource efﬁciency within manufacturing companies
can be deﬁned. These are not meant to be conclusive, but rather present an assessment
of those AI applications that are currently most commonly used for this purpose in the
literature. These typical AI use cases include:
- Predictive Maintenance [57,59,69,70,80,83,84,86,95,113];
- Production planning [52,54,61,65,72,77,78,101,102];
- Fault detection and prediction/predictive quality [58,62,74,82,87,89,93,94,110,111,115,118] ;
- Increasing energy efﬁciency in production [ 56,63,85,99,100,103,108,114,119] and facil-
ity management [53,67,76,107,109].
Predictive maintenance, in this context, is made possible by recording relevant time
series data over the use phase of a machine. These are intended to map and monitor the
condition of the infrastructure being analyzed. The objective is to ﬁnd patterns, in order to
predict failures and prevent them through early maintenance measures. By efﬁciently main-
taining machines, increases in material and energy efﬁciency can be achieved. Unwanted
material and energy losses due to wear and tear on tools and machines are prevented, and
components are only exchanged if needed.
Production planning can be supported by AI applications to determine future require-
ments, and thus to conﬁgure optimally designed production lines. Production planning
can additionally be supported by analyzing and classifying different production methods,
e.g., with regard to efﬁciency. In particular, classiﬁcation and trend analysis methods are
used for this purpose.
Another typical use case of AI in the ﬁeld of process optimization is fault detection
in production. This can be used for the automated quality control of components and
products. In addition, some methods enable fault prediction, which allows for predictive
intervention in the production process (process control) to avoid faults. Methods from
almost all AI tasks from classiﬁcation, dimension reduction, and image recognition are
used for this application.

==== Page 20 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 20 of 26
The increase in energy efﬁciency was identiﬁed as being the most commonly ad-
dressed resource efﬁciency aspect, and the use cases for the increase in energy efﬁciency in
production and facility management are deﬁned accordingly. These include the optimiza-
tion of different production processes, such as green electrical discharge machining, and
machine components, such as electric drives, via various AI methods. Despite the use of
such a variety of AI methods, methods of the AI task Modelling and Language Processing
are the most frequently applied. Furthermore, the optimization of building infrastructure,
such as heating, cooling and lighting, is identiﬁed as typical use case.
The use cases illustrate promising approaches to increasing resource efﬁciency with
AI applications and serve as a starting point for practitioners and applied research, con-
tributing to the diffusion of AI applications, with resource efﬁciency in mind.
6. Conclusions
To address climate change and the pressing environmental challenges such as biodiver-
sity loss, the integration of sustainability into business operations is becoming increasingly
important for companies and a key competitive advantage. In addition, AI applications are
becoming more relevant for practice and attractive for companies, due to current develop-
ments in the IT ﬁeld. Therefore, possible contributions by AI applications to sustainability
should be included from the beginning. This paper contributes to the necessity of inte-
grating sustainability with AI applications by explicitly examining the aspect of resource
efﬁciency increases caused by AI applications in manufacturing companies.
After analyzing 70 research papers, it was found that only a minority of papers had
resource efﬁciency as an explicit objective. Among those, energy efﬁciency was the most
commonly addressed resource efﬁciency aspect. Additionally, only a few papers were
identiﬁed that highly inﬂuence resource efﬁciency, and differences were found in the
AI tasks and AI methods used to address the resource efﬁciency aspects. The focus of
some AI applications is very narrow, and they only address two out of four predeﬁned
aspects, for example, Trend analysis with linear and non-linear regression or clustering
with Hierarchical Clustering. It needs to be taken into consideration that energy efﬁciency
and GHG emissions are closely related and, thus, only a few papers address these aspects
separately. Other AI tasks and AI methods consider several resource efﬁciency aspects at
once, and thus have a broader focus, such as classiﬁcation with decision tree and logistic
regression. Regarding business units, in most papers, the (potential) inﬂuence on resource
efﬁciency occurs within production planning and optimization.
Providing an overview of current AI applications, typical use cases were identi-
ﬁed, including predictive maintenance, production planning, fault detection and predic-
tion/predictive quality, as well as increasing energy efﬁciency in production and facility
management. Moreover, the link between AI and resource efﬁciency could be displayed in
more detail. The identiﬁed AI applications showed that there is potential for improvements
in both focused applications, such as increasing energy efﬁciency in lighting, and broad
applications, such as holistic process improvement, taking all four impact categories of
resource efﬁciency into account.
6.1. Limitations
This paper presents an extensive literature review, which aims to provide an overview
of current AI applications to increase resource efﬁciency in manufacturing companies.
However, this literature review is not without limitations. Through the deﬁnition of the
search string, methods involving machine learning were selected as the focus of this re-
search. An attempt was made to counteract this selection by including the overarching
term AI. However, further work could add to the selected methods, and thus provide a
more complete picture of AI applications for resource efﬁciency. In particular, AI methods
such as agent-based modeling, expert systems, e.g., with fuzzy systems or evolutionary al-
gorithms should be investigated for this purpose, since these are common AI methods, but
not machine learning methods, and therefore were not assessed in this paper. Additionally,

==== Page 21 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 21 of 26
this paper focuses on resource efﬁciency aspects, which have a direct impact on the natural
resources comprising energy, material and water efﬁciency. Other aspects, such as human
resources, system or product efﬁciency, are not considered in this paper and could be part
of further research. The various efﬁciency aspects should also be placed within a broader
context, as, in some cases, it may be more effective to increase resource efﬁciency in the
use phase of a product than in production. Therefore, hotspots for a speciﬁc AI application
should be identiﬁed, e.g., by an evaluation of the environmental impact via Life Cycle
Assessment. As well as this, a variety of industry sectors and, thus, production processes,
was included in the literature review, as the focus was narrowed down to manufacturing
companies only. Therefore, rather heterogeneous industries and production processes
were included, from semiconductor manufacturing to textile processing, and from plasma
etching to additive manufacturing and materials science. A differentiation and analysis of
the suitability of AI applications within a speciﬁc industry sector or production process
was, therefore, not possible. Further research could focus on these aspects. A similar aspect
is the view on rather different levels of a manufacturing company. Improvements in both
entire factories and individual components, such as ball bearings, were considered. In the
future, detailed analyses could be prepared for such differing levels. Within this research,
the majority of papers were identiﬁed as (potentially) improving resource efﬁciency in
the business unit of production. For ongoing analysis, it is suggested to further detail the
business unit and to speciﬁcally classify maintenance and quality management applica-
tions. The identiﬁed use cases in Section 5.2 present a suitable ﬁrst approach for such a
detailed classiﬁcation.
6.2. Theoretical and Practical Implications
This paper provides an overview for researchers and practitioners of AI applications
and methods for increasing resource efﬁciency by examining their (potential) inﬂuence.
It is shown that AI methods have already been applied to increase resource efﬁciency in
manufacturing companies, but only to a limited extent. Future research should, therefore,
address more AI applications with this explicit objective. Additionally, this paper offers
a ﬁrst insight for practitioners regarding which AI applications could be beneﬁcial for
their speciﬁc use case. In this context, the identiﬁed use cases can serve as a starting point
for practitioners and applied research, and provide a promising approach to increasing
resource efﬁciency with AI applications, leading to more frequent dissemination and
consideration of resource efﬁciency within AI research.
Furthermore, this literature review highlights the fact that only few researchers have
taken the direct environmental impact caused by training and implementing AI into ac-
count, although this may result in multiple possible savings of energy and resources. For
example, training an AI algorithm may consume ﬁve times as much energy as a passenger
car over its entire life cycle [ 75]. Furthermore, many data centers are being built because of
the large amount of computing capacity required. In the USA, these already account for
2% of total, energy consumption, whereas worldwide, information and communication
technologies currently consume about 1% of total global energy and could be responsible
for up to 20% of global energy in 2030 [ 125,126]. Thus, it is strongly suggested that the
research ﬁeld of AI should also consider at least the energy and material consumed by
implementing AI applications to increase the transparency of the environmental impact.
Taking this a step further, more research is needed that explicitly considers sustainability
in the development and use phase of AI solutions. This includes the sustainability im-
provement of AI applications themselves (Green AI) and by AI (Green by AI), similar to
the research ﬁelds of Green IT and Green IS [ 127]. The ﬁrst approaches can already be
found in the literature [ 128]. Hence, more interdisciplinary research is required, connecting
sustainability and AI research ﬁelds.
By analyzing 70 research papers, this paper identiﬁes the research gaps and con-
tributes to the scientiﬁc discourse on how AI applications can support sustainability and, in
particular, resource efﬁciency in manufacturing companies. To increase resource efﬁciency

==== Page 22 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 22 of 26
and, consequently, sustainability, AI is a promising technology, which helps to identify and
improve the products and processes of manufacturing companies. However, it does not
lead to greater sustainability on its own, but needs to be embedded in a sustainable frame-
work with speciﬁc objectives. Despite the stated limitations, it is our strong conviction that
this paper adds signiﬁcant value to the sustainability research ﬁeld and AI, and lays the
foundation for the further analysis of AI applications for increasing resource efﬁciency in
manufacturing companies.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.W. and S.K.; methodology, L.W.; formal analysis, L.W.
and J.S.; writing—original draft preparation, L.W., S.K. and J.S.; writing—review and editing, L.W.,
S.K. and R.M.; visualization, L.W.; supervision, R.M. and A.S. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Na-
ture Conservation and Nuclear Safety as part of the study “Potenziale der schwachen künstlichen
Intelligenz für die betriebliche Ressourcenefﬁzienz”.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank VDI Zentrum für Ressourcenefﬁzienz GmbH for the
professional management and Deloitte Consulting GmbH for the realization of the entire study
“Potenziale der schwachen künstlichen Intelligenz für die betriebliche Ressourcenefﬁzienz”.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ; IPCC: Geneva, Switzerland, 2014.
2. Miehe, R.; Waltersmann, L.; Sauer, A.; Bauernhansl, T. Sustainable production and the role of digital twins—Basic reﬂections and
perspectives. J. Adv. Manuf. Process. 2021 ,3. [CrossRef]
3. Miehe, R. Methodik zur Quantifizierung der Nachhaltigen Wertschöpfung von Produktionssystemen an der Ökonomisch-Ökologischen
Schnittstelle Anhand Ausgewählter Umweltprobleme. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany , 2018.
4. Jarass, L.J.; Obermair, G.M.; Voigt, W. Windenergie: Zuverlässige Integration in die Energieversorgung , 2nd ed.; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2009.
5. Sauer, A.; Bauernhansl, T. (Eds.) Energieefﬁzienz in Deutschland—Eine Metastudie: Analyse und Empfehlungen ; Springer Vieweg:
Berlin, Germany, 2016.
6. DeMartini, M.; Evans, S.; Tonelli, F. Digitalization Technologies for Industrial Sustainability. Procedia Manuf. 2019 ,33, 264–271.
[CrossRef]
7. Vinuesa, R.; Azizpour, H.; Leite, I.; Balaam, M.; Dignum, V .; Domisch, S.; Felländer, A.; Langhans, S.D.; Tegmark, M.; Nerini, F.F.
The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nat. Commun. 2020 ,11, 233. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
8. Di Vaio, A.; Palladino, R.; Hassan, R.; Escobar, O. Artiﬁcial intelligence and business models in the sustainable development goals
perspective: A systematic literature review. J. Bus. Res. 2020 ,121, 283–314. [CrossRef]
9. Nishant, R.; Kennedy, M.; Corbett, J. Artiﬁcial intelligence for sustainability: Challenges, opportunities, and a research agenda.
Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2020 ,53, 102104. [CrossRef]
10. Hatiboglu, B.; Schuler, S.; Bildstein, A.; Hämmerle, M. Einsatzfelder von Künstlicher Intelligenz im Produktionsumfeld. 2019.
Available online: http://publica.fraunhofer.de/eprints/urn_nbn_de_0011-n-5491073.pdf (accessed on 1 April 2021).
11. Nilsson, N.J. The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements ; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2010.
12. Wang, P . On Deﬁning Artiﬁcial Intelligence. J. Artif. Gen. Intell. 2019 ,10, 1–37. [CrossRef]
13. Kok, J.N.; Boers, E.J.; Kosters, W.A.; van der Putten, P . Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Deﬁnition, Trends, Techniques and Cases. In
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS) ; Developed under the Auspices of the UNESCO; EOLSS Publishers: Paris, France, 2009.
14. Dobrev, D.A. Deﬁnition of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Math. Balk. 2005 ,19, 67–74.
15. Iriondo, R. Machine Learning (ML) vs. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)—Crucial Differences. 2018. Available online: https://pub.
towardsai.net/differences-between-ai-and-machine-learning-and-why-it-matters-1255b182fc6 (accessed on 17 February 2021).
16. Kavlakoglu, E. AI vs. Machine Learning vs. Deep Learning vs. Neural Networks: What’s the Difference? 2020. Available online:
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/ai-vs-machine-learning-vs-deep-learning-vs-neural-networks (accessed on 1 April 2021).
17. Benaich, N.; Hogart, I. State of AI Report 2020. 2020. Available online: https://www.stateof.ai/ (accessed on 17 February 2021).
18. VDMA Software und Digitalisierung. Quick Guide: Machine Learning im Maschinen- und Anlagenbau. 2018. Available
online: https://sud.vdma.org/documents/15012668/26742261/!VDMA%20Quick%20Guide_Machine%20Learning_EN_1553
781666349.pdf/47bd499f-087d-4650-0af6-a569d7825b0d (accessed on 17 February 2021).
19. Sathya, R.; Abraham, A. Comparison of Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Algorithms for Pattern Classiﬁcation.
IJARAI 2013 . [CrossRef]

==== Page 23 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 23 of 26
20. Haldorai, A.; Ramu, A.; Khan, S.A.R. Business Intelligence for Enterprise Internet of Things ; Springer International Publishing: Cham,
Switzerland, 2020.
21. Mohri, M.; Rostamizadeh, A.; Talwalkar, A. Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning. In Foundations of Machine Learning ,
2nd ed.; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.
22. Aulet, B. Startup mit System: In 24 Schritten zum Erfolgreichen Entrepreneur , 1st ed.; O’Reilly: Heidelberg, Germany, 2016.
23. Kaelbling, L.P .; Littman, M.L.; Moore, A.W. Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. JAIR 1996 ,4, 237–285. [CrossRef]
24. VDI Zentrum Ressourcenefﬁzienz GmbH (Ed.) Potenziale der Schwachen Künstlichen Intelligenz für die Betriebliche
Ressourcenefﬁzienz. 2021. Available online: https://www.ressource-deutschland.de/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/downloads/
studien/VDI-ZRE_Studie_KI-betriebliche-Ressourcenefﬁzienz_Web_bf.pdf (accessed on 7 June 2021).
25. VDI. Resource Efﬁciency—Methodical Principles and Strategies (4800). 2016. Available online: https://www.vdi.de/en/home/
vdi-standards/details/vdi-4800-blatt-1-resource-efﬁciency-methodical-principles-and-strategies (accessed on 7 June 2021).
26. VDI Zentrum Ressourcenefﬁzienz GmbH. Ressourcenefﬁzienz Durch Industrie 4.0—Potenziale für KMU des verarbeitenden
Gewerbes. 2017. Available online: https://www.ressource-deutschland.de/ﬁleadmin/Redaktion/Bilder/Newsroom/Studie_
Ressourcenefﬁzienz_durch_Industrie_4.0.pdf (accessed on 17 February 2021).
27. Umweltbundesamt. Glossar zum Ressourcenschutz. 2012. Available online: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/
glossar-ressourcenschutz (accessed on 15 April 2021).
28. Tietenberg, T.; Lewis, L. Environmental and Natural Resource Economics , 11th ed.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2018.
29. Saiga, K.; Ullah, A.S.; Kubo, A.; Tashi, A. Sustainable Reverse Engineering Process. Procedia CIRP 2021 ,98, 517–522. [CrossRef]
30. Ullah, A.S. What is knowledge in Industry 4.0? Eng. Rep. 2020 ,2. [CrossRef]
31. Corea, F. AI Knowledge Map: How to Classify AI Technologies. In An Introduction to Data: Everything You Need to Know about AI,
Big Data and Data Science ; Corea, F., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; Volume 50, pp. 25–29.
32. Draper, N.R.; Smith, H. Applied Regression Analysis: Includes Disk , 3rd ed.; A Wiley-Interscience Publication; Wiley: New York, NY,
USA, 1998.
33. Bethea, R.M.; Duran, B.S.; Boullion, T.L. Statistical Methods for Engineers and Scientists , 2nd ed.; Dekker: New York, NY, USA, 1985;
Volume 57.
34. Wu, X.; Kumar, V .; Quinlan, J.R.; Ghosh, J.; Yang, Q.; Motoda, H.; McLachlan, G.J.; Ng, A.; Liu, B.; Yu, P .S.; et al. Top 10 algorithms
in data mining. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 2008 ,14, 1–37. [CrossRef]
35. Allison, P .D. Logistic Regression Using SAS , 2nd ed.; SAS Institute: Cary, NC, USA, 2012.
36. Domingos, P .; Pazzani, M. On the Optimality of the Simple Bayesian Classiﬁer under Zero-One Loss. Mach. Learn. 1997 ,29,
103–130. [CrossRef]
37. Cortes, C.; Vapnik, V . Support-Vector Networks. Mach. Learn. 1995 ,20, 273–297. [CrossRef]
38. Liu, F.T.; Ting, K.M.; Zhou, Z.-H. Isolation Forest. In Proceedings of the 2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining, Pisa, Italy, 15–19 December 2008; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2008; pp. 413–422.
39. Breunig, M.M.; Kriegel, H.-P .; Ng, R.T.; Sanders, J. LOF: Identifying density-based local outliers. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data—SIGMOD ’00, Dallas, TX, USA, 15–18 May 2000; Dunham, M.,
Naughton, J.F., Chen, W., Koudas, N., Eds.; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2000; pp. 93–104.
40. O’Shea, K.; Nash, R. An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv 2015 , arXiv:1511.08458.
41. Geyer, C.J. Practical Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Stat. Sci. 1992 ,7, 473–483. [CrossRef]
42. Bishop, C.M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Corrected at 8th printing 2009 ; Information Science and Statistics; Springer:
New York, NY, USA, 2009.
43. Schuster, M.; Paliwal, K. Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 1997 ,45, 2673–2681. [CrossRef]
44. Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.; Kaiser, L.; Polosukhin, I. Attention Is All You Need. arXiv
2017 , arXiv:1706.03762.
45. Hochreiter, S.; Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 1997 ,9, 1735–1780. [CrossRef]
46. Johnson, S.C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika 1967 ,32, 241–254. [CrossRef]
47. Kanungo, T.; Mount, D.; Netanyahu, N.; Piatko, C.; Silverman, R.; Wu, A. An efﬁcient k-means clustering algorithm: Analysis
and implementation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2002 ,24, 881–892. [CrossRef]
48. Jolliffe, I.T.; Cadima, J. Principal component analysis: A review and recent developments. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng.
Sci.2016 ,374, 20150202. [CrossRef]
49. Fan, J.; Wang, Z.; Xie, Y.; Yang, Z. A Theoretical Analysis of Deep Q-Learning. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1901.00137.
50. Van Hasselt, H. Double Q-Learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6 December 2009; Curran Associates Inc.: Red Hook, NY, USA, 2010; Volume 2, pp. 2613–2621.
51. Porter, M.E. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance ; First Free Press Edition; Free Press: New York,
NY, USA, 1998.
52. Rentz, O.; Fröhling, M.; Nebel, F.; Schultmann, F.; Engels, B. Integrierter Umweltschutz in der Metallerzeugung: Simulationsgestützte
Operative Produktionsplanung zur Optimierung Metallurgischer Abfallverwertungsprozesse. Schlussbericht des Forschungsvorhabens ; KIT
Scientiﬁc Publishing: Karlsruhe, Germany, 2006.
53. Irrek, W.; Barthel, C. Abschlussbericht des AP14 “Ökodesign-Richtlinie”: Materialefﬁzienz und Ressourcenschonung ; Wuppertal-Institut
für Klima, Umwelt, Energie: Wuppertal, Germany, 2010.

==== Page 24 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 24 of 26
54. Bartusch, H.; Fern ández Alcalde, A.M.; Fröhling, M.; Schultmann, F.; Schwaderer, F. Erhöhung der Energie- und Ressourcenefﬁzienz
und Reduzierung der Treibhausgasemissionen in der Eisen-, Stahl- und Zinkindustrie (ERESTRE) ; KIT Scientiﬁc Publishing: Karlsruhe,
Germany, 2012.
55. Hofbauer, E.; Rogner, W.; Gruber, K. Untersuchung über Energiesparende Maßnahmen in der Wärmeintensiven Industrie ; Energiepoli-
tische Schriftenreihe; Springer: Vienna, Austria, 1983; Volume 4.
56. Gebbe, C.; Klemm, F.; Zhai, S.; Reinhart, G. Estimating Machine Power Consumptions through Aggregated Measurements and
Machine Data Acquisition. Appl. Mech. Mater. 2014 ,655, 61–66. [CrossRef]
57. Wehle, H.-D.; Dietel, M. Industrie 4.0—Lösung zur Optimierung von Instandhaltungsprozessen. Inform. Spektrum 2015 ,38,
211–216. [CrossRef]
58. Youssef, S.; Zimmer, C.; Szielasko, K.; Suri, Z.K.; Schütze, A. V ergleich Subjektiver und Automatisierter Merkmalsextraktion Sowie
Einsatz Maschineller Lernalgorithmen zur Mikromagnetischen Materialcharakterisierung. In T agungsband 20. GMA/ITG-Fachtagung
Sensoren und Messsysteme 2019 ; VDI/VDE-Gesellschaft, Ed.; AMA Service GmbH: Wunstorf, Germany , 2019; pp. 347–354.
59. Adamczak, S.; Wrzochal, M.; Durakbasa, N. Evaluation of a non-contact method for measuring vibration of rolling bearings in
industrial conditions. Mechanik 2020 ,93, 8–11. [CrossRef]
60. Kuhlmann, T.; Sauer, A. Design and assessment of energetic agility measures in factories based on multivariate linear regression.
Procedia CIRP 2019 ,80, 162–167. [CrossRef]
61. Johnson, R.; Yang, F.; Ankenman, B.; Nelson, B. Nonlinear Regression Fits for Simulated Cycle Time vs. Throughput Curves for
Semicondutor Manufacturing. In Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation Conference, Washington, DC, USA, 5–8 December
2004; Volume 2, pp. 867–871.
62. Wohlgemuth, C. Entwurf und Galvanotechnische Fertigung Metallischer Trennmembranen für Mediengetrennte Piezo-Resistive
Drucksensoren. Ph.D. Thesis, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, 2008.
63. Flick, D.; Ji, L.; Dehning, P .; Thiede, S.; Herrmann, C. Energy Efﬁciency Evaluation of Manufacturing Systems by Considering
Relevant Inﬂuencing Factors. Procedia CIRP 2017 ,63, 586–591. [CrossRef]
64. Ghaedi, M.; Hossainpour, M.; Ansari, A.; Habibi, M.; Asghari, A. Least square-support vector (LS-SVM) method for modeling of
methylene blue dye adsorption using copper oxide loaded on activated carbon: Kinetic and isotherm study. J. Ind. Eng. Chem.
2014 ,20, 1641–1649. [CrossRef]
65. Evans, L.; Lohse, N.; Summers, M. A fuzzy-decision-tree approach for manufacturing technology selection exploiting experience-
based information. Expert Syst. Appl. 2013 ,40, 6412–6426. [CrossRef]
66. Ronowicz, J.; Thommes, M.; Kleinebudde, P .; Krysi´ nski, J. A data mining approach to optimize pellets manufacturing process
based on a decision tree algorithm. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,73, 44–48. [CrossRef]
67. Hsu, C.-H.; Wang, M.-J.J. Using decision tree-based data mining to establish a sizing system for the manufacture of garments. Int.
J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2005 ,26, 669–674. [CrossRef]
68. Antosz, K.; Pa´ sko, Ł.; Gola, A. The Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Methods to Assess the Effectiveness of Lean Maintenance Concept
Implementation in Manufacturing Enterprises. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 7922. [CrossRef]
69. Yan, J.; Lee, J. Degradation Assessment and Fault Modes Classiﬁcation Using Logistic Regression. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 2005 ,127,
912–914. [CrossRef]
70. Li, H.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, P .; Zhang, X.; Zhou, P . Cutting tool operational reliability prediction based on acoustic emission and
logistic regression model. J. Intell. Manuf. 2015 ,26, 923–931. [CrossRef]
71. Schmid, M. Kognitive Prozesssteuerung zur Steigerung der Ressourcenefﬁzienz in der Druckindustrie. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische
Universität München, München, Germany, 2017.
72. Yan, J.; Koc, M.; Lee, J. A prognostic algorithm for machine performance assessment and its application. Prod. Plan. Control. 2004 ,
15, 796–801. [CrossRef]
73. Doreswamy, H.K.S. Performance Evaluation of Predictive Classiﬁers for Knowledge Discovery from Engineering Materials Data
Sets. arXiv 2012 , arXiv:1209.2501.
74. Adam, A.; Chew, L.C.; Shapiai, M.I.; Jau, L.W.; Ibrahim, Z.; Khalid, M. A Hybrid Artiﬁcial Neural Network-Naive Bayes for
solving imbalanced dataset problems in semiconductor manufacturing test process. In Proceedings of the 2011 11th International
Conference on Hybrid Intelligent Systems (HIS), Malaxxa, Malaysia, 5–8 December 2011; pp. 133–138.
75. Ferreira, L.; Borenstein, D. A fuzzy-Bayesian model for supplier selection. Expert Syst. Appl. 2012 ,39, 7834–7844. [CrossRef]
76. Prasetiyo, B.; Alamsyah; Muslim, M.A. Analysis of building energy efﬁciency dataset using naive bayes classiﬁcation classiﬁer. J.
Physics: Conf. Ser. 2019 ,1321 , 032016. [CrossRef]
77. Decker, M. Entwicklung Eines Ganzheitlichen Prognosemodells zur Kompensation von Varianzen in Prozessfolgen Mittels
Support Vektor Maschinen. IPA-IAO-Forschung und Praxis. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, 2008.
Volume 469.
78. Freitag, M.; Kück, M.; Alla, A.A. Potenziale von Data Science in Produktion und Logistik: Teil 2: Vorgehensweise zur Datenanalyse
und Anwendungsbeispiele. Ind. 4.0 Manag. 2015 ,31, 40–46.
79. Zendehboudi, A.; Baseer, M.; Saidur, R. Application of support vector machine models for forecasting solar and wind energy
resources: A review. J. Clean. Prod. 2018 ,199, 272–285. [CrossRef]
80. Wanner, J.; Herm, L.-V .; Hartel, D.; Janiesch, C. Verwendung binärer Datenwerte für eine KI-gestützte Instandhaltung 4.0. HMD
2019 ,56, 1268–1281. [CrossRef]

==== Page 25 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 25 of 26
81. Deng, F.; Guo, S.; Zhou, R.; Chen, J. Sensor Multifault Diagnosis with Improved Support Vector Machines. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng. 2017 ,14, 1053–1063. [CrossRef]
82. Pai, P .-F.; Wu, T.-M.; Lin, K.-P .; Yang, S. Diagnosing Faulty Products in TFT-LCD Manufacturing Processes by Support Vector
Machines with Principal Components Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2009 WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems: GCIS
2009, Xiamen, China, 19–21 May 2009; Zhou, S.-M., Ed.; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA; pp. 413–417.
83. Zhang, J.; Wang, P .; Yan, R.; Gao, R.X. Long short-term memory for machine remaining life prediction. J. Manuf. Syst. 2018 ,48,
78–86. [CrossRef]
84. Cheng, Y.; Zhu, H.; Wu, J.; Shao, X. Machine Health Monitoring Using Adaptive Kernel Spectral Clustering and Deep Long
Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2019 ,15, 987–997. [CrossRef]
85. Yu, C.-M.; Chien, C.-F.; Kuo, C.-J. Exploit the Value of Production Data to Discover Opportunities for Saving Power Consumption
of Production Tools. IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 2017 ,30, 345–350. [CrossRef]
86. Susto, G.A.; Beghi, A.; McLoone, S. Anomaly detection through on-line isolation Forest: An application to plasma etching. In
Proceedings of the 2017 28th Annual SEMI Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference (ASMC), Saratoga Springs, NY,
USA, 15–18 May 2017; pp. 89–94.
87. Weimer, D.; Scholz-Reiter, B.; Shpitalni, M. Design of deep convolutional neural network architectures for automated feature
extraction in industrial inspection. CIRP Ann. 2016 ,65, 417–420. [CrossRef]
88. Bechtsis, D.; Tsolakis, N.; Vlachos, D.; Iakovou, E. Sustainable supply chain management in the digitalisation era: The impact of
Automated Guided Vehicles. J. Clean. Prod. 2017 ,142, 3970–3984. [CrossRef]
89. Scime, L.; Beuth, J. A multi-scale convolutional neural network for autonomous anomaly detection and classiﬁcation in a laser
powder bed fusion additive manufacturing process. Addit. Manuf. 2018 ,24, 273–286. [CrossRef]
90. Willenbacher, M.; Wohlgemuth, V . Einsatzmöglichkeiten von Methoden der Künstlichen Intelligenz zur Optimierung von Stoff-
und Energieströmen und prototypische Umsetzung auf der Basis von Stoffstromnetzen. In Nachhaltige Betriebliche Umweltinfor-
mationssysteme ; Arndt, H.-K., Marx G ómez, J., Wohlgemuth, V ., et al., Eds.; Springer Fachmedien: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2018;
pp. 97–108.
91. Choi, I.; Kim, H. An On-Device Deep Learning Approach to Battery Saving on Industrial Mobile Terminals. Sensors 2020 ,20, 4044.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Liang, Y.; Li, W.; Lu, X.; Wang, S. Fog computing and convolutional neural network enabled prognosis for machining process
optimization. J. Manuf. Syst. 2019 ,52, 32–42. [CrossRef]
93. Lee, S.Y.; Tama, B.A.; Moon, S.J.; Lee, S. Steel Surface Defect Diagnostics Using Deep Convolutional Neural Network and Class
Activation Map. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 5449. [CrossRef]
94. Cui, W.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Li, L.; Liou, F. Metal Additive Manufacturing Parts Inspection Using Convolutional Neural
Network. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 545. [CrossRef]
95. Li, L.; Ota, K.; Dong, M. Deep Learning for Smart Industry: Efﬁcient Manufacture Inspection System with Fog Computing. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform. 2018 ,14, 4665–4673. [CrossRef]
96. Wang, Y.; Li, H.; Qi, C. An adaptive mode convolutional neural network based on bar-shaped structures and its operation
modeling to complex industrial processes. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 2020 ,199, 103932. [CrossRef]
97. Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, Z.; Li, H.; Christoﬁdes, P .D. Operational trend prediction and classiﬁcation for chemical processes:
A novel convolutional neural network method based on symbolic hierarchical clustering. Chem. Eng. Sci. 2020 ,225, 115796.
[CrossRef]
98. Liu, Z.; Liu, Q.; Xu, W.; Liu, Z.; Zhou, Z.; Chen, J. Deep Learning-based Human Motion Prediction Considering Context
Awareness for Human-Robot Collaboration in Manufacturing. Procedia CIRP 2019 ,83, 272–278. [CrossRef]
99. Zhang, C.; Ji, W. Edge Computing Enabled Production Anomalies Detection and Energy-Efﬁcient Production Decision Approach
for Discrete Manufacturing Workshops. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 158197–158207. [CrossRef]
100. Reger, A.; Oette, C.; Aires, A.P .; Steinhilper, R. Pattern recognition in load proﬁles of electric drives in manufacturing plants.
In Proceedings of the 2015 5th International Electric Drives Production Conference (EDPC 2015), Nuremberg, Germany, 15–16
September 2015; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2015; pp. 1–10.
101. Abedi, S.; Mousakhani, M.; Hamidi, N. Using Markov Chain to Analyze Production Lines Systems with Layout Constraints. J.
Optim. Ind. Eng. 2010 ,3, 15–23.
102. Jónás, T.; Kall ó, N.; T óth, Z.E. Application of Markov Chains for Modeling and Managing Industrial Electronic Repair Processes.
Period. Polytech. Soc. Manag. Sci. 2014 ,22, 87–98. [CrossRef]
103. Xu, W.; Cao, L. Energy efﬁciency analysis of machine tools with periodic maintenance. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2014 ,52, 5273–5285.
[CrossRef]
104. Tsiliyannis, C.A. Markov chain modeling and forecasting of product returns in remanufacturing based on stock mean-age. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 2018 ,271, 474–489. [CrossRef]
105. Chin, R.T. Automated visual inspection techniques and applications: A bibliography. Pattern Recognit. 1982 ,15, 343–357.
[CrossRef]
106. Bhagat, P . Pattern Recognition in Industry , 1st ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2005.
107. Dong, B.; Andrews, B. Sensor-based occupancy behavioral pattern recognition for energy and comfort management in intelligent
buildings. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International IBPSA Conference, Glasgow, Scotland, 27–30 July 2009.

==== Page 26 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6689 26 of 26
108. O’Driscoll, E.; Kelly, K.; Cusack, D.O.; O’Donnell, G. Characterising the Energy Consumption of Machine Tool Actuator
Components Using Pattern Recognition. Procedia CIRP 2013 ,12, 127–132. [CrossRef]
109. Wang, Y.; Velswamy, K.; Huang, B. A Long-Short Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network Based Reinforcement Learning
Controller for Ofﬁce Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning Systems. Processes 2017 ,5, 46. [CrossRef]
110. Meyes, R.; Donauer, J.; Schmeing, A.; Meisen, T. A Recurrent Neural Network Architecture for Failure Prediction in Deep Drawing
Sensory Time Series Data. Procedia Manuf. 2019 ,34, 789–797. [CrossRef]
111. Selver, M.A.; Akay, O.; Alim, F.; Bardakçı, S.; Ölmez, M. An automated industrial conveyor belt system using image processing
and hierarchical clustering for classifying marble slabs. Robot. Comput. Manuf. 2011 ,27, 164–176. [CrossRef]
112. Kain, S. Charakterisierung von Mittels 3D-Druck Verarbeiteten Biogenen Holz-Filamenten unter Anwendung der Raman-Spektroskopie ;
Fachhochschule Salzburg: Salzburg, Austria, 2018.
113. Yiakopoulos, C.; Gryllias, K.; Antoniadis, I. Rolling element bearing fault detection in industrial environments based on a
K-means clustering approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 2011 ,38, 2888–2911. [CrossRef]
114. Park, G.Y.; Kim, H.; Jeong, H.W.; Youn, H.Y. A Novel Cluster Head Selection Method based on K-Means Algorithm for
Energy Efﬁcient Wireless Sensor Network. In Proceedings of the 2013 27th International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops, Barcelona, Spain, 25–28 March 2013; pp. 910–915.
115. Moll, P .; Schäfer, A.; Coutandin, S.; Fleischer, J. Method for the Investigation of Mold Filling in the Fiber Injection Molding Process
Based on Image Processing. Procedia CIRP 2019 ,86, 156–161. [CrossRef]
116. Gould, O.; Simeone, A.; Colwill, J.; Woolley, E.; Willey, R.; Rahimifard, S. Optimized Assembly Design for Resource Efﬁcient
Production in a Multiproduct Manufacturing System. Procedia CIRP 2017 ,62, 523–528. [CrossRef]
117. Kanyama, M.; Nyirenda, C.; Temaneh Nyah, C. Anomaly Detection in Smart Water Metering Networks. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics, 2017 ; School of Automation, Beijing
Institute of Technology: Beijing, China, 2017.
118. Lane, S.; Martin, E.B.; Morris, A.J.; Gower, P . Application of exponentially weighted principal component analysis for the
monitoring of a polymer ﬁlm manufacturing process. Trans. Inst. Meas. Control. 2003 ,25, 17–35. [CrossRef]
119. Jagadish; Ray, A. Optimization of process parameters of green electrical discharge machining using principal component analysis
(PCA). Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2016 ,87, 1299–1311. [CrossRef]
120. Yang, Y.; Juntao, L.; Lingling, P . Multi-robot path planning based on a deep reinforcement learning DQN algorithm. CAAI Trans.
Intell. Technol. 2020 ,5, 177–183. [CrossRef]
121. Lütje, A.; Willenbacher, M.; Engelmann, M.; Kunisch, C.; Wohlgemuth, V . Exploring the System Dynamics of Industrial Symbiosis
(IS) with Machine Learning (ML) Techniques—A Framework for a Hybrid-Approach. In Advances and New Trends in Environmental
Informatics ; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 117–130.
122. Yan, H.-S.; Li, W.-C. A scheduling procedure for a ﬂow shop-like knowledgeable manufacturing cell with self-evolutionary
features. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B J. Eng. Manuf. 2016 ,230, 2296–2306. [CrossRef]
123. Shah, H.; Gopal, M. A fuzzy decision tree-based robust Markov game controller for robot manipulators. IJAAC 2010 ,4, 417.
[CrossRef]
124. Johansson, M.; Thollander, P . A review of barriers to and driving forces for improved energy efﬁciency in Swedish industry—
Recommendations for successful in-house energy management. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018 ,82, 618–628. [CrossRef]
125. Jones, N. How to stop data centres from gobbling up the world’s electricity. Nature 2018 ,561, 163–166. [CrossRef]
126. Shehabi, A.; Smith, S.; Sartor, D.; Brown, R.; Herrlin, M.; Koomey, J.; Masanet, E.; Horner, N.; Azevedo, I.; Lintner, W. United States
Data Center Energy Usage Report ; 2016. Available online: https://eta-publications.lbl.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/lbnl-1005775_v2.pdf
(accessed on 1 April 2021).
127. Murugesan, S. Harnessing Green IT: Principles and Practices. IT Prof. 2008 ,10, 24–33. [CrossRef]
128. Schwartz, R.; Dodge, J.; Smith, N.A.; Etzioni, O. Green AI. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1907.10597. [CrossRef]

