==== Page 1 ====
128
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019© 2019                                 IMIA and  Georg Thieme Verlag KG
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision 
Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and 
Practical Implications
A Position Paper from the IMIA Technology Assessment & 
Quality Development in Health Informatics Working Group 
and the EFMI Working Group for Assessment of Health 
Information Systems
Farah Magrabi1, Elske Ammenwerth2, Jytte Brender McNair3, Nicolet F . De Keizer4, Hannele 
Hyppönen5, Pirkko Nykänen6, Michael Rigby7, Philip J. Scott8, Tuulikki Vehko5, Zoie Shui-Yee 
Wong9, Andrew Georgiou1
1 Macquarie University, Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Sydney, Australia
2 UMIT, University for Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology, Institute of Medical 
Informatics, Hall in Tyrol, Austria
3 Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
4 Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Medical Informatics, Amsterdam Public Health research institute, The Netherlands
5 National Institute for Health and Welfare, Information Department, Helsinki, Finland
6 Tampere University, Faculty for Information Technology and Communication Sciences, Tampere, Finland
7 Keele University, School of Social Science and Public Policy, Keele, United Kingdom
8 University of Portsmouth, Centre for Healthcare Modelling and Informatics, Portsmouth, United Kingdom
9 St. Luke’s International University, Tokyo, Japan
Summary
Objectives: This paper draws attention to: i) key considerations 
for evaluating artificial intelligence (AI) enabled clinical decision support; and ii) challenges and practical implications of AI design, development, selection, use, and ongoing surveillance.Method: A narrative review of existing research and evaluation approaches along with expert perspectives drawn from the Inter-national Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) Working Group on Technology Assessment and Quality Development in Health Infor-matics and the European Federation for Medical Informatics (EFMI) Working Group for Assessment of Health Information Systems.Results: There is a rich history and tradition of evaluating AI in healthcare. While evaluators can learn from past efforts, and build on best practice evaluation frameworks and meth -
odologies, questions remain about how to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of AI that dynamically harness vast amounts of genomic, biomarker, phenotype, electronic record, and care delivery data from across health systems. This paper first provides 1   Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) promises to trans -
form clinical decision-making processes as it 
has the potential to harness the vast amounts of genomic, biomarker, and phenotype data that is being generated across the health system including from health records and delivery systems, to improve the safety and quality of care decisions [1]. Today AI has been incor
-
porated successfully into decision support systems (DSSs) for diagnosis in data-intensive specialties like radiology, pathology, and oph
-
thalmology [2]. Future systems are expected to be increasingly more autonomous, going beyond making recommendations about possible clinical actions to autonomously per
-
forming certain tasks such as triaging patients 
and screening referrals [3, 4]. a historical perspective about the evaluation of AI in healthcare. 
It then examines key challenges of evaluating AI-enabled clinical decision support during design, development, selection, use, and ongoing surveillance. Practical aspects of evaluating AI in healthcare, including approaches to evaluation and indicators to monitor AI are also discussed.Conclusion : Commitment to rigorous initial and ongoing evalu -
ation will be critical to ensuring the safe and effective integration of AI in complex sociotechnical settings. Specific enhancements that are required for the new generation of AI-enabled clinical decision support will emerge through practical application. 
Keywords
Artificial intelligence; machine learning; clinical decision support, evaluation studies; program evaluation
Yearb Med Inform 2019:128-34
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1677903
Published online: 2019-04-25

==== Page 2 ====
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019129
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and Practical Implications
In this paper, we focus on the present 
role of AI in supporting clinical decisions. 
Evaluation of these machine-learning-based systems has tended to focus on examining the performance of algorithms in laboratory settings. There are a few 
observational studies which have tested 
systems in clinical settings providing a safe environment while patients continue 
to receive standard care [5]. However, little is known about the effects of AI on care delivery and patient outcomes which need to be carefully considered to ensure 
that it is appropriately applied. Like any 
technology, AI will also come with its unintended effects that may disrupt care 
delivery and pose risks to patients [6]. It is clear that the many benefits of AI cannot be realized safely unless AI is responsibly and effectively integrated into clinical 
decision-making and care delivery pro
-
cesses, and risks are effectively identified 
and mitigated. 
While we have witnessed the beginnings 
of mainstream adoption of AI in only the last five years or so, academic researchers within the informatics community have 
studied AI for almost half a century [7-9]. 
However, an enhanced risk is now pre
-
sented by a shift in the environment from draw-down of innovation based on positive evidence to political and commercial pres
-
sures for speedy adoption based on promise, with the call for evidence being presented as self-interested commitment to the status quo [10]. Clearly this disregard of evidence puts patients at risk.
The objective of this paper is to draw 
attention to key considerations for evaluat
-
ing AI in clinical decision support; and to examine challenges and practical implica
-
tions of AI design, development, selection, use, and ongoing surveillance. The paper begins with a historical perspective about the evaluation of AI in healthcare. It then examines key challenges of evaluating AI-enabled clinical decision-support. 
The final section deals with the practi
-
cal aspects of evaluating AI, including 
approaches to evaluation and indicators to monitor AI. It will show that evaluation and ongoing surveillance is central to safe and effective integration of AI in complex sociotechnical settings.2   Evaluation of AI in 
Healthcare – a Historical 
Perspective 
AI in healthcare is not new, and neither is AI 
evaluation; the dedicated journal, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine dates back to the early 1990’ s. AI as a term was used for a collection of established technologies that were called decision support technologies, 
knowledge-based systems, or expert sys
-
tems in earlier years. The health informatics 
community has a rich history and tradition of studying and evaluating the application of AI to solve problems in care delivery. Early applications were focussed on performing diagnosis and making therapy recommenda
-
tions in medical settings. The early versions of AI mostly used symbolic approaches based on rules and knowledge, whereas 
present day AI uses statistical methods 
along with symbolic approaches to disease representation. In the late 1950’ s, McCar
-
thy and colleagues developed the language LISP which was particularly well suited to symbolic approaches [11]. The PROLOG language for logic programming to manage reasoning and decision-making processes with logical structures was developed in the 
1960’ s [12]. In the 1970’ s, there was a big 
wave of the so called first generation of AI in medicine [13], such as Shortliffe’ s work with MYCIN [14], Kulikowski’ s individu
-
alized clinical decision models [15], and de Dombal’ s computer-aided diagnosis of acute abdominal pain [16] which incorporated newer statistical reasoning methods such as probabilistic reasoning and neural networks. 
Within the period covered above, there 
were extensive discussions about the role of AI in medicine, ranging from expert systems replacing doctors, to AI supporting doctors in their clinical decision-making processes, and AI embedded in medical devices. The latter has been successfully applied for sev
-
eral decades, e.g. in ECG machines and ICU equipment such as pumps, and insulin pens.
The need for rigorous evaluation of the 
quality and impact of AI was recognised in the 1980s. While the first publications focussed mainly on methodologies for 
evaluating performance in a laboratory envi
-
ronment, later papers addressed field-testing in clinical settings to examine effects on the 
structure, process, and outcome of care deliv -
ery [17-21]. The 1998 Helsinki workshop of our IMIA Working Group (then called the WG on Technology Assessment and Qual
-
ity Development, and Organizational and Social Issues ) focussed on the importance of 
addressing broader organisational issues and the need to focus on constructive evaluation within the whole lifecycle of information technology (IT) development [22-24]. Two 
books from 2006 which serve as textbooks 
for health IT evaluation methodologies spe
-
cifically address techniques for AI as well 
as potential biases that may compromise an evaluation [25, 26]. Biases introduced during the development of algorithms due to differences between training and real-world 
populations are particularly important for 
machine learning-based systems and are discussed in section 3.
Later, following implementations of AI 
in clinical practice, studies shifted to the clinical impacts of AI [18] and on the related methodological challenges to find adequate clinical endpoints [19]. Building upon evi
-
dence about the benefit of AI in medicine, research then focussed on reviewing the impact of AI on patient outcomes in inpa
-
tient settings [20], in psychiatry [21], and medication safety [22].
The challenges recognised in the early 
days of applying AI were among others: 1) the legal (e.g., who is responsible when the system makes an error?) and ethical issues 
(algorithms dealing with discriminative 
investigations that are highly unethical, see for example [27]); 2) the context including informal information that is not documented in the medical record but is nevertheless part of a doctor’ s mental image about the patient [28]; 3) the transferability of algo
-
rithms from one setting to another both with respect to patient groups and clinical setting (i.e. local technologies/methodologies, local or regional professional culture [29]); 4) brittleness (inability of AI to reason at the boundaries or outside own application range, 
resulting in “sense in – garbage out” [30]; 
and 5) the dynamic nature of professional knowledge development in health care that needs to be captured in dynamic AI. 
Today, there is an increasing and renewed 
interest in using AI, where a new generation 


==== Page 3 ====
130
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019Magrabi et al.
of clinical decision support is facilitated 
by the availability of powerful computing tools to manage big data and to analyse and generate new knowledge. Big data offers a challenge to connect molecular and cellular biology to the clinical world and to consider 
individual variations, as well as large volume 
responses and outcomes to similar present
-
ing problems, rather than using population averages [31] or the restricted population of clinical trials. While such advances in tech
-
nology may provide solutions to the problem of generalisation, they cannot solve all the other issues mentioned above. AI now incor
-
porates a diverse range of computational reasoning methods to support clinicians in making decisions. Evaluation of these kinds of applications is even more critical as they start to penetrate healthcare on a product purchase or turn-key basis, where they may 
have an impact on the individual treatment 
of patients and care delivery, as well as on the liability of the individual healthcare professional. There are also risks related to these systems, they may be ill-functioning or may even have negative impacts on the outcome of care in a specialised unit or a different populations or health systems [32]. We look at some of these challenges in the next section. 
3   Challenges in Evaluating AI 
for Clinical Decision Support
As with all interventions in healthcare we 
need to understand and evaluate the effects of AI on care delivery and patient out
-
comes. Evaluation is needed at each distinct stage in the IT lifecycle including design, development, selection, use, and ongoing surveillance. 
Design and development of AI: Histori
-
cally, evaluation of AI was limited to the 
design and development phase, as imple -
mentation and use of AI systems in routine clinical practice was rare. During design and development, evaluation concentrates upon the performance of the algorithms in terms of discrimination, accuracy, and precision. Depending on the use case, one performance 
measure might be more important than the other. For example, an algorithm used for 
triage needs high discrimination, while an algorithm that predicts mortality or compli
-
cation risks in shared decision-making needs to be highly accurate and precise for all types of patients. Even at this stage of performance evaluation, we need to recognise that the algorithm may be “mathematically optimal but ethically problematic” [33]. A fundamen
-
tal challenge is that AIs built using machine 
learning do not necessarily generalise 
well beyond the data upon which they are 
trained. Even in restricted tasks like image interpretation, AI can make erroneous diag
-
noses because of differences in the training and real-world populations, including new ‘edge’ cases, as well as differences in image capture workflows [4]. Another challenge 
is that algorithms need to reflect up-to-date 
knowledge given the dynamic changes of 
professional knowledge. Based on which knowledge do the algorithms work? What level of evidence is sufficient? How is regular adaptation to new professional knowledge organized? 
Designers also need to consider if the 
computational finding is actionable in an ethical way or if it might disadvantage peo
-
ple from a particular socio-demographic background. For example, an algorithm to prioritise which patient should receive an organ donated for transplant might include expected longevity as a predictor variable. This might seem sensible on face value, but 
would ignore the implicit correlation with 
social determinants of health and lifespan [33]. Furthermore, the inferential logic should be put in context – is the reasoning behind the algorithm meaningful in the real world or only a statistical artefact? This question has been raised about the so-called “week-end effect” of apparent increases in hospital mortality [34]. Many studies have relied upon administrative data to investi
-
gate the association between time or day of admission and hospital mortality, which has resulted in inadequate adjustment for case mix difference between weekdays and weekends and consequently has produced inconsistent findings and conclusions.
Evaluation challenges also arise from the 
nature of AI and the manner in which it is developed. Some computational reasoning methods in AI such as neural networks are considered black boxes to end-users. Auditing has been proposed as a pragmatic 
approach to evaluating opaque algorithms 
that were devised autonomously. This follows an analogy to human judgement; typically we measure outcomes, not prob
-
lem-solving style or cognitive process [35]. However, given the fundamental healthcare ethic of “first do no harm”, we suggest more effort is needed in the design phases to explain the principles of a computational model to allow transparent assessment. This 
would help to keep clinicians and patients 
engaged and avoid conflict between prac
-
titioners and commercial algorithm devel -
opers (e.g. [36]). Algorithm developers, including those who operate on a proprietary basis, need to consider how to open the black box (even if partially) and work within a framework for shareable biomedical knowl
-
edge so that clinicians can judge the merits of AI models [37]. 
Selection and use of AI: Widespread 
availability of clinical data, easy to use AI development environments (e.g. Ten
-
sorflow, DeepLearning4J and Keras [38]) and online communities (e.g. healthcare.ai) have resulted in rapidly growing numbers of algorithms that have become available to clinicians. When multiple algorithms are available and one must be selected, it is 
important to evaluate any risks of data qual
-
ity issues, and poor fit of the foundational 
data to a new situation, such as different population and morbidity patterns. What does the provenance of an algorithm tell us about its generalizability? For example, a computation that finds an association 
between blood pressure and complications 
in ICU patients where blood pressure is mea
-
sured continuously might not be applicable to other hospitalised patients where blood pressure is measured perhaps only once a day; or between a coronary unit where pressure may be controlled in most patients and a general surgical ward with a different 
and non-controlled hypertensive population. 
Data generation is often a “social phenom
-
enon” [39]: data may flow from unreliable processes [40] or human workarounds to mandatory entry fields [41]. 
We are also interested in the deci
-
sion-making performance of humans with 


==== Page 4 ====
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019131
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and Practical Implications
and without AI assistance. Once an algo -
rithm is developed, clinical validation of 
its utility is needed. The algorithm may be correct but is it operationally meaningful and useful? Does it fit clinical workflow? Does it still represent up-to-date clinical knowledge? Will it change clinical decisions? What 
level of confidence can be given? A signif
-
icant concern here is that when humans are 
assisted by DSSs, they tend to over-rely and delegate full responsibility to the DSS rather than continuing to be vigilant. This is known as automation bias and can have dangerous consequences when the DSS is wrong or 
fails, or the presenting problem is subtly 
unique. Previous work has demonstrated the effects of automation bias with a prescrib
-
ing DSS that was based on simple rules of 
logic [42]. In this study, the presence of the DSS reduced the verification of prescription safety and increased prescribing errors when 
the DSS was incorrect [43]. With AI, these 
effects of automation bias are likely to be 
exacerbated because of the black box nature 
of many machine learning approaches which are not conducive to verification. Methods are thus needed to mitigate automation bias, 
for example by improving the interpretability 
of machine learning models, explaining how 
an AI came to a conclusion, and training clinicians to maintain vigilance. 
Consideration also needs to be given to the 
various stakeholders involved in processes 
to select AI. Evaluation findings need to be 
communicated in a manner that is under
-
standable and meaningful to clinicians, but 
also to administrators and policymakers. One possible approach to support better selection of AI systems is by labelling. Neither patient nor clinician can be fully comfortable in the use of AI ‘black box’ decision support 
unless they know the system is appropriately 
created and relevant for their situation. Based on the transferability and quality schemas, label structures need to be developed which identify the training population type includ
-
ing demography and treatment setting, the nature of the decisions supported, the clinical environment, and any problems identified. It should be possible to devise a standard popu
-
lation characteristics data set that is verifiable, yet at the same time does not reveal technical design details and thus protects commercial confidence. Indeed population information may become mandatory as health systems are increasingly expecting AI developers to be transparent about the limitations and ethical 
examination of the population data used to 
develop algorithms, how data performance was validated, and how clinicians integrate into care delivery effective treatment and value for money [44]. Reporting to trusted third parties of any suspected adverse out
-
comes would also be valuable. 
Ongoing surveillance of AI: AI will have 
systemic effects in complex sociotech -
nical settings, including aspects such as usage, usability, interpretability, up-to-date capabilities, safety, unintended effects, and ethical issues. Algorithms may affect resource allocation and prioritisation, so the risk of reinforcing bias in care delivery 
must be considered. Of course, the impact 
of AI on patient outcomes and experience and on clinical experience, as well as both organisational and social impacts, all need to be monitored. Over time, the context, treat
-
ment possibilities, and patient population might change. Therefore, once implemented, ongoing surveillance is needed to monitor and recalibrate AI algorithms [45]. This surveillance is also needed for dynamic algo
-
rithms that continuously update themselves based on practice data and published clinical evidence. Another aspect is in detecting and evaluating “hidden” errors – subtle flaws in inferred data or a misconfiguration that may not be as obvious as the financial 
“flash crash” of 2010 [46] which may take 
months to be revealed (as with hand-crafted algorithms [47]). Thus, evaluation is likely to shift from a one-off activity to a continuous process to ensure that the use of AI, including those incorporating dynamic algorithms, is meeting expectations. 
4   Practical Aspects of 
Evaluating AI-enabled 
Clinical Decision Support 
This section examines some of the practical 
aspects of evaluating AI-enabled clinical decision support. It begins by consider
-
ing broad paradigms and frameworks to approach such evaluations. We reviewed existing guidelines for conducting and 
reporting evaluation studies, and concluded 
with exemplar indicators to monitor AI. The aim is to highlight existing approaches that can be readily applied and to identify areas where further work is required to meet the specific needs of current AI. 
Approaching AI evaluation: As we dis
-
cussed in the previous section, evaluating 
AI as a one-off activity will not be sufficient, therefore continuous evaluation or surveil
-
lance might become necessary to monitor the emergent behaviour of AI in complex sociotechnical settings, and the response of its users. Indeed, it may become an ethical imperative as the complexity of interven
-
tions and their effects on sociotechnical interactions become impossible to predict in advance. One paradigm that might be particularly relevant for approaching the evaluation of AI on an ongoing basis is the Learning Healthcare System [48]. 
This paradigm usefully incorporates the 
notion of continuous system improvement using locally generated evidence to inform practice changes. Such learning can occur at different levels including institutional, national, or international. While aspects like algorithm performance may be addressed at institutional level, safety governance might be considered at a national level and the ethical implications of using AI for clinical decision support could be tackled at an 
international level. 
Evaluation guidelines and models: Exist
-
ing resources such as the guidelines for Good 
Evaluation Practice in Health Informatics (GEP-HI) provide a solid foundation for planning and executing evaluation projects [49]. Validity of GEP-HI for AI and its completeness will become apparent through 
application and use. Similarly, the Statement 
on Reporting of Evaluation Studies in Health Informatics (STARE-HI) provides useful principles for publication of evaluation stud
-
ies [50, 51]. These guidelines support design, execution, and reporting of an evaluation study irrespective of the type of the system under study. The evaluation question and the purpose of the study guide the selection of evaluation methods and their application. 


==== Page 5 ====
132
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019Magrabi et al.
Very important evaluation criteria for AI 
applications include validity of the system, i.e. correctness in reasoning, usefulness for the clinical practice and effects and impacts on clinical work, care processes, and patient outcomes. With AI applications that are 
based on big data sets, especially genomic, 
biomarker, and phenotype data from across the health system, it is important to ensure sufficient coverage, specificity, and validity of the data. This will be an additional step in the evaluation process with AI systems i.e. to assess and collect evidence on data quality, and is the key point to prevent unin
-
tended consequences and to avoid risks of harmful results. 
Understanding of the comparability of 
the design and development situation with the potential implementation situation is cru
-
cial. Aspects such as the algorithm training data set (clinical situation, physiology, and demography) are critical, as are treatment options and user population (including professional and e-health skills). A lot can be learned from Implementation science; 
for instance Schloemer and Schröder-Bäck 
have created the useful generic PIET model, in which Population, Intervention, (clinical) Environment, and Transfer methods are decomposed [52]. Adaptation of the sub-cat
-
egories of each to fit the AI situation would yield a valuable assessment tool. 
Indicators to monitor AI: Implementation 
of AI in an organisation can have an impact on several aspects of care quality, depending on the clinical area where implemented. 
Existing methodologies for defining indica
-
tors for continuous monitoring of health IT 
help not only to pinpoint AI-specific care quality indicators, but also to define AI-spe
-
cific indicators for AI-quality monitoring and surveillance, for example, the methodology for the Nordic eHealth Indicators which has four major phases including definition of the context of measurement, monitoring goals (e.g. care quality, efficiency, technol
-
ogy quality …etc.), methods for indicator selection, and the collection, analysis, and feedback of data from relevant user groups (Box 1) [53].
Governing AI in healthcare may involve 
trade-offs between risk and rewards. Ques
-
tions on ethics, safety, and human values at stake depend on the type and purpose of use of the technologies, emphasizing the importance of the first two phases of the 
methodology. Peer-reviewed literature on 
AI for specific situations remains one solid source for practical indicator selection and grouping. 
Availability (state of the art) of custom 
AI applications for specific purposes in different contexts of use for different user groups provides the first level of monitoring, important for policy makers for local and national steering. If these data are collected systematically from a whole country, they 
can also be used as benchmarking data by 
policy makers to steer development and by healthcare providers to find best practices and learn about different AI solutions. 
The information system (IS) success 
model also offers an option for grouping indicators to examine AI quality, focussing on system quality, information quality, service quality, use, user satisfaction, and outcomes [54-56]. Each of these are exam
-
ined below: 
System quality: Once implemented, 
AI system requires ongoing surveillance based on a set of measures to recalibrate AI algorithms. Apart from surveillance tar
-
geted directly at AI development, IT System 
quality monitoring includes indicators like (IT) accessibility, reliability, flexibility, integration, response time, ease of learning [55]. Measures and indicators for these are targeted at monitoring and development of the entire socio-technical system where AI is implemented. Function quality is an important part of system quality, particularly when AI components feed other interim processes. AI applications with direct impact on patient health can be approached by the EU directive for medical devices, including 
the requirements for CE marking with tight 
clinical evidence requirements for Class II and III devices according to Regulation 2017/745 [57]. System quality is directly associated with patient safety, and existence of CE marking could be one indicator for AI quality and a proxy for patient safety. 
Information quality may be the most 
important surveillance and monitoring domain for AI algorithms alongside with system quality. It covers quality of data 
used as input for the AI as well as quality 
of the output information (e.g. accuracy, reliability, relevance, completeness) [55]. In addition to these, reproducibility, sensi
-
tivity and specificity of the results, type and severity of errors, observed versus expected error rates, causes of errors, how algorithms respond and what indicators to use if input data characteristics start vary, and the avail
-
ability of data, code, and workflows need to be focussed on, since the algorithms are Box 1   Defining indicators for monitoring AI.
1 Define context for measurement
1.1 Define AI application
 • Identify AI components and functions within operational system
 • Define outputs (which may be inputs to another component) and risks
1.2 Identify service context and boundaries (on micro-, meso- and macro levels).
1.3 Identify key stakeholders.
2 Define monitoring goals (e.g. safety, usability, transparency, up-to-dateness, reliability, patient safety, work process changes).
3 Define methods for indicator selection and categorisation e.g. by reviewing expert knowledge, peer-reviewed literature, or existing indicator work.
4 Define data for repeated measurements, analysis, and feedback from different user groups 
 • Produce objective reports.


==== Page 6 ====
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019133
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and Practical Implications
trained with certain data, and their soundness 
needs to be confirmed in the context of use in relation to the quality of actual clinical data to be used [58].
Service quality in the IS success model 
refers to help desk-type support available 
for users as well as long-term feedback from 
users for both immediate updates as well as for the entire system development. 
System use refers to utilization (e.g. use/
non-use, frequency of use) of the system output [55]. AI in healthcare can be used for decision support as well as automating actions of care (e.g., medication adminis
-
tration). Existing OECD and EU eHealth monitoring surveys focus on the availability and use of HIS [59-61]. Functionalities for diagnostic or treatment support (for pro
-
fessionals or patients) are not covered in the current surveys, and need revisions to encompass AI-enabled functionalities.
User satisfaction/acceptance refers to 
user perceptions about system output [55].
Validated satisfaction scales miss indicators for trust and competence of the personnel to deal with the decisions made by AI (e.g. to 
identify false results, and to record override 
and its contemporaneous justification). The 
competence of professionals to use com
-
monly agreed documentation standards, structures, and classifications may also be essential, since it impacts the quality of documentation (input for AI). From 
the viewpoint of patients, barriers to use, 
including trust and difficult instructions are 
likely to become increasingly important with growing numbers of AI implementations and wider settings. User competence to evaluate decisions offered by AI would gain crucial importance in future.
Outcomes refer to the individual and 
organizational impacts [55]. AI promises to enhance healthcare effectiveness and effi
-
ciency, but requires due diligence to validate actions, optimise their use, and minimize risks. Outcome indicators need to reflect the purpose of the algorithm, and can include appropriateness of AI-assisted decisions, efficiency in care process, as well as patient 
acceptance and adherence. Patient outcomes 
are increasingly important to monitor along with patient safety incidents. Monitoring risks/adverse effects/trade-offs is an essential part of monitoring AI outcomes, including equity and inclusion, data privacy and secu
-
rity, algorithmic bias, and representativeness of data [62].
A broader outlook is also essential, 
rather than solely focussing on the quality of algorithms or quality of their outcomes. The presence of governance structures 
(e.g. transparency of processes and policies 
to ensure reproducibility for large scale computational models, regulation related to safe and secure use of data, liability and accountability questions, data ownership), education and training, as well as national development and validation procedures can be used as indicators of system maturity on national level. 
5   Conclusions 
Technological developments are outpacing our ability to predict the effects of AI on the practice of medicine, the care received by patients, and the impact on their life. In the immediate future, we can expect AI to support clinical decisions with humans 
in the decision loop. The dynamics of 
decision-making processes are likely to be altered with clinicians needing to weigh AI-generated advice against other evidence and patient preferences [1]. To ensure the safe and effective integration of AI in care delivery, a robust commitment to evaluation is critical. Evaluators can draw important lessons from past efforts and should build upon current best practice frameworks, evaluation guidelines, and methods to guide 
evidence-based design, development, selec
-
tion, use, and ongoing surveillance of AI 
in clinical decision support. Labels will be important for defining source-training data so as to identify optimal transferable use patterns. Specific enhancements required for evaluating dynamic algorithms incorpo
-
rating vast amounts of genomic, biomarker, and phenotype data will emerge through practical application.
References
1. Coiera E. The fate of medicine in the time of AI. 
Lancet 2018 Dec 1;392(10162):2331-2.
2. Yu KH, Kohane IS. Framing the challenges of artificial intelligence in medicine. BMJ Qual Saf 2019;28:238-41.
3. Yu K-H, Beam AL, Kohane I.S. Artificial intelligence in healthcare. Nat Biomed Eng 
2018;2(10):719-31.
4. Challen R, Denny J, Pitt M, Gompels L, Edwards T, 
Tsaneva-Atanasova K. Artificial intelligence, bias and clinical safety. BMJ Qual Saf 2019;28:231-7.
5. Kanagasingam Y , Xiao D, Vignarajan J, Preetham A, Tay-Kearney M-L, Mehrotra A. Evaluation of Artificial Intelligence–Based Grading of Diabetic Retinopathy in Primary CareArtificial Intelli
-
gence–Based Grading of Diabetic Retinopathy in Primary Care Artificial Intelligence–Based Grading of Diabetic Retinopathy in Primary Care. JAMA Netw Open 2018;1(5):e182665-e.
6. Kim MO, Coiera E, Magrabi F . Problems with health 
information technology and their effects on care 
delivery and patient outcomes: a systematic review. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24(2):246-50.
7. Shortliffe EH. The adolescence of AI in medicine: will the field come of age in the ‘90s? Artif Intell Med 1993;5(2):93-106.
8. Coiera EW . Artificial intelligence in medicine: the challenges ahead. J Am Med Inform As
-
soc1996;3(6):363-6.
9. Patel VL, Shortliffe EH, Stefanelli M, Szolovits P , Berthold MR, Bellazzi R, Abu-Hanna A. The coming of age of artificial intelligence in medicine. Artif Intell Med 2009;46(1):5-17.
10. Benber B, Lay K. Health secretary Matt Han
-
cock endorses untested medical app; The Times, 
17 Septem ber 2018, available at https://www.
thetimes.co.uk/article/matt-hancock-endorses-un -
tested-health-app-3xq0qcl0x.
11. McCarthy J. Recursive Functions of Symbolic 
Expressions and Their Computation by Machine. 
Commun ACM 1960;3(4):184–95.
12. Colmerauer A, Roussel P . The birth of Prolog. ACM SIGPLAN Notices. 1993;28(3):37.
13. Kulikowski, C.A. An Opening Chapter of the First Generation of Artificial Intelligence in Medicine: The First Rutgers AIM Workshop. Y earb Med 
Inform 2015;10(1):227-33.
14. Shortliffe EH, Davis R, Axline SG, Buchanan BG, Green CC, Cohen SN. Computer-based consulta
-
tions in clinical therapeutics: explanation and rule 
acquisition capabilities of the MYCIN system. 
Comput Biomed Res 1975 8(4):303-20.
15. Sonnenberg FA, Hagerty CG, Kulikowski CA. 
An architecture for knowledge-based construc -
tion of decision models. Med Decis Making 1994;14(1):27-39.
16. de Dombal FT, Leaper DJ, Staniland JR, Mc
-
Cann AP , Horrocks JC. Comp uter-aided di -
agnosis of acute abdominal pain. Br Med J 1972;1(2(5804)):9-13.
17. Nykänen P , Chowdhury S, Wigertz O. Evaluation of decision support systems in medicine. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 1991;34(2/3):229 - 38.
18. Wyatt JC, Spiegelhalter D. Evaluating medical expert systems: What to test and how? Int J Med Inform 1990;15:205-17.
19. Clarke K, O’Moore R, Smeets R, Talmon J, Bren
-
der J, McNair P , et al. A Methodology for Evalu -
ation of Knowledge-Based Systems in Medicine. 


==== Page 7 ====
134
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019Magrabi et al.
In: van Bemmel J, McCray AT, editors. Y earbook 
of Medical Informatics1995. p. 513-27.
20. Yu VL, Buchanan BG, Shortliffe EH, Wraith SM, Davis R, Scott AC, et al. Evaluating the perfor
-
mance of a computer-based consultant. Comput Programs Biomed 1979 9(1):95-102.
21. van Gennip EM, Talmon JL, Bakker AR. ATIM, accompanying measure on the assessment of infor
-
mation technology in medicine. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 1994;45(1-2):5-8.
22. Brender J. Methodology for constructive assess
-
ment of IT -based systems in an organisational context. Int J Med Inform 1999;56:67-86.
23. Nykänen P , Enning J, Talmon J. Inventory of val
-
idation approaches in selected health telematics projects. Int J Med Inform 1999;56:87-96.
24. van Gennip E, Lorenzi NM. Results of discussions at the IMIA WG 13 and 15 working conference. 
Int J Med Inform 1999;56:177-80.
25. Brender J. Handbook of evaluation methods for health informatics. Burlington, MA: Elsevier 
Academic Press; 2006.
26. Friedman CP , Wyatt JC. Evaluation Methods in Medical Informatics. 2
nd ed. New Y ork: Springer; 
2006.
27. Karthaus V , Thygesen H, Egmont-Petersen M, Talmon J, BrenderJ, McNair P . User-requirements 
driven learning. Comput Methods Programs 
Biomed.1995;48(1-2):39-44.
28. Agniel D, Kohane IS, Weber GM. Biases in elec
-
tronic health record data due to processes within the healthcare system: retrospective observational 
study. BMJ 2018;361:k1479.
29. Nolan J, McNair P , Brender J. Factors influencing the transferability of medical decision support 
systems. Int J Biomed Comput 1991;27(1):7-26.
30. Feigenbaum EA, editor. Autoknowledge: from file server to knowledge servers. MEDINFO; 1986; 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers BV; 1986.
31. Nykänen P , Zvarova J. Big data challenges for per
-
sonalised medicine. Editorial. International Journal 
of Biomedicine and Healthcare 2015;3(1):1.
32. Ammenwerth E, Shaw N. Bad health informatics can kill - is evaluation the answer? Methods Inf 
Med 2005;44:1-3.
33. DeDeo S. Wrong side of the tracks: Big Data and Protected Categories. arXiv preprint arX
-
iv:14124643. 2014.
34. Bray BD, Steventon A. What have we learnt after 15 years of research into the ‘weekend effect’? 
BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26(8):607-10.
35. Sandvig C, Hamilton K, Karahalios K, Langbort C. Auditing algorithms: Research methods for de
-
tecting discrimination on internet platforms. Data and discrimination: converting critical concerns 
into productive inquiry; 2014. p. 1-23.
36. Crouch H. RCGP chair says GPs are not ‘techno
-
phobic dinosaurs’. Digital Health; 2018 [Available 
from: https://www.digitalhealth.net/2018/10/
rcgp-chair-technophobic-dinosaurs/.37. Lehmann HP , Downs SM. Desiderata for sharable 
computable biomedical knowledge for learning 
health systems. Learn Health Syst 2018:e10065.
38. Bhattacharya S, Czejdo B, Agrawal R, Erdemir 
E, Gokaraju B, editors. Open Source Platforms 
and Frameworks for Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning. SoutheastCon 2018; 2018 19-
22 April 2018.
39. Osoba OA, Welser IV W . An intelligence in our image: The risks of bias and errors in artificial 
intelligence. Rand Corporation; 2017.
40. Burnett S, Franklin BD, Moorthy K, Cooke MW , Vincent C. How reliable are clinical systems in the UK NHS? A study of seven NHS organisations. 
BMJ Qual Saf 2012;21(6):466-72.
41. Ser G, Robertson A, Sheikh A. A qualitative exploration of workarounds related to the imple
-
mentation of national electronic health records in 
early adopter mental health hospitals. PLoS One 
2014;9(1):e77669.
42. Lyell D, Magrabi F , Raban MZ, Pont LG, Baysari MT, Day RO, et al. Automation bias in electron
-
ic prescribing. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 
2017;17(1):28.
43. Lyell D, Magrabi F , Coiera E. Reduced Verification of Medication Alerts Increases Prescribing Errors. 
Appl Clin Inform 2019;10(1):66-76.
44. NHS code of conduct for data-driven health and care technology, 19 February 2019: https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-con
-
duct-for-data-driven-health-and-care-technology/initial-code-of-conduct-for-data-driven-health-
and-care-technology 
45. Minne L, Eslami S, de Keizer N, de Jonge E, de Rooij SE, Abu-Hanna A. Effect of changes over 
time in the performance of a customized SAPS-II 
model on the quality of care assessment. Intensive 
Care Med 2012;38(1):40-6.
46. Treleaven P , Galas M, Lalchand V . Algorithmic trading review. Commun ACM 2013;56(11):76-85.
47. Crouch H. East and North Herts could face 
£7m bill to fix Lorenzo issue: Digital Health; 
2018 [Available from: https://www.digitalhealth.
net/2018/10/east-and-north-herts-lorenzo-it-issue/.
48. Friedman C, Rigby M. Conceptualising and cre
-
ating a global learning health system. Int J Med 
Inform 2013;82(4):e63-71.
49. Nykänen P , Brender J, Talmon J, de Keizer NF , Rigby M, Beuscart-Zephir M, et al. Guideline 
for good evaluation practice in health informatics 
(GEP-HI). Int J Med Inform 2011;80(12):815-27.
50. Talmon J, Ammenwerth E, Brender J, de Keizer N, Nykanen P , Rigby M. STARE-HI -statement on re
-
porting of evaluation studies in health informatics. Y earb Med Inform 2009:23-31.
51. Brender J, Talmon J, de Keizer N, Nykanen P , Rigby M, Ammenwerth E. STARE-HI - Statement 
on Reporting of Evaluation Studies in Health In
-
formatics: explanation and elaboration. Appl Clin 
Inform 2013;4(3):331-58.52. Schloemer T, Schröder-Bäck P . Criteria for evalu -
ating transferability of health interventions: a sys -
tematic review and thematic synthesis. Implement Sci 2018;13(1):88.
53. Hyppönen H, Faxvaag A, Gilstad H, Hardardottir GA, Jerlvall L, Kangas M, et al. Nordic eHealth 
Indicators: Organisation of research, first results 
and the plan for the future [Internet]. Copenhagen: 
Nordic Council of Ministers; 2013. Available 
from: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:nor
-
den:org:diva-675. 
54. Canada Health Infoway Benefits Evaluation Indi -
cators Technical Report version 2.0. 2012.
55. DeLone WH, McLean ER. Information systems 
success: The quest for the dependent variable. Inf 
Syst Res 1992;3(1):60–95.
56. DeLone WH, McLean ER. The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Suc
-
cess: A Ten-Y ear Update. J Manage Inf Syst 2003;19(4):9-30.
57. Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Par
-
liament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, 
Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) 
No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 
90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC: https://publications.
europa.eu/en/home.
58. Artificial Intelligence for Health and Health Care, JSR-17-Task-002, JASON, The MITRE Corpora
-
tion 2017: https://fas.org/category/artificial-intel -
ligence/.
59. Draft OECD Guide for Measuring ICTs in the 
Health Sector, Paris: OECD. COM/DELSA/
DSTI(2013)3/FINAL; available at: http://www.
oecd.org/health/health-systems/Draft-oecd-guide-
to-measuring-icts-in-the-health-sector.pdf. 2013.
60. Adler-Milstein J, Ronchi E, Cohen GR, Winn LA, Jh, AK. Benchmarking health IT among OECD 
countries: better data for better policy. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 2014;21(1):111-6.
61. Codagnone C, Lupiañez-Villanueva F . Bench
-
marking Deployment of eHealth among General Practitioners Final report; 2013.
62. Lannquist Y . Ethical & Policy Risks of Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare. The Future Society; 
2018.
Correspondence to:
A/Prof. Farah Magrabi
Centre for Health InformaticsAustralian Institute of Health InnovationMacquarie UniversityLevel 6, 75 Talavera Road
Macquarie University NSW 2109
AustraliaTel: +61 2 9850 2429E-mail: farah.magrabi@mq.edu.au


