==== Page 1 ====
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Strategic Marketing Decision -Making: A research agenda  
To be published in The B ottom Line, 2019 
Professor Merlin Stone  
St Mary’s University, London, UK; University of Portsmouth UK; Merlin Stone Consulting  
Dr Eleni Aravopoulou  
St Mary’s University, London, UK  
Professor Yuksel Ekinci  
University of Portsmouth, UK  
Geraint Evans  
St Mary’s University, London, UK  
Matt Hobbs  
Accenture  
Professor Ashraf Labib  
University of Portsmouth, UK  
Paul Laughlin  
Laughlin Consultancy  
Dr Jon Machtynger  
Microsoft; Surrey University, UK  
Liz Machtynger  
Customer Essential Ltd ; Kingston University, UK;  University  of Portsmouth, UK  
Purpose  
The purpose of this article is to review literature and thinking about the application of AI in strategic 
situations and to identify the research that is needed in the area of applying AI to strategic marketing 
decisions.  
Design/methodology/approach  
Review  of literature and consultation with marketing experts who were invited to contribute to the article.  
Findings  
There is little research into applying AI to strategic marketing decision- making . This  is needed as the frontier 
of AI application to decision -making is moving in many management areas from operational to strategic. 
Given the competitive nature of such decisions and the insights from  applying AI to defence and similar 
areas, it is time to focus on applying AI to strategic marketing decisions.  
Research limitations/implications  
Applying AI to strategic marketing decision -making is known to be taking place, but the it is  commercially 
sensitive, so data is not available to the authors.  
Practical implications  
There are strong implications for all bu sinesses, particularly large businesses in competitive industries, where 
failure to deploy AI in the face of competition from firms who have deployed AI to improve their decision-
making could be dangerous.  
Social implications  
The public sector is a very important marketing decision- maker . Although in most cases it does not operate 
competitively , it must still make decisions about making different services available to different citizens and 
identify the risks of not providing services to certain citizens, s o this article is relevant to the public sector . 
Originality/valu e 
This is one of the first articles to probe deployment of  AI in strategic marketing decision- making. 
Keyword s 
Artificial intelligence, marketing, decision -making, strategy, planning, operati ons. 
Paper type 
Conceptual . 

==== Page 2 ====
Introduction  
This paper focuses on  the evolution of marketing practice  and in particular on the possible application of 
artificial intelligence  (AI) to strategic marketing decision- making . We use Accenture ’s definition of AI  as the 
use of multiple technologies that enable  computers to sense,  comprehend, act, and learn , including 
techniques such as  machine learning, natural language  processing, knowledge representation,  
computational intelligence  (Awalegaonkar  et al., 2019) . This report is discussed later.   
 
In marketing – and in other disciplines – there boundary between humans and computers in decision- making  
is shifting. Today, AI is increasingly deployed in operational marketing e.g.  identification of risks, contact 
centre response management, as well as in marketing including analysis and targeting of customers, design 
and selection of advertising copy to match target customers, pricing to maximise yield from individual customers (Marinchak et al. , 2018). Tomorrow, we expect that AI will be employed in strategic decision-
making ( e.g. which business models to use , which strategies to follow, which markets to target, which 
products to market, which channels of communication and distribution to use, what pricing  and competitive 
positioning strategies to follow, etc.). However, the use of AI in marketing strategy has not been much 
discussed in the public domain. Our contacts with industry indicate that some companies have made great 
progress in this area, but thes e projects are kept secret and treated as a source of competitive advantage.  
 
It should be emphasised at this point that the focus is not primarily on the replacement of human decision-
making in strategic decisions, but on the creation of a higher quality decision- making mechanism, using AI, in 
which marketers are provided with quicker, more complete and more fully -worked out options from which 
to choose, and the creation of the associated theoretical framework.  
 
Much of the writing about AI and strategy currently focuses on strategies which are based on extending the 
use of AI in organisations, often in operational areas, as Kiron and Schrage (2019) point out. However, as researchers start to focus on how AI can be used to develop new business models – a po ssible outcome of 
business and/or marketing planning (e.g. Lee et al. , 2019; Valter et al. , 2019), this may lead to the extension 
that Kiron and Schrage (2019) focus on, the use of AI in determining strategy. A related area is the literature on using AI to achieve digital transformation (e.g. Brock and Wagenheim, 2019), although this too focuses on 
AI in strategy. However, the focus of this article is firmly on the use of AI in marketing strategy.  
AI in management decision- making  
The frontier between humans  and computers in management  is moving from operational to strategic. A 
good synthesis is provided by Jarrahi (2018). This forms part of a wider discussion on the encroachment of AI on professions such as law, where the focus is partly on the ability of AI  to help humans make sense of high 
volumes of information, which themselves are growing (so -called “big -data”). A particularly relevant article, 
based on empirical research, is that of Kolbjørnsrud  et al.  (2016), which focuses on the use of AI in redefining 
management. In management decision- making, there is usually a trade -off between efficiency and fairness 
(equity). For example, see the work of Perris and Labib (2004) on prioritisation of patients for organ transplant waiting list using fuzzy logic. Another application of AI in management decision- making is 
classification and incorporation of various stakeholders’ views using AI technique of fuzzy logic ( Poplawska et 
al., 2015), and group decision- making using a machine learning method (Chakhar et al ., 2016).  
 Claudé and Comb (2018) identify that today, AI is seen primarily as a support to major business decisions rather than a decision- maker, but attribute this to the fact that AI as currently cons tituted is relatively weak, 
compared to what will be the strong AI of the future. As computational capacity and speed increase, and as data sets available to support decisions grow, the frontier of substitutability of AI for human decision- making 
shifts. S hrest ha et al.  (2019) suggest several possibilities, as follows:  
• Full human to AI delegation e.g. recommender systems, digital advertising, online fraud detection, dynamic pricing. 
• Hybrid 1: AI to human sequential decision- making  e.g. idea evaluation, hiring. 
• Hybrid 2: Human to AI sequential decision -making  e.g. sports analytics, health monitoring. 
• Aggregated human- AI decision -making  e.g. top management teams, boards.  
 

==== Page 3 ====
It is this latter alternative which reflects most closely the topic of this paper.  
 
Shrest ha et al.  (2019) also suggest that the appropriateness of these alternatives, and in particular the 
likelihood of appropriateness of full delegation to AI, depends upon:  
• Decision search space  specificity  – the more specific the required decisions, the more suitable AI is . 
• Interpretability – how easy it is to understand the reasons for decisions/recommendations (this relates to 
whether the AI approach used is “black box” or can “explain” its decisions) . 
• Size of the alternative set – the larger the size, the greater the problems humans have in dealing with  
• Decision -making speed required – the faster it is, the more suitable AI is . 
• Replicability – the higher the commonality of data/decisions etc., the more suitable AI is, given that  AI 
depends partly from learning from other cases.  
 In strategic decisions, t he time it can take to see if  a particular approach works ; the lack of specificity ; 
possible diversity of interpretations ; the fact that speed is less of the essence and relative lack of 
replicability ; means that aggregated human- AI decision -making  may be more appropriate , although Hybrid 1 
may be used too.  
 
In terms of evidence on implementation of AI in strategy, this seems to be  secret, though there is evidence 
of a battle betwe en the two main relevant digital players, Amazon and Google, to extend AI use, using the 
enormous data sets available to both companies (Condon, 2019; Kiron and Schrage, 2019). 
Industrial b ackground  
Marketing has changed much in the past and will  continue to change in the future,  so the scope  for the 
application of AI will change as a result, including: 
• The evolution of marketing analytics towards AI and changes in market research. 
• Ethical and data protection issues . 
• Patterns of expenditure and distribution in consumer markets . 
• Business to business marketing (including to the public sector) . 
• Public sector marketing (i.e. from the public sector) . 
 
We need to review these area s for two reasons:  
• Our interest is in the future of marketing strategic decision- making and related areas, not just AI. 
• Where we focus on the use of AI, we need to consider how it might apply in all these five  areas.  
 This paper is written main ly from the perspective of business -to-consumer (B2C), and also businesses  selling 
to consumers via other businesses (known as B2B2C).  We have covered some aspects of these developments 
in Wright et al.  (2019), Parnell et al.  (2018), Stone and Aravopoulou (2018), Stone et al.  (2017, 2018).  
The evolution of marketing analytics towards AI  
There is a fashion element to discussions about AI, particularly in marketing, where the boundary between advanced analytics and AI is definitely fuzzy. Analytics has evolved to where it can handle problems which are relatively unstructured and come up with suggestions in a way that would once have been considered “expert”  and even defined as AI . One essential characteristic  of AI that distinguishes it from classic 
“advanced analytics” is automation of feedback loops and improvement i.e. learning by the system (machine learning) about how to do things better, and this in turn implies that conclusions are being tested and 
assessed against certain criteria, as opposed to being reviewed by humans who then make decisions about 
what to do next.  Where the  action being “managed” by AI is precise and contained, implemented quickly 
and with the results also being measurable and assessable quickly, AI is generally very productive. But where decisions are more wide- ranging, take time to implement and time elapses before the results of the 
decisions are apparent, let alone measurable and assessable, deployment of AI can be  more complicated . It 
may  be hybrid, with parts of the cycle being undertaken by AI, part by human decision- makers.  The latter 
applies to marketing strategy. However, one technique which may be usable to improve applicability is back -
casting, in which decisions  taken earlier and o f which the results are now known are used along with dat a 
from the period of analysis to train the system.  This approach can also be used to capture the “ historic 
expertise” of strategic marketers , by rule elicitation or case -based reasoning. 

==== Page 4 ====
 
The rise of  AI in marketing is not taking place in isolation  from the rapid, wider advance of marketing 
technology, whether in front -line marketing operations such as contact centres, or the management of 
marketing resources. This advance helps in the deployment of AI in marketing, in the sense that it computerises other aspects of marketing and generates data which can be used to support AI. However, this also means that AI use should be integrated with these applications, taking data feeds automatically and making r ecommendations back to these other areas.  
Ethical and data protection issues  
Marketing involves doing things to customers and using their data. Both involve  important ethical 
considerations. Asking computers  to decide which customers shall be offered which products or which 
customers seem to have committed fraud is already normal in industries such as financial services, but has already raised problems of equity and trust. Where customers’ data is concerned, legislation makes it paramount that AI- based processing does not lead to infringement of increasingly stringent data protection 
legislation, or of basic ethical rules which marketers should observe.  
Patterns of expenditure and distribution in consumer markets  
In most developed markets,  much  consumer expe nditure is now on services, while government services are 
an important element of government expenditure (e.g. health services, education, security ). Services 
generally yield richer data flows about consumer behaviour, because (depending on the extent of digitalisation), usage , not just purchase,  can be or is tracked. The  data  richness is growing (for example, in 
motor insurance some policies require use of devices which track amount and style of usage). Data is an important theme of this paper , because one of the barriers to the use of AI is absence of data.  
 
Another important development is the emergence of giant web retailers e.g. Amazon, eBay and of platforms 
for advertising e.g. Google, which yield rich data about product and service purchasing. This data may or may not make its way back to product or service providers (this is increasingly the focus of a commercial transaction), but it is certainly available to these “platform players” to plan their marketing (Wright et al. , 
2019; Stone et al. , 2017) . 
 Finally, within the strict category of pure consumer expenditure, patterns are changing. Instead of going to the cinema, consumers use streaming video. Use of mobile apps has in many ways replaced other forms of 
entertainment. Channels are changing too, with digitalisation (particularly of content) supporting the switch 
from physical to virtual retail, perhaps seen in its most dramatic form in areas such as holiday booking, fashion and furniture. I n some countries, a rapidly ageing demography is causing an even faster shift away 
from physical products to services which can be easily consumed by the older adult.  
Business to business (B2B) marketing  
Much early thinking on customer relationship management arose from the experience of B2B companies, 
who  kept  contact with customers through sales  forces and then contact centres (e.g. Stone and Shaw, 1987 , 
1988 ; Stone et al. , 1990).  However, the data- richness of consumer marketing has led to much of the 
discussion on marketing automation being focused on consumer markets. Despite this, much of B2B 
marketing is completely analogous to  consumer  marketing, es pecially where it involves marketing to many 
small businesses. A t the other extreme is the world of major account and key account marketing, involving 
the sale of large contracts and the personal management of customers by sales forces  (Hughes et al. , 2004) . 
However, even this is becoming extensively digitalised. For example, in this world advanced content management systems are used to target content to appropriate prospects and customers, and downloading 
and engagement of this content is tracked, enabling suppliers to prioritise customers according to their 
interest in a product or service. However, as we shall see later, factors such as the big differences among 
customer s (and so the lack of simple replicability of decisions about them) can limit the appl icability of AI.  
Public sector marketing (i.e. from the public sector)  
In some countries, where the public sector retains a large share of expenditure on (if not always by) consumers, much of what is written about consumer marketing applies. In some situat ions, close 
partnerships between public and private sector organisations can also produce the same effect (e.g. partnerships between public owners of airports and privately- owned  airlines and retailers). The  boundary 

==== Page 5 ====
between public and private expenditure and the data that arises from it is shifting as government becomes 
more involved in enabling service provision, as in the case of smart cities  (Stone et al. , 2018) , where 
information platforms used to manage services may be partly or wholly gov ernment owned.  Indeed, the idea 
that public sector information platforms may be arenas in which private as well as public sector organisations compete to provide public services has been aired extensively – the so -called “government as 
a platform” (Brown et al., 2017). So, public expenditure is certainly not excluded from this paper, though 
some aspects of use of AI might be more constrained by political decisions, data protection and regulation.  
Applying AI to strategic management  
In this section of the ar ticle, we review some of the research in areas which are closely related to the topic of 
this article and need to be tied in more closely.  
The strategic decision- making process (SDMP)  
There is an extensive literature on this topic , summarised well by Shepherd and Rudd (2014). It arises from  
the n eed to understand how strategic decisions are made rather than their outcomes. However, there is 
little  literature on SDMP on m arketing , as most  SDMP literature covers  general management, particularly 
financial decisions relating to acquisitions and mergers, as well as psychology (the cognitive aspect). 
 
The SDMP literature identifies the importance of the se factors . 
• External environmental characteristics  
• Internal organisational characteristics  
• Top management team  characteristics  and behaviour  
• Other team characteristics  e.g. how it works together  
• Decision -specific characteristics  
• Decision maker’s individual characteristics  
• Data and technology 
• Cognitive issues  
 However, the SDMP literature has not been linked  with the literature on the use of AI in decision- making, 
and thus the two literatures need to be connected.  
The military experience  
The use of AI in strategic decision -making is becoming an area of focus  in military strategy  (Ayoub and Payne, 
2016; Payne, 2018). This is relevant because marketing is essentially a competitive activity, involving improving performance relative to a competitor (i.e. enemy), and in some industries in a complex world of alliances, where allies may have relationships with enemies and share forces. 
Cognitive bias  
One off the main advantages of the deployment of AI in strategy is the extent to which it could be used in removing the cognitive bias that results from individual and group decision- making (often but not always 
strategic) . The  individual and social biases  in making decisions  have  been the subject of intense research in 
many disciplines.  Reviews include those in the following areas – finance (Kumar and Goyal, 2015), 
entrepreneurship (Kerr et al. , 2018; Zhang and Cueto, 2017), pricing ( Iyer et al. , 2015) . A related area is the 
application of cognitive neuroscience disciplines, a general summary of which is provided by  Butler et al.  
(2016). A good review of cognitive and motivational biases and debiasing in decisions and risk analysis, is the 
work of Montibeller  and Von Winterfeldt  (2015). The broad conclusion relates to the ubiquity of bias, 
identifying the opportunity for AI to remove bias.  
Planning processes  
Research into this topic  goes back  to the 1960s , when the first marketing planning texts were produced, first  
by management consultants, then  by academics, becoming integrated into university teaching a decade or 
so later. The leading author here is McDonald (2016a, 2016b ), who h as researched marketing planning for 40 
years  and focuses on logical (e.g. from objectives, through strategies, to tactics), analytical and functional  or 
cross -functional (especially finance) and other processes deemed necessary  to produce a marketing plan 
appropriate for a firm’s context. It includes ideas about appropriate market research, customer information management and competitive intelligence. The data content of planning has been changed by the advent of 

==== Page 6 ====
customer relationship management and digital marketing, with data about individual customers, their 
behaviour and needs, becoming more widely used compared to “classic” market research ( Stone , 1996; 
Stone and Woodcock, 2014). Digitally supported marketing allows an initiative to move from an idea o r 
concept to execution in weeks or even days, compared to the months or years suggested in classic marketing (Chaffey and Ellis -Chadwick , 2019). More generally, the impact of big data on board decisions has been 
researched by Merendino et al.  (2018).  The impact of the digitisation  of data on board decisions has been 
explored by Dibb et al . (2015) . The impact of digitisation on the role of strategists is discussed by Åberg et al.  
(2017), while the problem posed by data overload and the impossibility of articulating all data is covered by Quinn et al.  (2018).  One of the most relevant points emphasised by Lee et al. (2019) is the dependence of AI 
on data quality and quantity  and the issue of  shortage of AI skills, pointing out that even in relativ ely 
straightforward operational implementation o n AI, shortage of AI skills may hinder progress. Blending the 
relatively high- level  skills of business/marketing planning with AI skills may prove an even greater challenge. 
Strateg ic tools  
Academic writing in this area focuses on the  tools of strategic analysis and decision- making and case studies 
of “successful” strategies. Many of the tools (e.g. SWOT  – Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats 
analysis, TOWS – Threats, Opportunities, Weaknesses, Strengths - analysis, Ansoff Matrix, BCG – Boston 
Consulting Group - matrix) have been integrated into marketing planning processes, but new tools /versions 
of tools  have emerged to meet the needs of marketing and business planning in the digital world. For 
examp le, instead of segmentation based upon static categories of need, it might be based up what is 
revealed real -time by what a customer does on a website.  One of the best books on strategy which covers all 
the relevant tools is that of Johnson et al.  (2017).  It is noteworthy that the SDMP literature does not focus on 
the use of different tools but focuses on decisions in general, so an additional aspect which should be explored is whether and how the SDMP varies according to the data and tools being used and the types of 
strategy being considered.  
AI in marketing decision -making – benefits and examples  
The benefits  
The benefits of applying AI to strategic marketing decision- making are expected  to include these:  
• Increased speed of decision -making, especially in response to new data being available or competitive 
threats emerging, allowing companies to capture the benefits of stronger market positions earlier . 
• Identification of missing data . 
• Increased rationality, particularly via removal or reduction of cognitive bias by decision- makers . 
• Creation of a common basis for decision -making . 
• Incorporation of learning from experience . 
• Higher quality management of marketing projects . 
Examples of application  
In this section, we consider some of the ways in which AI might be used in dif feren t areas of marketing 
decision -making and planning. It is based on the analysis framework proposed by Stone and Woodcock 
(2014)  for analysing the impact of digitalization but applied to AI . A similar matrix needs could be developed 
for corporate strategy.  There is no t always a clear separation between marketing strategy and business 
strategy . Nor is there a clear separation between overall marketing strategy and strategy for different 
elements of  the marketing mix. For example, decisions about marketing channels have strategic aspects 
(Stone et al. , 2002) as well as tactical aspects, particularly  as digital approaches change the balance between 
channels and the roles that different channels play. These decisions  can affect every aspect of marketing . 
However, T able s I-III present an attempt to show the main changes that digital marketing has made t o 
different  marketing activit ies, as digitalisa tion of marketing is a precondition for the data to be made 
available for AI to be deployed, and examples  of possible AI deployment . The tables cover in turn marketing 
strategy, marketing mix and marketing management.

==== Page 7 ====
Table I. Deployment of AI in marketing  strategy  
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each area  
Overall strategy – target 
markets, marketing mix for 
each, objectives, KPIs, goals 
etc. This allows infor mation for decision -making  to be assembled quickly and  be automated, 
and results of different strategies to be analysed more quickly so strategy can be revised in a ‘test and learn’ approach.  Quickly assessing different outcomes based on 
alternative strate gies. 
Assisting in rapid decision- making to choose those 
most likely to produce best results.  
Business model of customer management  This relates to which customers the company wants to acquire, retain, develop (up -sell 
and cross -sell) and divest, with what resulting revenues and costs, to achieve its strategic 
objectives rather than to meet the goals of certain elements of the marketing mix in 
isolation.  Using technology such as machine learning to 
assist in ‘reaching’ look alike audiences . 
Quantifying and exploring consequences of 
different business models.  
Overall branding and proposition  Depending on whether the company is involved in many different types of product and 
market, this may apply to the whole company or to parts of it, but at a higher level than individual products and services – with different branding approaches taken on different 
channels.  Identifying results of brand investments, 
recommending future investments and channel strategy.  
Developing new revenue streams  This refers to devel oping revenue using a way or introducing a new product or service 
that is in some sense different from existing ways – it may involve any or all elements of 
the marketing mix, and different markets.  Identifying revenue streams for existing customer 
base an d for new markets in order to accelerate 
launch.  
Ecosystem management, partnering, outsourcing and value chain redefinition This relates to how companies and partners (i.e. suppliers and manufacturers!) that are 
not owned by the client but work very closely with it are organised to ensure that the company’s overall marketing (and business) strategy is developed and delivered, and how 
the gains from working together are shared.  Identifying most productive parts of ecosystem 
and gaps in ecosystem development . 
Competitive strategy – who are 
main competitors, targeting for winning and defence  This relates to how direct and indirect competitors are identified, their strategies 
discovered and understood, and how the company strategizes so as to avoid where possi ble the negative effects of competition.  Identifying weak signals of impending 
competition . 
Identifying weaknesses in own and competitor’s 
strategy.  
Resource management  This allows overall costs and benefits of different strategies to be measured and analysed 
more quickly in order to adjust resourcing (i.e. for periods of peak demand).  Analysis of the data to identify risks, rewards and 
outcomes/ possible planning scenarios . 
  

==== Page 8 ====
Table II. Deployment of AI in the marketing  mix 
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each 
area  
Branding  The locus of many companies' brands has shifted from the real to the virtual world, w ith many  
brands of many others are strongly affected by what is said about them in the virtual world. Tracking shifting brand image using 
evidence from the web, particularly social 
media.  
Finding evidence of the causes of brand 
shift and loss of market share.  
Product  Customer input into product design (collaborative design) can be obtained much more quickly. 
Customers can design their own products more easily. Designs can be tested and revised more quickly, while problems can be identified and rectified more quickly and easily  using a variety of 
digital channels and collaboration tools.  Synthesising input from customers.  
Simulating results of new product designs of formulations.  
Proposition  The proposition can be more closely attuned to target markets, and the engagement of 
customers with different propositions can be understood more quickly, with iterative changes 
made and tested for further feedback.  Identifying which propositions work best 
though customer feedback and testing.  
Price  Prices can be tailored mo re easily to different customers. Yield management can be applied in 
many new areas . Resetting pricing strategies based on 
results of different yield management 
approaches.  
Advertising  Website/mobile /digital advertising is gradually usurping advertising i n conventional physical 
media, allowing greater trackability and better assessment of return on investment. This is leading to a blurring of the distinction between advertising , digital and other marketing 
communications methods.  The automation applied to advertising via programmatic and similar 
approaches is greatly increasing the opportunity for applying AI approaches.  Choosing/designing text, images and 
videos to suit market segments and individuals in different channels and platforms.  
Direct marketing  Direct marketing has expanded out of the conventional media of mail and telephone to include 
virtually all marketing communications , especially digital and CRM  (Customer Relationship 
Management) , so that in some ways it appears in all marketing, whether in itiated by the 
company or its customers. Referrals, always valuable, have been transformed into 
recommendations  for many companies.  Choosing which form / combinations of 
contact types / channels / content that is appropriate for different target markets and individuals.  
Personal selling  Personal selling now has much stronger information support, while improved sales management 
systems, sometimes integrated with response management systems, allow much more effective targeting , prospecting and management of customers and prospects . Providing personalised response to 
individuals . 
Analysing the results . 
Recommending different ways to 
personalise.  

==== Page 9 ====
Public relations  Electronic word of mouth, or "word of mouse", is replacing conventional media exposu re, not 
solely through social networks, but through all aspects of web and mobile dialogue  – and often 
developing rapidly and in real time (‘trending’) . In some sectors, online reviews have become 
critical in determining whether a product will sell, while social influencers have become a very 
important part of marketing in some sectors, such as travel, clothing, cosmetics and automotive.  Identifying patterns of word of mouth, 
reasons for them, suggested actions and 
underlying sentiment.  
Sales promotion  The effectiveness of sales promotions can be gauged much more quickly  than ever before , while 
online channels facilitate distribution of buying incentives (such as coupons , discounts  and other 
incentives ). Identifying which promotions work best 
and quickest w ith which customers/market 
segments . 
Identifying which offers should be used and 
when.  
Content  The increase in the number of channels and the importance of content (text, audio, image, 
video) in persuading and influencing customers has come to the fore, particularly given the possibility of customising all kinds of content to market segments and now  individual customers, 
supported by the ability to search for, classify and analyse all kinds of content. The rapid rise in video content, facilitated by significant improvements in mobile bandwidth (with more to come with the advent of 5G), is both a challenge and an opportunity, multiplied by using messaging to communicate content. Extended (virtual and augmented) reality are changing the approach to content, allowing the blending of real and digital experiences. Brand and product storytelling are  
being used much more, partly because they support the development of much richer content 
that can be used across all communication channels. However, an issue which remains controversial is the extent to which the use of AI can support and encourage creativity and 
increase the returns from it.  Serving content to the right customers and 
prospects at the right time and analysing results of serving it.  
Customising content to target segments and customers.  
Customer management (acquisition, retention, development, customer service, customer experience)  This relates to how the customer inventory is built for particular products or groups of them, 
from the targets set to the techniques used to achieve desired results and track fulfilment of commitment and  customer promises following transaction.  Optimising inventory levels real -time, and 
helping the customer react to different segments demand.  
Automating interaction with the customer 
(bots)  
Distribution  The web has become a very important channel of distr ibution for many information -based 
products and services, as well as some physical products, and in many markets the dominant 
channel for marketing communication, so that distribution and the communication decisions 
become closely tied to each other, with customers seeking immediate response to their 
requests, or a simple method in which to purchase when they are ready.  Optimising channels. Identifying missing 
channels. Improve transaction times and 
streamline fulfilment.  
  

==== Page 10 ====
Table III. Deployment of AI in marketing  management  
Marketing area  Changes made by digital marketing  Examples of how AI can be used in each area  
People  Marketing, sales and service people can be much better informed about what they need to know to 
sell and market better, and results of their work can be obtained and distributed more easily . They 
can also benefit professionally from having more training on new digital marketing tools and how to 
apply the technology personally.  Identifying what information should be used to 
support different types of decision.  
Identifying where managers are not using the right information , have not got access to the right 
information  or are misinterpreting the information 
they have .  
Providing tool s and frameworks to better use the 
opportunities created by new AI technology.  
Marketing analysis  Using the huge volumes of data now available to some companies, and customers growing 
increasingly impatient for rapid responses targeting of outbound messaging and rapid response to inbound messaging can be much more accurate and timely. Timing has become critically important to 
capture buying intent, as customers may be in the market for a very short time, as they make their comparisons and reach their conclusions using the mountains of content available from firms and 
their competitors.  Accelerating analysis and its application – both from 
a ‘reactive’ internal perspective and also from the point of view of customers accessing information relevant to a purchase.  
Market research  Market resea rch is increasing ly online, while gaining insight from both customer -initiated feedback  
and sentiment analysis (with the appropriate permissions)  are providing a new source of information 
to marketers on how their current and prospective customers think, f eel and act.  Gaining and analysing larger data sets.  
Analysis of results of research, especially when 
combined across different studies,  
Market targeting  Due to its growing complexity , market targeting is becoming increasingly automated. The results of 
recent changes in targets and deployment of different elements of marketing mix to produce 
appropriate response rates and sales . AI can assist with more accurate targeting, including 
allowing for real- time changes to strategy.  
Data and systems  Marketing processes can be migrated onto systems, increasingly  running on the "cloud"  and allowing 
the marketing and wider team to collaborate and  enhanc e their effectiveness and speed of proces ses 
such as workflow/ project management. Systems allow much b etter access to data required for 
decision -making  on everything from individual customers to strategic decisions, and then for 
measurement, review and calculation of return on investment . Personalisation and location -based 
marketing have  moved on from  beco ming watchwords,  to being ‘business as usual’ for the most 
effective marketing teams. They however pose significant privacy risks, as  data protection 
requirements have become  a central focus for marketing management. Meanwhile, the requirements 
for integra ting data from different sources so as to maximise marketing effectiveness, particularly the 
integration of their Data Management Platforms (centralized systems for collecting and analysing large data sets from disparate sources) with their Demand- Side Pla tforms  (systems that allow buyers 
of digital advertising to coordinate their activity, including bidding) are essential to keep up with 
competitors.  Identifying opportunities for improving returns to 
systems deployment.  
Identifying new ways to accelerate w orkflow and a 
collaboration to assist in developing speed to market and increased compliance.  

==== Page 11 ====
Marketing 
resource 
management  Marketing automation allows marketing processes to be managed more effectively as the return on 
investment for different marketing expenditures to be calculated and forecast with more accuracy  
than traditional channels.  Optimising resource management is key with 
business being more stretched than ever by a hyper 
competitive market.  
Content 
management  Managing the increasing volume and variety of content requires maint aining various  systems, and 
constantly customising content to the  needs  and use -cases of specific situations is particularly 
important, given the rising possibility of exposing the wrong customer to the wrong content. Matching content to the right end customer (at the right time) uses significantly more marketing resources, so the return on the additional cost improving content management must be measured 
and acted upon.  Detailed optimisation for individual custom ers. 
Provision of tool that speed s up delivery of content 
and improve s its optimisation.  
Managing marketing people  This relates to how marketing people are recruited, trained, developed, targeted and assessed as 
marketing professionals. This is particularly important in a rapidly changing landscape of digital technology, which is necessitating an entirely new skill set from traditional marketing channels and 
disciplines.  Identifying the most productive marketers and 
assisting the resolution of problems ass ociated with 
the decision- making of others.  
Marketing operating model  With digitalisation, the marketing operating model is changing. One of the best examples of this is the 
rise of programmatic advertising, which is helping companies use technology to move beyond the 
manual management of advertising to use technology to reach the nirvana of attributing the correct 
value to different advertising interventions, given the possession and use of the right analytics tools 
to reach the right target audience auto matically.  Optimising the efficient working of model, including 
using machine learning to make real time decisions 
on appropriate audiences and investment levels.  
Marketing 
finance  Identifying where revenue and crucially profit come from in while operati ng in a complex multi -
channel, multi -product/service business is essential. Given the reduction in barriers to entry online, 
the increasing speed of change in the market, ensuring that a business is acting in a sustainable manner needs to be ascertained much more quickly. New measures are being used, not just the 
classic financial ones, that take into account, portfolio approaches, and digital traction.  Identifying returns accurately, more rapidly and 
with greater impartiality than human analysis.  

==== Page 12 ====
Progress to date  
The use of AI in marketing operations has been extensively publicised by suppliers of systems which are 
either ones where AI can be deployed or which provide the AI component, for example, from the leading 
supplier of Customer Relationship Management software, Salesforce.com (Garvin, 2019) . However, the use 
of AI in making strategic marketing decisions has been researched very little, with the most recent 
comprehensive report being from Accenture ( Awalegaonkar  et al. , 2019). This report, based on interviews 
with 1,500 C -suite executives  from companies with a minimum revenue of US$1 billion in 12 countries in 16 
industries, focused on the factors require to scale artificial intelligence. The report used the concepts of 
piloting and scaling to segment users of AI. It defined “Pilot ” as rolling out a capability with real data, users 
and processes in a production environment (using a subset of the relevant scope). The purpose of piloting to test how the capability performs with a limited scope and to then make any needed modifications before 
expanding to the full applicable scope. It defined “Scale” as extension of the piloted capability across the full 
applicable scope with all relevant data, end users, customers, and processes.   The main findings of the report were as follows:  
• 84% of C -suite executives believe they  need to use A rtificial Intelligence (AI) to achieve their growth 
objectives. Nearly all C -suite executives view AI as an enabler of their strategic priorities and that 
achieving a positive return on AI investments requires scaling across the organization.  
• 76% acknowle dge that they struggl e in scaling AI across the business and that if they do  not scale AI in 
the next five years, they risk going out of business.  
• Companies that successfully scale AI achieve much better financial returns from their investment in it.  
 The report suggested that users of AI fell into three groups:  
• Those at proof of concept stage (80- 85% of companies), with a low scaling success rate, a low return on 
their AI investments, their efforts usually siloed within a department or team, often IT -led, with no 
connection to a business imperative and difficult to scale . 
• Those engaged in strategic scaling (15- 20% of companies), having moved beyond proof of concept, with a 
higher success rate for AI, with a clear AI strategy and operating model linked to the company’s business 
objectives, with an experimental mindset, with their efforts supported by a larger, multi -dimensional 
team championed by the Chief AI, Data or Analytics Officer, but with the scaled AI generally applied to 
individual applications suc h as personalization, intelligent automation and predictive reporting. 
• Those (at most 5%) who have industrialised their use of AI, creating a culture of AI, a clear enterprise vision based on strategy and competitive advantage that resists siloed applications, with strong accountability, metrics and governance, with thousands of models in use within an AI framework, using it to promote product and service innovation, using ‘What if’ analysis enabling improved acquisition, 
service and satisfaction, and re -using digital assets.  They recognise the importance of business -critical 
data — identifying financial, marketing, consumer, and master data as a priority, investing in structuring 
and managing data, data quality, data management, and data governance frameworks on the cloud, with 
clear operating models for generation versus consumption of data, integrating internal and external data sets as a standard practice, and understand the importance of using more diverse datasets to support initiatives.  
 The report cites two case studies, as follows:  
• A brewing firm which uses AI to develop  more accurate forecasting models, improved  consumer and 
customer segmentations, and enhanced sales , deploying advanced analytics capabilities  on more than 
one hundred global datasets, including sales and forecast data, social media, trade  spend, customer and 
product master data,  and weather data . 
• A convenience store chain which uses AI in pricing to match customer demand across the world, using virtual agents to interact with global category management teams to drive adoption of the new pricing approach, supported by multi -disciplinary teams with skills in areas like data engineering, visualization, 
data quality, and human- centered design.  

==== Page 13 ====
The future research agenda  
Where does the above leave us? Our conclusion is that there is an urgent need for deeper research, both to 
guide how marketing academics teach their students and prepare them for work in marketing, and to guide 
marketing, IT and strategy decision- makers in their decisions on investments in AI, on its deployment and in 
its exploitation, in their reconstruction of their strategic decision- making  processes, their forecasting and 
scenario planning, and their strategic cultures. Other areas that need more research include:  
• Impact of  culture on attitudes to possible changes in decision- making . 
• Applicability of AI- supported decision- making to transformational decisions e.g. switching to a new 
business model or dealing with “wicked” problems (Foss and Saebi, 2018) or in turbulent enviro nments 
(Vecchiato, 2015) . 
• How to maintain innovativeness in strategic  marketing decision -making and planning in an AI -driven 
world . 
• How to implement any new approach i.e. change management  requirements , including how to ensure 
that policy/strategy recommendations are implemented at the right speed, and that any required testing 
and learning is undertaken (should test and learn be built into the approach) , the skills required for 
leaders/others , implications for governance e.g. board behaviour, location of decisions, risk 
accountability. 
• Strategic partnerships that companies will need in order to achieve the best results, including the  role of 
consultants and suppliers and marketing and similar agencies .  
References  
Åberg, C., Kazemargi, N. and Bankewitz, M. (2017) , “Strategists on the Board in a Digital Era ”, Business and 
Management Research, Vol. 6 No. 2,  pp. 40- 51. 
Awalegaonkar , K., Berkey, R., Douglass, G. and Reilly, A . (2019), “AI: Built to Scale ”, Accenture , 
available at: https://www.accenture.com/gb- en/insights/artificial- intelligence/ai- investments  (acces sed 5 
December  2019). 
Ayoub, K. and Payne, K. (2016) , “Strategy in the age of artificial intelligence ”, Journal of Strategic Studies , 
Vol. 39 Nos. 5/6, pp. 793- 819.  
Brock, J.K.U. and Von Wangenheim, F. (2019) , “Demystifying AI: what digital transformation leaders can 
teach you about realistic artificial intelligence ”, California Management Review , Vol. 61 No. 4,  pp. 110- 134. 
Brown, A., Fishenden, J., Thompson, M. and Venters, W. ( 2017) , “Appraising the impact and role of platform 
models and Government as a Platform (GaaP) in UK Government public service reform: Towards a Platform 
Assessment Framework (PAF) ”, Government Information Quarterly , Vol. 34 No. 2,  pp. 167- 182. 
Butler, M.J., O'Broin, H.L., Lee, N. and Senior, C. (2016) , “How organizational cognitive neuroscience can 
deepen understanding of managerial decision -m aking: A review of the recent literature and future 
directions ”, International Journal of Management Reviews , Vol. 18 No. 4,  pp. 542- 559. 
Chaffey, D. and Ellis -Chadwick, F. (2019) , Digital marketing, Pearson , London. 
Chakhar, S., Ishizaka, A., Labib, A., Saad, I. (2016 ), “Dominance -based Rough Set Approach for Group 
Decisions ”, European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 251 No. 1,  pp. 206- 224. 
Claudé, M. and Combe, D. (2018), “The roles of artificial intelligence and humans in decision- making: 
Towards augmented humans”, Master's Thesis, Umeå University School of Business, Economics and 
Statistics, Sweden  
Condon, S. (2019) , “Amazon shares how it leverages AI throughout the business ”, available at: 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/amazon -shares -how- it-leverages -ai-throughout -the-business/  (accessed 24 
October 2019). 
Dibb, S., Meadows, M. and Wilson, D. ( 2015) , “Digitisation and Decision Making in the Boardroom ”, available 
at: http://www.nemode.ac.uk/?page_id=1524 (accessed 18 October 2019).  
Foss, N.J. and Saebi, T. (2018) , “Business models and business model innovation: Between wicked and 
paradigmatic problems ”, Long Range Planning, Vol. 51 No. 1,  pp. 9-21. 
Garvin, K. (2019) , “Artificial Intelligence in Marketing Is What Customers Want ”, available at: 
https://www.salesforce.com/products/marketing- cloud/best -practices/artificial- intelligence -for- marketing/  
(accessed 27 December  2019).  

==== Page 14 ====
Hughes, T., Foss, B., Stone, M. and Cheverton, P. (2004), “Key account management in financial services: An 
outline research agenda”, Journal of Financial Services Marketing, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 184- 193. 
Iyer, G.R., Xiao, S.H., Sharma, A. and Nicholson, M. ( 2015) , “Behavioral issues in price setting in business -to-
business marketing: A framework for analysis ”, Industrial Marketing Management , Vol. 47, pp. 6-16. 
Jarrahi, M. (2018) , “Artificial intelligence and the future of work: human- AI symbiosis in organizational 
decision making”, Business Horizons , Vol. 61 No. 4,  pp. 577- 586.  
Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. ( 2017), Exploring strategy , Pearson, 
London. 
Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Xu, T. (2018) , “Personality traits of entrepreneurs: a review of recent literature. 
Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship”, Vol. 14 No. 3,  pp. 279- 356. 
Kiron D. and Schrage, M. (2019) , “Strategy for and with AI ”, MIT Sloan Management Review Magazine , 
available at: https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/strategy-for- and-with -ai/ (accessed 24 October 2019). 
Kolbjørnsrud, V., Amico, R. and Thomas, R.J. ( 2016),  “How artificial intelligence will redefine management ”, 
Harvard Business Review , available at: https://hbr.org/2016/11/how -artificial- intelligence -will- redefine-
management  (accessed 1 Nov 2019). 
Kumar, S. and Goyal, N. (2015) , “Behavioural biases in investment -a systematic literature review ”, 
Qualitative Research in financial markets , Vol. 7 No. 1,  pp. 88- 108.  
Lahmann, M., Keiser, P. and Stierli, A. (2018) , “AI will transform project management, are you ready? ”, 
available at: https://www.pwc.ch/en/publications/2019/ai -will-transform -proje ct-management -en2019-
web.pdf  (accessed 13 October 2019 ). 
Lee, J., Suh, T., Roy, D. and Baucus, M. (2019) , “Emerging Technology and Business Model Innovation: The 
Case of Artificial Intelligence ”, Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexi ty, Vol. 5 No. 3,  
p.44.  
Marinchak, C.M., Forrest, E. and Hoanca, B. (2018) , “Artificial Intelligence: Redefining Marketing 
Management and the Customer Experience ”, International Journal of E -Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 
Vol. 8 No. 2,  pp. 14- 24. 
McDonald, M. (2016a) , Marketing Plans: How to prepare them, how to profit from them , Wiley , Chichester.  
McDonald, M. (2016b) , “Strategic marketing planning: theory and practice ”, in Baker,  M.J., Hart , S. (Eds.),  
The Marketing Book , Routledge, pp. 108- 142. 
Merendino, A., Dibb, S., Meadows, M., Quinn, L., Wilson, D., Simkin, L. and Canhoto, A. (2018) , “Big data, big 
decisions: The impact of big data on board level decision- making ”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 93, pp. 
67-78. 
Montibeller, G., Von Winterfeldt, D. (2015) , “Cognitive and motivational biases in decision and risk analysis ”, 
Risk Analysis , Vol. 35 No. 7, pp. 1230- 1251. 
Parnell, B., Stone, M. and Aravopoulou, E. (2018) , “How leaders manage their business models using 
information”, The Bottom Line,  Vol. 31 No. 2,  pp. 150- 167. 
Payne, K. (2018) , “Artificial Intelligence: A Revolution in Strategic Affairs? ”, Survival , Vol. 60 No. 5,  pp. 7-32. 
Perris, T. and Labib, A. W. (2004) , “An Intelligent System for Prioritisation of Organ Transplant Waiting List ”, 
Journal of Operational Research Society , Vol. 55 No. 2,  pp. 103- 115.  
Poplawska, J., Labib, A., Reed, D., Ishizaka, A. (2015) , “A dynamic framework for stakeholder identification 
and salience measurement using fuzzy logic methodology applied to a corporate social responsibility case 
study”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 105, pp. 103- 115. 
Quinn, L., Ardley, B. and Dibb, S. ( 2018), “ Unravelling the Tacit in a Digital Age: The Inescapable Ro le of 
Inarticulable Insight ”, paper presented at the  Data, organisations and society conference, Coventry 
University .  
Shepherd, N.G. and Rudd, J.M.  (2014), “ The influence of context on the strategic decision -m aking process: A 
review of the literature ”, International Journal of Management Reviews , Vol. 16 No. 3,  pp. 340- 364.  
Shrest ha, Y., Ben- Menahem, S. and von Krogh, G. (2019) , “Organizational Decision -Making Structures in the 
Age of Artificial Intelligence ”, California Management Review , Vol. 61 No. 4,  pp. 66- 83. 
Stone, M. and Shaw, R. (1987) , “Database marketing for competitive advantage ”, Long Range Planning,  Vol. 
20 No. 2,  pp. 24- 39. 

==== Page 15 ====
Stone, M. and Shaw, R. (1988) , “Competitive superiority through database marketing”, Long Range Planning, 
Vol. 21 No. 5,  pp. 24- 40. 
Stone, M. and Aravopoulou, E. (2018) , “Improving journeys by opening data: the case of Transport for 
London (TfL) ”, The Bottom Line, Vol. 31 No. 1,  pp. 2-15. 
Stone, M. Hobbs, M. and Khaleeli, M. (2002). “Multichannel customer management: The benefits and 
challenges ”, Journal of Database Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 1,  pp. 39- 52. 
Stone, M., Knapper, J., Evans, G. and Aravopoulou, E. (2018) , “Information management in the smart city ”, 
The Bottom Line, Vol. 31 Nos. 3/4,  pp. 234- 249. 
Stone, M., Laughlin, P., Aravopoulou, E., Gerardi, G., Todeva, E. and  Weinzierl L., (2017) , “How platforms are 
transforming customer information management ”, The Bottom Line,  Vol. 30 No. 3,  pp. 216- 235. 
Stone, M., Thomson, A. and  Wheeler C. (1990), Telemanage Your Customers , Gower , Aldershot . 
Stone, M., Woodcock, N. and Wilson, M. (1996) , “Managing the change from marketing planning to 
customer relationship management ”, Long Range Planning, Vol. 29 No. 5,  pp. 675- 683. 
Stone, M. and Woodcock, N. (2014) , “Interactive, direct and digital marketing: A future that depends on 
better use of business intelligence ”, Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, Vol. 8 No. 1,  pp. 4-17. 
Valter, P. , Lindgren, P. and Prasad, R. (2018) , “Advanced business model innovation supported by artificial 
intelligence and deep learning”, Wireless personal communications , Vol. 100 No. 1 , pp. 97- 111. 
Vecchiato, R. (2015) , “Strategic planning and organizational flexibility in turbulent environments ”. Foresight , 
Vol. 17 No. 3,  pp. 257- 273.  
Wright, L.T., Robin, R., Stone, M. and Aravopoulou, E. ( 2019) , “Adoption of big data technology for 
innovation in B2B marketing”, Journal of Business -to-Business Marketing, Vol. 26 Nos. 3/4,  pp. 281- 293. 
Zhang, S.X. and Cueto, J. (2017) , “The study of bias in entrepreneurship”, Entrepreneurship theory and 
Practice , Vol. 41 No. 3,  pp. 419- 454. 

