==== Page 1 ====
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND LIFE IN 2030
ONE HUNDRED YEAR STUDY ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE | REPORT OF THE 2015 STUDY PANEL | SEPTEMBER 2016
PREFACE
The One Hundred Year Study on 
Artificial Intelligence, launched 
in the fall of  2014, is a long-
term investigation of  the field of  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
its influences on people, their 
communities, and society . It 
considers the science, engineering, 
and deployment of  AI-enabled 
computing systems. As its core 
activity , the Standing Committee 
that oversees the One Hundred 
Year Study forms a Study Panel 
every five years to assess the 
current state of  AI. The Study 
Panel reviews AI’s progress in the years following the immediately prior report, 
envisions the potential advances that lie ahead, and describes the technical and 
societal challenges and opportunities these advances raise, including in such arenas as 
ethics, economics, and the design of  systems compatible with human cognition. The 
overarching purpose of  the One Hundred Year Study’s periodic expert review is to 
provide a collected and connected set of  reflections about AI and its influences as the 
field advances. The studies are expected to develop syntheses and assessments that 
provide expert-informed guidance for directions in  
AI research, development, and systems design, as well as programs and policies to 
help ensure that these systems broadly benefit individuals and society .1 
The One Hundred Year Study is modeled on an earlier effort informally known as 
the “ AAAI Asilomar Study .” During 2008-2009, the then president of  the Association 
for the Advancement of  Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Eric Horvitz, assembled a 
group of  AI experts from multiple institutions and areas of  the field, along with 
scholars of  cognitive science, philosophy , and law. Working in distributed subgroups, 
the participants addressed near-term AI developments, long-term possibilities, 
and legal and ethical concerns, and then came together in a three-day meeting at 
Asilomar to share and discuss their findings. A short written report on the intensive 
meeting discussions, amplified by the participants’ subsequent discussions with other 
colleagues, generated widespread interest and debate in the field and beyond. 
The impact of  the Asilomar meeting, and important advances in AI that included 
AI algorithms and technologies starting to enter daily life around the globe, spurred 
the idea of  a long-term recurring study of  AI and its influence on people and society . 
The One Hundred Year Study was subsequently endowed at a university to enable 
1 “One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100),” Stanford University, accessed 
August 1, 2016, https://ai100.stanford.edu .
The overarching purpose 
of the One Hundred Year 
Study’s periodic expert 
review is to provide a 
collected and connected 
set of reflections about  
AI and its influences as  
the field advances.

==== Page 2 ====
2extended deep thought and cross-disciplinary scholarly investigations that could 
inspire innovation and provide intelligent advice to government agencies and industry .
This report is the first in the planned series of  studies that will continue for at least 
a hundred years. The Standing Committee defined a Study Panel charge for the 
inaugural Study Panel in the summer of  2015 and recruited Professor Peter Stone, 
at the University of  Texas at Austin, to chair the panel. The seventeen-member 
Study Panel, comprised of  experts in AI from academia, corporate laboratories 
and industry , and AI-savvy scholars in law, political science, policy , and economics, 
was launched in mid-fall 2015. The participants represent diverse specialties and 
geographic regions, genders, and career stages. 
The Standing Committee extensively discussed ways to frame the Study Panel 
charge to consider both recent advances in AI and potential societal impacts on jobs, 
the environment, transportation, public safety , healthcare, community engagement, 
and government. The committee considered various ways to focus the study , 
including surveying subfields and their status, examining a particular technology 
such as machine learning or natural language processing, and studying particular 
application areas such as healthcare or transportation. The committee ultimately 
chose a thematic focus on “ AI and Life in 2030” to recognize that AI’s various uses 
and impacts will not occur independently of  one another, or of  a multitude of  other 
societal and technological developments. Acknowledging the central role cities have 
played throughout most of  human experience, the focus was narrowed to the large 
urban areas where most people live. The Standing Committee further narrowed the 
focus to a typical North American city in recognition of  the great variability of  urban 
settings and cultures around the world, and limits on the first Study Panel’s efforts. 
The Standing Committee expects that the projections, assessments, and proactive 
guidance stemming from the study will have broader global relevance and is making 
plans for future studies to expand the scope of  the project internationally .
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4
OVERVIEW 6
SECTION I: WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE? 12
Defining AI 12
AI Research Trends 14
SECTION II: AI BY DOMAIN 18
Transportation 18
Home/Service Robots 24
Healthcare 25
Education 31
Low-resource Communities 35
Public Safety and Security 36
Employment and Workplace 38
Entertainment 40
SECTION III: PROSPECTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AI PUBLIC POLICY 42
AI Policy, Now and in the Future 42
APPENDIX I: A SHORT HISTORY OF AI 50

==== Page 3 ====
3As one consequence of  the decision to focus on life in North American cities, 
military applications were deemed to be outside the scope of  this initial report. This 
is not to minimize the importance of  careful monitoring and deliberation about 
the implications of  AI advances for defense and warfare, including potentially 
destabilizing developments and deployments.
The report is designed to address four intended audiences. For the general public, 
it aims to provide an accessible, scientifically and technologically accurate portrayal 
of  the current state of  AI and its potential. For industry , the report describes relevant 
technologies and legal and ethical challenges, and may help guide resource allocation. 
The report is also directed to local, national, and international governments to help 
them better plan for AI in governance. Finally , the report can help AI researchers, 
as well as their institutions and funders, to set priorities and consider the ethical and 
legal issues raised by AI research and its applications. 
Given the unique nature of  the One Hundred Year Study on AI, we expect that 
future generations of  Standing Committees and Study Panels, as well as research 
scientists, policy experts, leaders in the private and public sectors, and the general 
public, will reflect on this assessment as they make new assessments of  AI’s future. We 
hope that this first effort in the series stretching out before us will be useful for both its 
failures and successes in accurately predicting the trajectory and influences of  AI.
The Standing Committee is grateful to the members of  the Study Panel for 
investing their expertise, perspectives, and significant time to the creation of  this 
inaugural report. We especially thank Professor Peter Stone for agreeing to serve as 
chair of  the study and for his wise, skillful, and dedicated leadership of  the panel,  
its discussions, and creation of  the report. 
Standing Committee of the One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence
Barbara J. Grosz, Chair  Russ Altman Eric Horvitz
Alan Mackworth Tom Mitchell Deirdre Mulligan Yoav Shoham
STUDY PANEL
Peter Stone , University of Texas at Austin, Chair
Rodney Brooks , Rethink Robotics
Erik Brynjolfsson , Massachussets Institute of Technology
Ryan Calo , University of Washington
Oren Etzioni , Allen Institute for AI
Greg Hager , Johns Hopkins University
Julia Hirschberg , Columbia University
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan , Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Ece Kamar , Microsoft Research
Sarit Kraus , Bar Ilan University
Kevin Leyton-Brown , University of British Columbia
David Parkes , Harvard University
William Press , University of Texas at Austin
AnnaLee (Anno) Saxenian , University of California, Berkeley 
Julie Shah , Massachussets Institute of Technology
Milind Tambe , University of Southern California
Astro Teller , X
Acknowledgments: The members of the Study Panel gratefully acknowledge the 
support of and valuable input from the Standing Committee, especially the chair, 
Barbara Grosz, who handled with supreme grace the unenviable role of mediating 
between two large, very passionate committees. We also thank Kerry Tremain for his 
tireless and insightful input on the written product during the extensive editing and 
polishing process, which unquestionably strengthened the report considerably.© 2016 by Stanford University . Artificial 
Intelligence and Life in 2030 is made 
available under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 License 
(International): https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/


==== Page 4 ====
4EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a science and a set of  computational technologies that 
are inspired by—but typically operate quite differently from—the ways people use 
their nervous systems and bodies to sense, learn, reason, and take action. While the 
rate of  progress in AI has been patchy and unpredictable, there have been significant 
advances since the field’s inception sixty years ago. Once a mostly academic area of   
study , twenty-first century AI enables a constellation of  mainstream technologies that  
are having a substantial impact on everyday lives. Computer vision and AI planning, 
for example, drive the video games that are now a bigger entertainment industry than  
Hollywood. Deep learning, a form of  machine learning based on layered representations 
of  variables referred to as neural networks, has made speech-understanding practical 
on our phones and in our kitchens, and its algorithms can be applied widely to an 
array of  applications that rely on pattern recognition. Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) and knowledge representation and reasoning have enabled a machine to beat 
the Jeopardy champion and are bringing new power to Web searches. 
While impressive, these technologies are highly tailored to particular tasks. Each 
application typically requires years of  specialized research and careful, unique 
construction. In similarly targeted applications, substantial increases in the future 
uses of  AI technologies, including more self-driving cars, healthcare diagnostics 
and targeted treatments, and physical assistance for elder care can be expected. AI 
and robotics will also be applied across the globe in industries struggling to attract 
younger workers, such as agriculture, food processing, fulfillment centers, and 
factories. They will facilitate delivery of  online purchases through flying drones,  
self-driving trucks, or robots that can get up the stairs to the front door.
This report is the first in a series to be issued at regular intervals as a part of  the 
One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Starting from a charge 
given by the AI100 Standing Committee to consider the likely influences of  AI in a  
typical North American city by the year 2030, the 2015 Study Panel, comprising experts  
in AI and other relevant areas focused their attention on eight domains they considered  
most salient: transportation; service robots; healthcare; education; low-resource 
communities; public safety and security; employment and workplace; and entertainment. 
In each of  these domains, the report both reflects on progress in the past fifteen years  
and anticipates developments in the coming fifteen years. Though drawing from a  
common source of  research, each domain reflects different AI influences and challenges, 
such as the difficulty of  creating safe and reliable hardware (transportation and service 
robots), the difficulty of  smoothly interacting with human experts (healthcare and  
education), the challenge of  gaining public trust (low-resource communities and public  
safety and security), the challenge of  overcoming fears of  marginalizing humans 
(employment and workplace), and the social and societal risk of  diminishing interpersonal 
interactions (entertainment). The report begins with a reflection on what constitutes 
Artificial Intelligence, and concludes with recommendations concerning AI-related 
policy . These recommendations include accruing technical expertise about AI in 
government and devoting more resources—and removing impediments—to research 
on the fairness, security , privacy , and societal impacts of  AI systems.
Contrary to the more fantastic predictions for AI in the popular press, the Study 
Panel found no cause for concern that AI is an imminent threat to humankind. 
No machines with self-sustaining long-term goals and intent have been developed, 
nor are they likely to be developed in the near future. Instead, increasingly useful 
applications of  AI, with potentially profound positive impacts on our society and  
economy are likely to emerge between now and 2030, the period this report 
considers. At the same time, many of  these developments will spur disruptions in Substantial increases 
in the future uses of AI 
applications, including 
more self-driving cars, 
healthcare diagnostics 
and targeted treatment, 
and physical assistance 
for elder care can be 
expected. 

==== Page 5 ====
5how human labor is augmented or replaced by AI, creating new challenges for the 
economy and society more broadly . Application design and policy decisions made in 
the near term are likely to have long-lasting influences on the nature and directions 
of  such developments, making it important for AI researchers, developers, social 
scientists, and policymakers to balance the imperative to innovate with mechanisms 
to ensure that AI’s economic and social benefits are broadly shared across society . If  
society approaches these technologies primarily with fear and suspicion, missteps that 
slow AI’s development or drive it underground will result, impeding important work 
on ensuring the safety and reliability of  AI technologies. On the other hand, if  society 
approaches AI with a more open mind, the technologies emerging from the field 
could profoundly transform society for the better in the coming decades.
Study Panel : Peter Stone , Chair , University of Texas at Austin,  Rodney Brooks , 
Rethink Robotics,  Erik Brynjolfsson , Massachussets Institute of Technology, Ryan 
Calo , University of Washington, Oren Etzioni , Allen Institute for AI, Greg Hager , Johns 
Hopkins University, Julia Hirschberg , Columbia University, Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan , 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Ece Kamar , Microsoft Research, Sarit Kraus , 
Bar Ilan University. Kevin Leyton-Brown , University of British Columbia, David Parkes , 
Harvard University, William Press , University of Texas at Austin, AnnaLee (Anno) 
Saxenian , University of California, Berkeley, Julie Shah , Massachussets Institute of 
Technology,  Milind Tambe , University of Southern California, Astro Teller , X
Standing Committee of the One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence:
Barbara J. Grosz, Chair , Russ Altman, Eric Horvitz, Alan Mackworth, Tom Mitchell, 
Deidre Mulligan, Yoav ShohamWhile drawing on common 
research and technologies, 
AI systems are specialized 
to accomplish particular 
tasks. Each application 
requires years of focused 
research and a careful, 
unique construction. 

==== Page 6 ====
6OVERVIEW
The frightening, futurist portrayals of  Artificial Intelligence that dominate films and 
novels, and shape the popular imagination, are fictional. In reality , AI is already 
changing our daily lives, almost entirely in ways that improve human health, safety , 
and productivity . Unlike in the movies, there is no race of  superhuman robots on the 
horizon or probably even possible. And while the potential to abuse AI technologies 
must be acknowledged and addressed, their greater potential is, among other things, 
to make driving safer, help children learn, and extend and enhance people’s lives. In 
fact, beneficial AI applications in schools, homes, and hospitals are already growing 
at an accelerated pace. Major research universities devote departments to AI studies, 
and technology companies such as Apple, Facebook, Google, IBM, and Microsoft 
spend heavily to explore AI applications they regard as critical to their futures. Even 
Hollywood uses AI technologies to bring its dystopian AI fantasies to the screen.
Innovations relying on computer-based vision, speech recognition, and Natural 
Language Processing have driven these changes, as have concurrent scientific and 
technological advances in related fields. AI is also changing how people interact with 
technology . Many people have already grown accustomed to touching and talking to  
their smart phones. People’s future relationships with machines will become ever more  
nuanced, fluid, and personalized as AI systems learn to adapt to individual personalities 
and goals. These AI applications will help monitor people’s well-being, alert them to  
risks ahead, and deliver services when needed or wanted. For example, in a mere 
fifteen years in a typical North American city—the time frame and scope of  this report—
AI applications are likely to transform transportation toward self-driving vehicles with 
on-time pickup and delivery of  people and packages. This alone will reconfigure the 
urban landscape, as traffic jams and parking challenges become obsolete.
This study’s focus on a typical North American city is deliberate and meant to 
highlight specific changes affecting the everyday lives of  the millions of  people who 
inhabit them. The Study Panel further narrowed its inquiry to eight domains where 
AI is already having or is projected to have the greatest impact: transportation, 
healthcare, education, low-resource communities, public safety and security , 
employment and workplace, home/service robots, and entertainment.
Though drawing from a common source of  research, AI technologies have 
influenced and will continue to influence these domains differently . Each domain 
faces varied AI-related challenges, including the difficulty of  creating safe and reliable 
hardware for sensing and effecting (transportation and service robots), the difficulty 
of  smoothly interacting with human experts (healthcare and education), the challenge 
of  gaining public trust (low-resource communities and public safety and security), the 
challenge of  overcoming fears of  marginalizing humans (employment and workplace) 
and the risk of  diminishing interpersonal interaction (entertainment). Some domains 
are primarily business sectors, such as transportation and healthcare, while others are 
more oriented to consumers, such as entertainment and home service robots. Some 
cut across sectors, such as employment/workplace and low-resource communities.
In each domain, even as AI continues to deliver important benefits, it also raises 
important ethical and social issues, including privacy concerns. Robots and other AI 
technologies have already begun to displace jobs in some sectors. As a society , we are now 
at a crucial juncture in determining how to deploy AI-based technologies in ways that 
promote, not hinder, democratic values such as freedom, equality , and transparency . For 
individuals, the quality of  the lives we lead and how our contributions are valued are 
likely to shift gradually , but markedly . Over the next several years, AI research, systems 
development, and social and regulatory frameworks will shape how the benefits of  AI 
are weighed against its costs and risks, and how broadly these benefits are spread.Many have already grown 
accustomed to touching 
and talking to their 
smart phones. People’s 
future relationships with 
machines will become ever 
more nuanced, fluid, and 
personalized. 

==== Page 7 ====
7An accurate and sophisticated picture of  AI—one that competes with its popular 
portrayal—is hampered at the start by the difficulty of  pinning down a precise 
definition of  artificial intelligence . In the approaches the Study Panel considered, 
none suggest there is currently a “general purpose” AI. While drawing on common 
research and technologies, AI systems are specialized to accomplish particular 
tasks, and each application requires years of  focused research and a careful, unique 
construction. As a result, progress is uneven within and among the eight domains.
A prime example is Transportation , where a few key technologies have catalyzed 
the widespread adoption of  AI with astonishing speed. Autonomous transportation 
will soon be commonplace and, as most people’s first experience with physically 
embodied AI systems, will strongly influence the public’s perception of  AI. As cars 
become better drivers than people, city-dwellers will own fewer cars, live further from 
work, and spend time differently , leading to an entirely new urban organization. In 
the typical North American city in 2030, physically embodied AI applications will 
not be limited to cars, but are likely to include trucks, flying vehicles, and personal 
robots. Improvements in safe and reliable hardware will spur innovation over the next 
fifteen years, as they will with Home/Service Robots , which have already entered 
people’s houses, primarily in the form of  vacuum cleaners. Better chips, low-cost 3D 
sensors, cloud-based machine learning, and advances in speech understanding will 
enhance future robots’ services and their interactions with people. Special purpose 
robots will deliver packages, clean offices, and enhance security . But technical 
constraints and the high costs of  reliable mechanical devices will continue to limit 
commercial opportunities to narrowly defined applications for the foreseeable future.
In Healthcare , there has been an immense forward leap in collecting useful data  
from personal monitoring devices and mobile apps, from electronic health records (EHR)  
in clinical settings and, to a lesser extent, from surgical robots designed to assist with 
medical procedures and service robots supporting hospital operations. AI-based 
applications could improve health outcomes and the quality of  life for millions of  
people in the coming years. Though clinical applications have been slow to move from  
the computer science lab to the real-world, there are hopeful signs that the pace of   
innovation will improve. Advances in healthcare can be promoted via the development 
of  incentives and mechanisms for sharing data and for removing overbearing policy , 
regulatory , and commercial obstacles. For many applications, AI systems will have to work  
closely with care providers and patients to gain their trust. Advances in how intelligent 
machines interact naturally with caregivers, patients, and patients’ families are crucial.
Enabling more fluid interactions between people and promising AI technologies 
also remains a critical challenge in Education , which has seen considerable progress 
in the same period. Though quality education will always require active engagement 
by human teachers, AI promises to enhance education at all levels, especially by 
providing personalization at scale. Interactive machine tutors are now being matched 
to students for teaching science, math, language, and other disciplines. Natural 
Language Processing, machine learning, and crowdsourcing have boosted online 
learning and enabled teachers in higher education to multiply the size of  their 
classrooms while addressing individual students’ learning needs and styles. Over the 
next fifteen years in a typical North American city , the use of  these technologies in 
the classroom and in the home is likely to expand significantly , provided they can be 
meaningfully integrated with face-to-face learning.
Beyond education, many opportunities exist for AI methods to assist  
Low-resource Communities by providing mitigations and solutions to a  
variety of  social problems. Traditionally , funders have underinvested in AI research 
lacking commercial application. With targeted incentives and funding priorities,  Society is now at a crucial 
juncture in determining 
how to deploy AI-based 
technologies in ways that 
promote rather than hinder 
democratic values such 
as freedom, equality, and 
transparency. 

==== Page 8 ====
8AI technologies could help address the needs of  low-resource communities, and 
budding efforts are promising. Using data mining and machine learning, for example, 
AI has been used to create predictive models to help government agencies address 
issues such as prevention of  lead poisoning in at-risk children and distribution of   
food efficiently . These budding efforts suggest more could be done, particularly if   
agencies and organizations can engage and build trust with these communities. 
Gaining public trust is also a challenge for AI use by Public Safety and Security  
professionals. North American cities and federal agencies have already begun to 
deploy AI technologies in border administration and law enforcement. By 2030,  
they will rely heavily upon them, including improved cameras and drones for 
surveillance, algorithms to detect financial fraud, and predictive policing. The latter 
raises the specter of  innocent people being unjustifiably monitored, and care must be 
taken to avoid systematizing human bias and to protect civil liberties. Well-deployed 
AI prediction tools have the potential to provide new kinds of  transparency about 
data and inferences, and may be applied to detect, remove, or reduce human bias, 
rather than reinforcing it.
Social and political decisions are likewise at play in AI’s influences on 
Employment and Workplace  trends, such as the safety nets needed to protect 
people from structural changes in the economy . AI is poised to replace people in 
certain kinds of  jobs, such as in the driving of  taxis and trucks. However, in many 
realms, AI will likely replace tasks rather than jobs in the near term, and will also 
create new kinds of  jobs. But the new jobs that will emerge are harder to imagine in  
advance than the existing jobs that will likely be lost. AI will also lower the cost of  
many goods and services, effectively making everyone better off. Longer term, AI may  
be thought of  as a radically different mechanism for wealth creation in which everyone 
should be entitled to a portion of  the world’s AI-produced treasures. It is not too soon 
for social debate on how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared.
Entertainment  has been transformed by social networks and other platforms for  
sharing and browsing blogs, videos, and photos, which rely on techniques actively 
developed in NLP , information retrieval, image processing, crowdsourcing, and machine 
learning. Some traditional sources of  entertainment have also embraced AI to compose 
music, create stage performances, and even to generate 3D scenes from natural 
language text. The enthusiasm with which people have already responded to AI-driven  
entertainment has been surprising. As with many aspects of  AI, there is ongoing debate 
about the extent to which the technology replaces or enhances sociability . AI will  
increasingly enable entertainment that is more interactive, personalized, and engaging. 
Research should be directed toward understanding how to leverage these attributes 
for individuals’ and society’s benefit. 
What’s next for AI research?
The research that fuels the AI revolution has also seen rapid changes. Foremost 
among them is the maturation of  machine learning, stimulated in part by the rise of  
the digital economy , which both provides and leverages large amounts of  data. Other 
factors include the rise of  cloud computing resources and consumer demand for 
widespread access to services such as speech recognition and navigation support.
Machine learning has been propelled dramatically forward by impressive 
empirical successes of  artificial neural networks, which can now be trained with huge 
data sets and large-scale computing. This approach has been come to be known as 
“deep learning.” The leap in the performance of  information processing algorithms 
has been accompanied by significant progress in hardware technology for basic 
operations such as sensing, perception, and object recognition. New platforms and Longer term, AI may be 
thought of as a radically 
different mechanism 
for wealth creation in 
which everyone should 
be entitled to a portion of 
the world’s AI-produced 
treasures.

==== Page 9 ====
9markets for data-driven products, and the economic incentives to find new products 
and markets, have also stimulated research advances. Now, as it becomes a central 
force in society , the field of  AI is shifting toward building intelligent systems that 
can collaborate effectively with people, and that are more generally human-aware , 
including creative ways to develop interactive and scalable ways for people to 
teach robots. These trends drive the currently “hot” areas of  AI research into both 
fundamental methods and application areas:
Large-scale machine learning  concerns the design of  learning algorithms, as 
well as scaling existing algorithms, to work with extremely large data sets.
Deep learning , a class of  learning procedures, has facilitated object recognition 
in images, video labeling, and activity recognition, and is making significant inroads into 
other areas of  perception, such as audio, speech, and natural language processing.
Reinforcement learning  is a framework that shifts the focus of  machine 
learning from pattern recognition to experience-driven sequential decision-making. 
It promises to carry AI applications forward toward taking actions in the real world. 
While largely confined to academia over the past several decades, it is now seeing 
some practical, real-world successes.
Robotics  is currently concerned with how to train a robot to interact with the 
world around it in generalizable and predictable ways, how to facilitate manipulation 
of  objects in interactive environments, and how to interact with people.  Advances in 
robotics will rely on commensurate advances to improve the reliability and generality 
of  computer vision and other forms of  machine perception.
Computer vision  is currently the most prominent form of  machine perception. 
It has been the sub-area of  AI most transformed by the rise of  deep learning. For the 
first time, computers are able to perform some vision tasks better than people. Much 
current research is focused on automatic image and video captioning.
Natural Language Processing , often coupled with automatic speech recognition, 
is quickly becoming a commodity for widely spoken languages with large data sets. 
Research is now shifting to develop refined and capable systems that are able to 
interact with people through dialog, not just react to stylized requests. Great strides 
have also been made in machine translation among different languages, with more 
real-time person-to-person exchanges on the near horizon.
Collaborative systems  research investigates models and algorithms to help develop 
autonomous systems that can work collaboratively with other systems and with humans.
Crowdsourcing and human computation  research investigates methods to 
augment computer systems by making automated calls to human expertise to solve 
problems that computers alone cannot solve well. 
Algorithmic game theory and computational social choice  draw attention 
to the economic and social computing dimensions of  AI, such as how systems can 
handle potentially misaligned incentives, including self-interested human participants 
or firms and the automated AI-based agents representing them.
Internet of  Things (IoT)  research is devoted to the idea that a wide array of  
devices, including appliances, vehicles, buildings, and cameras, can be interconnected to 
collect and share their abundant sensory information to use for intelligent purposes.
Neuromorphic computing  is a set of  technologies that seek to mimic 
biological neural networks to improve the hardware efficiency and robustness of  
computing systems, often replacing an older emphasis on separate modules for input/
output, instruction-processing, and memory .The field of AI is shifting 
toward building intelligent 
systems that can 
collaborate effectively with 
people, including creative 
ways to develop interactive 
and scalable ways for 
people to teach robots. 

==== Page 10 ====
10AI policy, now and in the future
The measure of  success for AI applications is the value they create for human lives. 
In that light, they should be designed to enable people to understand AI systems 
successfully , participate in their use, and build their trust. Public policies should help 
ease society’s adaptation to AI applications, extend their benefits, and mitigate their 
inevitable errors and failures. Debate about how AI is deployed, including concerns 
about how privacy is protected and AI’s benefits fairly shared, should be encouraged. 
Given the speed with which AI technologies are being realized, and concomitant 
concerns about their implications, the Study Panel recommends that all layers of  
government acquire technical expertise in AI. Further, research on the fairness, 
security , privacy , and societal implications of  AI systems should be encouraged by 
removing impediments and increasing private and public spending to support it.
Currently in the United States, at least sixteen separate agencies govern sectors 
of  the economy related to AI technologies. Rapid advances in AI research and, 
especially , its applications require experts in these sectors to develop new concepts 
and metaphors for law and policy . Who is responsible when a self-driven car crashes 
or an intelligent medical device fails? How can AI applications be prevented from 
promulgating racial discrimination or financial cheating? Who should reap the gains 
of  efficiencies enabled by AI technologies and what protections should be afforded 
to people whose skills are rendered obsolete? As people integrate AI more broadly 
and deeply into industrial processes and consumer products, best practices need to be 
spread, and regulatory regimes adapted.
While the Study Panel does not consider it likely that near-term AI systems will 
autonomously choose  to inflict harm on people, it will be possible for people to use  
AI-based systems for harmful as well as helpful purposes. And though AI algorithms 
may be capable of  making less biased decisions than a typical person, it remains 
a deep technical challenge to ensure that the data that inform AI-based decisions 
can be kept free from biases that could lead to discrimination based on race, sexual 
orientation, or other factors.
Faced with the profound changes that AI technologies can produce, pressure for 
“more” and “tougher” regulation is probably inevitable. Misunderstandings about 
what AI is and is not could fuel opposition to technologies with the potential to 
benefit everyone. Inappropriate regulatory activity would be a tragic mistake. Poorly 
informed regulation that stifles innovation, or relocates it to other jurisdictions, would 
be counterproductive.2
Fortunately , principles that guide successful regulation of  current digital technologies 
provide a starting point. In privacy regulation, broad legal mandates coupled with 
tough transparency requirements and meaningful enforcement—rather than strict 
controls—encourage companies to develop processes and professional staff to 
enforce privacy controls, engage with outside stakeholders, and adapt their practices 
to technological advances. This in turn supports the development of  professional 
trade associations and standards committees that spread best practices. In AI, too, 
regulators can strengthen a virtuous cycle of  activity involving internal and external 
accountability , transparency , and professionalization, rather than narrow compliance.
A vigorous and informed debate about how to best steer AI in ways that enrich 
our lives and our society , while encouraging creativity in the field, is an urgent and 
vital need. AI technologies could widen existing inequalities of  opportunity if  access 
to them—along with the high-powered computation and large-scale data that fuel 
many of  them—is unfairly distributed across society . These technologies will improve 
2  Kate Crawford, “ Artificial Intelligence’s White Guy Problem,” The New York Times , June 25, 
2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-
intelligences-white-guy-problem.html .Misunderstandings 
about what AI is and is 
not could fuel opposition 
to technologies with 
the potential to benefit 
everyone. Poorly informed 
regulation that stifles 
innovation would be a 
tragic mistake.

==== Page 11 ====
11the abilities and efficiency of  people who have access to them. Policies should be 
evaluated as to whether they foster democratic values and equitable sharing of  AI’s 
benefits, or concentrate power and benefits in the hands of  a fortunate few.
As this report documents, significant AI-related advances have already had 
an impact on North American cities over the past fifteen years, and even more 
substantial developments will occur over the next fifteen. Recent advances are largely 
due to the growth and analysis of  large data sets enabled by the internet, advances 
in sensory technologies and, more recently , applications of  “deep learning.” In the 
coming years, as the public encounters new AI applications in domains such as 
transportation and healthcare, they must be introduced in ways that build trust and 
understanding, and respect human and civil rights. While encouraging innovation, 
policies and processes should address ethical, privacy , and security implications, and 
should work to ensure that the benefits of  AI technologies will be spread broadly and 
fairly . Doing so will be critical if  Artificial Intelligence research and its applications 
are to exert a positive influence on North American urban life in 2030 and beyond.

==== Page 12 ====
12SECTION I: WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE?
This section describes how researchers and practitioners define “ Artificial Intelligence,” and 
the areas of  AI research and application that are currently thriving. It proffers definitions of  
what AI is and is not, and describes some of  the currently “hot” areas of  AI Research. This 
section lays the groundwork for Section II, which elaborates on AI’s impacts and future in 
eight domains and Section III, which describes issues related to AI design and public policy 
and makes recommendations for encouraging AI innovation while protecting democratic values.
DEFINING AI
Curiously , the lack of  a precise, universally accepted definition of  AI probably 
has helped the field to grow, blossom, and advance at an ever-accelerating pace. 
Practitioners, researchers, and developers of  AI are instead guided by a rough 
sense of  direction and an imperative to “get on with it.” Still, a definition remains 
important and Nils J. Nilsson has provided a useful one:
“ Artificial intelligence is that activity devoted to making machines intelligent, and 
intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to function appropriately and with 
foresight in its environment.”3
From this perspective, characterizing AI depends on the credit one is willing to 
give synthesized software and hardware for functioning “appropriately” and with 
“foresight.” A simple electronic calculator performs calculations much faster than 
the human brain, and almost never makes a mistake.4 Is a calculator intelligent? 
Like Nilsson, the Study Panel takes a broad view that intelligence lies on a multi-
dimensional spectrum. According to this view, the difference between an arithmetic 
calculator and a human brain is not one of  kind, but of  scale, speed, degree of  
autonomy , and generality . The same factors can be used to evaluate every other 
instance of  intelligence—speech recognition software, animal brains, cruise-control 
systems in cars, Go-playing programs, thermostats—and to place them at some 
appropriate location in the spectrum.
Although our broad interpretation places the calculator within the intelligence 
spectrum, such simple devices bear little resemblance to today’s AI. The frontier of   
AI has moved far ahead and functions of  the calculator are only one among the  
millions that today’s smartphones can perform. AI developers now work on improving, 
generalizing, and scaling up the intelligence currently found on smartphones.
In fact, the field of  AI is a continual endeavor to push forward the frontier of  
machine intelligence. Ironically , AI suffers the perennial fate of  losing claim to its 
acquisitions, which eventually and inevitably get pulled inside the frontier, a repeating 
pattern known as the “ AI effect” or the “odd paradox”—AI brings a new technology 
into the common fold, people become accustomed to this technology , it stops being 
considered AI, and newer technology emerges.5 The same pattern will continue in the 
future. AI does not “deliver” a life-changing product as a bolt from the blue. Rather, 
AI technologies continue to get better in a continual, incremental way .
3  Nils J. Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of  Ideas and Achievements  (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
4  Wikimedia Images, accessed August 1, 2016, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/b/b6/SHARP_ELSIMATE_EL-W221.jpg .
5  Pamela McCorduck, Machines Who Think: A Personal Inquiry into the History and Prospects of  
Artificial Intelligence , 2nd ed. (Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, Ltd., 2004; San Francisco: W . H. Freeman, 
1979), Citations are to the Peters edition.An accurate and 
sophisticated picture of 
AI—one that competes with 
its popular portrayal—is 
hampered by the difficulty 
of pinning down a precise 
definition of artificial 
intelligence.

==== Page 13 ====
13The human measure
Notably , the characterization of  intelligence as a spectrum grants no special status 
to the human brain. But to date human intelligence has no match in the biological 
and artificial worlds for sheer versatility , with the abilities “to reason, achieve 
goals, understand and generate language, perceive and respond to sensory inputs, 
prove mathematical theorems, play challenging games, synthesize and summarize 
information, create art and music, and even write histories.”6
This makes human intelligence a natural choice for benchmarking the progress 
of  AI. It may even be proposed, as a rule of  thumb, that any activity computers 
are able to perform and people once performed should be counted as an instance 
of  intelligence. But matching any human ability is only a sufficient condition, not a 
necessary one. There are already many systems that exceed human intelligence, at 
least in speed, such as scheduling the daily arrivals and departures of  thousands of  
flights in an airport.
AI’s long quest—and eventual success—to beat human players at the game of  
chess offered a high-profile instance for comparing human to machine intelligence. 
Chess has fascinated people for centuries. When the possibility of  building computers 
became imminent, Alan Turing, who many consider the father of  computer science, 
“mentioned the idea of  computers showing intelligence with chess as a paradigm.”7 
Without access to powerful computers, “Turing played a game in which he simulated 
the computer, taking about half  an hour per move.”
But it was only after a long line of  improvements in the sixties and seventies—
contributed by groups at Carnegie Mellon, Stanford, MIT , The Institute for 
Theoretical and Experimental Physics at Moscow, and Northwestern University—
that chess-playing programs started gaining proficiency . The final push came 
through a long-running project at IBM, which culminated with the Deep Blue 
program beating Garry Kasparov, then the world chess champion, by a score of  
3.5-2.5 in 1997. Curiously , no sooner had AI caught up with its elusive target than 
Deep Blue was portrayed as a collection of  “brute force methods” that wasn’t “real 
intelligence.”8 In fact, IBM’s subsequent publication about Deep Blue, which gives 
extensive details about its search and evaluation procedures, doesn’t mention the 
word “intelligent” even once!9 Was Deep Blue intelligent or not? Once again, the 
frontier had moved.
An operational definition
AI can also be defined by what AI researchers do. This report views AI 
primarily as a branch of  computer science that studies the properties of 
intelligence by synthesizing intelligence.10 Though the advent of  AI has depended 
on the rapid progress of  hardware computing resources, the focus here on 
software reflects a trend in the AI community . More recently , though, progress in 
building hardware tailored for neural-network-based computing11 has created a 
6  Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence .
7  Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence , 89.
8  McCorduck, Machines Who Think , 433.
9  Murray Campbell, A. Joseph Hoane Jr., and Feng-hsiung Hsu, “Deep Blue,” Artificial 
Intelligence 134, nos. 1 and 2 (2002): 57–83.
10  Herbert A. Simon, “ Artificial Intelligence: An Empirical Science,” Artificial Intelligence 77, no. 2 
(1995):95–127.
11  Paul Merolla John V . Arthur, Rodrigo Alvarez-Icaza, Andrew S. Cassidy , Jun Sawada, Filipp 
Akopyan, Bryan L. Jackson, Nabil Imam, Chen Guo, Yutaka Nakamura, Bernard Brezzo, Ivan Vo, 
Steven K. Esser, Rathinakumar Appuswamy , Brian Taba, Arnon Amir, Myron D. Flickner, William 
P . Risk, Rajit Manohar, and Dharmendra S. Modha, “ A Million Spiking-Neuron Integrated 
Circuit with a Scalable Communication Network and Interface,” accessed August 1, 2016, http://
paulmerolla.com/merolla_main_som.pdf .Intelligence lies on a 
multi-dimensional 
spectrum. According to 
this view, the difference 
between an arithmetic 
calculator and a human 
brain is not one of kind, 
but of scale, speed, 
degree of autonomy, and 
generality. 

==== Page 14 ====
14tighter coupling between hardware and software in advancing AI.
“Intelligence” remains a complex phenomenon whose varied aspects have attracted 
the attention of  several different fields of  study , including psychology , economics, 
neuroscience, biology , engineering, statistics, and linguistics. Naturally , the field of  AI has  
benefited from the progress made by all of  these allied fields. For example, the artificial 
neural network, which has been at the heart of  several AI-based solutions12 13 was 
originally inspired by thoughts about the flow of  information in biological neurons.14
AI RESEARCH TRENDS
Until the turn of  the millennium, AI’s appeal lay largely in its promise to deliver, but 
in the last fifteen years, much of  that promise has been redeemed.15 AI technologies 
already pervade our lives. As they becomes a central force in society , the field is 
shifting from simply building systems that are intelligent to building intelligent systems 
that are human-aware and trustworthy .
Several factors have fueled the AI revolution. Foremost among them is the 
maturing of  machine learning, supported in part by cloud computing resources 
and wide-spread, web-based data gathering. Machine learning has been propelled 
dramatically forward by “deep learning,” a form of  adaptive artificial neural 
networks trained using a method called backpropagation.16 This leap in the 
performance of  information processing algorithms has been accompanied by 
significant progress in hardware technology for basic operations such as sensing, 
perception, and object recognition. New platforms and markets for data-driven 
products, and the economic incentives to find new products and markets, have also 
contributed to the advent of  AI-driven technology .
All these trends drive the “hot” areas of  research described below. This compilation 
is meant simply to reflect the areas that, by one metric or another, currently receive 
greater attention than others. They are not necessarily more important or valuable 
than other ones. Indeed, some of  the currently “hot” areas were less popular in past 
years, and it is likely that other areas will similarly re-emerge in the future.
Large-scale machine learning
Many of  the basic problems in machine learning (such as supervised and 
unsupervised learning) are well-understood. A major focus of  current efforts is to 
scale existing algorithms to work with extremely large data sets. For example, whereas 
traditional methods could afford to make several passes over the data set, modern 
ones are designed to make only a single pass; in some cases, only sublinear methods 
(those that only look at a fraction of  the data) can be admitted.
Deep learning
The ability to successfully train convolutional neural networks has most benefited the 
field of  computer vision, with applications such as object recognition, video 
12  Gerald Tesauro, “Practical Issues in Temporal Difference Learning,” Machine Learning , no. 8 
(1992): 257–77.
13  David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den 
Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander 
Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, 
Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis, “Mastering the game 
of  Go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature 529 (2016): 484–489.
14  W . McCulloch and W . Pitts, W ., “ A logical calculus of  the ideas immanent in nervous activity ,” 
Bulletin of  Mathematical Biophysics , 5 (1943): 115–133.
15  Appendix I offers a short history of  AI, including a description of  some of  the traditionally 
core areas of  research, which have shifted over the past six decades.
16  Backpropagation is an abbreviation for “backward propagation of  errors,” a common method 
of  training artificial neural networks used in conjunction with an optimization method such as 
gradient descent. The method calculates the gradient of  a loss function with respect to all the 
weights in the network.Human intelligence has 
no match in the biological 
and artificial worlds for 
sheer versatility, with 
the abilities “to reason, 
achieve goals, understand 
and generate language... 
create art and music, and 
even write histories.” 

==== Page 15 ====
15labeling, activity recognition, and several variants thereof. Deep learning is also making 
significant inroads into other areas of  perception, such as audio, speech, and natural 
language processing.
Reinforcement learning
Whereas traditional machine learning has mostly focused on pattern mining, 
reinforcement learning shifts the focus to decision making, and is a technology that 
will help AI to advance more deeply into the realm of  learning about and executing 
actions in the real world. It has existed for several decades as a framework for 
experience-driven sequential decision-making, but the methods have not found great 
success in practice, mainly owing to issues of  representation and scaling. However, 
the advent of  deep learning has provided reinforcement learning with a “shot in the 
arm.” The recent success of  AlphaGo, a computer program developed by Google 
Deepmind that beat the human Go champion in a five-game match, was due in large 
part to reinforcement learning. AlphaGo was trained by initializing an automated 
agent with a human expert database, but was subsequently refined by playing a large 
number of  games against itself  and applying reinforcement learning.
Robotics
Robotic navigation, at least in static environments, is largely solved. Current efforts 
consider how to train a robot to interact with the world around it in generalizable 
and predictable ways. A natural requirement that arises in interactive environments 
is manipulation , another topic of  current interest. The deep learning revolution is 
only beginning to influence robotics, in large part because it is far more difficult to 
acquire the large labeled data sets that have driven other learning-based areas of  AI.  
Reinforcement learning (see above), which obviates the requirement of  labeled data, 
may help bridge this gap but requires systems to be able to safely explore a policy 
space without committing errors that harm the system itself  or others. Advances in 
reliable machine perception, including computer vision, force, and tactile perception, 
much of  which will be driven by machine learning, will continue to be key enablers to 
advancing the capabilities of  robotics.
Computer vision
Computer vision is currently the most prominent form of  machine perception. It has 
been the sub-area of  AI most transformed by the rise of  deep learning. Until just a 
few years ago, support vector machines were the method of  choice for most visual 
classification tasks. But the confluence of  large-scale computing, especially on GPUs, 
the availability of  large datasets, especially via the internet, and refinements of  neural 
network algorithms has led to dramatic improvements in performance on benchmark 
tasks (e.g., classification on ImageNet17). For the first time, computers are able to 
perform some (narrowly defined) visual classification tasks better than people. Much 
current research is focused on automatic image and video captioning.
Natural Language Processing
Often coupled with automatic speech recognition, Natural Language Processing is 
another very active area of  machine perception. It is quickly becoming a commodity 
for mainstream languages with large data sets. Google announced that 20% of  
current mobile queries are done by voice,18 and recent demonstrations have proven 
the possibility of  real-time translation. Research is now shifting towards developing 
refined and capable systems that are able to interact with people through dialog, not 
just react to stylized requests.
17  ImageNet, Stanford Vision Lab, Stanford University , Princeton University , 2016, accessed 
August 1, 2016, www.image-net.org/.
18  Greg Sterling, “Google says 20% of  mobile queries are voice searches,” Search Engine Land , 
May 18, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://searchengineland.com/google-reveals-20-percent-
queries-voice-queries-249917 .AI technologies already 
pervade our lives. As 
they become a central 
force in society, the 
field is shifting from 
simply building systems 
that are intelligent to 
building intelligent 
systems that are 
human-aware and 
trustworthy.

==== Page 16 ====
16Collaborative systems
Research on collaborative systems investigates models and algorithms to help 
develop autonomous systems that can work collaboratively with other systems and 
with humans. This research relies on developing formal models of  collaboration, 
and studies the capabilities needed for systems to become effective partners. There 
is growing interest in applications that can utilize the complementary strengths of  
humans and machines—for humans to help AI systems to overcome their limitations, 
and for agents to augment human abilities and activities.
Crowdsourcing and human computation
Since human abilities are superior to automated methods for accomplishing many 
tasks, research on crowdsourcing and human computation investigates methods to  
augment computer systems by utilizing human intelligence to solve problems that  
computers alone cannot solve well. Introduced only about fifteen years ago, this 
research now has an established presence in AI. The best-known example of  
crowdsourcing is Wikipedia, a knowledge repository that is maintained and updated 
by netizens and that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such 
as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth. Crowdsourcing focuses on 
devising innovative ways to harness human intelligence. Citizen science platforms 
energize volunteers to solve scientific problems, while paid crowdsourcing platforms 
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk provide automated access to human intelligence on 
demand. Work in this area has facilitated advances in other subfields of  AI, including 
computer vision and NLP , by enabling large amounts of  labeled training data and/or 
human interaction data to be collected in a short amount of  time. Current research 
efforts explore ideal divisions of  tasks between humans and machines based on their 
differing capabilities and costs. 
Algorithmic game theory and computational social choice
New attention is being drawn to the economic and social computing dimensions of  
AI, including incentive structures. Distributed AI and multi-agent systems have been 
studied since the early 1980s, gained prominence starting in the late 1990s, and were 
accelerated by the internet. A natural requirement is that systems handle potentially 
misaligned incentives, including self-interested human participants or firms, as well 
as automated AI-based agents representing them. Topics receiving attention include 
computational mechanism design (an economic theory of  incentive design, seeking 
incentive-compatible systems where inputs are truthfully reported), computational 
social choice (a theory for how to aggregate rank orders on alternatives), incentive 
aligned information elicitation (prediction markets, scoring rules, peer prediction) and 
algorithmic game theory (the equilibria of  markets, network games, and parlor games 
such as Poker—a game where significant advances have been made in recent years 
through abstraction techniques and no-regret learning).
Internet of Things (IoT)
A growing body of  research is devoted to the idea that a wide array of  devices can 
be interconnected to collect and share their sensory information. Such devices can 
include appliances, vehicles, buildings, cameras, and other things. While it’s a matter 
of  technology and wireless networking to connect the devices, AI can process and 
use the resulting huge amounts of  data for intelligent and useful purposes. Currently , 
these devices use a bewildering array of  incompatible communication protocols. AI 
could help tame this Tower of  Babel.
Neuromorphic Computing
Traditional computers implement the von Neumann model of  computing, which 
separates the modules for input/output, instruction-processing, and memory . With 
the success of  deep neural networks on a wide array of  tasks, manufacturers are Natural Language 
Processing is a very 
active area of machine 
perception. Research 
is now shifting towards 
developing systems that 
are able to interact with 
people through dialog, 
not just react to stylized 
requests.

==== Page 17 ====
17actively pursuing alternative models of  computing—especially those that are inspired 
by what is known about biological neural networks—with the aim of  improving the 
hardware efficiency and robustness of  computing systems. At the moment, such 
“neuromorphic” computers have not yet clearly demonstrated big wins, and are just 
beginning to become commercially viable. But it is possible that they will become 
commonplace (even if  only as additions to their von Neumann cousins) in the 
near future. Deep neural networks have already created a splash in the application 
landscape. A larger wave may hit when these networks can be trained and executed 
on dedicated neuromorphic hardware, as opposed to simulated on standard von 
Neumann architectures, as they are today .
Overall trends and the future of AI research
The resounding success of  the data-driven paradigm has displaced the traditional 
paradigms of  AI. Procedures such as theorem proving and logic-based knowledge 
representation and reasoning are receiving reduced attention, in part because of  the 
ongoing challenge of  connecting with real-world groundings. Planning, which was a 
mainstay of  AI research in the seventies and eighties, has also received less attention 
of  late due in part to its strong reliance on modeling assumptions that are hard 
to satisfy in realistic applications. Model-based approaches—such as physics-based 
approaches to vision and traditional control and mapping in robotics—have by and 
large given way to data-driven approaches that close the loop with sensing the results 
of  actions in the task at hand. Bayesian reasoning and graphical models, which were 
very popular even quite recently , also appear to be going out of  favor, having been 
drowned by the deluge of  data and the remarkable success of  deep learning.
Over the next fifteen years, the Study Panel expects an increasing focus on 
developing systems that are human-aware, meaning that they specifically model, 
and are specifically designed for, the characteristics of  the people with whom they 
are meant to interact. There is a lot of  interest in trying to find new, creative ways 
to develop interactive and scalable ways to teach robots. Also, IoT-type systems— 
devices and the cloud—are becoming increasingly popular, as is thinking about 
social and economic dimensions of  AI. In the coming years, new perception/object 
recognition capabilities and robotic platforms that are human-safe will grow, as will 
data-driven products and their markets.
The Study Panel also expects a reemergence of  some of  the traditional forms of  
AI as practitioners come to realize the inevitable limitations of  purely end-to-end deep 
learning approaches. We encourage young researchers not to reinvent the wheel,  
but rather to maintain an awareness of  the significant progress in many areas of   
AI during the first fifty years of  the field, and in related fields such as control theory , 
cognitive science, and psychology .A growing body of research 
is devoted to the idea that 
a wide array of devices 
can be interconnected 
to collect and share their 
sensory information. 
Such devices can include 
appliances, vehicles, 
buildings, cameras, and 
other things.

==== Page 18 ====
18SECTION II: AI BY DOMAIN
Though different instances of  AI research and practice share common technologies, such  
as machine learning, they also vary considerably in different sectors of  the economy and  
society. We call these sectors “domains,” and in this section describe the different states  
of  AI research and implementation, as well as impacts and distinct challenges, in eight of  
them: transportation; home/service robotics; healthcare; education; low-resource communities; 
public safety and security; employment and workplace; and entertainment. Based on these 
analyses, we also predict trends in a typical North American city over the next fifteen years. 
Contrary to AI’s typical depiction in popular culture, we seek to offer a balanced overview 
of  the ways in which AI is already beginning to transform everyday life, and how those 
transformations are likely to grow by the year 2030.
TRANSPORTATION
Transportation is likely to be one of  the first domains in which the general public 
will be asked to trust the reliability and safety of  an AI system for a critical task. 
Autonomous transportation will soon be commonplace and, as most people’s first 
experience with physically embodied AI systems, will strongly influence the public’s 
perception of  AI. Once the physical hardware is made sufficiently safe and robust, its 
introduction to daily life may happen so suddenly as to surprise the public, which will 
require time to adjust. As cars will become better drivers than people, city-dwellers 
will own fewer cars, live further from work, and spend time differently , leading to an 
entirely new urban organization. Further, in the typical North American city in 2030, 
changes won’t be limited to cars and trucks, but are likely to include flying vehicles 
and personal robots, and will raise social, ethical and policy issues.
A few key technologies have already catalyzed the widespread adoption of  AI 
in transportation. Compared to 2000, the scale and diversity of  data about personal 
and population-level transportation available today—enabled by the adoption of  
smartphones and decreased costs and improved accuracies for variety of  sensors—is 
astounding. Without the availability of  this data and connectivity , applications such as 
real-time sensing and prediction of  traffic, route calculations, peer-to-peer ridesharing 
and self-driving cars would not be possible.
Smarter cars
GPS was introduced to personal vehicles in 2001 with in-car navigation devices and 
has since become a fundamental part of  the transportation infrastructure.19 GPS 
assists drivers while providing large-scale information to technology companies and 
cities about transportation patterns. Widespread adoption of  smartphones with GPS 
technology further increased connectivity and the amount of  location data shared by 
individuals.
Current vehicles are also equipped with a wide range of  sensing capabilities. 
An average automobile in the US is predicted to have seventy sensors including 
gyroscopes, accelerometers, ambient light sensors, and moisture sensors.20 Sensors 
are not new to vehicles. Automobiles built before 2000 had sensors for the 
internal state of  the vehicle such as its speed, acceleration, and wheel position.21 
19  Mark Sullivan, “ A brief  history of  GPS,” PCWorld , August 9, 2012, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2000276/a-brief-history-of-gps.html .
20  William J. Fleming, “New Automotive Sensors - A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal 8, no 11 , 
(2008): 1900-1921.
21  Jean Jacques Meneu, ed., “ Automotive Sensors: Now and in the Future,” Arrow , September 24, 
2015, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.arrow.com/en/research-and-events/articles/automotive-
sensors-now-and-in-the-future .Autonomous 
transportation will soon 
be commonplace and, 
as most people’s first 
experience with physically 
embodied AI systems, 
will strongly influence the 
public’s perception of AI. 

==== Page 19 ====
19They already had a number of  functionalities that combined real-time sensing with 
perception and decision-making such as Anti-lock Braking Systems (ABS), airbag 
control, Traction Control Systems (TCS), and Electronic Stability Control (ESC).22 
Automated capabilities have been introduced into commercial cars gradually since 
2003 as summarized in the following table.
Context Automated Functionality Release Date
Parking Intelligent Parking Assist System Since 200323 
 
Parking Summon Since 201624 
 
Arterial & Highway Lane departure system Since 2004 in North America25 
 
Arterial & Highway Adaptive cruise control Since 2005 in North America26 
 
Highway Blind spot monitoring 200727 
 
Highway Lane changing 201528 
These functionalities assist drivers or completely take over well-defined activities 
for increased safety and comfort. Current cars can park themselves, perform adaptive 
cruise control on highways, steer themselves during stop-and-go traffic, and alert 
drivers about objects in blind spots during lane changes. Vision and radar technology 
were leveraged to develop pre-collision systems that let cars autonomously brake 
when risk of  a collision is detected. Deep learning also has been applied to improve 
automobiles’ capacity to detect objects in the environment and recognize sound .29
Self-driving vehicles
Since the 1930s, science fiction writers dreamed of  a future with self-driving cars, 
and building them has been a challenge for the AI community since the 1960s. By 
the 2000s, the dream of  autonomous vehicles became a reality in the sea and sky , and 
even on Mars, but self-driving cars existed only as research prototypes in labs. Driving 
in a city was considered to be a problem too complex for automation due to factors 
like pedestrians, heavy traffic, and the many unexpected events that can happen 
outside of  the car’s control. Although the technological components required to  
22  Carl Liersch, “Vehicle Technology Timeline: From Automated to Driverless,” Robert Bosch 
(Australia) Pty. Ltd., 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://dpti.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0009/246807/Carl_Liersch_Presentation.pdf .
23 “Intelligent Parking Assist System,” Wikipedia , last modified July 26, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_Parking_Assist_System .
24 The Tesla Motors Team, “Summon Your Tesla from Your Phone,” Tesla, January 10, 2016, 
accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.teslamotors.com/blog/summon-your-tesla-your-phone .
25 Lane departure warning system,” Wikipedia , last modified July 24, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lane_departure_warning_system .
26 “ Autonomous cruise control system,” Wikipedia , last modified July 30, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_cruise_control_system .
27 “Blind spot monitor,” Wikipedia , last modified April 20, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_spot_monitor .
28 Dana Hull, “Tesla Starts Rolling Out Autopilot Features,” Boomberg Technology , October 14, 
2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-10-14/tesla-
software-upgrade-adds-automated-lane-changing-to-model-s .
29  Aaron Tilley , “New Qualcomm Chip Brings Deep Learning To Cars,” Forbes , January 5, 2016, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.forbes.com/sites/aarontilley/2016/01/05/along-with-nvidia-
new-qualcomm-chip-brings-deep-learning-to-cars/#4cb4e9235357 .As cars will become better 
drivers than people, city-
dwellers will own fewer 
cars, live further from 
work, and spend time 
differently, leading to 
an entirely new urban 
organization.

==== Page 20 ====
20make such autonomous driving possible were available in 2000—and indeed some 
autonomous car prototypes existed30 31 32—few predicted that mainstream companies 
would be developing and deploying autonomous cars by 2015. During the first 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) “grand challenge” on 
autonomous driving in 2004, research teams failed to complete the challenge in a 
limited desert setting.
But in eight short years, from 2004-2012, speedy and surprising progress occurred 
in both academia and industry . Advances in sensing technology and machine learning 
for perception tasks has sped progress and, as a result, Google’s autonomous vehicles 
and Tesla’s semi-autonomous cars are driving on city streets today . Google’s self-
driving cars, which have logged more than 1,500,000 miles (300,000 miles without an 
accident),33 are completely autonomous—no human input needed. Tesla has widely 
released self-driving capability to existing cars with a software update.34 Their cars are 
semi-autonomous, with human drivers expected to stay engaged and take over if  they 
detect a potential problem. It is not yet clear whether this semi-autonomous approach 
is sustainable, since as people become more confident in the cars’ capabilities, they 
are likely to pay less attention to the road, and become less reliable when they are 
most needed. The first traffic fatality involving an autonomous car, which occurred in 
June of  2016, brought this question into sharper focus.35
In the near future, sensing algorithms will achieve super-human performance for 
capabilities required for driving. Automated perception, including vision, is already 
near or at human-level performance for well-defined tasks such as recognition and 
tracking. Advances in perception will be followed by algorithmic improvements  
in higher level reasoning capabilities such as planning. A recent report predicts 
self-driving cars to be widely adopted by 2020.36 And the adoption of  self-driving 
capabilities won’t be limited to personal transportation. We will see self-driving and 
remotely controlled delivery vehicles, flying vehicles, and trucks. Peer-to-peer 
transportation services such as ridesharing are also likely to utilize self-driving vehicles. 
Beyond self-driving cars, advances in robotics will facilitate the creation and adoption 
of  other types of  autonomous vehicles, including robots and drones.
It is not yet clear how much better self-driving cars need to become to encourage 
broad acceptance. The collaboration required in semi-self-driving cars and its 
implications for the cognitive load of  human drivers is not well understood. But 
if  future self-driving cars are adopted with the predicted speed, and they exceed 
human-level performance in driving, other significant societal changes will follow. 
Self-driving cars will eliminate one of  the biggest causes of  accidental death and 
injury in United States, and lengthen people’s life expectancy . On average, a 
30  “Navlab,” Wikipedia , last updated June 4, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Navlab .
31  “Navlab: The Carnegie Mellon University Navigation Laboratory ,” Carnegie Mellon 
University , accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/alv/www/ .
32  “Eureka Prometheus Project,” Wikipedia , last modified February 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eureka_Prometheus_Project .
33  “Google Self-Driving Car Project,” Google, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.google.
com/selfdrivingcar/ . 33  Molly McHugh, “Tesla’s Cars Now Drive Themselves, Kinda,” Wired , 
October 14, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.wired.com/2015/10/tesla-self-driving-over-
air-update-live/ .
34  Molly McHugh, “Tesla’s Cars Now Drive Themselves, Kinda,” Wired , October 14, 2015, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.wired.com/2015/10/tesla-self-driving-over-air-update-live/ .
35  Anjali Singhvi and Karl Russell, “Inside the Self-Driving Tesla Fatal Accident,” The New 
York Times , Last updated July 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2016/07/01/business/inside-tesla-accident.html .
36  John Greenough, “10 million self-driving cars will be on the road by 2020,” Business Insider , 
June 15, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.businessinsider.com/report-10-million-self-
driving-cars-will-be-on-the-road-by-2020-2015-5-6 .We will see self-driving and 
remotely controlled delivery 
vehicles, flying vehicles, 
and trucks. Peer-to-peer 
transportation services 
such as ridesharing are 
also likely to utilize self-
driving vehicles.  

==== Page 21 ====
21commuter in US spends twenty-five minutes driving each way .37 With self-driving car 
technology , people will have more time to work or entertain themselves during their 
commutes. And the increased comfort and decreased cognitive load with self-driving 
cars and shared transportation may affect where people choose to live. The reduced 
need for parking may affect the way cities and public spaces are designed. Self-driving 
cars may also serve to increase the freedom and mobility of  different subgroups of  
the population, including youth, elderly and disabled.
Self-driving cars and peer-to-peer transportation services may eliminate the need  
to own a vehicle. The effect on total car use is hard to predict. Trips of  empty vehicles 
and people’s increased willingness to travel may lead to more total miles driven. 
Alternatively , shared autonomous vehicles—people using cars as a service rather than  
owning their own—may reduce total miles, especially if  combined with well-constructed 
incentives, such as tolls or discounts, to spread out travel demand, share trips, and 
reduce congestion. The availability of  shared transportation may displace the need 
for public transportation—or public transportation may change form towards 
personal rapid transit, already available in four cities,38 which uses small capacity 
vehicles to transport people on demand and point-to-point between many stations.39
As autonomous vehicles become more widespread, questions will arise over their 
security , including how to ensure that technologies are safe and properly tested 
under different road conditions prior to their release. Autonomous vehicles and the 
connected transportation infrastructure will create a new venue for hackers to exploit 
vulnerabilities to attack. Ethical questions are also involved in programming cars to 
act in situations in which human injury or death is inevitable, especially when there 
are split-second choices to be made about whom to put at risk. The legal systems in 
most states in the US do not have rules covering self-driving cars. As of  2016, four 
states in the US (Nevada, Florida, California, and Michigan), Ontario in Canada, 
the United Kingdom, France, and Switzerland have passed rules for the testing 
of  self-driving cars on public roads. Even these laws do not address issues about 
responsibility and assignment of  blame for an accident for self-driving and semi-self-
driving cars.40
Transportation planning
By 2005, cities had started investing in the transportation infrastructure to develop 
sensing capabilities for vehicle and pedestrian traffic.41 The sensors currently used 
include inductive loops, video cameras, remote traffic microwave sensors, radars, and 
GPS.42 For example, in 2013 New York started using a combination of  microwave 
sensors, a network of  cameras, and pass readers to detect vehicle traffic in the city .43
37  Brian McKenzie and Melanie Rapino, “Commuting in the United States: 2009,” American 
Community Survey Reports , United States Census Bureau, September 2011, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acs-15.pdf .
38  Morgantown, West Virginia; Masdar City , UAE; London, England; and Suncheon, South 
Korea.
39  “Personal rapid transit,” Wikipedia , Last modified July 18, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_rapid_transit .
40  Patrick Lin, “The Ethics of  Autonomous Cars,” The Atlantic , October 8, 2013, accessed 
August 1, 2016, http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/10/the-ethics-of-
autonomous-cars/280360/ .
41  Steve Lohr, “Bringing Efficiency to the Infrastructure,” The New York Times , April 29, 
2009, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/30/business/energy-
environment/30smart.html .
42  “Intelligent transportation system,” Wikipedia , last modified July 28, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016,  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_transportation_system .
43  Access Science Editors, “ Active traffic management: adaptive traffic signal control,” Access Science , 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.accessscience.com/content/active-traffic-management-
adaptive-traffic-signal-control/BR0106141 .Shared transportation 
may displace the need for 
public transportation—
or public transportation 
may change form towards 
personal rapid transit  
that uses small capacity 
vehicles to transport 
people on demand.

==== Page 22 ====
22Cities use AI methods to optimize services in several ways, such as bus and subway 
schedules, and tracking traffic conditions to dynamically adjust speed limits or apply 
smart pricing on highways, bridges, and HOV lanes.44 45 46 Using sensors and cameras 
in the road network, they can also optimize traffic light timing for improving traffic 
flow and to help with automated enforcement.47 48 These dynamic strategies are aimed 
at better utilizing the limited resources in the transportation network, and are made 
possible by the availability of  data and the widespread connectivity of  individuals.
Before the 2000s, transportation planners were forced to rely on static pricing 
strategies tied to particular days or times of  day , to manage demand. As dynamic 
pricing strategies are adopted, this raises new issues concerning the fair distribution 
of  public goods, since market conditions in high-demand situations may make 
services unavailable to segments of  the public.
The availability of  large-scale data has also made transportation an ideal domain 
for machine learning applications. Since 2006, applications such as Mapquest, Google 
Maps, and Bing Maps have been widely used by the public for routing trips, using public 
transportation, receiving real-time information and predictions about traffic conditions, 
49 50 and finding services around a location.51 52 Optimal search algorithms have been 
applied to the routing of  vehicles and pedestrians to a given destination (i.e.,53 54).
Despite these advances, the widespread application of  sensing and optimization 
techniques to city infrastructure has been slower than the application of  these 
techniques to individual vehicles or people. Although individual cities have 
implemented sensing and optimization applications, as yet there is no standardization 
of  the sensing infrastructure and AI techniques used. Infrastructure costs, differing 
priorities among cities, and the high coordination costs among the parties involved 
have slowed adoption, as have public concerns over privacy related to sensing. Still, 
44  Kitae Jang, Koohong Chung, and Hwasoo Yeo, “ A Dynamic Pricing Strategy for High 
Occupancy Toll Lanes,” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 67 (2014): 69–80.
45  “Seattle Variable Tolling Study ,” City of  Seattle Department of  Transportation, May 2009, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.seattle.gov/transportation/docs/FINAL%20Tolling%20
Study%20report%20revised%206.25.10.pdf . 
46  James F . Peltz, “Dynamic Pricing Is Catching On in the Public and Private Sectors,” 
Government Technology , March 21, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.govtech.com/budget-
finance/Dynamic-Pricing-Is-Catching-On-in-the-Public-and-Private-Sectors.html .
47  Arthur G Sims and Kenneth W . Dobinson. “The Sydney Coordinated Adaptive Traffic 
(SCAT) System Philosophy and Benefits.” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 29, no. 2 (1980): 
130–137.
48  “New York City Launches Nation’s Most Sophisticated Active Traffic Management System 
Powered by TransCore’s TransSuite Traffic Management Software and RFID Technology ,” 
Business Wire , September 27, 2009, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20110927005530/en/York-City-Launches-Nation%E2%80%99s-Sophisticated-Active-Traffic .
49  Eric Horvitz, Johnson Apacible, Raman Sarin, and Lin Liao, “Prediction, Expectation, and 
Surprise: Methods, Designs, and Study of  a Deployed Traffic Forecasting Service,” Proceedings of  the 
Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty and Artificial Intelligence  (2005) (Arlington, Virginia: AUAI Press, 
July 2005), 275–283.
50  Timothy Hunter, Ryan Herring, Pieter Abbeel, and Alexandre Bayen, “Path and Travel Time 
Inference from GPS Probe Vehicle Data,” NIPS Analyzing Networks and Learning with Graphs 12 , no. 1 (2009).
51  John Krumm and Eric Horvitz, “Predestination: Inferring Destinations from Partial 
Trajectories,” UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, Proceedings of  the 8th International Conference , 
September 2006, (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006), 243–260.
52  Jill Duffy , “Get Organized: Using Location-Based Reminders,” PC Magazine , June 30, 2014, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2460207,00.asp.
53  Robert J. Szczerba, Peggy Galkowski, I. S. Glicktein, and Noah Ternullo. “Robust Algorithm 
for Real-time Route Planning,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 36 , no. 3 (2000): 
869–878.
54  Matt Duckham and Lars Kulik, “Simplest” Paths: Automated Route Selection for 
Navigation,” Spatial Information Theory . Foundations of  Geographic Information Science, 
Proceedings of  the International Conference, COSIT 2003, September 2003 (Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2003), 169-185.Ethical questions arise 
when programming cars to 
act in situations in which 
human injury or death is 
inevitable, especially when 
there are split-second 
choices to be made about 
whom to put at risk.

==== Page 23 ====
23AI is likely to have an increasing impact on city infrastructure. Accurate predictive 
models of  individuals’ movements, their preferences, and their goals are likely to 
emerge with the greater availability of  data. The ethical issues regarding such an 
emergence are discussed in Section III of  this report.
The United States Department of  Transportation released a call for proposals in  
2016 asking medium-size cities to imagine smart city infrastructure for transportation.55 
This initiative plans to award forty million dollars to a city to demonstrate how 
technology and data can be used to reimagine the movement of  people as well as goods.
One vision is a network of  connected vehicles that can reach a high level of  safety 
in driving with car-to-car communication.56 If  this vision becomes reality , we expect 
advances in multi-agent coordination, collaboration, and planning will have a 
significant impact on future cars and play a role in making the transportation system 
more reliable and efficient. Robots are also likely to take part in transportation by 
carrying individuals and packages (c.f., Segway robot). For transportation of  goods, 
interest in drones has increased, and Amazon is currently testing a delivery system using 
them,57 although questions remain about the appropriate safety rules and regulations. 
The increased sensing capabilities, adoption of  drones, and the connected 
transportation infrastructure will also raise concerns about the privacy of  individuals 
and the safety of  private data. In coming years, these and related transportation issues 
will need to be addressed either by preemptive action on the part of  industry or within 
the legal framework. As noted in the Section III policy discussion, how well this is done 
will affect the pace and scope of  AI-related advances in the transportation sector.
On-demand transportation
On-demand transportation services such as Uber and Lyft have emerged as another 
pivotal application of  sensing, connectivity , and AI,58 with algorithms for matching 
drivers to passengers by location and suitability (reputation modeling).59 60
Through dynamic pricing, these services ration access by willingness-to-pay , with 
dynamic pricing also encouraging an increase in the supply of  drivers, and have 
become a popular method for transportation in cities. With their rapid advance have 
come multiple policy and legal issues, such as competition with existing taxi services 
and concerns about lack of  regulation and safety . On-demand transportation services 
seem likely to be a major force towards self-driving cars.
Carpooling and ridesharing have long been seen as a promising approach to 
decrease traffic congestion and better utilize personal transportation resources. 
Services such as Zimride and Nuride bring together people sharing similar routes for a 
joint trip. But this approach to carpooling has failed to gain traction on a large scale.
55  “U.S. Department of  Transportation Launches Smart City Challenge to Create a City of  
the Future,” Transportation.gov, U.S. Department of  Transportation, December 7, 2015, accessed 
August 1, 2016, https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/us-department-transportation-
launches-smart-city-challenge-create-city-future .
56  Will Knight, “Car-to-Car Communication: A simple wireless technology promises to 
make driving much safer.,” MIT Technology Review , accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.
technologyreview.com/s/534981/car-to-car-communication/ .
57  “ Amazon Prime Air,” Amazon, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.amazon.com/
b?node=8037720011 .
58  Jared Meyer, “Uber and Lyft are changing the way Americans move about their country ,” 
National Review , June 7, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nationalreview.com/
article/436263/uber-lyft-ride-sharing-services-sharing-economy-are-future .
59  Alexander Howard, “How Digital Platforms Like LinkedIn, Uber And TaskRabbit Are 
Changing The On-Demand Economy ,” The Huffington Post , July 14, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/online-talent-platforms_us_55a03545e4b0b8145f72ccf6 .
60  “ Announcing UberPool,” Uber Newsroom, August 5, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, https://
newsroom.uber.com/announcing-uberpool/ .Our Study Panel doesn’t 
expect drones that can 
fly, swim, and drive, or 
flying quadcoptors to 
become a common means 
of transportation by 2030 
(although prototypes exist 
today). 

==== Page 24 ====
24Interacting with people
For decades, people have imagined wildly different, futuristic-looking transportation 
vehicles. Although future cars will be smarter and drones will be available widely , it 
is unlikely that by 2030 we will have widely adopted transportation vehicles that look 
and function differently than the ones we have today . Our Study Panel doesn’t expect 
drones that can fly , swim, and drive, or flying quadcoptors to become a common 
means of  transportation in this time horizon (although prototypes exist today).
We do expect humans to become partners to self-driving cars and drones in their 
training, execution, and evaluation. This partnering will happen both when humans 
are co-located with machines and also virtually . We predict advances in algorithms to 
facilitate machine learning from human input. We also expect models and algorithms 
for modeling of  human attention, and to support communication and coordination 
between humans and machine. This is an integral part of  the development of   
future vehicles.
HOME/SERVICE ROBOTS
Robots have entered people’s homes in the past fifteen years. Disappointingly slow 
growth in the diversity of  applications has occurred simultaneously with increasingly 
sophisticated AI deployed on existing applications. AI advances are often inspired by 
mechanical innovations, which in turn prompt new AI techniques to be introduced.
Over the next fifteen years, coincident advances in mechanical and AI technologies 
promise to increase the safe and reliable use and utility of  home robots in a typical 
North American city . Special purpose robots will deliver packages, clean offices,  
and enhance security , but technical constraints and the high costs of  reliable 
mechanical devices will continue to limit commercial opportunities to narrowly 
defined applications for the foreseeable future. As with self-driving cars and other  
new transportation machines, the difficulty of  creating reliable, market-ready 
hardware is not to be underestimated.
Vacuum cleaners
In 2001, after many years of  development, the Electrolux Trilobite, a vacuum 
cleaning robot, became the first commercial home robot. It had a simple control 
system to do obstacle avoidance, and some navigation. A year later, iRobot introduced 
Roomba, which was a tenth the price of  the Trilobite and, with only 512 bytes of  
RAM, ran a behavior based controller. The most intelligent thing it did was to avoid 
falling down stairs. Since then, sixteen million Roombas have been deployed all over 
the world and several other competing brands now exist.
As the processing power and RAM capacity of  low cost embedded processors 
improved from its dismal state in the year 2000, the AI capabilities of  these robots 
also improved dramatically . Simple navigation, self-charging, and actions for dealing 
with full dust bins were added, followed by ability to deal with electrical cords and 
rug tassels, enabled by a combination of  mechanical improvements and sensor 
based perception. More recently , the addition of  full VSLAM (Visual Simultaneous 
Location and Mapping)— an AI technology that had been around for twenty years—
has enabled the robots to build a complete 3D world model of  a house as they clean, 
and become more efficient in their cleaning coverage.
Early expectations that many new applications would be found for home robots have 
not materialized. Robot vacuum cleaners are restricted to localized flat areas, while real 
homes have lots of  single steps, and often staircases; there has been very little research 
on robot mobility inside real homes. Hardware platforms remain challenging to build, 
and there are few applications that people want enough to buy . Perceptual algorithms Over the next fifteen years, 
coincident advances 
in mechanical and AI 
technologies promise to 
increase the safe and 
reliable use and utility of 
home robots in a typical 
North American city.

==== Page 25 ====
25for functions such as image labeling, and 3D object recognition, while common at AI 
conferences, are still only a few years into development as products.
Home robots 2030
Despite the slow growth to date of  robots in the home, there are signs that this will 
change in the next fifteen years. Corporations such as Amazon Robotics and Uber 
are developing large economies of  scale using various aggregation technologies. Also:
System in Module (SiM), with a lot of  System on Chip (SoC) subsystems, are 
now being pushed out the door by phone-chip makers (Qualcomm’s SnapDragon, 
Samsung’s Artik, etc.). These are better than supercomputers of  less than ten years 
ago with eight or more sixty-four-bit cores, and specialized silicon for cryptography , 
camera drivers, additional DSPs, and hard silicon for certain perceptual algorithms. 
This means that low cost devices will be able to support much more onboard AI than 
we have been able to consider over the last fifteen years.
Cloud (“someone else’s computer”) is going to enable more rapid release of  new 
software on home robots, and more sharing of  data sets gathered in many different 
homes, which will in turn feed cloud-based machine learning, and then power 
improvements to already deployed robots.
The great advances in speech understanding and image labeling enabled by deep 
learning will enhance robots’ interactions with people in their homes.
Low cost 3D sensors, driven by gaming platforms, have fueled work on 3D 
perception algorithms by thousands of  researchers worldwide, which will speed the 
development and adoption of  home and service robots.
In the past three years, low cost and safe robot arms have been introduced to 
hundreds of  research labs around the world, sparking a new class of  research on 
manipulation that will eventually be applicable in the home, perhaps around 2025. 
More than half  a dozen startups around the world are developing AI-based robots for 
the home, for now concentrating mainly on social interaction. New ethics and privacy 
issues may surface as a result.
HEALTHCARE
For AI technologies, healthcare has long been viewed as a promising domain.  
AI-based applications could improve health outcomes and quality of  life for  
millions of  people in the coming years—but only if  they gain the trust of  doctors, 
nurses, and patients, and if  policy , regulatory , and commercial obstacles are removed. 
Prime applications include clinical decision support, patient monitoring and 
coaching, automated devices to assist in surgery or patient care, and management  
of  healthcare systems. Recent successes, such as mining social media to infer  
possible health risks, machine learning to predict patients at risk, and robotics 
to support surgery , have expanded a sense of  possibility for AI in healthcare. 
Improvements in methods for interacting with medical professionals and patients  
will be a critical challenge.
As in other domains, data is a key enabler. There has been an immense forward 
leap in collecting useful data from personal monitoring devices and mobile apps, from 
electronic health records (EHR) in clinical settings and, to a lesser extent, from robots 
designed to assist with medical procedures and hospital operations. But using this 
data to enable more finely-grained diagnostics and treatments for both individual 
patients and patient populations has proved difficult. Research and deployment have 
been slowed by outdated regulations and incentive structures. Poor human-computer 
interaction methods and the inherent difficulties and risks of  implementing 
technologies in such a large and complex system have slowed realization of  AI’s Special purpose robots 
will deliver packages, 
clean offices, and enhance 
security, but technical 
constraints and high 
costs will continue to limit 
commercial opportunities 
for the foreseeable future. 

==== Page 26 ====
26promise in healthcare.61 The reduction or removal of  these obstacles, combined with 
innovations still on the horizon, have the potential to significantly improve health 
outcomes and quality of  life for millions of  people in the coming years.
The clinical setting
For decades, the vision of  an AI-powered clinician’s assistant has been a near cliché. 
Although there have been successful pilots of  AI-related technology in healthcare,62 
the current healthcare delivery system unfortunately remains structurally ill-suited to 
absorb and deploy rapid advances. Incentives provided by the Affordable Care Act 
have accelerated the penetration of  electronic health records (EHRs) into clinical 
practice, but implementation has been poor, eroding clinicians’ confidence in their 
usefulness. A small group of  companies control the EHR market, and user interfaces 
are widely considered substandard, including annoying pop-ups that physicians 
routinely dismiss. The promise of  new analytics using data from EHRs, including AI, 
remains largely unrealized due to these and other regulatory and structural barriers.
Looking ahead to the next fifteen years, AI advances, if  coupled with sufficient data  
and well-targeted systems, promise to change the cognitive tasks assigned to human 
clinicians. Physicians now routinely solicit verbal descriptions of  symptoms from 
presenting patients and, in their heads, correlate patterns against the clinical 
presentation of  known diseases. With automated assistance, the physician could 
instead supervise this process, applying her or his experience and intuition to guide the 
input process and to evaluate the output of  the machine intelligence. The literal 
“hands-on” experience of  the physician will remain critical. A significant challenge is to 
optimally integrate the human dimensions of  care with automated reasoning processes.
To achieve future advances, clinicians must be involved and engaged at the outset to 
ensure that systems are well-engineered and trusted. Already , a new generation of  more 
tech savvy physicians routinely utilize specialized apps on mobile devices. At the same 
time, workloads on primary care clinicians have increased to the point that they are  
grateful for help from any quarter. Thus, the opportunity to exploit new learning methods,  
to create structured patterns of  inference by mining the scientific literature automatically ,  
and to create true cognitive assistants by supporting free-form dialogue, has never 
been greater. Provided these advances are not stymied by regulatory , legal, and social 
barriers, immense improvements to the value of  healthcare are within our grasp.
Healthcare analytics
At the population level, AI’s ability to mine outcomes from millions of  patient clinical 
records promises to enable finer-grained, more personalized diagnosis and treatment. 
Automated discovery of  genotype-phenotype connections will also become possible 
as full, once-in-a-lifetime genome sequencing becomes routine for each patient.
A related (and perhaps earlier) capability will be to find “patients like mine” as a way  
to inform treatment decisions based on analysis of  a similar cohort. Traditional and  
non-traditional healthcare data, augmented by social platforms, may lead to the emergence 
of  self-defined subpopulations, each managed by a surrounding ecosystem of  healthcare 
providers augmented with automated recommendation and monitoring systems.
These developments have the potential to radically transform healthcare 
61  LeighAnne Olsen, Dara Aisner, and J. Michael McGinnis, eds., “Institute of  Medicine 
(US) Roundtable on Evidence-Based Medicine,” The Learning Healthcare System: Workshop Summary.  
(Washington (DC): National Academies Press  (US); 2007), accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53500/ .
62  Katherine E. Henry , David N. Hager, Peter J. Pronovost, and Suchi Saria, “ A Targeted Real-
time Early Warning Score (TREWScore) for Septic Shock,” Science Translational Medicine 7 , (299), 
299ra122.AI-based applications 
could improve health 
outcomes and quality of 
life for millions of people 
in the coming years—but 
only if they gain the trust 
of doctors, nurses, and 
patients. 

==== Page 27 ====
27delivery as medical procedures and lifetime clinical records for hundreds of  millions 
of  individuals become available. Similarly , the automated capture of  personal 
environmental data from wearable devices will expand personalized medicine. These 
activities are becoming more commercially viable as vendors discover ways to engage 
large populations (e.g. ShareCare)63 and then to create population-scale data that can 
be mined to produce individualized analytics and recommendations.
Unfortunately , the FDA has been slow to approve innovative diagnostic software, 
and there are many remaining barriers to rapid innovation. HIPAA (Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act) requirements for protecting patient privacy create  
legal barriers to the flow of  patient data to applications that could utilize AI technologies. 
Unanticipated negative effects of  approved drugs could show up routinely , sooner, and 
more rigorously than they do today , but mobile apps that analyze drug interactions 
may be blocked from pulling the necessary information from patient records. More 
generally , AI research and innovation in healthcare are hampered by the lack of  
widely accepted methods and standards for privacy protection. The FDA has been 
slow to approve innovative software, in part due to an unclear understanding of  the 
cost/benefit tradeoffs of  these systems. If  regulators (principally the FDA) recognize 
that effective post-marketing reporting is a dependable hedge against some safety risks, 
faster initial approval of  new treatments and interventions may become possible.
Automated image interpretation has also been a promising subject of  study for 
decades. Progress on interpreting large archives of  weakly-labeled images, such as 
large photo archives scraped from the web, has been explosive. At first blush, it is 
surprising that there has not been a similar revolution in interpretation of  medical 
images. Most medical imaging modalities (CT , MR, ultrasound) are inherently digital, 
the images are all archived, and there are large, established companies with internal 
R&D (e.g. Siemens, Philips, GE) devoted to imaging.
But several barriers have limited progress to date. Most hospital image archives 
have only gone digital over the past decade. More importantly , the problem in 
medicine is not to recognize what is in the image (is this a liver or a kidney?), but 
rather to make a fine-grained judgement about it (does the slightly darker smudge 
in the liver suggest a potentially cancerous tumor?). Strict regulations govern these 
high-stakes judgements. Even with state-of-the-art technologies, a radiologist will still 
likely have to look at the images, so the value proposition is not yet compelling. Also, 
healthcare regulations preclude easy federation of  data across institutions. Thus, only 
very large organizations of  integrated care, such as Kaiser Permanente, are able to 
attack these problems.
Still, automated/augmented image interpretation has started to gain momentum. 
The next fifteen years will probably not bring fully automated radiology , but initial forays 
into image “triage” or second level checking will likely improve the speed and cost-
effectiveness of  medical imaging. When coupled with electronic patient record systems, 
large-scale machine learning techniques could be applied to medical image data. For 
example, multiple major healthcare systems have archives of  millions of  patient scans, 
each of  which has an associated radiological report, and most have an associated 
patient record. Already , papers are appearing in the literature showing that deep neural 
networks can be trained to produce basic radiological findings, with high reliability ,  
by training from this data.64
63  Sharecare, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.sharecare.com .
64  Hoo-Chang Shin, Holger R. Roth, Mingchen Gao, Le Lu, Ziyue Xu, Isabella Nogues, 
Jianhua Yao, Daniel Mollura, and Ronald M. Summers, “Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for 
Computer-aided Detection: CNN Architectures, Dataset Characteristics and Transfer Learning,” 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35, no. 5 (2016): 1285–1298.A small group of companies 
control the EHR market, 
and user interfaces 
are widely considered 
substandard, including 
annoying pop-ups that 
physicians routinely 
dismiss.

==== Page 28 ====
28Healthcare robotics
Fifteen years ago, healthcare robotics was largely science fiction. One company 
called Robodoc,65 a spin-out from IBM, developed robotic systems for orthopedic 
surgeries, such as hip and knee replacements. The technology worked, but the 
company struggled commercially , and was ultimately shut down and acquired for 
its technology .66 More recently , though, the research and practical use of  surgical 
robotics has exploded.
In 2000 Intuitive Surgical67 introduced the da Vinci system, a novel technology 
initially marketed to support minimally invasive heart bypass surgery , and then gained 
substantial market traction for treatment of  prostate cancer and merged with its 
only major competition, Computer Motion, in 2003. The da Vinci, now in its fourth 
generation, provides 3D visualization (as opposed to 2D monocular laparoscopy) and 
wristed instruments in an ergonomic platform. It is considered the standard of  care  
in multiple laparoscopic procedures, and used in nearly three quarters of  a million 
procedures a year,68 providing not only a physical platform, but also a new data 
platform for studying the process of  surgery .
The da Vinci anticipates a day when much greater insight into how medical 
professionals carry out the process of  providing interventional medical care will 
be possible. The presence of  the da Vinci in day-to-day operation has also opened 
the doors to new types of  innovation—from new instrumentation to image fusion 
to novel biomarkers—creating its own innovation ecosystem. The success of  the 
platform has inspired potential competitors in robotic surgery , most notably the 
Alphabet spin-off Verb, in collaboration with J&J/Ethicon.69 There are likely to be 
many more, each exploring a unique niche or space and building out an ecosystem of  
sensing, data analytics, augmentation, and automation.
Intelligent automation in hospital operations has been less successful. The story 
is not unlike surgical robotics. Twenty years ago, one company , HelpMate, created 
a robot for hospital deliveries,70 such as meals and medical records, but ultimately 
went bankrupt. More recently , Aethon71 introduced TUG Robots for basic deliveries, 
but few hospitals have invested in this technology to date. However, robotics in 
other service industries such as hotels and warehouses, including Amazon Robotics 
(formerly Kiva), are demonstrating that these technologies are practical and cost 
effective in at least some large-scale settings, and may ultimately spur additional 
innovation in health care.
Looking ahead, many tasks that appear in healthcare will be amenable to 
augmentation, but will not be fully automated. For example, robots may be able to 
deliver goods to the right room in a hospital, but then require a person to pick them 
up and place them in their final location. Walking a patient down the corridor may 
65  ROBODOC, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.robodoc.com/professionals.html .
66  THINK Surgical, accessed August 1, 2016, http://thinksurgical.com/history .
67  Intuitive Surgical, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.intuitivesurgical.com .
68  Trefis Team, “Intuitive Surgical Maintains Its Growth Momentum With Strong Growth In 
Procedure Volumes,” Forbes , January 22, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.forbes.com/
sites/greatspeculations/2016/01/22/intuitive-surgical-maintains-its-growth-momentum-with-
strong-growth-in-procedure-volumes/#22ae6b0939a1 .
69  Evan Ackerman, “Google and Johnson & Johnson Conjugate to Create Verb Surgical, 
Promise Fancy Medical Robots,” IEEE Spectrum , December 17, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/medical-robots/google-verily-johnson-johnson-
verb-surgical-medical-robots .
70  John M. Evans and Bala Krishnamurthy , “HelpMate®, the trackless robotic courier: A 
perspective on the development of  a commercial autonomous mobile robot,” Lecture Notes in Control 
and Information Sciences 236 , June 18, 2005 (Springer-Verlag London Limited, 1998), 182–210, 
accessed August 1, 2016, http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2FBFb0030806 .
71  Aethon, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.aethon.com .The problem in medicine 
is not to recognize what is 
in the image—is this a liver 
or a kidney?—but rather 
to make a fine-grained 
judgement about it. Strict 
regulations govern these 
high-stakes judgements. 

==== Page 29 ====
29be relatively simple once a patient is standing in a walker (though will certainly not 
be trivial for patients recovering from surgery and/or elderly patients, especially in 
corridors crowded with equipment and other people). Driving a needle to place a 
suture is relatively straightforward once the needle is correctly placed.72 This implies 
that many future systems will involve intimate interaction between people and 
machines and require technologies that facilitate collaboration between them.
The growth of  automation will enable new insights into healthcare processes. 
Historically , robotics has not been a strongly data-driven or data-oriented science. 
This is changing as (semi)automation infiltrates healthcare. As the new surgical, 
delivery , and patient care platforms come online, the beginnings of  quantification 
and predictive analytics are being built on top of  data coming from these platforms.73 
This data will be used to assess quality of  performance, identify deficiencies, errors, 
or potential optimizations, and will be used as feedback to improve performance. In 
short, these platforms will facilitate making the connection between what is done, and 
the outcome achieved, making true “closed-loop” medicine a real possibility .
Mobile health
To date, evidence-driven analytics on healthcare have relied on traditional healthcare 
data—mainly the electronic medical records discussed above. In the clinical setting, 
there are hopeful trends towards bringing new data to bear. For example, Tele-
Language enables a human clinician to conduct language therapy sessions with 
multiple patients simultaneously with the aid of  an AI agent trained by the clinician. 
And Lifegraph, which extracts behavioral patterns and creates alerts from data 
passively collected from a patient’s smartphone, has been adopted by psychiatrists in 
Israel to detect early signs of  distressful behavior in patients.
Looking ahead, driven by the mobile computing revolution, the astonishing growth 
of  “biometrics in the wild”—and the explosion of  platforms and applications that use 
them—is a hopeful and unanticipated trend. Thousands of  mobile apps now offer 
information, introduce behavior modification, or identify groups of  “people like me.” 
This, combined with the emerging trend of  more specialized motion tracking devices, 
such as Fitbit, and the emerging (inter)connectedness between the home environment 
and health-monitoring devices, has created a vibrant new sector of  innovation.
By combining social and healthcare data, some healthcare apps can perform data 
mining, learning, and prediction from captured data, though their predictions are 
relatively rudimentary . The convergence of  data and functionality across applications 
will likely spur new and even obvious products, such as an exercise app that not only 
proposes a schedule for exercise but also suggests the best time to do it, and provides 
coaching to stick to that schedule.
72  Azad Shademan, Ryan S. Decker, Justin D. Opfermann, Simon Leonard, Axel Krieger, and 
Peter CW Kim, “Supervised Autonomous Robotic Soft Tissue Surgery ,” Science Translational Medicine 
8, no. 337 (2016): 337ra64–337ra64.
73  Carolyn Chen, Lee White, Timothy Kowalewski, Rajesh Aggarwal, Chris Lintott, Bryan 
Comstock, Katie Kuksenok, Cecilia Aragon, Daniel Holst, and Thomas Lendvay , “Crowd-Sourced 
Assessment of  Technical Skills: a novel method to evaluate surgical performance.” Journal of  Surgical 
Research 187, no. 1 (2014): 65–71.Specialized motion 
tracking devices... and 
the emerging (inter)
connectedness between 
the home environment and 
health-monitoring devices 
have created a vibrant new 
sector of innovation.

==== Page 30 ====
30Elder care
Over the next fifteen years the number of  elderly in the United States will grow 
by over 50%.74 The National Bureau of  Labor Statistics projects that home health 
aides will grow 38% over the next ten years. Despite the broad opportunities in this 
domain—basic social support, interaction and communication devices, home health 
monitoring, a variety of  simple in-home physical aids such as walkers, and light meal  
preparation—little has happened over the past fifteen years. But the coming generational 
shift will accompany a change in technology acceptance among the elderly . Currently , 
someone who is seventy was born in 1946 and may have first experienced some form 
of  personalized IT in middle age or later, while a fifty-year-old today is far more 
technology-friendly and savvy . As a result, there will be a growing interest and market 
for already available and maturing technologies to support physical, emotional, social, 
and mental health. Here are a few likely examples by category:
Life quality and independence
• Automated transportation will support continued independence and expanded 
social horizons.
• Sharing of  information will help families remain engaged with one another at a 
distance, and predictive analytics may be used to “nudge” family groups toward 
positive behaviors, such as reminders to “call home.”
• Smart devices in the home will help with daily living activities when needed, 
such as cooking and, if  robot manipulation capabilities improve sufficiently , 
dressing and toileting.
Health and wellness
• Mobile applications that monitor movement and activities, coupled with social 
platforms, will be able to make recommendations to maintain mental and 
physical health.
• In-home health monitoring and health information access will be able to detect 
changes in mood or behavior and alert caregivers.
• Personalized health management will help mitigate the complexities associated 
with multiple co-morbid conditions and/or treatment interactions.
Treatments and devices
• Better hearing aids and visual assistive devices will mitigate the effects of  
hearing and vision loss, improving safety and social connection.
• Personalized rehabilitation and in-home therapy will reduce the need for 
hospital or care facility stays.
• Physical assistive devices (intelligent walkers, wheel chairs, and exoskeletons) will 
extend the range of  activities of  an infirm individual.
The Study Panel expects an explosion of  low-cost sensing technologies that can 
provide substantial capabilities to the elderly in their homes. In principle, social 
agents with a physical presence and simple physical capabilities (e.g. a mobile robot 
with basic communication capabilities) could provide a platform for new innovations. 
However, doing so will require integration across multiple areas of  AI—Natural 
Language Processing, reasoning, learning, perception, and robotics—to create  
a system that is useful and usable by the elderly .
These innovations will also introduce questions regarding privacy within various 
circles, including friends, family , and care-givers, and create new challenges to 
accommodate an evermore active and engaged population far past retirement.
74  Jennifer M. Ortman, Victoria A. Velkoff, and Howard Hogan, “ An Aging Nation: The 
Older Population in the United States: Population Estimates and Projections,” Current Population 
Reports , U.S Census Bureau (May 2014), accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.census.gov/
prod/2014pubs/p25-1140.pdf .Better hearing aids and 
visual assistive devices 
will mitigate the effects 
of hearing and vision 
loss, improving safety 
and social connection. 
Personalized rehabilitation 
and in-home therapy 
will reduce the need for 
hospital stays.

==== Page 31 ====
31EDUCATION
The past fifteen years have seen considerable AI advances in education. Applications 
are in wide use by educators and learners today , with some variation between K-12  
and university settings. Though quality education will always require active engagement 
by human teachers, AI promises to enhance education at all levels, especially by 
providing personalization at scale. Similar to healthcare, resolving how to best 
integrate human interaction and face-to-face learning with promising AI technologies 
remains a key challenge.
Robots have long been popular educational devices, starting with the early  
Lego Mindstorms kits developed with the MIT Media Lab in the 1980s. Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems (ITS) for science, math, language, and other disciplines match 
students with interactive machine tutors. Natural Language Processing, especially when 
combined with machine learning and crowdsourcing, has boosted online learning 
and enabled teachers to multiply the size of  their classrooms while simultaneously 
addressing individual students’ learning needs and styles. The data sets from large 
online learning systems have fueled rapid growth in learning analytics.
Still, schools and universities have been slow in adopting AI technologies primarily 
due to lack of  funds and lack of  solid evidence that they help students achieve 
learning objectives. Over the next fifteen years in a typical North American city , the 
use of  intelligent tutors and other AI technologies to assist teachers in the classroom 
and in the home is likely to expand significantly , as will learning based on virtual 
reality applications. But computer-based learning systems are not likely to fully 
replace human teaching in schools.
Teaching robots
Today , more sophisticated and versatile kits for use in K-12 schools are available 
from a number of  companies that create robots with new sensing technologies 
programmable in a variety of  languages. Ozobot is a robot that teaches children 
to code and reason deductively while configuring it to dance or play based on 
color-coded patterns.75 Cubelets help teach children logical thinking through 
assembling robot blocks to think, act, or sense, depending upon the function of  the 
different blocks.76 Wonder Workshop’s Dash and Dot span a range of  programming 
capabilities. Children eight years old and older can create simple actions using a 
visual programming language, Blockly , or build iOS and Android applications using 
C or Java.77 PLEO rb is a robot pet that helps children learn biology by teaching 
the robot to react to different aspects of  the environment.78 However, while fun and 
engaging for some, in order for such kits to become widespread, there will need to be 
compelling evidence that they improve students’ academic performance.
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) and online learning
ITS have been developed from research laboratory projects such as Why-2 Atlas, 
which supported human-machine dialogue to solve physics problems early in the 
era.79 The rapid migration of  ITS from laboratory experimental stages to real use is 
75  Ozobot, accessed August 1, 2016, http://ozobot.com/ .
76  “Cubelets,” Modular Robotics, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.modrobotics.com/
cubelets .
77  “Meet Dash,” Wonder Workshop, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.makewonder.com/
dash.
78  “Pleo rb,” Innvo Labs, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.pleoworld.com/pleo_rb/eng/
lifeform.php .
79  Kurt VanLehn, Pamela W . Jordan, Carolyn P . Rosé, Dumisizwe Bhembe, Michael Böttner, 
Andy Gaydos, Maxim Makatchev, Umarani Pappuswamy , Michael Ringenberg, Antonio Roque, 
Stephanie Siler, and Ramesh Srivastava, “The Architecture of  Why2-Atlas: A Coach for Qualitative Though quality education 
will always require active 
engagement by human 
teachers, AI promises to 
enhance education at 
all levels, especially by 
providing personalization 
at scale. 

==== Page 32 ====
32surprising and welcome. Downloadable software and online systems such as Carnegie 
Speech or Duolingo provide foreign language training using Automatic Speech 
Recognition (ASR) and NLP techniques to recognize language errors and help users 
correct them.80 Tutoring systems such as the Carnegie Cognitive Tutor81 have been 
used in US high schools to help students learn mathematics. Other ITS have been 
developed for training in geography , circuits, medical diagnosis, computer literacy 
and programming, genetics, and chemistry . Cognitive tutors use software to mimic 
the role of  a good human tutor by , for example, providing hints when a student gets 
stuck on a math problem. Based on the hint requested and the answer provided, the 
tutor offers context specific feedback. 
Applications are growing in higher education. An ITS called SHERLOCK82 is 
beginning to be used to teach Air Force technicians to diagnose electrical systems 
problems in aircraft. And the University of  Southern California’s Information 
Sciences Institute has developed more advanced avatar-based training modules to 
train military personnel being sent to international posts in appropriate behavior 
when dealing with people from different cultural backgrounds. New algorithms for 
personalized tutoring, such as Bayesian Knowledge Tracing, enable individualized 
mastery learning and problem sequencing.83
Most surprising has been the explosion of  the Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) and other models of  online education at all levels—including the use 
of  tools like Wikipedia and Khan Academy as well as sophisticated learning 
management systems that build in synchronous as well as asynchronous education 
and adaptive learning tools. Since the late 1990s, companies such as the Educational 
Testing Service and Pearson have been developing automatic NLP assessment tools to 
co-grade essays in standardized testing.84 Many of  the MOOCs which have become 
so popular, including those created by EdX, Coursera, and Udacity , are making use 
of  NLP , machine learning, and crowdsourcing techniques for grading short-answer 
and essay questions as well as programming assignments.85 Online education systems 
that support graduate-level professional education and lifelong learning are also 
expanding rapidly . These systems have great promise because the need for face-to-face
interaction is less important for working professionals and career changers. While not 
the leaders in AI-supported systems and applications, they will become early adopters 
as the technologies are tested and validated.
It can be argued that AI is the secret sauce that has enabled instructors, particularly 
in higher education, to multiply the size of  their classrooms by a few orders of  
magnitude—class sizes of  a few tens of  thousands are not uncommon. In order to 
continually test large classes of  students, automated generation of  the questions is 
Physics Essay Writing,” Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Proceedings of  the 6th International Conference , (Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2002), 158–167.
80  VanLehn et al, “The Architecture of  Why2-Atlas.”
81  “Resources and Support,” Carnegie Learning, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.
carnegielearning.com/resources-support/ .
82  Alan Lesgold, Suzanne Lajoie, Marilyn Bunzo, and Gary Eggan, “SHERLOCK: A Coached 
Practice Environment for an Electronics Troubleshooting Job,” in J. H. Larkin and R. W . Chabay , 
eds., Computer-Assisted Instruction and Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Shared Goals and Complementary Approaches  
(Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988).
83  Michael V . Yudelson, Kenneth R. Koedinger, and Geoffrey J. Gordon, (2013). “ Individualized 
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing Models,” Artificial Intelligence in Education , (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013), 171–180.
84  Jill Burstein, Karen Kukich, Susanne Wolff, Chi Lu, Martin Chodorow, Lisa Braden-Harder, 
and Mary Dee Harris, “ Automated Scoring Using a Hybrid Feature Identification Technique ” in 
Proceedings of  the Annual Meeting of  the Association of  Computational Linguistics , Montreal, Canada, August 
1998, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/erater_acl98.pdf .
85  EdX, https://www.edx.org/, Coursera, https://www.coursera.org/, Udacity , https://www.
udacity .com/ , all accessed August 1, 2016.It can be argued that AI 
is the secret sauce that 
has enabled instructors, 
particularly in higher 
education, to multiply the 
size of their classrooms 
by a few orders of 
magnitude—class sizes of 
a few tens of thousands 
are not uncommon. 

==== Page 33 ====
33also possible, such as those designed to assess vocabulary ,86 wh (who/what/when/
where/why) questions,87 and multiple choice questions,88 using electronic resources 
such as WordNet, Wikipedia, and online ontologies. With the explosion of  online 
courses, these techniques are sure to be eagerly adopted for use in online education. 
Although the long term impact of  these systems will have on the educational system 
remains unclear, the AI community has learned a great deal in a very short time.
Learning analytics
Data sets being collected from massive scale online learning systems, ranging from 
MOOCs to Khan Academy , as well as smaller scale online programs, have fueled 
the rapid growth of  the field of  learning analytics. Online courses are not only good 
for widespread delivery , but are natural vehicles for data collection and experimental 
instrumentation that will contribute to scientific findings and improving the quality 
of  learning at scale. Organizations such as the Society for Learning Analytics 
Research (SOLAR), and the rise of  conferences including the Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge Conference89 and the Learning at Scale Conference (L@S)90 reflect this 
trend. This community applies deep learning, natural language processing, and other 
AI techniques to analysis of  student engagement, behavior, and outcomes.
Current projects seek to model common student misconceptions, predict 
which students are at risk of  failure, and provide real-time student feedback that is 
tightly integrated with learning outcomes. Recent work has also been devoted to 
understanding the cognitive processes involved in comprehension, writing, knowledge 
acquisition, and memory , and to applying that understanding to educational practice 
by developing and testing educational technologies.
Challenges and opportunities
One might have expected more and more sophisticated use of  AI technologies in 
schools, colleges, and universities by now. Much of  its absence can be explained 
by the lack of  financial resources of  these institutions as well as the lack of  data 
establishing the technologies’ effectiveness. These problems are being addressed, 
albeit slowly , by private foundations and by numerous programs to train primarily 
secondary school teachers in summer programs. As in other areas of  AI, excessive 
hype and promises about the capabilities of  MOOCs have meant that expectations 
frequently exceed the reality . The experiences of  certain institutions, such as San Jose 
State University’s experiment with Udacity ,91 have led to more sober assessment of  
the potential of  the new educational technologies.
86  Jonathan C. Brown, Gwen A. Frishkoff , and Maxine Eskenazi, “ Automatic Question 
Generation for Vocabulary Assessment,” Proceedings of  Human Language Technology Conference and 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP) , Vancouver, October 
2005, (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005), 819–826.
87  Michael Heilman, “ Automatic Factual Question Generation from Text,” PhD thesis CMU-
LTI-11-004, (Carnegie Mellon University , 2011), accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.cs.cmu.
edu/~ark/mheilman/questions/papers/heilman-question-generation-dissertation.pdf .
88  Tahani Alsubait, Bijan Parsia, and Uli Sattler, “Generating Multiple Choice Questions from 
Ontologies: How Far Can We Go?,” in eds. P . Lambrix, E. Hyvönen. E. Blomqvist, V . Presutti, G. 
Qi, U. Sattler, Y . Ding, and C. Ghidini, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management: EKAW 2014 
Satellite Events, VISUAL, EKM1, and ARCOE-Logic  Linköping, Sweden, November 24–28, 2014 Revised 
Selected Papers, (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015), 66–79.
89  The 6th International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference, accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://lak16.solaresearch.org/ .
90  Third Annual ACM Conference on Learning at Scale, http://learningatscale.acm.org/
las2016/ .
91  Ry Rivard, “Udacity Project on ‘Pause’,” Inside Higher Ed , July 18, 2013, accessed August 1, 
2016, https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/07/18/citing-disappointing-student-outcomes-
san-jose-state-pauses-work-udacity .The current absence of 
sophisticated use of AI 
technologies in schools, 
colleges, and universities 
may be explained by 
the lack of financial 
resources as well as the 
lack of data establishing 
the technologies’ 
effectiveness. 

==== Page 34 ====
34In the next fifteen years, it is likely that human teachers will be assisted by AI 
technologies with better human interaction, both in the classroom and in the home. 
The Study Panel expects that more general and more sophisticated virtual reality 
scenarios in which students can immerse themselves in subjects from all disciplines 
will be developed. Some steps in this direction are being taken now by increasing 
collaborations between AI researchers and researchers in the humanities and social 
sciences, exemplified by Stanford’s Galileo Correspondence Project92 and Columbia’s 
Making and Knowing Project.93 These interdisciplinary efforts create interactive 
experiences with historical documents and the use of  Virtual Reality (VR) to explore 
interactive archeological sites.94 VR techniques are already being used in the natural 
sciences such as biology , anatomy , geology and astronomy to allow students to interact 
with environments and objects that are difficult to engage with in the real world. The 
recreation of  past worlds and fictional worlds will become just as popular for studies 
of  arts and other sciences.
AI techniques will increasingly blur the line between formal, classroom education 
and self-paced, individual learning. Adaptive learning systems, for example, are going 
to become a core part of  the teaching process in higher education because of  the 
pressures to contain cost while serving a larger number of  students and moving students 
through school more quickly . While formal education will not disappear, the Study 
Panel believes that MOOCs and other forms of  online education will become part of  
learning at all levels, from K-12 through university , in a blended classroom experience. 
This development will facilitate more customizable approaches to learning, in which 
students can learn at their own pace using educational techniques that work best for 
them. Online education systems will learn as the students learn, supporting rapid 
advances in our understanding of  the learning process. Learning analytics, in turn, will 
accelerate the development of  tools for personalized education.
The current transition from hard copy books to digital and audio media and texts 
is likely to become prevalent in education as well. Digital reading devices will also 
become much ‘smarter’, providing students with easy access to additional information 
about subject matter as they study . Machine Translation (MT) technology will 
also make it easier to translate educational material into different languages with a 
fair degree of  accuracy , just as it currently translates technical manuals. Textbook 
translation services that currently depend only upon human translators will 
increasingly incorporate automatic methods to improve the speed and affordability of  
their services for school systems.
Online learning systems will also expand the opportunity for adults and working 
professionals to enhance their knowledge and skills (or to retool and learn a new field)
 in a world where these fields are evolving rapidly . This will include the expansion 
of  fully online professional degrees as well as professional certifications based on 
online coursework.
Broader societal consequences
In countries where education is difficult for the broad population to obtain, online 
resources may have a positive effect if  the population has the tools to access them.  
The development of  online educational resources should make it easier for 
foundations that support international educational programs to provide quality 
92  Stanford University: Galileo Correspondence Project, accessed August 1, 2016, http://galileo.
stanford.edu .
93  The Making and Knowing Project: Reconstructing the 16th Century Workshop of  BNF MS. 
FR. 640 at Columbia University , accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.makingandknowing.org .
94  Paul James, “3D Mapped HTC Vive Demo Brings Archaeology to Life,” Road to VR , August 
31, 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.roadtovr.com/3d-mapped-htc-vive-demo-brings-
archaeology-to-life/.While formal education 
will not disappear, the 
Study Panel believes that 
MOOCs and other forms 
of online education will 
become part of learning 
at all levels, from K-12 
through university, in 
a blended classroom 
experience. 

==== Page 35 ====
35education by providing tools and relatively simple amounts of  training in their use. 
For example, large numbers of  educational apps, many of  them free, are being 
developed for the iPad. On the negative side, there is already a major trend among 
students to restrict their social contacts to electronic ones and to spend large amounts 
of  time without social contact, interacting with online programs. If  education also 
occurs more and more online, what effect will the lack of  regular, face-to-face contact 
with peers have on students’ social development? Certain technologies have even 
been shown to create neurological side effects.95 On the other hand, autistic children 
have benefited from interactions with AI systems already .96 
LOW-RESOURCE COMMUNITIES
Many opportunities exist for AI to improve conditions for people in low-resource 
communities in a typical North American city—and, indeed, in some cases it 
already has. Understanding these direct AI contributions may also inform potential 
contributions in the poorest parts of  the developing world. There has not been a 
significant focus on these populations in AI gatherings, and, traditionally , AI funders 
have underinvested in research lacking commercial application. With targeted incentives 
and funding priorities, AI technologies could help address the needs of  low-resource 
communities. Budding efforts are promising. Counteracting fears that AI may contribute 
to joblessness and other societal problems, AI may provide mitigations and solutions, 
particularly if  implemented in ways that build trust in them by the affected communities.
Machine learning, data mining approaches
 Under the banner of  “data science for social good,” AI has been used to create 
predictive models to help government agencies more effectively use their limited 
budgets to address problems such as lead poisoning,97 a major public health concern 
that has been in the news due to ongoing events in Flint, Michigan. Children may 
be tested for elevated lead levels, but that unfortunately means the problem is only 
detected after they have already been poisoned. Many efforts are underway to use 
predictive models to assist government agencies in prioritizing children at 
risk, including those who may not yet have been exposed.98 Similarly , the Illinois 
Department of  Human Services (IDHS) uses predictive models to identify pregnant 
women at risk for adverse birth outcomes in order to maximize the impact of  
prenatal care. The City of  Cincinnati uses them to proactively identify and deploy 
inspectors to properties at risk of  code violations.
Scheduling, planning
Task assignment scheduling and planning techniques have been applied by many 
different groups to distribute food before it spoils from those who may have excess, 
such as restaurants, to food banks, community centers and individuals.99
95  Scientist have studied, for example, the way reliance on GPS may lead to changes in the 
hippocampus. Kim Tingley , “The Secrets of  the Wave Pilots,” The New York Times , March 17, 2016, 
accessed August 1, 2016,  http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/20/magazine/the-secrets-of-the-wave-
pilots.html.
96  Judith Newman, “To Siri, With Love: How One Boy With Autism Became BFF With Apple’s 
Siri,” The New York Times , October 17, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.
com/2014/10/19/fashion/how-apples-siri-became-one-autistic-boys-bff.html.
97  Eric Potash, Joe Brew, Alexander Loewi, Subhabrata Majumdar, Andrew Reece, Joe Walsh, 
Eric Rozier, Emile Jorgensen, Raed Mansour, and Rayid Ghani, “Predictive Modeling for Public 
Health: Preventing Childhood Lead Poisoning,” Proceedings of  the 21th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining  (New York: Association for Computing Machinery , 
2015), 2039–2047.
98  Data Science for Social Good, University of  Chicago, accessed August 1, 2016,  
http://dssg.uchicago.edu/ .
99  Senay Solak, Christina Scherrer, and Ahmed Ghoniem, “The Stop-and-Drop Problem in 
Nonprofit Food Distribution Networks,” Annals of  Operations Research 221 , no. 1 (October 2014):  With targeted incentives 
and funding priorities, AI 
technologies could help 
address the needs of low-
resource communities. 
Budding efforts are 
promising. 

==== Page 36 ====
36Reasoning with social networks and influence maximization
Social networks can be harnessed to create earlier, less-costly interventions involving 
large populations. For example, AI might be able to assist in spreading health-
related information. In Los Angeles, there are more than 5,000 homeless youth (ages 
thirteen-twenty-four). Individual interventions are difficult and expensive, and the 
youths’ mistrust of  authority dictates that key messages are best spread through peer 
leaders. AI programs might be able to leverage homeless youth social networks to 
strategically select peer leaders to spread health-related information, such as how to 
avoid spread of  HIV . The dynamic, uncertain nature of  these networks does pose 
challenges for AI research.100 Care must also be taken to prevent AI systems from 
reproducing discriminatory behavior, such as machine learning that identifies people 
through illegal racial indicators, or through highly-correlated surrogate factors, such 
as zip codes. But if  deployed with great care, greater reliance on AI may well result 
in a reduction in discrimination overall, since AI programs are inherently more easily 
audited than humans.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY
Cities already have begun to deploy AI technologies for public safety and security . 
By 2030, the typical North American city will rely heavily upon them. These include 
cameras for surveillance that can detect anomalies pointing to a possible crime, 
drones, and predictive policing applications. As with most issues, there are benefits 
and risks. Gaining public trust is crucial. While there are legitimate concerns that 
policing that incorporates AI may become overbearing or pervasive in some contexts, 
the opposite is also possible. AI may enable policing to become more targeted and 
used only when needed. And assuming careful deployment, AI may also help remove 
some of  the bias inherent in human decision-making .
One of  the more successful uses of  AI analytics is in detecting white collar 
crime, such as credit card fraud.101 Cybersecurity (including spam) is a widely shared 
concern, and machine learning is making an impact. AI tools may also prove useful 
in helping police manage crime scenes or search and rescue events by helping 
commanders prioritize tasks and allocate resources, though these tools are not yet 
ready for automating such activities. Improvements in machine learning in general, 
and transfer learning in particular—for speeding up learning in new scenarios based 
on similarities with past scenarios—may facilitate such systems. 
The cameras deployed almost everywhere in the world today tend to be more 
useful for helping solve crimes than preventing them.102 103 This is due to the low 
quality of  event identification from videos and the lack of  manpower to look at 
massive video streams. As AI for this domain improves, it will better assist crime 
prevention and prosecution through greater accuracy of  event classification and 
efficient automatic processing of  video to detect anomalies—including, potentially , 
407–426.
100  Jordan Pearson, “ Artificial Intelligence Could Help Reduce HIV Among Homeless Youths,” 
Teamcore, University of  Southern California, February 4. 2015, accessed August 1, 2016, http://
teamcore.usc.edu/news/motherboard_news_ai_could_help_reduce_HIV .pdf.
101  “RSA Adaptive Authentication,” RSA, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.rsa.com/en-us/
products-services/fraud-prevention/adaptive-authentication .
102  Takeshi Arikuma and Yasunori Mochizuki, “Intelligent multimedia surveillance system for 
safer cities” APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing 5  (2016): 1–8.
103  “Big Op-Ed: Shifting Opinions On Surveillance Cameras,”, Talk of  the Nation , NPR, April 22, 
2013, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.npr.org/2013/04/22/178436355/big-op-ed-shifting-
opinions-on-surveillance-cameras .One of the more successful 
uses of AI analytics is in 
detecting white collar 
crime, such as credit 
card fraud. Cybersecurity 
(including spam) is a 
widely shared concern, 
and machine learning is 
making an impact. 

==== Page 37 ====
37evidence of  police malpractice. These improvements could lead to even more 
widespread surveillance. Some cities have already added drones for surveillance 
purposes, and police use of  drones to maintain security of  ports, airports, coastal 
areas, waterways, industrial facilities is likely to increase, raising concerns about 
privacy , safety , and other issues.
The New York Police Department’s CompStat was the first tool pointing toward 
predictive policing,104 and many police departments now use it.105 Machine learning 
significantly enhances the ability to predict where and when crimes are more likely 
to happen and who may commit them. As dramatized in the movie Minority Report , 
predictive policing tools raise the specter of  innocent people being unjustifiably 
targeted. But well-deployed AI prediction tools have the potential to actually remove 
or reduce human bias, rather than reinforcing it, and research and resources should 
be directed toward ensuring this effect.
AI techniques can be used to develop intelligent simulations for training law-
enforcement personnel to collaborate. While international criminal organizations and 
terrorists from different countries are colluding, police forces from different countries 
still face difficulty in joining forces to fight them. Training international groups of  law 
enforcement personnel to work as teams is very challenging. The European Union, 
through the Horizon 2020 program, currently supports such attempts in projects such 
as LawTrain.106 The next step will be to move from simulation to actual investigations 
by providing tools that support such collaborations.
Tools do exist for scanning Twitter and other feeds to look for certain types 
of  events and how they may impact security . For example, AI can help in social 
network analysis to prevent those at risk from being radicalized by ISIS or other 
violent groups. Law enforcement agencies are increasingly interested in trying to 
detect plans for disruptive events from social media, and also to monitor activity at 
large gatherings of  people to analyze security . There is significant work on crowd 
simulations to determine how crowds can be controlled. At the same time, legitimate 
concerns have been raised about the potential for law enforcement agencies to 
overreach and use such tools to violate people’s privacy .
The US Transportation Security Administration (TSA), Coast Guard, and the 
many other security agencies that currently rely on AI will likely increase their 
reliance to enable significant efficiency and efficacy improvements.107 AI techniques—
vision, speech analysis, and gait analysis— can aid interviewers, interrogators, and 
security guards in detecting possible deception and criminal behavior. For example, 
the TSA currently has an ambitious project to redo airport security nationwide.108 
Called DARMS, the system is designed to improve efficiency and efficacy of  airport 
security by relying on personal information to tailor security based on a person’s risk 
categorization and the flights being taken. The future vision for this project is a tunnel 
that checks people’s security while they walk through it. Once again, developers of  
this technology should be careful to avoid building in bias (e.g. about a person’s risk 
level category) through use of  datasets that reflect prior bias.109
104  Walter L. Perry , Brian McInnis, Carter C. Price, Susan Smith, and John S. Hollywood, “The 
Role of  Crime Forecasting in Law Enforcement Operations,” Rand Corporation Report 233  (2013).
105  “CompStat,” Wikipedia , last modified July 28, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CompStat .
106  LAW-TRAIN, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.law-train.eu/ .
107  Milind Tambe, Security and Game Theory: Algorithms, Deployed Systems, Lessons Learned  (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011).
108  Peter Neffenger, “TSA ’s 2017 Budget—A Commitment to Security (Part I),” Department 
of  Homeland Security , March 1, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.tsa.gov/news/
testimony/2016/03/01/hearing-fy17-budget-request-transportation-security-administration .
109  Crawford, “ AI’s White Guy Problem.”As dramatized in the 
movie Minority Report , 
predictive policing tools 
raise the specter of 
innocent people being 
unjustifiably targeted. But 
well-deployed AI prediction 
tools have the potential to 
actually remove or reduce 
human bias.

==== Page 38 ====
38EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE
While AI technologies are likely to have a profound future impact on employment 
and workplace trends in a typical North American city , it is difficult to accurately 
assess current impacts, positive or negative. In the past fifteen years, employment 
has shifted due to a major recession and increasing globalization, particularly with 
China’s introduction to the world economy , as well as enormous changes in non-AI 
digital technology . Since the 1990s, the US has experienced continued growth in 
productivity and GDP , but median income has stagnated and the employment to 
population ratio has fallen.
There are clear examples of  industries in which digital technologies have had 
profound impacts, good and bad, and other sectors in which automation will likely 
make major changes in the near future. Many of  these changes have been driven 
strongly by “routine” digital technologies, including enterprise resource planning, 
networking, information processing, and search. Understanding these changes should 
provide insights into how AI will affect future labor demand, including the shift in 
skill demands. To date, digital technologies have been affecting workers more in the 
skilled middle, such as travel agents, rather than the very lowest-skilled or highest 
skilled work.110 On the other hand, the spectrum of  tasks that digital systems can 
do is evolving as AI systems improve, which is likely to gradually increase the scope 
of  what is considered routine. AI is also creeping into high end of  the spectrum, 
including professional services not historically performed by machines.
To be successful, AI innovations will need to overcome understandable human 
fears of  being marginalized. AI will likely replace tasks rather than jobs in the near 
term, and will also create new kinds of  jobs. But the new jobs that will emerge are 
harder to imagine in advance than the existing jobs that will likely be lost. Changes 
in employment usually happen gradually , often without a sharp transition, a trend 
likely to continue as AI slowly moves into the workplace. A spectrum of  effects will 
emerge, ranging from small amounts of  replacement or augmentation to complete 
replacement. For example, although most of  a lawyer’s job is not yet automated,111  
AI applied to legal information extraction and topic modeling has automated parts of  
first-year lawyers’ jobs.112 In the not too distant future, a diverse array of  job-holders, 
from radiologists to truck drivers to gardeners, may be affected.
AI may also influence the size and location of  the workforce. Many organizations 
and institutions are large because they perform functions that can be scaled only by 
adding human labor, either “horizontally” across geographical areas or “vertically” 
in management hierarchies. As AI takes over many functions, scalability no longer 
implies large organizations. Many have noted the small number of  employees of  
some high profile internet companies, but not of  others. There may be a natural scale 
of  human enterprise, perhaps where the CEO can know everyone in the company . 
Through the creation of  efficiently outsourced labor markets enabled by AI, 
enterprises may tend towards that natural size.
AI will also create jobs, especially in some sectors, by making certain tasks more 
important, and create new categories of  employment by making new modes of  
interaction possible. Sophisticated information systems can be used to create new 
110  Jeremy Ashkenas and Alicia Parlapiano, “How the Recession Reshaped the Economy , in 255 
Charts,” The New York Times , June 6, 2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2014/06/05/upshot/how-the-recession-reshaped-the-economy-in-255-charts.html .
111  R Dana Remus and Frank S. Levy , “Can Robots Be Lawyers? Computers, Lawyers, and the 
Practice of  Law,” Social Science Research Network , last modified February 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 
2016, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2701092.
112  John Markoff, “ Armies of  Expensive Lawyers, Replaced by Cheaper Software,” The New 
York Times , March 4, 2011, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/05/
science/05legal.html .AI will likely replace tasks 
rather than jobs in the 
near term, and will also 
create new kinds of jobs. 
But the new jobs that 
will emerge are harder to 
imagine in advance than 
the existing jobs that will 
likely be lost. 

==== Page 39 ====
39markets, which often have the effect of  lowering barriers to entry and increasing 
participation—from app stores to AirBnB to taskrabbit. A vibrant research 
community within AI studies further ways of  creating new markets and making 
existing ones operate more efficiently . 
While work has intrinsic value, most people work to be able to purchase goods and 
services they value. Because AI systems perform work that previously required human 
labor, they have the effect of  lowering the cost of  many goods and services, effectively 
making everyone richer. But as exemplified in current political debates, job loss is 
more salient to people—especially those directly affected—than diffuse economic 
gains, and AI unfortunately is often framed as a threat to jobs rather than a boon to 
living standards. 
There is even fear in some quarters that advances in AI will be so rapid as 
to replace all human jobs—including those that are largely cognitive or involve 
judgment—within a single generation. This sudden scenario is highly unlikely , but 
AI will gradually invade almost all employment sectors, requiring a shift away from 
human labor that computers are able to take over.
The economic effects of  AI on cognitive human jobs will be analogous to  
the effects of  automation and robotics on humans in manufacturing jobs. Many 
middle-aged workers have lost well-paying factory jobs and the socio-economic status 
in family and society that traditionally went with such jobs. An even larger fraction  
of  the total workforce may , in the long run, lose well-paying “cognitive” jobs. As labor 
becomes a less important factor in production as compared to owning intellectual 
capital, a majority of  citizens may find the value of  their labor insufficient to pay for 
a socially acceptable standard of  living. These changes will require a political, rather 
than a purely economic, response concerning what kind of  social safety nets should 
be in place to protect people from large, structural shifts in the economy . Absent 
mitigating policies, the beneficiaries of  these shifts may be a small group at the  
upper stratum of  the society .113
In the short run, education, re-training, and inventing new goods and services may 
mitigate these effects. Longer term, the current social safety net may need to evolve into 
better social services for everyone, such as healthcare and education, or a guaranteed 
basic income. Indeed, countries such as Switzerland and Finland have actively considered 
such measures. AI may be thought of  as a radically different mechanism of  wealth 
creation in which everyone should be entitled to a portion of  the world’s AI-produced 
treasure.114 It is not too soon for social debate on how the economic fruits of   
AI-technologies should be shared. As children in traditional societies support their  
aging parents, perhaps our artificially intelligent “children” should support us, the 
“parents” of  their intelligence.
113  For example, Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age , have two chapters of  devoted to 
this (Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of  Brilliant Technologies , (New York: W . W . Norton & Company , Inc., 2014)) and Brynjolfsson, 
McAfee, and Spence describe policy responses for the combination of  globalization and digital 
technology (Erik Brynjolfsson, Andrew McAfee, and Michael Spence, Foreign Affairs , July/August 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/  
2014-06-04/new-world-order ).
114  GDP does not do a good job of  measuring the value of  many digital goods. When society 
can’t manage what isn’t measured, bad policy decisions result. One alternative is to look at 
consumer surplus, not just dollar flows. As AI is embodied in more goods, this issue becomes more 
salient. It may look like GDP goes down but people have better well-being through access to these 
digital goods. See Erik Brynjolfsson and Adam Saunders, “What the GDP Gets Wrong (Why 
Managers Should Care),” Sloan Management Review , vol. 51, no. 1 (October 1, 2009): 95–96.As labor becomes a 
less important factor in 
production as compared 
to owning intellectual 
capital, a majority of 
citizens may find the value 
of their labor insufficient 
to pay for a socially 
acceptable standard of 
living.

==== Page 40 ====
40ENTERTAINMENT
With the explosive growth of  the internet over the past fifteen years, few can imagine 
their daily lives without it. Powered by AI, the internet has established user-generated 
content as a viable source of  information and entertainment. Social networks such 
as Facebook are now pervasive, and they function as personalized channels of  
social interaction and entertainment—sometimes to the detriment of  interpersonal 
interaction. Apps such as WhatsApp and Snapchat enable smart-phone users to 
remain constantly “in touch” with peers and share sources of  entertainment and 
information. In on-line communities such as Second Life and role-playing games such 
as World of  Warcraft, people imagine an alternative existence in a virtual world.115 
Specialized devices, such as Amazon’s Kindle have also redefined the essentials of  
long-cherished pastimes. Books can now be browsed and procured with a few swipes 
of  the finger, stored by the thousands in a pocket-sized device, and read in much the 
same way as a handheld paperback.
Trusted platforms now exist for sharing and browsing blogs, videos, photos, and 
topical discussions, in addition to a variety of  other user-generated information. To 
operate at the scale of  the internet, these platforms must rely on techniques that are 
being actively developed in natural language processing, information retrieval, image 
processing, crowdsourcing, and machine learning. Algorithms such as collaborative 
filtering have been developed, for example, to recommend relevant movies, songs, or 
articles based on the user’s demographic details and browsing history .116
Traditional sources of  entertainment have also embraced AI to keep pace with the  
times. As exemplified in the book and movie Moneyball , professional sport is now subjected 
to intensive quantitative analysis.117 Beyond aggregate performance statistics, on-field 
signals can be monitored using sophisticated sensors and cameras. Software has been 
created for composing music118 and recognizing soundtracks.119 Techniques from computer 
vision and NLP have been used in creating stage performances.120 Even the lay user can 
exercise his or her creativity on platforms such as WordsEye, which automatically 
generates 3D scenes from natural language text.121 AI has also come to the aid of  
historical research in the arts, and is used extensively in stylometry and, more recently , 
in the analysis of  paintings.122
The enthusiasm with which humans have responded to AI-driven entertainment 
has been surprising and led to concerns that it reduces interpersonal interaction 
among human beings. Few predicted that people would spend hours on end 
interacting with a display . Children often appear to be genuinely happier playing 
at home on their devices rather than outside with their friends. AI will increasingly 
enable entertainment that is more interactive, personalized, and engaging. Research 
should be directed toward understanding how to leverage these attributes for 
individuals’ and society’s benefit.
115  Second Life, accessed August 1, 2016, http://secondlife.com; “World of  Warcraft,” Blizzard 
Entertainment, Inc, accessed August 1, 2016, http://us.battle.net/wow/en/.
116  John S. Breese, David Heckerman, and Carl Kadie, “Empirical Analysis of  Predictive 
Algorithms for Collaborative Filtering,” Proceedings of  the 14th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial 
Intelligence  (July 1998), accessed August 1, 2016, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1301.7363.pdf, 43–52.
117  Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of  Winning an Unfair Game  (New York: W . W . Norton & 
Company , Inc., 2003): http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1210166/ ).
118  MuseScore, accessed August 1, 2016, https://musescore.org/.
119  Shazam, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.shazam.com/.
120  Annie Dorsen, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.anniedorsen.com/.
121  WordsEye, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.wordseye.com/.
122  “Stylometry ,” Wikipedia , last modified August 4, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016,  https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stylometry ; http://arxiv.org/pdf/1408.3218v1.pdf.AI will increasingly enable 
entertainment that is more 
interactive, personalized, 
and engaging. Research 
should be directed toward 
understanding how to 
leverage these attributes 
for individuals’ and 
society’s benefit.

==== Page 41 ====
41Imagining the Future
The success of  any form of  entertainment is ultimately determined by the individuals 
and social groups that are its subjects. The modes of  entertainment that people find  
appealing are diverse and change over time. It is therefore hard to predict the forms 
entertainment will take in the next fifteen years precisely . Nevertheless, current trends  
suggest at least a few features that the future entertainment landscape is likely to contain.
To date, the information revolution has mostly unfolded in software. However, 
with the growing availability of  cheaper sensors and devices, greater innovation in the 
hardware used in entertainment systems is expected. Virtual reality and haptics could 
enter our living rooms—personalized companion robots are already being developed.123 
With the accompanying improvements in Automatic Speech Recognition, the Study 
Panel expects that interaction with robots and other entertainment systems will become 
dialogue-based, perhaps constrained at the start, but progressively more human-like. 
Equally , the interacting systems are predicted to develop new characteristics such as 
emotion, empathy , and adaptation to environmental rhythms such as time of  day .124
Today , an amateur with a video camera and readily-available software tools can 
make a relatively good movie. In the future, more sophisticated tools and apps will 
become available to make it even easier to produce high-quality content, for example, 
to compose music or to choreograph dance using an avatar. The creation and 
dissemination of  entertainment will benefit from the progress of  technologies such as 
ASR, dubbing, and Machine Translation, which will enable content to be customized 
to different audiences inexpensively . This democratization and proliferation of  AI-
created media makes it difficult to predict how humans’ taste for entertainment, which 
are already fluid, will evolve.
With content increasingly delivered digitally , and large amounts of  data being 
logged about consumers’ preferences and usage characteristics, media powerhouses 
will be able to micro-analyze and micro-serve content to increasingly specialized 
segments of  the population—down to the individual.125 Conceivably the stage is set 
for the emergence of  media conglomerates acting as “Big Brothers” who are able to 
control the ideas and online experiences to which specific individuals are exposed. 
It remains to be seen whether broader society will develop measures to prevent their 
emergence. This topic, along with others pertaining to AI-related policy , is treated in 
more detail in the next section.
123  Emoters, accessed August 1, 2016, http://emoterbots.com/.
124  “Siri,” Apple, Inc., accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.apple.com/in/ios/siri/.
125  Ryan Calo, “Digital Market Manipulation,” George Washington Law Review  82, no. 4 (2014): 
995–1051.More sophisticated tools 
and apps will become 
available to make it 
even easier to produce 
high-quality content, for 
example, to compose 
music or to choreograph 
dance using an avatar. 

==== Page 42 ====
42SECTION III: PROSPECTS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AI PUBLIC POLICY
The goal of  AI applications must be to create value for society. Our policy recommendations 
flow from this goal, and, while this report is focused on a typical North American city in 
2030, the recommendations are broadly applicable to other places over time. Strategies that 
enhance our ability to interpret AI systems and participate in their use may help build trust 
and prevent drastic failures. Care must be taken to augment and enhance human capabilities 
and interaction, and to avoid discrimination against segments of  society. Research to encourage 
this direction and inform public policy debates should be emphasized. Given the current 
sector-specific regulation of  US industries, new or retooled laws and policies will be needed 
to address the widespread impacts AI is likely to bring. Rather than “more” or “stricter” 
regulation, policies should be designed to encourage helpful innovation, generate and transfer 
expertise, and foster broad corporate and civic responsibility for addressing critical societal 
issues raised by these technologies. In the long term, AI will enable new wealth creation that 
will require social debate on how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared.
AI POLICY, NOW AND IN THE FUTURE
Throughout history , humans have both shaped and adapted to new technologies. This 
report anticipates that advances in AI technologies will be developed and fielded 
gradually—not in sudden, unexpected jumps in the techniques themselves—and will  
build on what exists today , making this adaptation easier. On the other hand, small  
improvements to techniques, computing power, or availability of  data can occasionally 
lead to novel, game-changing applications. The measure of  success for AI applications 
is the value they create for human lives. Going forward, the ease with which people 
use and adapt to AI applications will likewise largely determine their success.
Conversely , since AI applications are susceptible to errors and failures, a mark of   
their success will be how users perceive and tolerate their shortcomings. As AI becomes 
increasingly embedded in daily lives and used for more critical tasks, system mistakes 
may lead to backlash from users and negatively affect their trust. Though accidents 
in a self-driving car may be less probable than those driven by humans, for example, 
they will attract more attention. Design strategies that enhance the ability of  humans 
to understand AI systems and decisions (such as explicitly explaining those decisions),  
and to participate in their use, may help build trust and prevent drastic failures. Likewise, 
developers should help manage people’s expectations, which will affect their happiness 
and satisfaction with AI applications. Frustration in carrying out functions promised 
by a system diminishes people’s trust and reduces their willingness to use the system 
in the future.
Another important consideration is how AI systems that take over certain tasks 
will affect people’s affordances and capabilities. As machines deliver super-human 
performances on some tasks, people’s ability to perform them may wither. Already , 
introducing calculators to classrooms has reduced children’s ability to do basic 
arithmetic operations. Still, humans and AI systems have complementary abilities. 
People are likely to focus on tasks that machines cannot do as well, including complex 
reasoning and creative expression.
Already , children are increasingly exposed to AI applications, such as interacting 
with personal assistants on cell phones or with virtual agents in theme parks. Having 
early exposure will improve children’s interactions with AI applications, which 
will become a natural part of  their daily lives. As a result, gaps will appear in how 
younger and older generations perceive AI’s influences on society .The measure of success 
for AI applications is 
the value they create 
for human lives. Going 
forward, the ease with 
which people use and 
adapt to AI applications 
will likewise largely 
determine their success.

==== Page 43 ====
43Likewise, AI could widen existing inequalities of  opportunity if  access to AI 
technologies—along with the high-powered computation and large-scale data that 
fuel many of  them—is unfairly distributed across society . These technologies will 
improve the abilities and efficiency of  people who have access to them. A person with 
access to accurate Machine Translation technology will be better able to use learning 
resources available in different languages. Similarly , if  speech translation technology is 
only available in English, people who do not speak English will be at a disadvantage.
Further, AI applications and the data they rely upon may reflect the biases of  their 
designers and users, who specify the data sources. This threatens to deepen existing 
social biases, and concentrate AI’s benefits unequally among different subgroups 
of  society . For example, some speech recognition technologies do not work well for 
women and people with accents. As AI is increasingly used in critical applications, 
these biases may surface issues of  fairness to diverse groups in society . On the other 
hand, compared to the well-documented biases in human decision-making, AI-based 
decision-making tools have the potential to significantly reduce the bias in critical 
decisions such as who is lent money or sent to jail.
Privacy concerns about AI-enabled surveillance are also widespread, particularly 
in cities with pervasive instrumentation. Sousveillance, the recording of  an activity 
by a participant, usually with portable personal devices, has increased as well. Since 
views about bias and privacy are based on personal and societal ethical and value 
judgments, the debates over how to address these concerns will likely grow and resist 
quick resolution. Similarly , since AI is generating significant wealth, debates will grow 
regarding how the economic fruits of  AI technologies should be shared—especially as 
AI expertise and the underlying data sets that fuel applications are concentrated in a 
small number of  large corporations.
To help address these concerns about the individual and societal implications  
of  rapidly evolving AI technologies, the Study Panel offers three general policy 
recommendations: 
1. Define a path toward accruing technical expertise in AI at all 
levels of  government. Effective governance requires more experts 
who understand and can analyze the interactions between AI 
technologies, programmatic objectives, and overall societal values.
Absent sufficient technical expertise to assess safety or other metrics, national or  
local officials may refuse to permit a potentially promising application. Or insufficiently 
trained officials may simply take the word of  industry technologists and green light a 
sensitive application that has not been adequately vetted. Without an understanding 
of  how AI systems interact with human behavior and societal values, officials will be 
poorly positioned to evaluate the impact of  AI on programmatic objectives. 
2. Remove the perceived and actual impediments to research on the 
fairness, security , privacy , and social impacts of  AI systems.
Some interpretations of  federal laws such as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act  
and the anti-circumvention provision of  the Digital Millennium Copyright Act are  
ambiguous regarding whether and how proprietary AI systems may be reverse engineered 
and evaluated by academics, journalists, and other researchers. Such research is critical  
if  AI systems with physical and other material consequences are to be properly vetted 
and held accountable. 
3. Increase public and private funding for interdisciplinary studies of  
the societal impacts of  AI.
As a society , we are underinvesting resources in research on the societal implications  
of  AI technologies. Private and public dollars should be directed toward interdisciplinary AI could widen 
existing inequalities of 
opportunity if access to 
AI technologies—along 
with the high-powered 
computation and large-
scale data that fuel 
many of them—is unfairly 
distributed across society.

==== Page 44 ====
44teams capable of  analyzing AI from multiple angles. Research questions range from 
basic research into intelligence to methods to assess and affect the safety , privacy , 
fairness, and other impacts of  AI.
Questions include: Who is responsible when a self-driven car crashes or an 
intelligent medical device fails? How can AI applications be prevented from unlawful 
discrimination? Who should reap the gains of  efficiencies enabled by AI technologies 
and what protections should be afforded to people whose skills are rendered obsolete? 
As AI becomes integrated more broadly and deeply into industrial and consumer 
products, it enters areas in which established regulatory regimes will need to be 
adapted to AI innovations or in some cases fundamentally reconfigured according to 
broadly accepted goals and principles.
The approach in the United States to date has been sector-specific, with oversight 
by a variety of  agencies. The use of  AI in devices that deliver medical diagnostics and 
treatments is subject to aggressive regulation by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), both in defining what the product is and specifying the methods by which it is 
produced, including standards of  software engineering. The use of  drones in regulated 
airspace falls under the authority of  the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).126 For 
consumer-facing AI systems, regulation by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) comes 
into play . Financial markets using AI technologies, such as in high-frequency trading, 
come under regulation by the Security Exchange Commission (SEC).
In addition to sector-specific approaches, the somewhat ambiguous and broad 
regulatory category of  “critical infrastructure” may apply to AI applications.127 The 
Obama Administration’s Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) 21 broadly defines critical 
infrastructure as composed of  “the assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or 
virtual, so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have 
a debilitating effect on security , national economic security , national public health or 
safety , or any combination thereof.” Today , an enterprise does not come under federal 
regulation solely by falling under that broad definition. Instead, the general trend of  
federal policy is to seek regulation in sixteen sectors of  the economy .128
As regards AI, critical infrastructure is notably defined by the end-user application, 
and not the technology or sector that actually produces AI software.129 Software 
126  FAA controls the ways drones fly , requires drones to be semiautonomous as opposed to 
autonomous, requires visual connection to the drone, and enforces no-fly zones close to airports.
127  “Presidential Policy Directive (PPD-21)—Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience,” The 
White House, February 12, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-infrastructure-security-and-resil .
128  PPD 21 identifies agencies responsible in each case. Chemical: Department of  Homeland 
Security; Commercial Facilities: Department of  Homeland Security; Communications: Department 
of  Homeland Security; Critical Manufacturing: Department of  Homeland Security; Dams: 
Department of  Homeland Security; Defense Industrial Base: Department of  Defense; Emergency 
Services: Department of  Homeland Security; Energy: Department of  Energy; Financial Services: 
Department of  the Treasury; Food and Agriculture: U.S. Department of  Agriculture and 
Department of  Health and Human Services; Government Facilities: Department of  Homeland 
Security and General Services Administration; Healthcare and Public Health: Department of  
Health and Human Services; Information Technology: Department of  Homeland Security; 
Nuclear Reactors, Materials, and Waste: Department of  Homeland Security; Transportation 
Systems: Department of  Homeland Security and Department of  Transportation; Water and 
Wastewater Systems: Environmental Protection Agency .
129  In “ICYMI- Business Groups Urge White House to Rethink Cyber Security Order,” Internet 
Association , March 5, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, https://internetassociation.org/030513gov-3/ : 
“Obama’s Feb. 12 order says the government can’t designate ‘commercial information technology 
products’ or consumer information technology services as critical U.S. infrastructure targeted for 
voluntary computer security standards,’ ... ‘Obama’s order isn’t meant to get down to the level 
of  products and services and dictate how those products and services behave,’ said David LeDuc, 
senior director of  public policy for the Software & Information Industry Association, a Washington 
trade group that lobbied for the exclusions.”As a society, we are 
underinvesting resources 
in research on the 
societal implications of 
AI technologies. Private 
and public dollars should 
be directed toward 
interdisciplinary teams 
capable of analyzing AI 
from multiple angles. 

==== Page 45 ====
45companies such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon have actively lobbied to avoid 
being designated as critical to the economy , arguing that this would open the door to  
regulation that would inevitably compromise their rapid product development cycles  
and ability to innovate.130 Nonetheless, as the companies creating, operating, and 
maintaining critical infrastructure use AI, interest will grow in regulating that software. 
Some existing regulatory regimes for software safety (for example, the FDA ’s 
regulation of  high consequence medical software) require specific software 
engineering practices at the developer level. However, modern software systems 
are often assembled from library components which may be supplied by multiple 
vendors, and are relatively application-independent. It doesn’t seem feasible or 
desirable to subject all such developers to the standards required for the most critical, 
rare applications. Nor does it seem advisable to allow unregulated use of  such 
components in safety critical applications. Tradeoffs between promoting innovation 
and regulating for safety are difficult ones, both conceptually and in practice. At a 
minimum, regulatory entities will require greater expertise going forward in order to 
understand the implications of  standards and measures put in place by researchers, 
government, and industry .131
Policy and legal considerations
While a comprehensive examination of  the ways artificial intelligence (AI) interacts 
with the law is beyond the scope of  this inaugural report, this much seems clear:  
as a transformative technology , AI has the potential to challenge any number of  
legal assumptions in the short, medium, and long term. Precisely how law and policy 
will adapt to advances in AI—and how AI will adapt to values reflected in law and 
policy—depends on a variety of  social, cultural, economic, and other factors, and  
is likely to vary by jurisdiction.
American law represents a mixture of  common law, federal, state, and local 
statutes and ordinances, and—perhaps of  greatest relevance to AI—regulations. 
Depending on its instantiation, AI could implicate each of  these sources of  law. For  
example, Nevada passed a law broadly permitting autonomous vehicles and instructed 
the Nevada Department of  Motor Vehicles to craft requirements. Meanwhile, the 
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration has determined that a self-
driving car system, rather than the vehicle occupants, can be considered the “driver” 
of  a vehicle. Some car designs sidestep this issue by staying in autonomous mode 
only when hands are on the wheel (at least every so often), so that the human driver 
has ultimate control and responsibility . Still, Tesla’s adoption of  this strategy did not 
prevent the first traffic fatality involving an autonomous car, which occurred in June 
of  2016. Such incidents are sure to influence public attitudes towards autonomous 
driving. And as most people’s first experience with embodied agents, autonomous 
transportation will strongly influence the public’s perception of  AI.
Driverless cars are, of  course, but one example of  the many instantiations of   
AI in services, products, and other contexts. The legal effect of  introducing AI into 
the provision of  tax advice, automated trading on the stock market, or generating  
medical diagnoses will also vary in accordance to the regulators that govern 
these contexts and the rules that apply within them. Many other examples of  AI 
applications fall within current non-technology-specific policy , including predictive 
130  Eric Engleman, “Google Exception in Obama’s Cyber Order Questioned as Unwise Gap,” 
Bloomberg Technology , March 4, 2013, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2013-03-05/google-exception-in-obama-s-cyber-order-questioned-as-unwise-gap .
131  Ryan Calo, “The Case for a Federal Robotics Commission,” Brookings Report , September 15, 
2014, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports2/2014/09/case-for-
federal-robotics-commission .Absent sufficient technical 
expertise to assess 
safety or other metrics, 
national or local officials 
may refuse to permit a 
potentially promising 
application—or green light 
a sensitive application that 
has not been adequately 
vetted. 

==== Page 46 ====
46policing, non-discriminatory loans, healthcare applications such as eldercare and  
drug delivery , systems designed to interact with children (for example, autonomous 
tutoring systems are required to respect laws in regard to balanced handling of  
evolution vs. intelligent design), and interactive entertainment.
Given the present structure of  American administrative law, it seems unlikely  
that AI will be treated comprehensively in the near term. Nevertheless, it is possible  
to enumerate broad categories of  legal and policy issues that AI tends to raise in 
various contexts.
Privacy
Private information about an individual can be revealed through decisions and 
predictions made by AI. While some of  the ways that AI implicates privacy mirror 
those of  technologies such as computers and the internet, other issues may be unique 
to AI. For example, the potential of  AI to predict future behavior based on previous 
patterns raises challenging questions. Companies already use machine learning to 
predict credit risk. And states run prisoner details through complex algorithms to 
predict the likelihood of  recidivism when considering parole. In these cases, it is a 
technical challenge to ensure that factors such as race and sexual orientation are not 
being used to inform AI-based decisions. Even when such features are not directly 
provided to the algorithms, they may still correlate strongly with seemingly innocuous 
features such as zip code. Nonetheless, with careful design, testing, and deployment, 
AI algorithms may be able to make less biased decisions than a typical person.
Anthropomorphic interfaces increasingly associated with AI raise novel privacy 
concerns. Social science research suggests people are hardwired to respond to 
anthropomorphic technology as though it were human. Subjects in one study 
were more likely to answer when they were born if  the computer first stated 
when it was built.132 In another, they skipped sensitive questions when posed by an 
anthropomorphic interface.133 At a basic level lies the question: Will humans continue 
to enjoy the prospect of  solitude in a world permeated by apparently social agents 
“living” in our houses, cars, offices, hospital rooms, and phones?134
Innovation policy
Early law and policy decisions concerning liability and speech helped ensure the 
commercial viability of  the Internet. By contrast, the software industry arguably 
suffers today from the decision of  firms to pivot from open and free software to the 
more aggressive pursuit of  intellectual property protections, resulting in what some 
have termed patent “thickets.” Striking the proper balance between incentivizing 
innovation in AI while promoting cooperation and protection against third party 
harm will prove a central challenge.
Liability (civil )
As AI is organized to directly affect the world, even physically , liability for harms 
caused by AI will increase in salience. The prospect that AI will behave in ways 
designers do not expect challenges the prevailing assumption within tort law that 
courts only compensate for foreseeable injuries. Courts might arbitrarily assign 
liability to a human actor even when liability is better located elsewhere for reasons 
of  fairness or efficiency . Alternatively , courts could refuse to find liability because 
the defendant before the court did not, and could not, foresee the harm that the AI 
caused. Liability would then fall by default on the blameless victim. The role 
132  Youngme Moon, “Intimate Exchanges: Using Computers to Elicit Self-Disclosure from 
Consumers,” Journal of  Consumer Research 26, no. 4 (March 2000): 323–339.
133  Lee Sproull, Mani Subramani, Sara Kiesler , Janet H. Walker, and Keith Waters, “When the 
Interface is a Face,” Human-Computer Interaction 11, no. 2 (1996): 97–124.
134  M. Ryan Calo, “People Can Be So Fake: A New Dimension to Privacy and Technology 
Scholarship,” Penn State Law Review 114, no. 3 (2010): 809–855.As AI applications engage 
in behavior that, were it 
done by a human, would 
constitute a crime, courts 
and other legal actors will 
have to puzzle through 
whom to hold accountable 
and on what theory.

==== Page 47 ====
47of  product liability—and the responsibility that falls to companies manufacturing 
these products— will likely grow when human actors become less responsible for the 
actions of  a machine.
Liability (criminal )
If  tort law expects harms to be foreseeable, criminal law goes further to expect that 
harms be intended . US law in particular attaches great importance to the concept of  
mens rea —the intending mind. As AI applications engage in behavior that, were it 
done by a human, would constitute a crime, courts and other legal actors will have to 
puzzle through whom to hold accountable and on what theory .
Agency
The above issues raise the question of  whether and under what circumstances an 
AI system could operate as the agent of  a person or corporation. Already regulatory 
bodies in the United States, Canada, and elsewhere are setting the conditions under 
which software can enter into a binding contract.135 The more AI conducts legally 
salient activities, the greater the challenge to principles of  agency under the law.
Certification
The very notion of  “artificial intelligence” suggests a substitution for human skill 
and ingenuity . And in many contexts, ranging from driving to performing surgery or 
practicing law, a human must attain some certification or license before performing 
a given task. Accordingly , law and policy will have to—and already does—grapple 
with how to determine competency in an AI system. For example, imagine a 
robotics company creates a surgical platform capable of  autonomously removing an 
appendix. Or imagine a law firm writes an application capable of  rendering legal 
advice. Today , it is unclear from a legal perspective who in this picture would have to 
pass the medical boards or legal bar, let alone where  they would be required to do so.136
Labor
As AI substitutes for human roles, some jobs will be eliminated and new jobs will 
be created. The net effect on jobs is ambiguous, but labor markets are unlikely to 
benefit everyone evenly . The demand for some types of  skills or abilities will likely 
drop significantly , negatively affecting the employment levels and wages of  people 
with those skills.137 While the ultimate effects on income levels and distribution are not 
inevitable, they depend substantially on government policies, on the way companies 
choose to organize work, and on decisions by individuals to invest in learning new 
skills and seeking new types of  work and income opportunities. People who find their 
employment altered or terminated as a consequence of  advances of  AI may seek 
recourse in the legislature and courts. This may be why Littler Mendelson LLP—
perhaps the largest employment law firm in the world—has an entire practice group 
to address robotics and artificial intelligence.
Taxation
Federal, state, and local revenue sources may be affected. Accomplishing a task using AI 
instead of  a person can be faster and more accurate—and avoid employment taxes.  
As a result, AI applications could increasingly shift investment from payroll and 
income to capital expenditure. Depending on a state budget’s reliance on payroll 
and income tax, such a shift could be destabilizing. AI may also display different 
135  Ian R. Kerr, “Ensuring the Success of  Contract Formation in Agent-Mediated Electronic 
Commerce,” Electronic Commerce Research 1 (2001): 183–202.
136  Ryan Calo, “Digital Agenda’s public discussion on ‘The effects of  robotics on economics, 
labour and society ,’” Ausschuss Digitale Agenda , (Deutsche Bundestag: Ausschussdrucksache A-Drs.  
18(24)102), June 22, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, https://www.bundestag.de/blob/428266/195a
1cde8d5347849accbbe60ed91865/a-drs-18-24-102-data.pdf .
137  Brynjolfsson and McAfee, “Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution is 
Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity , and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the 
Economy (2011)”; Brynjolfsson and McAfee, Second Machine Age .AI applications could 
increasingly shift 
investment from payroll 
and income to capital 
expenditure. Depending on 
a state budget’s reliance 
on payroll and income 
tax, such a shift could be 
destabilizing. 

==== Page 48 ====
48“habits” than people, resulting in still fewer revenue sources. The many municipalities 
relying on income from speeding or parking tickets will have to find alternatives 
if  autonomous cars can drop people off and find distance parking, or if  they are 
programmed not to violate the law. As a result, government bodies trying to balance 
their budgets in light of  advances in AI may pass legislation to slow down or alter the 
course of  the technology .
Politics
AI technologies are already being used by political actors in gerrymandering and 
targeted “robocalls” designed to suppress votes, and on social media platforms in the 
form of  “bots.”138 They can enable coordinated protest as well as the ability to predict 
protests, and promote greater transparency in politics by more accurately pinpointing 
who said what, when. Thus, administrative and regulatory laws regarding AI can be 
designed to promote greater democratic participation or, if  ill-conceived, to reduce it.
This list is not exhaustive and focuses largely on domestic policy in the United 
States, leaving out many areas of  law that AI is likely to touch. One lesson that 
might be drawn concerns the growing disconnect between the context-specific way 
in which AI is governed today and a wider consideration of  themes shared by AI 
technologies across industries or sectors of  society . It could be tempting to create new 
institutional configurations capable of  amassing expertise and setting AI standards 
across multiple contexts. The Study Panel’s consensus is that attempts to regulate “ AI” 
in general would be misguided, since there is no clear definition of  AI (it isn’t any 
one thing), and the risks and considerations are very different in different domains. 
Instead, policymakers should recognize that to varying degrees and over time, various 
industries will need distinct, appropriate, regulations that touch on software built 
using AI or incorporating AI in some way . The government will need the expertise to 
scrutinize standards and technology developed by the private and public sector, and 
to craft regulations where necessary .
Guidelines for the future
Faced with the profound changes that AI technologies can produce, pressure for 
“more” and “tougher” regulation is inevitable. Misunderstanding about what AI is 
and is not, especially against a background of  scare-mongering, could fuel opposition 
to technologies that could benefit everyone. This would be a tragic mistake. 
Regulation that stifles innovation, or relocates it to other jurisdictions, would be 
similarly counterproductive.
Fortunately , principles that guide successful regulation of  current digital 
technologies can be instructive. A recent multi-year study comparing privacy 
regulation in four European countries and the United States, for example, yielded 
counter-intuitive results.139 Those countries, such as Spain and France, with strict 
and detailed regulations bred a “compliance mentality” within corporations, which 
had the effect of  discouraging both innovation and robust privacy protections. 
Rather than taking responsibility for privacy protection internally and developing a 
professional staff to foster it in business and manufacturing processes, or engaging with 
privacy advocates or academics outside their walls, these companies viewed privacy as 
a compliance activity . Their focus was on avoiding fines or punishments, rather than 
proactively designing technology and adapting practices to protect privacy .
By contrast, the regulatory environment in the United States and Germany , 
which combined more ambiguous goals with tough transparency requirements and 
meaningful enforcement, were more successful in catalyzing companies to view 
138  Political Bots, accessed August 1, 2016, http://politicalbots.org/ .
139  Kenneth A. Bamberger and Deirdre K. Mulligan, Privacy on the Ground: Driving Corporate Behavior 
in the United States and Europe  (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2015).Like other technologies, 
AI has the potential to be 
used for good or nefarious 
purposes. A vigorous and 
informed debate about 
how to best steer AI in 
ways that enrich our lives 
and our society is an 
urgent and vital need. 

==== Page 49 ====
49privacy as their responsibility . Broad legal mandates encouraged companies to 
develop a professional staff and processes to enforce privacy controls, engage with 
outside stakeholders, and to adapt their practices to technology advances. Requiring 
greater transparency enabled civil society groups and media to become credible 
enforcers both in court and in the court of  public opinion, making privacy more 
salient to corporate boards and leading them to further invest in privacy protection.
In AI, too, regulators can strengthen a virtuous cycle of  activity involving internal 
and external accountability , transparency , and professionalization, rather than narrow 
compliance. As AI is integrated into cities, it will continue to challenge existing 
protections for values such as privacy and accountability . Like other technologies, AI 
has the potential to be used for good or nefarious purposes. This report has tried to 
highlight the potential for both. A vigorous and informed debate about how to best 
steer AI in ways that enrich our lives and our society , while encouraging creativity 
in the field, is an urgent and vital need. Policies should be evaluated as to whether 
they democratically foster the development and equitable sharing of  AI’s benefits, 
or concentrate power and benefits in the hands of  a fortunate few. And since future 
AI technologies and their effects cannot be foreseen with perfect clarity , policies will 
need to be continually re-evaluated in the context of  observed societal challenges and 
evidence from fielded systems.
As this report documents, significant AI-related advances have already had 
an impact on North American cities over the past fifteen years, and even more 
substantial developments will occur over the next fifteen. Recent advances are largely 
due to the growth and analysis of  large data sets enabled by the Internet, advances 
in sensory technologies and, more recently , applications of  “deep learning.” In the 
coming years, as the public encounters new AI applications in domains such as 
transportation and healthcare, they must be introduced in ways that build trust and 
understanding, and respect human and civil rights. While encouraging innovation, 
policies and processes should address ethical, privacy , and security implications, and 
should work to ensure that the benefits of  AI technologies will be spread broadly and 
fairly . Doing so will be critical if  Artificial Intelligence research and its applications 
are to exert a positive influence on North American urban life in 2030 and beyond.

==== Page 50 ====
50APPENDIX I: A SHORT HISTORY OF AI
This Appendix is based primarily on Nilsson’s book140 and written from the prevalent 
current perspective, which focuses on data intensive methods and big data. However 
important, this focus has not yet shown itself  to be the solution to all problems. A 
complete and fully balanced history of  the field is beyond the scope of  this document.
The field of  Artificial Intelligence (AI) was officially born and christened at a 1956 
workshop organized by John McCarthy at the Dartmouth Summer Research Project 
on Artificial Intelligence. The goal was to investigate ways in which machines could 
be made to simulate aspects of  intelligence—the essential idea that has continued to 
drive the field forward. McCarthy is credited with the first use of  the term “artificial 
intelligence” in the proposal he co-authored for the workshop with Marvin Minsky , 
Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude Shannon.141 Many of  the people who attended soon 
led significant projects under the banner of  AI, including Arthur Samuel, Oliver 
Selfridge, Ray Solomonoff, Allen Newell, and Herbert Simon.
Although the Dartmouth workshop created a unified identity for the field and 
a dedicated research community , many of  the technical ideas that have come to 
characterize AI existed much earlier. In the eighteenth century , Thomas Bayes 
provided a framework for reasoning about the probability  of  events.142 In the 
nineteenth century , George Boole showed that logical reasoning —dating back to 
Aristotle—could be performed systematically  in the same manner as solving a system 
of  equations.143 By the turn of  the twentieth century , progress in the experimental 
sciences had led to the emergence of  the field of  statistics ,144 which enables 
inferences to be drawn rigorously from data. The idea of  physically engineering a 
machine to execute sequences of  instructions, which had captured the imagination 
of  pioneers such as Charles Babbage, had matured by the 1950s, and resulted in the 
construction of  the first electronic computers .145 Primitive robots , which could 
sense and act autonomously , had also been built by that time.146
The most influential ideas underpinning computer science came from Alan Turing,  
who proposed a formal model of  computing. Turing’s classic essay , Computing Machinery 
and Intelligence ,147 imagines the possibility of  computers created for simulating intelligence 
and explores many of  the ingredients now associated with AI, including how intelligence 
might be tested, and how machines might automatically learn. Though these ideas 
inspired AI, Turing did not have access to the computing resources needed to 
translate his ideas into action.
Several focal areas in the quest for AI emerged between the 1950s and the 1970s.148 
140 Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence .
141  J. McCarthy , Marvin L. Minsky , Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude E. Shannon, “ A Proposal 
for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence,” August 31, 1955, accessed 
August 1, 2016, http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/history/dartmouth/dartmouth.html .
142  Thomas Bayes, “ An Essay towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of  Chances,”  
Philosophical Transactions of  the Royal Society of  London  53 (January 1, 1763): 370–418, accessed August 1,  
2016, http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing. org/search?fulltext=an+essay+towards+solving&submit=yes  
&andorexactfulltext=and&x=0&y=0 .
143  George Boole, An Investigation of  the Laws of  Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories 
of  Logic and Probabilities , (Macmillan, 1854, reprinted with corrections, Dover Publications, New 
York, NY , 1958, and reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009), accessed August 1, 2016, 
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf ?bid=CBO9780511693090 .
144  “History of  statistics,” Wikipedia , Last modified June 3, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_statistics.
145  Joel N. Shurkin, Engines of  the Mind: The Evolution of  the Computer from Mainframes to Microprocessors  
(New York: W . W . Norton & Company , 1996). 
146  William Grey Walter, “ An Electromechanical Animal,” Dialectica 4 (1950): 42–49.
147  A. M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59, no. 236 (1950): 433–460.
148  Marvin Minsky , “Steps toward Artificial Intelligence,” MIT Media Laboratory , October 24, 
1960, accessed August 1, 2016, http://web.media.mit.edu/~minsky/papers/steps.html.The field of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) was 
officially born and
christened at a 1956 
workshop. The goal was to 
investigate ways in which 
machines could be made 
to simulate aspects of 
intelligence—the essential 
idea that has continued to 
drive the field forward.

==== Page 51 ====
51Newell and Simon pioneered the foray into heuristic search , an efficient procedure 
for finding solutions in large, combinatorial spaces. In particular, they applied this 
idea to construct proofs of  mathematical theorems, first through their Logic Theorist 
program, and then through the General Problem Solver.149 In the area of  computer 
vision , early work in character recognition by Selfridge and colleagues150 laid the 
basis for more complex applications such as face recognition.151 By the late sixties, 
work had also begun on natural language processing .152 “Shakey”, a wheeled 
robot built at SRI International, launched the field of  mobile robotics . Samuel’s 
Checkers-playing program, which improved itself  through self-play , was one of  the 
first working instances of  a machine learning  system.153 Rosenblatt’s Perceptron ,154 
a computational model based on biological neurons, became the basis for the field 
of  artificial neural networks . Feigenbaum and others advocated 155the case for 
building expert systems —knowledge repositories tailored for specialized domains 
such as chemistry and medical diagnosis.156
Early conceptual progress assumed the existence of  a symbolic system that could 
be reasoned about and built upon. But by the 1980s, despite this promising headway 
made into different aspects of  artificial intelligence, the field still could boast no 
significant practical  successes. This gap between theory and practice arose in part from 
an insufficient emphasis within the AI community on grounding  systems physically , with 
direct access to environmental signals and data. There was also an overemphasis on 
Boolean (True/False) logic, overlooking the need to quantify uncertainty . The field 
was forced to take cognizance of  these shortcomings in the mid-1980s, since interest 
in AI began to drop, and funding dried up. Nilsson calls this period the “ AI winter.”
A much needed resurgence in the nineties built upon the idea that “Good Old-
Fashioned AI”157 was inadequate as an end-to-end approach to building intelligent 
systems. Rather, intelligent systems needed to be built from the ground up, at all times 
solving  the task at hand, albeit with different degrees of  proficiency .158 Technological 
progress had also made the task of  building systems driven by real-world data more 
feasible. Cheaper and more reliable hardware for sensing and actuation made robots 
easier to build. Further, the Internet’s capacity for gathering large amounts of  data, 
and the availability of  computing power and storage to process that data, enabled 
statistical techniques that, by design, derive solutions from data. These developments 
have allowed AI to emerge in the past two decades as a profound influence on our 
daily lives, as detailed in Section II. 
149  Allen Newell, John C Shaw, and Herbert A Simon, “Report on a general problem-solving 
program,” Proceedings of  the International Conference on Information Processing , UNESCO, Paris 15-20  
June 1959 (Unesco/Oldenbourg/Butterworths, 1960), 256–264.
150  O. G. Selfridge, “Pandemonium: A paradigm for learning,” Proceedings of  the Symposium on 
Mechanization of  Thought Processes  (London: H. M. Stationary Office, 1959): 511–531.
151  Woodrow W . Bledsoe and Helen Chan, “ A Man-Machine Facial Recognition System: Some 
Preliminary Results,” Technical Report PRI 19A  (Palo Alto, California: Panoramic Research, Inc., 1965).
152  D. Raj Reddy , “Speech Recognition by Machine: A Review,” Proceedings of  the IEEE 64 , no.4 
(April 1976), 501–531.
153  Arthur Samuel, “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of  Checkers, IBM 
Journal of  Research and Development 3, no. 3 (1959): 210—229.
154  Frank Rosenblatt, “The Perceptron—A Perceiving and Recognizing Automaton,”  
Report 85-460-1 , (Buffalo, New York: Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory , 1957).
155  “Shakey the robot,” Wikipedia , last modified July 11, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016,  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shakey_the_robot.
156  Edward A. Feigenbaum and Bruce G. Buchanan, “DENDRAL and Meta-DENDRAL:  
Roots of  Knowledge Systems and Expert System Applications,” Artificial Intelligence 59, no. 1-2 
(1993), 233–240.
157  John Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press, 1985).
158  Rodney A. Brooks, “Elephants Don’t Play Chess,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6, no. 1-2 
(June 1990): 3–15.Although the separation 
of AI into sub-fields 
has enabled deep 
technical progress along 
several different fronts, 
synthesizing intelligence 
at any reasonable scale 
invariably requires many 
different ideas to be 
integrated.

==== Page 52 ====
52In summary , following is a list of  some of  the traditional sub-areas of  AI. As described 
in Section II, some of  them are currently “hotter” than others for various reasons. 
But that is neither to minimize the historical importance of  the others, nor to say that 
they may not re-emerge as hot areas in the future.
• Search and Planning deal with reasoning about goal-directed behavior. Search 
plays a key role, for example, in chess-playing programs such as Deep Blue, in 
deciding which move (behavior) will ultimately lead to a win (goal).
• The area of  Knowledge Representation and Reasoning involves processing 
information (typically when in large amounts) into a structured form that can 
be queried more reliably and efficiently . IBM’s Watson program, which beat 
human contenders to win the Jeopardy challenge in 2011, was largely based on 
an efficient scheme for organizing, indexing, and retrieving large amounts of  
information gathered from various sources.159
• Machine Learning is a paradigm that enables systems to automatically improve 
their performance at a task by observing relevant data. Indeed, machine 
learning has been the key contributor to the AI surge in the past few decades, 
ranging from search and product recommendation engines, to systems for 
speech recognition, fraud detection, image understanding, and countless other 
tasks that once relied on human skill and judgment. The automation of  these 
tasks has enabled the scaling up of  services such as e-commerce.
• As more and more intelligent systems get built, a natural question to consider 
is how such systems will interact with each other. The field of  Multi-Agent 
Systems considers this question, which is becoming increasingly important in 
on-line marketplaces and transportation systems.
• From its early days, AI has taken up the design and construction of  systems that 
are embodied in the real world. The area of  Robotics investigates fundamental 
aspects of  sensing and acting—and especially their integration—that enable 
a robot to behave effectively . Since robots and other computer systems share 
the living world with human beings, the specialized subject of  Human Robot 
Interaction has also become prominent in recent decades.
• Machine perception has always played a central role in AI, partly in developing 
robotics, but also as a completely independent area of  study . The most commonly 
studied perception modalities are Computer Vision and Natural Language 
Processing, each of  which is attended to by large and vibrant communities.
• Several other focus areas within AI today are consequences of  the growth of  the  
Internet. Social Network Analysis investigates the effect of  neighborhood relations 
in influencing the behavior of  individuals and communities. Crowdsourcing is 
yet another innovative problem-solving technique, which relies on harnessing 
human intelligence (typically from thousands of  humans) to solve hard 
computational problems.
Although the separation of  AI into sub-fields has enabled deep technical progress 
along several different fronts, synthesizing intelligence at any reasonable scale invariably 
requires many different ideas to be integrated. For example, the AlphaGo program160 161 
that recently defeated the current human champion at the game of  Go used multiple 
machine learning algorithms for training itself, and also used a sophisticated search 
procedure while playing the game.
159  David A. Ferrucci, “Introduction to ‘This is Watson,’” IBM Journal of  Research and Development , 
56, no. 3-4 (2012): 1.
160  David Silver et al., “Mastering the Game of  Go with Deep Neural Networks and Tree Search.”
161  Steven Borowiec and Tracey Lien, “ AlphaGo beats human Go champ in milestone for 
artificial intelligence,” Los Angeles Times , March 12, 2016, accessed August 1, 2016, http://www.
latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-korea-alphago-20160312-story.html .

