==== Page 1 ====
1
Attention-based Convolutional Neural Network
for Weakly Labeled Human Activities Recognition
with Wearable Sensors
Kun Wang, Jun He, and Lei Zhang
Abstract —Unlike images or videos data which can be easily
labeled by human being, sensor data annotation is a time-
consuming process. However, traditional methods of human
activity recognition require a large amount of such strictly labeled
data for training classiﬁers. In this paper, we present an attention-
based convolutional neural network for human recognition from
weakly labeled data. The proposed attention model can focus
on labeled activity among a long sequence of sensor data, and
while ﬁlter out a large amount of background noise signals. In
experiment on the weakly labeled dataset, we show that our
attention model outperforms classical deep learning methods
in accuracy. Besides, we determine the speciﬁc locations of
the labeled activity in a long sequence of weakly labeled data
by converting the compatibility score which is generated from
attention model to compatibility density. Our method greatly
facilitates the process of sensor data annotation, and makes data
collection more easy.
Index Terms —Human activity recognition, attention-based
convolutional neural network, compatibility density, weakly su-
pervised learning, wearable sensor data.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN the recent years, the wide diffusion of mobile devices has
made human activity recognition(HAR) based on wearable
sensors[1] become a new research point in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence and pattern recognition[2][3], and there are pre-
vailing applications which beneﬁt from HAR include sports
activity detection[4], smart homes[5] and health support[6],
et al. Those sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes and
magnetometers[7], which are embedded on mobile devices,
can generate time-series data for HAR. But unlike videos or
images which can be smoothly annotated by humans, it is
laborious to accurately segment a speciﬁc type of activity from
a long sequence of sensor data. Nevertheless, it is feasible for
data collector to identify whether a labeled activity takes place
in a long recorded sensor data. This kind of data is correspond-
ing to the weakly labeled sensor data. Consequently, the new
The work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61203237 and the Industry-Academia Cooperation
Innovation Fund Projection of Jiangsu Province under Grant BY2016001-
02, and in part by the Foundation of Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation
and Location-based Services, Shanghai, under Grant 20040. (Corresponding
author: Lei Zhang.)
Kun Wang and Lei Zhang are with School of Electrical and Automation
Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210023, China (e-mail:
iskenn7@gmal.com, leizhang@njnu.edu.cn).
Jun He is with the School of Electronic and Information Engineer-
ing,Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing,
210044, China (e-mail: jhe@nuist.edu.cn).
Kun Wang and Jun He contribute equally to the article.challenge is whether we can exploit the weakly labeled sensor
data to accurately predict activities and determine the exact
location of the labeled activity.
Traditional methods, which have been developed to facilitate
human activity recognition, are inside the range of supervised
learning. For instance, the pervious methods include SVM[8]
and Random Forest[9], which require to extract handcrafted
features as the inputs of classiﬁers. Later, deep learning, and
in particular, convolutional neural networks, has been diffusely
used in the ﬁeld of HAR. Although deep learning models have
excellent performance in HAR, there are some challenges need
to be addressed, the main one of which is the need for labeled
datasets for ground truth annotation[10].
Recently, an end-to-end-trainable attention module for con-
volutional neural network architectures built for image classi-
ﬁcation has been proposed[11]. Inspired by that, we propose
a new weakly supervised learning method of human activity
recognition, which can be trained by weakly labeled sensor
data and determine the location of the labeled activity.
In this paper, we exploit the attention-based convolutional
neural network model to recognize activities from sensor data
with weak labels. The dataset only obtains the information
about what activity occurred in a sequence of sensor data
without knowing the speciﬁc time of this activity. Besides,
the precise locations of the speciﬁc labeled activity can be
determined by utilizing the mechanism of attention.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II summarizes related work of human activity recognition. In
section III, we propose our attention model for HAR. Section
IV presents and examines the experimental results. In section
V , we draw out our conclusion.
II. R ELATED WORKS
The pervious methods used to extract features manually. For
example, Bao and Intille[12] corroborated that accelerometer
sensor data is appropriate for activities recognition. They
extracted handcrafted features (mean, energy, frequency and
domain entropy) from accelerometer data and then fed these
features into different classiﬁers: decision table[13], K-nearest
neighbor(KNN)[14], decision tree[15], and Nave Bayes[13].
Kwapisz et al.[16] also manually extracted features (i.e. av-
erage and standard deviation) from the accelerometer sensor
of smartphones, and recognized six different activities us-
ing classiﬁers such as decision trees(J48), multilayer percep-
tions(MLP), and logistic regression. However, these methodsarXiv:1903.10909v2  [cs.LG]  27 Mar 2019

==== Page 2 ====
2
Fig. 1. The architecture of our model
based on feature engineering[17] had low performance in
distinguishing similar activities such as walking upstairs and
walking downstairs[18]. Besides, it is difﬁcult in both choosing
suitable features and extracting features from sensor data
manually.
Therefore, another increasing line of research in human
activity recognition based on wearable sensors aims at avoid-
ing the design of handcrafted features, operation that requires
human work and expert knowledge[19], these works employ
rapid developing deep learning[20], especially convolutional
neural networks(ConvNet), to learn the features and the clas-
siﬁer simultaneously[19]. For example, Chen and Xue[21]
fed raw signal into a sophisticated ConvNet, which had an
architecture composed of three convolutional layers and three
max-pooling layers. Furthermore, Jiang and Yin[22] converted
the raw sensor signal into 2D signal image by utilizing the
techniques of a speciﬁc permutation algorithm and discrete
cosine transformation(DCT), then fed the 2D signal image into
a two layer 2D ConvNet to classify this signal image equaling
to the desired activity recognition. Ordez et al.[23] proposed an
architecture comprised of convolutional and LSTM recurrent
units(DeepConvLSTM), which outperforms CNN. However,
these methods all belong to supervised learning[24], that is to
say that all methods require massive data with perfect ground-
truth for training.
III. M ODEL
The aim of our model is to recognize and locate human
activity in weakly labeled sensor data. The model consists
of fundamental CNN pipelines and attention submodule, as
the Fig. 1 shows. The advantage of our attention mechanisms
is that it can identify salient activity data areas and enhance
their inﬂuence, while likewise suppressing the irrelevant and
potentially confusing information in other activity data areas.
Hence, it is very applicable to weakly supervised learning.
The model is able to focus on labeled activity among a long
sequence of sensor data, and while ﬁlter out a large amount of
background noise signals. Besides, we propose a novel method
to convert compatibility score to compatibility density which is
used for locating, because the structure of the weakly labeled
sensor data is quite different from the image data.
A. Attention Submodule
The attention method mainly focuses on implementing
a compatibility computation between local feature vectorsextracted at intermediate layers in the CNN pipeline and
the global feature vector that used to be fed into the linear
classiﬁcation layers at the end of the pipeline[11], which is
illustrated in Fig. 1. We denote by Ls=fls
1; ls
2; ; ls
ngthe
set of feature vectors extracted at a given convolutional layer
s2f1;2; ; Sg, where ls
iis the i thfeature vector of n total
spatial locations in the local feature vector Ls. The global
feature vectors Ggenerated by input data that passes through
entire CNN pipelines, which used to be fed into ﬁnal fully
connected layers to produce the results of classiﬁcation, now
are combined with local feature vectors Lsby a compatibility
function C. The compatibility function C can be deﬁned in
various ways[25][26], we can concatenate the Gandls
iby
an addition operation and then use a dot product between a
weight vector uandls
i+G:
cs
i=hu; ls
i+Gi; i2f1; ; ng (1)
where cs
iis the compatibility score and the weight vector u
here can play a role in learning the universal set of features
relevant to the activity categories in the sensor dataset. In
addition, we can also use the dot product between Gandls
i
to weigh up their compatibility:
cs
i=hls
i; Gi; i2f1; ; ng (2)
After the computing process, we have a set of compatibility
score C(Ls; G) =fcs
1; cs
1; ; cs
ng, which are then normalized to
As=fas
1; as
2; ; as
ngby a softmax function:
as
i=exp(cs
i)Pn
jexp(cs
j)(3)
or a tanh function:
as
i=exp(cs
i) exp( cs
i)
exp(cs
i) + exp( cs
i)(4)
The normalized compatibility scores Asare used to produce
a single vector gsfor each layer sby element-wise weighted
averaging:
gs=nX
i=1as
ils
i (5)
Most crucially, the global feature descriptor Gof the input
data now can be replaced by the gs. The new global vectors
gsare concatenated into a single vector g=
g1; g2; ; gs
and
then fed as input to the linear classiﬁcation step.
B. Fundamental CNN
The fundamental model that the attention submodules based
on is a deep CNN, which comprises convolutional, pooling and
fully-connected layers. As depicted in Fig. 1, the shorthand
description is: C(32) C(64) C(128) P C(128) 
P C(128) P FC(128) softmax , where C(Ls)
denotes a convolutional layer swithLsfeature maps, Pa
max pooling layer, FC(n)a fully connected layer with n
units and softmax a softmax classiﬁer. Besides, the output of
each layer is transformed using a ReLU activation function.
The aim that there is no pooling layer following the ﬁrst two

==== Page 3 ====
3
convolutional layer is to ensure that the local feature maps
extracted from three convolutional layers C(128) which are
utilized for estimating attention have a higher resolution. We
deliberately design the same dimensionality between the local
features Lsand the global features G(both are 128) in order to
avoid mapping the different dimensionality of feature vectors
to the same one which can cause extra computational cost.
C. Location Function
For an original CNN architecture, a global feature descrip-
torGusually is computed from the input data and passed
through a fully connected layer to output class prediction
probabilities. In order to render the classes linearly separable
from one another, the Gmust be expressed by mapping the
input into a high-dimensional space where salient higher-order
data concepts are represented by different dimensions. The
attention method put the ﬁlters at the earlier stage in the CNN
pipeline to learn similar mappings, which is compatible with
the one that outputs Gin the original architecture[11]. Due to
the attention mechanism of our model, the compatibility score
C(Ls; G)should be high if and only if the correspond patch
contains parts of the dominant data category. That is to say, for
weakly labeled sensor data, the areas with high compatibility
score are inclined to be the locations where the labeled activity
occurs, while the compatibility scores of those areas where
background activity takes place are low. Taking advantage of
this notion, we can not only get a good recognition results,
but also determine the speciﬁc location of the labeled activity
in a long sequence of weakly labeled data.
Assume that we have a set of compatibility score
C(Ls; G) =fcs
1; cs
2; ; cs
ng, where cs
iis the speciﬁc compat-
ibility score of the i thspatial location of ntotal spatial
locations in the layer s. Then a varied width slide window is
used to sum up the score within the section at each location
of the compatibility score:
si=8
>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>:i+w
2P
j=1cs
jfori <w
2
i+w
2P
j=i w
2cs
jforw
2in w
2
nP
j=i w
2cs
jfori > n w
2(6)
where the location score siis corresponding to the density of
the compatibility score around the spatial location i, the range
of this calculation is equal to the slide window width which is
varied as the spatial location i changes (the maximum is w).
The total spatial location nis equal to the length of the set
of compatibility score C(Ls; G). Fig. 2 illustrates the above
operation process and now we have a set of compatibility
density D=fd1; d2; ; dng. The peak points of compatibility
density curve denote that these points are most likely where
the labeled activity happen. Since activities cannot take place
at just one point but a section of data, the areas around peak
points are also regarded as the section of the labeled activity.
Besides, the coverage of these areas should be deﬁned by the
width of slide window. For example, if spatial location iis the
Fig. 2. Process of conversion from compatibility score to compatibility density
peak point of the compatibility density Dcurve, the section
[i w
2; i+w
2]is considered to be the activity area.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
The experiments are composed of three parts. Firstly, we
validate whether our attention model has the capacity to imple-
ment traditional human activity recognition. We chose to use
the public dataset Human Activity Recognition Using Smart-
phones Dataset (UCI HAR Dataset). Secondly, we explore the
performance of weakly supervised human activity recognition
with the weakly labeled sensor dataset. Both types of above
experiments used a simple CNN model and the DeepConvL-
STM model proposed in [23] as the baseline models. Among
them, the CNN baseline model consists of four convolutional
layers with 64 convolution ﬁlters and two fully connected
layers with 128 units, and then outputs the classiﬁcation
result by the Softmax layer. We use the default parameter
setting for DeepConvLSTM according to [23]. Thirdly, we
investigate the location performance of the attention model.
The experiments are performed on a workstation with CPU
AMD Ryzen 5, 8 GB memory, and a NVIDIA GPU 1050
with 5GB memory. All algorithm is implemented in Python
by using the machine learning framework TensorFlow. In the
experiments, the number of epoch was set to 100 and Adam
optimization method was used to train our model. The learning
rate was set to 0.001 and the input batch size was 50.
We refer to the network Net with attention at the last level
asNet-att , at the last two levels as Net-att2 , and at the last
three levels as Net-att3 . We use dotto denote the operation of
the dot product for matching the local and global features and
usepcto denote the operation of parametrized compatibility.
We denote by smthe utilization of softmax normalization and
bytanh the utilization of tanh normalization.
A. Dataset
1) UCI HAR Dataset [27]: This dataset consists of 12 daily
activities, namely 3 static activities (standing, sitting, lying), 3
dynamic activities (walking, going upstairs, going downstairs),
and the switch of 3 static activities (standing-sitting, sitting-
standing, standing-lying, lying-sitting, standing-lying, lying-
standing). The data are recorded from a Samsung Galaxy
smartphone, which collected three-axial linear acceleration and
three-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50 Hz using
its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope. The collectors

==== Page 4 ====
4
Fig. 3. Weakly labeled sample data, the labeled activity is ”going upstairs”
and the background activity is ”walking”
TABLE I
WEAKLY LABELED DATASET STATISTICS
Activity Label Number
going upstairs 0 20194
going downstairs 1 18611
jumping 2 14088
jogging 3 23264
total - 76157
utilized the video-recorded to label the data manually, and
then divided the data into two sets randomly, where 70% was
selected to generate the training data and 30% the test data.
The sensor data was then pre-processed by applying a noise
ﬁlter and then sampled in a ﬁxed width sliding window of 2.56
seconds and 50% overlap (window width is 128). We utilize
six activities of this dataset including three static and three
dynamic activities for our experiments.
2) Weakly Labeled Dataset : The dataset includes ﬁve kinds
of activities:walking, jogging, jumping, going upstairs and
going downstairs. The need to pay attention to is that walking
is the background activity for four other kinds, as illustrated in
the Fig. 3. This dataset is collected from 3-axis acceleration
of iPhone, which was placed in 7 participants right trouser
pocket. The smartphone accelerometer has a sampling rate of
50Hz. We divide raw data by distinguishing different partici-
pants, then use a ﬁxed width sliding window of 40.96 seconds
(window width is 2048) to sample the data. Finally, this
collected weakly labeled dataset consists of 76,157 sequences
of data, 70% of which is used for training, 10% for validating,
and 20% for testing. The statistics of different activity samples
are shown in Table I.
B. Experiments on UCI HAR Dataset
We compared the experimental results of our attention
model, the fundamental CNN model, and two classical deep
learning models[23] on the UCI HAR Dataset in the metrics of
classiﬁcation accuracy. The computational cost that is deﬁned
as the average number of predicted sequences per second is
used to evaluate the efﬁciency. The results are shown in Table
II. On this dataset, all of the models perform comparably
well, which indicates that our model also performs well on
traditional supervised training tasks. Regarding the efﬁciency,
our approach can predict more than 5000 sequences per second
which is relate slow than CNN but comfortably ahead of the
DeepConvLSTM model.TABLE II
EXPERIMENT ON UCI HAR D ATASET
Model Accuracy Efﬁciency
-Architectures without attention-
The fundamental CNN 93.16% 8046 seqs/s
CNN[23] 93.21% 8745 seqs/s
DeepConvLSTM[23] 93.54% 580 seqs/s
-Architectures with attention-
Net-att2-dot-sm 92.27% 6573 seqs/s
Net-att-pc-tanh 93.21% 6280 seqs/s
Net-att2-pc-tanh 93.41% 5953 seqs/s
Net-att3-pc-tanh 92.70% 5517 seqs/s
C. Experiments on Weakly Labeled Dataset
We compare our model to the fundamental CNN model to
study whether our methods can better recognize activities from
weakly labeled dataset. Besides, we use two classical deep
learning models[23] as baseline model. The proposed attention
model produce visible performance improvement over the
fundamental model under certain conditions, as shown in Table
III. Speciﬁcally, the Net-att3-pc-tanh model achieves a 3.65%,
4.21% and 3.79% improvement over the fundamental CNN
model, the classical CNN model and the DeepConvLSTM
model for weakly labeled data recognition. As is evident from
Fig. 4, the utilization of attention mechanism facilitates the
model to focus on the areas of labeled activity supposed to
be extracted features while ignoring the background activity
information. In terms of efﬁciency, compared with the classical
CNN model, our model can achieve greater performance
without increasing unduly computational burden.
TABLE III
EXPERIMENT ON WEAKLY LABELED DATASET
Model Accuracy Efﬁciency
-Architectures without attention-
The fundamental CNN 90.18% 1145 seqs/s
CNN[23] 89.62% 1042 seqs/s
DeepConvLSTM[23] 90.04% 174 seqs/s
-Architectures with attention-
Net-att3-dot-sm 84.15% 799 seqs/s
Net-att3-dot-tanh 91.58% 801 seqs/s
Net-att3-pc-sm 85.27% 773 seqs/s
Net-att-pc-tanh 92.84% 976 seqs/s
Net-att2-pc-tanh 93.55% 895 seqs/s
Net-att3-pc-tanh 93.83% 775 seqs/s
In contrast to the small difference in recognition perfor-
mance among the attention models on UCI HAR dataset,
that the performance on weakly labeled dataset is relatively
high. The combination of the dot product operation and the
softmax normalization is implemented on the weakly labeled
dataset that consist of long sequences data generates the
abnormal compatibility score. As Fig. 4(b) shows,there are
only a few points having excessively effective value, which

==== Page 5 ====
5
(a) Att3-pc-tanh
(b) Att3-dot-sm
Fig. 4. Illustration of the weakly sensor data sample and the generated
compatibility score
results in the feature vectors produced by combining the local
feature vectors and the defective compatibility score that lack
crucial information beside of these valid points. We address the
above problem by employing Att-pc-tanh architecture, where
the operation of parametrized compatibility can generate a
set of compatibility scores with relatively low disparity and
meanwhile the compatibility scores are not jointly normalized
by the softmax operation but are normalized independently
using pointwise tanh function.
D. Location Experiments
We conduct the location experiment using the proposed
attention Net-att3-pc-tanh model on the weakly labeled data
sequences which have manually labeled ground truth by
matching the video and the sensor data. Converting the com-
patibility score to the compatibility density provides more
clarity in determining the locations of labeled activity, because
compared with the peak points of the compatibility score
curve, that of the compatibility density curve concentrate on
the points where the labeled activity happen more intensively.
We mark the locations by utilizing windows whose width are
equal to that of the slide window used for conversion of scores.
In our experiment, the width of the slide window is set to
128. The center of these windows are determined by the local
maximum points of the compatibility density curve instead
of the compatibility score. The location windows depend
on compatibility density locate within the margin of labeled
activity as expected, while another one cross the boundary, as
is illustrated between Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b).
V. C ONCLUSION
We study the attention-based convolutional neural network
for weakly labeled human activities recognition with wear-
(a) Labeled activity location based on compatibility density
(b) Labeled activity location based on compatibility score
Fig. 5. Comparison of the location performance between the compatibility
density and the compatibility score
able sensors. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed attention model is comparable with the classical
methods of human activity recognition on traditional UCI
HAR Dataset. Crucially, our model can achieve signiﬁcant
accuracy improvement on the weakly labeled dataset, com-
pared to the classical deep learning models. We discuss how
attention model achieves higher accuracy and why the Att-pc-
tanh architecture perform well than the Att-dot-sm .
Usually, it is hard for data recorder to keep a ﬁxed activity,
and the weakly labeled sensor data inevitably occurs in the
data collection process. Our attention-based CNN method can
greatly facilitate the data collection process based on wearable
sensor data. The proposed model can utilize the weakly labeled
data to avoid the time-consuming process of traditional data
annotation, and do not increase unduly computational cost
compared to the classical CNN model. Taking advantage of
the mechanism of attention, we utilize the compatibility score
by converting it to compatibility density to determine the
speciﬁc location of the labeled activity in a long weakly
labeled data sequence. In the future, we will utilize the location
function of our model to collect speciﬁc segments extracted
from the weakly labeled dataset as a dataset for human activity
recognition, and then evaluate the performance.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Pei, R. Guinness, R. Chen, J. Liu, H. Kuusniemi, Y . Chen, L. Chen,
and J. Kaistinen, “Human behavior cognition using smartphone sensors,”
Sensors , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1402–1424, 2013.

==== Page 6 ====
6
[2] F. Foerster, M. Smeja, and J. Fahrenberg, “Detection of posture and
motion by accelerometry: a validation study in ambulatory monitoring,”
Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 571–583, 1999.
[3] A. Mannini and A. M. Sabatini, “Machine learning methods for classi-
fying human physical activity from on-body accelerometers,” Sensors ,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1154–1175, 2010.
[4] J. Yang, M. N. Nguyen, P. P. San, X. L. Li, and S. Krishnaswamy, “Deep
convolutional neural networks on multichannel time series for human
activity recognition,” in Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2015.
[5] P. Rashidi and D. J. Cook, “Keeping the resident in the loop: Adapting
the smart home to the user.” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part A , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 949–959, 2009.
[6] T. Magherini, A. Fantechi, C. D. Nugent, and E. Vicario, “Using
temporal logic and model checking in automated recognition of human
activities for ambient-assisted living,” IEEE Transactions on Human-
Machine Systems , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 509–521, 2013.
[7] M. Cornacchia, K. Ozcan, Y . Zheng, and S. Velipasalar, “A survey
on activity detection and classiﬁcation using wearable sensors,” IEEE
Sensors Journal , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 386–403, 2017.
[8] D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. Parra, and J. L. Reyes-Ortiz, “Human
activity recognition on smartphones using a multiclass hardware-friendly
support vector machine,” in International workshop on ambient assisted
living . Springer, 2012, pp. 216–223.
[9] T. Peterek, M. Penhaker, P. Gajdo ˇs, and P. Dohn ´alek, “Comparison of
classiﬁcation algorithms for physical activity recognition,” in Innova-
tions in bio-inspired computing and applications . Springer, 2014, pp.
123–131.
[10] F. Cruciani, I. Cleland, C. Nugent, P. McCullagh, K. Synnes, and
J. Hallberg, “Automatic annotation for human activity recognition in
free living using a smartphone,” Sensors , vol. 18, no. 7, p. 2203, 2018.
[11] S. Jetley, N. A. Lord, N. Lee, and P. H. Torr, “Learn to pay attention,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02391 , 2018.
[12] L. Bao and S. S. Intille, “Activity recognition from user-annotated
acceleration data,” in International conference on pervasive computing .
Springer, 2004, pp. 1–17.
[13] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, L. E. Trigg, M. A. Hall, G. Holmes, and S. J.
Cunningham, “Weka: Practical machine learning tools and techniques
with java implementations,” 1999.
[14] S. Pirttikangas, K. Fujinami, and T. Nakajima, “Feature selection and
activity recognition from wearable sensors,” in International symposium
on ubiquitious computing systems . Springer, 2006, pp. 516–527.
[15] L. Todorovski and S. D ˇzeroski, “Combining classiﬁers with meta
decision trees,” Machine learning , vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 223–249, 2003.
[16] J. R. Kwapisz, G. M. Weiss, and S. A. Moore, “Activity recognition us-
ing cell phone accelerometers,” ACM SigKDD Explorations Newsletter ,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 74–82, 2011.
[17] T.-P. Kao, C.-W. Lin, and J.-S. Wang, “Development of a portable activ-
ity detector for daily activity recognition,” in 2009 IEEE International
Symposium on Industrial Electronics . IEEE, 2009, pp. 115–120.
[18] C. A. Ronao and S.-B. Cho, “Deep convolutional neural networks for
human activity recognition with smartphone sensors,” in International
Conference on Neural Information Processing . Springer, 2015, pp.
46–53.
[19] A. Jordao, A. C. Nazare Jr, J. Sena, and W. R. Schwartz, “Human activity
recognition based on wearable sensor data: A standardization of the
state-of-the-art,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05226 , 2018.
[20] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature , vol. 521,
no. 7553, p. 436, 2015.
[21] Y . Chen and Y . Xue, “A deep learning approach to human activity
recognition based on single accelerometer,” in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics . IEEE, 2015, pp. 1488–
1492.
[22] W. Jiang and Z. Yin, “Human activity recognition using wearable sensors
by deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
international conference on Multimedia . Acm, 2015, pp. 1307–1310.
[23] F. Ord ´o˜nez and D. Roggen, “Deep convolutional and lstm recurrent
neural networks for multimodal wearable activity recognition,” Sensors ,
vol. 16, no. 1, p. 115, 2016.
[24] M. Shoaib, S. Bosch, O. Incel, H. Scholten, and P. Havinga, “A survey
of online activity recognition using mobile phones,” Sensors , vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 2059–2085, 2015.
[25] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 ,
2014.[26] K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. Courville, R. Salakhudinov, R. Zemel,
and Y . Bengio, “Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation
with visual attention,” in International conference on machine learning ,
2015, pp. 2048–2057.
[27] D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. Parra, and J. L. Reyes-Ortiz, “A public
domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones.” in
Esann , 2013.

