==== Page 1 ====
1 
 Autonomous d riving, the built environment  
and policy implications  
 
Eva Fraedrich * 
Institute of Transport Research  
German Aerospace Center  (DLR)  
e-mail: eva.fraedrich@dlr.de  
 
Dirk Heinrichs  
Institute of Transport  Research  
German Aerospace Center (DLR)  
and 
Technische Universität Berlin  
e-mail:  dirk.heinrichs @dlr.de   
 
Francisco J. Bahamonde -Birke  
Institute of Transport Research  
German Aerospace Center (DLR)  
and 
Technische  Universität Berlin  
e-mail: francisco.bahamondebirke@dlr.de   
 
Rita Cyganski  
Institute of Transport Research  
German Aerospace Center (DLR)  
e-mail: rita.cyganski@dlr.de  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

==== Page 2 ====
2 
 ABSTRACT  
This article seeks to clarify how autonomous vehicles (AV)  could affect  urban planning 
and the built environment, to what extent these  effects  are compatible with municipalities’ 
existing objectives, and  what lessons can be drawn from that. The paper combines a 
systematic review of the literature , a quantitative online survey and qualitative interviews 
with representatives from urban transport planning authorities in Germany . Four concrete 
‘use cases ’ were  applied to structure the survey . 
Results show that r espondents are rather skeptical about the compatibility of AV with 
existing transport and urban planning objectives, above all to strengthen  non-motorized 
transportation and  to promote public transportat ion. Particularly, automating private 
motorized travel appears not to match  municipal planning perspectives. On the contrary, 
transport planners think that shared autonomous vehicles as a complement  to public 
transport systems are more appropriate to support  urban development strategies.  Their 
most prominent concern with respect to AV is  the expectation that car travel will increase 
with AV, propagating problems like congestion and negative environmental effects. 
However, survey respondents  expect th at effects differ quite strongly depending on how 
AV will occur.  
As a lesson, the study suggests that different AV  use cases should receive specific attention 
to explore their potentials and challenges. The study likewise suggests  to, given the 
discrepancy between the objectives of urban transport planning  and federal government‘s  
policy  focus , consider consolidating  the communal  strategic positions  on research and 
develop ment priorities . The results indicate a demand for studies that demonstrate  how AV 
can respond to more fundamental challenges and goals that city planner ’s face.  Given the 
wide range of potential implications , the study suggests to broaden the debate from its 
present primary  focus on the transport planning domain to city planning  and development .  
Keywords: autonomous driving, systemic analysis, transportation planning, transportation 
policy, built environment  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Autonomous driving has started to receive attention not only by the research community 
but also by planning practitioners and policy makers concerned with transport and urban 
planning . There seems to be  great concern and perhaps even greater uncertainty ab out how 
autonomous vehicles in cities may possibly affect a core domain of city planning: the 
interaction of the transport system with land use and the built environment.  
Visions of integrating autonomous vehicles into the urban transport system so far 
essentially refer to the development of the vehicle technology itself, the effects on traffic 
flow and potential benefits with respect to safety, congestion or emissions. Effects on 
parking as a result that autonomous vehicles ( AV) can park themselves or rema in in the 
transportation network while awaiting their next passenger have been modelled and 
showed significant impact on inner city street space usage (e.g. Pavone , 2016, Fagnant and 
Kockelman , 2015 ; Brownell and Kornhauser , 2014). Only a few studies or papers have 
explored the effects on land use (Anderson et al. , 2016, Chapin et al. , 2016 ; Heinrichs , 
2016 ; Heinrichs and Cyganski , 2015 ; Litman , 2015), primarily in a U.S. context. They 

==== Page 3 ====
3 
 identify possible impacts on road and mo vement space itself such as  adjustments in lane 
widths and layouts, removal of signage or the need for drop -off and pick -up areas. The 
studies highlight redevelopment opportunities in urban areas dominated by surface parking 
and wide roadways. And they ske tch that autonomous driving may potentially alter the 
trade -offs that household’s  make between choosing location and daily mobility and thus 
may take an effect on long term land use patterns.  
However, the debate is so far led by the question “about how th e built environment might 
need to adapt over time to accommodate AV“ (Chapin et al. , 2016) rather than to address 
uncertainties about the future in a more proactive sense. While this does not mean that 
uncertainty about the future would be dissolved for good, such a proactive approach could 
be the basis to “develop business models and pol icy paths that are flexible and resilient” to 
uncertainties (Lyons , 2016). With respect to autonomous driving and its relation to the 
built environment, dealing with this uncertainty first of all requires a common and 
transparent understanding about plausi ble use cases and scenarios (including their 
development pathways) of the technology and its implications (Heinrichs , 2016 ; Fraedrich 
et al. , 2015). The specific effects on the built environment and – what might be of even 
greater importance in this regard  – how this could inform and support  urban policy 
interventions and planning have not been sufficiently explored so far.  
This paper  responds to these needs and questions. It seeks to clarify (1)  the state of 
knowledge about the likely effects of autonomous driving on the built environment, (2)  
whether autonomous driving appears to be ‘desirable’ i.e. compatible with existing 
frameworks from a planning perspective, and  (3), how, to what extent and with what 
direction urban transport  and city planni ng will need deal with these effects .  
To address these questions, the paper combines a systematic review of the state -of the art 
literature , a quantitative online survey and  qualitative intervi ews with representatives from  
transport  planning authorities  in Germany . The results will help planning actors and 
institutions to  get a clearer picture on the p otentials and constraints of AV in urban areas, 
and how to  deal with implications of autonomous driving in the context of urban 
environments. The paper  will pinpoint policy areas that may require priority attention . It 
goes beyond current knowledge (1) by differentiating impacts of autonomous driving on 
the built environment depending on use cases, thereby clarifying specific potentials and 
challenges, and ( 2) by providing 'near time' urban planning policy guidance for a yet 
distant uncertain development.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a state -of-the-art literature 
review  on the impacts of AV on the built environment. Section 3 outlines the methodology. 
It defines a set of concrete use cases that served as the basis for the online survey , provides 
information on the structure and respondents of the online questionnaire , and explains the 
focus of the qualitative follow -up interviews.  Section 4 presents the empirical data 
gathered in the online survey (4.1) and the qualitative interviews (4.2). Section 5 discusses 
the findings with respect to the questions outlined above , summarizes  the results a nd gives 
a conclusion.  

==== Page 4 ====
4 
 2. Autonomous driving and its possible implications on 
the built environment : a literature review  
Mobility and the built environment  are closely connected  with each other . Urban form and 
the distribution of different land uses  play an important role on mobility decisions, and , to 
a considerable degree, dictate  what forms of transport shape the transport systems  (Cervero 
and Kockelman, 1997) . Compact city form s with high density and mixed use s provide 
good preconditions for short tri ps and efficien t public transportation, promoting also  
walking and cycling, and often making daily car use unnecessary. Sprawling and  sparsely 
populated urban structures , on the other hand, discourage non -motorized travel . In turn, the 
availability and use  of designated transport modes strongly influences land use patterns, 
their densities  and the necessary infrastructures. The residential suburbanization of the 
latter half of last century was thus , to a great extent , encouraged by car availability and the 
expansion of the transport infrastructure for motorized passenger transport (Apel, 2003).   
Fully automated driving will entail a completely new transport system, which will not only 
bring new possibilities and new ty pes of transport provision, but is also likely to strongly 
interact with the built environment  and, therefore, touch the domain of city planning . This 
connection is so far not well -understood. Visions of autonomous  driving and its integration 
in urban area s primarily concentrate on the development of  the technology and the direct 
effects of alternative tr ansport systems on traffic flow, safety, resulting emissions, among 
many others (Heinrichs , 2015 ; Fagnant and Kockelman 2015; for instance ). Nevertheless, 
only a few existing studies investigate  the link between AV and urban form, land use, 
urban infrastructures and the implications for city planning  (see Milakis et al., 2017a (for 
an explorative literature review) . These studies, primarily conducted in the form of 
consulting experts , indicate several areas where AV are likely to influence  the built 
environment . Among the key themes are (1)  changes in the required road space ( right -of-
ways and travel lanes ) and infrastructures (signage, etc.), (2) effe cts on the location, form, 
and amount of parking, (3) interactions with the mobility  of cyclists and pedestrians, (4) 
opportu nities for redevelopment of land -use, and (5) land -use changes and residential 
relocation.  
Some studies argue that AV will require city and transport planners to rethink the design 
and dimensions of road space and infrastructure. Based on a visioning workshop with 
urban planners, Chapin et al . (2016) identify a number of aspects in this regard. Firstly, AV 
may lead to  changes in the required road space, in particular affecting right -of-ways and 
travel lanes and the design intersections. Secondly , AV are likely to affect access time,  as 
they would make it possible that users  be picked up and dropped off very close to their 
origins and destinations. Thirdly, AV may also lead to a substantial diminution of the 
requirements for signage and signalization, as this information could be provided wireless 
in real -time (Chapin et al., 2016) . Along these lines, some authors postul ate, that 
intersections would no longer require traffic lights or stop signs, relying instead on 
computer programs that communicate directly with the vehicles on the road (Begg, 2016) 
and/or on digital signage, e.g. in the form of high quality digital maps  (Wagner et al., 
2014). On the basis of expert interviews on the policy implication of AV, Wagner et al. 
(2014) confirm the effect on roadway infrastructure, but raise doubts about infrastructure 
adapting rapidly enough to keep pace with  the development of  AV.  

==== Page 5 ====
5 
 Nevertheless, and despite the aforementioned possibilities, AV will still have to interact 
with pedestrians and cyclist. Thus, to a greater or lesser extent, signage will still be 
required, reducing the potential impact of the changes in this regard.  Changes in signage 
are not expected to be the main implication of the interaction among automated motorized 
traffic and non-motorized transportation . Alessandrini  et al. (2013) argue that AV will have 
positive effects in terms of road safety, as well as, of confidence of cyclist and pedestrians, 
by reducing intimidation of the latter in the knowledge that vehicles are being driven 
correctly. Thus, this “freedom fro m fear” should certainly improve non -motorized travel. 
On the contrary, the increased number  of pick-up / drop-off areas and free flow 
intersections could hinder pedestrian and bicycle  travel  (Chapin et al., 2016) .  
Other s tudies point out the possible eff ect on location, form, and amount of parking . AV 
technology promises vehicles that can drop riders off and park themselves, making the 
need for nearby parking much less impor tant for a large number of land -uses. In this 
context, while some  studies address  park efficiency gains (via autonomous parking) in 
parking houses  (e.g. Kummerle et a l., 2009; Mitchell et al., 2010;  Heinrichs, 2015 ; 
Heinrichs and Cyga nski, 2015; Li and Shao, 2015), it is unclear whether these efficiency 
gains shall be proved economicall y relevant. Provision of private parking infrastructure 
(e.g. parking houses ) in dense urban areas is expensive. Therefore, it is possible that t he 
provision costs of parking infrastructure  exceed the travel costs to free (or more 
convenient)  parking space s - along the same line, it is also possible than cruising without a 
driver for short periods of time be more convenient than paying an expensive parking fee.  
As a result, it can be expected that the demand for parking lots be relocated to sparsely 
populat ed areas , where parking space is not a scarce good (Chapin et al., 2016 ; 
Zakharenko, 2016 ). Furthermore, the development of autonomous taxi-like vehicles 
("Vehicle on Dem and"; Wachenfeld et al., 2015) would also result in a significant 
reduction of the dem and for parking lots in city centers  (Heinrichs, 2015 ). For example, the  
OECD / ITF study (2015) , addressing the replacement of privately owned by shared 
autonomous vehicles,  estimated a potential reduction in the parking requirements of ca. 
6 %-16 % for Lisbon, Portugal . Similar results are founded in Zhang et al . (2015).  
Given the many changes to the urban environment regarding road use and parking space, 
some studies address  the potential for redevelopment opportunities in urban contexts. 
Alessandrini e t al. (2013) suggest that the new parking requirements should  free urban 
space, which can be used to improve  livability of urban environments.  Examples of more 
sustainable  public space use include  reassigning road and parking space to (segregated) 
public t ransport lanes , broader or better  sidewalks and bike paths , parks and green areas  
(Hass -Klau, 2014 ; Chapin et al ., 2016). Additionally , Chapin et al. (2016)  considered  the 
implementation  of fixed stops for AV, in order to facilitate getting on and off the vehicles  
without affecting the traffic  flow. 
Another possible effect associated with auton omous  driving relates to longer term land-use 
change s, in terms of ( residential ) location choice. Economic literature suggests that 
households make a trade -off between commute -time, wage/income, living costs, etc., when 
selecting housing  and working locations (So et al ., 2001; Bhat and Guo, 2007; among 
many others). Since house -prices and rent are lower with increasing distance from ci ty 
centers, a consumer may get access to superior dwellings outside cities (or in their 
suburbs). But they must then accept lower wages in the rural area or larger commuting 
times in exchange of higher wages  in the cities (Alonso, 1964). Autonomous  driving  may 

==== Page 6 ====
6 
 affect this trade -off. Relieving the driver from  driving tasks enable s them to engage in 
other activities during the travel, which may be deemed more appealing or  meaningful by 
the passengers  (Silberg et al., 2012 ; Heinrichs, 2015 ; Cyganski et al., 20 15). This would 
lead to a reduction of the subjective value of travel time savings (SVTTS) for users of AV 
(Smith, 2012 ; Zmud et al., 2016; Milakis et al., 2017b ). Thus, a lower SVTTS would result 
in a willingness to drive longer distances with an impact o n the choice of destinations 
(shopping, leisure, training places) and ultimately even on the choice of residence location 
(Bahamonde -Birke et al., 2017). Hence, a reduced SVTTS could lead to substantial 
changes in the settlement structure and to an intensi fied suburbanization  (Childress et al., 
2015; Milakis et al., 2017a) . This, in turn, would further i ncrease motorized transportation, 
as well as fuel consumption, pollutant emissions, and consequently the demand for 
transport related measures (infrastructu re, management).  Nevertheless, Wagner et al . 
(2014) raise doubts about claims that vehicle automation technologies would affect 
commuting patterns. Other technologies developments outside of vehicle automation, like 
maturing telecommuting technologies, could have a greater impact on travel and urban 
development patterns. Along this line , it is to be expected that a potential revaluation of the 
SVTTS would impact on distinct use r groups (i.e. given the potential alternative uses of the 
travel time) and tr ansportation modes differently (e.g. the potential appear to be larger in 
the case of passenger cars than in public transportation).  
Finally, some studies address the impact of autonomous vehicles in the opposite way: that 
is not how AV are likely to affe ct cities, but how cities (and city planning) provide 
conditions for AV. For instance, Heinrichs (2015) consider s different city typologies and 
how different types provide conditions for different forms and applications of AV. 
Nevertheless, Wagner et al . (2014) interview ed several actors and entities in this regard, 
reporting that the majority has not yet begun  the discussion about how manag ing the 
transition to AV operation. Along these lines, Guerra  (2016)  presents a r eview of the 
regional transportation plans ( RTP) of the American ’s twenty -five largest metropolitan 
areas , showing  that none has incorporated self -driving cars and only one mentions the new 
technology  in their current planning documents . As he points out, t his is almost certainly 
not because the planners be unaware or skeptical about self -driving cars . Instead, 
uncertainty abo ut autonomous vehicles’ impacts, their timeline  and the gap between  future  
potential impacts and day -to-day investment decisions are  mentioned  the principal reasons 
for self-driving cars do not being considered  in RTPs . In general terms,  although planners 
follow existing research and develop modeling and other scenarios , it is perceived  that 
existing research does not yet provide sufficient, actionable information to direc t 
investments or planning priorities.  In their literature review paper on policy and society 
related implications of automated driving technology, Milakis et al. (2017b) also revealed 
the manifold open research questions and uncertainties and suggested to differentiate 
between different stages of implications – thus indicating that effects of AV have to be 
considered on a systemic level and not in their singular characteristics. However, we would 
additionally suggest including experts’ perspectives in this process to gain a more 
comprehensive understanding of the system itself (in its particular spatial form, e.g. urban 
environments). Thus, valuable hints on directions of fut ure research could be expected.   
3. Methodology  
It can be assumed  that the impact s of a large scale introduction of AV in urban 
environments will go far beyond the direct implications on vehicle flow and usage 

==== Page 7 ====
7 
 primarily discussed in the current literature. Rather , fundamental impacts on  the 
organization of urban transport systems and the urb an space  can be expected . Against this 
background, competent planning authorities will have to develop suitable responses and 
strategies that deal with the new technology. While t heir perspectives and objectives on the 
topic are of particular relevance , they have so far been addressed only marginally .  
To pick up these  aspects, an empirical study was carried  out amongst  the members of the 
Association of German Cities’  expert commission  on transport. The Association of 
German cities is Germany’s largest national federation of municipalities and understands 
itself as the cities’ voice and advocate for local self -government (Deutscher Städtetag , 
2016). The expert commission on transport  consists of 48 members of different urban 
transport  and city planning authorities . The members of the commission are responsible for 
the strategic transport planning tasks in their cities. Such strategies  need to address how to 
deal with current and future trends including automation of the transport systems.  
The study appli ed a mixed -method design in the form of a n explanatory  sequential design 
(Cres well, 2014) using a quantitative survey and qualitative in -depth interviews. The 
interviews should thus help to deepen and explain the result s from the quantitative part of 
the study  as well as draw upon selected aspects in a more differentiated way (Plano Clark 
and Creswell, 2008) .1 The survey  was design ed as an online survey . A preliminary online 
survey  was sent to  members of the commission fo r comments . A revised version of the 
questionnaire was circulated  in September 2016 and yielded a response from 24 cities  
(50% of the members of the commission2). In adherence with  data protection guidelines, 
the survey was conducted in an anonymous form. This impli es that the name and position 
of the respondents and the name of the city they work for are not known. However, t he 
survey included a question on the  field(s) of professi onal activity of respondents to get an 
indication of their professional focus .  
The r esults were jointly discussed in a dedicated session of the expert commission in fall 
2016 . Following this, four in -depth interviews were conducted with experts from 
municipalities that are already carrying out or considering activities on autonomous 
driving. The interviews were conducted in January and February 2017 – three were 
realized via tel ephone, one was a face -to-face conversation. They were audio -taped and 
subsequently transcribed and evaluated. Special focus was put on similarities between the 
cities’ perspectives (respectively the experts’ perspectives) on autonomous driving in 
relation  to objectives of activities and need for actions.  
In line with previous studies that emphasized the need to specify and differentiate 
autonomous driving in relation to different development paths (see Fraedrich et al., 201 5; 
Heinrichs, 201 6; Wachenfeld  et al., 201 6), four different uses cases of autonomous  driving 
                                                 
1 Though there has been an ongoing discussion for decades whether the often differing methodological, 
epistemological/theoretical paradigms of quantitative and qualitative approaches actually allow it to combine 
them (see Tasha kkori and Teddlie, 2003 ) we decided to use a rather pragmatic but nevertheless also very 
common approach  (see Johnson and Omwuegbuzie, 2004).  
2 As this  is the entire population of transport city planning authorities dedicated to automatization in 
Germany , the respon ses are not treated as a sample but as a census of a small population.  

==== Page 8 ====
8 
 were defined to  correctly address the point  that the effects of AV are likely to differ 
substantially depending on the form or type of use case3.  They are defined as follows:  
• Autonomous Park Pilot  (APP): After all passengers get off, the vehicle can travel 
alone to a predetermined parking and from there back to a given pick-up address.  
• Shared Autonomous Vehicle ( SAV ): A Shared Autonomous Vehicle is a vehicle 
that drives its occupants without a driver. Users can no longer drive themselves in such a 
vehicle, as there are no steering wheels or pedals.  
• Private Autonomous Vehicle (PAV ): On request or if necessary, the vehicle can 
take over the driving task. During this time, the driver do es not have to pay attention to the 
traffic and can execute  other activities.  
• Autonomous Delivery Vehicle  (ADV ): A small self -propelled vehicle, which may, 
if required, also drive on footpaths or cycle paths, takes over the last mile for goods 
deliveries  to customers or to parcel boxes.  
From the overall 24 respondents of the questionnaire, s ix are represent ative s from large 
cities with 500,000 inhabitants or more; 18 respondents work in  medium sized 
municipalities with 50,000 to 500, 000 inhabitants . It ha s to be noted though, that, as 
individual persons were consulted, the responses  reflect the opinion of the interviewees 
and do not necessarily depict  a coordinated response from across the administration of the 
municipalities . 
Figure 1 illustrates the field of professional activity given by the survey participants. As 
can be seen, multiple answers were allowed. The majority of the respondents are engaged 
in municipal transport planning and development activities , as well as physical  planning 
and design of streets and squares.  Other prominent fields of activities – alongside transport 
in general – include traffic management and public transport . In addition, quite a num ber 
of respondents are engaged in other activities . This category (referred to as ‘Other’ in 
figure 1) comprises activities like  city planning , landscape planning and environmental 
planning.  In summary , all respondents are working on subjects with relevanc e to the  
planning of future transport systems with presences of AV. The listed fields of professional 
activities suggest that a majority of the survey participants work directly on transport 
topics. This indicates that these respondents  have primarily an  urban transport planning 
perspective . In addition, this may be an indication that the topic of AV is currently 
primarily seen and dealt with as a transport planning concern. However , quite many 
activities reported by the respondents relate to  other urban planning subjects . Therefore, 
while we can expect a strong urban transport planning perspective in the responses to our 
questions  in the subsequent sections, we may not confine it to the transport realm alone . 
                                                 
3 However, the four use cases are not mutually exclusive in two ways: first, they could as well evolve parallel 
to each other and therefore be complementary rather than competitive (see  Fraedrich et al 2015). Second, 
they only present a small selection of possible scenarios of autonomous d riving – there are in fact many  more 
that are conceivable, but the ones that were chosen for this study should present likely developments of AV 
in the  city by having been widely discussed in the current literature on autonomous driving at the same time.  

==== Page 9 ====
9 
  
 
Figure 1: Field of  activit ies of the survey participants  
To gain a more comprehensive view on how autonomous driving is currently dealt with in 
German municipalities, we specifically approached urban transport planning actors from 
four large cities (more than 500 ,000 inhabitants) where autonomous driving is already a 
topic (e.g. in the form of testbeds, pilot projects or policy papers). The respondents – all of 
them employed in the urban transport and planning departments of their local government  
and in leading po sitions  – were directly involved in the ongoing activities . The following 
were the respective working fields of the interviewees: (1) head of city development plan 
in a department of transport politics, (2) head of the transport department, (3) team leader  
in the section on forecast, commercial transport and environment in the city’s department 
of transport planning, and (4) head of a department of road maintenance, intelligent 
transport systems and automotive. With thes e four experts, w e conducted qualitat ive 
guided interviews .  
4. THE PERSPECTIVE S OF CITY -PLANNERS : RESULTS FROM 
THE EXPERT SURVEY  AND SUBSEQUENT INTERVIEWS  
This section presents the results of the  quantitative  survey (Section 4. 1) and  introduces 
results of the qualitative interviews that were carried out subsequently to the survey  
(Section 4.2) . 
4.1. Quantitative expert survey  
In a first block of questions , the respondents were requested to indicate whether activities 
related to the introduction of autonomous vehicles have already been conducted in their 
cities, are currently being carried out or are planned in the near future. The results indicate 
that such activities have only be en conducted  so far  in about one third of the cities, and that 
no major differences can be observed (for our sample) betw een big (more than 500,000 
inhabitants ) and medium -sized cities (between 100,000 and 500,000 inhabitants) regarding 
the realization of such activities.  
Respondents were requested to state the five most important goals for  urban transport  
planning in  their respective municipalities . The results are pictured in Figure 2.  
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Transport in general
 Transport development
Planning and design of streets and squares
Public Transport
Planning approval for road and rail
Traffic management
Transport legislation
Transport: Other
Other

==== Page 10 ====
10 
 
  
Figure 2: Stated o bjectives of urban transport planning  in the municipalities  
The following three objectives could be identified  as most  important  for the urban 
transport planners : strengthening non -motorized transportation (83  % of the mentions ), 
strengthening and complementing public transportation (63  %) and reducing  energy 
consumption , CO 2 and air pollutants emissions (63  %). Furthermore, s trengthening inter - 
and multimodality as well as improving traffic safety  and reducing noise pollution are also 
among the primary targets in about half of the cities . On the other hand, only about 20  % of 
the interviewees consider ed the improvement of traffic flow  and road ca pacities  as a major 
objective (which is , on the other hand, one the most mentioned aspects in the current 
debate on autonomous driving ). Some cities  are also  targeting other objectives (including, 
for instance , reducing motorized traffic and travel time, reducing the rate of motorization, 
guaranteeing equal access for impaired people, increasing the accessibility of urban 
districts, etc.). These goals represent 67 % of the mentions, but no common denominators 
among them could be established . In summary , the focus of  urban transport planning  
appears to be set on the reduction of private  transportation and its negative externalities as 
well as assuring the persistence and development of public transport . 
In a seco nd block,  the respondents were asked  to consider the aforementioned use cases 
and to assess how these could contribute  to the achievement of the objectives presented i n 
Figure 2. Subsequently,  we only include goals accounting for more than 20  % of the 
responses and picture them  in Figure 3 (for the abbreviations of the use cases please refer 
to section 3  above ). 
 0%20%40%60%80%100%Strengthening non-motorized
transportation
Strengthening and complementing
public transportation
Reducing energy consumption and
CO2 and air pollutant emissions
Strengthening inter- and
multimodality
Improving traffic safety
Reducing noise pollution
Improving road capacities
Other
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Strengthening non -motorized 
transportation  
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Strengthening and complementing 
public transportation  

==== Page 11 ====
11 
 
  
 
 
Figure 3: Stated contribution of the different use cases to main planning objectives   
The results indicate that the majority of the experts expect  rather negative  consequences 
from AV with  respect to their  cities’ primary goals in association with the introduction of 
autonomous vehicles . At the same time, respondents differentiate in their assessment 
clearly be tween the four use cases . The introduction of AV appears to be particularly in 
conflict with the objective to strengthen non -motorized transport  (a major objective in 
83 % of the participating cities) . None of the  expert s saw a potential  for improvement  in 
association with any of the considered  use case s; moreover, the vast majority did expect  
not a neutral but negative impact . These negative assessmen ts also dominate d the topics of 
strengthening and complementing public transportation , strengthening  inter- and 
multimodality and reducing  pollutant emissions. Notwithstanding, some experts (though 
not the majority) could  envisage autonomous vehicles contributing positively to the goals , 
especially in association with shared autonomous vehicle s (SAV). Overall, positive effect s 
induced by  automation were  only expected with regard to objectives  deemed as less 
important in the previous block , such as increasing traffic safety, and improving traffic 
flow and infrastructure capacity  (the latter  are not included in  Figure 3 due to their low 
importance) . The responden ts’ opinions regarding the impact of automation on reducing 
noise pollution were  divided.  
The a ssess ment of  the overall contribution of the considered  use case s in relation to the 
goals of urban transport  development in general  are shown in Figure 4. 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Reducing energy consumption and 
CO2 and air pollutant emissions  
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Strengthening inter - and 
multimodality  
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Improving traffic safety  
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Reducing noise pollution  


==== Page 12 ====
12 
   
Figure 4 - Can autonomous vehicles contribute to achieving  urban transport planning 
objectives ? 
As illustrated , 50 % of the respondents believe d that SAV  could have an overall positive 
impact on the objectives of the cities. In contrast, no ne of the respondents  associate d PAV 
with a positive contribution to  urban and transport  planning objectives . Moreover, 40  % of 
the interviewees did not expect that any of the  use case s could have  an overall positive 
impact on the cities’ goals . The results  reflect that many of the potentials currently  
associated with autonomous vehicles (e.g. reducing costs, improving road capacities, etc.; 
Fagnant und Kockelman, 2016) do not seem to be  in line with the objectives of the city 
planners  but rather conflict them . 
In a third and final block , respondents  were asked to evaluate  the need for action s and 
measures  in several areas in order to enable  autonomous vehicles  to contribute effectively 
to the objections of  the cities . These areas were addressed considering the fields of action  
depicted in Table 1:  
Area  Field of action  
Transportation planning  - Update of traffic and local massive transit development plans  
- Adjustment of strategies to support non -motorized transportation  
- Adjustment of current economic and business concepts  
- Development of prediction tools and integra ted transportation models considering 
autonomous vehicles  
Traffic control  - Revision of rights -of-way (road pricing, exclusive lines, no vehicles areas, etc.)  
- Adjustment of speed limits  
- Adjustment of traffic priorities  
Infrastructure planning  - Securing, adapting and certifying road infrastructure for autonomous vehicles  
- Adjustment of current road infrastructure plans  
- Redesign and transformation of the road place (lane widths, bus stations, drop-off and 
pick-up areas, etc. ) 
Urban planning  - Update of urban development plans  
- Update of land -use plans  
- Revision of parking policies  
- Development of new spatial concepts for parking (decentralized parking facilities, 
drop-off and pick -up areas, etc.)  
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%
APP
SAV
PAV
ADV
None of the former

==== Page 13 ====
13 
 Participation  - Opening and encouraging the societal debate on autonomous vehicles regarding 
possible new uses for urban space  
- Opening and encouraging the societal debate on autonomous vehicles in order to 
increase acceptance in the population  
Other aspects  - Creating a nd setting up test fields for autonomous vehicles (for both private and 
public transportation)  
- Definition of data standards and data requirements  
Table 1 – Potential fields of action regarding an implementation of AV  
The following table how immediate respondents see the need for action. For th is purpose, 
Table 2 summarizes the average of the different fields for actions in a given area.  
Area  Short -term  Mid-term  
(3-10 years)  Long -term  
(10 – 20 years)  No actions 
required  
Transportation planning  13.2% 48.8% 17.8%  20.1% 
Traffic control  7.9% 34.9% 14.3% 42.9% 
Infrastructure planning  16.0% 41.9% 21.2% 20.9% 
Urban planning  12.2% 45.2% 22.0% 20.6% 
Participation  32.6% 39.5% 9.3% 18.6% 
Other aspects  48.8% 25.6% 16.3% 9.3% 
Table 2 – Immediacy of actions regarding an implementation of AV as stated by the 
respondents  
Apart from creating and setting up  test fields or the definition of data protocols, the 
interviewees did not see major  short -term need for action with regard to automation. 
However, promoting the participation of the civil society  in the societal debate around 
autonomous vehi cles is regarded as im portant in the short and medium -term. The majority 
of the respondents  believe d that automation sh ould be addressed in the medium -term at the 
level of transport ation , infrastructure and urban  planning . It is surprising, however, that 
16 % of the planners considered changes in road infrastructure as a short -term necessity, 
especially when lower proportions ide ntify a short -term need for  action in the areas of 
transportation and urban planning). Finally, a  large proportion of th e respond ents stated 
that no actions would be required at all regarding traffic management and control . These 
findings diverge from recommendations found in the transportation literature (e.g. Smith, 
2012; Bahamonde -Birke et al., 201 7) which point out that autonomo us vehicles can cause 
substantial changes in the attractiveness of the alternatives and thus in the modal partition , 
This would make it necessary  to rethink and reevaluate current traffic control and 
management measures.  
4.2. Qualitative interviews  
The quantita tive survey revealed a general skepticism that autonomous vehicles would 
benefit the cities. However, as only about one third of the questionnaire participants stated 
that their cities have been engaged or are planning to engage in activities related to 
autonomous driving , one could assume that the critical views are in part due to a lack of 
knowledge about the potentials of the technology. The interviews with transport planners 
from four large  cities were conducted to gain a more differentiated view on the  topic. City 
governments in all four cities have already started to implement activities with respect to 

==== Page 14 ====
14 
 AV, which permitted an informed perspective on specific requirements for action and 
whether existing infrastructure needs to be redeveloped.  The respon dents displayed a 
positive attitude towards automated driving in general. However, they also raised concerns 
about potential challenges and risks that might come along with the implementation of the 
technology that we will discuss in this section.  
Activiti es in the four cities include the inclusion of the topic in strateg y documents by the 
city governments and planning for pilot projects or testbeds in the field of smart mobility 
and intelligent transport systems . In some cases, these projects are already o ngoing  for 
several years. Perhaps a unifying aspect across the cities is the objective to connect AV 
activities to public transport enhancement (see below). In contrast to this joint goal, the 
interview participants expressed different views on the needs for infrastructure 
investments. One interviewee stated that his city government currently links considerations 
regar ding the requirements of AV with possibilities to fund them. The other respondents  
were in general more skeptical in terms of adapting the infrastructure to allow  AV to better 
‘fit in’, al though the ir arguments  slightly differed. While a lack of possible f unding fo r 
large scale investments seems  to be a prominent challenge for all of them, one participant 
explicitly stated that “ it is not the infrastructures that have to adapt to autonomous vehicles 
but rather the other way round ”. This perspective reveals the general concern of all the 
interviewed planners . While they see  the potentials that AV offer in terms of safety or  
efficiency, they also perceive potential negative implications like an increase in individual 
motorized traffic  and a decrease of public transport mode use in case local governments 
did not actively promote  a development path for AV in urban areas that is in line with their 
objectives . In general, considerations in relatio n to infrastructure development  seem to be 
more closely linked  to dig italization projects and testbeds than to automated driving  ‘only’.  
The interviews revealed four overarching concerns  across all four municipalities . They are  
briefly presented below.  
Municipalities as driving and steering forces  
All respondents  indicated that the planning authorities in the ir city have played a major 
role in pushing, organizing and implementing  activities related to automated (and 
connected) driving. However, municipalities seem to focus on steering and regulating the 
activities  rather than on “just” b eing part of research projects, testbeds or  pilots . The 
planning actors stated that they are in general more interested in integrated concepts than in 
technology -driven projects. One interviewee summarized this view in this way : “New 
technologies are not ends in themselves but have to adapt to what serves the city. And in 
the end, it is the municipalities that have to implement it .” 
Other important actors in relation to activities on automated driving are – first and 
foremost – the local public transport companies, but also industry and economic actors, 
research organizations  and others with whom they collaborate in different initiati ves. 
Strengthening, supporting and (re)developing public transport as a major 
goal 
Respondents emphasized that a  central task for municipalities is securing livelihoods and 
welfare services. Thus, to strengthen and (re)develop  public transport services was  stated  

==== Page 15 ====
15 
 as a major goal in all four interviews. Transport p lanners share the opinion that 
autonomous on -demand vehicles can be a valuable complement to public transport 
systems, e.g. in areas with lower demand. In their view, this is also a significant  potential 
for technology dissemination. Complementing rather than replacing existing public 
transport was seen particularly important to “prevent  cannibalization ” (by other actors), to 
increase  the attractiveness of public transport modes through flexible “ on-demand ” offers 
and to use  existing infrastructure  efficiently , specifically with respect to mass transport 
modes.  
Fighting potential increase in car use and its negative effects  
Interviewees  were very  concern ed that AV technology would lead to an increase  in 
individual motorized traffic. The reasons behind are that cars could be more  easily 
accessible for everyone, be used more intensively during the day to serve all members of a 
family, or drive around empty for redistri bution purposes. The  respondents  thus expressed 
less interest of their cities to engage in activities and projects that would promote 
individual autonomous vehicles. To counterbalance  this threat , they expressed  the need to 
focus  on the system as a whole rather than engaging in AV for mo torized individual travel. 
A general consensus among  the planners was that automation of vehicles should go along 
with electrifying their powertrains.  
Municipalities’ objectives versus federal policy and industry interests  
The respondents  mentioned that w hile f ederal policy’s focus currently is on safeguarding 
Germany as a production location  through pushing AV technology (“ mostly technology 
funding ”) as well as safety and efficiency gains, the municipalities have different goals . 
These are geared towards  securing the cities’ welfare system and guaranteeing livable 
cities’ for all its inhabi tants. These objectives have not gained sufficient attention in the 
debate on AV so far. Respondents  expressed  a strong n eed to consolidate  and articulate 
strategic city’s positions and to enter into  the debate  on research and development 
priorities for AV . They mentioned the  Association of German Cities as the main actor to 
achieve these consolidated positions. However, they saw the challenge that  currently  not 
enough local governments  are seriously engaged in discussions and activities around AV 
and thus do not see too much pressure. This statement connects to the results of the 
quantitativ e survey where around two third  of the respondents stated to not have been 
involved in activities on AV so far  and a majority only saw a need for action in the mid - or 
long-term. 
5. URBAN PLANING POLICY  FOR AUTONOMOUS 
VEHICLES : DISCUSSION and  RECOMMENDATIONS  
This paper  aims at  clarify ing (1) how autonomous driving could  affect  the built 
environment, (2) to what extent these  effects  are deemed as ‘desirable’ i.e. compatible with 
existing frameworks from a planning perspective, and  (3), how urban transport  and city  
planning will need  to deal with the aforementioned implications . With respect to the first 
question, the literature review  show ed that autonomous driving has the potential to affect  
the built environment  in many ways. Among the key themes are changes in the required 
road space (right -of-ways and travel lanes ) and infrastructures (signage, etc.), effects on 

==== Page 16 ====
16 
 the location, form, and amount of parking, interactions with the mobility  of cyclists and 
pedestrians, and changes in land-use and residential relocation.  
The survey and the q ualitative interviews add ed some instructive insights on the se effects. 
Firstly, the respondents made clear that the effects on the built environment cannot be 
separated from deliberations on the impacts  on mobility and traffic. The most prominent 
concern is that AV are likely to increase the attractiveness of private motorized 
transportation , increasing existing problems like congestion and negative environmental 
effects. Secondly , and related to the previous point, the survey demonstrate d that planners 
expect the effects to differ quite  strongly depending on how autonomous driving  will 
occur. While all respondents of the survey expect ed the use-case private auto nomous  
vehicle to not positive ly contribut e to urban development, SAV and ADV  got a m ore 
positive response. This underlines the importance of differentiating impacts of autonomous 
driving on transport ation systems  and the built environment depending on how the 
technology is likely to be adopted.  Thirdly , the  survey highlight ed the importance  of 
infrastructures as a concern of planners with respect to AV. It raises questions whether AV 
in the different forms will require additional infrastructure and what planning measures and 
investments the transition from a ‘hardware’ to a ‘softwa re’ driven transport infrastructure 
will require.  
Regarding  the second question, urban transport professionals  were rather skeptical about 
the compatibility of AV with existing transport and urban planning objectives.  Almost 
40% of the respondents  in the questionnaire doubted that AV – in any form described in 
the different  the use -cases  – are suited to support the primary planning objectives of their 
cities. The  main  goals  – as identified by the survey respondents  – are strengthen ing non-
motorized  transportation , strengthen ing and complement ing public transportation  and 
reduc ing energy consumption , CO 2 and air pollutants emissions. Particularly , the 
development of private autonomous vehicles  travel does not seem to be  in line with the  
goals of city  planner regarding  the strength ening of non-motorized and public transport. 
On the contrary, autonomous on -demand vehicles (shared autonomous vehicles) , as part of 
public transport systems , could be a meaningful complement to urban development 
strategies. Across all use -cases, the  survey results exhibited that some respondents show ed 
slightly higher optimism with regards to the potential  of AV to support energy as well as 
safety and env ironment related objectives . Nevertheless, t he overall  assessment of AV 
contribution to these goals is at best mixed.  
In a way, these results suggest that from the perspective  of participants in this survey , AV 
as a technological solution  may fall too short to overcome fundamental challenges  
associated with transport in urban areas. While they could imagine the technology to help 
fix p roblems like traffic congestion, optimizing flow or re -routing vehicles or optimizing 
parking, it is perhaps less capable of address ing more fundamental concern s such as  
congestion and an excessive number  vehicles using the road system , which would  require  a 
shift of people onto public transport or cycling/walking  to be overcome . 
Interestingly , the survey reveals that the respondents on average did not see the im mediate 
need to take action to prepare for the ‘arrival’ of AV and to steer the introduction of the 
technology in the desired direction. Only a few planners state d that urban and transport 
planning should be adjusted, while the majority identifie d that thi s is rather a concern for 
the more distant future. This assessment perhaps comes a bit as a surprise, when taking 

==== Page 17 ====
17 
 into consideration that industry and the federal government  in Germany is likewise  pushing 
the case of AV quite strongly. Given that planners are rather  skeptical regarding the 
possible contribution of the technology, one would expect a more proactive perspective.  
A possible explanation for this reluctance is that professionals  and city administrators are 
uncertain if and when the technology will be mature enough to be seriously considered and 
what development path it will possibly take . Currently, a lot of the activities around 
autonomous driving are  framed as ‘ test fields ’ or ‘living labs’. Technologies are stil l being 
developed and trialed.  The lack of clarity  whether the technology will definitely work and 
solve problem s and improve city services  may well be a reason why planners tend to be 
reluctant to prioritize AV as a topic on their planning agenda.  
This brings us to the  third question of this article. A first lesson from this survey is that 
from the urban transport planning perspective, the different use cases of autonomous 
vehicles seem to differ in their potential implications and, thus, should receive specific 
attention by planning. Obviously, it occurs that automation may be a promising 
complement to public transport in the form of SAV. As noted in the interviews, 
autonomous on -demand vehicles could increase the attractiveness of the public transport 
supply as feeder modes in areas w ith lower and fluctuating demand. Planning at the 
municipal level could start thinking about actions on how to explore this potential. On the 
other hand, the uptake of AV technology for motorized individual travel raises concerns 
about increasing car trave l and associated negative effects. Local  planning could start 
discussing how this ties into existing strategies to manage car use in cities including 
parking. Looking at freight, there is yet little clarity and understanding about the possible 
implications . Activities therefor e should start with exploring potential applications and 
their impact on cost structures, transport and the environment . 
A second lesson from the study  is the d iscrepancy between the objectives of urban 
planning, the f ederal  government‘s  policy  focus and the priorities of the industry. The 
survey illustrates that objectives at the municipal level are to increase public transport and 
non-motorized travel. To this end, planners see a higher potential of automation with 
respect to the public transport system. F ederal government and industry arguments 
currently appear  to attach  a high visibility to the automation of cars, related to  the 
arguments of improved safety, better traffic flow and increased energy efficiency. In 
addition,  they tend to strongly focus on securing industry’s competitiveness.   
Given this ‘mismatch’, local planners and administrators in Germany should start to 
consider preparing, consolidating and communicating their strategic positions  – as was also 
argued for  in the interviews . This could be done individually as well as collectively , as 
done elsewhere already. Particularly , a joint position by local governments would be 
needed to influence current federal policy on research and development priorities with 
respect to auto nomous  driving. This seems to be particularly important because the survey 
shows that the concerns of local transport and urban planners have been  not well addressed  
so far .  
A third lesson  from the survey addresses the type of knowledge that city planning requires 
from current research and development activities. One of the biggest concerns highlighted 
in the study is that any action with respect to AV needs to go beyond  demonstrating how  to 
solve  specific, practical problems . Rather, studies are required  that show and demonstrate 

==== Page 18 ====
18 
 how technology  can indeed respond to more fundamental challenges and goals that city 
planners face.  Related to this, they should p rovide 'near time' urban planning  policy 
guidance for a yet (perhaps) distant uncertain development.   
To conclude , we have gathered and interpreted current perspectives  and expectations of 
planning professionals on the implications of AV and their opinion on how transport and 
city plannin g will need to deal with them. Since the  respondents primarily engage in urban 
transport planning and to a lesser extent in city planning  activities , the results may well 
reflect a transport planning perspective . Given the focus on this  particular group of 
professionals  and the comparatively small size of the sample, findings should not be over -
interpreted  or over -generalized . Nonetheless , the study results provide  valuable hints to 
local governments for their short, medium and long -term plans for urban transport and city 
development. As the technology will continue to evolve and provide  options to solve 
challenges, lo cal authorities and their urban transport and city planning professionals 
should be clear and have an agenda on how these potentials may be of use for realizing 
objectives for urban developm ent. The results of this survey  can be a good starting point 
for developing such an agenda . But it also leaves many questions open, for example what 
specific types of action are needed and  suited to ensure that autonomous driving supports 
sustainable transport planning in cities . Because of the possible far reaching (second and 
third order) effects, AV will likely influence broader local development objectives like 
local economic vitality, social inclusiveness, or attractiveness and livability of public 
spaces, Therefore, this agenda setting should not be a concern from the transport planning 
domain alone but rather a multi -sectoral undertaking. This requires placing  the debate on 
autonomous  driving, the built environment and the policy implications in a wider urban 
development context . 
6. REFERENCES  
Alessandrini, A., Campagna, A.,  Delle Site, P., Filippi, F., and Persia, L. (2015). 
Automated vehicles and the rethinking of mobility and cities. Transportation Research 
Procedia , 5, 145 -160. 
Alonso, W (1964)  Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent, 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge , Mass.  
Apel, D. (2003).  Der Einfluss der Verkehrsmittel auf Städtebau und  Stadtstruktur. In: 
Bracher, T., Haag, M., Holzapfel, H.,  Kiepe, F. , Lehmbrock, M. , and  Reutter, U. (eds. ): 
Handbuch der kommunalen Verkehrsplanung .  
Anderson, J.  M., Kalra N., Stanley, K.  D., Sorensen, P., Samaras, C. , and Oluwatola, O.  A. 
(2016). Autonomous Vehicle Technology:  A Guide for Policymakers . Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND Corporation, http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR443 -2.html . 
Bahamonde Birke, F. J., Kickhöfer, B., Heinrichs, D., and Kuhnimho f, T. (2017). A 
systemic view on autonomous vehicles: Policy aspects for a sustainable transportation 
planning. Kuhmo -Nectar Conference of the International Transportation Economics 
Association, Barcelona, Spain, 21 -23, June, 2017.  
Begg, D. (2014). A 2050 vision for London: what are the implications of driverless 
transport?   

==== Page 19 ====
19 
 Bhat, C. R.  and Guo, J. Y. (2007). A comprehensive analysis of built environment 
characteristics on household residential choice and auto ownership levels. Transportation 
Research Part B: Methodological , 41(5), 506 -526. 
Brownell, C.  and Kornhauser, A. (2014). A driverless alternative: fleet size and cost 
requirements for a statewide autonomous taxi network in New Jersey. Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Resea rch Board , (2416), 73 -81.  
Cervero, R . and Kockelman, K. (1997): Travel demand and the 3 D’s: Density, diversity, 
and design. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2(3) , 199 -219. 
Chapin, T., Stevens, L., Crute, J., Crandall, J., Rokyta , A., and Washington, A. (2016). 
Envisioning Florida’s Future: Transportation and Land Use in an Automated Vehicle 
Automated Vehicle World . Florida Department of Transportation, Tallahassee.  
Childress, S., Nichols, B., Charlton, B., and Coe, S. (2015). Usi ng an activity -based model 
to explore the potential impacts of automated vehicles. Transportation Research Record: 
Journal of the Transportation Research Board , (2493), 99 -106. 
Creswell, J . (2014): Research Design. Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods 
Approaches. Sage, London.  
Cyganski, R., Fraedrich, E., and Lenz, B. (2015). Travel -Time Valuation for Automated 
Driving: A Use -Case -Driven Study. Proceedings of the 94th Annual Meeting of the 
Transportation Research Board.  
Fagnant, D. J.  and Kockel man, K. (2015). Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: 
opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations. Transportation Research Part A: 
Policy and Practice , 77, 167 -181. 
Fraedrich , E., Cyganski , R., Wolf , I., and  Lenz , B. (2016). User Perspectives on 
Autonomous Driving. A  use case -Driven Study in Germany. Arbeitsberichte 
Geographisches Institut . Heft 187. Berlin.  
Fraedrich, E., Beiker, S. , and Lenz, B. (2015). Transition pathways to fully automated 
driving and its implications for the sociotechnical  system of automobility. European 
Journal of Futures Research , 3(1), 1 -11. 
Guerra, E. (2016): Planning for Cars that drive themselves: metropolitan planning 
organizations, regional transportation plans, and autonomous vehicles. Journal of Planning 
Educatio n and Research , 36 (2), 210 -224 
Hass -Klau, C. (2014). The pedestrian and the city . Routledge, New York, USA and 
London, UK.  
Heinrichs, D. (201 6): Autonom ous Driving and Urban Land Use . In Maurer, M., Gerdes, 
J.C., Lenz, B. and Winner, H. (eds .) Autonom ous Driving. Technical, Legal and Social 
Aspects . Springer Open , Heidelberg , 213-232. 
Heinrichs, D., and Cyganski, R. (2015). Automated Driving: How It Could Enter Our 
Cities and How This Might Affect Our Mobility Decisions. disP-The Planning Review , 
51(2), 74 -79. 
Johnson, B. and Onwuegbuzie, A. (2004). Mixed methods research: A paradigm whose 
time has come. Educational Researcher , 33, 14 -26. 
Kummerle, R., Hahnel, D., Dolgov, D., Thrun, S. , and Burgard, W. (2009). Autonomous 
driving in a multi -level park ing structure. 12th International IEEE Conference on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems , 3395 -3400.  

==== Page 20 ====
20 
 Li, B. and Shao, Z. (2015). A unified motion planning method for parking an autonomous 
vehicle in the presence of irregularly placed obstacles. Knowledge -Based Systems , 86, 11-
20. 
Litman, T. (2015). Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions . Victoria Transport 
Policy Institute  28. 
Lyons , G. (2016). Transport analysis in an uncertain world. Transport Reviews , 36(5) , 553-
557. 
Milakis, D., van Arem , B., and van Wee, B. (2017a). Policy and society related 
implications of automated driving: A review of literature and directions for future research. 
Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems .  
Milakis, D., Snelder, M., van Arem, B., Homem  de Almeida Correia, G., and van Wee, G. 
P. (2017b). Development and transport implications of automated vehicles in the 
Netherlands: scenarios for 2030 and 2050. European Journal of Transport and 
Infrastructure Research , 17(1), 63 -85. 
Mitchell, W. J., Bor onni-Bird, E., and Burns, L.D. (2010). Reinventing the Automobile. 
Personal Urban Mobility for the 21st Century.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
OECD/ITF and CPB (2015). Urban Mobility System Upgrade. How shared self -driving 
cars could change city traffic. International Transportation Forum , Paris, http://www.itf -
oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/15cpb_self -drivingcars.pdf . 
Pavone M (2016). Autonomous Mobility -on-Deman d Systems for Future Urban Mobility. 
In Maurer, M., Gerdes, J.C., Lenz, B. and Winner, H. (eds .) Autonomes Fahren - 
Technische, rechtliche und gesellschaftliche Aspekte . Springer Vieweg, Wiesbaden, 387-
404. 
Schulz, M.  and Renn , O. (2009). Das Gruppendelphi. Konzept und 
Fragebogenkonstruktion . Wiesbaden: Springer . 
Silberg, G., Wallace, R., Matuszak, G., Plessers, J., Brower, C. , and Subramanian, D. 
(2012). Self-driving cars: The next revolution. White paper, KPMG LLP & Center of 
Automotive Resea rch. 
Plano Clark, V. and Creswell, J. (ed.) (2008). The mixed methods reader. Los Angeles, 
Sage.  
So, K., Orazem, P., and Otto, D. (2001). The Effects of Housing Prices, Wages, and 
Commuting Time on Joint Residential and Job Location Choices. American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics , (3(4), 1037 –1048.  
Smith, B.W. (2012). Managing Autonomous Transportation Demand. Santa Clara Law 
Review , 52(4), 1401 -1422.  
Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (ed.) (2003). Handbook of mixed methods in social and 
behavioral re search. Sage, Thousand Oaks.  
Wachenfeld, W., Winner, H., Gerdes, C.G., Lenz, B., Maurer, M., Beiker, S., Fraedrich, 
E., and Winkle, T. (201 6). Use Cases for Autonomous Driving . In Maurer, M., Gerdes, 
J.C., Lenz, B. and Winner, H. (eds .) Autonom ous Driving. Technicial, Legal and Social 
Aspects . Springer Open , Heidelberg , 9-37. 
Wagner, J., Baker, T., Goodin, G., and Maddox, J. (2014). Automated vehicles: Policy 
implications scoping study. Texas A&M Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, 
Research Report SWUTC/14/600451 -00029 -1, http://d2dtl5nnlpfr0r. cloudfront. net/swutc. 
tamu.edu/publications/technicalreports/600451 -00029 -1. pdf . 

==== Page 21 ====
21 
 Zakharenko, R. (2016). Self -driving cars will change cities. Regional Science and Urban 
Economics , 61, 26 -37. 
Zhang, W ., Guhathakurta, S., Fang, J., and  Zhang, G. (2015). Exploring the impact of 
shared autonomous vehicles on urban parking demand: An agent -based simulation 
approach. Sustainable Cities and Society , 19, 34 -45. 
Zmud, J., Sener, I. N., and Wagner, J. ( 2016). Self -Driving Vehicles: Determinants of 
Adoption and Conditions of Usage. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board , 2565, 57 -64. 

