==== Page 1 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System
Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, Xia Hu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
{jin,song_3134,xiahu}@tamu.edu
ABSTRACT
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been proposed to automat-
ically tune deep neural networks, but existing search algorithms,
e.g., NASNet [ 51], PNAS [ 29], usually suffer from expensive com-
putational cost. Network morphism, which keeps the functional-
ity of a neural network while changing its neural architecture,
could be helpful for NAS by enabling more efficient training during
the search. In this paper, we propose a novel framework enabling
Bayesian optimization to guide the network morphism for effi-
cient neural architecture search. The framework develops a neural
network kernel and a tree-structured acquisition function optimiza-
tion algorithm to efficiently explores the search space. Extensive
experiments on real-world benchmark datasets have been done to
demonstrate the superior performance of the developed framework
over the state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, we build an open-
source AutoML system based on our method, namely Auto-Keras.
The code and documentation are available at https://autokeras.com.
The system runs in parallel on CPU and GPU, with an adaptive
search strategy for different GPU memory limits.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Neural networks ;Supervised
learning ;Discrete space search .
KEYWORDS
Automated Machine Learning, AutoML, Neural Architecture Search,
Bayesian Optimization, Network Morphism
ACM Reference Format:
Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, Xia Hu. 2019. Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural
Architecture Search System. In The 25th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’19), August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.
3330648
1 INTRODUCTION
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) has become a very im-
portant research topic with wide applications of machine learning
techniques. The goal of AutoML is to enable people with limited
machine learning background knowledge to use machine learning
models easily. Work has been done on automated model selection,
automated hyperparameter tunning, and etc. In the context of deep
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6201-6/19/08. . .$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330648learning, neural architecture search (NAS), which aims to search
for the best neural network architecture for the given learning task
and dataset, has become an effective computational tool in AutoML.
Unfortunately, existing NAS algorithms are usually computation-
ally expensive. The time complexity of NAS is O(n¯t), where nis the
number of neural architectures evaluated during the search, and ¯t
is the average time consumption for evaluating each of the nneu-
ral networks. Many NAS approaches, such as deep reinforcement
learning [ 2,37,47,50,51], gradient-based methods [ 8,31,33] and
evolutionary algorithms [ 12,17,30,38,39,41], require a large nto
reach a good performance. Moreover, many of them train each of
thenneural networks from scratch, which is very slow.
Initial efforts have been devoted to making use of network mor-
phism in neural architecture search [ 7,13]. It is a technique to
morph the architecture of a neural network but keep its function-
ality [ 10,45]. Therefore, we are able to modify a trained neural
network into a new architecture using the network morphism op-
erations, e.g., inserting a layer or adding a skip-connection. Only a
few more epochs are required to further train the new architecture
towards better performance. Using network morphism would re-
duce the average training time ¯tin neural architecture search. The
most important problem to solve for network morphism-based NAS
methods is the selection of operations, which is to select an opera-
tion from the network morphism operation set to morph an existing
architecture to a new one. The network morphism-based NAS meth-
ods are not efficient enough. They either require a large number of
training examples [ 7], or inefficient in exploring the large search
space [ 13]. How to perform efficient neural architecture search with
network morphism remains a challenging problem.
As we know, Bayesian optimization [ 40] has been widely adopted
to efficiently explore black-box functions for global optimization,
whose observations are expensive to obtain. For example, it has
been used in hyperparameter tuning for machine learning mod-
els [3,15,21,24,40,44], in which Bayesian optimization searches
among different combinations of hyperparameters. During the
search, each evaluation of a combination of hyperparameters in-
volves an expensive process of training and testing the machine
learning model, which is very similar to the NAS problem. The
unique properties of Bayesian optimization motivate us to explore
its capability in guiding the network morphism to reduce the num-
ber of trained neural networks nto make the search more efficient.
It is non-trivial to design a Bayesian optimization method for
network morphism-based NAS due to the following challenges.
First, the underlying Gaussian process (GP) is traditionally used for
learning probability distribution of functions in Euclidean space.
To update the Bayesian optimization model with observations, the
underlying GP is to be trained with the searched architectures and
their performances. However, the neural network architectures are
not in Euclidean space and hard to parameterize into a fixed-length
vector. Second, an acquisition function needs to be optimized for
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1946


==== Page 2 ====
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
Bayesian optimization to generate the next architecture to observe.
However, in the context of network morphism, it is not to maximize
a function in Euclidean space, but finding a node in a tree-structured
search space, where each node represents a neural architecture and
each edge is a morph operation. Thus traditional gradient-based
methods cannot be simply applied. Third, the changes caused by a
network morphism operation is complicated. A network morphism
operation on one layer may change the shapes of some intermediate
output tensors, which no longer match input shape requirements of
the layers taking them as input. How to maintain such consistency
is a challenging problem.
In this paper, an efficient neural architecture search with network
morphism is proposed, which utilizes Bayesian optimization to
guide through the search space by selecting the most promising
operations each time. To tackle the aforementioned challenges, an
edit-distance neural network kernel is constructed. Being consistent
with the key idea of network morphism, it measures how many
operations are needed to change one neural network to another.
Besides, a novel acquisition function optimizer, which is capable
of balancing between the exploration and exploitation, is designed
specially for the tree-structure search space to enable Bayesian
optimization to select from the operations. In addition, a graph-level
network morphism is defined to address the changes in the neural
architectures based on layer-level network morphism. The proposed
approach is compared with the state-of-the-art NAS methods [ 13,
22] on benchmark datasets of MNIST, CIFAR10, and FASHION-
MNIST. Within a limited search time, the architectures found by
our method achieves the lowest error rates on all of the datasets.
In addition, we have developed a widely adopted open-source
AutoML system based on our proposed method, namely Auto-Keras.
It is an open-source AutoML system, which can be download and
installed locally. The system is carefully designed with a concise
interface for people not specialized in computer programming and
data science to use. To speed up the search, the workload on CPU
and GPU can run in parallel. To address the issue of different GPU
memory, which limits the size of the neural architectures, a memory
adaption strategy is designed for deployment.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
•Propose an algorithm for efficient neural architecture search
based on network morphism guided by Bayesian optimization.
•Conduct intensive experiments on benchmark datasets to demon-
strate the superior performance of the proposed method over the
baseline methods.
•Develop an open-source system, namely Auto-Keras, which is
one of the most widely used AutoML systems.
2 PROBLEM STATEMENT
The general neural architecture search problem we studied in this
paper is defined as: Given a neural architecture search space F, the
input data Ddivided into Dtrain andDval, and the cost function
Cost(·), we aim at finding an optimal neural network f∗∈ F ,
which could achieve the lowest cost on dataset D. The definition is
equivalent to finding f∗satisfying:
f∗=argmin
f∈FCost(f(θ∗),Dval), (1)θ∗=argmin
θL(f(θ),Dtrain). (2)
where Cost(·,·)is the evaluation metric function, e.g., accuracy,
mean sqaured error, θ∗is the learned parameter of f.
The search spaceFcovers all the neural architectures, which
can be morphed from the initial architectures. The details of the
morph operations are introduced in 3.3. Notably, the operations
can change the number of filters in a convolutional layer, which
makesFlarger than methods with fixed layer width [31].
3 NETWORK MORPHISM GUIDED BY
BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION
The key idea of the proposed method is to explore the search space
via morphing the neural architectures guided by Bayesian optimiza-
tion (BO) algorithm. Traditional Bayesian optimization consists
of a loop of three steps: update, generation, and observation. In
the context of NAS, our proposed Bayesian optimization algorithm
iteratively conducts: (1) Update : train the underlying Gaussian pro-
cess model with the existing architectures and their performances;
(2)Generation : generate the next architecture to observe by opti-
mizing a delicately defined acquisition function; (3) Observation:
obtain the actual performance by training the generated neural ar-
chitecture. There are three main challenges in designing a method
for morphing the neural architectures with Bayesian optimization.
We introduce three key components separately in the subsequent
sections coping with the three challenges.
3.1 Edit-Distance Neural Network Kernel for
Gaussian Process
The first challenge we need to address is that the NAS space is
not a Euclidean space, which does not satisfy the assumption of
traditional Gaussian process (GP). Directly vectorizing the neural
architecture is impractical due to the uncertain number of layers
and parameters it may contain. Since the Gaussian process is a
kernel method, instead of vectorizing a neural architecture, we
propose to tackle the challenge by designing a neural network
kernel function. The intuition behind the kernel function is the edit-
distance for morphing one neural architecture to another. More
edits needed from one architecture to another means the further
distance between them, thus less similar they are. The proof of the
validity of the kernel function is presented in Appendix E.
Kernel Definition : Suppose faandfbare two neural networks.
Inspired by Deep Graph Kernels [ 48], we propose an edit-distance
kernel for neural networks. Edit-distance here means how many
operations are needed to morph one neural network to another.
The concrete kernel function is defined as:
κ(fa,fb)=e−ρ2(d(fa,fb)), (3)
where function d(·,·)denotes the edit-distance of two neural net-
works, whose range is [0,+∞),ρis a mapping function, which
maps the distance in the original metric space to the corresponding
distance in the new space. The new space is constructed by em-
bedding the original metric space into a new one using Bourgain
Theorem [4], which ensures the validity of the kernel.
Calculating the edit-distance of two neural networks can be
mapped to calculating the edit-distance of two graphs, which is
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1947

==== Page 3 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
Figure 1: Neural Network Kernel. Given two neural networks fa,fb, and matchings between the similar layers, the figure
shows how the layers of facan be changed to the same as fb. Similarly, the skip-connections in faalso need to be changed to
the same as fbaccording to a given matching.
an NP-hard problem [ 49]. Based on the search space Fdefined in
Section 2, we tackle the problem by proposing an approximated
solution as follows:
d(fa,fb)=Dl(La,Lb)+λDs(Sa,Sb), (4)
where Dldenotes the edit-distance for morphing the layers, i.e., the
minimum edits needed to morph fatofbif the skip-connections
are ignored, La={l(1)
a,l(2)
a, . . .}andLb={l(1)
b,l(2)
b, . . .}are the
layer sets of neural networks faandfb,Dsis the approximated
edit-distance for morphing skip-connections between two neural
networks, Sa={s(1)
a,s(2)
a, . . .}andSb={s(1)
b,s(2)
b, . . .}are the skip-
connection sets of neural network faandfb, andλis the balancing
factor between the distance of the layers and the skip-connections.
Calculating Dl: We assume|La|<|Lb|, the edit-distance for
morphing the layers of two neural architectures faandfbis calcu-
lated by minimizing the follow equation:
Dl(La,Lb)=min|La|Õ
i=1dl(l(i)
a,φl(l(i)
a))+|Lb|−|La|, (5)
whereφl:La→Lbis an injective matching function of layers
satisfying: ∀i<j,φl(l(i)
a) ≺φl(l(j)
a)if layers in LaandLbare
all sorted in topological order. dl(·,·)denotes the edit-distance of
widening a layer into another defined in Equation (6),
dl(la,lb)=|w(la)−w(lb)|
max[w(la),w(lb)], (6)
where w(l)is the width of layer l.
The intuition of Equation (5)is consistent with the idea of net-
work morphism shown in Figure 1. Suppose a matching is provided
between the nodes in two neural networks. The sizes of the tensors
are indicators of the width of the previous layers (e.g., the output
vector length of a fully-connected layer or the number of filters
of a convolutional layer). The matchings between the nodes are
marked by light blue. So a matching between the nodes can be seen
as matching between the layers. To morph fatofbwith the given
matching, we need to first widen the three nodes in fato the same
width as their matched nodes in fb, and then insert a new node of
width 20 after the first node in fa. Based on this morphing scheme,
the edit-distance of the layers is defined as Dlin Equation (5).Since there are many ways to morph fatofb, to find the best
matching between the nodes that minimizes Dl, we propose a
dynamic programming approach by defining a matrix A|La|×|Lb|,
which is recursively calculated as follows:
Ai,j=max[Ai−1 ,j+1,Ai,j−1+1,Ai−1 ,j−1+dl(l(i)
a,l(j)
b)],(7)
where Ai,jis the minimum value of Dl(L(i)
a,L(j)
b), where L(i)
a=
{l(1)
a,l(2)
a, . . . , l(i)
a}andL(j)
b={l(1)
b,l(2)
b, . . . , l(j)
b}.
Calculating Ds: The intuition of Dsis the sum of the the edit-
distances of the matched skip-connections in two neural networks
into pairs. As shown in Figure 1, the skip-connections with the
same color are matched pairs. Similar to Dl(·,·),Ds(·,·)is defined
as follows:
Ds(Sa,Sb)=min|Sa|Õ
i=1ds(s(i)
a,φs(s(i)
a))+|Sb|−|Sa|, (8)
where we assume|Sa|<|Sb|.(|Sb|−|Sa|)measures the total edit-
distance for non-matched skip-connections since each of the non-
matched skip-connections in Sbcalls for an edit of inserting a new
skip connection into fa. The mapping function φs:Sa→Sbis
an injective function. ds(·,·)is the edit-distance for two matched
skip-connections defined as:
ds(sa,sb)=|u(sa)−u(sb)|+|δ(sa)−δ(sb)|
max[u(sa),u(sb)]+max[δ(sa),δ(sb)], (9)
where u(s)is the topological rank of the layer the skip-connection
sstarted from, δ(s)is the number of layers between the start and
end point of the skip-connection s.
This minimization problem in Equation (8)can be mapped to
a bipartite graph matching problem, where faandfbare the two
disjoint sets of the graph, each skip-connection is a node in its
corresponding set. The edit-distance between two skip-connections
is the weight of the edge between them. The weighted bipartite
graph matching problem is solved by the Hungarian algorithm
(Kuhn-Munkres algorithm) [26].
3.2 Optimization for Tree Structured Space
The second challenge of using Bayesian optimization to guide net-
work morphism is the optimization of the acquisition function. The
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1948

==== Page 4 ====
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
traditional acquisition functions are defined in Euclidean space.
The optimization methods are not applicable to the tree-structured
search via network morphism. To optimize our acquisition func-
tion, we need a method to efficiently optimize the acquisition func-
tion in the tree-structured space. To deal with this problem, we
propose a novel method to optimize the acquisition function on
tree-structured space.
Upper-confidence bound (UCB) [ 1] is selected as our acquisition
function, which is defined as:
α(f)=µ(yf)−βσ(yf), (10)
whereyf=Cost(f,D),βis the balancing factor, µ(yf)andσ(yf)
are the posterior mean and standard deviation of variable yfpre-
dicted by the Gaussian process. It has two important properties,
which fit our problem. First, it has an explicit balance factor βfor ex-
ploration and exploitation. Second, α(f)is directly comparable with
the cost function value c(i)in search historyH={(f(i),θ(i),c(i))}.
The UCB estimates the lowest possible cost given the neural net-
work f.ˆf=arдminfα(f)is the generated neural architecture for
next observation.
The tree-structured space is defined as follows. During the op-
timization of α(f),ˆfshould be obtained from f(i)andO, where
f(i)is an observed architecture in the search history H,Ois a
sequence of operations to morph the architecture into a new one.
Morph ftoˆfwith Ois denoted as ˆf←M( f,O), whereM(·,·)is
the function to morph fwith the operations in O. Therefore, the
search can be viewed as a tree-structured search, where each node
is a neural architecture, whose children are morphed from it by
network morphism operations.
The most common defect of network morphism is it only grows
the size of the architecture instead of shrinking them. Using network
morphism for NAS may end up with a very large architecture
without enough exploration on the smaller architectures. However,
in our tree-structure search, we not only expand the leaves but also
the inner nodes, which means the smaller architectures found in
the early stage can be selected multiple times to morph to more
comparatively small architectures.
Inspired by various heuristic search algorithms for exploring
the tree-structured search space and optimization methods balanc-
ing between exploration and exploitation, a new method based
on A* search [ 19] and simulated annealing [ 23] is proposed. A*
algorithm is widely used for tree-structure search. It maintains a
priority queue of nodes and keeps expanding the best node in the
queue. Since A* always exploits the best node, simulated annealing
is introduced to balance the exploration and exploitation by not
selecting the estimated best architecture with a probability.
As shown in Algorithm 1, the algorithm takes minimum temper-
ature Tlow, temperature decreasing rate rfor simulated annealing,
and search historyHdescribed in Section 2 as the input. It outputs
a neural architecture f∈H and a sequence of operations Oto
morph finto the new architecture. From line 2 to 6, the searched
architectures are pushed into the priority queue, which sorts the
elements according to the cost function value or the acquisition
function value. Since UCB is chosen as the acquisiton function,
α(f)is directly comparable with the history observation values c(i).
From line 7 to 18, it is the loop optimizing the acquisition function.Algorithm 1 Optimize Acquisition Function
1:Input:H,r,Tlow
2:T←1,Q←PriorityQueue()
3:cmin←lowest cinH
4:for(f,θf,c)∈H do
5: Q.Push(f)
6:end for
7:while Q,∅andT>Tlowdo
8: T←T×r,f←Q.Pop()
9:foro∈Ω(f)do
10: f′←M( f,{o})
11: ifecmin−α(f′)
T >Rand()then
12: Q.Push( f′)
13: end if
14: ifcmin >α(f′)then
15: cmin←α(f′),fmin←f′
16: end if
17: end for
18:end while
19:Return The nearest ancestor of fmininH, the operation se-
quence to reach fmin
Following the setting in A* search, in each iteration, the architec-
ture with the lowest acquisition function value is popped out to be
expanded on line 8 to 10, where Ω(f)is all the possible operations
to morph the architecture f,M(f,o)is the function to morph the
architecture fwith the operation sequence o. However, not all the
children are pushed into the priority queue for exploration purpose.
The decision of whether it is pushed into the queue is made by
simulated annealing on line 11, where ecmin−α(f′)
T is a typical accep-
tance function in simulated annealing. cminandfminare updated
from line 14 to 16, which record the minimum acquisition function
value and the corresponding architecture.
3.3 Graph-Level Network Morphism
The third challenge is to maintain the intermediate output tensor
shape consistency when morphing the architectures. Previous work
showed how to preserve the functionality of the layers the operators
applied on, namely layer-level morphism. However, from a graph-
level view, any change of a single layer could have a butterfly effect
on the entire network. Otherwise, it would break the input and
output tensor shape consistency. To tackle the challenge, a graph-
level morphism is proposed to find and morph the layers influenced
by a layer-level operation in the entire network.
Follow the four network morphism operations on a neural net-
work f∈F defined in [ 13], which can all be reflected in the change
of the computational graph G. The first operation is inserting a
layer to fto make it deeper denoted as deep(G,u), where uis
the node marking the place to insert the layer. The second one is
widening a node in fdenoted as wide(G,u), where uis the node
representing the intermediate output tensor to be widened. Widen
here could be either making the output vector of the previous fully-
connected layer of ulonger, or adding more filters to the previous
convolutional layer of u, depending on the type of the previous
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1949

==== Page 5 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
layer. The third is adding an additive connection from node uto
nodevdenoted as add(G,u,v). The fourth is adding an concatena-
tive connection from node uto nodevdenoted as concat(G,u,v).
Fordeep(G,u), no other operation is needed except for initializing
the weights of the newly added layer. However, for all other three
operations, more changes are required to G.
First, we define an effective area of wide(G,u0)asγto better
describe where to change in the network. The effective area is a
set of nodes in the computational graph, which can be recursively
defined by the following rules: 1. u0∈γ. 2.v∈γ, if∃eu→v<Ls,
u∈γ. 3.v∈γ, if∃ev→u<Ls,u∈γ.Lsis the set of fully-connected
layers and convolutional layers. Operation wide(G,u0)needs to
change two set of layers, the previous layer set Lp={eu→v∈
Ls|v∈γ}, which needs to output a wider tensor, and next layer
setLn={eu→v∈Ls|u∈γ}, which needs to input a wider tensor.
Second, for operator add(G,u0,v0), additional pooling layers may
be needed on the skip-connection. u0andv0have the same number
of channels, but their shape may differ because of the pooling layers
between them. So we need a set of pooling layers whose effect is
the same as the combination of all the pooling layers between
u0andv0, which is defined as Lo={e∈Lpool|e∈pu0→v0}.
where pu0→v0could be any path between u0andv0,Lpool is the
pooling layer set. Another layer Lcis used after to pooling layers
to process u0to the same width as v0. Third, in concat(G,u0,v0),
the concatenated tensor is wider than the original tensor v0. The
concatenated tensor is input to a new layer Lcto reduce the width
back to the same width as v0. Additional pooling layers are also
needed for the concatenative connection.
3.4 Time Complexity Analysis
As described at the start of Section 3, Bayesian optimization can
be roughly divided into three steps: update, generation, and obser-
vation. The bottleneck of the algorithm efficiency is observation,
which involves the training of the generated neural architecture.
Letnbe the number of architectures in the search history. The time
complexity of the update is O(n2log2n). In each generation, the ker-
nel is computed between the new architectures during optimizing
acquisition function and the ones in the search history, the number
of values in which is O(nm), where mis the number of architectures
computed during the optimization of the acquisition function. The
time complexity for computing d(·,·)once is O(l2+s3), where l
andsare the number of layers and skip-connections. So the overall
time complexity is O(nm(l2+s3)+n2log2n). The magnitude of
these factors is within the scope of tens. So the time consumption
of update and generation is trivial comparing to the observation.
4 AUTO-KERAS
Based on the proposed neural architecture search method, we de-
veloped an open-source AutoML system, namely Auto-Keras. It
is named after Keras [ 11], which is known for its simplicity in
creating neural networks. Similar to SMAC [ 21], TPOT [ 35], Auto-
WEKA [ 44], and Auto-Sklearn [ 15], the goal is to enable domain
experts who are not familiar with machine learning technologies
to use machine learning techniques easily. However, Auto-Keras
is focusing on the deep learning tasks, which is different from the
systems focusing on the shallow models mentioned above.
Figure 2: Auto-Keras System Overview. (1) The user calls the
API. (2) The Searcher generates neural architectures on CPU.
(3) Graph builds real neural networks with parameters on
RAM from the neural architectures. (4) The neural network
is copied to GPU for training. (5) Trained neural networks
are saved on storage devices. The Searcher is updated based
on the training results. Step (2) to (5) will repeat until it
reaches the time limit.
Although, there are several AutoML services available on large
cloud computing platforms, three things are prohibiting the users
from using them. First, cloud services are not free to use, which
may not be affordable for everyone who wants to use AutoML
techniques. Second, the cloud-based AutoML usually requires com-
plicated configurations of Docker containers and Kubernetes, which
is not easy for people without a rich computer science background.
Third, the AutoML service providers are honest-but-curious [ 9],
which cannot guarantee the security and privacy of the data. An
open-source software, which is easily downloadable and runs lo-
cally, would solve these problems and make the AutoML accessible
to everyone. To bridge the gap, we developed Auto-Keras.
It is challenging, to design an easy-to-use and locally deploy-
able system. First, we need a concise and configurable application
programming interface (API). For the users who don’t have rich
experience in programming, they could easily learn how to use the
API. For the advanced users, they can still configure the details of
the system to meet their requirements. Second, local computation
resources may be limited. We need to make full use of the local
computation resources to speed up the search. Third, the available
GPU memory may be of different sizes in different environments.
We need to adapt the neural architecture sizes to the GPU memory
during the search.
4.1 System Overview
The system architecture of Auto-Keras is shown in Figure 2. We
design this architecture to fully make use of the computational
resource of both CPU and GPU, and utilize the memory efficiently
by only placing the currently useful information on the RAM, and
save the rest on the storage devices, e.g., hard drives. The top part
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1950

==== Page 6 ====
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
is the API, which is directly called by the users. It is responsible
for calling corresponding middle-level modules to complete certain
functionalities. The Searcher is the module of the neural architec-
ture search algorithm containing Bayesian Optimizer and Gaussian
Process. These search algorithms run on CPU. The Model Trainer is
a module responsible for the computation on GPUs. It trains given
neural networks with the training data in a separate process for
parallelism. The Graph is the module processing the computational
graphs of neural networks, which is controlled by the Searcher for
the network morphism operations. The current neural architecture
in the Graph is placed on RAM for faster access. The Model Storage
is a pool of trained models. Since the size of the neural networks
are large and cannot be stored all in memory, the model storage
saves all the trained models on the storage devices.
A typical workflow for the Auto-Keras system is as follows. The
user initiated a search for the best neural architecture for the dataset.
The API received the call, preprocess the dataset, and pass it to the
Searcher to start the search. The Bayesian Optimizer in the Searcher
would generate a new architecture using CPU. It calls the Graph
module to build the generated neural architecture into a real neural
network in the RAM. The new neural architecture is copied the
GPU for the Model Trainer to train with the dataset. The trained
model is saved in the Model Storage. The performance of the model
is feedback to the Searcher to update the Gaussian Process.
4.2 Application Programming Interface
The design of the API follows the classic design of the Scikit-Learn
API [ 6,36], which is concise and configurable. The training of a
neural network requires as few as three lines of code calling the
constructor, the fit and predict function respectively. To accommo-
date the needs of different users, we designed two levels of APIs.
The first level is named as task-level. The users only need to know
their task, e.g., Image Classification, Text Regression, to use the API.
The second level is named search-level, which is for advanced users.
The user can search for a specific type of neural network architec-
tures, e.g., multi-layer perceptron, convolutional neural network.
To use this API, they need to preprocess the dataset by themselves
and know which type of neural network, e.g., CNN or MLP, is the
best for their task.
Several accommodations have been implemented to enhance the
user experience with the Auto-Keras package. First, the user can
restore and continue a previous search which might be accidentally
killed. From the users’ perspective, the main difference of using
Auto-Keras comparing with the AutoML systems aiming at shallow
models is the much longer time consumption, since a number of
deep neural networks are trained during the neural architecture
search. It is possible for some accident to happen to kill the pro-
cess before the search finishes. Therefore, the search outputs all
the searched neural network architectures with their trained pa-
rameters into a specific directory on the disk. As long as the path
to the directory is provided, the previous search can be restored.
Second, the user can export the search results, which are neural
architectures, as saved Keras models for other usages. Third, for
advanced users, they can specify all kinds of hyperparameters of
the search process and neural network optimization process by the
default parameters in the interface.
Searcher Queue GPU CPU
Pop Graph
Train Model
Update GPGenerate 
Graph
Generated 
Graph
Push GraphFigure 3: CPU and GPU Parallelism. The Searcher obtains
the next neural architecture to be trained and starts the
training on GPU in a separate process. Then, instead of wait-
ing for the training to finish, it directly starts to generate the
next neural architecture on CPU.
4.3 CPU and GPU Parallelism
To make full use of the limited local computation resources, the pro-
gram can run in parallel on the GPU and the CPU at the same time.
If we do the observation (training of the current neural network),
update, and generation of Bayesian optimization in sequential or-
der. The GPUs will be idle during the update and generation. The
CPUs will be idle during the observation. To improve efficiency,
the observation is run in parallel with the generation in separated
processes. A training queue is maintained as a buffer for the Model
Trainer. Figure 3 shows the Sequence diagram of the parallelism
between the CPU and the GPU. First, the Searcher requests the
queue to pop out a new graph and pass it to GPU to start training.
Second, while the GPU is busy, the searcher requests the CPU to
generate a new graph. At this time period, the GPU and the CPU
work in parallel. Third, the CPU returns the generated graph to the
searcher, who pushes the graph into the queue. Finally, the Model
Trainer finished training the graph on the GPU and returns it to the
Searcher to update the Gaussian process. In this way, the idle time
of GPU and CPU are dramatically reduced to improve the efficiency
of the search process.
4.4 GPU Memory Adaption
The size of the neural networks needs to be limited according to
the GPU memory. Otherwise, the system would crash because of
running out of GPU memory. Many approaches have been taken
to search for memory-efficient neural architectures [ 42]. In Auto-
Keras, we implement a memory estimation function on our own
data structure for the neural architectures. An integer value is
used to mark the upper bound of the neural architecture size. Any
new computational graph whose estimated size exceeds the upper
bound is discarded. However, the system may still crash because
the management of the GPU memory is very complicated, which
cannot be precisely estimated. So whenever it runs out of GPU
memory, the upper bound is lowered down to further limit the size
of the generated neural networks.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1951

==== Page 7 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
5 EXPERIMENTS
In the experiments, we aim at answering the following questions.
1) How effective is the search algorithm with limited running time?
2) How much efficiency is gained from Bayesian optimization and
network morphism? 3) Does the proposed kernel function correctly
measure the similarity among neural networks in terms of their
actual performance?
Datasets Three benchmark datasets, MNIST [ 27], CIFAR10 [ 25],
and FASHION [ 46] are used in the experiments to evaluate our
method. They prefer very different neural architectures to achieve
good performance.
Baselines Four categories of baseline methods are used for com-
parison, which are elaborated as follows:
•Straightforward Methods: random search (RAND) and grid search
(GRID). They search the number of convolutional layers and the
width of those layers.
•Conventional Methods: SPMT [ 40] and SMAC [ 21]. Both SPMT
and SMAC are designed for general hyperparameters tuning
tasks of machine learning models instead of focusing on the deep
neural networks. They tune the 16 hyperparameters of a three-
layer convolutional neural network, including the width, dropout
rate, and regularization rate of each layer.
•State-of-the-art Methods: SEAS [ 13], NASBOT [ 22]. We carefully
implemented the SEAS as described in their paper. For NAS-
BOT, since the experimental settings are very similar, we directly
trained their searched neural architecture in the paper. They did
not search architectures for MNIST and FASHION dataset, so the
results are omitted in our experiments.
•Variants of the proposed method: BFS and BO. Our proposed
method is denoted as AK. BFS replaces the Bayesian optimization
in AK with the breadth-first search. BO is another variant, which
does not employ network morphism to speed up the training. For
AK,βis set to 2.5, while λis set to 1 according to the parameter
sensitivity analysis.
In addition, the performance of the deployed system of Auto-Keras
(AK-DP) is also evaluated in the experiments. The difference from
the AK above is that AK-DP uses various advanced techniques
to improve the performance including learning rate scheduling,
multiple manually defined initial architectures.
Experimental Setting The general experimental setting for
evaluation is described as follows: First, the original training data
of each dataset is further divided into training and validation sets
by 80-20. Second, the testing data of each dataset is used as the
testing set. Third, the initial architecture for SEAS, BO, BFS, and
AK is a three-layer convolutional neural network with 64 filters in
each layer. Fourth, each method is run for 12 hours on a single GPU
(NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti) on the training and validation set
with batch size of 64. Fifth, the output architecture is trained with
both the training and validation set. Sixth, the testing set is used
to evaluate the trained architecture. Error rate is selected as the
evaluation metric since all the datasets are for classification. For a
fair comparison, the same data processing and training procedures
are used for all the methods. The neural networks are trained for 200
epochs in all the experiments. Notably, AK-DP uses a real deployed
system setting, whose result is not directly comparable with theTable 1: Classification Error Rate
Methods MNIST CIFAR10 FASHION
RANDOM 1.79% 16 .86% 11 .36%
GRID 1.68% 17 .17% 10 .28%
SPMT 1.36% 14 .68% 9 .62%
SMAC 1.43% 15 .04% 10 .87%
SEAS 1.07% 12 .43% 8 .05%
NASBOT NA 12.30% NA
BFS 1.56% 13 .84% 9 .13%
BO 1.83% 12 .90% 7 .99%
AK 0.55% 11 .44% 7 .42%
AK-DP 0.60% 3 .60% 6 .72%
rest of the methods. Except for AK-DP, all other methods are fairly
compared using the same initial architecture to start the search.
5.1 Evaluation of Effectiveness
We first evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The
results are shown in Table 1. The following conclusions can be
drawn based on the results.
(1) AK-DP is evaluated to show the final performance of our
system, which shows the deployed system (AK-DP) achieved state-
of-the-art performance on all three datasets.
(2) The proposed method AK achieves the lowest error rate on
all the three datasets, which demonstrates that AK is able to find
simple but effective architectures on small datasets (MNIST) and can
explore more complicated structures on larger datasets (CIFAR10).
(3) The straightforward approaches and traditional approaches
perform well on the MNIST dataset, but poorly on the CIFAR10
dataset. This may come from the fact that: naive approaches like
random search and grid search only try a limited number of archi-
tectures blindly while the two conventional approaches are unable
to change the depth and skip-connections of the architectures.
(4) Though the two state-of-the-art approaches achieve accept-
able performance, SEAS could not beat our proposed model due
to its subpar search strategy. The hill-climbing strategy it adopts
only takes one step at each time in morphing the current best archi-
tecture, and the search tree structure is constrained to be unidirec-
tionally extending. Comparatively speaking, NASBOT possesses
stronger search expandability and also uses Bayesian optimization
as our proposed method. However, the low efficiency in training the
neural architectures constrains its power in achieving comparable
performance within a short time period. By contrast, the network
morphism scheme along with the novel searching strategy ensures
our model to achieve desirable performance with limited hardware
resources and time budges.
(5) For the two variants of AK, BFS preferentially considers
searching a vast number of neighbors surrounding the initial archi-
tecture, which constrains its power in reaching the better architec-
tures away from the initialization. By comparison, BO can jump
far from the initial architecture. But without network morphism, it
needs to train each neural architecture with a much longer time,
which limits the number of architectures it can search within a
given time.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1952

==== Page 8 ====
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
Figure 4: Evaluation of Efficiency. The two figures plot the
same result with different X-axis. BFS uses network mor-
phism. BO uses Bayesian optimization. AK uses both.
5.2 Evaluation of Efficiency
In this experiment, we try to evaluate the efficiency gain of the pro-
posed method in two aspects. First, we evaluate whether Bayesian
optimization can really find better solutions with a limited number
of observations. Second, we evaluated whether network morphism
can enhance training efficiency.
We compare the proposed method AK with its two variants, BFS
and BO, to show the efficiency gains from Bayesian optimization
and network morphism, respectively. BFS does not adopt Bayesian
optimization but only network morphism, and use breadth-first
search to select the network morphism operations. BO does not
employ network morphism but only Bayesian optimization. Each
of the three methods is run on CIFAR10 for twelve hours. The two
figures in Figure 4 shows the same results but with different X-axes.
The Y-axis is the lowest error rate achieved. The X-axes are the
number of neural networks searched and the searching time.
Two conclusions can be drawn by comparing BFS and AK. First,
Bayesian optimization can efficiently find better architectures with
a limited number of observations. When searched the same num-
ber of neural architectures, AK could achieve a much lower error
rate than BFS. It demonstrates that Bayesian optimization could
effectively guide the search in the right direction, which is much
more efficient in finding good architectures than the naive BFS
approach. Second, the overhead created by Bayesian optimization
during the search is low. In the left part of Figure 4, it shows BFS and
AK searched similar numbers of neural networks within twelve
hours. BFS is a naive search strategy, which does not consume
much time during the search besides training the neural networks.
AK searched slightly less neural architectures than BFS because of
higher time complexity.
Two conclusions can be drawn by comparing BO and AK. First,
network morphism does not negatively impact search performance.
In the left part of Figure 4, when BO and AK search a similar
number of neural architectures, they achieve similar lowest error
rates. Second, network morphism increases training efficiency, thus
improve the performance. As shown in the left part of Figure 4,
AK could search much more architectures than BO within the
same amount of time due to the adoption of network morphism.
Since network morphism does not degrade the search performance,
searching more architectures results in finding better architectures.
This could also be confirmed in the right part of Figure 4. At the
end of the searching time, AK achieves lower error rate than BO.
(a) Kernel Matrix
 (b) Performance Similarity
Figure 5: Kernel and Performance Matrix Visualization. (a)
shows the proposed kernel matrix. (b) is a matrix of similar-
ity in the performance of the neural architectures.
To show the quality of the edit-distance neural network kernel,
we investigate the difference between the two matrices KandP.
K∈Rn×nis the kernel matrix, where Ki,j=κ(f(i),f(j)).P∈
Rn×ndescribes the similarity of the actual performance between
neural networks, where Pi,j=−|c(i)−c(j)|, where c(i)is the cost
function value in the search history Hdescribed in Section 3. We
use CIFAR10 as an example here, and adopt error rate as the cost
metric. Since the values in KandPare in different scales, both
matrices are normalized to the range [−1,1]. The difference between
KandPare measured quantitatively with mean square error, which
is1.12×10−1.
KandPare visualized in Figure 5a and 5b. Lighter color means
larger values. There are two patterns can be observed in the figures.
First, the white diagonal of Figure 5a and 5b. According to the
definiteness property of the kernel, κ(fx,fx)=1,∀fx∈F, thus
the diagonal of Kis always 1. It is the same for Psince no difference
exists in the performance of the same neural network. Second,
there is a small light square area on the upper left of Figure 5a.
These are the initial neural architectures to train the Bayesian
optimizer, which are neighbors to each other in terms of network
morphism operations. A similar pattern is reflected in Figure 5b,
which indicates that when the kernel measures two architectures
as similar, they tend to have similar performance.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a novel method for efficient neural architecture search
with network morphism is proposed. It enables Bayesian optimiza-
tion to guide the search by designing a neural network kernel, and
an algorithm for optimizing acquisition function in tree-structured
space. The proposed method is wrapped into an open-source Au-
toML system, namely Auto-Keras, which can be easily downloaded
and used with an extremely simple interface. The method has shown
good performance in the experiments and outperformed several
traditional hyperparameter-tuning methods and state-of-the-art
neural architecture search methods. The following open questions
may be studied in future work. (1) Tune the neural architecture
and the hyperparameters of the training process jointly. (2) Design
task-oriented NAS to solve specific machine learning problems,
e.g., image segmentation [ 28], object detection [ 16,32], network
analysis [20, 43].
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1953

==== Page 9 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments, and all the contributors from the open-source community.
This work is, in part, supported by DARPA (#FA8750-17- 2-0116) and
NSF (#IIS-1718840 and #IIS-1750074). The views, opinions, and/or
findings expressed are those of the author(s) and should not be
interpreted as representing the official views or policies of the De-
partment of Defense or the U.S. Government.
REFERENCES
[1] Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. 2002. Finite-time analysis of
the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine learning (2002).
[2]Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. 2016. Design-
ing neural network architectures using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02167 (2016).
[3]James Bergstra, Dan Yamins, and David D Cox. 2013. Hyperopt: A python library
for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms. In Python
in Science Conference.
[4]Jean Bourgain. 1985. On Lipschitz embedding of finite metric spaces in Hilbert
space. Israel Journal of Mathematics (1985).
[5]Andrew Brock, Theodore Lim, James M Ritchie, and Nick Weston. 2017. SMASH:
one-shot model architecture search through hypernetworks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.05344 (2017).
[6]Lars Buitinck, Gilles Louppe, Mathieu Blondel, Fabian Pedregosa, Andreas
Mueller, Olivier Grisel, Vlad Niculae, Peter Prettenhofer, Alexandre Gramfort,
Jaques Grobler, et al .2013. API design for machine learning software: experi-
ences from the scikit-learn project. In ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data
Mining and Machine Learning.
[7]Han Cai, Tianyao Chen, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Jun Wang. 2018. Efficient
architecture search by network transformation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
[8]Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. 2019. ProxylessNAS: Direct neural architec-
ture search on target task and hardware. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
[9]Qi Chai and Guang Gong. 2012. Verifiable symmetric searchable encryption for
semi-honest-but-curious cloud servers. In International Conference on Communi-
cations.
[10] Tianqi Chen, Ian Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. 2015. Net2net: Accelerating
learning via knowledge transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05641 (2015).
[11] François Chollet et al. 2015. Keras. https://keras.io.
[12] Travis Desell. 2017. Large scale evolution of convolutional neural networks
using volunteer computing. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference
Companion.
[13] Thomas Elsken, Jan-Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. 2017. Simple And Ef-
ficient Architecture Search for Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.04528 (2017).
[14] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. 2018. Neural Architecture
Search: A Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05377 (2018).
[15] Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel
Blum, and Frank Hutter. 2015. Efficient and robust automated machine learning.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[16] Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc V Le. 2019. NAS-FPN:
Learning Scalable Feature Pyramid Architecture for Object Detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.07392 (2019).
[17] Zichao Guo, Xiangyu Zhang, Haoyuan Mu, Wen Heng, Zechun Liu, Yichen
Wei, and Jian Sun. 2019. Single Path One-Shot Neural Architecture Search with
Uniform Sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00420 (2019).
[18] Bernard Haasdonk and Claus Bahlmann. 2004. Learning with distance substitu-
tion kernels. In Joint Pattern Recognition Symposium.
[19] Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. 1968. A formal basis for the
heuristic determination of minimum cost paths. IEEE transactions on Systems
Science and Cybernetics (1968).
[20] Xiao Huang, Qiangquan Song, Fan Yang, and Xia Hu. 2019. Large-scale hetero-
geneous feature embedding. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[21] Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2011. Sequential Model-
Based Optimization for General Algorithm Configuration. In International Con-
ference on Learning and Intelligent Optimization.
[22] Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabas Poczos,
and Eric Xing. 2018. Neural Architecture Search with Bayesian Optimisation and
Optimal Transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2018).
[23] Scott Kirkpatrick, C Daniel Gelatt, and Mario P Vecchi. 1983. Optimization by
simulated annealing. science (1983).
[24] Lars Kotthoff, Chris Thornton, Holger H Hoos, Frank Hutter, and Kevin Leyton-
Brown. 2016. Auto-WEKA 2.0: Automatic model selection and hyperparameteroptimization in WEKA. Journal of Machine Learning Research (2016).
[25] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images. Technical Report. Citeseer.
[26] Harold W Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval
Research Logistics (1955).
[27] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. 1998. Gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE (1998).
[28] Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan
Yuille, and Li Fei-Fei. 2019. Auto-DeepLab: Hierarchical Neural Architecture
Search for Semantic Image Segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02985 (2019).
[29] Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, Alan
Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. 2017. Progressive neural architecture
search. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
[30] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. 2017. Hierarchical representations for efficient architecture search.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00436 (2017).
[31] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. 2018. Darts: Differentiable
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055 (2018).
[32] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed,
Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C Berg. 2016. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector.
InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision.
[33] Renqian Luo, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Enhong Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2018. Neural
architecture optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[34] Hiroshi Maehara. 2013. Euclidean embeddings of finite metric spaces. Discrete
Mathematics (2013).
[35] Randal S. Olson, Nathan Bartley, Ryan J. Urbanowicz, and Jason H. Moore. 2016.
Evaluation of a Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool for Automating Data
Science. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016.
[36] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,
Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss,
Vincent Dubourg, et al .2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research (2011).
[37] Hieu Pham, Melody Y Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V Le, and Jeff Dean. 2018.
Efficient Neural Architecture Search via Parameter Sharing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03268 (2018).
[38] Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. 2018. Reg-
ularized Evolution for Image Classifier Architecture Search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.01548 (2018).
[39] Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxena, Yutaka Leon Sue-
matsu, Quoc Le, and Alex Kurakin. 2017. Large-scale evolution of image
classifiers, In International Conference on Machine Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01041.
[40] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. 2012. Practical bayesian
optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.
[41] Masanori Suganuma, Shinichi Shirakawa, and Tomoharu Nagao. 2017. A genetic
programming approach to designing convolutional neural network architectures.
InGenetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
[42] Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V Le. 2018.
Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.11626 (2018).
[43] Qiaoyu Tan, Ninghao Liu, and Xia Hu. 2019. Deep Representation Learning for
Social Network Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08547 (2019).
[44] Chris Thornton, Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2013.
Auto-WEKA: Combined selection and hyperparameter optimization of classifi-
cation algorithms. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining.
[45] Tao Wei, Changhu Wang, Yong Rui, and Chang Wen Chen. 2016. Network
morphism. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
[46] Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. 2017. Fashion-MNIST:
a Novel Image Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms.
arXiv:cs.LG/cs.LG/1708.07747
[47] Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. 2019. SNAS: stochastic
neural architecture search. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
[48] Pinar Yanardag and SVN Vishwanathan. 2015. Deep graph kernels. In Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
[49] Zhiping Zeng, Anthony KH Tung, Jianyong Wang, Jianhua Feng, and Lizhu Zhou.
2009. Comparing stars: On approximating graph edit distance. In International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases.
[50] Zhao Zhong, Junjie Yan, and Cheng-Lin Liu. 2017. Practical Network Blocks
Design with Q-Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05552 (2017).
[51] Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. 2016. Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1954

==== Page 10 ====
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
APPENDIX: REPRODUCIBILITY
In this section, we provide the details of our implementation and
proofs for reproducibility.
•The default architectures used to initialized are introduced.
•The details of the implementation of the four network mor-
phism operations are provided.
•The details of preprocessing the datasets are shown.
•The details of the training process are described.
•The proof of the validity of the kernel function is provided.
•The process of using ρ(·)to distort the approximated edit-
distance of the neural architectures d(·,·)is introduced.
Notably, the code and detailed documentation are available at Auto-
Keras official website (https://autokeras.com).
A DEFAULT ARCHITECTURES
As we introduced in the experiment section, for all other methods
except AK-DP, are using the same three-layer convolutional neural
network as the default architecture. The AK-DP is initialized with
ResNet, DenseNet and the three-layer CNN. In the current imple-
mentation, ResNet18 and DenseNet121 specifically are chosen as
the among all the ResNet and DenseNet architectures.
The three-layer CNN is constructed as follows. Each convolu-
tional layer is actually a convolutional block of a ReLU layer, a
batch-normalization layer, the convolutional layer, and a pooling
layer. All the convolutional layers are with kernel size equal to
three, stride equal to one, and number of filters equal to 64.
All the default architectures share the same fully-connected
layers design. After all the convolutional layers, the output tensor
passes through a global average pooling layer followed by a dropout
layer, a fully-connected layer of 64 neurons, a ReLU layer, another
fully-connected layer, and a softmax layer.
B NETWORK MORPHISM IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation of the network morphism is introduced from
two aspects. First, we describe how the new weights are initial-
ized. Second, we introduce a pool of possible operations which the
Bayesian optimizer can select from, e.g.the possible start and end
points of a skip connection.
The four network morphism operations all involve adding new
weights during inserting new layers and expanding existing lay-
ers. We initialize the newly added weights with zeros. However,
it would create a symmetry prohibiting the newly added weights
to learn different values during backpropagation. We follow the
Net2Net [ 10] to add noise to break the symmetry. The amount of
noise added is the largest noise possible not changing the output.
There are a large amount of possible network morphism op-
erations we can choose. Although there are only four types of
operations we can choose, a parameter of the operation can be set
to a large number of different values. For example, when we use the
deep(G,u)operation, we need to choose the location uto insert the
layer. In the tree-structured search, we actually cannot exhaust all
the operations to get all the children. We will keep sampling from
the possible operations until we reach eight children for a node.
For the sampling, we randomly sample an operation from deep ,
wide and skip ( addandconcat ), with equally likely probability. Theparameters of the corresponding operation are sampled accord-
ingly. If it is the deep operation, we need to decide the location to
insert the layer. In our implementation, any location except right
after a skip-connection. Moreover, we support inserting not only
convolutional layers, but activation layers, batch-normalization
layers, dropout layer, and fully-connected layers as well. They are
randomly sampled with equally likely probability. If it is the wide
operation, we need to choose the layer to be widened. It can be any
convolutional layer or fully-connected layer, which are randomly
sampled with equally likely probability. If it is the skip operations,
we need to decide if it is addorconcat . The start point and end
point of a skip-connection can be the output of any layer except
the already-exist skip-connection layers. So all the possible skip-
connections are generated in the form of tuples of the start point,
end point and type ( addorconcat ), among which we randomly
sample a skip-connection with equally likely probability.
C PREPROCESSING THE DATASETS
The benchmark datasets, e.g., MNIST, CIFAR10, FASHION, are pre-
processed before the neural architecture search. It involves nor-
malization and data augmentation. We normalize the data to the
standard normal distribution. For each channel, a mean and a stan-
dard deviation are calculated since the values in different channels
may have different distributions. The mean and standard deviation
are calculated using the training and validation set together. The
testing set is normalized using the same values. The data augmen-
tation includes random crop, random horizontal flip, and cutout,
which can improve the robustness of the trained model.
D PERFORMANCE ESTIMATION
During the observation phase, we need to estimate the perfor-
mance of a neural architecture to update the Gaussian process
model in Bayesian optimization. Since the quality of the observed
performances of the neural architectures is essential to the neural
architecture search algorithm, we propose to train the neural ar-
chitectures instead of using the performance estimation strategies
used in literatures [ 5,14,37]. The quality of the observations is
essential to the neural architecture search algorithm. So the neural
architectures are trained during the search in our proposed method.
There two important requirements for the training process. First,
it needs to be adaptive to different architectures. Different neu-
ral networks require different numbers of epochs in training to
converge. Second, it should not be affected by the noise in the
performance curve. The final metric value, e.g., mean squared er-
ror or accuracy, on the validation set is not the best performance
estimation since there is random noise in it.
To be adaptive to architectures of different sizes, we use the same
strategy as the early stop criterion in the multi-layer perceptron
algorithm in Scikit-Learn [ 36]. It sets a maximum threshold τ. If the
loss of the validation set does not decrease in τepochs, the training
stops. Comparing with the methods using a fixed number of training
epochs, it is more adaptive to different neural architectures.
To avoid being affected by the noise in the performance, the
mean of metric values of the last τepochs on the validation set is
used as the estimated performance for the given neural architecture.
It is more accurate than the final metric value on the validation set.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1955

==== Page 11 ====
Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
E VALIDITY OF THE KERNEL
Theorem 1. d(fa,fb)is a metric space distance.
Proof of Theorem 1:
Theorem 1 is proved by proving the non-negativity, definiteness,
symmetry, and triangle inequality of d.
Non-negativity:
∀fxfy∈F,d(fx,fy)≥0.
From the definition of w(l)in Equation (6),∀l,w(l)>0.∴
∀lxly,dl(lx,ly)≥0.∴∀LxLy,Dl(Lx,Ly)≥0. Similarly, ∀sxsy,
ds(sx,sy)≥0, and ∀SxSy,Ds(Sx,Sy)≥0. In conclusion, ∀fxfy∈
F,d(fx,fy)≥0.
Definiteness:
fa=fb⇐⇒ d(fa,fb)=0.
fa=fb=⇒d(fa,fb)=0is trivial. To prove d(fa,fb)=0=⇒
fa=fb, letd(fa,fb)=0.∵∀LxLy,Dl(Lx,Ly)≥0and∀SxSy,
Ds(Sx,Sy)≥0. Let LaandLbbe the layer sets of faandfb. Let Sa
andSbbe the skip-connection sets of faandfb.
∴Dl(La,Lb)=0andDs(Sa,Sb)=0.∵∀lxly,dl(lx,ly)≥0
and∀sxsy,ds(sx,sy)≥0.∴|La|=|Lb|,|Sa|=|Sb|,∀la∈La,
lb=φl(la) ∈ Lb,dl(la,lb)=0,∀sa∈Sa,sb=φs(sa) ∈ Sb,
ds(sa,sb)=0. According to Equation (6), each of the layers in fa
has the same width as the matched layer in fb, According to the
restrictions of φl(·), the matched layers are in the same order, and all
the layers are matched, i.e.the layers of the two networks are exactly
the same. Similarly, the skip-connections in the two neural networks
are exactly the same. ∴fa=fb. Sod(fa,fb)=0=⇒fa=fb, let
d(fa,fb)=0. Finally, fa=fb⇐⇒ d(fa,fb).
Symmetry:
∀fxfy∈F,d(fx,fy)=d(fy,fx).
Letfaandfbbe two neural networks in F, Let LaandLbbe the
layer sets of faandfb. If|La|,|Lb|,Dl(La,Lb)=Dl(Lb,La)since
it will always swap LaandLbifLahas more layers. If |La|=|Lb|,
Dl(La,Lb)=Dl(Lb,La)sinceφl(·)is undirected, and dl(·,·)is
symmetric. Similarly, Ds(·,·)is symmetric. In conclusion, ∀fxfy∈
F,d(fx,fy)=d(fy,fx).
Triangle Inequality:
∀fxfyfz∈F,d(fx,fy)≤d(fx,fz)+d(fz,fy).
Letlx,ly,lzbe neural network layers of any width. If w(lx)<
w(ly)<w(lz),dl(lx,ly)=w(ly)−w(lx)
w(ly)=2−w(lx)+w(ly)
w(ly)≤2−
w(lx)+w(ly)
w(lz)=dl(lx,lz)+dl(lz,ly). Ifw(lx) ≤ w(lz) ≤ w(ly),
dl(lx,ly)=w(ly)−w(lx)
w(ly)=w(ly)−w(lz)
w(ly)+w(lz)−w(lx)
w(ly)≤w(ly)−w(lz)
w(ly)+
w(lz)−w(lx)
w(lz)=dl(lx,lz)+dl(lz,ly). Ifw(lz) ≤ w(lx) ≤ w(ly),
dl(lx,ly)=w(ly)−w(lx)
w(ly)=2−w(ly)
w(ly)−w(lx)
w(ly)≤2−w(lz)
w(lx)−w(lx)
w(ly)≤
2−w(lz)
w(lx)−w(lz)
w(ly)=dl(lx,lz)+dl(lz,ly). By the symmetry property
ofdl(·,·), the rest of the orders of w(lx),w(ly)andw(lz)also satisfy
the triangle inequality. ∴∀lxlylz,dl(lx,ly)≤dl(lx,lz)+dl(lz,ly).
∀LaLbLc, givenφl:a→candφl:c→bused to compute Dl(La,
Lc)andDl(Lc,Lb), we are able to construct φl:a→bto compute
Dl(La,Lb)satisfies Dl(La,Lb)≤Dl(La,Lc)+Dl(Lc,Lb).
LetLa1={l|φl:a→c(l),∅∧φl:c→b(φl:c→a(l)),∅}.
Lb1={l|l=φl:c→b(φl:a→c(l′)),l′∈La1},Lc1={l|l=
φl:a→c(l′),∅,l′∈La1},La2=La−La1,Lb2=Lb−Lb1,
Lc2=Lc−Lc1.From the definition of Dl(·,·), with the current matching func-
tionsφl:a→candφl:c→b,Dl(La,Lc)=Dl(La1,Lc1)+Dl(La2,Lc2)
andDl(Lc,Lb)=Dl(Lc1,Lb1)+Dl(Lc2,Lb2). First, ∀la∈La1is
matched to lb=φl:c→b(φl:a→c(la))∈ Lb. Since the triangle in-
equality property of dl(·,·),Dl(La1,Lb1)≤Dl(La1,Lc1)+Dl(Lc1,
Lb1). Second, the rest of the la∈Laandlb∈Lbare free to match
with each other.
LetLa21={l|φl:a→c(l),∅∧φl:c→b(φl:c→a(l))=∅},
Lb21={l|l=φl:c→b(l′),∅,l′∈Lc2},Lc21={l|l=
φl:a→c(l′),∅,l′∈La2},La22=La2−La21,Lb22=Lb2−Lb21,
Lc22=Lc2−Lc21.
From the definition of Dl(·,·), with the current matching func-
tionsφl:a→candφl:c→b,Dl(La2,Lc2)=Dl(La21,Lc21)+Dl(La22,
Lc22)andDl(Lc2,Lb2)=Dl(Lc22,Lb21)+Dl(Lc21,Lb22).
∵Dl(La22,Lc22)+Dl(Lc21,Lb22)≥|La2|
andDl(La21,Lc21)+Dl(Lc22,Lb21)≥|Lb2|
∴Dl(La2,Lb2)≤|La2|+|Lb2|≤Dl(La2,Lc2)+Dl(Lc2,Lb2).
SoDl(La,Lb)≤Dl(La,Lc)+Dl(Lc,Lb).
Similarly, Ds(Sa,Sb)≤Ds(Sa,Sc)+Ds(Sc,Sb).
Finally, ∀fxfyfz∈F,d(fx,fy)≤d(fx,fz)+d(fz,fy).
In conclusion, d(fa,fb)is a metric space distance. □
Theorem 2. κ(fa,fb)is a valid kernel.
Proof of Theorem 2: The kernel matrix of generalized RBF ker-
nel in the form of e−γD2(x,y)is positive definite if and only if there
is an isometric embedding in Euclidean space for the metric space
with metric D[18]. Any finite metric space distance can be isomet-
rically embedded into Euclidean space by changing the scale of the
distance measurement [ 34]. By using Bourgain theorem [ 4], metric
space dis embedded to Euclidean space with distortion. ρ(d(fa,fb))
is the embedded distance for d(fa,fb). Therefore, e−ρ2(d(fa,fb))is
always positive definite. So κ(fa,fb)is a valid kernel. □
F DISTANCE DISTORTION
In this section, we introduce how Bourgain theorem is used to
distort the learned calculated edit-distance into an isometrically
embeddable distance for Euclidean space in the Bayesian optimiza-
tion process.
From Bourgain theorem, a Bourgain embedding algorithm is
designed. The input for the algorithm is a metric distance matrix.
Here we use the edit-distance matrix of neural architectures. The
outputs of the algorithm are some vectors in Euclidean space cor-
responding to the instances. In our case, the instances are neural
architectures. From these vectors, we can calculate a new distance
matrix using Euclidean distance. The objective of calculating these
vectors is to minimize the difference between the new distance
matrix and the input distance matrix, i.e., minimize the distortions
on the distances.
We apply this Bourgain algorithm during the update process of
the Bayesian optimization. The edit-distance matrix of previous
training examples, i.e., the neural architectures, is stored in memory.
Whenever new examples are used to train the Bayesian optimiza-
tion, the edit-distance is expanded to include the new distances.
The distorted distance matrix is computed using Bourgain algo-
rithm from the expanded edit-distance matrix. It is isometrically
embeddable to the Euclidean space. The kernel matrix computed
using the distorted distance matrix is a valid kernel.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1956

