==== Page 1 ====
1
Automatically Designing CNN Architectures Using
Genetic Algorithm for Image Classiﬁcation
Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE, Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE,
Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE, and Jiancheng Lv, Member, IEEE,
Abstract —Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have gained
a remarkable success on many image classiﬁcation tasks in
recent years. However, the performance of CNNs highly relies
upon their architectures. For most state-of-the-art CNNs, their
architectures are often manually-designed with expertise in both
CNNs and the investigated problems. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
for users, who have no extended expertise in CNNs, to design
optimal CNN architectures for their own image classiﬁcation
problems of interest. In this paper, we propose an automatic
CNN architecture design method by using genetic algorithms,
to effectively address the image classiﬁcation tasks. The most
merit of the proposed algorithm remains in its “automatic”
characteristic that users do not need domain knowledge of
CNNs when using the proposed algorithm, while they can still
obtain a promising CNN architecture for the given images.
The proposed algorithm is validated on widely used benchmark
image classiﬁcation datasets, by comparing to the state-of-the-art
peer competitors covering eight manually-designed CNNs, seven
automatic+manually tuning and ﬁve automatic CNN architecture
design algorithms. The experimental results indicate the proposed
algorithm outperforms the existing automatic CNN architecture
design algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, parameter
numbers and consumed computational resources. The proposed
algorithm also shows the very comparable classiﬁcation accuracy
to the best one from manually-designed and automatic+manually
tuning CNNs, while consumes much less of computational re-
source.
Index Terms —Convolutional neural networks, genetic algo-
rithms, neural network architecture optimization, evolutionary
deep learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
CONVOLUTIONAL Neural Networks (CNNs), as the
dominant technique of deep learning [1], have shown
remarkable superiority in various real-world applications over
most machine learning approaches [2]–[5]. It has been known
that the performance of CNNs highly relies upon their ar-
chitectures [2], [6]. To achieve promising performance, the
architectures of state-of-the-art CNNs, such as GoogleNet [7],
ResNet [8] and DenseNet [9], are all manually designed by
experts who have rich domain knowledge from both investi-
gated data and CNNs. Unfortunately, such domain knowledge
is not necessarily held by each interested user. For example,
users who are familiar with the data at hand do not necessarily
have the experience in designing the architectures of CNNs,
and vice versa. As a result, there is a surge of interest in
automating the design of CNN architectures, allowing tuning
skills of the CNN architectures to be transparent to the users
This paper has been accepted by IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
DOI:10.1109/TCYB.2020.2983860who have no domain knowledge on CNNs. On the other hand,
CNN architecture design algorithms can also spread the wide
adoption of CNNs, which in turn promotes the development
of machine intelligence.
Existing CNN architecture design algorithms can be di-
vided into two different categories, based on whether domain
knowledge is required or not when using them. The ﬁrst is
the “automatic + manually tuning” CNN architecture designs,
which implies that the manual tuning based on the expertise
in designing CNN architectures is still required. This category
covers the genetic CNN method (Genetic CNN) [10], the hier-
archical representation method (Hierarchical Evolution) [11],
the efﬁcient architecture search method (EAS) [12], the block
design method (Block-QNN-S) [13], and the advanced neu-
ral architecture search method (NSANet) [14]. The other
is the “automatic” CNN architecture designs, which do not
require any manually-tuning from users when using them. The
large-scale evolution method (Large-scale Evolution) [15], the
Cartesian genetic programming method (CGP-CNN) [16], the
neural architecture search method (NAS) [17], and the meta-
modelling method (MetaQNN) [18] belong to this category.
Owing to the extra beneﬁts of manual expertise in CNNs, it
is natural that the “automatic+manually tuning” designs often
show slightly better performance than the “automatic” de-
signs. However, the signiﬁcant superiority of the “automatic”
designs is their manually-tuning-free characteristic, which is
much preferred by users without any domain knowledge of
CNNs. For example, the NASNet and the Large-scale Evo-
lution algorithms, which are from the “automatic+manually
tuning” and the “automatic” categories, respectively, achieved
the classiﬁcation accuracies of 96.27% and 94.60% on the
CIFAR10 benchmark dataset [19], respectively. However, a
CNN framework architecture must be provided to NSANet be-
cause NSANet only automated partial cells of the framework.
Obviously, if the framework architecture is not well-designed,
the resulted CNN will not have promising performance. When
using the Large-scale Evolution method, the users just directly
perform it on the given data, and ﬁnally a promising CNN
architecture is obtained. To this end, the “automatic” CNN
architecture designs should be more welcomed because the
majority of CNN users have no extensive domain knowledge
of CNN architecture design.
On the other hand, based on the adopted techniques, CNN
architecture designs can also be classiﬁed into the evolutionary
algorithm-based ones and the reinforcement learning-based
ones. Speciﬁcally, Genetic CNN, Large-scale Evolution, Hier-
archical Evolution and CGP-CNN are based on evolutionaryarXiv:1808.03818v3  [cs.NE]  27 Mar 2020

==== Page 2 ====
2
algorithms [20], following the standard ﬂow of an evolutionary
algorithm to heuristically discover the optimal solution; while
NAS, MetaQNN, EAS, Block-QNN-S and NASNet are based
on reinforcement learning [21], resembling those based on
evolutionary algorithms, in addition to the employed heuristic
nature utilizing the reward-penalty principle of reinforcement
learning. Experimental evidence shows that the reinforcement
learning-based designs often require more intensive compu-
tational resources than the ones based on the evolutionary
algorithms [22]. For example, the NAS method consumed
800 Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) in 28 days to ﬁnd the
promising CNN architecture on the CIFAR10 dataset, while
the Genetic CNN consumed only 17 GPUs in one day on the
same dataset providing with similar performance. To this end,
the evolutionary algorithms-based CNN architecture designs
are much preferred because intensive computational resources
are not necessarily available to every interested user.
Evolutionary algorithm [20] is a class of population-based
meta-heuristic optimization paradigms inspired by the bi-
ological evolution. Typical evolutionary algorithms include
genetic algorithms (GAs) [23], genetic programming [24],
evolutionary strategy [25], etc., among which GAs are the most
popular one mainly because of their theoretical evidences [26]
and promising performance in solving different optimization
problems [27]–[31]. It has also been recognized that GAs
are capable of generating high-quality optimal solutions by
using bio-inspired operators, i.e., mutation, crossover and
selection [32]. Commonly, the operators need to be carefully
designed for the speciﬁc problems at hand. For example, Liu
et al. [33] designed a one-point crossover operator and a
novel mutation operator for the WCDMA network planning.
In addition, Kaustuv et al. [34] developed a new mutation
operator to exploit the ﬁtness and the unﬁtness for feature
selection via an ensemble method for feature selection and
classiﬁcation. Considering both characteristics of “automatic”
and evolutionary algorithm-based CNN architecture designs,
we propose an effective and efﬁcient algorithm by using GA,
in short, termed as CNN-GA, to automatically discover the
best architectures of CNNs, so that the discovered CNN can
be directly used without any manual tunings. Obviously, CNN-
GA is an automatic CNN architecture design algorithm. Please
note that the “automatic” and “automatic+manually-tuning”
are discussed from the users’ view but not the developers’
view. In contrast, adequate domain knowledge should be
encouraged in developing high-performance CNN architecture
design algorithms. This effort can be easily understood by
the analogy to the design of Windows Operation System
by scientists from Microsoft: the scientists should use their
professional knowledge as much as possible in designing a
user-friendly operating system so that the users are allowed
to effectively work on the computers, even without extensive
knowledge on the operating system.
The novelty of the proposed algorithm lies in its complete
automation in discovering the best CNN architectures, and
not requiring any manual intervention during the evolutionary
search. The contributions of the proposed CNN-GA algorithm
are summarized as follows:
1) GAs often employ the ﬁxed-length encoding strategybecause of the crossover operators primitively designed
for the individuals having the same lengths. In this case,
the length of the encoding must be speciﬁed beforehand.
Ideally, the length should be the optimal CNN depth
that is mostly unknown in advance. As a result, the
speciﬁed number may be incorrectly estimated, result-
ing in ineffective architecture designed. Although many
researchers have developed the variable-length encoding
strategy independently, the resulted CNN architecture is
not optimal because the crossover operator is not re-
designed accordingly. In this paper, we have proposed a
variable-length encoding strategy and the corresponding
crossover operator to address both issues aforementioned
efﬁciently and effectively.
2) Most existing CNN architecture algorithms are designed
based on the basic components or the well-constructed
blocks of CNNs. In practice, both designs often gener-
ate the ineffective CNN architectures and the complex
CNN architectures having poor generalization ability,
respectively. In this paper, the skip connections are
incorporated into the proposed algorithm to deal with
complex data by avoiding the Vanishing Gradient (VG)
problems [35]. On one hand, this design can reduce
the search space so that the best performance can be
easily identiﬁed. On the other hand, compared to other
algorithms with similar performance, the architectures
evolved by the proposed algorithm are much simpler.
3) In order to speed up the CNN architecture design and
provide the users with an optimal CNN architecture
within an acceptable time, most of the existing al-
gorithms employed extensive computational resource.
Particularly, the algorithms employed the data paral-
lelism strategy which is not efﬁcient. The main reason
is that most architectures are median-scale and do not
need to run on the extensive computational resource.
Otherwise, the communication consumption between
different computational nodes will take up most of
the computational cost. In the proposed algorithm, an
asynchronous computational component is developed to
make full use of the given computational resources to
accelerate the evaluation of the ﬁtness of the individuals,
while a cache component is employed to further reduce
the ﬁtness evaluation time for the whole population.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly,
related works and background are presented in Section II.
Then, the details of the proposed algorithm are documented
in Section III. Next, the experiment designs and experimental
results as well as the analysis are shown in Sections IV and V,
respectively. Finally, conclusions and future works are outlined
in Section VI.
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, CNNs and skip connections which are
considered the background of the proposed algorithm, are
introduced to help readers better understand the related works
and the proposed algorithm. Then, the relevant work in dis-
covering the architectures of CNNs is reviewed.

==== Page 3 ====
3
A. Background
1) Convolutional Neural Networks: In this subsection, we
mainly introduce the building blocks of CNNs, i.e., the con-
volutional and pooling layers, which are the basic objects
encoded by GAs to represent CNNs.
Speciﬁcally, the convolutional layer employs ﬁlters to per-
form convolutional operations on the input data. One ﬁlter can
be viewed as a matrix. During the convolutional operation,
the ﬁlter horizontally slides (with a given step size), then
vertically moves (with another step size) for the next horizontal
slide, until the whole image has been scanned. The set of
ﬁlter outputs form a new matrix called the feature map. The
horizontal and vertical step sizes are called the width and
height of a stride. The exact number of feature maps used
is a parameter in the architecture of the corresponding CNN.
In addition, two convolutional operations are applied: the
same convolutional operation which pads zeros to the input
data when there is not enough area for the ﬁlter to overlap,
and the valid convolutional operation which does not pad
anything. Hence, the parameters of a convolutional layer are
the number of feature maps, the ﬁlter size, the stride size and
the convolutional operation type. A pooling layer has common
components of a convolutional layer except that 1) the ﬁlter
is called the kernel which has no value, 2) the output of a
kernel is the maximal or mean value of the area it stops, and
3) the spatial size of the input data is not changed through
a pooling layer. When the maximal value is returned, it is a
pooling layer with the type of max, otherwise of mean . Hence,
the parameters of a pooling layer are the kernel size, the stride
size and the pooling type used. In addition, the fully-connected
layers are usually incorporated into the tail of a CNN. In the
proposed algorithm, the fully-connected layers are discarded,
and the justiﬁcations are given in Subsection III-B.
2) Skip Connections: The skip connections refer to those
connecting the neurons of the layers that are not adjacent.
The skip connection was ﬁrstly introduced in [35] as a gate
mechanism, effectively training a recurrent neural network
with long and short-term memory [36] and avoiding the VG
problems [35]. Speciﬁcally, the VG problems refer to the
gradient becoming either very small or explosion during back
propagation training in a deep neural network, and are the
main obstacle to effectively train deep neural networks. The
skip connections were experimentally proven to be able to
train very deep neural networks [37]. Indeed, the promising
performance of ResNet [8], which was proposed very recently,
also beneﬁts from the skip connections. A simple example of
using a skip connection is shown in Fig. 1, where the dashed
line denotes the skip connection from the input Xto the output
of the N-th building block, and the symbol “ ” refers to the
element-wise addition.
XBuilding Block 
#1
+ Skip connection...Building Block 
#N
Fig. 1. An example of using the skip connection.Over the past few years, an increasing number of researchers
has attempted to theoretically reveal the mechanisms behind
the skip connections. For example, the skip connections have
also been claimed to be able to eliminate singularities [38].
Among the existing theoretical evidence, skip connections
defying the VG problems receives the most recognition [35],
[36]. Because the skip connections shorten the number of lay-
ers of back-propagation, the VG problems should be alleviated.
As discussed above, the deeper the CNN is, the more powerful
capability it would have to process complex data. Combined
with the connections that are not skipped, a CNN with the skip
connections can have the capability that a deep architecture has
and can also be effectively trained.
B. Related Work
As the based work of the proposed algorithm, the Genetic
CNN method [10] is discussed in this subsection.
In Genetic CNN, encoding the whole architecture of a
CNN is composed of multiple stages. In each stage, a small
architecture is encoded, and then multiple, different small
architectures are stacked to give the whole architecture. Just
like the NSANet method, a CNN architecture framework
is provided to Genetic CNN, while the small architectures
replace the convolutional layers in the provided framework
to form the ﬁnal CNN. These small architectures are called
cell in Genetic CNN, and each cell is designed in each
stage of Genetic CNN. In each stage, multiple predeﬁned
building blocks of CNNs are ordered, and their connections are
encoded. For ordering these building blocks, the ﬁrst and the
last building blocks are manually speciﬁed, and the remainings
are all convolutional layers with the same settings. In order to
encode the connections between these ordered building blocks,
a binary string encoding method [39] is used. Suppose there
are four building blocks, a string of “111-10-0” implies that
the ﬁrst building block has the connections to all other building
blocks. The second one has no connection to the fourth build-
ing block, which is the same as the third one. Furthermore,
the number of stages is manually predeﬁned. Clearly observed
from this encoding strategy, multiple manual interventions are
required, such as the numbers of building blocks in each stage
and total stages. Because these numbers are related to the
depth of the discovered CNN, domain expertise in CNNs is
strongly needed to predeﬁne these numbers for proper depth of
the CNN. In addition, the parameters of the building blocks
in each stage cannot be changed in Genetic CNN. Indeed,
this encoding strategy can be viewed at only discovering the
connections of a given CNN, and cannot change the depth
of the given CNN. Note that, no speeding up technique was
designed in Genetic CNN, resulting in the experiments not
applicable to complex datasets such as CIFAR100.
III. T HEPROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, we ﬁrstly present the framework of the
proposed algorithm in Subsection III-A, and then detail the
main steps in Subsections III-B to III-E. To help readers better
understand the proposed algorithm, we will not only document
the details of each main step, but also provide the analysis for
given designs.

==== Page 4 ====
4
Initial 
PopulationFitness 
EvaluationSelectionCrossover 
&MutationOffspring 
PopulationEnvironmental 
Selection
Criterion is 
 satisfied NoEndYes
Fig. 2. The ﬂowchart of a genetic algorithm.
Code:32-64Code:0.2Code:64-256Code:0.8Code:512-256Code:256-512Input  32x32x3Conv@32Max PoolingConv@64Conv@128Mean PoolingConv@256Conv@512Conv@256Conv@256Output  8x8x512Conv@512
Fig. 3. An example of the proposed encoding strategy representing a CNN. This CNN is composed of four skip layers and two pooling layers. The code
encoding this CNN is composed of the codes representing each layer. For each skip layer, its codes are the number of feature maps of the two convolutional
layers within this skip layer; while the code for each pooling layer is the pooling type. We use a number between (0;0:5)to represent the max pooling
type, and a number between [0:5;1)to represent the mean pooling type. The numbers above each layer are the code of the corresponding layer. So the code
representing this CNN is “32-64-0.2-64-256-0.8-512-256-256-512”.
A. Algorithm Overview
Algorithm 1: The Proposed Algorithm
Input: A set of predeﬁned building blocks, the
population size, the maximal generation number,
the image dataset for classiﬁcation.
Output: The discovered best architecture of CNN.
1P0 Initialize a population with the given population
size using the proposed variable-length encoding
strategy ;
2t 0;
3while t <the maximal generation number do
4 Evaluate the ﬁtness of each individual in Ptusing
the proposed acceleration components ;
5 Qt Generate offspring from the selected parent
individuals using the proposed mutation and the
crossover operators ;
6 Pt+1 Environmental selection from Pt[Qt;
7 t t+ 1;
8end
9Return the individual having the best ﬁtness in Pt.
Algorithm 1 shows the framework of the proposed algo-
rithm. Speciﬁcally, by giving a set of predeﬁned building
blocks of CNNs, the population size as well as the maximal
generation number for the GA and the image classiﬁcation
dataset, the proposed algorithm begins to work, through a
series of evolutionary processes, and ﬁnally discovers the best
architecture of the CNN to classify the given image dataset.
During evolution, a population is randomly initialized with
the predeﬁned population size, using the proposed encoding
strategy to encode the predeﬁned building blocks (line 1).
Then, a counter for the current generation is initialized to zero
(line 2). During evolution, the ﬁtness of each individual, which
encodes a particular architecture of the CNN, is evaluated on
the given dataset (line 4). After that, the parent individuals are
selected based on the ﬁtness, and then generate new offspring
by the genetic operators including the crossover and mutationoperators (line 5). Then, a population of individuals surviving
into the next generation is selected by the environmental
selection from the current population (line 6). Speciﬁcally,
the current population is composed of the parent population
and the generated offspring population. Finally, the counter
is increased by one, and the evolution continues until the
counter exceeds the predeﬁned maximal generation. As shown
in Fig. 2, the proposed algorithm follows the standard pipeline
of a GA (the phases of selection, crossover and mutation,
and the offspring population shown in Fig. 2 are collectively
described in line 5 of Algorithm 1).
Please note that GAs only provide a uniﬁed framework
to solve optimization problems with their inherent biological
mechanism. When GAs are used in practice, their compo-
nents regarding the biological mechanism must be speciﬁcally
designed based on the particular problems to be solved. In
the proposed algorithm, we carefully design the variable-
length encoding strategy, acceleration components and genetic
operators (they are also highlighted in bold in Algorithm 1),
to assure the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed
algorithm in designing CNN architectures.
B. Population Initialization
As introduced in Section II, a CNN is composed of the
convolutional layers, pooling layers and occasionally fully-
connected layers. The performance of a CNN highly relies on
its depth, and the skip connections could turn the deep depth
to be a reality. In the proposed encoding strategy, we design
a new building block by directly using the skip connections,
named the skip layer, to replace the convolutional layer when
forming a CNN. In addition, the fully-connected layers are
discarded in the proposed encoding strategy (the reason will
be given later in this subsection). In summary, only the skip
layers and the pooling layers are used to construct a CNN in
the proposed encoding strategy.
Speciﬁcally, a skip layer is composed of two convolutional
layers and one skip connection. The skip connection connects
from the input of the ﬁrst convolutional layer to the output

==== Page 5 ====
5
of the second convolutional layer. As introduced above, the
parameters of a convolutional layer are the number of feature
maps, the ﬁlter size, the stride size and the convolutional
operation type. In the proposed encoding strategy, we use the
same settings for the ﬁlter sizes, stride sizes and convolutional
operations, respectively. Particularly, the ﬁlter and stride sizes
are set to 33and11, respectively, and only the same
convolutional operation is used. To this end, the parameters
encoded for a skip layer are the numbers of the feature
maps for the two convolutional layers (denoted as F1and
F2, respectively). In addition, the pooling layers used in the
proposed encoding strategy are set to be 22for the kernel
sizes and the stride sizes. To this end, the parameter encoded
for a pooling layer is only the pooling type (denoted as P1).
Note that, the reasons for this design and adopting the settings
for such a design will be explained later in this subsection.
Algorithm 2: Population Initialization
Input: The population size T.
Output: The initialized population P0.
1P0 ; ;
2whilejP0j< T do
3 L Randomly generate an integer greater than zero;
4 list Create a linked list contains Lnodes;
5 foreach node in the linked list do
6 r Uniformly generate a number from (0;1);
7 ifr <0:5then
8 node:type 1;
9 node:F 1 Randomly generate an integer
greater than zero;
10 node:F 2 Randomly generate an integer
greater than zero;
11 else
12 node:type 2;
13 q Uniformly generate a number from
(0;1);
14 ifq <0:5then
15 node:P 1 max;
16 else
17 node:P 1 mean ;
18 end
19 end
20 end
21 P0 P0[list;
22end
23Return P0.
Algorithm 2 shows the details of the population initial-
ization. Brieﬂy, Tindividuals are initialized with the same
ways, and then they are stored into P0. During the individ-
ual initialization process, the length (denoted as L) of an
individual, representing the depth of the corresponding CNN,
is randomly initialized ﬁrstly (line 3). Then, a linked list
containing Lnodes is created (line 4). After that, each node is
conﬁgured (lines 5-20), and then the linked list is stored into
P0(line 21). During the conﬁguration of each node, a number,
r, is randomly generated from (0;1)(line 6). If r <0:5, thetype of this node is marked as a skip layer by setting its type
property to 1. Otherwise, this node represents a pooling layer
by setting type to2. In the case of a skip connection layer, the
numbers of the feature maps are randomly generated and then
assigned to node:F 1andnode:F 2, respectively (lines 7-10).
Otherwise, the pooling type is determined by the probability
of tolling a coin. Particularly, the pooling type, node:P 1, is set
tomax when the probability is below 0:5, and mean otherwise
(lines 11-19).
An example of the proposed encoding strategy encoding
a CNN is shown in Fig. 3. This CNN is composed of four
skip layers and two pooling layers. The code representing
one skip layer is the string of the feature map numbers of
the corresponding convolutional layers within the same skip
layer; while that for a pooling layer is a number representing
the pooling type. Particularly, a random number between
(0;0:5)represents a max pooling layer, while that between
[0:5;1)represents a mean pooling layer. The code representing
the whole CNN is the sequential string connection of codes
representing the layers. As shown in this example where the
code of each layer is listed above itself, the code of the whole
CNN is “32-64-0.2-64-256-0.8-512-256-256-512” to represent
a CNN with a depth of 10.
Next, we will detail the reasons why discarding the fully-
connected layers, using two convolutional layers in a skip
layer and the settings for the skip and pooling layers in
the proposed algorithm. Speciﬁcally, multiple fully-connected
layers are typically added to the tail of a CNN. However,
the fully-connected layer easily results in the over-ﬁtting
phenomenon [40] due to its dense connection [41]. To reduce
the over-ﬁtting, the dropout [41] randomly removing a part of
the connections is commonly used. However, each dropout will
introduce one parameter. Only a properly speciﬁed parameter
can lead to the promising performance of the corresponding
CNN. Meanwhile, the number of fully-connected layers and
the number of neurons in each fully-connected layer are
also two parameters hard to tune. If the fully-connected
layers are incorporated into the proposed encoding strategy,
the search space will substantially enlarge, increasing the
difﬁculty of ﬁnding the best CNN architecture. The use of
two convolutional layers in a skip layer is inspired by the
design of ResNet, and the effectiveness of such skip layers
have been experimentally proved in literature [9], [11], [15],
[42]. However, the sizes of feature maps in each skip layer of
ResNet are set to be equal. In the proposed encoding strategy,
the sizes of feature maps can be unequal, which is more
ﬂexible. Furthermore, setting the convolutional operation to
same and using the 11stride are to make the dimension of
the input data remain the same, which is more ﬂexible for such
an automatic design because 11stride does not change the
image size. As the settings of ﬁlter and kernel sizes as well as
the stride size in the pooling layers, they are all based on the
designs of existing hand-crafted CNNs [9], [42]. Moreover,
another important reason for specifying such settings is based
on our expertise in manually tuning the architectures of CNNs.
The effectiveness of such settings will be shown in Section V.

==== Page 6 ====
6
Algorithm 3: Fitness Evaluation
Input: The population Ptof the individuals to be
evaluated, the image dataset for classiﬁcation.
Output: The population Ptof the individuals with their
ﬁtness values.
1ift == 0 then
2 Cache ;;
3 SetCache to a global variable;
4end
5foreach individual in Ptdo
6 ifthe identiﬁer of individual in Cache then
7 v Query the ﬁtness by identifier from
Cache ;
8 Setvtoindividual ;
9 else
10 while there is available GPU do
11 asynchronously evaluate individual in an
available GPU (details shown in
Algorithm 4);
12 end
13 end
14end
15Return Pt.
C. Fitness Evaluation
Algorithm 3 details the ﬁtness evaluation of the individuals
in the population Pt. Brieﬂy, given the population, Pt, con-
taining all the individuals for evaluating the ﬁtness, and the
image classiﬁcation dataset on which the best architecture of
a CNN is to discover, Algorithm 3 evaluates each individual
ofPtin the same manner, and ﬁnally returns Ptcontaining
the individuals whose ﬁtness have been evaluated. Speciﬁcally,
if the ﬁtness evaluation is for the initialized population, i.e.,
P0, a global cache system (denoted as Cache ) is created,
storing the ﬁtness of the individuals with unseen architectures
(lines 1-4). For each individual (denoted by individual ) in
Pt, ifindividual is found in Cache , its ﬁtness is directly
gotten from Cache (lines 6-8). Otherwise, individual is
asynchronously placed on an available GPU for its ﬁtness
evaluation (lines 9-13). Note that, querying an individual from
Cache is based on the individual’s identiﬁer. Theoretically,
arbitrary identiﬁers can be used, as long as they can dis-
tinguish individuals encoding different architectures. In the
proposed algorithm, the 224-hash code [43], which has been
implemented by most programming languages, in terms of the
encoded architecture is used as the corresponding identiﬁer.
Furthermore, the individual is asynchronously placed on an
available GPU, which implies that we don’t need to wait
for the ﬁtness evaluation for the next individual until the
ﬁtness evaluation of the current one ﬁnishes, but place the
next individual on an available GPU immediately.
The details of evaluating the ﬁtness of one individual are
shown in Algorithm 4. Firstly, a CNN is decoded from
individual , and a classiﬁer is added to this CNN (line 1)
based on the given image classiﬁcation dataset. In the proposed
algorithm, a softmax classiﬁer [44] is used, and the particularAlgorithm 4: Individual Fitness Evaluation
Input: The individual individual , the available GPU,
the number of training epochs, the global cache
Cache , the training data Dtrain and the ﬁtness
evaluation data Dfitness from the given image
classiﬁcation dataset.
Output: The individual individual with its ﬁtness.
1Construct a CNN with a classiﬁer based on the
information encoded in individual and the given image
classiﬁcation dataset;
2vbest 0;
3foreach epoch in the given training epochs do
4 Train the CNN on Dtrain by using the given GPU;
5 v Calculate the classiﬁcation accuracy on
Dfitness ;
6 ifv > v bestthen
7 vbest v;
8 end
9end
10Setvbestas the ﬁtness of individual ;
11Put the identiﬁer of individual andvbestintoCache ;
12Return individual .
number of classes is determined by the given image dataset.
When decoding a CNN, a rectiﬁer activation function [45]
followed by a batch normalization [46] operation is added to
the output of the convolutional layer, which is based on the
conventions of modern CNNs [8], [9]. In addition, when the
spatial number of the skip layer differs from that of the input
data, a convolutional layer, which is with the unit ﬁlter and
the unit stride but the special number of the feature maps, is
added to the input data [8], [9]. After that, the CNN is trained
by the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm [47] on
the training data by using the given GPU (line 4), and the
classiﬁcation accuracy is calculated on the ﬁtness evaluation
data (line 5). Note that, the use of the softmax classiﬁer and
SGD training method are based on the conventions of the deep
learning community. When the training phase is ﬁnished, the
best classiﬁcation accuracy on the ﬁtness evaluation data is set
as the ﬁtness of individual (line 10). Finally, the identiﬁer
and ﬁtness of individual are associated and put into Cache
(line 11).
Next, the reasons for designing such an asynchronous and a
cache components are given. In summary, because the training
on CNNs is very time-consuming, varying from several hours
to even several months depending on the particular architec-
ture, they are designed to speed up the ﬁtness evaluation in the
proposed algorithm. Speciﬁcally, the asynchronous component
is a parallel computation platform based on GPUs. Due to
the computational nature of calculating the gradients, deep
learning algorithms are typically placed on GPUs to speed up
the training [48]. Indeed, existing deep learning libraries, such
as Tensorﬂow [49] and PyTorch [50], support the calculation
on multiple GPUs. However, their parallel calculations are
based on the data-parallel and model-parallel pipelines. In the
data-parallel pipeline, the input data is divided into several

==== Page 7 ====
7
small groups, and each group is placed on one GPU for the
calculation. The reason is that the limited memory of one
GPU cannot effectively handle the whole data at the same
time. In the model-parallel pipeline, a model is divided into
several small models, and each GPU carries one small model.
The reason is that the limited computational capability on
one GPU cannot run a whole model. However, the designed
parallel pipeline obviously does not fall into either of the
pipelines, but a higher level based on them. Hence, such an
asynchronous component is designed to make full use of the
GPU computational resource, especially for the population-
based algorithms. Furthermore, the asynchronous component
is widely used in solving a large problem, if the problem can
be divided into several independent sub-problems. By paral-
lel performing these sub-problems in different computational
platforms, the total processing time of the whole problem is
consequently shortened. In the past, evolutionary algorithms
are typically used to solve the problems of which the ﬁtness
evaluation is not time-consuming1, and there is no high need
in developing such asynchronous components. Occasionally,
they just use the built-in components based on the adopted
programming languages. However, almost all such built-in
components are based on CPUs, and they cannot effectively
train deep neural networks, mainly because the acceleration
platform for neural networks are based on GPUs. Furthermore,
the ﬁtness evaluation of each individual is independent, which
just satisﬁes the scene of using this technique. Motivated by
the reasons described above, such an asynchronous component
is designed in the proposed algorithm. The cache component is
also used to speed up the ﬁtness evaluation, which is based on
the following considerations: 1) the individuals surviving into
the next generation do not need to evaluate the ﬁtness again if
its architecture is not changed, and 2) the architecture, which
has been evaluated, could be regenerated with the mutation
and crossover operations in another generation. Note that, the
weight inheriting of Large-scale Evolution cannot work for the
second consideration.
Commonly, a cache system should seriously treat its size
and provide the details to discuss the conﬂicting problem
resulted from the duplicate keys. In the proposed algorithm,
none is necessary to be investigated. Firstly, the cache com-
ponent is similar to a map data structure where each record
in this component is a string combining the identiﬁer and the
ﬁtness value of a CNN. For example, a record such as “identi-
ﬁer1=98.12” denotes that the identiﬁer is “identiﬁer1” and its
ﬁtness value is “98.12”. Secondly, as we have highlighted, the
identiﬁer is calculated by the 224-hash code that can generate
2224different identiﬁers. In practice, the CNN architecture
algorithms, including the proposed algorithm, only evaluate
thousands of CNNs. Obviously, we do not need to consider the
conﬂicting problem because the conﬂicting problem will not
happen. Thirdly, the 224-hash code implementation used for
the proposed algorithm will generate the identiﬁer having the
length of 32, and the ﬁtness value is the classiﬁcation accuracy
that is denoted by a string having the length of 4. Totally,
1Although there is a type of computationally expensive problems, their
ﬁtness is commonly calculated by a surrogate model to bypass the direct
ﬁtness evaluation.each record in the cache component is a string having the
length of 37 occupying 37 bytes with the UTF-8 ﬁle encoding.
Obviously, the cache ﬁle will only occupy very little disk space
even though there are thousands of records. Therefore, we do
not need to concern about the size of the cache component.
D. Offspring Generating
Algorithm 5: Offspring Generating
Input: The population Ptcontaining individuals with
ﬁtness, the probabity for crossover operation pc,
the probability for mutation operation pm, the
mutation operation list lm, the probabilities of
selecting different mutation operations pl.
Output: The offspring population Qt.
1Qt ;;
2whilejQtj<jPtjdo
3 p1 Randomly select two individuals from Pt, and
from the two then select the one with the better
ﬁtness;
4 p2 Repeat Line 3;
5 while p2==p1do
6 Repeat Line 4;
7 end
8 r Randomly generate a number from (0;1);
9 ifr < p cthen
10 Randomly choose a point in p1and divide it into
two parts;
11 Randomly choose a point in p2and divide it into
two parts;
12 o1 Join the ﬁrst part of p1and the second part
ofp2;
13 o2 Join the ﬁrst part of p2and the second part
ofp1;
14 Qt Qt[o1[o2;
15 else
16 Qt Qt[p1[p2;
17 end
18end
19foreach individual p in Qtdo
20 r Randomly generate a number from (0;1);
21 ifr < p mthen
22 i Randomly choose a point in p;
23 m Select one operation from lmbased on the
probabilities in pl;
24 Do the mutation mat the point iofp;
25 end
26end
27Return Qt.
The details of generating the offspring are shown in Algo-
rithm 5, which is composed of two parts. The ﬁrst is crossover
(lines 1-18) and the second is mutation (lines 19-26). During
the crossover operation, there will be totally jPtjoffspring
generated, wherejjmeasures the size of the collection. Specif-
ically, two parents are selected ﬁrst, and each is selected from
two randomly selected individuals based on the better ﬁtness

==== Page 8 ====
8
(lines 3-7). This selection is known as the binary tournament
selection [51], which is popular in GAs for single-objective
optimization. Once the parents are selected, a random number
is generated (line 8), determining whether the crossover will
be done or not. If the generated number is not below the
predeﬁned crossover probability, these two parent individuals
are put into Qtas the offspring (line 16). Otherwise, each
parent individual is randomly split into two parts, and the two
parts from the two parent individuals are swapped to formulate
two offspring (lines 10-14). During the mutation operation, a
random number is generated ﬁrst (line 20), and the mutation
operation is performed on the current individual if the gener-
ated number is below than pm(lines 21-25). When mutating an
individual, a position (denoted as i) is randomly selected from
the current individual, and one particular mutation operation
(denoted as m) is selected from the provided mutation list
based on the probabilities deﬁned in pl. Then, mis performed
on the position i. In the proposed algorithms, the available
mutation operations deﬁned in the mutation list are:
Adding a skip layer with random settings;
Adding a pooling layer with random settings;
Remove the layer at the selected position; and
Randomly changing the parameter values of the building
block at the selected position.
Next, the motivation of designing such a crossover operator
and selecting a mutation operation based on a provided prob-
ability list is given. Firstly, the designed crossover operator is
inspired by the one-point crossover [39] in traditional GAs.
However, the one-point crossover was designed only for the
individuals with the equal lengths. The designed crossover
operator is used for the individuals with unequal lengths.
Although the designed crossover operator is simple, it dose
improve the performance in discovering the architectures of
CNNs, which will be experimentally proved in Section V.
Secondly, existing algorithms use an equal probability for
choosing the particular mutation operation. In the proposed
algorithm, the provided mutation operations are selected with
different probabilities. Speciﬁcally, we provide a higher prob-
ability for the “adding a skip layer” mutation, which will have
a higher probability to increase the depths of CNNs. For other
mutation operations, we still employ the equal probabilities.
The motivation behind this design is that a deeper CNN will
have a more powerful capability, as mentioned previously.
Although the “adding a pooling layer” is also capable of
increasing the depth of CNNs, the dimension of input data
will be reduced to half by using one pooling layer, which
results in the unavailability of the discovered CNN. To this
end, we do not put a higher probability on it.
Please note that the optimal depth of the CNN is achieved
by the proposed mutation operators. As shown above, there
are four different types of mutation operators designed in the
proposed algorithm. The optimal depth can be found through
the ﬁrst three mutation operators. Particularly, the ﬁrst two
operators provide a chance to increase the depth of the CNN
(denoted both as the “depth-increasing operator”), while the
third mutation operator provides a chance to decrease the
depth (denoted it as the “depth-decreasing operator”). Forexample, if the optimal depth of the CNN is N, after the
random initialization, some individuals may have the length
(denoting the depth of the CNNs) smaller than N, while
others are with length greater than N. During evolution, each
individual has a chance to be mutated. If the individual whose
length is greater than Nand the depth-decreasing operator is
selected, the individuals’ length will be decreased towards N,
and vice versa. In summary, the optimal depth is obtained
by performing the mutation operations on the individuals
randomly initialized with different lengths.
E. Environmental Selection
Algorithm 6: Environmental Selection
Input: The parent population Pt, the offspring
population Qt
Output: The population for the next generation Pt+1.
1Pt+1 ;;
2whilejPt+1j<jPtjdo
3 p1; p2 Randomly select two individuals from
Qt[Pt;
4 p Select the one who has a better ﬁtness from
fp1; p2g;
5 Pt+1 Pt+1[p;
6end
7pbest Find the individual with the best ﬁtness from
Qt[Pt;
8ifpbestis not in Pt+1then
9 Replace the one who has the worst ﬁtness in Pt+1by
pbest;
10end
11Return Pt+1.
Algorithm 6 shows the details of the environmental selec-
tion. Firstly,jPtjindividuals are selected from the current
population ( Qt[Pt) by using the binary tournament selection,
and then these selected individuals are placed into the next
population (denoted Pt+1) (lines 2-6). Secondly, the best
individual is selected and to check whether it has been placed
intoPt+1. If not, it will replace the worst individual in Pt+1
(lines 7-10).
In principle, only selecting the top jPtjbest individuals
for the next generation easily causes the premature phe-
nomenon [52], which will lead the algorithm trap into a
local optimum [23], [53]. If we do not explicitly select the
best individuals for the next generation, the algorithm will
not convergence. In principle, a desirable population should
contain not only good but also the relatively bad ones for
enhancing the diversity [54], [55]. To this end, the binary
tournament selection is typically used for such a purpose [51],
[56]. However, only using the binary tournament selection may
miss the best individual, resulting in the algorithm not towards
a better direction of the evolution. Hence, we explicitly add
the best individual to the next population, which is a particular
elitism strategy in evolutionary algorithms [57].
Note that the binary tournament selection, used in the
proposed algorithm (they are used in the offspring generating

==== Page 9 ====
9
and environmental selection phases), is used with replacement.
Based on our previous work [58], the tournament selection
with or without replacement almost has no different bias to the
ﬁnal performance, and the replacement mechanism used in the
proposed algorithm is just to follow the common practice [27],
[28], [30].
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed
algorithm, a series of experiments has been conducted on
image classiﬁcation tasks. Speciﬁcally, the peer competitors
chosen to compare with the proposed algorithm are introduced
in Subsection IV-A. Then, the used benchmark datasets are
detailed in Subsection IV-B. Finally, the parameter settings of
the proposed algorithm are shown in Subsection IV-C.
A. Peer Competitors
In order to show the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the
proposed algorithm, the state-of-the-art algorithms are selected
as the peer competitors to the proposed algorithm. Particularly,
the peer competitors are chosen from three different categories.
The ﬁrst refers to the state-of-the-art CNNs that are man-
ually designed, including ResNet [8], DenseNet [9], VG-
GNet [6], Maxout [59], Network in Network [60], Highway
Network [61] and All-CNN [62]. Speciﬁcally, two versions
of ResNet, i.e., the ResNet models with a depth of 110 and
1;202, are used for the comparison. For the convenience, they
are named ResNet (depth= 110) and ResNet (depth= 1;202),
respectively. Among all the ResNet versions investigated in
the seminal paper [8], ResNet (depth= 110) is the winner in
terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy on CIFAR10, and ResNet
(depth= 1;202) is the most complex version, which is the
main reason for selecting them for the comparison. For the
DenseNet, we use the version named “DenseNet-BC” that
achieved the promising classiﬁcation accuracy but also has the
least number of parameters among its all variants [9]. Note
that, most algorithms from this category are the champions
in the large-scale visual recognition challenges in recent
years [63].
The second and the third contain the CNN architecture
design algorithms from the “automatic+manually tuning” and
the “automatic” categories, respectively. Speciﬁcally, Genetic
CNN [10], Hierarchical Evolution [11], EAS [17], Block-
QNN-S [13], DARTS [64], and NSANet [14] belong to
the second category, while Large-scale Evolution [15], CGP-
CNN [16], NAS [17] and MetaQNN [18] fall into the third
category. In the comparison, we choose two versions of
NASNet, i.e., NASNet-B and NASNet-A+cutout, which are
the ones having the least number of parameters and the best
classiﬁcation accuracy, respectively. Speciﬁcally, the “cutout”
refers to a regularization method [65] used in the training of
CNNs, which could improve the ﬁnal performance.
Please note that, the proposed algorithm mainly focuses
on providing an “automatic” way to design promising CNN
architectures for users who have no rich domain knowledge
of tuning CNN architectures. Based on the “No Free LunchTheorems [66]”, we should realize that CNNs whose archi-
tectures are designed with manual tuning should have better
classiﬁcation accuracy than the “automatic” ones including
the proposed algorithm. Indeed, only the comparison to the
CNN architecture designs from the “automatic” category is
fair to the proposed algorithm. In this experiment, we still
would like to provide the extensive comparisons to the CNN
architectures designed with domain knowledge, to show the
efﬁciency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm among
all existing state-of-the-art CNNs.
B. Benchmark Datasets
The CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 benchmark datasets [19] are
chosen as the image classiﬁcation tasks in the experiments.
The reasons for choosing them are that 1) both datasets
are challenging in terms of the image sizes, categories of
classiﬁcation and the noise as well as rotations in each image;
and 2) they are widely used to measure the performance of
deep learning algorithms, and most of the chosen compared
algorithms have publicly reported their classiﬁcation accuracy
on them.
airplane
automobile
bird
(a) CIFAR10
apple
aquarium fish
baby
(b) CIFAR100
Fig. 4. Examples from CIFAR10 (shown in Fig. 4a) and CIFAR100 (shown
in Fig. 4b). Each row denotes the images from the same category, and the
ﬁrst column displays the corresponding category label.
Speciﬁcally, the CIFAR10 dataset is an image classiﬁcation
benchmark for recognizing 10classes of natural objects, such
as air planes and birds. It consists of 60;000RGB images in
the dimension of 3232. In addition, there are 50;000images
and10;000 images in the training set and the testing set,
respectively. Each category has an equal number of images. On
the other hand, the CIFAR100 dataset is similar to CIFAR10,
except it has 100 classes. In order to have a quick glance
on both datasets, we randomly select three classes from
each benchmark dataset, and then randomly select 10images
from each class. These selected images are shown in Fig. 4.
Speciﬁcally, Fig. 4a shows the images from CIFAR10, while
Fig. 4b displays those from CIFAR100. The left column in
Fig. 4 shows the class names of the images in the same
rows. It can be observed that, the objects to be classiﬁed
in these benchmark datasets typically occupy different areas
of the whole image, and their positions are not the same in
different images. Their variations are also challenging for the
classiﬁcation algorithms.

==== Page 10 ====
10
In the experiments, the training set is split into two parts.
The ﬁrst part accounts for 90% to serve as the training set for
training the individuals, while the remaining images serve as
the ﬁtness evaluation set for evaluating the ﬁtness. In addition,
the images are augmented during the training phases. In order
to do a fair comparison, we employ the same augmentation
routine as those often used in peer competitors, i.e., each
direction of one image is padded by four zeros pixels, and
then an image with the dimension of 3232is randomly
cropped. Finally, a horizontal ﬂip is randomly performed on
the cropped image with a probability of 0.5 [8], [9].
To date, most architecture discovering algorithms do not
perform experiments on the CIFAR100 dataset due to its large
number of classes. In order to show the superiority of our
proposed algorithm over the peer competitors, we perform
experiments on CIFAR100 and report the results.
C. Parameter Settings
As have been discussed, the main objective of this paper
is to design an automatic architecture discovering algorithm
for researchers without domain expertise in CNNs. To further
improve the applicability of the proposed algorithm, we design
it in a way that potential users are not required to have
expertise in evolutionary algorithms either. Hence, we simply
set the parameters of the proposed algorithm based on the
conventions. Speciﬁcally, the probabilities of crossover and
mutation are set to 0:9and0:2, respectively, as suggested
in [20]. During the training of each individual, the routine
in [8] is employed, i.e., the SGD with the learning rate
of0:1and the momentum of 0:9are used to train 350
epochs and the learning rate is decayed by a factor of 0:1
at the 1-st,149-th and 249-th epochs. Indeed, most peer
competitors are also based on this training routine. When the
proposed algorithm terminates, we choose the one with the
best ﬁtness value, and then train it up to 350 epochs on the
original training set. At last, the classiﬁcation accuracy on
the testing set is tabulated to compare with peer competitors.
In addition, the available numbers of feature maps are set to
f64;128;256gbased on the settings employed by the state-
of-the-art CNNs. As for the probabilities of the four mutation
operations shown in Subsection III-D, we set the normalized
probability of increasing the depth to 0:7, while others share
the equal probabilities. Theoretically, any probability can be
set for the adding mutation by keeping it higher than that
of others. In addition, the population size and the number of
generations are all set to 20, and the similar settings are also
employed by the peer competitors. Ideally, a larger population
size and a larger maximal generation number should result
in a better performance, but expectedly also consume more
computational resources. However, such optimal settings are
not within the scope of this paper since the current settings, as
commonly adopted by other papers, have easily outperformed
most of the peer competitors based on the results shown in
Table I. Noting that, the experiments of the proposed algorithm
are performed on three GPU cards with the same model of
Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti.V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we ﬁrstly show an overview of the compar-
ison results between the proposed algorithm and the chosen
peer competitors. Then, the evolutionary trajectories of the
proposed algorithm are shown, which helps readers to better
understand the proposed algorithm during the process of
discovering the best CNN architecture and the appropriateness
of setting to the generation number.
A. Overall Results
Because the state-of-the-art CNNs in the ﬁrst category of
peer competitors are manually-designed, we mainly compare
the classiﬁcation accuracy and the number of parameters.
For the algorithms in the other two categories, we compare
the “GPU days” used to discover the corresponding CNN,
in addition to the classiﬁcation accuracy and the number
of parameters. Particularly, the unit GPU day means the
algorithm has performed one day on one GPU when the
algorithm terminates, which reﬂects the computational re-
source consumed by these algorithms. For the convenience
of summarizing the comparison results, we use the name of
the architecture discovering algorithm as the name of the
discovered CNN when comparing the classiﬁcation accuracy
and the number of parameters between peer competitors. For
example, the proposed algorithm is named CNN-GA which is
an architecture discovering algorithm, so its discovered CNN
is titled as CNN-GA when comparing it to the chosen state-
of-the-art CNNs.
The comparison results between the proposed algorithm and
the peer competitors are shown in Table I. In Table I, the peer
competitors are grouped into three different blocks based on
the categories, and the ﬁrst column shows the category names.
As a supplement, the last column also provides the information
regarding how much manual assistance the corresponding
CNN requires during discovering the architectures of CNNs.
Additionally, the second column denotes the names of the peer
competitors. The third and fourth columns refer to the classi-
ﬁcation accuracies on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets,
while the ﬁfth column displays the numbers of parameters in
the corresponding CNNs. The sixth column shows the used
GPU days which are only applicable to the semi-automatic
and automatic algorithms. The symbol “–” implies there is
no result publicly reported by the corresponding algorithm.
For ResNet (depth=110), ResNet (depth=1,202), DenseNet,
VGG, All-CNN, EAS and Block-QNN-S, they have the same
number of parameters on both the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100
datasets, which is caused by the similar CNNs achieving
the best classiﬁcation accuracy on both datasets. Note that,
the results of the peer competitors shown in Table I are
all from their respective seminal papers2. For the proposed
algorithm, the best CNN discovered by CNN-GA is selected
from the population in the last generation, and then trained
independently for ﬁve times. The best classiﬁcation accuracy
is selected from the ﬁve results to show in Table I, which
2It is exceptional for VGG because it does not perform experiments on
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 in its seminal paper. Its results displayed in Table I
is derived from [16].

==== Page 11 ====
11
TABLE I
THE COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND THE STATE -OF-THE-ART PEER COMPETITORS IN TERMS OF THE CLASSIFICATION
ACCURACY (%), NUMBER OF PARAMETERS AND THE TAKEN GPU DAYS ON THE CIFAR10 AND CIFAR100 BENCHMARK DATASETS .
CIFAR10 CIFAR100 # Parameters GPU days Manual assistance?
manually designedResNet (depth=110) 93.57 74.84 1.7M – completely needed
ResNet (depth=1,202) 92.07 72.18 10.2M – completely needed
DenseNet-BC 95.49 77.72 0.8M – completely needed
VGGNet 93.34 71.95 20.04M – completely needed
Maxout 90.70 61.40 – – completely needed
Network in Network 91.19 64.32 – – completely needed
Highway Network 92.40 67.66 – – completely needed
All-CNN 92.75 66.29 1.3M – completely needed
automatic + manually tuningGenetic CNN 92.90 70.97 – 17 partially needed
Hierarchical Evolution 96.37 – – 300 partially needed
EAS 95.77 – 23.4M 10 partially needed
Block-QNN-S 95.62 79.35 6.1M 90 partially needed
DARTS 97.00 – 3.3M 4 partially needed
NASNet-B 96.27 – 2.6M 2,000 partially needed
NASNet-A + cutout 97.60 – 27.6M 2,000 partially needed
automaticLarge-scale Evolution 94.60 – 5.4M 2,750 completely not needed
Large-scale Evolution – 77.00 40.4M 2,750 completely not needed
CGP-CNN 94.02 – 1.68M 27 completely not needed
NAS 93.99 – 2.5 M 22,400 completely not needed
Meta-QNN 93.08 72.86 – 100 completely not needed
CNN-GA 95.22 – 2.9M 35 completely not needed
CNN-GA – 77.97 4.1M 40 completely not needed
CNN-GA + cutout 96.78 – 2.9M 35 completely not needed
CNN-GA + cutout – 79.47 4.1M 40 completely not needed
follows the conventions of its peer competitors [10], [11],
[13], [15]–[18]. Inspired by the performance improvement of
NASNet given by the cutout regularization, we also report
the results by performing CNN-GA with the cutout, which
is denoted as “CNN-GA+cutout” in Table I. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrstly choose the best CNN-GA architectures found in
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, respectively, then retrained these
architectures with the cutout on the training set, and then report
the classiﬁcation accuracy on the testing set.
In this experiment, we try our best to do a fair comparison
by using the same training process as well as the same data
augmentation method as those of the chosen peer competi-
tors. However, because of multiple peer competitors aiming
at ﬁnding the best classiﬁcation accuracy, different training
process and data augmentation methods are adopted by them.
For example, NASNet employed a revised path drop technique
to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. Because the revised
path drop technique is not publicly available, we only keep the
proposed algorithm with the same training process and data
augmentation methods as those of the most peer competitors.
Therefore, we should keep in mind that solely comparing the
classiﬁcation accuracy is not fair to the proposed algorithm
either.
For the peer competitors in the ﬁrst category, CNN-GA
obtains 3:15% and1:88% improvements in terms of the
classiﬁcation accuracy on the CIFAR10 dataset over ResNet
(depth=1,202) and VGG, respectively, while using merely
28% and14% of their respective parameters. The number
of parameters in CNN-GA is more than that of ResNet
(depth=110) and All-CNN on the CIFAR10 dataset, but CNN-
GA shows the best classiﬁcation accuracy among them. For
DenseNet-BC, which is the most recent state-of-the-art CNN,
CNN-GA shows slightly worse classiﬁcation accuracy on
CIFAR10, but on the CIFAR100 that is a more complex
benchmark dataset than CIFAR10, CNN-GA shows slightly
better classiﬁcation accuracy. In addition, CNN-GA achievesthe highest classiﬁcation accuracy among Maxout, Network
in Network and Highway Network on the CIFAR10 dataset.
On the CIFAR100 dataset, CNN-GA employs 52%,85% and
40% fewer parameters compared to ResNet (depth=1202),
DenseNet and VGG, respectively, but even achieves 5:79%,
1:39% and6:02% improvements over the respective classiﬁca-
tion accuracy. CNN-GA also outperforms ResNet (depth=110),
Maxout, Network in Network, Highway Network and All-
CNN in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy, although it uses
a larger network than that of RestNet (depth=101) and All-
CNN. In summary, CNN-GA achieves the best classiﬁcation
accuracy on both the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets among
the state-of-the-art CNNs manually designed. Additionally, it
also employs a much fewer number of parameters than most
of the state-of-the-art CNNs in the ﬁrst category.
For the peer competitors in the second category, the clas-
siﬁcation accuracy of CNN-GA is better than that of Genetic
CNN. CNN-GA shows 1:15% lower classiﬁcation accuracy
than that of Hierarchical Evolution; however, CNN-GA takes
only one-tenth of the GPU days compared with that of
Hierarchical Evolution. Compared to Block-QNN-S, CNN-GA
shows slightly worse classiﬁcation accuracy on the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 datasets, while CNN-GA consumes about half
of the number of the parameters and also half of the GPU
days compared to those of Block-QNN-S. Furthermore, the
classiﬁcation accuracy of CNN-GA is competitive to that of
EAS, and CNN-GA employs a signiﬁcantly smaller number
of parameters than that of EAS ( 87% fewer parameters used
by CNN-GA than that of EAS). In addition, NASNet-B shows
slightly better classiﬁcation accuracy on CIFAR10 than CNN-
GA (96.20% v.s. 95.22%), while CNN-GA only consumes
about 1/55 GPU days of that consumed by NASNet-B (35
GPU days v.s., 2,000 GPU days). Compared to NASNet-
B, NASNet-A+cutout improves a classiﬁcation accuracy of
1.33% with a CNN having 27.6M parameters, by consum-
ing 2,000 GPU days; but the CNN-GA+cutout obtains a

==== Page 12 ====
12
1.76% classiﬁcation accuracy improvement, while still with
the same CNN having 2.9M parameters and consumes 35
GPU days. Although CNN-GA targets at designing promising
CNN architectures without any CNN domain knowledge, it
still shows comparable classiﬁcation accuracy among the peer
competitors in this “automatic+manually tuning” category.
Compared to CNN-GA, the major limitation of the algorithms
in this category is the requirement of extended expertise when
they are used to solve real-world tasks. For example, EAS
requires a manually-tuned CNN on the given dataset, and then
EAS is used to reﬁne the tuned CNN. If the tuned CNN
is not with a promising performance, the developed EAS
would perform not well either at the end. In addition, the
CNNs discovered by Hierarchical Evolution and Block-QNN-
S cannot be directly used. They must be inserted into a larger
CNN manually-designed in advance. If the larger network is
not designed properly, the ﬁnal performance of Hierarchical
Evolution and Block-QNN-S would also perform poorly. In
addition to the CNN framework that is required by all versions
of NASNet, NASNet also employed a revised path-dropping
technique to improve its performance. In addition, as can be
seen in Table I, DARTS achieves the similar performance as
well as the number of parameters as CNN-GA on CIFAR10,
while consumes much fewer GPU days than CNN-GA dose.
However, DARTS requires a manually-designed large CNN as
a building block, and then using the differential method, i.e.,
the SGD, to choose the best path among the large CNNs. If the
provided CNN is smaller than the optimal one, DARTS can
never ﬁnd the optimal CNN architecture. The proposed CNN-
GA bears no such limitations, although it consumes more GPU
days than DARTS dose.
For the peer competitors in the third category, CNN-GA
performs better than Large-scale Evolution and CGP-CNN,
and much better than NAS and Meta-QNN on the CIFAR10
dataset in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy. Meanwhile,
CNN-GA also shows superiority in the classiﬁcation accuracy
over Large-scale Evolution and Meta-QNN on the CIFAR100
dataset. Furthermore, CNN-GA only has 2:9M parameters on
the CIFAR10 dataset, which is almost half of those of Large-
scale Evolution. On the CIFAR100 dataset, CNN-GA has
4:1M parameters, which saves 90% parameters compared to
those of Large-scale evolution which requires 40:4M param-
eters [15]. Furthermore, CNN-GA takes only 35GPU days
on the CIFAR10 dataset and 40GPU days on the CIFAR100
dataset, while Large-scale Evolution consumes 2;750 GPU
days on the CIFAR10 dataset and another 2;750 GPU days
on the CIFAR100 dataset. Even more, NAS employs 22;400
GPU days on the CIFAR10 dataset. Based on the number
of parameters and GPU days taken, it can be summarized
that CNN-GA shows a promising performance by using 90%
simpler architectures on 99% less computational resource than
the average numbers of competitors in this category3.
3The number is calculated by summing up the corresponding number of
each peer competitor in this category, and then normalized by the numbers of
available classiﬁcation results. For example, the total GPU days of the peer
competitors are 28;027, and there are only six available classiﬁcation results.
Hence, the average GPU days are 4;671. In the same way, the average GPU
days took by CNN-GA are found to be 37:5.In summary, CNN-GA outperforms most of the state-of-art
CNNs manually designed and all the automatic architecture
discovering algorithms in terms of not only the classiﬁcation
accuracy, but also the number of parameters and the em-
ployed computational resource. Although the state-of-the-art
“automatic+manually-tuning” architecture discovering algo-
rithms show similar (to slightly better) classiﬁcation accuracy
to that of CNN-GA, CNN-GA is automatic and dose not
require users to have any expertise in CNNs when solving
real-world tasks, which is the main purpose of our work in
this paper.
To make the readers intuitively understand the efﬁcacy
of the proposed one on the image classiﬁcation tasks, the
representative of the conventional image classiﬁcation meth-
ods [67], i.e., the Histograms of Oriented Gradient (HOG)
descriptor with the Support Vector Machine (SVM) (in short,
denoted as HOG+SVM), is used to compare the classiﬁcation
accuracy on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Particularly, we use the
source code of HOG+SVM downloaded from the Github4,
and the resulted classiﬁcation accuracies of CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 are 51.22% and 43.90%, respectively. As compared
with the results of the proposed algorithm, which are 96.78%
and 79.47%, respectively, it is easy to conclude that the
proposed algorithm can outperform the HOG+SVM with the
signiﬁcant improvement.
B. Evolutionary Trajectories
1234567891011121314151617181920
The number of generations0.50.60.70.80.9Classification accuracybest result median result
Fig. 5. The evolutionary trajectory of the proposed algorithm in discovering
the best architecture of CNN on the CIFAR10 dataset.
In order to better understand the details of the proposed
algorithm in discovering the architectures of CNNs and the
appropriateness of setting 20 as the generation number, the
evolutionary trajectory of the proposed algorithm on CIFAR10
dataset is shown in Fig. 5. To achieve this, we ﬁrstly collect
the individuals selected by the environmental selection in each
generation, and then use the boxplot [68] to show the statistics
in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy. Meanwhile, we also
connect the best and median classiﬁcation accuracy during
each generation by using a dashed line and a solid line,
respectively. In Fig. 5, the horizon axis denotes the number of
generations, while the vertical axis denotes the classiﬁcation
accuracy.
As shown in Fig. 5, both the best and median classiﬁcation
accuracy increase as the evolution progresses. By investigating
4https://github.com/subicWang/HOG-SVM-classifer

==== Page 13 ====
13
the height of each box, it can also be observed that the
variation of the classiﬁcation accuracy during each generation
becomes smaller and smaller, which implies the evolution
towards a steady state in discovering the architectures of CNNs
on CIFAR10 dataset. In addition, the classiﬁcation accuracy
increases sharply from the ﬁrst generation to the second
generation, which is due to the random initialization of the
population at the beginning of the evolution. From the second
to the fourth generations, the improvement of the classiﬁcation
accuracy becomes much smaller than the previous generations,
and it sharply increases immediately after until the 15-th
generation. Since then, the classiﬁcation accuracy does not
change too much until the evolution terminates, which also
implies that the setting of 20generations in this particular case
is reasonable because the proposed algorithm well converges
with this setting.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The objective of this paper is to propose an automatic
architecture design algorithm for CNNs by using the GA
(in short named CNN-GA), which is capable of discovering
the best CNN architecture in addressing image classiﬁcation
problems for the users who have no expertise in tuning CNN
architectures. This goal has been successfully achieved by
designing a new encoding strategy for the GA to encode
arbitrary depths of CNNs, incorporating the skip connections
to promote deeper CNNs to be produced during the evolution
and developing a parallel as well as a cache component to
signiﬁcantly accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation given a limited
computational resource. The proposed algorithm is examined
on two challenging benchmark datasets, and compared with
18 state-of-the-art peer competitors, including eight manually-
designed CNNs, six automatic+manually tuning and four au-
tomatic algorithms discovering the architectures of CNNs. The
experimental results show that CNN-GA outperforms almost
all the manually-designed CNNs as well as the automatic peer
competitors, and shows competitive performance with respect
to automatic+manually tuning peer competitors in terms of the
best classiﬁcation accuracy. The CNN discovered by CNN-
GA has a much smaller number of parameters than those of
most peer competitors. Furthermore, CNN-GA also employs
signiﬁcantly less computational resource than most automatic
and automatic+manually tuning peer competitors. CNN-GA
is also completely automatic, and users can directly use it to
address their own image classiﬁcation problems whether or
not they have domain expertise in CNNs or GAs. Moreover,
the CNN architecture designed by CNN-GA on CIFAR10 also
shows the promising performance when it is transferred to the
ImageNet dataset.
In CNN-GA, two components have been designed to speed
up the ﬁtness evaluation, and much computational resource has
been saved. However, the computational resource employed is
still fairly large than those of GAs in solving traditional prob-
lems. In the ﬁeld of solving expensive optimization problems,
several algorithms based on evolutionary computation tech-
niques have been developed. In future, we will place efforts
on developing effective evolutionary computation methods to
signiﬁcantly speed up the ﬁtness evaluation of CNNs.REFERENCES
[1] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[2] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[3] T. N. Sainath, A.-r. Mohamed, B. Kingsbury, and B. Ramabhadran,
“Deep convolutional neural networks for lvcsr,” in 2013 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing . IEEE,
2013, pp. 8614–8618.
[4] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 2014, pp. 3104–3112.
[5] C. Clark and A. Storkey, “Training deep convolutional neural networks
to play go,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Machine Learning , Lille, France, 2015, pp. 1766–1774.
[6] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning , Lille, France, 2015.
[7] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V . Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich et al. , “Going deeper with convolutions,”
inProceedings of 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , Boston, MA, USA, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[8] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , Las Vegas, NV , USA, 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[9] G. Huang, Z. Liu, K. Q. Weinberger, and L. van der Maaten, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of 2017 IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , Honolulu, HI,
USA, 2017, pp. 2261–2269.
[10] L. Xie and A. Yuille, “Genetic CNN,” in Proceedings of 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision , Venice, Italy, 2017, pp.
1388–1397.
[11] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, C. Fernando, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“Hierarchical representations for efﬁcient architecture search,” in Pro-
ceedings of 2018 Machine Learning Research , Stockholm, Sweden,
2018.
[12] H. Cai, T. Chen, W. Zhang, Y . Yu, and J. Wang, “Efﬁcient architecture
search by network transformation,” in Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Louisiana, USA, 2018.
[13] Z. Zhong, J. Yan, and C.-L. Liu, “Practical network blocks design with
q-learning,” in Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , Louisiana, USA, 2018.
[14] B. Zoph, V . Vasudevan, J. Shlens, and Q. V . Le, “Learning transferable
architectures for scalable image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp.
8697–8710.
[15] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y . L. Suematsu, J. Tan, Q. Le, and
A. Kurakin, “Large-scale evolution of image classiﬁers,” in Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , Sydney, Australia, 2017, pp. 2902–2911.
[16] M. Suganuma, S. Shirakawa, and T. Nagao, “A genetic programming
approach to designing convolutional neural network architectures,” in
Proceedings of the 2017 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Con-
ference . Berlin, Germany: ACM, 2017, pp. 497–504.
[17] B. Zoph and Q. V . Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning,” in Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on
Learning Representations , Toulon, France, 2017.
[18] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing neural network
architectures using reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 2017
International Conference on Learning Representations , Toulon, France,
2017.
[19] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features from
tiny images,” online: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/kriz/cifar.html , 2009.
[20] T. Back, Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and Practice: Evolution
Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Genetic Algorithms . England,
UK: Oxford university press, 1996.
[21] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: an introduction .
MIT press Cambridge, 1998, vol. 1, no. 1.
[22] Y . Sun, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Evolving deep convolutional neural
networks for image classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10741 ,
2017.
[23] L. Davis, Handbook of genetic algorithms . Bosa Roca, USA: Taylor
& Francis Inc, 1991.

==== Page 14 ====
14
[24] W. Banzhaf, P. Nordin, R. E. Keller, and F. D. Francone, Genetic
programming: an introduction . Morgan Kaufmann San Francisco, 1998,
vol. 1.
[25] C. Janis, “The evolutionary strategy of the equidae and the origins of
rumen and cecal digestion,” Evolution , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 757–774, 1976.
[26] L. M. Schmitt, “Theory of genetic algorithms,” Theoretical Computer
Science , vol. 259, no. 1-2, pp. 1–61, 2001.
[27] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “IGD indicator-based evolutionary algo-
rithm for many-objective optimization problems,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 173–187, 2019.
[28] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
[29] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “Reference line-based estimation of
distribution algorithm for many-objective optimization,” Knowledge-
Based Systems , vol. 132, pp. 129–143, 2017.
[30] M. Jiang, Z. Huang, L. Qiu, W. Huang, and G. G. Yen, “Transfer
learning based dynamic multiobjective optimization algorithms,” IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 501–514,
2018.
[31] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “Improved regularity model-based EDA
for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation , vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 662–678, 2018.
[32] M. Mitchell, An introduction to genetic algorithms . Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA: MIT press, 1998.
[33] H. L. Liu, F. Gu, Y .-m. Cheung, S. Xie, and J. Zhang, “On solving
WCDMA network planning using iterative power control scheme and
evolutionary multiobjective algorithm [application notes],” IEEE Com-
putational Intelligence Magazine , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 44–52, 2014.
[34] K. Nag and N. R. Pal, “A multiobjective genetic programming-based
ensemble for simultaneous feature selection and classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 499–510, 2015.
[35] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[36] F. A. Gers, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Cummins, “Learning to forget:
continual prediction with lstm,” Neural Computation , vol. 12, no. 10,
pp. 2451–2471, 2000.
[37] R. K. Srivastava, K. Greff, and J. Schmidhuber, “Training very deep
networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
Montral, Canada, 2015, pp. 2377–2385.
[38] A. E. Orhan and X. Pitkow, “Skip connections eliminate singularities,” in
Proceedings of 2018 Machine Learning Research , Stockholm, Sweden,
2018.
[39] M. Srinivas and L. M. Patnaik, “Genetic algorithms: A survey,” Com-
puter , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 17–26, 1994.
[40] D. M. Hawkins, “The problem of overﬁtting,” Journal of Chemical
Information and Computer Sciences , vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2004.
[41] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from over-
ﬁtting,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 15, no. 1, pp.
1929–1958, 2014.
[42] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Identity mappings in deep residual
networks,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Springer, 2016, pp. 630–645.
[43] R. Housley, “A 224-bit one-way hash function: Sha-224,” RFC 3874,
September 2004.
[44] N. M. Nasrabadi, “Pattern recognition and machine learning,” Journal
of Electronic Imaging , vol. 16, no. 4, p. 049901, 2007.
[45] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y . Bengio, “Deep sparse rectiﬁer neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , FL, USA, 2011, pp. 315–323.
[46] S. Ioffe, “Batch renormalization: towards reducing minibatch depen-
dence in match-normalized models,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Inc., 2017, pp. 1945–1953.
[47] L. Bottou, “Stochastic gradient descent tricks,” in Neural networks:
tricks of the trade . Springer, 2012, pp. 421–436.
[48] R. Helfenstein and J. Koko, “Parallel preconditioned conjugate gradient
algorithm on gpu,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics ,
vol. 236, no. 15, pp. 3584–3590, 2012.
[49] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard et al. , “Tensorﬂow: a system for
large-scale machine learning.” in Operating Systems Design and Imple-
mentation , vol. 16, 2016, pp. 265–283.
[50] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,
A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in
pytorch,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
BJJsrmfCZ[51] B. L. Miller, D. E. Goldberg et al. , “Genetic algorithms, tournament
selection, and the effects of noise,” Complex Systems , vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
193–212, 1995.
[52] Z. Michalewicz and S. J. Hartley, “Genetic algorithms + data structures
= evolution programs,” Mathematical Intelligencer , vol. 18, no. 3, p. 71,
1996.
[53] D. E. Goldberg and J. H. Holland, “Genetic algorithms and machine
learning,” Machine Learning , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 95–99, 1988.
[54] C. M. Anderson-Cook, “Practical genetic algorithms,” p. 1099, 2005.
[55] S. Malik and S. Wadhwa, “Preventing premature convergence in genetic
algorithm using dgca and elitist technique,” nternational Journal of
Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering ,
vol. 4, no. 6, 2014.
[56] G. Zhang, Y . Gu, L. Hu, and W. Jin, “A novel genetic algorithm and
its application to digital ﬁlter design,” in Proceedings of 2003 IEEE
Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 2. IEEE, 2003, pp. 1600–1605.
[57] D. Bhandari, C. Murthy, and S. K. Pal, “Genetic algorithm with
elitist model and its convergence,” International Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 10, no. 06, pp. 731–747,
1996.
[58] H. Xie and M. Zhang, “Impacts of sampling strategies in tournament
selection for genetic programming,” Soft Computing , vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
615–633, 2012.
[59] I. J. Goodfellow, D. Warde-Farley, M. Mirza, A. Courville, and Y . Ben-
gio, “Maxout networks,” in Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on Machine Learning , Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Jun 2013,
pp. 1319–1327.
[60] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” in Proceedings of
the 2014 International Conference on Learning Representations , Banff,
Canada, 2014.
[61] R. K. Srivastava, K. Greff, and J. Schmidhuber, “Highway networks,”
inProceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Learning
Representations Workshop , San Diego, CA, 2015.
[62] J. T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller, “Striving
for simplicity: the all convolutional net,” in Proceedings of the 2015
International Conference on Learning Representations , San Diego, CA,
2015.
[63] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma,
Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-
Fei, “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge,” International
Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.
[64] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y . Yang, “Darts: Differentiable architecture
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055 , 2018.
[65] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
neural networks with cutout,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552 , 2017.
[66] D. H. Wolpert and W. G. Macready, “No free lunch theorems for
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 67–82, 1997.
[67] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2005.
[68] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: a
simple visual method to interpret data,” Annals of Internal Medicine ,
vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 916–921, 1989.

