==== Page 1 ====
AWB-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network
Accelerator with Runtime Workload Rebalancing
Tong Geng1;2, Ang Li2, Runbin Shi4, Chunshu Wu1, Tianqi Wang1, Yanfei Li5,
Pouya Haghi1, Antonino Tumeo2, Shuai Che3, Steve Reinhardt3, Martin C. Herbordt1
1Boston University
2Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory
3Microsoft
4The University of Hong Kong
5Zhejiang University
Abstract —Deep learning systems have been successfully ap-
plied to Euclidean data such as images, video, and audio. In
many applications, however, information and their relationships
are better expressed with graphs. Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) appear to be a promising approach to efﬁciently learn
from graph data structures, having shown advantages in many
critical applications. As with other deep learning modalities,
hardware acceleration is critical. The challenge is that real-world
graphs are often extremely large and unbalanced; this poses
signiﬁcant performance demands and design challenges.
In this paper, we propose Autotuning-Workload-Balancing
GCN (A WB-GCN) to accelerate GCN inference. To address the is-
sue of workload imbalance in processing real-world graphs, three
hardware-based autotuning techniques are proposed: dynamic
distribution smoothing, remote switching, and row remapping. In
particular, A WB-GCN continuously monitors the sparse graph
pattern, dynamically adjusts the workload distribution among
a large number of processing elements (up to 4K PEs), and,
after converging, reuses the ideal conﬁguration. Evaluation is
performed using an Intel D5005 FPGA with ﬁve commonly-used
datasets. Results show that 4K-PE A WB-GCN can signiﬁcantly
elevate PE utilization by 7.7 on average and demonstrate
considerable performance speedups over CPUs (3255 ), GPUs
(80.3), and a prior GCN accelerator (5.1 ).
Index Terms —Graph Neural Network, Graph Convolutional
Network, Sparse Matrix Multiplication, Computer Architecture,
Machine Learning Accelerator, Dynamic Scheduling
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning paradigms such as Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [1] and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
[2] have been applied to a wide range of applications including
image classiﬁcation, video processing, speech recognition, and
natural language processing [3]–[7]. These paradigms, how-
ever, are only able to extract and analyze latent information
from euclidean data such as images, video, audio, and text [8]–
[10]. As a result, the adoption of neural networks is greatly
limited in ﬁelds with complex relationships among objects.
A large (and increasing) number of applications use non-
Euclidean data structures that are modeled as graphs. Nodes
and edges represent objects and relationships between those
objects, respectively, as appropriate for the application. Mostof these graphs have a tremendously large numbers of nodes;
moreover, the node degree generally varies dramatically, often
following a power law distribution [11]–[17].
The irregularity of the graph data makes most of the
existing Neural Network (NN) algorithms ill-suited; critical
feature extraction operations, such as convolutions, are no
longer applicable. To tackle this issue, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) have been proposed, in various forms, to extend
deep learning approaches to graph data [8], [18]–[25]. Among
various GNNs, the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), an
approach that marries some ideas of CNNs to the distinct
needs of graph data processing, has demonstrated signiﬁcant
potential and become one of the most important topics in NN-
based graph research [26]–[30].
With the rapid development of GCNs, designing dedicated
hardware accelerators has become an urgent issue [31]. GCNs
have already been investigated in a large number of real-
world applications [8], including electric grid cascading failure
analysis [32], prediction of chemical reactivity [33], prediction
of synthesized material properties [34], polypharmacy side-
effect modeling [35], accurate advertisement in E-commerce
[36], and cybersecurity [37]. Many of these applications pose
stringent constraints on latency and throughput.
Accelerators developed for other domains, such as the
sparse-CNN-accelerator (SCNN) [38]–[40], are not likely to
be optimal as GCN accelerators. There are several reasons.
(i)GCN applications have highly unbalanced non-zero data
distributions: non-zeros can be clustered or appear in only
a few rows. This leads to computing challenges [11]–[13]
due to workload imbalance [14]. Figure 1 compares the
distribution of non-zeros between a typical adjacency matrix
in a GCN and a typical sparse-weight matrix in a CNN: the
distribution of non-zeros is much more balanced in the SCNN.
(ii)Extremely high sparsity . The sparsity of a graph adjacency
matrix often exceeds 99 :9%, while the sparsity of SCNNs
generally ranges from 10% to 50%. Therefore, in GCNs the
indices of consecutive non-zero elements are often highly
scattered; this makes it a major challenge to identify and accessarXiv:1908.10834v10  [cs.DC]  11 Sep 2020

==== Page 2 ====
05010015020025030035001k2k3k4k5k
657552
Row ID37
050100150200250300350010203040506070Non-zero ElementsNon-zero Elements
Row IDOrdered NNZ Elements per Row
GCN SCNN
4550Fig. 1. Histograms show ordered non-zero per-row density. Left: Adjacency
matrix of the NELL graph (avg. density: 0.0073%) has most of non-zeros
clustered in 70/66k rows. Right: Unstructured compressed AlexNet weight
matrix (avg. density: 27%) has workload roughly balanced across 384 rows.
65754 x 65754Evil Rows
Regionally 
Clustered
    Least 
Clustered
Fig. 2. Adjacency matrix of NELL following power-law distribution: elements
are clustered regionally and in a few rows/cols. The matrix density is 0.0073%.
For better visualization, non-zero dots are enlarged.
sufﬁcient valid non-zero pairs to feed a massive number of PEs
per cycle at an acceptable hardware cost (see Section 6). (iii)
Large matrix size. Real-world graphs are usually very large.
For example, the Reddit graph has 233K nodes and 115M
edges. Its 23K23K adjacency matrix requires 1.7Tb storage
in dense format or 11.0Gb in sparse format, which usually
cannot ﬁt into on-chip memory. Although neural networks also
have large models, the matrix of a particular layer is often
much smaller, e.g., 1k 1k, so the working set often can ﬁt
easily into on-chip memory.
For these reasons, novel and efﬁcient accelerator designs are
urgently required to accelerate GCN workloads. We therefore
propose AWB-GCN, a hardware accelerator for GCN infer-
ence with workload auto-tuning. It monitors the workload dis-
tribution at three levels at runtime and, accordingly, rebalances
the distribution per round1.
Three techniques are proposed: distribution smoothing ,re-
mote switching , and evil row remapping . Distribution smooth-
ing balances the workload among neighbors. In matrices
1The calculation of one output matrix column is a round
Fig. 3. AWB-GCN utilization improvement per round.
following the power-law distribution, non-zero elements are
usually clustered, and, in some cases, appear in just a few
rows/columns (Figure 2). Given only distribution smoothing,
it would be slow and difﬁcult for an autotuner to converge
and achieve good load balance. We solve this problem with
remote switching andevil row remapping . Remote switching
shufﬂes workloads of regions with the most and least clustered
non-zero elements, making efﬁcient distribution smoothing
possible. If a row is observed to still contain too many
elements to be smoothed or balanced by remote switching,
it is designated as an evil row. AWB-GCN partitions that row
and remaps its non-zero elements to multiple regions (with
least clustered elements). Figure 3 shows the resulting per-
round improvement in hardware utilization as these methods
are applied (Nell GCN).
This paper makes the following contributions:
We propose a novel and efﬁcient architecture for accel-
erating GCNs and Sparse Matrix Multiplication (SpMM)
kernels for matrices with a power-law distribution.
To handle the extreme workload imbalance, we propose a
hardware-based workload distribution autotuning frame-
work, which includes an efﬁcient online workload proﬁler
and three workload rebalancing techniques.
We evaluate AWB-GCN using an Intel D5005 FPGA
Acceleration Card with ﬁve of the most widely used GCN
datasets. Results show that 4K-PE AWB-GCN improves
the PE utilization on average by 7.7 as compared with
the baseline without workload rebalancing. Compared
with CPUs (Intel Xeon E5-2680v3 + PyTorch Geometric
(PyG)), GPUs (NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000 + PyG),
and prior art, AWB-GCN achieves average speedups of
3255, 80.3, and 5.1, respectively.
II. M OTIVATION
In this section we brieﬂy introduce the GCN algorithm and
discuss data characteristics of power-law graphs.
A. Graph Convolutional Network Structure
Equation 1 shows the layer-wise forward propagation of a
multi-layer spectral GCN [8], [29]:
X(l+1)=s(AX(l)W(l)) (1)
2

==== Page 3 ====
Fig. 4. Illustration of a GCONV layer in GCNs.
Ais the graph adjacency matrix with each row delineating
the connection of a vertex with all the other vertices in the
graph. X(l)is the matrix of input features in layer- l; each
column of Xrepresents a feature while each row denotes a
node. Wlis the weight matrix of layer- l.s(:)denotes the non-
linear activation function, e.g., ReLU [1]. In general Aneeds
to be normalized: ˜A=D 1
2(A+I)D 1
2where Iis the
identity matrix, and Dii=åAi j. The reason is that, without
normalization, multiplying the feature vector X(l)byAwill
change its scale: those nodes with more neighbors tend to
have larger values under feature extraction. Note that during
both training and inference of GCN, ˜Aremains constant. Since
˜Acan be computed ofﬂine from A, in the remainder of this
paper we use Ato denote the normalized ˜A. In general A
is multiplied only once per layer. However, when multi-hop
neighbor information is to be collected, Acan be multiplied
twice or more (i.e., A2,A3, etc.) per layer.
Equation 1 is derived from graph signal processing theory:
convolutions on a graph can be converted to a multiplication of
signal x2RN(i.e., a scalar for each node) and a ﬁlter g2RN
in the frequency domain via the Fourier transform:
CONV (g;x) =F 1(F(x)F(w)) = U(UTxUTg)(2)
wheredenotes the Hadamard product. Uis a collection
of eigenvectors for the normalized graph Laplacian L=
IN D 1
2AD 1
2=ULU. The diagonal matrix Lcomprises
the eigenvalues. If a frequency domain ﬁlter gW=diag(W)
is deﬁned, then Equation 2 can be simpliﬁed [27] as:
CONV (gW;x) =UgWUTx (3)
Equation 3 can be further simpliﬁed by deﬁning the ﬁlter as
the Chebyshev polynomials of the diagonal matrix L[28], [29]
to obtain Equation 1.
Figure 4 illustrates the structure of a Graph Convolutional
layer (GCONV). Each GCONV layer encapsulates the hidden
features of nodes by aggregating information from neighbors
of nodes. By multiplying AandX(l), information from 1-hop
connected neighboring nodes are aggregated. By multiplying
AX(l)with W(l), and going through the non-linear activation
function s(), we obtain the output of this layer, which is also
the feature matrix for the next layer X(l+1). The matrix A will
normally be the same in different layers. After multiple layers,
the GCN is able to extract very high-level abstracted features
for various learning purposes.TABLE I
MATRIX DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS OF 5WIDELY -USED GCN DATASETS .
CORA CITESEER PUBMED NELL REDDIT
DensityA 0.18% 0.11% 0.028% 0.0073% 0.21%
W 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
X1 1.27% 0.85% 10.0% 0.011% 100%
X2 78.0% 89.1% 77.6% 86.4% 63.9%
DimensionNode 2708 3327 19717 65755 232965
Feature 1433 3703 500 61278 602
B. Characteristics of Power-Law Graphs
Real-world graphs in many critical domains typically follow
thepower-law distribution [14]–[17], which states that the
number of nodes yof a given degree xis proportional to
x bfor a constant b>0. This implies that in the adjacency
matrix A, a small number of rows (or columns) include the
majority of non-zeros whereas the majority of the rows (or
columns) contain only a few non-zeros but are not empty.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of non-zero elements for the
ﬁve publicly available datasets that are widely used for GCN
evaluation [29]. The power-law effect is prominent for Cora ,
Citeseer ,Pubmed andNell .
Table I lists the density and dimension of matrices in the ﬁve
GCN datasets used in this paper. Note that adjacency matrix
Ais always very sparse ( 99%). Matrix Xis also usually
sparse. For the ﬁrst layer, the sparsity ( X1) is usually larger
than 90%. As the weight matrix Wis dense, the output of
AXW is also dense. However, because of the ReLU activation
function, the ﬁnal output X2 (also the input of the next layer)
becomes sparse but with sparsity usually less than 50%. The
sizes of the matrices in GCNs depend on the dataset and can
range from thousands to millions or more. Acan be extremely
large and is stored in a sparse format.
III. GCN B ASELINE ARCHITECTURE
This section introduces the multi-core baseline architec-
ture for GCN acceleration. This baseline supports efﬁcient
processing of power-law graphs with ultra-high sparsity and
large sizes. This design alone cannot address the workload
imbalance issue of power-law graphs, but builds a foundation
for its further augmentation, described in the next section,
which achieves near-optimal workload balancing.
A. Matrix Computation Order
To compute AXW at each GCONV layer, there are two
alternative computation orders: (AX)WandA(XW).
The choice is signiﬁcant as it dictates the volume of non-
zero multiplications. Based on proﬁling, Ais ultra sparse and
large, Xis generally sparse and usually has a large number
of columns, and Wis small and dense. For (AX)W,
since multiplying Aand Xrequires complex sparse-sparse-
matrix-multiplication and produces a very large dense matrix,
multiplying their product by another dense matrix Wleads
to signiﬁcant computation workload and long delay. Alterna-
tively, for A(XW), both are sparse-dense matrix multi-
plications (SpMM) and the scale of computation is drastically
smaller. Table II lists the amount of computation for the ﬁve
3

==== Page 4 ====
Fig. 5. Non-zero distribution imbalance of Adjacency matrices in Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, Nell and Reddit datasets.
TABLE II
OPERATIONS REQUIRED UNDER DIFFERENT EXEC ORDERS .
Layer Order CORA CITESEER PUBMED NELL REDDIT
Ops(AX)W 62.8M 198.0M 165.5M 258G 83.3G
A(XW) 1.33M 2.23M 18.6M 782M 21.4G
datasets following the two approaches. Since the difference is
quite obvious, in this design we ﬁrst perform XWand then
multiply with A.
B. SpMM Execution Order and Mapping
We perform column-wise-product-based SpMM [41]–[43]
as described as follows. Given SB=C, ifSis(mn),Bis
(nk), and Cis(mk), then we can reformulate Cas:
C= [n 1
å
j=0Sjb(j;0);n 1
å
j=0Sjb(j;1);:::;n 1
å
j=0Sjb(j;k 1)] (4)
where Sjis the jth column of Sand bj;kis an element of
Bat row- jand column- k. In other words, by broadcasting
thejth element from column- kofBto the entire column- j
ofS, we can obtain a partial column of C. Essentially, Bis
processed in a streaming fashion: each element b(j;k)ﬁnishes
all computation it involves at once and is then evicted. In this
way, we reuse the entire sparse matrix Sfor each column of C
(ktimes in total). To reduce off-chip memory access for matrix
S, we apply inter-layer data forwarding and matrix blocking
techniques (discussed in Section 3.4).
This design has additional advantages when SandCare
stored in Compressed-Sparse-Column (CSC) format. Further-
more, it provides opportunities to pipeline multiple SpMM
operations, as is discussed in Section 3.4. Moreover, column-
wise-product brings massive opportunities of workload distri-
bution autotuning which is key to achieving high performance.
Figure 6(A) shows the column-wise order for calculating C.
The columns of Sand elements of Bin the same color are
multiplied and stored as partial results in Cwith the same
color.
In the baseline design, with the assumption that non-zeros
are evenly distributed among the rows, we use a direct and
static mapping from matrix rows to PEs to avoid expensive
parallel reduction in hardware as illustrated in Figure 6(B).
C. Design of Baseline Architecture
Figure 7 illustrates the baseline design for SpMM calcu-
lation with efﬁcient support of skipping zeros. The archi-
Fig. 6. (A) SpMM computation order: Column-wise-product; (B) Matrix
partitioning & mapping among PEs.
tecture comprises the modules sparse-matrix-memory (Sp-
MMeM), dense-column-memory (DCM), task-distributor &
Queue (TDQ), PE-array , and accumulation-buffers-array
(ACC Buffer). SpMMeM buffers the input sparse matrix S
(from off-chip) and feeds non-zeros and their indices to TDQ.
DCM buffers the input dense matrix Band broadcasts its
elements to TDQ. TDQ distributes tasks to the PEs. The PE-
array performs concurrent multiplication of non-zero pairs,
partial result accumulation, and data exchange with the ACC
Buffers. Finally, the ACC Buffers cache the partial results
of the resulting matrix Cfor accumulation and send them to
the next SpMM engine at the completion of a whole column
calculation. Depending on the sparsity and storage format of
S, i.e., CSC, we have two alternative designs for TDQ:
TDQ-1 (Figure 7-left) is used when Sis generally sparse (spar-
sity<75%) and stored in dense format. We perform the direct
row partition as discussed and map non-zeros to the input
buffer of the corresponding PEs (Figure 6(B)). In each cycle,
NPE =(1 Sparsity )elements are forwarded to the PE array.
Only non-zeros are kept in the queues. Here NPE denotes
the number of parallel PEs. Given evenly distributed non-
zeros, each PE receives one non-zero per cycle to calculate. In
practice, however, the distribution can be very imbalanced and
each PE has the chance to receive at most 1 =(1 Sparsity )in
one cycle. Therefore, each PE is equipped with multiple Task
Queues (TQs) guaranteeing enough concurrency to cache all
valid data. As shown in Figure 7-(left), in each cycle a PE can
receive up to 4 non-zero elements (sparsity <75%). Each PE
has four task queues to buffer them.
In each cycle, an arbiter selects a non-empty queue, pops
an element, checks for a Read-after-Write (RaW) hazard, and
forwards it to the PE for processing. Since the computations
are all ﬂoating-point, the pipelined multiply-accumulate-unit
(MAC) usually takes several cycles to process, but can still
4

==== Page 5 ====
Fig. 7. Architecture of the proposed baseline SpMM engine.
accept new tasks while processing. If the new task tries to
accumulate the same partial result of C (i.e., from the same
row of A), it actually fetches a stale partial result from the
ACC buffer and a RaW hazard occurs. To avoid this hazard,
we implement a stall buffer of size T, where T is the delay
of the MAC units. We track the row indices currently being
processed by the MAC and check whether the current element
is targeting the same row in the RaW-check-unit. If so, we
buffer that job and delay until the hazard is resolved. The
RaW hazard is detected by checking the row index of the
coming data.
TDQ-2 (Figure 7-right) is used when Sis ultra-sparse and
stored in CSC format. Since in CSC the non-zeros are con-
tiguous in a dense array, if we can directly process the dense
array, we gain from avoiding all the zeros. However, we suffer
from the overhead of navigating to the correct PE as the indices
of neighboring elements are highly scattered. We use a multi-
stage Omega-network for routing the non-zeros to the correct
PE according to their row indices. Each router in the Omega-
network has a local buffer in case the buffer of the next stage is
saturated. This design attempts to balance the data forwarding
rate and the processing capability of the PEs by sending NPE
non-zeros per cycle. This is achieved when non-zero elements
are distributed evenly among rows. Compared with a global
crossbar network, the Omega-network design scales better and
incurs lower hardware complexity.
When a PE receives a new non-zero pair [ d1;d2] from
TDQ, it (1) performs the new multiplication task with d1;d2,
(2) fetches the corresponding partial results [ dacc] of output
matrix Cfrom the ACC buffers according to the newly
received row index, (3) accumulates the multiplication result
and dacc, and (4) updates the ACC buffers with the new
accumulation result. Each PE is coupled with a bank of ACC
buffer to store the rows of Cit accounts for. A PE has
two units: a MAC and an Address-Generation-Unit (AGU)
for result address generation and forwarding. Since Cis a
dense matrix and stored in dense format, the rows of Care
statically partitioned among ACC buffers. Synchronization is
only needed when an entire column of the resulting matrix C
is completely calculated.
Overall, for each layer of GCN, we ﬁrst execute SpMMonXW. Since Xis generally sparse (except the ﬁrst layer)
and stored in dense format, we use TDQ-1. The result of XW
is dense. We then compute A(XW)which again is SpMM.
However, as Ais ultra-sparse and stored in CSC format, we use
TDQ-2. The result is dense, but after ReLU , a large fraction
of the entries become zero, and we again have a sparse matrix
as the input feature matrix for the next layer.
D. Pipelining SpMM Chains
Intra-Layer SpMM Pipelining: One can exploit the par-
allelism between consecutive SpMMs (i.e., XWand A
(XW)) in a layer through ﬁne-grained pipelining. This is based
on the observation that Ais constant for the inference of a
certain graph. Once a column of (XW)is calculated, we can
start the multiplication of this column with Aimmediately
without waiting for the entire XW (see Figure 8). This design
has two major beneﬁts: (i) we gain extra parallelism and
reduce the overall latency through this ﬁne-grained pipelining,
and (ii) instead of requiring off-chip storage to cache the
big resulting XW matrix, we only need to buffer a single
column of XW; this can be done on-chip. This method can be
reused within a GCONV layer if (AXW )is left-multiplied by
any other sparse matrices. For example, some GCNs collect
information from 2-hop neighbors so the layer formulation
becomes A(A(XW))and the three multiplications can
be pipelined and processed in parallel.
Inter-Layer SpMM Pipelining: SpMMs from different layers
can also be pipelined. To avoid pipeline bubbles and large
intermediate buffers, we allocate hardware resources (PEs) in
proportion to the workload of each layer (Figure 8). In this
way, the output generation of the previous layer matches the
data consumption of the current layer, so that the execution
time of different layers is similar, given optimal workload
balance and PE utilization. Pipelining SpMMs from different
layers has two beneﬁts. First, it exploits inter-layer parallelism.
Second, since Ais shared for all GCONV layers in the
inference of a particular graph, it can be reused by SpMM
engines across the layers, so off-chip accesses of Aare only
required by the ﬁrst layer. This is done by forwarding elements
ofAthrough the layers.
Bandwidth Analysis: Off-chip data access of the big Ad-
jacency matrix Acan be a concern. However, as AWB-GCN
5

==== Page 6 ====
Fig. 8. Pipelined SpMMs: data production and consumption rates match
across consecutive SpMMs by allocating PEs in proportion to workload sizes.
Fig. 9. Matrix Blocking Optimization to reduce the off-chip bandwidth
requirement. The sub-SpMM of each pair of blocks is performed in column-
wise-product order. The numbers represent execution orders.
always requests and consumes data with continuous addresses,
the off-chip memory bandwidth and the burst mode access can
be efﬁciently utilized. Also, we use three extra methods to
reduce the off-chip bandwidth requirement: (1) as mentioned
above, Ais reused across layers; (2) matrix blocking is used
to improve the data locality and reuse of matrix A. Figure 9
illustrates how the proposed matrix blocking works without
affecting the efﬁciency of the rebalancing techniques which
are discussed in the next section. The numbers in the ﬁgure
are execution orders. Ais partitioned into multiple blocks.
Instead of calculating each column of A(XW)by multiplying
all blocks of Aand the corresponding column of (XW), we
calculate tcolumns of A(XW)in parallel. The calculation of
a certain block of Awill not start until the previous block is
reused ttimes and ﬁnishes calculating its intermediate results
of all tcolumns of the resulting matrix. By doing so, the
data reuse of matrix Ais improved by ttimes. Note that
this optimization will not hurt the efﬁciency of the autotuning
rebalancing of AWB-GCN, as the sub-SpMM of each block
ofAis still following column-wise product order. (3) AWB-
GCN is equipped with a scratchpad memory to cache parts of
Aon-chip as much as possible. For example, the AandX1 of
Cora can be entirely stored on-chip.
Based on our experiments, with the proposed optimizations,
the AWB-GCN accelerator requires at most 459 Gbps off-chip
bandwidth to keep the hardware busy with 1024 PEs for the 5
datasets evaluated. This bandwidth demand can be generally
satisﬁed by current platforms (e.g., Intel D5005 FPGA board
provides 614 Gbps DDR bandwidth; VCU-128 FPGA provides
3680 Gbps HBM bandwidth; NVIDIA V100 provides 7176
Gbps HBM bandwidth).
E. The Workload Balance Problem
The baseline architecture works well when non-zeros are
evenly distributed among the rows of A. However, when this
0 64 128 192 25600.20.40.60.81
0 64 128 192 256
PE IDCiteseer Nell
PE ID00.20.40.60.81UtilizationUtilizationFig. 10. PE utilization waves of 256-PE Baseline SpMM engine processing
A(XW)of Nell and Citeseer.
assumption does not hold, the performance of the baseline
architecture can degrade considerably due to workload im-
balance among PEs. Figures 10 illustrates the utilization of
256 PEs processing SpMMs with Adjacency matrices of the
Citeseer and NELL datasets. As mentioned in Section 1, evil
rows and regionally clustered non-zeros in power-law graph
matrices bring the inefﬁciency. The existence of evil rows
keeps only a few PEs busy while all others idle most of the
time, resulting in signiﬁcant major crests in the utilization
waves; the regionally clustered non-zero elements result in the
minor crests; the differences in the numbers of non-zeros in
neighboring rows result in other ﬂuctuations.
A common software approach for dealing with sparse
data structures is to proﬁle the structure, e.g., with symbolic
analysis, and then use that information to guide the “real”
processing. For GCNs, however, it has been demonstrated
that the preprocessing stage can take 10 more time than
the inference itself [31]. In this work, we dynamically adjust
hardware conﬁgurations for workload rebalancing. This design
can be applied to a variety of specialized accelerators for
processing sparse data structures.
IV. AWB-GCN A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe the AWB-GCN architecture.
The core is the handling of load balancing at three levels
of granularity: distribution smoothing for local utilization
ﬂuctuations among PEs, remote switching for the minor crests,
androw remapping for the major crests.
Figure 11 illustrates autotuning with 24 PEs performing
SpMM on a power-law matrix. The gray bars at the top
show the execution time of parallel PEs; the length changes
dynamically through the process. The narrower bars at the
bottom show the static density-per-row of the matrix. Ideally,
at the end of autotuning, all bars on the top becomes short
and have the same length. Each round of autotuning includes
two phases: First, data processing and distribution smoothing
in phase 1; then remote switching and row remapping.
Figure 11 (a)&(b) illustrate the ﬁrst round of autotuning.
The progression from Figure (a) to (b) shows the ﬁrst phase.
Figure (a) gives estimated execution time without distribution
smoothing; Figure (b) shows the actual execution time with
distribution smoothing applied. During phase 1, PEs keep
ofﬂoading workloads to their less busier neighbors, resulting
6

==== Page 7 ====
Row density of matrix (%)0100Execution time of parallel PEs0
PE stallPE utilizationRow densityin matrix
DistributionsmoothingPE3Row density of matrix (%)0100Execution time of parallel PEs0Phase1: Distribution smoothing (1st round)
Phase2: Remote switching + Row remapping (1st round)
!
Evil rows
PE1PE5
PE6
PE18Remote switchingEvil rowremapping
Distributionsmoothing
✅
 Balanced PE workload
✅
 High PE utilization
✅
 Less execution timeAutotuning converge to optimal balance
Distribution smoothing (2nd round)(a)(b)
(c)(d)40% workload
30% workload
PE18PE1220% workloadAdjust toFig. 11. Rebalancing process: distribution smoothing, remote switching and
row remapping per round. (a)&(b): 1st round; (c)&(d): 2nd round.
in a more ﬂat and smooth execution time wave (shown in (b)).
Meanwhile, the execution time of PEs at the wave crests and
troughs is recorded by the Autotuner.
After all the PEs have ﬁnished, phase 2 starts. The Auto-
tuner partitions and remaps evil rows to PEs at troughs and
switches workloads of the PEs at the minor crests with the ones
at the troughs. The green and blue arrows in (b) show evil row
remapping and remote switching decisions, respectively. After
these decisions are made, the second round of autotuning starts
(Figures (c)&(d)). With remote switching and row remapping
determined in the ﬁrst round, the initial workload distribution
among PEs at the start of the second round (shown in (c)) can
be more efﬁciently balanced by distribution smoothing (shown
in (d)). The blue arrows in (d) show that remote balancing not
only ﬁnds new pairs of PEs to switch workloads, but also
adjusts the switch fractions determined in the previous round.
After several rounds, the system converges to optimal balanced
status; this is then used for the remainder of the computation.
All proﬁling and adjustment are performed at runtime. We
now present design details.
A. Distribution Smoothing
At the start of processing, rows are evenly distributed among
PEs as introduced in Section 3.2 (as shown in Figure 6(B)).
During the calculation of each round, we employ distribution
smoothing by averaging out the workloads among neighbors.
The architecture is able to monitor the runtime PE utilization
information by tracking the number of pending tasks in TQs
and keep ofﬂoading the work of PEs with more pending tasks
to their less busy neighbors. However, the ofﬂoaded work
needs to be returned for aggregation after processing. Due to
Fig. 12. Simpliﬁed architecture of distribution smoothing.
chip area and design complexity restrictions, we may ofﬂoad
workloads among direct neighbors, 2-hop neighbors, or even
3-hop neighbors, but not farther ones.
Figure 12 illustrates the hardware design of 1-hop distribu-
tion smoothing for TDQ-1 and TDQ-2.
TDQ-1: Before a new task is pushed into the TQ of a PE,
the PE compares the number of pending tasks with those in
the neighboring TQs. The task is then forwarded to the TQ
with the fewest pending tasks. If forwarded to a neighbor, the
result needs to be returned to the ACC buffer of its original
PE after accumulation (see Figure 12-(B)). The calculation of
valid return address and accumulation of partial results are
done in the neighbor PE.
TDQ-2: The ﬁnal layer of the multi-stage Omega network
handles neighbor task forwarding. As shown in Figure 12-(C)
(also in Figure 13), multiple PEs share the same ﬁnal-layer
switch; we refer to these PEs as a group . AWB-GCN keeps
tracking the usage of TQs of the ﬁnal layer. Once a new task
is forwarded to the ﬁnal-layer switch, the TQ usages among
neighbors are compared and then the task is routed to the PE
with the lowest TQ usage. To enable PEs on the group edge
(i.e., the leftmost or rightmost PEs per group) to communicate
with their out-of-group neighbors, we augment the Omega-
network by adding 2 extra links per switch in the ﬁnal layer,
as shown in Figure 12-(D). Note that Figure 12-(D) shows
sharing only among 1-hop neighbors. By considering more
distant hop neighbors, a more balanced design is obtained
at the cost of higher hardware complexity and area. This is
discussed in the evaluation section.
Distribution smoothing helps remove local utilization ﬂuc-
tuations (Figures 11(a) to (b)), but is not sufﬁcient when (1)
non-zeros are clustered in a region across many PEs, so that
neighbors are mostly busy and have no chance to help each
7

==== Page 8 ====
other, resulting in a minor utilization crests (PE20,21,22 in
Figure 11(b)); or (2) most non-zeros are clustered in only a
few rows so that the major crests cannot be eliminated even
if all neighboring PEs help (PE9 in Figure 11(b)).
B. Remote Switching
To address regional clustering, we propose remote switch-
ing. This process partially or completely exchanges the work-
loads between under- and overloaded PEs, i.e., at centers of
utilization wave troughs and crests, respectively. The switch
fraction is determined at runtime by an autotuner and is based
on per-round PE utilization. As the sparse matrix Ais reused
during the processing per round, the switch strategy generated
in prior rounds is valuable in the processing of later rounds.
The accelerator remembers the switch strategies used in the
current round and incrementally optimizes them based on the
utilization information obtained in the next round. In this way,
remote switching is able to ﬂatten the crests and troughs;
after several rounds of autotuning, the switch strategy best
matching the sparse structure of Ais obtained, and is used for
the remaining rounds for almost perfect PE utilization.
The hardware design is shown in Figure 13. The over-
loaded and under-loaded PEs are identiﬁed by using the PE
Status Monitor (PESM) of Autotuner during Phase one of
autotuning. Recall that each TQ has a counter to track the
number of pending tasks; these can trigger an empty signal
when reaching zero. These empty signals are connected to the
PESM. At each cycle, the updated empty signals are xored
with their values recorded on the previous cycle. The XOR
results indicate which PEs are newly ﬁnished; this information
is stored in the Switch Candidate Buffer .
At the start of each round (after Ais totally sent to TDQs),
the arbiter scans the buffer and record IDs of newly done PEs
until enough under-loaded PEs have been found. The number
of PE tuples for switching at each round can be customized.
In Figure 13, four tuples of the most over- and under-loaded
PEs are selected for remote switching. After the arbiter ﬁnds
the ﬁrst 4 idle PEs, it stops scanning the buffer and instead
waits for the completion signal ( bit AND all empty signals)
from the system, which implies all PEs have become idle.
Meanwhile, the Switch Candidate Buffer caches the newly idle
info of the most recent cycles. Whenever the arbiter receives
the completion signal it starts to scan the buffer and continues
until the four most over-loaded PEs have been found. Note
that the arbiter does not select neighbor PEs continuously; this
guarantees that PE tuples selected by PESM are at different
crests and troughs of the utilization wave.
To avoid thrashing, we only exchange a portion of the
workload between PEs. We use the following equation to
calculate the number of jobs (i.e., rows of A) to be switched
in the i-th round (i.e., a column of B),Niinit:
Niinit=Gi=G1(R=2) (5)
where Giis the workload gap of the selected PE tuple at
thei-th round, and Ris the number of rows per PE underequal mapping. Here, workload gap is approximated as the
difference of execution cycles to ﬁnish all tasks.
In the i+1-th round, new PE-tuples are selected and their
switch fractions are calculated. Meanwhile, the autotuner also
tracks the post-switching utilization gaps of PE-tuples selected
in the prior rounds and uses them as feedback to adjust the
switch fraction Niinit; this minimizes the utilization gaps
further. The workload switching fraction for each tracked PE-
tuple is adjusted for two or more rounds and is highly likely
to converge to the optimal distribution. Equation 5 can now
be rewritten as follows:
Ni;j=(
Gi=G1(R=2) i f j=0
N(i 1);(j 1)+Gi=G1(R=2) i f j>0(6)
where jdenotes the number of rounds of fraction update.
Ni;jindicates that the current PE-tuple is in its j-th update
and its initial fraction to switch was calculated in the i j-th
round. The number of rounds tracked simultaneously can be
customized and depends on the size of the tracking window in
the PESM; this is an area/performance tradeoff. In Figure 13,
two consecutive rounds are tracked.
Calculation of Equation 6 is done in the Utilization Gap
Tracker (UGT in Figure 13). To reduce the hardware cost of
calculating Gi=G1(R=2), we use a hardware-friendly ap-
proximation with threshold-based counting and table lookup;
when the most under-loaded PE is found, the left CNTs in
UGT start counting. The execution cycle gap (G1) at the ﬁrst
round is right-shifted by gbits (the granularity for division
approximation). The result is used as a threshold. Whenever
the left CNTs reach the threshold, they get back to 0 and the
right CNT adds 1. When the most over-loaded PE is found, the
counting stops. Assuming the right CNT counts to q, we know
the execution time gap at the current round is approximately
qG1=(2g).
Using qas the address to access the Table for Switch
Fraction Lookup (TfSFL), we know the approximate number
of rows that needs to be switched. More details are omitted due
to space limitations. Once the number of rows to be switched is
known, it is forwarded to the Workload Distribution Controller
(WDC) together with the corresponding PE IDs. At the start
of the next round, the destination PE of these rows is updated
in the Shufﬂe Switches (SS). By doing so, the non-zeros in
these rows will be forwarded to the post-switching PEs in the
coming rounds.
Furthermore, in order to reduce the workloads of over-
loaded PEs more efﬁciently, all operations related to the
main-diagonal elements at the rows assigned to these PEs
are skipped during processing. Instead of performing these
operations, when the required elements of the dense matrix
reach TDQs, they will be directly forwarded to the ACC
Buffers of the post-switching PEs and be accumulated just
before the ﬁnal accumulation results are sent to the next kernel.
Remote switching followed by distribution smoothing is
efﬁcient on getting rids of most of crests of utilization waves.
However, for the major crests resulted from evil rows which
8

==== Page 9 ====
Fig. 13. Overall architecture of SpMM engine in AWB-GCN with three rebalancing techniques: distribution smoothing, remote switching (red bordered) and
evil row remapping (purple bordered). Here every 128 PEs has one Super-PEs and four Labor-PEs. These numbers can be customized.
have too many non-zeros to be shared only by neighbors, extra
effort is required.
C. Evil Row Remapping
We address evil-row clustering by building row remapping
support into the remote switching hardware. With row remap-
ping, the evil row is distributed to the most under-loaded
PEs in troughs; in this way the neighbors of these PEs can
help. Row remapping is triggered based on demand at the end
of each round. The autotuner calculates the utilization gaps
between the most over- and under-loaded PEs and determines
whether their gaps are too big for remote switching to handle.
If yes, row remapping is performed. The workloads of the
PE overloaded in the current round are switched (temporarily)
with a Super-PE in the next round. During processing of the
next round, the Super-PE counts the numbers of non-zeros per
row and ﬁnds the evil rows containing the most non-zeros. In
the round after, the workloads of each evil row are partitioned
and distributed to a set of Labor-PEs controlled by the Super-
PE.
After evil rows are remapped to labor-PEs, the original
workloads of the labor-PEs can still be swapped with the most
under-loaded PEs via remote switching; this ensures that even
if the labor-PEs are overloaded originally, they do not become
new crests after row remapping. If a labor-PE itself is found
to have an evil row, evil row remapping will ﬁrst map its
workload to the master-PE, and then distributively remap the
evil row back to labor-PEs, including the one which has the
evil row originally. By remapping evil rows statically to certain
PEs instead of dynamically to random ones, the aggregation of
partial results becomes hardware efﬁcient. If row remapping
is not triggered, Super- and Labor-PEs serve as regular PEs.
The existence of evil rows is generally the most critical
bottleneck, especially when utilization is lower than 50%.
The proposed row remapping technique makes it possible for
the autotuner to ﬁnd the optimal workload distributions and
achieve high utilization. As evil row remapping is normally
triggered during the ﬁrst few rounds, the utilization of thesystem increases rapidly right at the start and the autotuner
generally converges quickly.
Figure 13 illustrates the hardware support of row remap-
ping. For clarity, only one Super-PE and its four Labor-PEs
are shown. The Labor-PE has an architecture similar to the
normal PE, but they are connected to an adder tree for result
aggregation. The aggregated results of evil rows are cached
in a small separate ACC buffer. The super-PE is much bigger
than other PEs, as it serves as a proﬁler to ﬁnd the evil rows. It
is equipped with two extra modules: a parallel sorting circuit
that tracks the rows with the most non-zeros; and a non-zero
counter (including a local buffer) that records the number of
non-zeros per row. Workload remapping between Super-PE &
Labor-PEs and workload switching between Super-PE & the
PE-with-evil-rows are handled by augmenting the Autotuner as
follows. First, the UGT module is equipped with a comparator
to identify whether evil row remapping is required; if it
does, then the UGT will send the information to WDC. The
WDC knows the IDs of the Super-PE and Labor-PEs. If row
remapping is triggered or an evil row is found, the entries
of the Super- and Labor-PE at Distribution Switch Table in
the WDC are updated. This enables workload switching and
remapping in the coming round.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate AWB-GCNs with different
design choices and compare them with other platforms pro-
cessing the same networks.
A. Evaluation Conﬁguration
We implement AWB-GCNs in Verilog HDL and measure
PE utilization, performance, energy efﬁciency, and hardware
resource consumption on Intel acceleration card D5005 which
is equipped with a Stratix 10 SX FPGA. Note that the FPGA
is only used as an evaluation platform to demonstrate the per-
formance of AWB-GCN. The design is a general architecture
that does not leverage any FPGA-speciﬁc features.
To measure utilization, we add a counter to each PE to
track the number of idle cycles. The number of operating
9

==== Page 10 ====
Fig. 14. Overall performance and PE utilization of 1K-PE AWB-GCN with ﬁve design choices.
Fig. 15. Per-SpMM performance and PE utilization of 1K-PE AWB-GCN with ﬁve design choices.
cycles (i.e., execution delay) is also measured with a hardware
counter. The hardware consumption and operating frequency
are reported by Quartus Pro 19.4 after synthesis and imple-
mentation. To perform fair cross-platform comparisons, we
implement GCNs with the state-of-the-art and famous software
framework, PyG [44], and run them on Intel Xeon E5-2680-
V3 CPU and NVIDIA RTX 8000 GPU. We also compare
AWB-GCN with prior work on GCNs such as HyGCN [31].
The datasets used for evaluation are Cora ,Citeseer ,
Pubmed ,Nell andReddit ; these are the ﬁve most widely used
publicly available datasets in GCN research.
B. AWB-GCN Evaluation
Design efﬁciency is evaluated by comparing the perfor-
mance, hardware resource consumption, and PE utilization of
the 1K-PE baseline design without any rebalancing techniques
(i.e., Baseline ) with the four different design choices of
1K-PE AWB-GCNs: (i) 1-hop distribution smoothing (i.e.,
Design(A) ), (ii) 2-hop distribution smoothing (i.e., Design(B) ),
(iii) 1-hop distribution smoothing plus remote switching and
row remapping (i.e., Design(C) ), and (iv) 2-hop distribution
smoothing plus remote switching and row remapping (i.e.,
Design(D) ). The only exception is for Nell where we use 2-
hop and 3-hop distribution smoothing (rather than 1-hop and
2-hop) due to its extremely clustered distribution.
Figure 14 compares the end-to-end GCN inference latency
and average utilization of PEs for the ﬁve designs over the
ﬁve datasets. The lines show the overall PE utilization. The
bars show the breakdown of execution cycles of different
Remote Switching + Row Remapping Distribution SmoothingOthers in PE Omega/Shuﬄe network Task Queue MAC in PE
Remote Switching + Row Remapping Others Task Queue0.60
0.45
0.30
0.15
05
4
3
2
145
36
27
18
925
20
15
10
50.60
0.45
0.30
0.15
0On-chip Storage Demand (MB)Normallized Hardware 
Usage for Logic (ALM)750K
600K
450K
300K
150K750K
600K
450K
300K
150K750K
600K
450K
300K
150K750K
600K
450K
300K
150K750K900K
600K
450K
300K
150KFig. 16. (A) Hardware resource consumption normalized to the number of
ALMs and (B) On-chip storage demand of 1K-PE AWB-GCN.
GCN layers. The latency of ReLU is too low to show in
the ﬁgure. The off-chip memory access latency is overlapped
with computation. We also mark the latency lower bound
assuming theoretically ideal PE utilization. For Cora ,Citeseer ,
Pubmed ,Nell andReddit , comparing to Baseline, Design(B)
can improve PE utilization from 38%, 56%, 44%, 7.1% and
10

==== Page 11 ====
Fig. 17. AWB-GCN PE (1K) average utilization per round of workload autotuning.
Fig. 18. Scalability evaluation: PE utilization and overall performance of Baseline, Design(B) and Design(D) of AWB-GCNs with 512, 1K, 2K and 4K PEs.
82%, to 79%, 77%, 86%, 39%, and 99%, respectively, leading
to 1:94, 1:25, 1:56, 5:93, and 1 :19performance
improvement. Enabling remote switching can further improve
PE utilization to 88%, 88%, 93%, 88%, and 99%, bringing
performance gain to 2 :11, 1:41, 1:62, 8:75, and 1 :20.
The results show that AWB-GCN always provides high uti-
lization and close to theoretical peak performance for datasets
with various levels of power-law distribution.
In AWB-GCN, hardware resources allocated to different
layers are in proportion to their volume of operations. Thus,
when perfect utilization is achieved, the same execution delay
is observed for all layers. As shown in Figure 14, the green
and red bars have similar lengths at Design(D), while their
lengths vary signiﬁcantly for the Baseline.
The shaded area in Figure 14 represents the performance
overhead of the proposed rebalancing techniques. Distribu-
tion smoothing is performed during the processing of PEs
incurring no overhead so Designs(A)&(B) are not shaded.
For Designs(C)&(D), most of the tasks for remote switching
and row remapping are also performed in parallel with the
processing of PEs, e.g., all tasks at PESM and the utilization
gap calculation at UGT. However, the table lookup for switch
fraction at UGT and data update at WDC must be done se-
quentially between the processing of two consecutive iterations
(columns). They introduce negligible overheads (shaded area
of bars for Design(C)&(D)), before the system converges to
optimal balanced status. The shaded areas are only visible for
Cora and Citeseer whose workloads are relatively lighter.
Figure 15 further breaks down the numbers of execution
cycles and shows results for every SpMM kernel; this demon-
strates the beneﬁts of AWB-GCN on kernels with various
sparsity, size and distributions. The shaded area of the bars
represents the Sync cycles due to workload imbalance; the
unshaded area represents the Ideal cycles assuming perfectworkload balance. The bars in different colors represent the
execution cycles of the four SpMM kernels in the two-layer
GCNs [8], [29]: A(XW)and XW at Layer 1 and 2 . The
lines show the corresponding PE utilizations. As shown in Fig-
ure 15, Design(D) signiﬁcantly minimizes the synchronization
overheads for all kernels of the 5 GCN models.
Comparing SpMM kernels, utilization improves signiﬁ-
cantly for A(XW)at both layers and XWat Layer-1. As
forXWat Layer-2, although Xis also sparse after activation
is performed, its sparsity is much lower than that of the X
at Layer-1 and its non-zero distribution does not follow the
power-law (similar to that of the sparse matrices in SCNNs);
utilization is thus high even with the baseline design.
Figure 16(A) compares the hardware resource usage of
the ﬁve designs over the ﬁve datasets. To show comparable
breakdowns to ASIC implementations, the results of hardware
resource usage are reported by Quartus Pro 19.4 after synthesis
(therefore, FPGA-speciﬁc optimizations are not included) and
are normalized to the number of Adaptive Logic Modules
(ALMs). ALM is the basic component of Intel FPGAs. In
an ASIC design the analogue would be the number of tran-
sistors. The blue segments represent the resource usage for
the modules of the baseline design including MAC units in
PEs, other modules in PEs, task queue control logic, and
omega/shufﬂe networks. The green and red segments refer
to the hardware overheads for the support of distribution
smoothing andremote switching + row remapping . Note that
in practical FPGA implementations, MAC units in PEs are
instantiated with ﬂoating-point DSP slices. In order to show
the area breakdown more clearly, we normalize the DSP
slices to ALMs. As shown in Figure (A), the overheads of
1-hop and 2-hop distribution smoothing are on average 3.5%
and 6.7%, respectively, which is acceptable; the overhead of
remote switching and row remapping is, on average 0.9%,
11

==== Page 12 ====
which is negligible.
Figure 16(B) compares on-chip storage demand. That of
Task Queues in the Omega-Network is in blue; the buffers for
remote switching + row remapping are in red; the others are in
green. As shown in Figure (B), the overall storage demands of
AWB-GCN with Design(D) are even lower than the baseline.
This is largely due to dramatically reduced per-PE Task
Queue size under more balanced workloads. With much more
balanced workload distributions in Design(D), the congestion
and backpressure in Omega-Network are signiﬁcantly relieved,
making the TQs narrower and shallower.
Finally, Figure 17 shows the utilization improvement due
to iterative workload autotuning. Rebalancing can be accom-
plished within 10 iterations. This means that most of the
iterations can beneﬁt from operating under the converged
optimal strategy. Note that the utilization of Nell has a sharp
improvement in round 3 due to effective evil row remapping.
C. Scalability of AWB-GCN
We evaluate the scalability of AWB-GCN by running GCN
inference of the ﬁve datasets on the baseline as well as Designs
(B) and (D) of AWB-GCN and varying the number of PEs
from 512, 1024, 2048 to 4096. In Figure 18, the bars represent
the performance speedup comparing with the baseline design
with 512 PEs. The lines represent average PE utilizations.
As shown in Figure 18, the PE utilization of the baseline de-
sign drops dramatically with increasing number of PEs. This is
because more PEs means fewer rows per PE, highlighting the
imbalance among PEs: they have fewer opportunities to absorb
inter-row imbalance. Due to the dropping PE utilization, the
performance speedup shows poor scalability. For AWB-GCN
with only distribution smoothing, PE utilization also drops but
more slowly than baseline. Nell is an outlier as the utilization
of baseline with 512 PEs is too low to drop. In contrast, the PE
utilization of the complete version of AWB-GCN, Design(D),
is high and stable. The performance scales almost linearly with
increasing number of PEs.
D. Cross-platform Comparison
We evaluate ﬁve scenarios: (i) AWB-GCN Design-(D) with
4096 PEs, (ii) PyG-based implementation on Intel Xeon E5-
2680v3 CPU (PyG-CPU), (iii) PyG-based implementation on
a NVIDIA RTX 8000 GPU (PyG-GPU), (iv) 4096-PE baseline
AWB-GCN without workload rebalancing, and (v) SCNN [45]
reproduction with 4096 multipliers (we build a system-C-
based cycle-accurate simulator for SCNN). We use the ﬁve
datasets: Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, Nell, and Reddit for the
evaluation. The GCN model conﬁguration follows the original
GCN algorithm papers [29], [46], [47]. We label these GCNs
“Standard networks ”.
As shown in Table III, despite running at a relatively
low frequency, AWB-GCN achieves, on average, speedups of
2622and 136over the well-optimized PyG implementa-
tions on high-end CPUs and GPUs. It achieves a speedup of
6:1over the baseline design without workload rebalancing.
For the Nell dataset, the speedup over the baseline is 18.8 ,demonstrating in particular the impact of workload balanc-
ing. Reddit fails on GPU due to out-of-memory. AWB-GCN
achieves from 2.3to 19.7speedup compared with SCNN.
SCNN is inefﬁcient when working with GCNs because it uses
Cartesian Product-based SpMM which requires massive and
highly irregular reduction of intermediate results, especially
when the matrices are very big, sparse, and follow power-law.
SCNN also requires very high off-chip bandwidth for the re-
duction. In our evaluation, we assume SCNN is equipped with
a High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) which provides sufﬁcient
off-chip bandwidth. If DRAMs are used, the performance of
SCNN would be even lower.
The tremendous speedups over PyG-CPU and PyG-GPU
originate from AWB-GCN’s dedicated architecture which uses
features not available on general-purpose CPUs and GPUs: (a)
the dynamic autotuning techniques ensure balanced workload
and high PE utilization (Section 4); (b) all the SpMM kernels
of the GCN layers are deeply pipelined, leading to reduced on-
chip storage demand (Figure 8); (c) inter-layer data forwarding
and matrix blocking (with column-wise-product sub-SpMM
execution Figure 9) improve data reuse and guarantee that
off-chip memory accesses are to consecutive addresses.
We also compare AWB-GCN with existing GCN accelera-
tors. Prior to this work, to the best of our knowledge, the de-
sign proposed by Yan et al., HyGCN [31], is the only reported
accelerator of GCN inference. However, HyGCN customizes
the hidden layer of all GCN models to 128 channels, which is
distinct from the original settings [29], [46], [47]. We refer to
the HyGCN-customized models as HyGCN networks . Also,
the HyGCN report does not give absolute performance but,
rather, relative speedups over a E5-2680v3 CPU. To compare
AWB-GCN with HyGCN, we realize the HyGCN networks
on the same E5-2680v3 CPU, adopting the same software
framework (PyG [44] – HyGCN also uses PyG for the testing
on CPU). The PyG-CPU result is thus a common baseline for
comparing the relative speedups. Table IV shows the results.
With the HyGCN networks, AWB-GCN achieves on av-
erage 3888, 25:3, and 5 :1speedups over PyG-CPU,
PyG-GPU, and the HyGCN design, respectively. The perfor-
mance improvement is attributable, in part, to the features of
AWB-GCN as discussed, and one additional reason: HyGCN
scheduling is coarse-grained block-wise, while that of AWB-
GCN is ﬁne-grained element-wise. This avoids redundant data
access and results in more beneﬁt from a balanced workload.
As this design is implemented on an FPGA, it is difﬁcult to
compare energy efﬁciency to HyGCN, which is implemented
as an ASIC. Comparing to ASIC, the reconﬁgurable routing
switches on FPGA chip consume extra energy, making the
energy efﬁciency of FPGA design lower (approximately 14 
according to the numbers reported by Kuon [48]). To compare
the performance fairly, we limit the number of multipliers used
and make it comparable to HyGCN. In particular, we use
4k 32-bit ﬂoating-point multipliers and HyGCN uses 4608
32-bit ﬁxed-point multipliers. Floating-point multipliers also
consume more energy than ﬁxed-point ones.
12

==== Page 13 ====
TABLE III
COMPARISON WITH CPU, GPU AND BASELINE PROCESSING STANDARD NETWORKS . OOM: O UT OF MEMORY .
Platform Standard networks Cora CiteSeer Pubmed Nell Reddit
Intel Xeon E5-2680 (PyG) Latency (ms) [speedup] 2.51 [1] 3.66 [1] 13.97 [1] 2.28E3 [1] 2.94E5 [1]
Freq: 2.5GHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 6.68E3 3.88E3 1.03E3 6.99 5.43E-2
NVIDIA RTX8000 (PyG) Latency (ms) [speedup] 0.69 [3.6] 0.68 [5.4] 0.69 [20.2] 90.50 [25.2] OoM
Freq: 1395MHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 1.06E4 1.29E4 1.11E4 89.06 OoM
SCNN (Cartesian product, 330MHz) Latency (ms) [speedup] 1.6E-2 [158] 2.6E-2 [142] 7.2E-2 [195] 31.47 [72.4] 73.22 [4015]
Baseline Intel D5005 FPGA Latency (ms) [speedup] 1.3E-2 [191.8] 9.0E-3 [406] 6.7E-2 [208] 30.09 [75.8] 47.4 [6209]
Freq: 330MHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 6.86E5 9.75E5 1.22E5 3.28E2 1.83E2
AWB-GCN Intel D5005 FPGA Latency (ms) [speedup] 2.3E-3 [1063] 4.0E-3 [913] 3E-2 [466] 1.6 [1425] 31.81 [9242]
Freq: 330MHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 3.08E6 1.93E6 2.48E5 4.12E3 2.09E2
TABLE IV
COMPARISON WITH THE PRIOR ART , HYGCN, PROCESSING HYGCN NETWORKS CUSTOMIZED IN HYGCN PAPER [31].
Platform HyGCN networks Cora CiteSeer Pubmed Nell Reddit
Intel Xeon E5-2680 (PyG) Latency (ms) [speedup] 13.07 [1] 15.73 [1] 2.19E2 [1] 3.17E3 [1] 8.05E5 [1]
Freq: 2.5GHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 1.23E3 9.36E2 70.61 4.59 0.02
NVIDIA RTX8000 (PyG) Latency (ms) [speedup] 0.69 [18.9] 0.69 [22.8] 1.31 [167] 100.18 [31.7] OoM
Freq: 1395MHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 1.16E4 1.09E4 6.46E3 79.81 OoM
HyGCN TSMC 12 nm Latency (ms) [speedup] 2.1E-2 [627] 0.30 [52.1] 0.64 [341.5] NA 2.89E2 [2787]
Freq: 1GHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 7.16E6 4.94E5 2.33E5 NA 5.17E2
AWB-GCN Intel D5005 FPGA Latency (ms) [speedup] 1.7E-2 [768] 2.9E-2 [548] 0.23 [948] 3.25 [978] 49.7 [16197]
Freq: 330MHz Energy efﬁciency (graph/kJ) 4.39E5 2.71E5 3.17E4 2.28E3 1.45E2
VI. R ELATED WORK
GNN studies use neural network algorithms to address prob-
lems in graph processing. The ﬁrst GNN model was proposed
by Gori et al. [18]. In the past decade, work has continued
on optimizing GNN algorithms exploring new neural network
approaches [8], [19], [20], [22]–[25]. More recently, inspired
by CNNs that achieve great success with euclidean data, GCNs
are proposed for hidden feature extraction of non-euclidean
data. In 2013, Bruna et al. [27] proposed the ﬁrst GCNs for
spectral graph theory; this was developed further in a number
of variants [26], [28], [29]. GCNs are at the center of the
research on neural-network-based graph processing [30].
There have been many efforts on accelerating sparse CNNs
[38]–[40], [45], [49]–[52]. We summarize them and explain
why they fall short when applied to GCNs. Kung et al. con-
dense the sparse parameter matrix through column grouping
[50]. In case of conﬂict, only the most signiﬁcant parameters
are kept, others are discarded. Essentially, some accuracy is
sacriﬁced for performance. Kim et al. [40] address the work-
load imbalance problem of sparse CNNs, but use information
from design-time proﬁling and pre-scanning. Han et al. [38]
propose EIE, an SpMV accelerator that addresses imbalance
with row-direction queuing. The design is not feasible in
GCNs due to their large data size and power-law distribution.
In EIE, weight matrices of SCNNs are distributively pre-
stored on-chip in local buffers of PEs. This avoids off-chip
non-zero accesses and online workload distribution, but is
not possible for GCNs. Also, single-direction queuing fails
to balance the workload of power-law matrices, which have
serious imbalance on both directions. Zhang et al. [39] pro-
pose Cambricon-S with efﬁcient index matching to identify
and multiplex non-zeros and feed them to massively parallel
PEs. Again, these proposed architectures are not feasible for
processing GCNs due to the ultra-low sparsity of power-lawgraphs which leads to highly scattered indices of neighboring
elements. Given the adjacency matrix of Nell and a 1024-PE
Cambricon-S, multiplexing enough non-zero pairs to feed all
PEs per cycle would require 1024 13699:1 multiplexers for
single-precision ﬂoating point; this is not viable given likely
chip technology.
Besides work on sparse CNNs, researchers also propose
architectures for general SpMM. Zhuo and Prasanna [53]
present an SPMV design for FPGAs. Pal [54] proposes an
outer-product-based SpMM architecture. This work focuses on
reducing redundant memory accesses to non-zeros and does
not essentially address the ultra-workload-imbalanced issue
faced with GCNs. In their results, load-imbalances during the
merge phase and the uneven data sharing patterns during the
multiply phase lead to degraded speedup for the dataset with
highly-unbalanced non-zero element distribution.
SIGMA [55] and ALRESCHA [56] are recent high-
performance architectures for SpMM and SpMV . We mainly
discuss SIGMA, as SIGMA focuses on SpMM kernels and
is equipped with more efﬁcient optimizations for SpMM,
while ALRESCHA has higher ﬂexibility to support vari-
ous kernels through switch reconﬁguration. SIGMA uses an
element-wise smart global controller to distribute every pair
of non-zeros to the proper PEs dynamically through a Benes
network. By doing so, PEs work with high utilization and
the operations are evenly distributed among all multipliers
so that workload imbalance is eliminated. SIGMA is highly
efﬁcient for general SpMMs, but needs some augmentation to
work with GCNs. First, for a very large and sparse matrix,
the type of bitmap compression format introduces signiﬁcant
overhead. Second, similar to Cambricon-S, the multiplexer
required to get source/destination pairs would become very
large, which limits the performance signiﬁcantly. Third, for the
extremely large and sparse matrices common in GCN usage,
the efﬁciency of the element-wise global controller decreases
13

==== Page 14 ====
signiﬁcantly when performing tasks such as matrix scanning
and element ﬁltering/counting which determines the number
of Flex-DPEs.
To eliminate workload imbalance without using a global
element-wise controller (as used in SIGMA), AWB-GCN uses
auto-tuning-based rebalancing hardware, which is essentially
also a “controller”, to dynamically distribute tasks. In contrast
to the controller used in SIGMA, AWB-GCN’s is more coarse-
grained and lighter weight. In particular, the distribution
smoothing function is a local element-wise controller which,
similarly to SIGMA, distributes non-zero pairs to proper
PEs. However, in contrast to SIGMA, in AWB-GCN the
destination PEs must be local, meaning that they must within
a few hops of the PE assigned in the initial mapping. Also,
remote switching +row remapping is effectively a global row-
wise controller which can distribute tasks to any proper PEs
without range limit, rather, with granularity of rows/fraction
of rows instead of elements. To make the proposed hybrid
and light-weight controller handle workload imbalance as well
as a global element-wise controller, we use auto-tuning. The
proposed auto-tuning-based controller is designed especially
for SpMMs with power-law matrices. For general SpMMs, a
global element-wise controller can be more efﬁcient.
Another active area of research is graph processing. Song
et al. [57] and Zhang et al. [58] propose GraphR and GraphP,
which are both based on Processing In Memory (PIM), to
accelerate low-precision graph tasks. However, they do not
support complex ﬂoating-point operations. Ham et al. [59] pro-
pose Graphicionado, a vertex-centric acceleration framework
for graph analytics applications. It focuses on simple graph
analysis applications. Ozdal et al. [60] propose a System-C
based template for graph analytics applications. Ozdal’s work
and Graphicionado both use crossbars for data exchange which
limits their scalability. None of these can directly support
GCNs without signiﬁcant modiﬁcations.
Researchers also conduct software optimizations for SpMM
on GPUs and general-purpose multicore CPUs [61]–[65].
These software solutions, however, do not meet the strict
timing requirements of GCNs because of signiﬁcant overhead
in pre-scanning [31], [61]–[63] which is avoided in AWB-
GCN. Also, adjacency matrices evolve at runtime, making
ofﬂine processing even less useful.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose AWB-GCN to accelerate GCN
inference. To tackle the major performance issues derived
from workload imbalance, we propose a hardware-based au-
totuning framework including three runtime workload rebal-
ancing techniques: distribution smoothing, remote switching,
and row remapping. The proposed rebalancing methods rely
on hardware ﬂexibility to realize performance autotuning with
negligible area and delay overhead. This is the ﬁrst accelerator
design for GCNs that relies on hardware autotuning to achieve
workload rebalancing for sparse matrix computations. We
evaluate AWB-GCN using an Intel FPGA D5005 Accelerator
Card with 5 widely used GCN datasets. Results show thatAWB-GCN can achieve, on average, 3255 , 80.3, and 5.1
speedups over high-end CPUs, GPUs, and other prior work
respectively. Although FPGAs are used as a demonstration
in this paper, the proposed architecture does not rely on any
FPGA-speciﬁc features. And although AWB-GCN is designed
for GCNs, it is generally efﬁcient for GNNs whose major
arithmetic primitives are also SpMMs, e.g., GraphSage [66],
GINConv [67], and GTN [30].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported, in part, by the NSF through
Awards CCF-1618303, CCF-1919130, and CNS-1925504; by
the NIH through Award R44GM128533; by grants from Mi-
crosoft and Red Hat; and by Xilinx and by Intel through
donated FPGAs, tools, and IP. This research was also partially
funded by Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory’s DMC-CFA
project and DeepScience-HPC LDRD project. The evaluation
platforms were supported by the U.S. DOE Ofﬁce of Science,
Ofﬁce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research, under
award 66150: “CENATE - Center for Advanced Architecture
Evaluation.” The Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory is
operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy under
contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
[2] T. Mikolov, M. Karaﬁ ´at, L. Burget, J. ˇCernock `y, and S. Khudanpur,
“Recurrent neural network based language model,” in The 11st Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association ,
2010.
[3] H. Kwon, P. Chatarasi, M. Pellauer, A. Parashar, V . Sarkar, and T. Kr-
ishna, “Understanding reuse, performance, and hardware cost of dnn
dataﬂow: A data-centric approach,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,
pp. 754–768, 2019.
[4] H. Kwon, P. Chatarasi, V . Sarkar, T. Krishna, M. Pellauer, and
A. Parashar, “MAESTRO: A data-centric approach to understand reuse,
performance, and hardware cost of dnn mappings,” IEEE Micro , vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 20–29, 2020.
[5] T. Geng, T. Wang, C. Wu, C. Yang, W. Wu, A. Li, and M. Herbordt,
“O3BNN: An out-of-order architecture for high-performance binarized
neural network inference with ﬁne-grained pruning,” in ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Supercomputing (ICS) , vol. 2160, pp. 461–472,
2019. doi: 10.1145/ 3330345. 3330386.
[6] T. Geng, T. Wang, A. Sanaullah, C. Yang, R. Xuy, R. Patel, and M. Her-
bordt, “FPDeep: Acceleration and load balancing of CNN training on
FPGA clusters,” in 2018 IEEE 26th Annual International Symposium on
Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM) , p. 8184,
2018. doi: 10.1109/ FCCM.2018. 00021.
[7] A. Li, T. Geng, T. Wang, M. Herbordt, S. Song, and K. Barker,
“BSTC: A novel binarized-soft-tensor-core design for accelerating bit-
based approximated neural nets,” in International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) , 2019.
doi: 10.1145/ 3295500.3356169.
[8] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y . Philip, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2020.
[9] T. Wang, T.Geng, A. Li, X. Jin, and M. Herbordt, “FPDeep: Scalable
acceleration of CNN training on deeply-pipelined FPGA clusters,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers , vol. C-69, no. 8, pp. 1143–1158, 2020. doi:
10.1109/TC.2020.3000118.
[10] T. Geng, T. Wang, C. Wu, Y . Li, C. Yang, W. Wu, A. Li, and M. Her-
bordt, “O3BNN-R: An out-of-order architecture for high-performance
and regularized BNN inference,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems , 2021. doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2020.3013637.
14

==== Page 15 ====
[11] J. E. Gonzalez, Y . Low, H. Gu, D. Bickson, and C. Guestrin, “Pow-
erGraph: Distributed graph-parallel computation on natural graphs,” in
Presented as part of the 10th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI) , pp. 17–30, 2012.
[12] A. Abou-Rjeili and G. Karypis, “Multilevel algorithms for partitioning
power-law graphs,” in Proceedings 20th IEEE International Parallel &
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) , pp. 10–pp, IEEE, 2006.
[13] M. Latapy, “Main-memory triangle computations for very large (sparse
(power-law)) graphs,” Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 407, no. 1-3,
pp. 458–473, 2008.
[14] C. Xie, L. Yan, W.-J. Li, and Z. Zhang, “Distributed power-law graph
computing: Theoretical and empirical analysis,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 1673–1681, 2014.
[15] W. Aiello, F. Chung, and L. Lu, “A random graph model for power law
graphs,” Experimental Mathematics , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 53–66, 2001.
[16] F. Chung, L. Lu, and V . Vu, “The spectra of random graphs with given
expected degrees,” Internet Mathematics , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 257–275,
2004.
[17] L. A. Adamic, R. M. Lukose, A. R. Puniyani, and B. A. Huberman,
“Search in power-law networks,” Physical Review E , vol. 64, no. 4,
p. 046135, 2001.
[18] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli, “A new model for learning
in graph domains,” in Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, 2005. , vol. 2, pp. 729–734, IEEE, 2005.
[19] A. Micheli, “Neural network for graphs: A contextual constructive
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 498–511, 2009.
[20] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The graph neural network model,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 61–80, 2008.
[21] Y . Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel, “Gated graph
sequence neural networks,” arXiv:1511.05493 , 2015.
[22] H. Dai, Z. Kozareva, B. Dai, A. Smola, and L. Song, “Learning steady-
states of iterative algorithms over graphs,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning , pp. 1114–1122, 2018.
[23] J. You, R. Ying, X. Ren, W. L. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec, “GraphRNN:
A deep generative model for graphs,” arXiv:1802.08773 , 2018.
[24] S. Abu-El-Haija, B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and A. A. Alemi, “Watch
your step: Learning node embeddings via graph attention,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 9180–9190, 2018.
[25] H. Gao, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Large-scale learnable graph convolutional
networks,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pp. 1416–1424,
ACM, 2018.
[26] M. Henaff, J. Bruna, and Y . LeCun, “Deep convolutional networks on
graph-structured data,” arXiv:1506.05163 , 2015.
[27] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y . LeCun, “Spectral networks and
locally connected networks on graphs,” arXiv:1312.6203 , 2013.
[28] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 3844–3852, 2016.
[29] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” arXiv:1609.02907 , 2016.
[30] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Graph transformer
networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 11960–11970, 2019.
[31] M. Yan, L. Deng, X. Hu, L. Liang, Y . Feng, X. Ye, Z. Zhang, D. Fan,
and Y . Xie, “HyGCN: A GCN accelerator with hybrid architecture,” in
2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA) , pp. 15–29, IEEE, 2020.
[32] Y . Liu, N. Zhang, D. Wu, A. Botterud, R. Yao, and C. Kang, “Guiding
cascading failure search with interpretable graph convolutional network,”
arXiv:2001.11553 , 2020.
[33] C. W. Coley, W. Jin, L. Rogers, T. F. Jamison, T. S. Jaakkola, W. H.
Green, R. Barzilay, and K. F. Jensen, “A graph-convolutional neural
network model for the prediction of chemical reactivity,” Chemical
Science , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 370–377, 2019.
[34] T. Xie and J. C. Grossman, “Crystal graph convolutional neural networks
for an accurate and interpretable prediction of material properties,”
Physical Review Letters , vol. 120, no. 14, p. 145301, 2018.
[35] M. Zitnik, M. Agrawal, and J. Leskovec, “Modeling polypharmacy side
effects with graph convolutional networks,” Bioinformatics , vol. 34,
no. 13, pp. i457–i466, 2018.[36] H. Yang, “AliGraph: A comprehensive graph neural network platform,”
inProceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pp. 3165–3166, ACM, 2019.
[37] H.-T. Nguyen, Q.-D. Ngo, and V .-H. Le, “IoT botnet detection approach
based on PSI graph and DGCNN classiﬁer,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Information Communication and Signal Processing (ICI-
CSP) , pp. 118–122, IEEE, 2018.
[38] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, M. A. Horowitz, and
W. J. Dally, “EIE: efﬁcient inference engine on compressed deep neural
network,” in 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA) , pp. 243–254, IEEE, 2016.
[39] S. Zhang, Z. Du, L. Zhang, H. Lan, S. Liu, L. Li, Q. Guo, T. Chen, and
Y . Chen, “Cambricon-X: An accelerator for sparse neural networks,” in
The 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
tecture (MICRO) , p. 20, IEEE Press, 2016.
[40] D. Kim, J. Ahn, and S. Yoo, “A novel zero weight/activation-aware
hardware architecture of convolutional neural network,” in Design,
Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2017 ,
pp. 1462–1467, IEEE, 2017.
[41] J. Gao, W. Ji, Z. Tan, and Y . Zhao, “A systematic survey of general
sparse matrix-matrix multiplication,” arXiv:2002.11273 , 2020.
[42] M. Deveci, C. Trott, and S. Rajamanickam, “Performance-portable
sparse matrix-matrix multiplication for many-core architectures,” in
2017 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo-
sium Workshops (IPDPSW) , pp. 693–702, IEEE, 2017.
[43] Y . Chen, K. Li, W. Yang, G. Xiao, X. Xie, and T. Li, “Performance-aware
model for sparse matrix-matrix multiplication on the sunway taihulight
supercomputer,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems ,
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 923–938, 2018.
[44] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
PyTorch geometric,” arXiv:1903.02428 , 2019.
[45] A. Parashar, M. Rhu, A. Mukkara, A. Puglielli, R. Venkatesan,
B. Khailany, J. Emer, S. W. Keckler, and W. J. Dally, “SCNN: An
accelerator for compressed-sparse convolutional neural networks,” in
2017 ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA) , pp. 27–40, IEEE, 2017.
[46] C. Zhuang and Q. Ma, “Dual graph convolutional networks for graph-
based semi-supervised classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 2018 World
Wide Web Conference , pp. 499–508, 2018.
[47] J. Chen, J. Zhu, and L. Song, “Stochastic training of graph convolutional
networks with variance reduction,” arXiv:1710.10568 , 2017.
[48] I. Kuon and J. Rose, “Measuring the gap between FPGAs and ASICs,”
IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 203–215, 2007.
[49] J. Albericio, P. Judd, T. Hetherington, T. Aamodt, N. E. Jerger, and
A. Moshovos, “Cnvlutin: Ineffectual-neuron-free deep neural network
computing,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News , vol. 44,
no. 3, pp. 1–13, 2016.
[50] H. Kung, B. McDanel, and S. Q. Zhang, “Packing sparse convolutional
neural networks for efﬁcient systolic array implementations: Column
combining under joint optimization,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Program-
ming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , pp. 821–834, ACM,
2019.
[51] Y .-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V . Sze, “Eyeriss: An energy-
efﬁcient reconﬁgurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural net-
works,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 127–
138, 2016.
[52] C. Ding, S. Liao, Y . Wang, Z. Li, N. Liu, Y . Zhuo, C. Wang, X. Qian,
Y . Bai, G. Yuan, et al. , “CirCNN: accelerating and compressing deep
neural networks using block-circulant weight matrices,” in Proceedings
of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
tecture , pp. 395–408, 2017.
[53] L. Zhuo and V . K. Prasanna, “Sparse matrix-vector multiplication on
fpgas,” in Proceedings of the 2005 ACM/SIGDA 13th international
symposium on Field-programmable gate arrays , pp. 63–74, ACM, 2005.
[54] S. Pal, J. Beaumont, D.-H. Park, A. Amarnath, S. Feng, C. Chakrabarti,
H.-S. Kim, D. Blaauw, T. Mudge, and R. Dreslinski, “OuterSPACE:
An outer product based sparse matrix multiplication accelerator,” in
2018 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA) , pp. 724–736, IEEE, 2018.
[55] E. Qin, A. Samajdar, H. Kwon, V . Nadella, S. Srinivasan, D. Das,
B. Kaul, and T. Krishna, “SIGMA: A sparse and irregular gemm
accelerator with ﬂexible interconnects for dnn training,” in 2020 IEEE
15

==== Page 16 ====
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA) , pp. 58–70, IEEE, 2020.
[56] B. Asgari, R. Hadidi, T. Krishna, H. Kim, and S. Yalamanchili,
“ALRESCHA: A lightweight reconﬁgurable sparse-computation accel-
erator,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA) , pp. 249–260, IEEE, 2020.
[57] L. Song, Y . Zhuo, X. Qian, H. Li, and Y . Chen, “GraphR: Accelerating
graph processing using ReRAM,” in 2018 IEEE International Sympo-
sium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , pp. 531–
543, IEEE, 2018.
[58] M. Zhang, Y . Zhuo, C. Wang, M. Gao, Y . Wu, K. Chen, C. Kozyrakis,
and X. Qian, “GraphP: Reducing communication for pim-based graph
processing with efﬁcient data partition,” in 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) ,
pp. 544–557, IEEE, 2018.
[59] T. J. Ham, L. Wu, N. Sundaram, N. Satish, and M. Martonosi, “Graphi-
cionado: A high-performance and energy-efﬁcient accelerator for graph
analytics,” in 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO) , pp. 1–13, IEEE, 2016.
[60] M. M. Ozdal, S. Yesil, T. Kim, A. Ayupov, J. Greth, S. Burns, and
O. Ozturk, “Energy efﬁcient architecture for graph analytics acceler-
ators,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News , vol. 44, no. 3,
pp. 166–177, 2016.
[61] J. L. Greathouse and M. Daga, “Efﬁcient sparse matrix-vector multipli-cation on GPUs using the CSR storage format,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis (SC) , pp. 769–780, 2014.
[62] W. Liu and B. Vinter, “An efﬁcient GPU general sparse matrix-matrix
multiplication for irregular data,” in 2014 IEEE 28th International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) , pp. 370–381,
IEEE, 2014.
[63] A. Ashari, N. Sedaghati, J. Eisenlohr, S. Parthasarathy, and P. Sadayap-
pan, “Fast sparse matrix-vector multiplication on GPUs for graph appli-
cations,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Perfor-
mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) , pp. 781–792,
IEEE Press, 2014.
[64] N. Bell and M. Garland, “Efﬁcient sparse matrix-vector multiplication
on CUDA,” tech. rep., Nvidia Technical Report NVR-2008-004, Nvidia
Corporation, 2008.
[65] N. Bell and M. Garland, “Implementing sparse matrix-vector mul-
tiplication on throughput-oriented processors,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis (SC) , p. 18, ACM, 2009.
[66] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 1024–1034, 2017.
[67] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” arXiv:1810.00826 , 2018.
16

