==== Page 1 ====
JSS
 Journal of Statistical Software
January 2023, Volume 105, Issue 9. doi:10.18637/jss.v105.i09
Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling of
Bayesian Networks with the RPackage BiDAG
Polina Suter
ETH ZürichJack Kuipers
ETH Zürich
Giusi Moffa
University of BaselNiko Beerenwinkel
ETH Zürich
Abstract
The Rpackage BiDAGimplements Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for
structure learning and sampling of Bayesian networks. The package includes tools to
search for a maximum a posteriori (MAP) graph and to sample graphs from the posterior
distributiongiventhedata. Anewhybridapproachtostructurelearningenablesinference
in large graphs. In the first step, we define a reduced search space by means of the PC
algorithm or based on prior knowledge. In the second step, an iterative order MCMC
scheme proceeds to optimize the restricted search space and estimate the MAP graph.
Sampling from the posterior distribution is implemented using either order or partition
MCMC. The models and algorithms can handle both discrete and continuous data. The
BiDAGpackagealsoprovidesanimplementationofMCMCschemesforstructurelearning
and sampling of dynamic Bayesian networks.
Keywords : Bayesian networks, dynamic Bayesian networks, structure learning, Bayesian in-
ference, MCMC, R.
1. Introduction
A Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical model, which represents conditional indepen-
dence relationships between a set of random variables by a directed acyclic graph (DAG).The
problem of DAG learning from observational data is hard (Chickering 1996), and the number
of DAGs grows super-exponentially with the number of nodes. Hence, developing and im-
plementing methods to learn an underlying DAG from observational data in reasonable time
continues to be the focus of much research (Bartlett and Cussens 2017; Goudie and Mukher-
jee 2016; Scanagatta, de Campos, and Corani 2015). Drton and Maathuis (2017) provide

==== Page 2 ====
2 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
an overview of the approaches for structure learning of graphical models including Bayesian
networks.
The R(RCore Team 2022) packages pcalg(Kalisch, Mächler, Colombo, Maathuis, and
Bühlmann 2012), bnlearn(Scutari 2010), bnstruct (Franzin, Sambo, and Camillo 2017) and
theTETRAD toolbox (Ramsey, Zhang, Glymour, Romero, Huang, and Ebert-Uphoff 2018)
basedin Java(Gosling, Joy, Steele, andBracha2000)implement multipleapproachestostruc-
ture learning, including both constraint-based and search-and-score methods. Constraint-
based methods use conditional independence tests to learn the edges of the graph. Search-
and-score methods rely on an efficient search strategy in the space of DAGs and a score
function to find the graph which best explains the data. Hybrid methods, such as max-min
hill climbing (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006), use a combination of both approaches
to learn the optimal graph. A comparison of accuracy and efficiency of different methods for
structure learning of Bayesian networks can be found in Scutari, Graafland, and Gutiérrez
(2019). Despite a wide variety of available tools, most of them aim to find one best solution.
However, especially when the number of observations is modest, relying on one best graph
can be inadequate because many graphs may explain the data similarly well (Friedman and
Koller 2003). Bayesian methods can help to address this issue. Posterior sampling, in par-
ticular, enables Bayesian model averaging and allows us to adequately account for modeling
uncertainty when the number of observations is finite. However, only a few tools exist for
Bayesian structure learning, probably because Bayesian approaches are computationally de-
manding and unfeasible in large domains. The Rpackage mcmcabn (Kratzer and Furrer 2019)
implements a structure MCMC algorithm for sampling DAGs from their posterior distribu-
tion given the data. Structure MCMC is only suitable for domains with a limited number
of nodes. The Rpackage dealimplements Bayesian parameter learning, but for structure
learning, it uses a greedy search with random restarts (Bøttcher and Dethlefsen 2003). The
Matlab/C/Java (The MathWorks, Inc. 2011) package BDagl(Eaton and Murphy 2007) im-
plements an order MCMC scheme (Friedman and Koller 2003) without any restrictions on
the search space, so that it is only feasible for small networks and does not scale well beyond
20 nodes.
Here, we describe the Rpackage BiDAG, an implementation of various MCMC schemes,
whichovercomestheissuespreviouslyrestrictingBayesianmethodstosmalldomains. BiDAG
implementsorder(FriedmanandKoller2003)andpartition(KuipersandMoffa2016)MCMC
schemes. These scales to networks with hundreds of nodes when combined with the hybrid
approach of Kuipers, Suter, and Moffa (2022). Both order and partition MCMC schemes
can sample from the posterior and find a MAP DAG, and both reach convergence much
faster than the structure MCMC approach. Simulation studies have shown that the iterative
order MCMC scheme (Kuipers et al.2022) displays better accuracy to discover the ground
truth DAG compared to other well-established methods such as the PC algorithm (Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2000) or greedy equivalent search (GES) (Chickering 1996).
TheBiDAGsoftware supports both discrete and continuous data types, and the methods also
apply to weighted data as required, for example, in mixture models (Kuipers et al.2018b).
Further, all the implemented MCMC schemes handle structure learning and sampling of first-
order dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs). BiDAGis available from the Comprehensive R
Archive Network (CRAN) at https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=BiDAG .
BiDAGalso imports some methods from other packages. In the first step of a hybrid ap-
proach, it uses by default the constraint-based PC algorithm from pcalgto define a search

==== Page 3 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 3
space, complemented by a new implementation of conditional independence tests for discrete
and weighted data. BiDAGincludes a visualization tool, which imports methods from the
Rpackages graph(Gentleman, Whalen, Huber, and Falcon 2022) and Rgraphviz (Hansen
et al.2019).
In Section 2, we describe the methodological background behind the algorithms in BiDAG. In
Section 3, we describe the BiDAGfunctions, further divided into four subsections on struc-
ture learning and sampling, posterior model selection, convergence diagnostics, and model
comparison. In Section 4, we describe how to use the package for structure learning of DBNs.
Section 5 contains examples of structure learning and sampling on two simulated data sets.
In this section we also show how sampling from the posterior can improve model selection. In
Section 6, we apply the package to the problem of characterizing cancer sub-types. Finally,
in Section 7, we discuss the runtime of the implemented algorithms in different simulation
settings.
2. Methodological background
ABayesiannetworkdescribesafactorizationofajointprobabilitydistribution P(X)ofasetof
random variables X= (X1,...,X n)by means of a DAG. Specifically we can define a Bayesian
networkBas a pair (G,Θ)whereGis a DAG whose nodes represent the random variables
inXandΘare the parameters of the probability distributions P(Xi|Pai)describing the
relationship between each variable Xiand its parents Paiin the graphG, such that
P(X) =n/productdisplay
i=1P(Xi|Pai).
Learning a Bayesian network requires estimating both components: parameters Θand struc-
tureG. Maximizing or marginalizing the parameters for a given structure will provide a score
for each DAG. In BiDAG, the scoreSof each DAG is proportional to its posterior probability
given the data D. For computational feasibility of the implementation, it is essential that the
score function factorizes into a product where each term depends only on one node and its
parents:
P(G|D)∝P(D|G)P(G) =n/productdisplay
i=1S(Xi,Pai|D).
See Geiger and Heckerman (1995) for the technical conditions guaranteeing the desired score
factorization. Two score functions Smeeting the conditions for the decomposition in Equa-
tion 2 are implemented in BiDAG: (1) the Bayesian Dirichlet equivalent score (BDe) (Geiger
and Heckerman 1995) with a Dirichlet parameter prior for binary and categorical data, and
(2) the Bayesian Gaussian equivalent score (BGe) (Geiger and Heckerman 2002; Consonni
and Rocca 2012) with a Wishart prior for continuous data.
Learning the structure component of a network Brequires finding the DAG G, which best fits
a data setD. As far as search-and-score methods are concerned, this means finding a graph
with a score larger or equal than any other. In situations where several structures achieve
similar scores, focusing on a single structure may be misleading (Friedman and Koller 2003).
The MCMC methods in BiDAGaccount for structure uncertainty by sampling DAGs from

==== Page 4 ====
4 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
the posterior distribution given the data D. Rather than examining the highest scoring DAG,
we can select the model that consists only of edges whose posterior probabilities are higher
than a desired threshold. Although not guaranteed to give a DAG, simulation studies show a
reduction in the number of false-positive edges with this approach compared to choosing one
maximally scoring model (Kuipers et al.2022), while hardly ever resulting in directed cycles.
2.1. Order MCMC
The rationale behind MCMC schemes is to construct a Markov chain Msuch that its sta-
tionary distribution equals the posterior distribution P(G|D)we would like to sample from.
One of the schemes implemented in BiDAGis order MCMC, which does not operate directly
on the space of DAGs but on the smaller space of orders. The posterior landscape is smoother
in the space of orders than in the space of DAGs since the likelihood of each order is a sum
over multiple DAGs (Friedman and Koller 2003). Consequently order MCMC can achieve
faster convergence with respect to structure MCMC (Friedman and Koller 2003).
A permutation (i1,i2,...,i n)of thennodes of a DAG defines a linear order i1≺i2≺···≺in.
A DAGGis compatible with an order ≺ifi≺jwheneverjis a parent of iinG(Kuipers et al.
2022). We denote with Γ≺the set of all DAGs compatible with ≺. Each order is assigned a
score that equals the sum of the scores of all DAGs compatible with this order,
R(≺|D) =/summationdisplay
G∈Γ≺P(G|D)∝/summationdisplay
G∈Γ≺n/productdisplay
i=1S(Xi,Pai|D).
As discussed in Friedman and Koller (2003) we can exchange the product and sum and get
the order score by summing over all parent sets compatible with the order instead of summing
over all possible DAGs. Similarly to DAGs we can formulate the compatibility requirement
for parent sets. A parent set Paiof a nodeiis compatible with an order ≺ifi≺jfor all
parentsj∈Pai. For each node i, we denote the set of all parent sets compatible with ≺by
U≺,i. Then
R(≺|D)∝n/productdisplay
i=1/summationdisplay
Pai∈U≺,iS(Xi,Pai|D). (1)
To construct a Markov chain in the space of orders we use the following moves from an order
≺to a new order≺′:
•local move: swapping adjacent nodes in ≺;
•global move: swapping two random nodes in ≺;
•node relocation: in this move we place a single node ikin each possible position
(1,2,...,n )of the current order (i1,i2,...,i n), while keeping the order of the other
nodes in≺fixed. Allnorders corresponding to all possible positions of the node ikin
the order are scored according to Equation 1 and the new order ≺′is sampled according
to these scores.
The Metropolis-Hastings acceptance probability for the first two moves is
ρ= min/braceleftigg
1,R(≺′|D)
R(≺|D)/bracerightigg
.

==== Page 5 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 5
The last move is always accepted, but it can return the current order.
Order MCMC produces a sample of orders. Obtaining a sample of graphs from the posterior
distribution requires an additional step of sampling DAGs from these orders according to their
scores. Due to score decomposability we can do this on a per-node basis: We sample a parent
set for each node from the set of parents compatible with the order, independently of other
nodes. The exact functional form of score terms in Equation 1 assigned to each parent set
depends on the model assumptions, namely parameter and graphical priors. The parameter
prior can be chosen between normal-Wishart and Dirichlet corresponding to the BGe and
BDe score functions mentioned previously in Section 2. The graphical prior is uniform by
default, hence each parent set has the same probability a priori. However, BiDAGsuggests
the possibility of imposing a prior that penalizes each additional edge to favor sampling of
sparse DAGs. BiDAGalso suggests the possibility of penalizing each edge with an individual
penalization factor to include more detailed prior information. In Section 3.1, we describe
how to define a parameter and graphical priors in BiDAG. In addition, for large DAGs, all
possible parent sets must be limited to a set corresponding to the reduced search space for
computational feasibility. The efficient algorithm for defining the reduced search space in a
way that it includes the bulk of the posterior weight is described in Section 2.4. In this way,
we obtain a sample of DAGs G1,...,GM, from which we usually exclude the first mto account
for the burn-in period. Assuming that the Markov chain has converged within msteps, we
can approximate the posterior probability of any structural feature fby the sample average
P(f|D)≈1
M−mM/summationdisplay
i=m+1f(Gi), (2)
wheref(Gi)equals 1 if the feature fis present in structure Giand 0 otherwise.
2.2. Partition MCMC
One advantage of the order MCMC sampling scheme compared to structure MCMC resides
in its increased efficiency. Another characteristic of order MCMC is that it imposes a non-
uniform prior over structures by over-representing DAGs that belong to several orders (Fried-
man and Koller 2003). To achieve unbiased sampling, Kuipers and Moffa (2016) proposed an
MCMC scheme in the space of ordered partitions instead. A labeled partition Λis defined
by two components: a node ordering ≺and a vector of sizes of the parts κ= (k1,...,k p),
where 1≤p≤nand/summationtextp
i=1ki=n. The vector κdivides the order ≺intopparts:v1,...,v p,
such thatv1includes the first k1nodes of the permutation ≺,v2includes the following k2
nodes, etc. A DAG Gis compatible with a partition Λ = (≺,κ)if the following conditions
are satisfied for every node Xiwith, say,Xi∈vj:
•ifj <p,Xihas at least one parent in the part vj+1;
•all nodes in Paibelong to the parts with indices higher than j;
•Pai=∅if and only if j=p.
BiDAGimplements the following moves in the space of partitions:
•swap any two nodes from different parts;

==== Page 6 ====
6 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
•swap any two nodes in adjacent parts;
•split a part or join two parts;
•move a single node into an existing part or form a new part with the single node.
The unbiased sampling with partition MCMC comes at the cost of a higher complexity and
slower convergence as compared to order MCMC. However, the bias of order MCMC may not
be a strong limitation in practice. Kuipers et al.(2022) have shown in simulation studies that
the models obtained via averaging over the sample of DAGs obtained by the order MCMC
scheme are very close to the ground truth structures.
2.3. MAP discovery
In addition to sampling from the posterior distribution, we can also use the algorithms imple-
mented in BiDAGto search for a MAP graph (Kuipers et al.2022). To do so, we replace the
sum in Equation 1 with a maximum. Then, the order score equals the score of a maximum
scoring DAG compatible with this order,
Q(≺|D) =n/productdisplay
i=1max
Pai∈Ui,≺S(Xi,Pai|D) = max
G∈Γ≺P(G|D). (3)
A non-uniform prior on DAGs imposed by order MCMC sampling does not affect the MAP
search since DAG scores are equal in the order and partition schemes. Due to order MCMC
being more computationally efficient, we implement it for both sampling and MAP estimation
and partition MCMC only for sampling.
2.4. Hybrid sampling scheme
Even in the efficient order score decomposition of Equation 1, the number of possible parent
sets, which need to be scored, is exponential of order O(2n−1). To apply the algorithm to
networks with, say, n>20nodes, we prune the search space. BiDAGimplements the hybrid
approach of Kuipers et al.(2022) which limits the search space by means of a (possibly
undirected) graph H, whose maximal parent set size per node is K, so that the number of
possible parent sets reduces to O(n2K). Since we wish to sample DAGs from the posterior
distribution, prior knowledge together with evidence from the data drive the pruning process
to ensure that the search space Hcaptures the bulk of the posterior weight. In BiDAG, we
used the constraint-based PC algorithm (Spirtes et al.2000) to define the search space.
The PC algorithm starts with a complete undirected graph and deletes edges based on condi-
tional independence tests. After deleting as many edges as possible, we identify the skeleton
graph, i.e., a graphical structure where all edges are bi-directional. Inference with the PC
algorithm includes steps to direct some edges which yield a completed partially directed
acyclic graph (CPDAG), which represents a class of equivalent DAGs. By default, we use a
PC-defined skeleton as search space Hand not the CPDAG to avoid mistakes in directing
edges.
An essential feature of BiDAGis the possibility to improve the initially defined search space
H(Kuipers et al.2022). Errors in the statistical tests of the PC algorithm can lead to the
deletion of true positive edges or edges appearing in high-scoring DAGs. Simulation studies

==== Page 7 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 7
Algorithm 1: Iterative MCMC procedure.
Input:dataD
Output: MAP estimateGmax, optimized search space H
1Initiate the search space Hwith the PC algorithm or an arbitrary adjacency matrix
2Run the order MCMC scheme on the search space H+
3AssignGmaxthe maximally scoring DAG obtained by the MCMC scheme
4UpdateH,Hold:
Hold=H
H=H∪Gmax
5Repeat Steps 2 to 4, till H=Hold
show that the true positive rate (TPR) of structures estimated by the PC algorithm decreases
when the density of the ground truth DAG, defined as an average number of parents of one
node, increases (Kalisch and Bühlmann 2007). If the search space Hlacks some of the edges
from a MAP DAG GMAP, we will not be able to find it when searching in H. To address
this limitation, Kuipers et al.(2022) propose to expand the search to an extended space H+
in which the possible parent sets of every node include not only all combinations of parents
ofXiinHbut also these parent sets joined with any other node that is not a parent of Xi
inH. Searching inH+provides the opportunity to correct for any mistakes of the pruning
algorithm and yields higher scoring DAGs. We will refer to Has the core search space and
toH+as the extended search space.
The improvements we can achieve by simply searching in the extended space are limited. For
example, if two or more parents are missing in the same node’s parent set, the approach would
allow us to recover only one of them. However, if we iterate the procedure we may be able
to correct for more than one mistake per parent set. The iterative order MCMC procedure
is summarized in Algorithm 1 below:
Simulation studies show that the iterative MCMC procedure can improve even poor search
spaces containing only 50−60%true positive edges so that the final space contains 90−100%
true positive edges (Kuipers et al.2022). However, the worse the original search space is, the
more expansion iterations we need to optimize it. Defining a reasonable search space Hto
start with can significantly decrease the total runtime of the iterative MCMC scheme. In the
current version of BiDAG, in addition to the PC algorithm, it is possible to define the search
space with an arbitrary adjacency matrix, which may stem from expert knowledge or another
algorithm for structure learning. Computational complexity of the MCMC schemes in H+is
higher than inH. We will discuss differences in runtimes between using HandH+in more
detail in Section 7.
3.BiDAGpackage
The core functions of the package learnBN andsampleBN can be used for structure learning
and sampling of Bayesian networks accordingly. The remaining functions can be divided into
four main groups: convergence diagnostics, model averaging, model comparison, and network
visualization. In this section, we describe the most important functions from all groups.

==== Page 8 ====
8 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
3.1. Constructing the score object
All functions for structure learning require an object of class ‘ scoreparameters ’, which stores
the data and other quantities needed to score Bayesian networks. We can construct an object
of class ‘ scoreparameters ’ using the function
scoreparameters(scoretype = c("bge", "bde", "bdecat", "usr"), data,
bgepar = list(am = 1, aw = NULL, edgepf = 1),
bdepar = list(chi = 0.5, edgepf = 2),
bdecatpar = list(chi = 0.5, edgepf = 2),
dbnpar = list(samestruct = TRUE, slices = 2, b = 0),
usrpar = list(pctesttype = c("bge", "bde", "bdecat")),
mixedpar = list(nbin = 0), DBN = FALSE, weightvector = NULL,
bgnodes = NULL, edgepmat = NULL, nodeslabels = NULL)
The datashould be in the form of a data.frame or a matrixwithNrows andncolumns,
wherenis the number of variables in the Bayesian network and Nthe number of observations.
The parameter scoretype defines which score function is used: bdefor binary data, bdecat
for categorical data, bgefor continuous data and usrfor a user-defined score. An optional
parameter weightvector defines the weight of each observation. The need for weighted data
mayarise, forexample, insurveyanalysis(Kuipers, Moffa, Kuipers, Freeman, andBebbington
2018a) and Bayesian network-based clustering (Kuipers et al.2018b).
There are several ways to include prior information in structure learning. The parameter
bgnodes lists root nodes (those who can have children but no parents). For example, we may
expect that the gender of a participant in a survey data can have an effect on the answers,
but not the opposite. Through the parameter edgepmat we can define a graphical prior
that penalizes specific edges with individual penalization factors: we do not exclude them
completely but simply reduce their chance to be sampled. Excluding the edges from the
search space is also possible via the parameter blacklist of the structure learning functions,
which we will discuss in Section 3.2. For penalizing each additional edge in the parent set and
favoring sampling of sparse DAGs, the element edgepfof the corresponding score parameter
can be used.
3.2. Structure learning and sampling
The functions learnBN andsampleBN implement the described MCMC schemes for learning
and sampling of Bayesian networks. The function sampleBN implements order, partition and
iterative order MCMC schemes for sampling of DAGs from the posterior distribution. The
function learnBN implements order and iterative order MCMC schemes for finding a MAP
DAG. In sampleBN the order score is calculated according to Equation 1, while in learnBN it
is calculated using Equation 3. At each MCMC step, learnBN returns the maximally scoring
DAG from the order, and sampleBN samples DAGs from the orders or partitions according
to their scores.
Functions learnBN andsampleBN return the objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’
or‘iterativeMCMC ’dependingonthevalueoftheparameter algorithm withavailableoptions
being "order","partition" and"orderIter" (the corresponding algorithms were described
in Sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.4). The functions orderMCMC ,partitionMCMC anditerativeMCMC

==== Page 9 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 9
corresponding to each of the classes were used for sampling and learning of DAGs in the
previous versions of the package ( <2.0.6) instead of learnBN andsampleBN .
The functions learnBN andsampleBN share mostly similar syntax. We will describe the main
parameters of the function sampleBN :
sampleBN(scorepar, algorithm = c("order", "orderIter", "partition"),
chainout = TRUE, scoreout = FALSE, alpha = 0.05, moveprobs = NULL,
iterations = NULL, stepsave = NULL, gamma = 1, verbose = FALSE,
compress = TRUE, startspace = NULL, blacklist = NULL, scoretable = NULL,
startpoint = NULL, plus1 = TRUE, cpdag = FALSE, hardlimit = 12,
iterpar = list(posterior = 0.5, softlimit = 9, mergetype = "skeleton",
accum = FALSE, plus1it = NULL, addspace = NULL, alphainit = NULL))
and point out important differences with learnBN. All parameters, except scorepar and
algorithm , are either optional or have default values. However, the MCMC schemes are very
flexible, and the parameters should be consistent with the objectives and constraints of a
particular structure learning problem. Parameters fall into four categories:
•parameters defining the search space: startspace ,scoretable ,cpdag,plus1;
•parameters of the Markov chain: iterations ,stepsave ,moveprobs ;
•parameters to include prior information: blacklist ,startorder ;
•parameters defining objects included in the output: chainout ,scoreout
•iterpar is a list containing additional parameters if the iterative MCMC scheme is
chosen ( algorithm = "orderIter" )
The number of MCMC iterations defined by the parameter iterations should be large
enough for the MCMC chain to converge, while still controlling the runtime. The num-
ber of MCMC iterations required for convergence cannot be calculated analytically. Heuris-
tics (Kuipers and Moffa 2016) and simulation studies (Kuipers et al.2022) suggest that we
needO(n2logn)iterations to reach convergence or discover a maximum DAG. Motivated by
this finding, in BiDAG, we set the default value of iterations to6n2lognfor order MCMC,
20n2lognfor partition MCMC and 3.5n2lognfor iterative MCMC. The decreased default
number of iterations for iterative MCMC is motivated by the fact that with each expan-
sion of the search space, a new MCMC chain is constructed. By algorithm definition (see
Algorithm 1), two last chains are constructed in the same search space, hence the effective
number of MCMC iterations is doubled compared to standard order MCMC.
To avoid excessively long runtimes, the algorithm does not sample DAGs at each MCMC
iterationbutonceevery stepsave steps. Theideaof stepsave isthatthenumberofiterations
neededfortheMCMCchaintoconvergeislargeandcanbetensofthousandsorevenmillions,
while the required number of DAGs sampled from the posterior is usually much smaller.
Sampling DAGs from the orders after each lsteps significantly reduces the runtime without
having a negative effect on convergence. By default, we define stepsave in such a way that
the algorithm samples 1001DAGs. This procedure is also known as thinning and results
in reduced autocorrelation between the resulting samples. Less correlated samples provide

==== Page 10 ====
10 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
a better representation of the posterior distribution. However, it was shown that unthinned
chainsoffermorepreciseestimates(LinkandEaton2011)inthemajorityofcasesbecausethey
contain more samples and hence more information about the posterior distribution. Thinning
is still recommended to avoid the need for large computational and memory resources (Link
and Eaton 2011).
The function learnBN implements the MAP search and does not save the list of DAGs found
at each MCMC step. By default, it returns only one maximally scoring DAG. The list of
DAGs can be saved for inspection by setting the parameter chainout toTRUE. However, it is
not recommended to use for model averaging since learnBN does not yield a random sample
from the posterior distribution. In contrast, the function sampleBN targets obtaining a sample
of DAGs from the posterior distribution and its default output includes a trace of sampled
DAGs.
Theparameter startspace candefinethesearchspaceviaasparseorbinaryadjacencymatrix
of sizen×n. An entry [i,j]in the adjacency matrix is 1to indicate the presence of an edge
fromitoj. The search space can be an arbitrary graph without the acyclicity requirement.
When edges are bidirectional both entries [i,j]and[j,i]should be equal to 1. Unit entries
in columnjdetermine the permissible parent sets for node j. Another way to pass a search
space is the parameter scoretable , which has to be an object of class ‘ scorespace ’. The
parameter scoretable can be used to pass an adjacency matrix together with the score tables
and decrease the overall runtime (see Section 7 for details). Objects of class ‘ scorespace ’ can
be extracted from the objects of classes ’ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’ or ‘ iterativeMCMC ’
returned by the sampleBN andlearnBN functions using the function getSpace . When neither
startspace norscoretable is specified, we define the search space by the skeleton estimated
by the PC algorithm or by an equivalence class represented by a CPDAG if the parameter
cpdagequals TRUE.
The parameter alphadefines the significance level αused in the conditional independence
tests of the PC algorithm. Larger αvalues lead to larger search spaces, which decrease the
risk that true positive edges are absent as a result of errors in the statistical tests. By the
same principle though, high αvalues will also increase the number of false-positive edges.
While a higher number of false positive edges in the search space does not affect the goodness
of fit of the resulting structures, it can negatively affect the runtime. Moreover, larger α
values also imply longer runtimes for the PC algorithm, which is worst-case exponential. By
defaultα= 0.05.
For the order MCMC scheme, the parameter plus1indicates whether the algorithm should
perform the search/sampling in the core search space Hor in the extended space H+. When
plus1equals TRUE, then the chain is constructed in H+instead ofH, as described in Sec-
tion 2.4.
The parameter blacklist defines all single edges we wish to remove from the search space,
and hence they will not appear in any of the sampled DAGs. If a node is not allowed to have
any parents, it is computationally more efficient to define it as a root node via the parameter
bgnodes in the scorepar object instead of specifying all edges from any other node in a
blacklist . The parameter edgepmat of the function scoreparameters mentioned above
can be regarded as a soft version of the blacklist.
In Section 2.4, we noted that the maximum number of parents has to be limited to ensure
feasibility of the schemes for larger DAGs. The parameter hardlimit sets a limit on the

==== Page 11 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 11
number of parents any node may have. If the initial search space is higher than this limit,
the functions sampleBN andlearnBN stop execution and warn the user to redefine the search
space or increase hardlimit . The runtimes for computing the scores of a all possible parent
sets for a node with Kpossible parents in the search space Hand its extension H+are given
in Section 7.
When the parameter algorithm = "orderIter" , the parameter iterpar includes additional
parameters to define the iterative expansions of the search space. The element plus1it
defines the number of iterations of expansion of the search space; In the function learnBN,
when plus1it is not specified, the search space expands until no edges can be added to the
search space to improve the score of a maximally scoring DAG Gmax. When sampleBN is used,
the expansion graph G∗is estimated at each iteration on the basis of a sample of graphs and a
posterior probability threshold given by the element posterior of the parameter iterpar.G∗
includes all edges with posterior probabilities higher than the threshold. When extending the
search space, the maximal parent set size Kmay increase as well. The parameter hardlimit
sets a limit on the number of parents any node may have. When we hit the limit for one
node, the algorithm prevents adding further elements to that node’s parent set, but it can
still expand the parent sets of other nodes until they all reach the limit or the score does not
improve further. Another element of iterpar controlling the expansion of the search space is
mergetype . The possible values of mergetype , namely dag,cpdag, and skeleton , correspond
to merging the core space Hwith a maximally scoring graph Gmax(or posterior-based G∗in
sampleBN ), its equivalence class or a skeleton accordingly.
3.3. Bayesian model averaging and posterior model selection
To calculate posterior probabilities of single edges based on a sample of graphs from MCMC
schemes we can use the function
edgep(MCMCchain, pdag = FALSE, burnin = 0.2, endstep = 1)
wheretheparameter MCMCchain isanobjectofoneoftheclasses‘ orderMCMC ’,‘partitionMCMC ’
or ‘iterativeMCMC ’. The parameter burnindefines the proportion of samples to discard as
burn-in. We can also perform posterior model selection by constructing a graph consisting
only of edges with posterior probability higher than a certain threshold with the function
modelp(MCMCchain, p, pdag = FALSE, burnin = 0.2)
which however is not guaranteed to result in a DAG. When building a consensus graph from
a sample of DAGs it is possible to account for the uncertainty related to equivalence class by
setting the parameter pdagtoTRUE. In this case, we first convert all DAGs in the sample to
CPDAGs corresponding to their equivalence classes. In this case, the resulting graph is not
guaranteed to be either a DAG or a CPDAG. However, this option is still recommended since
it results in more stable posterior probabilities of non-directed edges. In model averaging,
the focus is on selecting individual edges rather than on specific structure requirements. For
example, model selection based on posterior probabilities of individual edges was beneficial
for small datasets, where estimated MAP DAGs contained more than half of false-positive
edges (Kuipers et al.2022).

==== Page 12 ====
12 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
3.4. Diagnostic plots
The convergence of the MCMC schemes is essential both for sampling from the posterior
distribution as well as for MAP discovery. It is generally impossible to prove that the Markov
chain has converged. However, diagnostic plots may help analyzing convergence and spotting
cases when convergence was not reached. Trace plots are the basic tool for convergence
diagnostics. For objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’ and ‘ iterativeMCMC ’, the
method plotis available, which plots the trace of log scores of sampled DAGs.
To plot the changes in posterior probabilities of all single edges with the addition of new
graphs from the sample according to Equation 2 we can use the function
plotpedges(MCMCtrace, cutoff = 0.2, pdag = FALSE, onlyedges = NULL,
highlight = NULL, ...)
Large fluctuations of posterior probabilities are possible at the beginning, but while approach-
ing convergence posterior probabilities should also reach stable levels.
Convergence diagnostic plots based on a single chain may be misleading. For a better un-
derstanding of convergence we can examine jointly several independent MCMC runs with
random starting points. If all chains converge, the DAGs in each chain should represent the
posterior distribution in a similar way. Posterior probabilities of single edges calculated on
the basis of each sample should then be close to each other. If some chains do not converge,
we are likely to see significant differences between posterior probabilities of single edges. We
can plot the concordance between pairs of MCMC runs using the function
plotpcor(pmat, highlight = 0.3, printedges = FALSE, cut = 0.05, ...)
where the parameter pmatis a list of matrices containing posterior probabilities of single
edges; such a list can be created by applying the function edgepto a list of objects of class
‘orderMCMC ’ or ‘ partitionMCMC ’. We can also inspect the edges whose posterior probabilities
differ by more than highlight in the first two matrices by setting printedges to TRUE.
The functions bidag2coda andbidag2codalist transform the objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’
and ‘ partitionMCMC ’ (or a list of such objects) into objects of classes ‘ mcmc’ and ‘ mcmc.list ’
from the R-package coda(Plummer, Best, Cowles, and Vines 2006). The package coda
contains standard tools for convergence diagnostics of MCMC chains of continuous or cate-
gorical variables. However, samples of DAGs usually cannot be analyzed by standard conver-
gence diagnostic tools. For this reason, the MCMC objects constructed by bidag2coda and
bidag2codalist contain the traces of DAG scores from a single or multiple MCMC chains
that can be visualized in one plot for mixing diagnostics using codafunctions traceplot and
densplot . When the parameter edgesis set to TRUE, instead of score traces, these func-
tions compute the traces of posterior probabilities of single edges, that are continuous and
can be used to perform convergence diagnostics based on the potential scale reduction factor
(PRSF) that compares within- and between-chain means and variances (Gelman and Rubin
1992; Goudie and Mukherjee 2016). The function gelman.diag from the package codacan be
used to compute PRSF. However, as noted by Goudie and Mukherjee (2016) this diagnostics
failed to produce reliable results for DAGs. The most common convergence diagnostics of
MCMC schemes for DAGs is implemented in the BiDAGfunction plotpcor , hence it is the
recommended option.

==== Page 13 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 13
3.5. Model comparison
The function DAGscore computes the score of a single DAG. When the goal is MAP discovery,
we can use this function to compare structures estimated by different algorithms. We can
also compare scores of the estimated structures to the score of the ground truth DAG when
the latter is known.
To compare the performance of structure learning algorithms it is useful to assess how close
the estimated structure is to the ground truth DAG on the basis of a certain distance measure.
The function compareDAGs allows several measures: the number of true-positive edges (TP),
the number of false-positive edges (FP), the number of false-negative edges (FN), the struc-
tural Hamming distance (SHD) and others; see ?compareDAGs for a detailed list of measures
and formulas. All measures apart from SHD refer to differences in the skeletons of two DAGs,
i.e., the directions of the edges are disregarded. SHD equals the sum of all types of mistakes:
false negatives, false positives, and edges with erroneous directions. The functions plotdiffs ,
plotdiffsDBN andplot2in1 can be used to visualize the differences and similarities between
two graphs.
4. Structure learning of dynamic Bayesian networks
A dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) is a graphical model that encodes temporal relationships
between random variables in X. A DBN defines a joint probability distribution over Xt=
(Xt
1,...,Xt
n)for all discrete time points t= 1,...,T. The random variable Xt
idescribes
featureiat time point t. InBiDAG, we consider first-order homogeneous DBNs, where the
conditional probability distributions P(Xt|Xt−1)are assumed to be the same for all time
pointst. In a first-order DBNs, variables in time slice tcan only depend on other variables
in the same time slice or on variables in the previous time slice t−1. The structure of a
first-order homogeneous DBN Gis fully specified by the initial structure G0and the transition
structureG→.G0represents the structure of the first slice, and G→represents the structure
for transitioning between any pair of consecutive time slices. Specifically, G→includes intra-
slice edges, i.e., edges between the nodes within the same time slice and inter-slice edges,
i.e., edges from the nodes in a previous time slice to the current time slice. Intra-slice edges
are also called instantaneous or contemporaneous to characterize the time interval in which
interactions between the corresponding variables occur. Similarly, inter-slice edges are also
called time-delayed or temporal. The unfolded DBN structure Gshown in Figure 1 can be
more compactly represented as the two structures G0andG→shown in Figure 2.
BiDAGcan also be used for learning DBNs from data. When we initialize the score object
with the function scoreparameters we set the parameter DBNtoTRUE(the default is FALSE).
The dataobject must adhere to a special DBN format to perform structure learning correctly.
The number of columns must equal the number of variables in all time slices b+n·T, where
bis the number of static variables, nthe number of dynamic variables in one time slice and T
the number of time points. All bstatic variables, if present, have to be in the first bcolumns
of the dataandbshould be specified via the parameter dbnpar, containing a list of variables
specific to DBNs. We assume that static variables are present in every time slice, but since
they do not change over time we need to store their values only once. The next n·Tcolumns
should store the observations of the dynamic variables over all time slices. They need to be
ordered in such a way that for each group of nvariables, the ithcolumn of group tcontains
the observations of the variable Xt
i.

==== Page 14 ====
14 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
X1s
X50X20X30
X40
X51X21X31
X41
X52X22X32
X42
X53X23X33
X43
Figure 1: Unfolded structure of a first-order DBN consisting of four time slices. Each time
slice includes one static variable XS
1and four dynamic variables Xt
2,Xt
3,Xt
4,Xt
5, fort= 0,
1, 2, 3.
X1s
X50X20X30
X40
(a)G0
X5t−1X2t−1X3t−1X1s
X5tX2tX3t
X4t
intra−slice edges
inter−slice edges (b)G→
Figure 2: Initial G0and transitionG→structures representing the first-order DBN whose
unfolded structure is depicted in Figure 1.

==== Page 15 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 15
InBiDAG, we consider a special case when the structure within the first time slice is the same
as the internal structure in all other time slices (including the edges from static nodes), which
we indicate by setting to TRUEthe slot samestruct in the parameter dbnpar. Otherwise we
learn the initial and transition structures independently.
5. Examples on simulated data
We consider two data sets to demonstrate possible ways of working with the BiDAGpackage.
Thefirstsimulateddatasetis gsim100; itincludes100observationsgeneratedfromarandomly
generatedDAGwith n= 100nodes, correspondingtoGaussianrandomvariables. Thesecond
simulated dataset, DBNdata, contains observations from five consecutive time points of a DBN
consisting of 12 dynamic 3 static variables.
5.1. MAP discovery
We first demonstrate how to use the algorithms in BiDAGfor MAP discovery, which we
can perform via the function learnBN. The parameter algorithm can be either orderor
orderIter and defines the approach to construct the search space.
To run any of the implemented MCMC schemes, we need to construct an object of class
‘scoreparameters ’.
R> set.seed(4419)
R> library("BiDAG")
R> data("gsim100", package = "BiDAG")
R> score100 <- scoreparameters("bge", gsim100)
We first learn the MAP network from gsim100 dataset by running order MCMC on a core
search spaceH(plus1 = FALSE ) defined by the PC algorithm. It is the least computationally
expensive of all options to define a search space but also prone to mistakes.
R> basefit <- learnBN(scorepar = score100, algorithm = "order", plus1 = FALSE)
The score of the maximum DAG sound in the core search space is lower than the score of the
ground truth structure stored as the adjacency matrix gsimmat:
R> getMCMCscore(basefit)
[1] -17952.42
R> data("gsimmat", package = "BiDAG")
R> DAGscore(scorepar = score100, incidence = gsimmat)
[1] -15239.79
By looking at structural differences, we can see that most differences in the estimated equiv-
alence class come from the low number of discovered true-positive edges:

==== Page 16 ====
16 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
R> compareDAGs(getDAG(basefit), gsimmat,
+ cpdag = TRUE)[c("TPR", "FPRn", "SHD")]
TPR FPRn SHD
0.58 0.03 94.00
The TPR of the highest scoring graph found in the core search space is only 58%. In an
attempt to improve the search space and estimate a better DAG, we use the iterative MCMC
by setting algorithm = "orderIter" :
R> iterativefit <- learnBN(score100, algorithm = "orderIter",
+ scoreout = TRUE, verbose = FALSE)
For each expansion iteration, the algorithm constructs a new MCMC chain, and the scheme
may take a while to run. When the parameter verbose equals TRUE, messages in the output
indicates the iteration currently running.
R> summary(iterativefit)
object of class 'iterativeMCMC '
Results:
maximum score DAG with 100 nodes and 199 edges:
maximum DAG score= -15195.67
algorithm: iterative order MCMC
number of search space expansion steps: 7
number of edges in the intial search space: 204
number of added edges: 196
total number of MCMC iterations: 1127000
total number of MCMC sampling steps (length of trace): 7007
number of MCMC iterations per expansion step: 161000
number of MCMC sampling steps per expansion step: 1001
initial search space: PC
sample/MAP: MAP
Additional output:
scoretable, object of class 'scorespace '
The iterative order MCMC scheme added 196 edges to the initial PC-defined search space in
7 iterations. We can observe how the score improved with each search space expansion step
by looking at the trace plot depicted in Figure 3:
R> plot(iterativefit)
The scores of the DAGs sampled at the final expansion step improved significantly compared
to the initial step. Moreover, the score of a MAP DAG found in the last iteration by iterative

==== Page 17 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 17
01000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000−17500 −17000 −16500 −16000 −15500iterative MCMC, DAG scores
MCMC stepDAG logscore
search 
space 
expansion
Figure 3: Trace plot of saved DAG scores obtained by iterative MCMC.
−16200 −15800 −154000.850.900.95
scoreTPR
123456
(a) TPR and score
20 25 30 35 40565860626466
FPSHD123
45
6 (b) FP and SHD
Figure 4: Structure fit changes through iterative expansions of the search space: the iter-
ative MCMC scheme was applied to the simulated dataset gsim100. At each search space
expansion, the MAP DAG is stored together with its score and compared to the ground truth
structure with the function itercomp . For (a), TPR and DAG score were used, while for (b),
FP and SHD were used to visualize the changes.

==== Page 18 ====
18 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
MCMC (−15195.67)is higher than the score of the ground truth structure (−15239.79),
and much higher than the score of a MAP graph found in the core PC-defined search
space (−17952.42). Outside of simulation studies, DAG score is the most used criterion that
informs model selection and iterative MCMC has shown great performance in maximizing the
score (Kuipers et al.2022).
Since we know the ground truth DAG, we can use the function itercomp to assess how close
the estimated MAP structures are to the true DAG with each expansion of the search space:
R> it100 <- itercomp(iterativefit, gsimmat)
R> plot(it100, vars = c("score", "TPR"), showit = 1:6)
R> plot(it100, vars = c("FP", "SHD"), col = 2, showit = 1:6)
As visualized in Figure 4a, the results of this comparison show that the TPR grows as the
score increases with each search space expansion and is very close to 1 in the last iteration.
However, FP grows as well, and thus, the improvement of SHD is not as impressive as of
TPR (Figure 4b).
Simulation studies help us by guiding what we can expect from applying a particular method
in a specific simulation setting, e.g., low sample size. In our example, using the PC-defined
search space results in a low TPR. While iterative MCMC helps with the TPR and the DAG
score, it does not necessarily result in the best structure fit, as previously mentioned, due to
a possible increase in false positives. In the next section, we will describe how to use BiDAG
to obtain consensus graphs that help mitigate this problem.
5.2. Sampling graphs from posterior distribution
So far, we focused on finding one maximally scoring DAG. For sampling from the poste-
rior distribution, we can use the function sampleBN . In addition to two algorithms available
for MAP discovery, sampleBN suggests the option algorithm = "partition" implementing
partition MCMC.
For sampling, it is important that the search space includes as many true positives as possi-
ble. The iterative MCMC scheme has been shown to optimize the search space in multiple
simulation settings successfully (Kuipers et al.2022). Therefore, we can pass the search
space optimized in Section 5.1 to the sampling function via the parameters startspace or
scoretable . The parameter startspace allows passing an arbitrary adjacency matrix. In
contrast, scoretable requires an object of class ‘ scorespace ’ which in addition to the adja-
cency matrix includes the score tables described in Section 2 and hence decreases the runtime.
R> iterSpace <- getSpace(iterativefit)
R> orderfit <- sampleBN(score100, algorithm = "order",
+ scoretable = iterSpace)
R> plot(orderfit)
For MCMC sampling schemes, it is important to check if the chain has converged, and we
can look at diagnostic plots, which may highlight lack of convergence. The trace plot in
Figure 5 shows the scores of all sampled DAGs. When a random order is used as a starting
point, typically, the scores increase sharply in the beginning, reflecting the burn-in period of
the chain. A sharp increase is visible on the left subgraph, while the right subgraph shows

==== Page 19 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 19
0200 400 600 800 1000−17000 −16500 −16000 −15500DAG logscores
iterationlogscore
200 400 600 800 1000−15400 −15360 −15320excluding burn−in
iterationlogscore
Figure 5: Trace plot of DAGs sampled by the order MCMC scheme. The sampling is per-
formed on a search space that was previously optimized by iterative MCMC.
the trace plots of scores after excluding the burn-in period. If we choose the burn-in period
adequately, the scores on the right will stay in a narrow stable range. To modify the default
burn-in period of 20% we can set the parameter burninto another value.
To demonstrate a more rigorous convergence diagnostic, we need to run MCMC two (or more)
times for the same data but with different starting points. By default, the starting point of
each run is random unless the parameter startorder is set to a specific value.
We proceed with computing posterior probabilities of edges based on each of the two chains
with the function edgepand visualize the results with the function plotpcor , Figure 6.
R> orderfit2 <- sampleBN(score100, algorithm = "order",
+ scoretable = iterSpace)
R> epd <- lapply(list(orderfit, orderfit2), edgep, pdag = TRUE)
R> plotpcor(epd, xlab = "run 1", ylab = "run 2")
The concordance plot in Figure 6a does not indicate any convergence issues. All points are
close to diagonal, meaning that posterior probabilities of single edges based on two samples
of DAGs produced by order MCMC are close to each other.
We repeat the same procedure for a pair of runs of partition MCMC. The concordance plot
in Figure 6b indicates convergence issues. Several edges have a high posterior probability
in one run and low in the other. When the concordance plot looks concerning, increasing
the number of iterations and repeating sampling is recommended. However, even with
the default number of iterations, partition sampling takes longer than order sampling, and
any further increase in runtime might be unwanted. It is important to be aware of the
convergence and complexity properties of both approaches in order to choose the right trade-
off between runtime and prior over structures. As mentioned in Section 2.2, partition MCMC
was designed in order to impose a uniform prior over structures. However, this feature comes
at the cost of slower convergence and longer runtimes. In this example, we proceed with the
sample obtained by the order MCMC scheme for model selection. Section 6 will demonstrate
an example using real data, where the convergence diagnostics of the partition MCMC sample
does not indicate any issues.

==== Page 20 ====
20 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0KIRC
run 1run 2
(a) Order MCMC (default iterations )
0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0KIRC
run 1run 2 (b) Partition MCMC (default iterations )
Figure 6: Convergence diagnostic plot: concordance of posterior probabilities estimates of sin-
gle edges between pairs of MCMC runs. For each subfigure two pairs of samples of DAGs were
obtained by order/partition MCMC schemes. Posterior probabilities of all edges were calcu-
lated based on each sample with the function edgepand visualized pair-wise with plotpcor .
Red points correspond to edges whose posterior probabilities differ by more than 0.3 between
two samples.
In Section 5.1, we have compared an estimated MAP DAG to the ground truth structure by
comparing their scores and skeletons. The estimated MAP DAG contains 39 false-positive
edges, around 20% of all edges in the discovered DAG. Simulation studies show that in
cases when the number of observations is low, even high scoring structures may contain a
lot of false-positive edges (Kuipers et al.2022). With a sample of DAGs from the posterior
distribution, we can apply an alternative approach to model selection based on posterior
probability estimates of single edges, by using the function modelpand setting the parameter
pto a desired value. Since we also know the ground truth structure in this example, we
can use the function samplecomp to demonstrate how models selected based on a range of
posterior thresholds compare to the ground truth. We set the parameter pdagtoTRUEto
account for equivalence class uncertainty and accordingly, in each case, compare the chosen
model to an equivalence class corresponding to the ground truth DAG:
R> samplecomp(orderfit, gsimmat, pdag = TRUE, p = c(0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 0.95))
object of class 'samplecomp '
TP FP FN TPR FPR FPRn FDR SHD p
1 159 29 2 0.99 0.01 0.18 0.15 38 0.50
2 157 16 4 0.98 0.00 0.10 0.09 25 0.70
3 144 3 17 0.89 0.00 0.02 0.02 20 0.90
4 141 1 20 0.88 0.00 0.01 0.01 21 0.95
Each row in the table corresponds to the result of comparing a consensus graph based on

==== Page 21 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 21
N= 100 N= 1000
TP FP SHD TP FP SHD
MAP 159 40 55 161 8 12
p= 0.50159 29 38 161 4 6
p= 0.90144 3 20 154 1 8
p= 0.95141 1 21 146 1 18
Table 1: Comparison between MAP and posterior threshold-based models for the two data
sets gsim100 and gsimgenerated from the same graph and containing 100 and 1000 obser-
vations accordingly.
the posterior threshold in the last column to the ground truth CPDAG. For example, a
graph consisting only of edges with an estimated probability higher than 0.90 contains only
three false-positive edges, while maintaining a rather high TPR of 89%. To further show in
which settings posterior model selection based on a threshold may provide an advantage over
choosing one highest scoring model, we also applied a similar MCMC scheme to the dataset
generated from the same network but with a larger number of observations (dataset gsim,
N= 1000). The results of comparing the estimated models with the ground truth structure
are summarized in Table 1.
For both sample sizes, a posterior threshold-based model for p= 0.5has as many true edges
as the MAP estimate while reducing the number of false-positive edges. A more stringent
threshold can further reduce false positives. For example, for N= 100andp= 0.95there was
only one false-positive edge in the estimated model compared to 20%in the MAP DAG. We
can also observe that for N= 100, the reduction in false-positive edges is more pronounced
than forN= 1000. As a result, SHDs between consensus and ground truth models are
smaller than SHDs between MAP and the ground truth models for all posterior thresholds
andN= 100, while forN= 1000, the lower SHD is only observed for p= 0.5. Similar results
were observed in larger-scale simulation studies by Kuipers et al.(2022).
5.3. Learning DBNs
Both functions learnBN andsampleBN can also be applied to structure learning and sampling
of DBNs. Here we consider a simulated example of a DBN consisting of 12 dynamic and 3
static nodes. The data includes samples generated from five consecutive time slices. The
syntax of structure learning functions then is the same as for usual Bayesian networks. Here
we again learn the MAP estimate and optimize the search space with the function learnBN
andalgorithm = "orderIter" .
R> set.seed(4419)
R> data("DBNdata", package = "BiDAG")
R> data("DBNmat", package = "BiDAG")
R> DBNscore <- scoreparameters("bge", DBNdata, DBN = TRUE,
+ dbnpar = list(samestruct = TRUE, slices = 5, b = 3))
R> DBNfit <- learnBN(DBNscore, algorithm = "orderIter", verbose = FALSE,
+ scoreout = TRUE)
R> plotdiffsDBN(getDAG(DBNfit), DBNmat, "trans", b = 3)

==== Page 22 ====
22 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
s1s2 s3 v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6v7v8 v9v10v11v12 v1.2
v2.2 v3.2
v4.2v5.2
v6.2v7.2 v8.2v9.2
v10.2v11.2
v12.2
nodes(t):
stat
i
i+1edges:
true positive
false positive
Figure 7: Transition structure of MAP estimate of a 15-node DBN. Edge colors highlight
differences/similarities between the maximum scoring structure found by the iterative MCMC
scheme and the ground truth transition structure.
Figure 7 demonstrates the transition structure of MAP estimate of a DBN learned from
DBNdata and its differences with the ground truth structure (when the ground truth structure
isunknownthefunction plotDBN canbeusedinsteadof plotdiffsDBN forvisualization). The
MAPtransitionstructurefoundbyiterativeMCMCisveryclosetothegroundtruthstructure
with just two false-positive edges. Typically for DBNs, we observe many transitional edges
connecting the same variable in neighboring time points iandi+ 1.
6. Applications
Kuiperset al.(2018b) used BiDAGfor learning structures of Bayesian networks that charac-
terize mutation profiles across cancer types and novel subtypes. The dataset included muta-
tional profiles of N= 8198tumor samples across 22 cancer types. For n= 201significantly
mutated genes, a Bayesian network-based clustering approach was used to define clusters
of tumor samples, such that a Bayesian network represented each cluster center. Structure
learning was performed in two steps. In the first step, the function learnBN with the param-

==== Page 23 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 23
SETD2 KRAS CUL3
TP53 PBRM1 KDM5C PIK3CA
FAM200AC12orf43 CABLES1
ARID1A
CDH1PKD2 EGFR
QRICH1 R3HDM1
RPTN
MET NEFH
PAMAR CCBL2 RB1 EP300 MAP3K1
MLL3APC
PIK3R1 NSD1FAT1
JUBARHGAP18 EME2
LMTK2ZFP36L2
TNRC18
KIRP
KIRC
bothKIRP
KIRC
both
Figure 8: Joint graph representing KIRC and KIRP MAP CPDAGs obtained by iterative
MCMC. Only nodes that have at least one connection are shown. Blue and green nodes/edges
are specific to KIRP and KIRC graphs, respectively. Orange nodes have connections in both
graphs.
eter algorithm = "orderIter" was used to optimize the search space. In the second step,
sampling was performed with sampleBN with the parameter algorithm = "partition" on
the optimized search space. Posterior model selection was performed based on the sample
of 100 DAGs from the posterior distribution with a posterior threshold of 0.5. The code
for unsupervised clustering as well as the example of using BiDAGfor Bayesian network-
based clustering can be found at https://github.com/cbg-ethz/pancancer-clustering .
Kuiperset al.(2018b) discovered networks both in supervised and unsupervised settings. As
a demonstration here we show how BiDAGcan be used to characterize cancer subtypes in a
supervised setting and follow the learning steps described in Kuipers et al.(2018b).
We analyze non-silent mutation data from two cohorts from the cancer genome atlas (TCGA,
https://www.cancer.gov/tcga ). The cohorts represent two kidney cancer subtypes: renal
papillary cell carcinoma (KIRP) and kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC). We include
the most significantly mutated genes (q < 0.1) from both cohorts. Mutation data and cor-
responding lists of significantly mutated genes were obtained from Broad Institute TCGA
Genome Data Analysis Center (2016a) and Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data Analysis
Center (2016b). Additionally, we have included connected genes from KIRP and KIRC net-

==== Page 24 ====
24 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0KIRC
run 1run 2
(a) KIRP cohort
0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0KIRP
run 1run 2 (b) KIRC cohort
Figure 9: Convergence diagnostic plot: concordance of posterior probabilities estimates of
single edges between pairs of partition MCMC runs.
works discovered by Kuipers et al.(2018b). Both pre-processed datasets are accessible in the
BiDAGpackage.
Following the methods in Kuipers et al.(2018b), we use a prior derived from the protein-
protein interaction database STRING (Szklarczyk et al.2019). The edges that are not among
interactions in the STRING database are penalized by a factor of 2 for graph inference. The
database is being constantly updated, and known interactions between genes have changed
considerably since the analysis reported by Kuipers et al.(2018b) was performed. Here,
we use the most recent version 11.0 of the database. In BiDAG, the function string2mat
transforms the downloaded list of interactions from STRING into a matrix, which can be
used for blacklisting or penalizing of edges in BiDAG.
We run iterative MCMC to find MAP DAGs representing the KIRC and KIRP subtypes and
corresponding equivalence classes. Figure 8, produced by the function plot2in1 , shows edges
from both discovered CPDAGs in one graph. The genes TP53, PIK3CA, ARID1A, PBRM1,
CDH1, RPTN, R3HDM1 are connected to other nodes in both subgraphs representing KIRP
and KIRC cohorts. However, the subgraphs do not share any edges.
We proceed with partition MCMC to understand how confident we can be about the discov-
ered mutational interactions. To check convergence we use the edgepandplotpcor functions
as in the previous section. The result is shown in Figure 9. There are no visible convergence
problems, and all the points are close to the diagonal.
Another useful plot for checking convergence depicts how the posterior probabilities of single
edges change through MCMC iterations. In Figure 10 we can see that posteriors of the vast
majority of edges stabilize in both cases after a short burn-in period. Edges of the MAP
CPDAG (highlighted in green) reach higher posterior probabilities than almost all other
edges. However, many edges of MAP structures converge to posterior levels below 0.5. The
posterior probability of an edge can be interpreted as a measure of confidence in the edge
based on the data.

==== Page 25 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 25
(a) KIRC, function plotpedges
 (b) KIRP, function plotpedges
Figure 10: Convergence of posterior probabilities of single edges: a pair of MCMC chains
were run for each of KIRP and KIRC datasets. Posterior probability traces were obtained
by applying Equation 2 ( m= 1) at each MCMC step ( M= 1,2,..., 1001). Green lines
correspond to traces of posterior probabilities of the edges of the estimated MAP CPDAG.
SETD2 TP53
PBRM1KDM5C PIK3CA
FAM200AC12orf43 CABLES1 ARID1A
CDH1 PKD2EGFR
QRICH1 R3HDM1 RPTN KRASCUL3
common edge
present only in KIRP MAP
Figure 11: Comparison between MAP CPDAG and consensus model learned from the kirp
dataset. MAP CPDAG was obtained with iterative MCMC. Consensus model was obtained
by averaging over a sample of DAGs obtained by partition MCMC and converted to CPDAGs
and keeping the edges whose posterior is bigger than 0.5.

==== Page 26 ====
26 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
SETD2
TP53 PBRM1KDM5C PIK3CA
FAM200AC12orf43 CABLES1 ARID1A
CDH1PKD2 EGFR
QRICH1 R3HDM1 RPTN
MET
PAMAR CCBL2 RB1
EP300MAP3K1 MLL3 APC
PIK3R1 NSD1FAT1
JUB ARHGAP18EME2
LMTK2ZFP36L2
KIRP
KIRC
bothKIRP
KIRC
both
Figure 12: Joint graph for KIRC and KIRP cohorts obtained averaging over a sample from
posteriordistributionobtainedbypartitionMCMC.Onlynodesthathaveatleastoneconnec-
tionandwhoseposteriorprobabilityishigherthan0.5areshown. Blueandgreennodes/edges
are specific to KIRP and KIRC. Orange nodes have connections in both graphs.
Kuipers et al.(2022) have shown that when the data is noisy or scarce, the MAP graph
may include a lot of edges with low posterior probability, many of which turn out to be false
positives. We perform model averaging based on a sample of DAGs obtained by partition
MCMC and remove the edges with a posterior less than 0.5. As we have seen in Section 5, this
approach can help to remove false-positive edges, while keeping most of the true positives.
Figure 11 depicts differences between MAP and consensus graphs for the KIRP cohort. Eight
edges out of ten passed the posterior threshold of 0.5. In the KIRC cohort, similarly, 12 out
of 18 edges of MAP CPDAG passed the threshold of 0.5.
Figure 12 visualizes the consensus models for KIRP and KIRC in one graph. Many of the
discovered edges correspond to those found previously by Kuipers et al.(2018b) for the
respective cancer subtypes. Although we have followed the analysis steps from Kuipers et al.
(2018b) on the same set of tumors, we used an updated prior and genes that are specific
to analyzed cohorts. Consequently, the discovered networks display some differences. For
example, we discovered an edge between CCBL2 and R3HDM1, but the gene CCLB2 was
not included in the list of genes analyzed by Kuipers et al.(2018b).

==== Page 27 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 27
7. Runtime
ThenumberofMCMCiterationsusedintheorderMCMCschemebydefaultis 6n2logn, fora
network with nnodes. Each MCMC iteration requires the computation of the score R(≺′|D)
of at least one proposed order. When implemented naively, the complexity of scoring an order
is exponential, O(nK+1), whereKis the maximum number of parents allowed in the scheme.
This brings the total chain complexity to O(nKn2logn). For efficient implementation, we
use the approach and computational optimizations described by Kuipers et al.(2022) and
pre-compute the quantities needed to score an order at each iteration of the MCMC scheme.
We refer to this step further as pre-computing the score tables. This reduces the complexity
of the chain by a factor of nKtoO(n2logn)(Kuipers et al.2022). Of course, the complexity
of computing the score tables remains exponential, but now it is independent of the number
of MCMC iterations as it has to be done only once. In addition, using the search space
Hinstead of restricting the number of parents to a hard limit Kreduces the complexity of
computing the score tables to O(K32K)for order MCMC. In H+the complexity grows by a
factor ofntoO(nK32K)for order MCMC and to O(nK23K)for partition MCMC.
When the score tables are pre-computed, the complexity of the MCMC scheme is polynomial
in the size of the number of nodes of the network, n, such that the algorithm is applicable to
large networks with hundreds of nodes. The computation of the score tables is exponential in
themaximalparentsetsize K, soKimposesafeasibilitylimitontheimplementedalgorithms.
While no hard limit for Kis required in BiDAG, for largeK, the score table computations
can become prohibitive.
Figure 13 shows how much time is needed to compute the score tables for a node with Kpar-
0255075100
5 10 15 20
Ktime (sec)scheme
order MCMC, H
order MCMC, H+
partition MCMC, H+
Figure 13: Time needed to compute a score table for a node with Kparents for a network
withn= 100nodes.

==== Page 28 ====
28 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
entsforanetworkwith n= 100nodes. Alltimingmeasurementswerecarriedoutona2.3GHz
Intel Core i5 processor. For K > 7, the differences in runtimes of different MCMC schemes
become substantial. As expected, the runtime is lowest for order MCMC sampling in Hand
highestforpartitionMCMC.Buildingscoretablesinthecoresearchspace H(plus1=FALSE)
requires shorter time than in its extended version H+(plus1=TRUE), but scoring a node
with up to 14 parents is feasible in both cases for the order MCMC scheme. Note, however,
that most real-world networks are much sparser than that. For example, in 30 networks found
in the Bayesian network repository ( http://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/ ) the average
parent set size is 1.4, while the maximum parent set size is 13.
The parameter hardlimit of structure learning functions sampleBN and learnBN ensures
that the search space contains only nodes with parent set sizes not exceeding this limit. As
mentioned in Section 3.2, the iterative MCMC scheme stops extending a node’s parent set
when the hardlimit has been hit for this node, but it can still expand the parent sets of
other nodes until they all reach the limit or the score does not improve further.
8. Discussion
The Rpackage BiDAGimplements flexible MCMC schemes for structure learning and sam-
pling of Bayesian networks. The iterative MCMC scheme can be used to search for a MAP
graph and to optimize the search space, while partition and order MCMC can be used for
sampling from the posterior distribution. Order MCMC converges faster and is computation-
ally less demanding than partition MCMC, but only the latter provides an unbiased sample
of the posterior. Other tools for structure learning either focus on finding one best solution
or implement Bayesian approaches, which are not feasible for large networks due to compu-
tational costs or slow convergence. BiDAGis the first package available for efficient sampling
of DAGs with hundreds of nodes. In the future, we plan to implement features that could
potentially reduce the runtimes of partition and iterative MCMC schemes. In the iterative
MCMC scheme, we consider adding algorithms other than PC for defining the initial search
space. Furthermore, the convergence of partition MCMC could be improved with the addition
of new moves.
References
Bartlett M, Cussens J (2017). “Integer Linear Programming for the Bayesian Network Struc-
ture Learning Problem.” Artificial Intelligence ,244, 258–271. doi:10.1016/j.artint.
2015.03.003 .
BøttcherSG,DethlefsenC(2003). “ deal: aPackageforLearningBayesianNetworks.” Journal
of Statistical Software ,8(20). doi:10.18637/jss.v008.i20 .
Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data Analysis Center (2016a). “Mutation Analysis (MutSig
2CV V3.1).” doi:10.7908/c19c6wtf .
Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data Analysis Center (2016b). “Mutation Analysis (MutSig
2CV V3.1).” doi:10.7908/c10864rm .

==== Page 29 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 29
Chickering DM (1996). “Learning Bayesian Networks is NP-Complete.” In Learning from
Data: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics V , 1st edition, pp. 121–130. Springer-Verlag.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-2404-4_12 .
Consonni G, Rocca LL (2012). “Objective Bayes Factors for Gaussian Directed Acyclic
Graphical Models.” Scandinavian Journal of Statistics ,39(4), 743–756. doi:10.1111/
j.1467-9469.2011.00785.x .
Drton M, Maathuis MH (2017). “Structure Learning in Graphical Modeling.” An-
nual Review of Statistics and Its Application ,4(1), 365–393. doi:10.1146/
annurev-statistics-060116-053803 .
Eaton D, Murphy K (2007). BDAGL: Bayesian DAG Learning . URL https://www.cs.ubc.
ca/~murphyk/Software/BDAGL/ .
Franzin A, Sambo F, Camillo BD (2017). “ bnstruct: An RPackage for Bayesian Network
Structure Learning in the Presence of Missing Data.” Bioinformatics ,33(8), 1250–1252.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw807 .
Friedman N, Koller D (2003). “A Bayesian Approach to Structure Discovery in Bayesian
Networks.” Machine Learning ,50, 95–125. doi:10.1023/a:1020249912095 .
Geiger D, Heckerman D (1995). “Learning Bayesian Networks: A Unification for Discrete
and Gaussian Domains.” In Proceedings of Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence , pp. 274–284.
Geiger D, Heckerman D (2002). “Parameter Priors for Directed Acyclic Graphical Models
and the Characterization of Several Probability Distributions.” The Annals of Statistics ,
30(5), 1412–1440. doi:10.1214/aos/1035844981 .
Gelman A, Rubin DB (1992). “Inference from Iterative Simulation Using Multiple Sequences.”
Statistical Science ,7(4). doi:10.1214/ss/1177011136 .
GentlemanR,WhalenE,HuberW,FalconS(2022). graph: A Package to Handle Graph Data
Structures .Rpackage version 1.76.0, URL http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/graph.html .
Gosling J, Joy B, Steele G, Bracha G (2000). The JavaLanguage Specification . Addison-
Wesley Professional.
Goudie RJB, Mukherjee S (2016). “A Gibbs Sampler for Learning DAGs.” Journal of
Machine Learning Research ,17(30). URL https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume17/
14-486/14-486.pdf .
HansenKD,GentryJ,LongL,GentlemanR,FalconS,HahneF,SarkarD(2019). Rgraphviz :
Provides Plotting Capabilities for RGraph Objects . URL https://www.bioconductor.
org/packages/release/bioc/html/Rgraphviz.html .
Kalisch M, Bühlmann P (2007). “Estimating High-Dimensional Directed Acyclic Graphs
with the PC-Algorithm.” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,8, 613–636. URL https:
//www.jmlr.org/papers/v8/kalisch07a.html .

==== Page 30 ====
30 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
Kalisch M, Mächler M, Colombo D, Maathuis M, Bühlmann P (2012). “Causal Inference
Using Graphical Models with the RPackage pcalg.”Journal of Statistical Software ,47(11),
1–26. doi:10.18637/jss.v047.i11 .
Kratzer G, Furrer R (2019). mcmcabn : A Structural MCMC Sampler for DAGs Learned from
Observed Systemic Datasets .Rpackage version 3.18.17, URL https://CRAN.R-project.
org/package=mcmcabn .
Kuipers J, Moffa G (2016). “Partition MCMC for Inference on Acyclic Digraphs.” Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association ,1(517), 1–15. doi:10.1080/01621459.2015.
1133426.
Kuipers J, Moffa G, Kuipers E, Freeman D, Bebbington P (2018a). “Links between Psychotic
and Neurotic Symptoms in the General Population: An Analysis of Longitudinal British
National Survey Data Using Directed Acyclic Graphs.” Psychological Medicine ,49(3),
388–395. doi:10.1017/s0033291718000879 .
Kuipers J, Suter P, Moffa G (2022). “Efficient Sampling and Structure Learning of Bayesian
Networks.” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics ,31(3), 639–650. doi:10.
1080/10618600.2021.2020127 .
Kuipers J, Thurnherr T, Moffa G, Suter P, Behr J, Goosen R, Christofori G, Beerenwinkel
N (2018b). “Mutational Interactions Define Novel Cancer Subgroups.” Nature Communi-
cations,9(1). doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06867-x .
Link WA, Eaton MJ (2011). “On Thinning of Chains in MCMC.” Methods in Ecology and
Evolution ,3(1), 112–115. doi:10.1111/j.2041-210x.2011.00131.x .
Plummer M, Best N, Cowles K, Vines K (2006). “ coda: Convergence Diagnosis and Out-
put Analysis for MCMC.” RNews,6(1), 7–11. URL http://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/
Rnews/.
Ramsey JD, Zhang K, Glymour M, Romero RS, Huang B, Ebert-Uphoff I (2018). “ TETRAD
– A Toolbox for Causal Discovery.” In 8th International Workshop on Climate Informatics .
Boulder.
RCore Team (2022). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing .RFounda-
tion for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/ .
Scanagatta M, de Campos CP, Corani G (2015). “Learning Bayesian Networks with
Thousands of Variables.” NIPS: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems . URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5803-learning-bayesian-networks-with-thousands-of-variables.pdf .
Scutari M (2010). “Learning Bayesian Networks with the bnlearn RPackage.” Journal of
Statistical Software ,35(3), 1–22. doi:10.18637/jss.v035.i03 .
Scutari M, Graafland CE, Gutiérrez JM (2019). “Who Learns Better Bayesian Network
Structures: Accuracy and Speed of Structure Learning Algorithms.” International Journal
of Approximate Reasoning ,115, 235–253. doi:10.1016/j.ijar.2019.10.003 .

==== Page 31 ====
Journal of Statistical Software 31
Spirtes P, Glymour C, Scheines R (2000). Causation, Prediction, and Search . 2nd edition.
MIT Press. doi:10.7551/mitpress/1754.001.0001 .
SzklarczykD,GableAL,LyonD,JungeA,WyderS,Huerta-CepasJ,SimonovicM,Doncheva
NT, Morris JH, Bork P, Jensen LJ, von Mering C (2019). “STRING V11: Protein-
Protein Association Networks with Increased Coverage, Supporting Functional Discovery
in Genome-Wide Experimental Datasets.” Nucleic Acids Research ,47(D1), D607–D613.
doi:10.1093/nar/gky1131 .
The MathWorks, Inc (2011). MATLAB – The Language of Technical Computing, Ver-
sion R2011b . The MathWorks, Inc., Natick. URL http://www.mathworks.com/products/
matlab/.
Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF (2006). “The Max-Min Hill-Climbing Bayesian Net-
work Structure Learning Algorithm.” Machine Learning ,65(1), 31–78. doi:10.1007/
s10994-006-6889-7 .
Affiliation:
Polina Suter, Jack Kuipers, Niko Beerenwinkel
Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering
ETH Zürich
Mattenstrasse 26
4058 Basel, Switzerland
E-mail(s): polina.suter@gmail.com ,jack.kuipers@bsse.ethz.ch ,
niko.beerenwinkel@bsse.ethz.ch
and
SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
4058 Basel, Switzerland
Giusi Moffa
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel
Spiegelgasse 1
4051 Basel, Switzerland
E-mail: giusi.moffa@unibas.ch
Journal of Statistical Software https://www.jstatsoft.org/
published by the Foundation for Open Access Statistics https://www.foastat.org/
January 2023, Volume 105, Issue 9 Submitted: 2021-04-29
doi:10.18637/jss.v105.i09 Accepted: 2022-05-21

