==== Page 1 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Aleksei Triastcyn1Boi Faltings1
Abstract
Traditional differential privacy is independent of
the data distribution. However, this is not well-
matched with the modern machine learning con-
text, where models are trained on speciﬁc data.
As a result, achieving meaningful privacy guar-
antees in ML often excessively reduces accuracy.
We propose Bayesian differential privacy (BDP) ,
which takes into account the data distribution to
provide more practical privacy guarantees. We
also derive a general privacy accounting method
under BDP, building upon the well-known mo-
ments accountant. Our experiments demonstrate
that in-distribution samples in classic machine
learning datasets, such as MNIST and CIFAR-10,
enjoy signiﬁcantly stronger privacy guarantees
than postulated by DP, while models maintain
high classiﬁcation accuracy.
1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) and data analytics offer vast oppor-
tunities for companies, governments and individuals to take
advantage of the accumulated data. However, their ability
to capture ﬁne levels of detail can compromise privacy of
data providers. Recent research (Fredrikson et al., 2015;
Shokri et al., 2017; Hitaj et al., 2017) suggests that even in
a black-box setting it is possible to infer information about
individual records in the training set.
Numerous solutions have been proposed to address this
problem, varying in the extent of data protection and how
it is achieved. In this work, we consider a notion that is
viewed by many researchers as the gold standard – differen-
tial privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006). Initially, DP algorithms
focused on sanitising simple statistics, but in recent years,
it made its way to machine learning (Abadi et al., 2016;
Papernot et al., 2016; 2018; McMahan et al., 2018).
1Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Ecole Polytechnique F ´ed´erale de
Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Aleksei Triastcyn <aleksei.triastcyn@epﬂ.ch >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).Despite notable advances, differentially private ML still
suffers from two major problems: (a) utility loss due to
excessive noise added during training and (b) difﬁculty in
interpreting the privacy parameters "and. In many cases
where the ﬁrst problem appears to be solved, it is actually
being hidden by the second. We design a motivational
example in Section 3 that illustrates how a seemingly strong
privacy guarantee allows for the attacker accuracy to be as
high as 99%. Although this guarantee is very pessimistic
and holds against a powerful adversary with any auxiliary
information, it can hardly be viewed as a reassurance to
a user. Moreover, it provides only the worst-case bound,
leaving users to wonder how far is it from a typical case.
In this paper, we focus on practicality of privacy guarantees
and propose a variation of DP that provides more meaning-
ful guarantees for typical scenarios on top of the global DP
guarantee. We name it Bayesian differential privacy (BDP) .
The key to our privacy notion is the deﬁnition of typical
scenarios. We observe that machine learning models are
designed and tuned for a particular data distribution (for
example, an MRI dataset is very unlikely to contain a pic-
ture of a car). Moreover, such prior distribution of data is
often already available to the attacker. Thus, we consider a
scenario typical when all sensitive data is drawn from the
same distribution. While the traditional differential privacy
treats all data as equally likely and hides differences by large
amounts of noise, Bayesian DP calibrates noise to the data
distribution and provides much tighter expected guarantees.
As the data distribution is usually unknown , BDP estimates
the necessary statistics from data as shown in the following
sections. Furthermore, since typical scenarios are deter-
mined by data, the participants of the dataset are covered by
the BDP guarantee with high probability.
To accompany the notion of Bayesian DP (Section 4.1), we
provide its theoretical analysis and the privacy accounting
framework (Section 4.2). The latter considers the privacy
loss random variable and employs principled tools from
probability theory to ﬁnd concentration bounds on it. It
provides a clean derivation of privacy accounting in gen-
eral (Sections 4.2 and 4.3), as well as in the special case
of subsampled Gaussian noise mechanism. Moreover, we
show that it is a generalisation of the well-known moments
accountant (MA) (Abadi et al., 2016) (Section 4.4.2).

==== Page 2 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Since our privacy accounting relies on data distribution
samples, a natural concern is that the data not present in the
dataset are not taken into account, and thus, are not protected.
However, our ﬁnite sample estimator is speciﬁcally designed
to address this issue (see Section 4.3).
Our contributions in this paper are the following:
•we propose a variation of DP, called Bayesian differ-
ential privacy, that allows to provide more practical
privacy guarantees in a wide range of scenarios;
•we derive a clean, principled privacy accounting
method that generalises the moments accountant;
•we experimentally demonstrate advantages of our
method (Section 5), including the state-of-the-art pri-
vacy bounds in deep learning (Section 5.2).
2. Related Work
With machine learning applications becoming more and
more ubiquitous, vulnerabilities and attacks on ML mod-
els get discovered, raising the need for matching defences.
These attacks can be based on both passive adversaries, such
as model inversion (Fredrikson et al., 2015) and member-
ship inference (Shokri et al., 2017), and active adversaries
(for example, (Hitaj et al., 2017)).
One of the strongest privacy standards that can be employed
to protect ML models from these and other attacks is dif-
ferential privacy (Dwork, 2006; Dwork et al., 2006). Pure
"-DP is hard to achieve in many realistic learning settings,
and therefore, a notion of approximate (";)-DP is used
across-the-board in machine learning. It is typically accom-
plished by applying the Gaussian noise mechanism (Dwork
et al., 2014) during the gradient descent update (Abadi et al.,
2016). Privacy accounting, i.e. computing the privacy guar-
antee throughout multiple iterations of the algorithm, is typ-
ically done by the moments accountant (MA) (Abadi et al.,
2016). In Section 4.4.2, we discuss the link between MA and
our accounting method, as well as connection to a closely re-
lated notion of R ´enyi DP (Mironov, 2017). Similarly, a link
can be established to concentrated DP deﬁnitions (Dwork &
Rothblum, 2016; Bun & Steinke, 2016).
A number of previous relaxations considered a similar idea
of limiting the scope of protected data or using the data
generating distribution, either through imposing a set of
data evolution scenarios (Kifer & Machanavajjhala, 2014),
policies (He et al., 2014), distributions (Blum et al., 2013;
Bhaskar et al., 2011), or families of distributions (Bassily
et al., 2013; Bassily & Freund, 2016). Some of these def-
initions (e.g. (Blum et al., 2013)) may require more noise,
because they are stronger than DP in the sense that datasets
can differ in more than one data point. This is not the case
with our deﬁnition: like DP, it considers adjacent datasets
differing in a single data point . The major problem of suchdeﬁnitions, however, is that in real-world scenarios it is not
feasible to exactly deﬁne distributions or families of dis-
tributions that generate data. And even if this problem is
solved by restricting the query functions to enable the us-
age of the central limit theorem (e.g. (Bhaskar et al., 2011;
Duan, 2009)), these guarantees would only hold asymptoti-
cally and may require prohibitively large batch sizes. While
Bayesian DP can be seen as a special case of some of the
above deﬁnitions, the crucial difference with the prior work
is that our additional assumptions allow the Bayesian ac-
counting (Sections 4.2, 4.3) to provide guarantees w.h.p.
with ﬁnite number of samples from data distributions, and
hence, enable a broad range of real-world applications.
Finally, there are other approaches that use the data distribu-
tion information in one way or another, and coincidentally
share the same (Yang et al., 2015) or similar (Leung & Lui,
2012) names. Yet, similarly to the methods discussed above,
their assumptions (e.g. bounds on the minimum probabil-
ity of a data point) and implementation requirements (e.g.
potentially constructing correlation matrices for millions
of data samples) make practical applications very difﬁcult.
Perhaps, the most similar to our approach is random differ-
ential privacy (Hall et al., 2011). The main difference is that
Hall et al. (2011) consider the probability space over all data
points, while we only consider the space over a single differ-
ing example. As a result, our guarantees are more practical
to compute for large, realistic ML datasets. Furthermore,
Hall et al. (2011) only propose a basic composition theo-
rem, which is not tight enough for accounting in iterative
methods, and to the best of our knowledge, there are no
proofs for other crucial properties, such as post-processing
and group privacy.
3. Motivation
Before we proceed, we ﬁnd it important to motivate research
on alternative privacy deﬁnitions, as opposed to fully con-
centrating on new mechanisms for DP. On the one hand,
there is always a combination of data and a desired statistic
that would yield large privacy loss in DP paradigm, regard-
less of the mechanism. In other words, there can always be
data outliers that are difﬁcult to hide without a large drop in
accuracy. On the other hand, we cannot realistically expect
companies to sacriﬁce model quality in favour of privacy.
As a result, we get models with impractical worst-case guar-
antees (as we demonstrate below) without any indication of
what is the privacy guarantee for the majority of users.
Consider the following example. The datasets D;D0consist
of income values for residents of a small town. There is
one individual x0whose income is orders of magnitude
higher than the rest, and whose residency in the town is
what the attacker wishes to infer. The attacker observes
the mean income wsanitised by a differentially private

==== Page 3 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
mechanism with "="0(we consider the stronger, pure DP
for simplicity). What we are interested in is the change in the
posterior distribution of the attacker after they see the private
model compared to prior (Mironov, 2017; Bun, 2017). If
the individual is not present in the dataset, the probability
ofwbeing above a certain threshold is extremely small. On
the contrary, if x0is present, this probability is higher (say
it is equal to r). The attacker computes the likelihood of
the observed value under each of the two assumptions, the
corresponding posteriors given a ﬂat prior, and applies a
Bayes optimal classiﬁer. The attacker then concludes that
the individual is present in the dataset and is a resident.
By the above expression, rcan only bee"0times larger than
the respective probability without x0. However, if the re "0
is small enough, then the probability P(A)of the attacker’s
guess being correct is as high as r=(r+re "0), or
P(A) =1
1 +e ": (1)
To put it in perspective, for a DP algorithm with "= 2,
the upper bound on the accuracy of this attack is as high
as88%. For"= 5, it is 99:33%. For"= 10 ,99:995% .
Importantly, these values of "are very common in DP ML
literature (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015; Abadi et al., 2016;
Papernot et al., 2018), and they can be even higher in real-
world deployments1.
This guarantee does not tell us anything other than that this
outlier cannot be protected while preserving utility. But
what is the guarantee for other residents of the town? Intu-
itively, it should be much stronger. In the next section, we
present a novel DP-based privacy notion. It uses the same
privacy mechanism and augments the general DP guarantee
with a much tighter guarantee for the expected case, and, by
extension, for any percentile of the user/data population.
4. Bayesian Differential Privacy
In this section, we deﬁne Bayesian differential privacy
(BDP) . We then derive a practical privacy loss accounting
method, and discuss its relation to the moments accountant.
All the proofs are available in the supplementary material.
4.1. Deﬁnition
Let us deﬁne strong Bayesian differential privacy (Deﬁni-
tion 1) and ( weak ) Bayesian differential privacy (Deﬁni-
tion 2). The ﬁrst provides a better intuition, connection
to concentration inequalities, and is being used for privacy
accounting. Unfortunately, it may not be closed under post-
processing, and therefore, the actual guarantee provided
1https://www.macobserver.com/analysis/
google-apple-differential-privacy/by BDP is stated in Deﬁnition 2 and mimics the (";)-
differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2014). The reason Def-
inition 1 may pose a problem with post-processing is that
it does not consider sets of outcomes, and a routine that
integrates groups of values into one value could therefore
invalidate the guarantee by increasing the probability ratio
beyond epsilon. On the other hand, it can still be used for ac-
counting with adaptive composition, because in this context,
every next step is conditioned on a single outcome of the
previous step. This separation mirrors the moments accoun-
tant approach of bounding tails of the privacy loss random
variable and converting it to the (";)-DP guarantee (Abadi
et al., 2016), but does so in a more explicit manner.
Deﬁnition 1 (Strong Bayesian Differential Privacy) .A ran-
domised functionA:D!R with domainD, rangeR, and
outcomew=A(), satisﬁes (";)-strong Bayesian differ-
ential privacy if for any two adjacent datasets D;D02D,
differing in a single data point x0(x), the following
holds:
Pr[LA(w;D;D0)"]; (2)
where probability is taken over the randomness of the out-
comewand the additional example x0.
Here,LA(w;D;D0)is the privacy loss deﬁned as
LA(w;D;D0) = logp(wjD)
p(wjD0); (3)
wherep(wjD),p(wjD0)are private outcome distributions
for corresponding datasets. For brevity, we often omit pa-
rameters and denote the privacy loss simply by L.
We use the subscript to underline the main difference
between the classic DP and Bayesian DP: in the classic deﬁ-
nition the probability is taken only over the randomness of
the outcome ( w), while the BDP deﬁnition contains two ran-
dom variables ( wandx0). Therefore, the privacy parameters
"anddepend on the data distribution (x).
The addition of another random variable yields the change
in the meaning of compared to the of DP. In Bayesian
differential privacy, it also accounts for the privacy mecha-
nism failures in the tails of data distributions in addition to
the tails of outcome distributions.
Deﬁnition 2 (Bayesian Differential Privacy) .A randomised
functionA:D!R with domainDand rangeRsatisﬁes
(";)-Bayesian differential privacy if for any two adjacent
datasetsD;D02D,differing in a single data point x0
(x), and for any set of outcomes Sthe following holds:
Pr [A(D)2S]e"Pr [A(D0)2S] +: (4)
Proposition 1. (";)-strong Bayesian differential pri-
vacy implies (";)-Bayesian differential privacy.

==== Page 4 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Bayesian DP repeats some basic properties of the classic DP,
such as composition, post-processing resilience and group
privacy. More details, proofs for these properties and the
above proposition, can be found in supplementary material.
While Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 do not specify the distribution of
any point in the dataset other than the additional example
x0, it is natural to assume that all examples in the dataset are
drawn from the same distribution (x). This holds in many
real-world applications, including applications evaluated in
this paper, and it allows using dataset samples instead of
requiring knowing the true distribution.
We also assume that data points are exchangeable (Aldous,
1985), i.e. any permutation of data points has the same
joint probability. It enables tighter accounting for iterative
applications of the privacy mechanism (see Section 4.2), is
weaker than independence and is naturally satisﬁed in the
considered scenarios.
4.2. Privacy Accounting
In the context of learning, it is important to be able to keep
track of the privacy loss over iterative applications of the
privacy mechanism. And since the bounds provided by the
basic composition theorem are loose, we formulate the ad-
vanced composition theorem and develop a general account-
ing method for Bayesian differential privacy, the Bayesian
accountant , that provides a tight bound on privacy loss and
is straightforward to implement. We draw inspiration from
the moments accountant (Abadi et al., 2016).
Observe that Eq. 4 is a typical concentration bound inequal-
ity, which are well studied in probability theory. One of
the most common examples of such bounds is Markov’s
inequality. In its extended form, it states the following:
Pr[jLj"]E['(jLj)]
'("); (5)
where'()is a monotonically increasing non-negative
function. It is immediately evident that it provides a re-
lation between "and(i.e.=E['(jLj)]='(")),
and in order to determine them we need to choose 'and
compute the expectation E['(jL(w;D;D0)j)]. Note that
L(w;D;D0) = L(w;D0;D), and since the inequality has
to hold for any pair of D;D0, we can use Linstead ofjLj.
We use the Chernoff bound that can be obtained by choosing
'(L) =eL. It is widely known because of its tightness,
and although not explicitly stated, it is also used by Abadi
et al. (2016). The inequality in this case transforms to
Pr[L"]E[eL]
e": (6)
This inequality requires the knowledge of the moment gen-
erating function of Lor some bound on it. The choice ofthe parameter can be arbitrary, because the bound holds
for any value of it, but it determines how tight the bound is.
By simple manipulations we obtain
E[eL] =E
elogp(wjD)
p(wjD0)
=E"p(wjD)
p(wjD0)#
: (7)
If the expectation is taken only over the outcome random-
ness, this expression is the function of R ´enyi divergence be-
tweenp(wjD)andp(wjD0), and following this path yields
re-derivation of R ´enyi differential privacy (Mironov, 2017).
However, by also taking the expectation over additional
examplesx0(x), we can further tighten this bound.
By the law of total expectation,
E"p(wjD)
p(wjD0)#
=Ex"
Ew"p(wjD)
p(wjD0)x0##
;
(8)
where the inner expectation is again the function of R ´enyi
divergence, and the outer expectation is over (x).
Combining Eq. 7 and 8 and plugging it in Eq. 6, we get
Pr[L"]Exh
eD+1[p(wjD)kp(wjD0)] "i
:(9)
This expression determines how to compute "for a ﬁxed
(or vice versa) for one invocation of the privacy mechanism.
However, to accommodate the iterative nature of learning,
we need to deal with the composition of multiple applica-
tions of the mechanism. We already determined that our
privacy notion is naively composable, but in order to achieve
better bounds we need a tighter composition theorem.
Theorem 1 (Advanced Composition) .Let a learning algo-
rithm run for Titerations. Denote by w(1):::w(T)a se-
quence of private learning outcomes at iterations 1;:::;T ,
andL(1:T)the corresponding total privacy loss. Then,
Eh
eL(1:T)i
TY
t=1Exh
eTD+1(ptkqt)i1
T;
wherept=p(w(t)jw(t 1);D),qt=p(w(t)jw(t 1);D0).
Proof. See supplementary material.
Unlike the moments accountant, our composition theorem
presents an upper bound on the total privacy loss due to
computing expectation over the distribution of the same
example over all iterations. However, we found that the
inequality tends to be tight in practice, and there is little

==== Page 5 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
overhead compared to na ¨ıvely swapping the product and the
expectation.
We denote the logarithm of the quantity inside the product
in Theorem 1 as ct(;T)and call it the privacy cost of the
iterationt:
ct(;T) = log Exh
eTD+1(ptkqt)i1
T(10)
The privacy cost of the whole learning process is then a sum
of the costs of each iteration. We can now relate "and
parameters of BDP through the privacy cost.
Theorem 2. Let the algorithm produce a sequence of pri-
vate learning outcomes w(1):::w(T)using a known proba-
bility distribution p(w(t)jw(t 1);D). Then, for a ﬁxed ":
logTX
t=1ct(;T) ":
Corollary 1. Under the conditions above, for a ﬁxed :
"1
TX
t=1ct(;T) 1
log:
Theorems 1, 2 and Corollary 1 immediately provide us with
an efﬁcient privacy accounting algorithm. During training,
we compute the privacy cost ct(;T)for each iteration t,
accumulate it, and then use to compute ";pair. This pro-
cess is ideologically close to that of the moment accountant
but accumulates a different quantity (note the change from
the privacy loss random variable to R ´enyi divergence). We
further explore this connection in Section 4.4.2.
The link to R ´enyi divergence is an advantage for applicabil-
ity of this framework: if the outcome distribution p(wjD)
has a known analytic expression for R ´enyi divergence (Gil
et al., 2013; Van Erven & Harremos, 2014), it can be easily
plugged into our accountant.
For the popular subsampled Gaussian mechanism (Abadi
et al., 2016), we can demonstrate the following.
Theorem 3. Given the Gaussian noise mechanism with
the noise parameter and subsampling probability q, the
privacy cost for 2Nat iterationtcan be expressed as
ct(;T) = maxfcL
t(;T);cR
t(;T)g;
where
cL
t(;T) =1
TlogEx"
EkB(+1;q)
ek2 k
22kgt g0
tk2T#
;
cR
t(;T) =1
TlogEx"
EkB(;q)
ek2+k
22kgt g0
tk2T#
;
andB(;q)is the binomial distribution with experiments
and the probability of success q.4.3. Privacy Cost Estimator
Computing ct(;T)precisely requires access to the data
distribution(x), which is unrealistic. Therefore, we need
an estimator for E[eTD+1(ptkqt)].
Typically, having access to the distribution samples, one
would use the law of large numbers and approximate the
expectation with the sample mean. This estimator is unbi-
ased and converges with the growing number of samples.
However, these are not the properties we are looking for.
The most important property of the estimator in our context
is that it does not underestimate E[eTD+1(ptkqt)], because
the bound (Eq. 6) would not hold for this estimate otherwise.
We employ the Bayesian view of the parameter estimation
problem (Oliphant, 2006) and design an estimator with this
single property: given a ﬁxed , it returns the value that
overestimates the true expectation with probability 1 .
We then incorporate the estimator uncertainty in.
4.3.1. B INARY CASE
Let us demonstrate the process of constructing the expecta-
tion estimator with the above property on a simple binary
example. This technique is based on (Oliphant, 2006) and
it translates directly to other classes of distributions with
minor adjustments. Here, we also address the concern of
not taking into account the data absent from the dataset.
Let the datafx1;x2;:::;xNg, such thatxi2f0;1g, have a
common mean and a common variance. As this information
is insufﬁcient to solve our problem, let us also assume that
the data comes from the maximum entropy distribution . This
assumption adds the minimum amount of information to the
problem and makes our estimate pessimistic.
For the binary data with the common mean , the maximum
entropy distribution is the Bernoulli distribution:
f(xij) =xi(1 )1 xi; (11)
whereis also the probability of success ( xi= 1). Then,
f(x1;:::;xNj) =N1(1 )N0; (12)
whereN0andN1is the number of 0’s and 1’s in the dataset.
We impose the ﬂat prior on , assuming all values in [0;1]
are equally likely, and use Bayes’ theorem to determine the
distribution of given the data:
f(jx1;:::;xN) = (N0+N1+ 2)
 (N0+ 1) (N1+ 1)N1(1 )N0;
(13)
where the normalisation constant in front is obtained by
setting the integral over equal to 1.
Now, we can use the above distribution of to design an es-
timator ^, such that it overestimates with high probability,

==== Page 6 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
i.e.Pr [^]1 . Namely, ^=F 1(1 ), where
F 1is the inverse of the CDF:
F 1(1 )
= inffz2R:Zz
 1f(tjx1;:::;xN)dt1 g:
We refer to as the estimator failure probability , and to
1 as the estimator conﬁdence .
To demonstrate the resilience of this estimator to unseen
data, consider the following example. Let the true expecta-
tion be 0:01, and let the data consist of 100 zeros, and no
ones. A typical “frequentist” mean estimator would conﬁ-
dently output 0. However, our estimator would never output
0, unless the conﬁdence is set to 0. When the conﬁdence
is set to 1(= 0), the output is 1, which is the most pes-
simistic estimate. Finally, the output ^== 0:01will be
assigned the failure probability = 0:991010:36, which
is the probability of not drawing a single 1in101draws.
In a real-world system, the conﬁdence would be set to a
much higher level (in our experiments, we use = 10 15),
and the probability of 1would be signiﬁcantly overesti-
mated. Thus, unseen data do not present a problem for this
estimator, because it exaggerates the probability of data that
increase the estimated expectation.
4.3.2. C ONTINUOUS CASE
For applications evaluated in this paper, we are primarily
concerned with continuous case. Thus, let us deﬁne the
followingm-sample estimator of ct(;T)for continuous
distributions with existing mean and variance:
^ct(;T) = log
M(t) +F 1(1 ;m 1)pm 1S(t)
;
(14)
whereM(t)andS(t)are the sample mean and the sample
standard deviation of e^D(t)
+1,F 1(1 ;m 1)is the
inverse of the Student’s t-distribution CDF at 1 with
m 1degrees of freedom, and
^D(t)
+1= maxfD+1(^ptk^qt); D+1(^qtk^pt)g;
^pt=p(w(t)jw(t 1);B(t));
^qt=p(w(t)jw(t 1);B(t)nfxig): (15)
Since in many cases learning is performed on mini-batches,
we can similarly compute R ´enyi divergence on batches B(t).
Theorem 4. Estimator ^ct(;T)overestimates ct(;T)with
probability 1 . That is,
Pr [^ct(;T)<ct(;T)]:
The proof follows the steps of the binary example above.Remark. By adapting the maximum entropy probability
distribution an equivalent estimator can be derived for other
classes of distributions (e.g. discrete).
To avoid introducing new parameters in the privacy deﬁni-
tion, we can incorporate the probability of underestimating
the true expectation in . We can re-write:
Pr[LA(w(t);D;D0)"]
= Prh
LA(w(t);D;D0)";^ct(;T)ct(;T)i
+ Prh
LA(w(t);D;D0)";^ct(;T)<ct(;T)i
:
(16)
When ^ct(;T)ct(;T), using the Chernoff inequality,
the ﬁrst summand is bounded by = exp(PT
t=1^ct(;T) 
").
Whenever ^ct(;T)<ct(;T),
Pr[LA(w(t);D;D0)";^ct(;T)<ct(;T)]
Pr[^ct(;T)<ct(;T)]
: (17)
Therefore, the true is bounded by +, and despite
the incomplete data, we can claim that the mechanism is
(";)-Bayesian differentially private, where =+.
Remark. This step further changes the interpretation of 
in Bayesian differential privacy compared to the classic of
DP. Apart from the probability of the privacy loss exceeding
", e.g. in the tails of its distribution, it also incorporates
our uncertainty about the true data distribution (in other
words, the probability of underestimating the true expecta-
tion because of not observing enough data samples). It can
be intuitively understood as accounting for unobserved (but
feasible) data in , rather than in ".
4.4. Discussion
4.4.1. R ELATION TO DP
To better understand how the BDP bound relates to the tra-
ditional DP, consider the following conditional probability:
(";x0) = Pr [L(w;D;D0)>"jD;D0=D[fx0g]:
(18)
The moments accountant outputs that upper-bounds
(";x0)for allx0. It is not true in general for other ac-
counting methods, but let us focus on MA, as it is by far the
most popular. Consequently, the MA bound is
max
x(";x); (19)

==== Page 7 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
where"is a chosen constant. At the same time, BDP bounds
the probability that is not conditioned on x0, but we can
transform one to another through marginalisation and get:
Ex[(";x)]: (20)
Since ()is a non-negative random variable in x, we can
apply Markov’s inequality and obtain a tail bound on it using
.We can therefore ﬁnd a pair (";)pthat holds for any
percentilepof the data distribution, not just in expectation.
In all our experiments, we consider bounds well above 99th
percentile, so it is very unlikely to encounter data for which
the equivalent DP guarantee doesn’t hold. Moreover, it
is possible to characterise privacy by building a curve for
different percentiles, and hence, gain more insight into how
well users and their data are protected.
4.4.2. R ELATION TO MOMENTS ACCOUNTANT
As mentioned in Section 4.2, removing the distribution re-
quirement on D;D0and further simplifying Eq. 9, we can
recover the relation between R ´enyi DP and (";)-DP.
At the same time, our accounting technique closely resem-
bles the moments accountant. In fact, we can show that
the moments accountant is a special case of Theorem 3.
Ignoring the data distribution information and substituting
expectation by maxD;D0yields the substitution of kgt g0
tk
forCin Theorem 3, where Cis the sensitivity (or clip-
ping threshold), which turns out to be the exact moments
accountant bound. In addition, there are some extra beneﬁts,
such as avoiding numerical integration when using 2N
due to connection to Binomial distribution, which improves
numerical stability and computational efﬁciency.
4.4.3. P RIVACY OF ^ct(;T)
Due to calculating ^ct(;T)from data, our privacy guarantee
becomes data-dependent and may potentially leak informa-
tion. To obtain a theoretical bound on this leakage, we need
to get back to the maximum entropy assumption in Sec-
tion 4.3, and assume that M(t)andS(t)are following some
speciﬁc distributions, such as Gaussian and 2distributions.
Hence, in case of simple random sampling, these statistics
for two neighbour datasets are differentially private and the
privacy parameters can be computed using R ´enyi divergence.
Furthermore, these guarantees are controlled by the number
of samples used to compute the statistics: the more samples
are used, the more accurate the statistics are, and the less
privacy leakage occurs. This property can be used to control
estimates privacy without sacriﬁcing their tightness, only at
the cost of extra computation time. Without distributional
assumptions, the bound can be computed in the limit of the
sample size used by the estimator, using the CLT.
On the other hand, consider the fact that the information
from many high-dimensional vectors gets ﬁrst compresseddown to their pairwise distances, which are not as informa-
tive in high-dimensional spaces (i.e. the curse of dimension-
ality), and then down to one number. Intuitively, at this rate
of compression very little knowledge can be gained by an
attacker in practice.
The ﬁrst approach would provide little information about
real-world cases due to potentially unrealistic assumptions,
and hence, we opt for the second approach. We examine
pairwise gradient distances of the points within the training
set and outside, and demonstrate that the privacy leakage is
not statistically signiﬁcant in practice (see Section 5.2).
5. Evaluation
This experimental section comprises two parts. First, we
examine how well Bayesian DP composes over multiple
steps. We use the Bayesian accountant and compare to the
state-of-the-art DP results obtained by the moments accoun-
tant. Second, we consider the context of machine learning.
In particular, we use the differentially private stochastic gra-
dient descent (DP-SGD), a well known privacy-preserving
learning technique broadly used in combination with the mo-
ments accountant, to train neural networks on classic image
classiﬁcation tasks MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) and CI-
FAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009). We then compare the accuracy
and privacy guarantees obtained under BDP and under DP.
We also perform experiments with variational inference on
Abalone (Waugh, 1995) and Adult (Kohavi, 1996) datasets.
Importantly, DP and BDP can use the same privacy mech-
anism and be accounted in parallel to ensure the DP guar-
antees hold if BDP assumptions fail. Thus, all comparisons
in this section should be viewed in the following way: the
reported BDP guarantee would apply to typical data (i.e.
data drawn from the same distribution as the dataset); the
reported DP guarantee would apply to all other data; their
difference is the advantage for typical data we gain by using
Bayesian DP. In some experiments we use smaller noise
variance for BDP in order to speed up training, meaning
that the reported BDP guarantees will further improve if
noise variance is increased to DP levels. For more details
and additional experiments, we refer the reader to the sup-
plementary material, while the source code is available on
GitHub2.
5.1. Composition
First, we study the growth rate of the privacy loss over a
number of mechanism invocations. This experiment is car-
ried out using synthetic gradients drawn from the Weibull
distribution with the shape parameter <1to imitate a more
difﬁcult case of heavy-tailed gradient distributions. We do
2https://github.com/AlekseiTriastcyn/
bayesian-differential-privacy

==== Page 8 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
(a)0:05-quantile of krfk.
 (b)0:25-quantile of krfk.
 (c)0:75-quantile of krfk.
 (d)0:95-quantile of krfk.
Figure 1: Evolution of "and"over multiple steps of the Gaussian noise mechanism with =Cfor DP (with clipping)
and BDP (without clipping). Sub-captions indicate the noise variance relative to the gradient norms distribution.
Table 1: Estimated privacy bounds "for= 10 5and=
10 10for MNIST, CIFAR10, Abalone and Adult datasets.
In parenthesis, a potential attack success probability P(A).
Accuracy Privacy
Dataset Baseline Private DP BDP
MNIST 99% 96% 2:2 (0:898) 0:95 (0 :721)
CIFAR10 86% 73% 8:0 (0:999) 0:76 (0 :681)
Abalone 77% 76% 7:6 (0:999) 0:61 (0 :649)
Adult 81% 81% 0:5 (0:623) 0:2 (0 :55)
not clip gradients for BDP in order to show the raw effect
of the signal-to-noise ratio on the privacy loss behaviour.
Technically, bounded sensitivity is not as essential for BDP,
because extreme individual contributions are mitigated by
their low probability. However, in practice it is still advanta-
geous to have a better control over privacy loss spikes and
ensure that the worst-case DP guarantee is preserved.
In Figure 1, we plot "and"as a function of steps for
different levels of noise. Naturally, as the noise standard
deviation gets closer to the expected gradients norm, the
growth rate of the privacy loss decreases dramatically. Even
when the noise is at the 0:25-quantile, the Bayesian accoun-
tant matches the moments accountant. It is worth noting,
that DP behaves the same in all these experiments because
the gradients get clipped at the noise level C. Introducing
clipping for BDP yields the behaviour of Figure 1d, as we
demonstrate in the next section on real data.
5.2. Learning
We now consider the application to privacy-preserving deep
learning. Our setting closely mimics that of (Abadi et al.,
2016) to enable a direct comparison with the moments ac-
countant and DP. We use a version of DP-SGD that has been
extensively applied to build differentially private machine
learning models. The idea of DP-SGD is to clip the gradient
norm to some constant C(ensuring bounded sensitivity) and
add Gaussian noise with variance C22at every iteration of
SGD. For Abalone and Adult, we use variational inference
(a) MNIST.
 (b) CIFAR10.
Figure 2: Pairwise gradient distances distribution.
in a setting similar to (J ¨alk¨o et al., 2016).
Using the gradient distribution information allows the BDP
models to reach the same accuracy at a much lower "(for
99:999% of data points from this distribution, see Sec-
tion 4.4.1). On MNIST, we manage to reduce it from 2:2
to0:95. For CIFAR10, from 8:0to0:76. See details in
Table 1. Moreover, since less noise is required for Bayesian
DP, the models reach the same test accuracy much faster.
For example, our model reaches 96% accuracy within 50
epochs for MNIST, while DP model requires more noise and
slower training over hundreds of epochs to avoid "blowing
up. These results conﬁrm that discounting outliers in the
privacy accounting process is highly beneﬁcial for getting
high accuracy and tighter guarantees for all the other points.
To make our results more transparent, we include in Table 1
the potential attack success probability P(A)computed us-
ing Eq. 1. In this interpretation, the beneﬁts of using BDP
become even more apparent.
An important aspect of BDP, discussed in Section 4.4.3, is
the potential privacy leakage of the privacy cost estimator.
To illustrate that this leakage is minimal, we conduct the
following experiment. After training the model (to ensure
it contains as much information about data as possible),
we compute the gradient pairwise distances over train and
test sets. We then plot the histograms of these distances to
inspect any divergence that would distinguish the data that
was used in training. Note that this is more information than
what is available to an adversary, who only observes ",.

==== Page 9 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
As it turns out, these distributions are nearly identical (see
Figures 2a and 2b), and we do not observe any correlation
with the fact of the presence of data in the training set.
For example, the sample mean of the test set can be both
somewhat higher or lower than that of the train set. We
also run the t-test for equality of means and Levene’s test
for equality of variances, obtaining p-values well over the
0:05threshold, suggesting that the difference of the means
and the variances of these distributions is not statistically
signiﬁcant and the equality hypothesis cannot be rejected.
6. Conclusion
We introduce the notion of (";)-Bayesian differential
privacy, a variation of (";)-differential privacy for sensi-
tive data that are drawn from an arbitrary (and unknown)
distribution (x). It is a reasonable assumption in many
ML scenarios where models are designed for and trained on
speciﬁc data distributions (e.g. emails, face images, ECGs,
etc.). For example, trying to hide music records in a train-
ing set for ECG analysis may be unjustiﬁed, because the
probability of it appearing is actually much smaller than .
We present the advanced composition theorem for Bayesian
DP that allows for efﬁcient and tight privacy accounting.
Since the data distribution is unknown, we design an esti-
mator that overestimates the privacy loss with high, control-
lable probability. Moreover, as the data sample is ﬁnite, we
employ the Bayesian parameter estimation approach with
the ﬂat prior and the maximum entropy principle to avoid
underestimating probabilities of unseen examples.
Our evaluation conﬁrms that Bayesian DP is highly bene-
ﬁcial in ML context where its additional assumptions are
naturally satisﬁed. First, it needs less noise for compara-
ble privacy guarantees (with high probability, as per Sec-
tion 4.4.1). Second, models train faster and can reach higher
accuracy. Third, it may be used along with DP to ensure
the worst-case guarantee for out-of-distribution samples and
outliers, while providing tighter guarantees for most cases.
In our supervised learning experiments, "always remains
below 1, translating to much more meaningful bounds on a
potential attacker success probability.
References
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B.,
Mironov, I., Talwar, K., and Zhang, L. Deep learning
with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security , pp. 308–318. ACM, 2016.
Aldous, D. J. Exchangeability and related topics. In ´Ecole
d’´Et´e de Probabilit ´es de Saint-Flour XIII1983 , pp. 1–198.
Springer, 1985.Bassily, R. and Freund, Y . Typical stability. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1604.03336 , 2016.
Bassily, R., Groce, A., Katz, J., and Smith, A. Coupled-
worlds privacy: Exploiting adversarial uncertainty in sta-
tistical data privacy. In 2013 IEEE 54th Annual Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Computer Science , pp. 439–448.
IEEE, 2013.
Bhaskar, R., Bhowmick, A., Goyal, V ., Laxman, S., and
Thakurta, A. Noiseless database privacy. In International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology
and Information Security , pp. 215–232. Springer, 2011.
Blum, A., Ligett, K., and Roth, A. A learning theory ap-
proach to noninteractive database privacy. Journal of the
ACM (JACM) , 60(2):12, 2013.
Bun, M. A teaser for differential privacy. 2017.
Bun, M. and Steinke, T. Concentrated differential privacy:
Simpliﬁcations, extensions, and lower bounds. In The-
ory of Cryptography Conference , pp. 635–658. Springer,
2016.
Duan, Y . Privacy without noise. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment , pp. 1517–1520. ACM, 2009.
Dwork, C. Differential privacy. In 33rd Interna-
tional Colloquium on Automata, Languages and
Programming, part II (ICALP 2006) , volume
4052, pp. 1–12, Venice, Italy, July 2006. Springer
Verlag. ISBN 3-540-35907-9. URL https:
//www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
publication/differential-privacy/ .
Dwork, C. and Rothblum, G. N. Concentrated differential
privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01887 , 2016.
Dwork, C., McSherry, F., Nissim, K., and Smith, A. Calibrat-
ing noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In Theory
of cryptography conference , pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Dwork, C., Roth, A., et al. The algorithmic foundations of
differential privacy. Foundations and Trends ®in Theo-
retical Computer Science , 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
Fredrikson, M., Jha, S., and Ristenpart, T. Model inver-
sion attacks that exploit conﬁdence information and ba-
sic countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security , pp. 1322–1333. ACM, 2015.
Gil, M., Alajaji, F., and Linder, T. R ´enyi divergence mea-
sures for commonly used univariate continuous distribu-
tions. Information Sciences , 249:124–131, 2013.

==== Page 10 ====
Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Hall, R., Rinaldo, A., and Wasserman, L. Random differen-
tial privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.2680 , 2011.
He, X., Machanavajjhala, A., and Ding, B. Blowﬁsh privacy:
Tuning privacy-utility trade-offs using policies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGMOD international con-
ference on Management of data , pp. 1447–1458. ACM,
2014.
Hitaj, B., Ateniese, G., and P ´erez-Cruz, F. Deep models
under the gan: information leakage from collaborative
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,
pp. 603–618. ACM, 2017.
J¨alk¨o, J., Dikmen, O., and Honkela, A. Differentially private
variational inference for non-conjugate models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.08749 , 2016.
Kifer, D. and Machanavajjhala, A. Pufferﬁsh: A framework
for mathematical privacy deﬁnitions. ACM Transactions
on Database Systems (TODS) , 39(1):3, 2014.
Kohavi, R. Scaling up the accuracy of naive-bayes classi-
ﬁers: a decision-tree hybrid. Citeseer, 1996.
Krizhevsky, A. Learning multiple layers of features from
tiny images. 2009.
LeCun, Y ., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y ., and Haffner, P. Gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Leung, S. and Lui, E. Bayesian mechanism design with
efﬁciency, privacy, and approximate truthfulness. In Inter-
national Workshop on Internet and Network Economics ,
pp. 58–71. Springer, 2012.
McMahan, H. B., Ramage, D., Talwar, K., and Zhang, L.
Learning differentially private recurrent language models.
2018.
Mironov, I. Renyi differential privacy. In Computer Security
Foundations Symposium (CSF), 2017 IEEE 30th , pp. 263–
275. IEEE, 2017.
Oliphant, T. E. A bayesian perspective on estimating mean,
variance, and standard-deviation from data. 2006.
Papernot, N., Abadi, M., Erlingsson, U., Goodfellow, I.,
and Talwar, K. Semi-supervised knowledge transfer for
deep learning from private training data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.05755 , 2016.
Papernot, N., Song, S., Mironov, I., Raghunathan, A., Tal-
war, K., and Erlingsson, ´U. Scalable private learning with
pate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08908 , 2018.Shokri, R. and Shmatikov, V . Privacy-preserving deep learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC conference
on computer and communications security , pp. 1310–
1321. ACM, 2015.
Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., and Shmatikov, V . Mem-
bership inference attacks against machine learning mod-
els. In Security and Privacy (SP), 2017 IEEE Symposium
on, pp. 3–18. IEEE, 2017.
Van Erven, T. and Harremos, P. R ´enyi divergence and
kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory , 60(7):3797–3820, 2014.
Waugh, S. G. Extending and benchmarking Cascade-
Correlation: extensions to the Cascade-Correlation ar-
chitecture and benchmarking of feed-forward supervised
artiﬁcial neural networks . PhD thesis, University of Tas-
mania, 1995.
Yang, B., Sato, I., and Nakagawa, H. Bayesian differential
privacy on correlated data. In Proceedings of the 2015
ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management
of Data , pp. 747–762. ACM, 2015.

