==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2104.11757v2  [cs.CY]  3 May 2021BecomingGood at AIforGood
MeghanaKshirsagar∗
Microsoft AIforGood
USACalebRobinson∗
MicrosoftAI forGood
USASiyu Yang∗
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
ShahrzadGholami
MicrosoftAI forGood
USAIvanKlyuzhin
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USASumit Mukherjee
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
MdNasir
MicrosoftAI forGood
USAAnthony Ortiz
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USAFelipeOviedo
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
DarrenTanner
MicrosoftAI forGood
USAAnusuaTrivedi
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USAYixi Xu
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
MingZhong
MicrosoftAI forGood
USABistraDilkina
University of SouthernCalifornia
USARahulDodhia
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
JuanM. LavistaFerres
MicrosoftAIfor Good
USA
ABSTRACT
AI for good (AI4G) projects involve developing and applying ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence (AI) based solutions to further goals in areas
such as sustainability, health, humanitarian aid, and soci al justice.
Developing and deploying such solutions must be done in coll ab-
oration with partners who are experts in the domain in questi on
andwhoalreadyhaveexperienceinmakingprogresstowardss uch
goals. Based on our experiences, we detail the diﬀerent aspe cts of
this type of collaboration broken down into four high-level cat-
egories: communication, data, modeling, and impact, and di still
eleven takeaways to guide such projects in the future. We bri eﬂy
describetwocasestudiestoillustratehowsomeofthesetak eaways
were applied inpracticeduringourpast collaborations.
CCS CONCEPTS
•General and reference →Surveys and overviews ; •Human-
centered computing →Collaborative and social computing; •
Social andprofessional topics →Sustainability.
∗Equal ﬁrstauthorcontribution.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesar enotmadeordistributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this n otice and the full cita-
tionontheﬁrstpage.Copyrightsforcomponents of thiswork owned byothersthan
ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.T ocopyotherwise,orre-
publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requ irespriorspeciﬁcpermission
and/or afee. Request permissionsfrompermissions@acm.or g.
AIES ’21,May 19–21,2021,Virtual Event,USA.
© 2021 Associationfor Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN978-1-4503-8473-5/21/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462599KEYWORDS
AI forgood;collaboration;sustainability; casestudy
ACMReference Format:
Meghana Kshirsagar, Caleb Robinson, Siyu Yang, Shahrzad Gholami, Iv an
Klyuzhin,Sumit Mukherjee,MdNasir,AnthonyOrtiz,FelipeOviedo,Da r-
ren Tanner, Anusua Trivedi, Yixi Xu, Ming Zhong, Bistra Dilkina, Rahul
Dodhia, and Juan M. Lavista Ferres. 2021. Becoming Good at AI for Go od.
InProceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, a nd Society
(AIES ’21),May 19–21, 2021, VirtualEvent, USA. ACM,NewYork, NY,USA,
11pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462599
1 INTRODUCTION
Advances inartiﬁcialintelligence (AI) andcomputingpowe rhave
given rise to powerful AI tools ubiquitous in many people’s p er-
sonalandprofessionallives.Theseabilitiesareintegrat edintoour
phones and computers, and are driven mainly by businesses th at
have productizedadvances in AI at massive scales. Many of th ese
tools are broadly available and provide some social beneﬁt ( e.g.,
search engines, navigation tools). However, the promise of AI to
improve lives and protect vulnerable people and ecosystems has
notyet reached its potential.
AI for Good(AI4G) is a movement within the larger ﬁeld of AI
that aims to develop and use AI methods to further progress to -
wards goals in sustainability, health, humanitarian aid, a nd social
justice, guided loosely by the UN Sustainable Development G oals
(SDGs) and priorities within local communities. Excellent litera-
ture reviews on the topic are oﬀered by [17, 54, 61, 70]. A key
diﬀerence from commercial applications of AI is that those A I4G
problemsand successes areoftennot deﬁnedbymarket need, b ut
ratherbynon-proﬁts,socialenterprises andgovernments s eeking

==== Page 2 ====
tosolveproblemsthathave notfoundsolutionsintheprivat esec-
tor.Forexample,researchers intheﬁeldofcomputationals ustain-
ability[24]developandapplymethodstotackleproblemssu chas
wildlifeconservation [19],bioacoustics[82],bird-migr ation track-
ing [59] and poverty detection [34]. In recent years, a numbe r of
pieces of criticism have been directed at the AI4G movement [ 10,
26,40].Whilethesecritiquesraiseimportantconcernssuc hasthe
biasofmodelstrainedonlimiteddata,shiftingattentiona wayfrom
rootcausesofsocietalproblems,andapaternalisticunder standing
of the aﬀected community, the discussion largely centers on the
diﬃcultyof deﬁning what is “good”in oursocietalcontext.
Inthisarticlewedistillﬁrst-handexperiencesfromourre search
lab focused on AI4G projects spanning several application a reas
over two years. Cognizant of the complexity of problems in th e
AI4Gdomainandourexpertiserestrictedtothetechnicalsi deofAI
(statistics, modeling,and engineering), wecollaboratee xtensively
with external partner organizations (PO) to deﬁne good outcomes
forourprojects,sourceandcuratedata,andrealizereal-w orldim-
pact from our modeling solutions. These AI4G projects contribute
to solving problems in two ways: we develop and apply AI tech-
niques toacceleratepreviouslymanualtaskssuchasdatapr ocess-
ing to enable the PO to arrive at their solutionfaster, and we ana-
lyze and model collecteddata for additional insights. The c ollabo-
rativeandpracticalnatureofsuchprojectsmeans thatthe deliver-
ablesarenotjustmodelweights,sourcecode,andtechnicalpaper s;
they crucially involve working with these POs (whose techni cal
capabilities and infrastructure vary greatly) to develop w orkable
engineering solutions for deployment that respect resourc e con-
straintsthatPOsface,aswellascommunicatinganddocumen ting
oursolutions–and theirlimitations –forthedomainexpert sout-
side of computer science and engineering who use our models t o
impact society.
WehighlightchallengesthataremorepronouncedinAI4Gpro jects
compared to machine learning (ML) projects in the academic a nd
corporate spheres, outline strategies we have learned for u nder-
takingsuchprojects,andreﬂectondiﬃcultieswehavefaced mea-
suring our impact. We break these down into four sections in t he
restofthediscussion:communication,data,modeling,and impact.
Finally, we describetwo case studies,i.e. AI4G projects ,that exem-
plifythesediﬃcultiesandhowweapproachedtheminareal-w orld
setting.
2 COMMUNICATION
Therelationshipandinteractionbetweendatascientistsa ndPOs–
whoarethedomainexpertsthatdeﬁneproblems,curatedata, and
actonmodeloutputs–isanimportantﬁrsttopic.Domainexpe rts
sometimes have decades worth of experience working in a prob -
lem area. Communicating all of this accumulated knowledge t o
datascientistswithinafewdaysorweeksduringprojectpla nning
canbediﬃcult,butdatascientistsmustbewillingandready toin-
corporate this knowledge into their modeling approaches. W hile
straightforward,accuratebi-directionalcommunication atallstages
ofanAI4Gprojectisessentialforitssuccess,wefocusbelo wonar-
eas wheredatascientists mayneedtodrivetheconversation with
thePO.2.1 Settingrealisticexpectations from AI
It is often the case that POs have inﬂated expectations about the
capabilities of modern AI-based techniques due to the hype s ur-
rounding the ﬁeld1and its misrepresentation in the media [38].
In our experience, when initially proposing and scoping pro jects,
somePOsmaybelievethattherearepre-existingAItoolstha tcan
beimmediatelyadaptedforanichepurposewithlittletonot rain-
ing data (cf. [15]). However, our experience also shows that POs
respond well to open, honest communication about AI’s capab ili-
ties,ortheneedfor(labeled)trainingdata.Earlyconvers ationsof-
ten involved directing POs’ expectations away from a model t hat
achievesalloftheirgoals,whichwouldrequiremoretraini ngdata
than is currently available, to more targeted models for whi ch ap-
propriate and suﬃcient training data is available, and whic h will
still bring them signiﬁcantly closer to their goals. For cer tain use
cases, an adequateand achievable approach is to use AI as a co m-
plementary tool to streamline and accelerate current workﬂ ows,
ratherthanentirely supplantingthem.
One such example we have worked on involved a PO who ini-
tiallyapproachedusaboutbuildinganaturallanguageproc essing
(NLP)modeltoextractverynuancedauthorintentfromdecon tex-
tualized 1- or 2-sentence texts in a small corpus of unlabele d doc-
uments. After gaining a better understanding of the speciﬁc use
caseforthemodel,weworkedwiththePOtoreframetheproble m
in terms of multi-label topic classiﬁcation, and also worke d with
them to label the data. The result was a model that allowed the
POtoincorporateanentirelynewdatasource(text)intoabr oader
initiative focusedon quantifying human activities’ impac ts onen-
vironmental resources.
InadditiontodiscussingthegenerallimitationsofAI-bas edmeth-
odswith regards to what can beachieved, depending on the PO’ s
domain and technical expertise, it may also be crucial to mak e
them aware of more concrete issues encountered while buildi ng
MLmodels.Theseincludeoverﬁttinginsmalldataregimes,m odel
bias, generalization issues after deploying a model,adver sarial at-
tacks,dataandmodelprivacyconcerns,limitationsofinte rpretable
models, etc. For example, lesion shape irregularity is one o f the
mostcriticalfeaturesintheclinicaldiagnosisofmelanom a[1].On
theotherhand,recentstudieshavedeterminedthatconvolu tional
neural networks are negatively-biased in capturing shape- related
information from images [5, 21]. Clinical researchers who m ay
wishtodevelopaconvolutionalmodelformelanomadetectio nare
likely to be unaware of this ﬁnding, and eﬀective communicat ion
of this knowledge may facilitate the development of alterna tive
approaches. We believe that knowledge transfer should be a c ore
componentofan AI4Gproject.
In contrast to these positive cases, there may be circumstan ces
in which POs need to be informed when their goals – even with
proper reframing – may not be achievable with AI. For example ,
a model trained to detect ﬁsh species from underwater camera s
may be highly accurate in identifying a few common species, b ut
theresearchers mayliketodetectveryrarespeciesif,fore xample,
detectionof therare species is key todeciding whether some eco-
nomic development opportunityis allowed. In these cases, m odel
1For example, a Gartner 2020 report on emerging technologies places AI at the peak
intermsof inﬂated expectations [46].

==== Page 3 ====
creationmayneedtobepostponedfortime-consumingdataco llec-
tionand labeling. And in some cases itmay benecessary toask if
the current stateofmachine learning is abletomeaningfull y help
thePO inmeeting its goals.
Takeaway 1.EducatingPOs aboutAI’s limits and op-
portunitiesisacorepartofanAI4Gproject.Potentially
unrealistic expectations for AI can often be reframed
into achievable goals that streamline the PO’s work-
ﬂows.
2.2 Project scoping andimplementation
CollaborationsbetweenPOsandtechnicalexpertsonAI4Gpr ojects
are typically short-term or phased, hence it is important to set
priorities and expectations before beginning a project. Fo r exam-
ple, one project we have worked on involves counting herd ani -
mals (e.g. cattle) over large areas from satellite imagery t o moni-
tortheeﬀectiveness ofconservationpolicies.Thisis anex pensive
task to perform manually, but can potentially be automated w ith
computervisionmodels.Instancesegmentationoftheanima lsisa
straightforwardapproach,however itisriskyduetothelac kofla-
beleddataorlowspatialresolutionoftheimagery.Lessstr aightfor-
wardmodelingapproaches,suchascoarseranimaldensityes tima-
tionmodels,cansatisfythesameprojectgoals,butmaytake more
eﬀorttodeﬁneupfront.Suchapproachesmayalsobeinformed by
domain knowledge – herd animals move in groups, resulting in
dense crowds more easily identiﬁable in imagery than indivi dual
animals. The back-and-forth communication with the PO to un -
derstand the goal and explore appropriate modeling solutions is a
crucial partoftheprojectlifecycle.
Wesummarizequestionstoexplorewhenscopingaprojectwit h
a PO as aguideline forfutureprojects:
(1) Setting accurate goals: is the project oriented towards the
prediction or estimation of quantities, or is it towards the
visualization and representation of data? If the project is
oriented towards prediction/estimation, then whatwill be
done with the output from the model, whowill use it (say,
for decision-making), and wherewill it be deployed? If the
project is oriented towards visualization/representatio n or
to interpretability/inference, whatformat is expected, who
will be consuming the end result, and – again – wherewill
itbedeployed?
(2) What are the resource constraints of the PO? Thecompute
andstorageresourcesavailableandthetypeofdevicewhere
thesolutionwillbedeployed(cloud-based,battery-power ed
devices) should be taken into account to determine what
modelingsolutionsarepossible.
(3) WhatisthetechnicalexpertiseavailableatthePO?This will
determine theamountof supportavailablefor maintaining
a deliverablebeyond thedurationof theproject.
(4) Does the problem require developing novel machine learn -
ing techniques? This will inform the project timeline and
the risk. It could present an opportunity to identify larger
researchchallengesandbringthemintotheMLcommunity
atlarge.
(5) To what degree is data/model privacy a concern? The data
availabletothePOcanoftencontainpersonallyidentiﬁabl einformation about individuals. This would not only make
thedatasetnotreleasableforthesakeofreproducibility, but
also limit the public release of models since they may be
subjecttoprivacyattacks [62].
(6) Ispreciseinformationonthedatawelldocumented?TheP O
should convey the assumptions and the procedures under-
lyingdatacollection.Ifthedatahasalreadybeenprocesse d,
the processing steps should be communicated because cer-
tainpre-processingstepscanintroducebiasinthedata[20 ].
(7) How could the PO’s domain knowledge be incorporatedin
modeling?Duringtheprojectdevelopment stage,itmaybe
necessarytonotrelyentirelyondata-driventechniques(f or
instance, for feature learning), but also utilize PO’s know l-
edgeofdomain-relevantmetricsandfeaturesthathavebeen
identiﬁed as signiﬁcant in their ﬁeld. For example, in radi-
ology, dozens of hand-crafted radiomic features have been
previously found to be signiﬁcant predictors of cancer sur-
vival and response totherapy[4].
Takeaway 2.Toensure we develop solutionsthatare
practicallyuseful,projectscopingneedstobeanongo-
ing dialoguewiththePO.
3 DATA
Most AI4G projects start with the PO sharing a dataset they ha ve
previously collected and labeled, or pointing out public da tasets
that are relevant to the problem. While speciﬁc funding oppo rtu-
nitiesforcreatingdatasetsforMLapplicationsandnovelm ethods
to take advantage of weakly labeled public data [73, 83] or ge n-
erated data [8] exist, exploiting these is often not possibl e. This
is in contrast to enterprise applications where ML teams are also
responsible for collecting training data and have budget al located
forcuratingdatasetswithspeciﬁcMLtasksinmind.Inthiss ection
we reﬂect on recurring challenges related to data availabil ity and
qualityinthecontext ofAI4Gprojects;foranin-depth disc ussion
ofdata issues present inhigh-stakes AI applications,refe r to[57].
3.1 Adaptingtopreviously collecteddatasets
Limitations in the data collection process often inﬂuence t he de-
gree to which an AI4G project can be successful, possibly mor e
so than they aﬀect the outcomes of commercial or academic AI
projects,which have morecontrolover datacollection.
First, there is a discrepancy between the purpose of data col -
lection by POs that have the goal of solving an application pr ob-
lem and data collectionbygroups that have the goal of creati ng a
generalizable model.ThePOs need not necessarily care abou tthe
metadataassociatedwithdatapointsthattheylabelforfur thering
theirgoals,whilesuchmetadatamaybeimportantforquanti fying
how a model trained on such data will generalize. Put diﬀeren tly,
ifdatacollectionisconductedbyaPOwithafocusonthecont ent,
ratherthantechnicalspeciﬁcationsofthedata,thenthisc ancause
problemsin post-hocmodelingsteps.
Extending the example of counting herd animals from the last
section,thePO mightlabelherd animals fromsatelliteimag ery at
a variety of spatial resolutions. The imagery could be at a sp atial
resolution of 0.1, 0.3, or 0.5 m/pixel; as long as the PO can co unt
the types of animals of interest over a given area and date, th ey

==== Page 4 ====
canmeettheirgoals.Ontheotherhand,amachinelearningmo del
thathasbeentrainedtoidentifyherdanimalsfromonly0.1m /pixel
imagerywilllikelynotgeneralizeto0.5m/pixelimageryas objects
willbe5timessmallerineachdimension.Themetadataassoc iated
with the labeled data is necessary to inform modeling decisi ons
(e.g.augmentingthescaleofsatellitedataandlabelsduri ngmodel
training willallow themodelto generalize over a range of sc ales).
Thisisincontrasttosettingswheredataiscollectedspeci ﬁcallyfor
thepurposeofbuildingeﬀectivemodels,wheremetadatawou ldbe
considered explicitlyatthedatacollectionstage.
In addition to the completeness of metadata, quality and con -
sistency of data collection, which do not aﬀect experts’ abi lity to
discernthecontentbutwhichposeadditionalgeneralizati on chal-
lenges tomachinelearningmodels,areafrequentissue.For exam-
ple, in a study applying speech feature modeling to analyze m en-
tal health issues, the recording of conversations between m ilitary
personnel with suicide risk and their therapists is used to p redict
theiremotionalbond[43].Here,theconsistentuseofdedic atedmi-
crophones for the two speakers in a controlled environment w as
foundtoimprovemodelingoutcomes,however thisaspectofd ata
collectionwouldnotaﬀect themanual analysis of therecord ings.
Second,AI4Gprojectsofteninvolvesensitivedatanecessi tating
the adherence to strict ethical and legal restrictions that make us-
ing such data more diﬃcult. For example, many agencies would
like to train computer vision models to detect images of Chil d
Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM), but databases such as the Chil d
AbuseImageDatabase(CAID) maintainedbytheUKGovernment
are not accessible to other organizations [11]. Other examp les in-
cludeapplicationswithhealthcaredata–modelsthatident ifypul-
monaryfeaturesfromchestx-rayimageryneedtobetrainedw ith
labeledchestx-rays,adatasourcethatinitiallyrequires pairingpa-
tient records with their chest x-rays. These sensitive appl ications
require specialized privacy-preserving modeling methods and a
layer ofcomplexitythatotherapplicationsdonotentail.P Os may
choose to share synthetic data generated using generative m od-
els instead ofreal data butthese approaches also may bepron eto
membership inference attacks [30]. Recent work on privacy p re-
servingMLhasdevelopedbothdefenses[41,77]andwaystome a-
suretheprivacy risks from releasing models[33, 37].
Third, the amount and quality of data available in some AI4G
projectswillbelimited.Thisis notspeciﬁctoAI4Gproject s,how-
ever is worth mentioning due to the frequency with which such
projectscomeup.Forexample,projectsthatinvolvedetect ingpoul-
trybarns,solarfarms,orotherrelativelyuncommonfeatur esfrom
satelliteimagery requirehaving a labeleddataset ofsuch f eatures.
However, creating labeled data in these applications is exp ensive
as it requires annotators to ﬁrst ﬁnd examples of the objects in
questionoverlargelandscapesbeforelabelingthemapprop riately.
In our experience, these type of satellite image annotation s will
notbeinaformatthatisimmediatelyuseable(e.g.pointlab elsfor
a segmentation problem),or willbea biased sample(e.g. man y la-
belsfromaspeciﬁcarearatherthanasampleoflabelsfromab road
area).
Finally,opendatasetsoftenhavesigniﬁcantdatacuration issues.
For example, a Kaggle dataset for predicting the outcomeof p reg-
nancies in India has been shown to be missing key data from the
original survey, resulting in misleading predictions [67] . POs thatwanttohelpreduceinfantmortalitycanbemisledbysuchdat asets
or the promise of eﬀective models from open competitions tha t
use such data. Another issue is the lack of query infrastruct ure
aroundpublicdatasetswhichcreatessigniﬁcantfrictioni nprojects
that might use such data. A positive example is Google Earth E n-
gine[25],whichallowsresearchers toquicklyqueryacross itscol-
lection of public satellite imagery, visualize sample patc hes, and
assess if the data is of suﬃcient quantity and resolution for the
intended analysis.
Takeaway 3.DatasetsinAI4Gprojectsmaynotbeim-
mediately useful for creating models. When creating
models with such data, it is important to understand
theassociatedmetadata,collectionprocess,andanyse-
curityorprivacyconcerns.
3.2 Dealingwithsubjective data annotation
Thevariables of interest in several sociallyimportant dom ains in-
volvinghumanperceptionanddecision-makingareambiguou sand
ill-deﬁned. Diﬀerent annotators might interpret the deﬁni tion of
labels diﬀerently, leading to inconsistent and noisy label s. For ex-
ample, the colloquial meaning of “depression” might be diﬀe rent
from its meaning in a clinical context [79]. The data annotat ion
process for an AI system aimed at diagnosing clinical depres sion
should be cognizant of the diﬀerence. Creating a taxonomy of la-
belscouldminimizetheannotator’ssubjectivity.Thisals orequires
transparencyintheinterpretationofthelabelsandclearl ycommu-
nicating its limitations during diﬀerent stages of the proj ect life
cycle, including annotation, modelling and deployment to m ini-
mize the semantic ambiguity of labels. An in-depth discussi on on
ambiguous labels in the context of computational social sci ences
can be found in [14]. When subjectivity of the labels are inhe rent
duetothevariabilityinhumanperception,itshouldbeasta ndard
practicetoemploymultipleannotatorsforeachexampleand judge
thefeasibilityofthetaskbyevaluatinginter-annotatora greement.
Severalmethodshavebeenproposedtoobtainestimatesofth etrue
groundtruthlabelsfromthenoisy/subjectivelabelscolle ctedfrom
multipleannotators[42,48].
Takeaway 4.Inseveralsociallyimportantdomains,la-
bels suﬀer from subjective annotation. Such situation
should be identiﬁed upfront to avoid introducing in-
consistencies inthemodelingpipeline.
3.3 Creating trainingand testsetswiththe
application scenario in mind
Poorchoicesoftraining, validationandtestsetsplitscan resultin
an estimated model performance that does not reﬂect actual p er-
formance when deployed (for other lessons learnt in evaluat ing
model performance, see section 4.3). This is especiallyrel evant in
humanitarianaidandconservationapplicationswheremode lsare
expectedtogeneralize wellspatiallyand/or temporally.
Forinstance, withmarine mammal sounddetection[81],whil e
generatingtrain/testsplits,considerationshouldbegiv entodiﬀer-
ent types of underwater and anthropogenic noises such as tho se
from commercial ship generators, mining, aircraft, and sea sonal

==== Page 5 ====
eﬀectsonoceanwaves.Asanotherexample,thexBDdatasetas so-
ciatedwiththexViewChallenge[28]isalarge-scalepublic dataset
designed to enable building damage assessment for humanita rian
assistance and disaster recovery. It consists of data from 1 9 dis-
asters from around the world between 2011 and 2019. However,
scenes from the 19 disasters are present in all of the oﬃcial t rain,
testandhold-outsplits,whereasitwouldbemoreusefultor eport
performance on unseen locations as the next disaster will li kely
strike elsewhere. The same is true for the SpaceNet Challeng e Se-
ries for building footprint extraction, where the default s plits cre-
atedbythechallenge’sutilitiescontainoverlappingloca tions[69].
Subsequentstudieshaveshownthatperformancedropsdrast ically
when applying a trained building damage classiﬁer to an unse en
location, even within the same region [29, 68]. As another ex am-
plerequiringspatialgeneralization, untilveryrecently ,allstudies
of animal species classiﬁcation on camera trap images were s plit
across sequences of images but not across locations. This re sults
in precision and recall metrics of greater than 90% [44]. In r eality,
performanceismuchworseifwesplitthedatabycameralocat ion,
and even worseif we splitbyecosystem [9,58].
Many past studies in wildﬁre risk prediction, another probl em
important to both disaster relief and environmental conser vation,
assumecertainrandomvariablestobeindependentandident ically
distributed in the evaluation phase [12, 53, 56]. However, n atural
hazards like wildﬁres are stochastic events with spatio-te mporal
dimensions, and evaluating models of such events based on ra n-
domizedtraining and testsplits leads toinformationleaka ge, mis-
leading organizations whooperationalizesuch models[22] .
In applying machine learning to medical imaging, Zech et al.
[80]foundthatadatasetofchestx-rayscuratedforscreeni ngpneu-
monia cases could be used to train a model to accurately predi ct
which hospital system the x-ray comes from, indicating that the
pneumoniadetectionmodeldevelopedfromthedatasetcould have
been aided by features not related to the medical condition. The
training and testsplits should bechosen tomeasure how well the
modelwillwork forunseen x-raymachines.
Takeaway 5.Carefully consider how to splitthe data
intotrainingandtestsetssothatthemodel’sabilityto
generalize tounseen instances of inputis measured.
4 MODELING
The models used in AI4G contexts usually involve a diﬀerent s et
of requirements and constraints compared to general AI appl ica-
tions. First, AI4G models are developed in applied ML contex ts.
Most of the models are developed with domain-speciﬁc motiva -
tions and limitations in mind. In consequence, models devel oped
formainstreamMLﬁelds,suchasNLPorcomputervision,requ ire
cautious adaptation and deployment to the speciﬁc domain. F ur-
thermore, the process of model development is motivated ﬁrs t by
application requirements instead of pure novelty or state- of-the-
art performance.
4.1 Incorporatingdomain expertise
Domain expertise from the PO can help in model development as
POsoftenhavedecadesofexperienceandaccumulatedknowle dgein deﬁning and solving related problems. Speciﬁcally, doma in ex-
pertiseisusefulin:i)determiningadequatefeaturesandd atarepre-
sentations, ii) enforcing inductive bias and regularizati on in mod-
els, iii) choosing simpliﬁed parameterizations, iv) inter preting the
learned modelsand outputs.
Domain expertise is invaluable for collecting features tha t are
relevanttoaproblem.ThisisespeciallyrelevantinAI4Gpr oblems
where there are few samples compared to the number of feature s
or where informative features are mixed with noisy features . For
instance, topredict the lateeﬀects of chemotherapy oncanc er pa-
tients, we found that including all chemotherapy drugs gave us a
higher predictive performance as compared to prior work. Ho w-
ever, clinical researchers know that only certain drugs hav e been
clinicallylinkedtocertainlateeﬀectsinotherprioranal yses.This
suggests that the additional confounding features were pro bably
spuriouscontributorstopredictiveperformanceandhence should
notbeincludedin themodel.
In addition to helping determine data representation, doma in
expertise can help improve performance by embedding speciﬁ c
knowledge, often in the form of inductive bias or regulariza tion,
in model design. For example, ﬁnding promising solar cell te ch-
nologiesisoftenadiﬃcultandatime-consumingtask.Asola rcell
consistsofastackofvarioussemiconductormaterials,whe reeach
layer performs a certain electrical and optical function an d fabri-
cationparameters areoptimizedformaximizing solarenerg y cap-
tured.A machine learning modelcan avoid theneed for resour ce-
intensive physical experiments and accelerate the paramet er op-
timization step. Combining a supervised machine learning m odel
with a physical model of solar cell operation calibrated by a n ex-
pertallowed foramodelregularizationmethodbasedonphys ical
principles [49] and an order of magnitude reduction in the ti me
and resources requiredtocreate a solarcell[45, 49].
Further, AI4G projects often involve collaborations spann ing
multiplecountriesandPOsinadiﬀerent countryarelikelyt oface
unique challenges that only local experts would be aware of. For
example, work on the anti-poaching PAWS project [18] uses th e
localknowledgeofparkrangers toconstrainpredictedsear ch pat-
terns toareas that canbefeasiblyvisited.
If an interpretable model is used, then domain experts may be
able to use aggregated model predictions to draw larger conc lu-
sionsaboutaproblem.Forexample,inourcollaborationstu dying
thefoodsecurityinlow-resourcecommunitiesinMalawibas edon
survey panel dataof households,domainexperts were ableto use
the outputs of interpretable models to recognize spatial an d sea-
sonalpatternsassociatedwiththefoodsecuritystatusoft hecom-
munitiesandvillages.Thesecommunity-levelinsightscan helplo-
cal governments manage their resources more eﬃciently acro ss
thecommunities and over time.
Takeaway 6.Endeavor to incorporate the PO’s do-
main expertise in model development when possible
through methods such as feature selection and engi-
neering, modelchoice, and modelregularization.

==== Page 6 ====
4.2 Modeldevelopment withresource
constraints
Since deployed models are maintained by the PO who often has
lessresourcesthanenterprisesfocusedonmainstreamMLap plica-
tions,resourceconstraints oncethemodelis operationali zedlimit
the choice of models. In addition to the ﬁnancial cost of runn ing
sophisticatedmodelsonpotentiallylargedatasets,deplo yingtore-
mote regions in battery-powered devices and carbon emissio n re-
latedenvironmental costarealso importantconsideration s.
For example, Robinson et al. [51] trained a fully convolutio nal
neuralnetwork(CNN)onover55terabytesofaerialimageryt ocre-
ateahigh-resolutionlandcovermapovertheUnitedStates. Diﬀer-
ences in seconds of running time per batch translate to hundr eds
ofdollarsinthecostoftheﬁnalcomputation.Here,alarger ,state-
of-the-art model would incur a ~270% increase in the cost of t he
ﬁnalcomputationforafractionalincreaseinperformancem etrics
suchasaccuracyandintersection-over-union,andsoatrad e-oﬀin
favor of lowering thecostwas made.
Inwildlifeconservation [74]and accessibilityapplicati ons[75],
models need to be deployed to edge or mobile devices of vary-
ingcapacity.Forinstance, theSeeing AI2mobileapp,whichhelps
peoplewith visionimpairment orlow vision tobetterunders tand
their surroundings, uses deep learning architectures spec iﬁcally
designed forlow resourcesettings.
State-of-the-art deep learning models have large carbon fo ot-
prints from training and operation [63], which is a concern f or
AI4Gprojectsinparticular.Applicationssuchastheonede scribed
in Lacoste et al. [35] allow the model developer to choose a da ta
center location powered to a large extent by renewable energ y
sourcesandacloudproviderwhooﬀsetstheremaining emissi ons.
Takeaway 7.Carefully consider a project’s con-
straints during deployment in advance before settling
onamodelingapproach.
4.3 Evaluation and metrics
ModelvalidationisacrucialpartofanyAIproject.InAI4Gp rojects,
validation metrics will not only need to measure how well the
model is performing in standard ways (e.g. accuracy, AUC-RO C,
intersection over union), but how well the model is performi ng
with respecttoany domain-speciﬁc requirements.
For example, the common part of commuters (CPC) [36] is a
domain-speciﬁcmetricusedinmeasuringhowwellpredicted com-
mutingﬂowsalignwithgroundtruthdata.Thismetricjointl ycon-
siders all commutingﬂows together,as opposedtoa commonML
metric such as mean squared error that only considers pairwi se
errors between a single origin and destination. ReportingC PC re-
veals more about the overall structure of a predicted set of ﬂ ows
andisthusimportanttoreportinAI4Gprojectsthatconside rcom-
muter ormigrationﬂows [50].
Another example comes from cancer imaging, where special-
izedextensionsofthereceiveroperatingcharacteristic( ROC)anal-
ysis are used to evaluate the lesion detection performance b y ra-
diology readers: localization ROC (LROC) quantiﬁes not onl y the
correct binary diagnosis, but also takes into account the ac curacy
2https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/seeing-aioflesionlocalizationwithinanimage.Thefree-responseo perating
characteristic(FROC) extends thenotionofLROC tothemult iple-
lesiondetectiontask [6].
These and other domain-speciﬁc metrics can potentially be i n-
cluded in modeling as well as in evaluation. For example, if t he
domain-speciﬁc metric is diﬀerentiable with respect to the pre-
dicted quantity and computed on a per-sample basis, then it c an
be used in combination, or in place of, common loss functions
whentrainingmodelswithgradientdescentbasedmethods.I nthe
medical-imagery domain, such loss functions have been used to
bettercapturedomain-speciﬁc problemcharacteristics [6 5].
In other cases, a domain-speciﬁc metric is not necessary, ho w-
ever domain experts will care littleabout commonly reporte dML
metrics. For example, mean average precision (mAP) involve s av-
eraging the precision of a model at all possiblerecall value s. This
averagewillinclude,forexample,theprecisionofthemode lat1%
recall which is not informative as such performance would ne ver
beacceptable. Precision@ /u1D458, where/u1D458is the lowest tolerablerecall,
is a more appropriate metric. As we discuss in Section 2, arri ving
atthis metric involves extended dialoguewith domainexper ts.
Finally, the data collection process by the PO can be imperfe ct,
thereforemodelevaluationbasedsolelyonsuchdatasetsmi ghtbe
insuﬃcient. For example, in the case of the anti-poaching PA WS
project,thedatasetiscollectedbylimitedparkrangersvi afootpa-
trolling over a vast area. As such, many regions in the protec ted
areas arenotthoroughlycovered bytherangers every montha nd
thedatasetdoesnotperfectlyrepresenttheareaunderstud y.Build-
ingalong-termcollaborationwithPOstodeploymachinelea rning
solutionsforpilottestsbeforeafullcommitmentcanbring impor-
tant insights about the performance of the trained model in t he
wild[23,78].
Takeaway 8.Check if domain-speciﬁcmetricscanbe
incorporatedduringtrainingand validationofmodels
and determine which ML metrics are relevant to solv-
ing theproblemathand.
4.4 Humans in theloop
Intheindustry,continueddatacollectionanduser-suppli edlabels
allow models to be improved over time, the so-called “data ﬂy -
wheel” eﬀect [16, 66]. In a similar manner, many scientiﬁc ﬁe lds
have come up with labeled datasets and models [13, 64, 71] tha t
arecontinuouslyupdatedas labelingtechniques(such as ph ysical
simulationsordataacquisitionmethods)areimproved.Aco mmon
industrypracticeforimprovingmodelperformanceistoite rateon
improving datasetsinstead of iterating on improving models[31].
In both cases, having humans continually in the loop – whethe r
bylabelingortuningmodelbehaviorbasedonfeedbackfroma de-
ployed system – provide large beneﬁts to the overall project out-
comes.
In general, the one-oﬀ nature of AI4G projects preclude this
commonwayofimprovingmodelperformance.Accumulatingex pert-
annotatedlabels,even thosecreatedwitheﬃciency gains en abled
by the ﬁrst version of the model, lies outsideof formal infra struc-
turesand therefore modelre-training is not doneas often.

==== Page 7 ====
At the same time, most of the models used in AI4G projects do
notenablecompleteautomation.Forexample,theoutputofa medi-
caldiagnosismodelwillbeinterpretedbyhealthprofessio nals,and
ﬁnal decision may be made based on the patient’s clinical his tory
and the presence of secondary signs and symptoms that are not
captured by the model [39]. Here, a human mustbe in the mod-
eling loop evaluating every output of a model. More broadly, the
output of allAI4G models will be inspected by domain experts
in the PO and their feedback will constitute a form of weak su-
pervision that must be included in the modeling process in or der
to produce a suitable deliverable. For example, POs that rel y on
highly accurate land cover data will often need to make manua l
corrections to modeled outputs, and, as such, will have a diﬃ cult
time using land cover predictions with artifacts such as rou nded
cornersonbuildingthatarenoteasilycorrectableinGISso ftware.
This type of feedback is only apparent after one iteration of mod-
elling and inspecting the results with the PO. Glacier monit oring
is another scenario where incorporatinghumans in the looph ave
beenshownvaluable.Barakaet.alproposedaglaciermappin gtool
thatusessemanticsegmentationpredictionsasastartingp ointand
allows domain experts for easy adjustments of those predict ions
for afaster glacier mappingsystem [7].
Thus, achieving a balance between having human feedback in-
cluded in the modeling process and staying within-scope is a cru-
cial part of ﬁnishing such AI4G projects. We have found activ e
learningpipelinestobebeneﬁcialtowardsthisend.Withan active
learning pipeline, participants at the PO can be engaged dir ectly
during the modeling process and will allow their feedback (i n the
form oflabels) tobedirectlyincorporatedin theﬁnaldeliv erable.
We note that the active learning loop can also incorporate hu -
mansmoretightly.Forexample,whenhumansarefurtherallo wed
tochoosethelocationstolabel(versus beingpresented loc ations),
and can observe the eﬀect labeling those locations has on mod el
output after a retraining period, they can more eﬃciently tr ain
land cover models [52]. Finally, as active learning methods more
tightly couple dataset collection with model training, the y show
promise in reducing the total amount of manual eﬀort require d
to produce a ﬁnal product. For instance, active learning tra ining
of camera trap species identiﬁcation models has been found t o
match state-of-the-art accuracy with orders of magnitude f ewer
annotated training samples [55].
Takeaway 9.AI4G projects require humans in the
loop to some extent. Active learning pipelines can en-
ablePOstoengagewiththemodelingprocessdirectly
duringa project.
5 IMPACT
Lacking in theusualbusiness indicators such as revenue and user
engagement, oneofthemostdiﬃcultaspectsofanAI4Gprojec tis
measuring the degree to which it is successful, and weighing the
success by the potential impact in advancing a PO’s mission. In
turn, an AI4G project’s potential impact will not be realize d with-
out the PO or the broader communities adopting the technolog y.
Indeed,therearemanymorepressreleases,blogposts,andp romis-
ing published results than functioning AI systems actively “doing
good”intheworld.Inthissection,weattempttounderstand whythat is by exploring the three related issues of deployment, adop-
tionand impact.
5.1 Uphillpathto deployment andadoption
Unlikeresearch developing novel techniques ortheoretica lunder-
standing, AI4G projects necessitate the deployment of any d evel-
opedmodels,andseparatelyandoftenmorediﬃcult,theadop tion
of such technologies by the PO and related communities, for t he
eﬀort tobemeaningful [72].This “last mile” problem can bee spe-
cially challenging in AI4G projects since engineering is of ten not
afocusfor aPO ora research group.
Inourexperience, deployment entails threescenarios:
i) aone-timescoringofrelevantinputdatatoproducederiv ed
datafor thePO’s downstream analysis and publication,
ii) areal-timeAPIexposingthemodelforapplicationssuch as
anti-poaching and invasive species monitoring,
iii) a batch processing mechanism triggered automatically or
bytheusertoprocessalargequantityofrawdataforrecur-
ringanalysis,suchaswhileprocessingconﬂictvideosfrom
a region forweapondetection[2].
Theﬁrstscenariorequirestheleastengineeringeﬀortbeyo ndmodel
development,butmaynotresultinlastingimpact.Real-tim eAPIs
have recurring cost, in addition to requiring upkeep and int egra-
tion with the client application consuming model output. Ba tch
processingcouldtakeadvantageofdiscountcloudcomputea tlow-
traﬃc times and parallelize model scoring. It is often neces sary
to guide the PO in understanding whether they require real-t ime
always-onmodeldeploymentorifoﬄinebatchprocessingiss uﬃ-
cient.ThereisalsoalotofenthusiasmfordeployingMLmode lson
edge devices so that the PO can avoid uploading the raw data fo r
processinginlow-connectivityregions.Inthiscase,itis important
to communicate any trade-oﬀs compressing the model through
techniquessuchasquantizationmayhaveonperformance[60 ,76].
To truly enable productivity gains from using AI tools and cl oud
infrastructure,thePOsoftenneedamuchlargerpieceofsof tware
toorchestratescoring rawdatausing themodeland interact with
themodeloutputs,ofwhichWildlifeInsights isanotableex ample
foracceleratingwildlifesurveysusingcomputervisionmo dels[3].
Adoption is the harder problem because, in many ways, it is
outside of the control of the technical team. Identifying ho w ML
metrics translate into time saved in the PO’s workﬂows is par a-
mount. Taking input from human-computer interaction exper ts
maybehelpfulat this stage, as is thinking abouthow tointeg rate
modeloutputwith thesoftwareusedindownstream analysis. For
example,beingabletopreview modeloutputsaboveacertain con-
ﬁdencethresholdcanhelpthedomainexperttoﬁlteroutinpu tﬁles
thatdonot containany subjects ofinterest; pre-populatin gthela-
bel ﬁeld with the most common class may save many keystrokes
duringmanualreview[27].Wehavealsofoundthatopen-sour cing
themodeldevelopmentcodebuildstrustinthemodel,andthe code
repositorywithdiscussionboardscanactasahubforthecom mu-
nityinvolved intransfusing AI into their domain.

==== Page 8 ====
Takeaway 10.Maintaining deployed modelsrequires
long-term engineering resource commitments. Focus-
ingontimesavedinsteadofpureMLmetricshelpsor-
ganizations adoptthetechnology.
5.2 Measuringimpact
Typicalmachinelearningprojectsmeasuresuccessinterms ofmodel
evaluation metrics (e.g. F1-score, ROC-AUC, etc.) (also se e discus-
sioninthelastsection)orbusinesskeyperformanceindica tor(KPIs)
(e.g.click-throughrate,dailyactiveusers,etc.).Howev er,inthelife
cycle of AI4G projects, model evaluation metrics serve more as a
basisofdiscussionswithPOsaboutamodel’scapabilitiesa ndlim-
itations; the KPIs important to the POs are outcomes that can be
several steps removed from the model outputs. It is importan t to
learn about the PO’s KPIs in the scoping phase of the project t o
inform theapproach.
A challenge in creating lastingimpact comes from the lack of
a business model for these AI4G endeavors. We are ﬁnding ways
to step out of a funding mindset and grow the technical capabi l-
ities of the PO so that they could be self-suﬃcient in subsequ ent
datacollectionandre-trainingeﬀorts.Thisisanotherpla cewhere
two-waycommunicationisimportant(seeSection2):thetec hnical
teamoftendoesnotgettoseetheimpactoftheirworkintheﬁe ld.
Maintaining arelationship withthePOafterthetechnicalp ortion
of the project is complete to get updates on how their workﬂow s
have been impacted is important in maintaining a long-term c ol-
laboration and acts as part of a larger feed-back loop for sol ving
theapplicationproblem.
InourengagementswithPOs,wedonotconcernourselveswith
deﬁningwhatisapositiveimpactagainsttheﬁnalproblemth ePO
aims to tackle. We rely on the domain experts at the PO to deter -
mine what the intended eventual impact is and to what extent a
project furthers the PO’s mission. More proximal to data mod el-
ing,incollaboratingwithPOsonAI4Gprojectswehavefound two
ways forAI techniques torealize impact:ﬁnding structurea nd in-
sightsfromlargedatasets,andmakingdomainexperts’work ﬂows
more eﬃcient so that they may scale outtheir work. Therefore , it
may requireworking with thePOto ﬁnd ways totrack theimme-
diateimpact of anAI4G modelontheir dataanalysis orworkﬂo w
eﬃciency, inadditiontoimpacts onthePO’s end mission.
Takeaway 11.Domain experts within POs should
deﬁne mission-related impacts. When quantiﬁcation
of direct model impact is needed, work with the PO
to identify opportunities to quantify both immedi-
ate (workﬂow or analysis enhancement) and farther-
removed(mission-related)impactsoftheAI4Gproject.
6 CASESTUDIES
6.1 NLP tomap Syrian conﬂict
Problem :
The Carter Center (TCC) has beenworking onsupportinga poli t-
ical solutiontothewars inSyria3.Since 2012,TCC has initiated a
conﬂict mapping project that analyzes an unprecedented vol ume
of citizen-generated information about the conﬂict. Every week,
3https://www.cartercenter.org/countries/syria.htmlTCC compiles a report using the information it receives from the
Armed Conﬂict Location and Event Data (ACLED) Project4[47],
whichcuratesnewsstoriesandarticlesrecordingincident srelated
to the war in Syria. This report is read by various committees in
the UN, foreign ministries and NGOs. Given the weekly timeli ne
(Takeaway7),collatingtheincomingdataintoastructures uitable
for their analysis manually has been diﬃcultgiven the incre asing
volumeofreports.Automatingthiscurationprocesswouldr educe
thethousandsof hoursofwork neededbyprofessional analys ts.
Solution :
Our work automated this process by classifying the informat ion
into several categories such as shelling, artillery ﬁre, an d aerial
bombardment.WehelpedTCCbuildahigh-precision,neuraln etwork-
based natural language processing (NLP) model that reclass iﬁes
the input conﬂict events at the granularity desired by TCC (T ake-
away 6). This improvement in data processing allowed TCC em-
ployeestothenfocusonsubsequentanalysisoftheconﬂicte vents
(Takeaway 9).
6.2 Mappingsolarfarmsacross India
Problem :
At the end of 2020, India was only 2% away from the target of
40% installed non-fossil fuel electricity capacity, one of its Paris
Climate Agreement targets [32]. While it is encouraging to s ee
renewable energy production systems, such as solar farms, b eing
rapidly built, it is also important to locate such installat ions in a
waythatavoidsencroachingonthehabitatsofendangeredsp ecies
andotherecologicalreserves.Aninternationalconservat ionNGO
has been working with states in India to create a tool for iden ti-
fying areas where solar and wind developments are less likel y to
cause ecological harm. However, information on where solar in-
stallations are located is only available for two states, an d so we
workedtogetherwiththeNGOtousesatelliteimagerytotryi den-
tifysolarinstallations across allof India.
Solution :
Finding solar farms from satellite imagery is straight-for ward to
formulateasasemanticsegmentationtask,butthelabelsth atwere
availablefortheprojectwerebothfewandnotintheformatn eeded
forthis MLtask:only72pointlabelsoflocationsofsolarfa rmsin
two states were available (Takeaway 3). To overcome this lim ita-
tion,weﬁrstpre-trainedaconvolutionalneuralnetworkto cluster
pixels in the input satellite imagery by color (i.e. in an uns uper-
vised manner). We then used an interactive training applica tion
toquicklyﬁne-tunethenetworktosegmenttheclassesofint erest
andusedthisﬁne-tunedmodeltoobtainweaksegmentationla bels
fortheentiretyofthestudyarea.Theseweaklabelsmakeitp ossi-
bletotrainasupervisedsemantic segmentationnetworktha twas
capable of accurately detecting solar farms. Solar farms fo und by
thissupervisedmodelwerevalidatedbyanalystsattheNGO. Into-
talwewereabletoﬁndandvalidate1422solarinstallations across
India. The human-in-the-loop process we used was a crucialc om-
ponentinbothtrainingand evaluation,enablingMLmodelsy ield
reliableresultsgiventhesmallamountsoflabelsavailabl einitially
(Takeaway 9). Given the large area of interest, we must also r ely
4https://www.acleddata.com/data/

==== Page 9 ====
on free satellite imagery, which is lower in resolution than com-
mercial imagery; we accept this constraint to ensure our sol ution
remains practically useful in the long term as the NGO update s
the map each year (Takeaway 10). To reduce the number of false
positive identiﬁcations, we incorporated OpenStreetMap d ata to
remove areas of roads, snow and water bodies, a post-process ing
step informed byexpertiseingeospatial analysis (Takeawa y 6).
7 CONCLUSION
Our work presents a broad overview of the considerations nec es-
sarywhileworkingonAI4Gproblemsandthechallenges encou n-
teredtherein.WeobservethatthemostusefulAI4Gprojects result
from working closely with speciﬁc stakeholders and underst and-
ing their operations and needs; attention to the particular char-
acteristics of the problem while developing ML models, metr ics
and evaluation; a deep understanding of ethics and fairness con-
cerns;acommitmenttosoundscientiﬁcandengineeringprac tices
andatransferoftechnologythatempowersthebeneﬁciaries toun-
derstand and learnfrom thesolution,and hopefully,adapti t with
theirchangingneeds.Tosupportourobservationswepresen tsev-
eral examples from our own experiences and relevant literat ure
and summarize the learned lessons in takeaways. We hope that
our endeavor helps researchers who are passionate about soc ial
good causes by bridging the gap between ML methodologies and
their potential for relevant impact. However, we note that t here
are many problems and questions still outstanding, and that we
are continually learning and growing our own repertoire in t ack-
ling challenging issues and working with POs. Becoming good at
AI4G is a process that we are actively engaged in, and we hope
others joinus and learnwith us.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WewouldliketothankKarthikeyanRamamurthyforhelpfulfe ed-
backonaninitialdraft.Wewouldalsoliketothankthemanyp art-
nerorganizationswhohavecollaboratedwithusoverthepas tsev-
eral years.
REFERENCES
[1] NaheedRAbbasi,HelenMShaw,DarrellSRigel,RobertJFr iedman,WilliamH
McCarthy,ImanOsman,AlfredWKopf,andDavidPolsky.2004. Earlydiagnosis
of cutaneous melanoma: revisiting the ABCD criteria. JAMA292, 22 (2004),
2771–2776.
[2] Raja Abdulrahim. 2021. AI Emerges as Crucial Tool for Gro ups Seek-
ing Justice for Syria War Crimes. The Wall Street Journal (2021).
https://www.wsj.com/articles/ai-emerges-as-crucial- tool-for-groups-seeking-justice-for-syria-war-crime s-11613228401
[3] Jorge A Ahumada, Eric Fegraus, Tanya Birch, Nicole Flore s, Roland Kays, Tim-
othy G O’Brien, Jonathan Palmer, Stephanie Schuttler, Jenn ifer Y Zhao, Walter
Jetz,et al. 2020. Wildlife insights:A platform to maximize the potential of cam-
era trap and other passive sensor wildlife data for the plane t.Environmental
Conservation 47,1(2020), 1–6.
[4] MicheleAvanzo,JosephStancanello, and IssamElNaqa.2 017. Beyondimaging:
the promiseofradiomics. PhysicaMedica 38(2017), 122–139.
[5] N. Baker, H. Lu, Gennady Erlikhman, and P. Kellman. 2020. Local features and
global shape information in object classiﬁcation by deep co nvolutional neural
networks. VisionResearch 172 (2020), 46–61.
[6] Andriy I Bandos, Howard E Rockette, and David Gur. 2013. S ubject-centered
free-responseROC(FROC) analysis. Medical physics 40,5 (2013), 051706.
[7] ShimaaBaraka,BenjaminAkera,BibekAryal,TenzingShe rpa,FinuShresta,An-
thony Ortiz,KrisSankaran,JuanLavistaFerres,MirMatin, and Yoshua Bengio.
2020. Machine Learning for Glacier Monitoring in the Hindu K ush Himalaya.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05013 (2020).
[8] SaraBeery,YangLiu,DanMorris,JimPiavis,AshishKapo or,NeelJoshi,Markus
Meister,andPietroPerona.2020. Syntheticexamplesimpro vegeneralizationforrare classes. In The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Visi on.
863–873.
[9] Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. 2018. Reco gnition in Terra
Incognita.In ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision .Munich,
Germany.
[10] BettinaBerendt.2019.AIfortheCommonGood?!Pitfall s,challenges,andethics
pen-testing. Paladyn, Journal ofBehavioral Robotics 10, 1(2019), 44–65.
[11] Roderic Broadhurst. 2020. Child sex abuse images and ex ploitation materials.
InTheHumanFactorofCybercrime ,RutgerLeukfeldtand ThomasJ.Holt (Eds.).
Routledge, 310–336.
[12] MauroCastelli,LeonardoVanneschi,andAlešPopovič. 2015. Predictingburned
areasof forest ﬁres:anartiﬁcialintelligence approach. Fireecology 11, 1 (2015),
106–118.
[13] Lowik Chanussot, Abhishek Das,Siddharth Goyal, Thiba utLavril, Muhammed
Shuaibi, Morgane Riviere, Kevin Tran, Javier Heras-Doming o, Caleb Ho, Wei-
hua Hu, et al. 2020. The Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community
Challenges. arXiv preprintarXiv:2010.09990 (2020).
[14] Nan-Chen Chen, Margaret Drouhard, Rafal Kocielnik, Ji na Suh, and Cecilia R
Aragon. 2018. Using machine learning to support qualitativ e coding in social
science:Shifting thefocustoambiguity. ACMTransactionsonInteractiveIntelli-
gent Systems(TiiS) 8, 2(2018), 1–20.
[15] Michael Chui, James Manyika, and Mehdi Miremadi. 2018. What AI can and
can’t do (yet) foryourbusiness. McKinseyQuarterly 1 (2018), 97–108.
[16] JimCollins.2019. Turningtheﬂywheel:amonographtoaccompanygoodtogreat .
Random House.
[17] Josh Cowls, Thomas King, MariarosariaTaddeo, and Luci ano Floridi. 2019. De-
signing AI for socialgood: Sevenessential factors. SSRN 3388669 (2019).
[18] FeiFang,ThanhHongNguyen,RobPickles,WaiYLam,Gopa lasamyRClements,
BoAn,AmandeepSingh,MilindTambe,AndrewLemieux,etal.2 016.Deploying
PAWS: Field Optimization of the Protection Assistant for Wi ldlife Security.. In
AAAI,Vol. 16. 3966–3973.
[19] FeiFang, Milind Tambe,BistraDilkina,andAndrew JPlu mptre. 2019. Artiﬁcial
intelligence and conservation . CambridgeUniversityPress.
[20] SalvadorGarcía,JuliánLuengo,andFranciscoHerrera .2015.Datapreprocessing
in data mining . Springer.
[21] Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A.
Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. 2019. ImageNet-trained CNN s are biased to-
wardstexture;increasingshapebiasimprovesaccuracyand robustness.In Inter-
national Conferenceon Learning Representations .
[22] Shahrzad Gholami, Narendran Kodandapani, Jane Wang, a nd Juan M. Lav-
ista Ferres. 2021. Where there’s Smoke, there’s Fire: Wildﬁ re Risk Predictive
ModelingviaHistoricalClimateData.In AnnualConferenceonInnovativeAppli-
cationsof ArtiﬁcialIntelligence (IAAI) .
[23] Shahrzad Gholami, Sara Mc Carthy, Bistra Dilkina, Andr ew J Plumptre, Milind
Tambe,MargaretDriciru,FredWanyama,AggreyRwetsiba,Mu staphaNsubaga,
Joshua Mabonga, et al. 2018. Adversary Models Account for Im perfect Crime
Data: Forecasting and Planning against Real-world Poacher s. InAAMAS. 823–
831.
[24] Carla Gomes, Thomas Dietterich, Christopher Barrett, Jon Conrad, Bistra Dilk-
ina,Stefano Ermon, FeiFang, Andrew Farnsworth,AlanFern, Xiaoli Fern,et al.
2019. Computationalsustainability:Computingforabette rworldandasustain-
ablefuture. Commun.ACM 62,9 (2019), 56–65.
[25] Noel Gorelick, Matt Hancher, Mike Dixon, Simon Ilyushc henko, David Thau,
andRebeccaMoore.2017. GoogleEarthEngine:Planetary-sc alegeospatialanal-
ysisforeveryone. Remote sensingofEnvironment 202 (2017), 18–27.
[26] Ben Green. 2019. “Good” isn’t good enough. In Proceedings of the AI for Social
Good workshopatNeurIPS .
[27] Saul Greenberg. 2020. Automated Image Recognition for Wildlife Camera Traps:
Making itWork forYou . Technical Report. Science.
[28] Ritwik Gupta, Bryce Goodman, Nirav Patel, Ricky Hosfel t, Sandra Sajeev, Eric
Heim,JigarDoshi,KeaneLucas,HowieChoset,andMatthewGa ston.2019. Cre-
ating xBD:A DatasetforAssessingBuilding DamagefromSate llite Imagery.In
Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionan d PatternRecogni-
tion (CVPR)Workshops .
[29] Hanxiang Hao, Sriram Baireddy, Emily R Bartusiak, Lati sha Konz, Kevin La-
Tourette, Michael Gribbons, Moses Chan, Mary L Comer, and Ed ward J Delp.
2020. An Attention-Based System for Damage Assessment Usin g Satellite Im-
agery.arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06643 (2020).
[30] JamieHayes,LucaMelis,GeorgeDanezis,andEmilianoD eCristofaro.2019. LO-
GAN: Membershipinference attacksagainstgenerative mode ls.Proceedings on
Privacy EnhancingTechnologies 2019,1 (2019), 133–152.
[31] Fred Hohman, Kanit Wongsuphasawat, MaryBeth Kery,and KayurPatel. 2020.
Understanding and VisualizingData Iteration inMachine Le arning. In Proceed-
ingsof the 2020CHIConference onHuman Factorsin Computing Systems.1–13.
[32] Anjali Jaiswal and Madhura Joshi. 2020. Climate Action : All Eyes on India.
https://www.nrdc.org/experts/anjali-jaiswal/climate -action-all-eyes-india
[33] Bargav Jayaraman, Lingxiao Wang, David Evans, and Quan quan Gu. 2020. Re-
visiting Membership Inference Under Realistic Assumption s.arXiv preprint

==== Page 10 ====
arXiv:2005.10881 (2020).
[34] NealJean,MarshallBurke,MichaelXie,W MatthewDavis ,DavidBLobell,and
Stefano Ermon. 2016. Combining satellite imagery and machi ne learning to
predict poverty. Science353,6301 (2016), 790–794.
[35] Alexandre Lacoste, Alexandra Luccioni, Victor Schmid t, and Thomas Dandres.
2019. Quantifying the Carbon Emissions of Machine Learning .arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.09700 (2019).
[36] Maxime Lenormand, Sylvie Huet, Floriana Gargiulo, and Guillaume Deﬀuant.
2012. A UniversalModel of Commuting Networks. PLoS ONE 7,10 (2012).
[37] XiyangLiu,YixiXu,Sumit Mukherjee,and JuanLavistaF erres.2020. MACE:A
Flexible Framework for Membership Privacy Estimation in Ge nerative Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05683 (2020).
[38] Gary Marcus. 2019. An Epidemic of AI Misinformation. The Gradient (2019).
https://thegradient.pub/an-epidemic-of-ai-misinform ation/
[39] D Douglas Miller and Eric W Brown. 2018. Artiﬁcial intel ligence in medical
practice: the question to the answer? The American journal of medicine 131, 2
(2018), 129–133.
[40] JaredMoore.2019. AI for not bad. FrontiersinBig Data 2(2019), 32.
[41] Sumit Mukherjee, Yixi Xu, Anusua Trivedi,and Juan Lavi staFerres. 2019. Pro-
tecting GANs against privacy attacks by preventing overﬁtt ing.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.00071 (2019).
[42] Md Nasir,BrianBaucom,Panayiotis Georgiou, and Shrik anth Narayanan.2015.
Redundancy analysis of behavioral coding for couples thera py and improved
estimation of behavior from noisy annotations. In 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference onAcoustics,Speech and Signal Processing(ICASSP) . IEEE, 1886–1890.
[43] MdNasir,BrianRBaucom,CraigJBryan,ShrikanthSNara yanan,andPanayio-
tisGGeorgiou.2017. ComplexityinSpeech and itsRelationt o Emotional Bond
in Therapist-Patient Interactions During Suicide Risk Ass essment Interviews..
InINTERSPEECH .3296–3300.
[44] Mohammad Sadegh Norouzzadeh,Anh Nguyen, MargaretKos mala, Alexandra
Swanson,MeredithS.Palmer,CraigPacker,andJeﬀClune.20 18. Automatically
identifying, counting, and describing wild animals in came ra-trapimages with
deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2018).
[45] Felipe Oviedo, Zekun Ren, Xue Hansong, Siyu Isaac Parke r Tian, Kaicheng
Zhang,MariyaLayurova,ThomasHeumueller,NingLi,ErikBi rgersson,Shijing
Sun, et al. 2020. Bridging the gap betweenphotovoltaics R&D and manufactur-
ing with data-drivenoptimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13599 (2020).
[46] Kasey Panetta. 2020. 5 Trends Drive the Gart-
ner Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies, 2020.
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/5-trends -drive-the-gartner-hype-cycle-for-emerging-technolo gies-2020/
[47] Clionadh Raleigh, Andrew Linke, Håvard Hegre, and Joak im Karlsen. 2010. In-
troducing ACLED: an armed conﬂict location and event datase t: special data
feature.Journal of peace research 47,5 (2010), 651–660.
[48] VikasCRaykar,ShipengYu,LindaHZhao,GerardoHermos illoValadez,Charles
Florin, Luca Bogoni, and Linda Moy. 2010. Learning from crow ds.Journal of
Machine Learning Research 11, 4(2010).
[49] Zekun Ren, Felipe Oviedo, Maung Thway, Siyu IP Tian, Yue Wang, Hansong
Xue, Jose Dario Perea, MariyaLayurova,Thomas Heumueller, Erik Birgersson,
et al. 2020. Embedding physics domain knowledge into a Bayes ian network
enableslayer-by-layerprocessinnovationfor photovolta ics.npj Computational
Materials 6,1 (2020), 1–9.
[50] CalebRobinsonandBistraDilkina.2018. Amachinelear ningapproachto mod-
eling human migration. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on
Computingand Sustainable Societies . 1–8.
[51] CalebRobinson,LeHou,KolyaMalkin,RachelSoobitsky ,JacobCzawlytko,Bis-
traDilkina,andNebojsaJojic.2019. Largescalehigh-reso lutionlandcovermap-
ping with multi-resolution data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Visionand Pattern Recognition . 12726–12735.
[52] CalebRobinson,AnthonyOrtiz,KolyaMalkin,BlakeEli as,AndiPeng,DanMor-
ris, Bistra Dilkina, and Nebojsa Jojic. 2019. Human-Machin e Collaboration for
FastLand CoverMapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04176 (2019).
[53] MarcosRodriguesandJuandelaRiva.2014.Aninsightin tomachine-learningal-
gorithmstomodelhuman-causedwildﬁreoccurrence. EnvironmentalModelling
&Software 57(2014), 192–201.
[54] David Rolnick, Priya L Donti, Lynn H Kaack, Kelly Kochan ski, Alexandre La-
coste, Kris Sankaran, Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic -Dupont, Natasha
Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, et al. 2019. Tackling climate c hange with ma-
chine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05433 (2019).
[55] Mohammad Sadegh Norouzzadeh, DanMorris,Sara Beery, N eel Joshi, Nebojsa
Jojic, and Jeﬀ Clune. 2019. A deep active learning system for species identiﬁ-
cation and counting in camera trap images. Methods in Ecology and Evolution
(2019).
[56] YoussefSaﬁand AbdelazizBouroumi.2013. Predictiono f forestﬁresusingarti-
ﬁcialneuralnetworks. Applied MathematicalSciences 7,6 (2013), 271–286.
[57] Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highﬁll, D iana Akrong,
Praveen Kumar Paritosh, and Lora Mois Aroyo. 2021. "Everyon e wants to do
the model work,not the datawork":DataCascadesinHigh-Sta kesAI.[58] Stefan Schneider, Saul Greenberg, Graham W Taylor, and Stefan C Kremer.
2020. Three critical factors aﬀecting automated image spec ies recognition per-
formance forcameratraps. Ecologyand evolution 10,7 (2020), 3503–3517.
[59] Daniel Sheldon, Andrew Farnsworth, Jed W Irvine, Benja min Van Doren,
Kevin F Webb, Thomas G Dietterich, and Steve Kelling. 2013. A pproximate
Bayesianinferenceforreconstructingvelocitiesofmigra tingbirdsfromweather
radar.InProceedings of theTwenty-Seventh AAAIConferenceon Artiﬁc ialIntelli-
gence.
[60] TaoSheng,ChenFeng,ShaojieZhuo,XiaopengZhang,Lia ngShen,andMickey
Aleksic.2018. A quantization-friendly separableconvolu tion formobilenets. In
20181stWorkshoponEnergyEﬃcientMachineLearningandCog nitiveComputing
for Embedded Applications (EMC2) .IEEE, 14–18.
[61] Zheyuan Ryan Shi, Claire Wang, and Fei Fang. 2020. Artiﬁ cial intelligence for
social good: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01818 (2020).
[62] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vital y Shmatikov. 2017.
Membership inference attacks against machine learning mod els. In2017 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 3–18.
[63] EmmaStrubell,Ananya Ganesh,and AndrewMcCallum.201 9. Energy and pol-
icyconsiderationsfordeeplearninginNLP.In 57thAnnual MeetingoftheAsso-
ciation forComputational Linguistics(ACL) .
[64] ShijingSun,ArmiTiihonen,FelipeOviedo,ZheLiu,Jan akThapa,NoorTitanPu-
tri Hartono, Anuj Goyal, Clio Batali, Alex Encinas, Jason Yo o, et al. 2021. A
Physical Data Fusion Approach to Optimize Compositional St ability of Halide
Perovskites. Matter(2021).
[65] Saeid Asgari Taghanaki, Yefeng Zheng, S Kevin Zhou, Bog dan Georgescu,
Puneet Sharma, Daguang Xu, Dorin Comaniciu, and GhassanHam arneh. 2019.
Comboloss:Handlinginputandoutputimbalanceinmulti-or gansegmentation.
Computerized Medical Imagingand Graphics 75(2019), 24–33.
[66] Erik Trautman. 2018. The Virtuous Cycle of AI Products.
https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/the-virtuous-cyc le-of-ai-products
[67] Anusua Trivedi,Sumit Mukherjee, Edmund Tse, Anne Ewin g, and JuanLavista
Ferres.2019. RisksofUsingNon-veriﬁedOpenData:Acasest udyonusingMa-
chine Learning techniques for predicting Pregnancy Outcom es in India. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.02136 (2019).
[68] TinkaValentijn,JacopoMargutti,MarcvandenHomberg ,andJormaLaaksonen.
2020.Multi-HazardandSpatialTransferabilityofaCNNfor AutomatedBuilding
DamageAssessment. Remote Sensing 12,17 (2020), 2839.
[69] Adam Van Etten, Dave Lindenbaum, and Todd M Bacastow. 20 18. Spacenet:
A remote sensing dataset and challenge series. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01232
(2018).
[70] Ricardo Vinuesa, Hossein Azizpour, Iolanda Leite, Mad eline Balaam, Virginia
Dignum, Sami Domisch, Anna Felländer, Simone Daniela Langh ans, Max
Tegmark, and Francesco Fuso Nerini. 2020. The role of artiﬁc ial intelligence
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature communications 11, 1
(2020), 1–10.
[71] RandiVita,SwapnilMahajan,JamesAOverton,Sandeep K umarDhanda,Sheri-
dan Martini, Jason R Cantrell, Daniel K Wheeler, Alessandro Sette, and Bjoern
Peters. 2019. The immune epitope database (IEDB): 2018 upda te.Nucleic acids
research47,D1 (2019), D339–D343.
[72] Kiri Wagstaﬀ. 2012. Machine learning that matters. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1206.4656 (2012).
[73] SherrieWang,WilliamChen,SangMichaelXie,GeorgeAz zari,andDavidBLo-
bell.2020. Weaklysuperviseddeeplearningforsegmentati onofremotesensing
imagery. Remote Sensing 12,2 (2020), 207.
[74] BenGWeinstein.2018. Acomputervisionforanimalecol ogy.JournalofAnimal
Ecology87,3 (2018), 533–545.
[75] Christine T Wolf. 2020. Democratizing AI? experience a nd accessibility in the
age of artiﬁcialintelligence. XRDS: Crossroads,The ACMMagazine for Students
26, 4(2020), 12–15.
[76] Carole-Jean Wu, David Brooks, Kevin Chen, Douglas Chen , Sy Choudhury,
Marat Dukhan, Kim Hazelwood, Eldad Isaac, Yangqing Jia, Bil l Jia, et al. 2019.
Machinelearningatfacebook:Understandinginferenceatt heedge.In 2019IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Archi tecture (HPCA) .
IEEE, 331–344.
[77] Liyang Xie, Kaixiang Lin, Shu Wang, Fei Wang, and Jiayu Z hou. 2018. Diﬀer-
entially privategenerativeadversarialnetwork. arXiv preprintarXiv:1802.06739
(2018).
[78] Lily Xu, Shahrzad Gholami, Sara Mc Carthy, Bistra Dilki na, Andrew Plumptre,
MilindTambe,RohitSingh,MustaphaNsubuga,JoshuaMabong a,MargaretDri-
ciru, et al. 2020. Stay Ahead of Poachers: Illegal Wildlife P oaching Prediction
and Patrol Planning Under Uncertainty with Field Test Evalu ations (Short Ver-
sion). In 2020 IEEE 36th International Conference on Data Engineerin g (ICDE).
IEEE, 1898–1901.
[79] AmirHosseinYazdavar,HusseinSAl-Olimat,MonirehEb rahimi,GoonmeetBa-
jaj,TanviBanerjee,KrishnaprasadThirunarayan,Jyotish manPathak,andAmit
Sheth. 2017. Semi-supervisedapproachto monitoring clini cal depressivesymp-
toms in social media. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/ACMInternational Confer-
ence on Advances in Social NetworksAnalysisand Mining .1191–1198.

==== Page 11 ====
[80] John R Zech, Marcus A Badgeley, Manway Liu, Anthony B Cos ta, Joseph J Ti-
tano, and Eric Karl Oermann. 2018. Variable generalization performance of a
deeplearningmodeltodetectpneumoniainchestradiograph s:across-sectional
study.PLoS medicine 15,11 (2018), e1002683.
[81] Ming Zhong, Manuel Castellote, Rahul Dodhia, Juan Lavi sta Ferres, Mandy
Keogh,andArialBrewer.2020. Belugawhaleacousticsignal classiﬁcationusing
deep learning neural network models. The Journal of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica147, 3(2020), 1834–1841.
[82] MingZhong,JackLeBien,MarconiCampos-Cerqueira,Ra hulDodhia,JuanLav-
ista Ferres, Julian P Velev, and T Mitchell Aide. 2020. Multi species bioacous-
tic classiﬁcationusing transferlearning of deep convolut ional neural networks
with pseudo-labeling. Applied Acoustics 166 (2020), 107375.
[83] Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2018. A brief introduction to weakly supe rvised learning. Na-
tional Science Review 5,1 (2018), 44–53.

