==== Page 1 ====
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (2023) 37:1719–1778
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-023-00933-9
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods for black
box models
Francesco Bodria1·Fosca Giannotti1·Riccardo Guidotti3·
Francesca Naretto1·Dino Pedreschi3·Salvatore Rinzivillo2
Received: 24 November 2021 / Accepted: 10 March 2023 / Published online: 3 June 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The rise of sophisticated black-box machine learning models in Artiﬁcial Intelligencesystems has prompted the need for explanation methods that reveal how these models
work in an understandable way to users and decision makers. Unsurprisingly, the state-
of-the-art exhibits currently a plethora of explainers providing many different types ofexplanations. With the aim of providing a compass for researchers and practitioners,
this paper proposes a categorization of explanation methods from the perspective of
the type of explanation they return, also considering the different input data formats.The paper accounts for the most representative explainers to date, also discussing
similarities and discrepancies of returned explanations through their visual appearance.
A companion website to the paper is provided as a continuous update to new explainersas they appear. Moreover, a subset of the most robust and widely adopted explainers,
are benchmarked with respect to a repertoire of quantitative metrics.
Responsible editor: Johannes Fürnkranz.
B Francesco Bodria
francesco.bodria@sns.it
B Francesca Narettofrancesca.naretto@sns.it
Fosca Giannotti
fosca.giannotti@isti.cnr.it
Riccardo Guidotti
riccardo.guidotti@unipi.it
Dino Pedreschi
dino.pedreschi@di.unipi.it
Salvatore Rinzivillo
salvatore.rinzivillo@isti.cnr.it
1Scuola Normale Superiore, P.zz dei Cavalieri, 7, Pisa, Italy
2ISTI-CNR, Via Moruzzi, 1, Pisa, Italy
3University of Pisa, Largo Bruno Pontecorvo, 3, Pisa, Italy
123

==== Page 2 ====
1720 F. Bodria et al.
Keywords Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence ·Interpretable machine learning ·
Transparent models ·Benchmarking
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has become one of the most important scientiﬁc and tech-
nological areas, with a tremendous socio-economic impact in many aspects of modern
society. The impressive performance of AI systems is often reached by adopting
sophisticated Machine Learning (ML) models, whose complexity hides the logic of
their internal processes (Miller 2019 ). For this reason, such models are referred to as
“black-box models” (Freitas 2013 ; Pasquale 2015 ). Well-known examples of black-
box models used within current AI systems include deep learning models and ensemble
models such as bagging and boosting (Guidotti et al. 2019c ). The high performance
of such models in terms of accuracy comes together with a high degree of opaqueness
that might cause developers and users to overlook issues that the models may inherit
by training data due to different forms of hidden biases (Kurenkov 2020 ).
There is an inherent risk that relying on opaque models may lead to adopting
decisions that we do not fully understand or, even worse, violate ethical principles
or legal norms. These risks are particularly relevant in high-stakes decision-makingscenarios, such as medicine, justice, ﬁnance, recruitment, access to public beneﬁts, and
so on (Rudin 2019 ); the lack of transparency and trust may explain the relatively low
adoption rate of current AI-based decision support systems in the mentioned areas.Moreover, companies that embed black-box ML models in their AI products and
applications risk incurring a potential loss of safety and trust (Chouldechova 2017 ).
In 2018, the European Parliament introduced in the GDPR
1a set of clauses for auto-
mated decision-making in terms of a right of explanation for all individuals to obtain
“meaningful explanations of the logic involved” when automated decision making
takes place. Also, in 2019, the High-Level Expert Group on AI presented the ethics
guidelines for trustworthy AI,2where explainability is indicated as one of the fun-
damental requirements for trustworthiness. Today, the same principle has become acornerstone of the AI Act, the proposed new EU regulation establishing standardized
rules on artiﬁcial intelligence.
3Indeed, there is a widespread and increasing consensus
on the urgency of implementing appropriate explanation tools, although it represents ascientiﬁc challenge that is still largely open. Meaningful explanations are fundamental
for debugging models, unveiling possible biases, tackling ethical issues, and fostering
trust and collaboration between humans and their AI assistants.
Unsurprisingly, as a reaction to the mentioned concerns, we have witnessed in the
last years the rise of a plethora of explanation methods for black-box models (Guidotti
et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Theissler et al. 2022 ;
Guidotti 2022 ; Yuan et al. 2020b ) both from academia and industries. eXplainable
1https://ec.europa.eu/justice/smedataprotect/ .
2https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai .
3https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-
artiﬁcial-intelligence .
123

==== Page 3 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1721
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) (Miller 2019 ) emerged as a broad and very active research
area, investigating methods that provide many different types of explanations, each
capturing diverse aspects of a black-box model.
The objective of this work is to provide a fresh account of the ideas and tools
of the current generation of explanation methods, or explainers, from the perspec-
tive of the different types of explanations, that such methods produce as an output.4
To this purpose, we provide a comprehensive ontology of the explanations returned,
taking into account the most popular data formats: tabular data, images, and text,
with an account also of time series and graphs. We mainly focus on the most recentapproaches of post-hoc explainers but also consider some promising intrinsic explain-
ers (“explainable-by-design” models).
While presenting the plethora of existing XAI methods, we provide more details
on solid, pioneering approaches but try to discuss also less known recent methods. In
any case, further information can be found by the reader in the companion website
of this paper, the XAI Live Survey
5that we are maintaining to keep pace with newly
emergent methods. We report extensive examples of the various explanations for each
data type, highlighting similarities and discrepancies of returned explanations through
their visual appearance. Finally, a subset of methods, selected among the most robust
and widely adopted, are benchmarked with respect to a collection of quantitative
metrics, assessing faithfulness, stability, robustness, and execution time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2summarizes existing sur-
veys on XAI and highlights the differences between this work and previous ones.
Section 3presents the proposed explanation-based taxonomy of explanation methods,
while Sect. 4illustrates and formalizes existing evaluation measures typically used to
benchmark explanation methods. Sections 5,6and 7present the details of the most
recent and widely adopted explanation methods, together with examples and quanti-tative comparison. Finally, Sect. 10summarizes the crucial aspects that emerged from
the analysis of state of the art, and brieﬂy discusses future research directions.
2 Related works
The widespread need for XAI in the last years caused an explosion of interest in the
design of explanation methods (Goebel et al. 2018 ). The books (Molnar 2022 ; Samek
et al. 2019 ) present in detail a restricted set of the best-known methodologies to make
general ML models interpretable (Molnar 2022 ) and to explain the outcomes of deep
neural networks (Samek et al. 2019 ).
In (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), the classiﬁcation is based on four categories of prob-
lems, and the explanation methods are classiﬁed according to the problem they are
able to solve. The ﬁrst distinction is between explanation by design [(also named
intrinsic interpretability), and black-box explanation (also named post-hoc inter-
pretability (Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Murdoch et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 )]. The
4This work extends and completes “A Survey Of Methods For Explaining Black-Box Models” appeared
in ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(5), 1–42 (Guidotti et al. 2019c ).
5https://kdd-lab.github.io/XAISurvey/ .
123

==== Page 4 ====
1722 F. Bodria et al.
second distinction in (Guidotti et al. 2019c ) further classiﬁes the black-box explana-
tion problem into model explanation, outcome explanation, and black-box inspection.
Model explanation, achieved by global explainers (Craven and Shavlik 1995 ), aims
at explaining the whole logic of a model. Outcome explanation, achieved by local
explainers (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ; Lundberg and Lee 2017 ), understands the reasons for
a speciﬁc prediction. Finally, the aim of the black-box inspection is to retrieve a visualrepresentation for understanding how the black-box works. Another crucial distinction
highlighted in (Martens et al. 2007 ; Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ;
Došilovi´ ce ta l . 2018 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 ) is between model-speciﬁc and model-
agnostic explanation methods. This classiﬁcation depends on whether the technique
adopted to explain can work only on a speciﬁc black-box model or can be adopted on
any black-box.
In (Gilpin et al. 2018 ), the focus is to propose a uniﬁed taxonomy to classify the
existing literature. The following key terms are deﬁned: explanation ,interpretability ,
andexplainability . Interpretability consists of describing the internals of a system in a
way that is understandable to humans. A system is called interpretable if it produces
descriptions that are simple enough for a person to understand using a vocabulary
that is meaningful to the user. An alternative classiﬁcation of deﬁnitions is presented
in (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), with a speciﬁc taxonomy for explainers of deep learning mod-
els. The leading concept of the classiﬁcation is Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence,i.e., a methodology for the large-scale implementation of AI methods in real organi-
zations with fairness, model explainability, and accountability at its core. Similarly
to (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), in (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), the term interpretability (or trans-
parency) is used to refer to a passive characteristic of a model that makes sense for
a human observer. On the other hand, explainability is an active characteristic of a
model, denoting any action taken with the intent of clarifying or detailing its internalfunctions. Further taxonomies and deﬁnitions are presented in (Murdoch et al. 2019 ;
Carvalho et al. 2019 ). Another branch of the literature review focuses on the quanti-
tative and qualitative evaluation of explanation methods (Samek et al. 2019 ;C a r v a l h o
et al. 2019 ). Also, we are recently witnessing to XAI surveys devoted to speciﬁc topics
such as XAI methods for time series classiﬁcation (Theissler et al. 2022 ), or counter-
factual explanations (Guidotti 2022 ; Karimi et al. 2020b ). Finally, we highlight that
the literature reviews related to explainability are focused not just on ML and AI but
also on social studies (Miller 2019 ; Byrne 2019 ), recommendation systems (Zhang and
Chen 2020 ), model-agents(Anjomshoae et al. 2019 ), and domain-speciﬁc applications
such as health and medicine (Tjoa and Guan 2019 ).
In this survey, we propose an alternative view w.r.t. the taxonomy introduced
in (Guidotti et al. 2019c ) but starting from the data perspective. In light of the works
mentioned above, we believe that an updated systematic categorization of explanation
methods based on the type of explanation returned and their comparison is still miss-ing in the literature and might be beneﬁcial for end users. Indeed, users requiring an
explanation ﬁrst know which data type they are dealing with, then the type of explana-
tion they can have for that data type, and ﬁnally, they can select the best XAI methodthat can be used to obtain such explanation among the available ones comparing the
properties offered by the method as well as a ﬁrst general evaluation.
123

==== Page 5 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1723
3 Explanation-based taxonomy
The goal of this survey is to provide the reader with a guide to map a problem set-
ting with a certain data type and black-box model to a set of compatible explanation
methods. Thus, in this section, we present a novel taxonomy of XAI methods based
on the type of explanation returned. To collect the papers presented in the followingsections, we opted for a semi-systematic literature review (Snyder 2019 ): (i) we con-
ducted a systematic search on Scopus using a set of XAI search terms like “explain*”
or “interpretab*” in title or abstracts; (ii) we conducted a dynamic search to uncoveradditional papers in the different subﬁelds (i.e., by collecting papers citing the once
we found with the ﬁrst search); (iii) the collected papers were analyzed by the authors
based on the number of citations, venue, and availability of an open-source library.
6
In particular, we focus our survey on explanations and explanation methods acting
on the three principal data types recognized in the literature: tabular data, images and
text(Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ; Miller 2019 ). For each data type,
we have distinguished different types of explanations illustrated in Fig. 1. A reader
should use Fig. 1as follows. First, she should identify through the column header
the data type of her problem setting. After that, each row offers an alternative type of
explanation with an example. For instance, if we are interested in images, we should
look to the second column. Here we can ﬁnd saliency maps and concept attribution asimage-speciﬁc explanation types. The last rows reports visualizations and examples of
prototypes and counterfactuals, i.e., instance-based explanations, which are available
independently from the data type analyzed. Finally, once the reader has selected thedesired/most-suitable explanation type on Fig. 1, she can ﬁnd in the corresponding sec-
tion an overview of the most well-known and used explanation methods able to return
that kind of explanation. For the sake of completeness, other types of data, increasinglypresent in literature, such as graphs (Yuan et al. 2020b ) and time series (Theissler et al.
2022 ), have been included in a separate section. A Table appearing at the beginning
of each subsequent section summarizes the explanation methods by grouping themaccordingly to the classiﬁcation illustrated in Fig. 1. Besides, in every section, we
present the meaning of each type of explanation. The acronyms reported in capital
letters in Fig. 1, in this section and in the following, are used in the remainder of the
work to quickly categorize the various explanations and explanation methods.
In the rest of this section, we recall the existing taxonomy and classiﬁcation of
XAI methods present in the literature (Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and Berrada 2018 ;
6In particular, we adopted the following criteria. First, contributions with working implementation There
are several publications in the ﬁeld of XAI, but the majority of them do not have a working implementation.Since the goal of this survey is also to provide a quantitative comparison among different XAI methods,
the availability of an implementation is a key factor. Second, contributions with a high number of citations .
In this survey, we discuss and also present some works that do not have implementations. These works are
still considered due to the fact that they have a great number of citations (more than 150); hence, in our
opinion, they are pillars of this ﬁeld. Third, XAI pillars . We also considered some works that do not have
working implementations, but they were published several years ago with a great number of citations. For
this reason, we considered them pillars of this research ﬁeld, and we added them to the survey. Fourth,
works considering ethical aspects . Lastly, we considered works that tackle ethical aspects, such as privacy.
This choice is due to the fact that the GDPR and the AI Act are changing the focus of the works in XAI:
during the last few years, the concept of trustworthy AI is gaining a lot of interest, leading up to many worksthat consider not only the aspect of explanation, but also fairness, privacy, and accountability.
123

==== Page 6 ====
1724 F. Bodria et al.
TABULAR IMAGE TEXT TIME SERIES GRAPHS
Feature Importance (FI)
A vector containing a value
for each feature. Each value
indicates the importance of
the feature for the
classiﬁcation.Saliency Maps (SM)
A map that highlights the
contribution of each pixel at
the prediction.Sentence Highlighting
(SH)
A map that highlights the
contribution of each word to
the prediction.Series Highlighting
A score for every point in
the series, which highlights
the contribution to the
prediction.Node Highlighting
A score for every node in
the graph which highlights
the contribution of that
node to the prediction.
Rule-Based (RB)
A set of premises that the
record must satisfy in order
to meet the rule’s
consequence.
r=E d u c a t i o n ≤
College →≤ 50kConcept Attribution
(CA)
Compute attribution to a
target “concept” given by
the user. For example, how
sensitive is the output (a
prediction of zebra) to a
concept (the presence of
stripes)?Attention Based (AB)
This type of explanation
gives a matrix of scores
which reveals how the words
in the sentence are related
to each other.Attention Based
This type of explanation
gives a matrix of scores that
reveal how the points in the
series are related to each
other.Edge Highlighting
A score for every edge in
the graph which highlights
the contribution of edges to
the prediction.
Prototypes (PR)
The user is provided with a series of examples that characterize a class of the black box
p=A g e ∈[35,60],
Education ∈
[College ,Master ]→“≥50k”p=→
“cat”p= “... not bad ...” →
“positive”Graph Prototypes
Identifying which part of
the graph has inﬂuenced
the prediction
Counterfactuals (CF)
The user is provided with a series of examples similar to the input query but with diﬀerent class prediction
q=Education ≤College →
“≤50k”
c=Education ≥Master →
“≥50k”q= →“3”
c= →“8”q= The movie is not bad
→“positive”
c= The movie is that bad
→“negative”
Fig. 1 Explanation-based taxonomy with examples divided for different data types
Fig. 2 Existing taxonomy for the classiﬁcation of explanation methods
Gilpin et al. 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Samek et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al. 2019 ) in order
to provide the reader a complete overview of the proposed explanation-based cate-
gorization of explanation methods. In the following, we summarize the fundamental
distinctions adopted to annotate the methods in Fig. 2:
–INtrinsically (IN) explainable methods are explainable by design methods that
return a decision, and the reasons for the decision are directly accessible becausethe model is transparent.
–Post-Hoc (PH) explanation methods provides explanations for a black-box model.
–Global (G) explanation methods aim at explaining the overall logic of a black-box
model. Therefore the explanation returned is a global, complete explanation valid
for any instance;
–Local (L) explainers aim at explaining the reasons for the decision of a black-box
model for a speciﬁc instance.
–Model-Agnostic (A) explanation methods can be used to interpret any type of
black-box model;
–Model-Speciﬁc (S) explanation methods that can be used to interpret only a speciﬁc
type of black-box model.
123

==== Page 7 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1725
Moreover, to provide the reader with a self-contained review of XAI methods,
we complete this section by reporting the deﬁnitions of explanation, interpretability,
transparency, and complexity present in the literature:
–Explanation (Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Guidotti et al. 2019c )i sa n interface between
humans and an AI decision-maker that is both comprehensible to humans and anaccurate proxy of AI. Consequently, explainability is the ability to provide a valid
explanation.
–Interpretability (Guidotti et al. 2019c ), or comprehensibility (Gleicher 2016 ), is
the ability of stakeholders to understand relevant aspects of the modeling pro-
cess. Interpretability and comprehensibility are tied to the evaluation of the model
complexity.
–Transparency (Arrieta et al. 2020 ), or equivalently understandability or intelligi-
bility, is the capacity of a model to be interpretable itself. Thus, the model allows
a human to direct understand its internal mechanism and its decision process.
–Complexity (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017 ) is the degree of effort required by a user
to comprehend an explanation. The complexity can consider the user background
or eventual time limitation necessary for the understanding.
Finally, the same taxonomy and categorization adopted in the survey are exploited in
aXAI Live Survey
7where the existing methods are further analyzed and continuously
updated with emergent approaches.
4 Evaluation measures for explanations
There is a wide debate on how to evaluate the quality of the explanation methods.
Often it is formulated as properties of the returned explanations aimed at capturingconcepts as goodness and usefulness of explanations (Guidotti et al. 2019c ; Adadi and
Berrada 2018 ; Gilpin et al. 2018 ; Arrieta et al. 2020 ; Samek et al. 2019 ; Carvalho et al.
2019 ). In the following, we describe a selection of established methodologies for the
evaluation of explanation methods both from the quantitative and qualitative point of
view which are typically used to judge the output of XAI methods.
Quantitative evaluation focuses on the performance of the explainer and on the
goodness of the explanations returned. In the following, we present the general idea
of each metric used later on for benchmarking. Since every metric may vary in its
application depending on data type, further details are provided in the various sections.
–Fidelity aims to evaluate how good is fat mimicking b. There are different imple-
mentations of ﬁdelity, depending on the type of explanator under analysis (Guidotti
et al. 2019a ). For example, in methods where there is a creation of a surrogate model
gto mimic b, ﬁdelity compares the prediction of bandgon the instances used to
train g.
–Stability aims at validating if similar instances obtain similar explanations. Stability
can be evaluated through the Lipschitz constant (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018 )
asL
x=max/bardblex−ex/prime/bardbl
/bardblx−x/prime/bardbl,∀x/prime∈Nxwhere xis the instance, exthe explanation and
Nxis a neighborhood of instances similar to x.
7https://kdd-lab.github.io/XAISurvey/ .
123

==== Page 8 ====
1726 F. Bodria et al.
–Deletion and Insertion (Petsiuk et al. 2018 ) are metrics that remove the features
that the explanation method ffound important and see how the performance of b
degrades. The intuition behind deletion is that removing the “cause” will force theblack-box to change its decision. Among the deletion methods, there is the Faith-
fulness (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018 ). It aims to validate if the relevance
scores indicate true importance: we expect higher importance values for attributesthat greatly inﬂuence the ﬁnal prediction.
8Given a black-box model band the
feature importance eextracted from an importance-based explanator f, the faith-
fulness method incrementally removes each of the attributes deemed important by
f. At each removal, the effect on the performance of bis evaluated. In general, a
sharp drop and a low area under the probability curve mean a good explanation.
On the other hand, the insertion metric takes a complementary approach. Typi-cally, insertion and deletion evaluations are tailored for speciﬁc types of explainers
called Feature Importance explainers for tabular data, Saliency Maps for image
data, and Sentence Highlighting for text data.
–Monotonicity (Luss et al. 2021 ) can be seen as an implementation of an insertion
method: it evaluates the effect of bby incrementally adding each attribute in order
of increasing importance. In this case, we expect that the black-box performance
increases by adding more and more features, thereby resulting in monotonically
increasing model performance.
–Running Time : the time needed to produce the explanation is also an important
evaluation.
It is worth noting that, to the best of our knowledge, there are currently no objec-
tive evaluation measures that can select the best explainer. A different approach to
evaluating explainers consists in generating synthetic ground truth explanations andcomparing them with those returned by the explainers (Guidotti 2021 ). However, this
evaluation with synthetic explanations cannot be transferred to an objective evalua-
tion of real data because we would not need an explainer if we knew the ground truthexplanation. Qualitative evaluation is important to understand the actual usability of
explanations from the point of view of the end-user: they satisfy human curiosity, ﬁnd
meanings, safety, social acceptance, and trust. In (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017 ), the
evaluation criteria for the qualitative evaluation are systematized into three categories:
–Functionally-grounded metrics aim to evaluate interpretability by exploiting some
formal deﬁnitions that are used as proxies. They do not require humans for valida-
tion. The challenge is to deﬁne the proxy to employ, depending on the context. Asan example, we can validate the interpretability of a model by showing the improve-
ments w.r.t. to another model already proven to be interpretable by human-based
experiments.
–Application-grounded evaluation methods require human experts to validate the
speciﬁc task under analysis (Williams et al. 2016 ; Suissa-Peleg et al. 2016 ). They
are usually employed in speciﬁc settings. For example, if the model is an assistant
in the decision-making process of doctors, the validation is done by the doctors.
–Human-grounded metrics evaluate the explanations through humans who are not
experts. The goal is to measure the overall understandability of the explanation in
8An implementation of faithfulness is available in aix360 presented in Sect. 9.
123

==== Page 9 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1727
simpliﬁed tasks (Lakkaraju et al. 2016 ; Kim et al. 2015 ). This validation is most
appropriate for general testing notions of the quality of an explanation.
In this work, we do not provide a qualitative evaluation from the human point of view,
but we try to fulﬁll these criteria by providing the user with a visual example of what
the explanation returned by the explainer looks like. This helps the user to understand
whether the explainer produced fulﬁlls his needs.
In the following section, besides illustrating explanation methods with respect to our
explanation-based taxonomy, we report a qualitative comparison of the explanations.
These examples might help the reader to understand how to interpret these explana-
tions returned by the different methods. Additionally, when possible, we benchmarked
the most widely used explanation methods on a set of datasets, and we report theirevaluation using the measures described in this section.
9
5 Explanations for tabular data
In this section, we present a selection of approaches for explaining the decision systems
acting on tabular data. In particular, we present the following types of explanations
based on: Features Importance (FI, Sect. 5.1),Rule (RB, Sect. 5.2),Prototype (PR), and
Counterfactual (CF) (Sect. 5.3). Table 1summarizes and categorizes the explainers.
The methods are sorted by the explanation type they produce. Every explanation
method is provided the author’s name, the year of publication, and the data type it canhandle. In addition, Table 1speciﬁes if the method is intrinsic (IN) or Post-hoc (PH), if
it provides Global explanations (G) or Local one(L), and if it is an Agnostic method(A)
or a model Speciﬁc one (S). Methods with code available are highlighted in blue. Afterthe presentation of the methods, we report the results of experiments obtained from
the application of the explainers on Logistic Regression (LG), XGBoost (XGB), and
Catboost (CAT) classiﬁers.
10trained on the adult andgerman dataset.11
5.1 Feature importance
Feature importance is one of the most popular types of explanation returned by
local explanation methods. For feature importance-based explanation methods, the
explainer assigns to each feature an importance value which represents how much thatparticular feature was important for the prediction under analysis. Formally, given
a record x, an explainer f(·)models a feature importance explanation as a vector
9All the experiments in the next sections are performed on a server with GPU: 1xTesla K80, compute 3.7,
having 2496 CUDA cores, 12GB GDDR5 VRAM, CPU: 1xsingle core hyperthreaded Xeon Processors
@2.3Ghz, i.e. (1 core, 2 threads) with 16 GB of RAM, or on a server: CPU: 16x Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold
5120 CPU @ 2.20GHz (64 bits), 63 GB RAM. The code for reproducing the results is available https://
github.com/kdd-lab/XAI-Survey .
10LG: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html
XGB: https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/python/python_intro.html CAT: https://catboost.ai/en/
docs/concepts/python-usages-examples
11adult :https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/adult ,german :https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
statlog+(german+credit+data) .
123

==== Page 10 ====
1728 F. Bodria et al.
Table 1 Summary of methods for explaining black-boxes for tabular data
Type Name Ref. Data type IN/PH G/L A/S
FI lrp Bach et al. ( 2015 ) ANY PH L A
lime Ribeiro et al. ( 2016 ) ANY PH L A
shap Lundberg and Lee ( 2017 ) ANY PH G/L A
maple Plumb et al. ( 2018 ) TAB PH/IN L A
ebm Nori et al. ( 2019 ) TAB IN G/L A
nam Agarwal et al. ( 2021 )T A B I N L S
ciu Anjomshoae et al. ( 2020 ) TAB PH L A
eem Chowdhury et al. ( 2022 ) TAB PH G A
dalex Lipovetsky ( 2022 ) ANY PH G/L A
RB trepan Craven and Shavlik ( 1995 ) TAB PH G S
msft Chipman et al. ( 1998 ) TAB PH G S
cmm Domingos ( 1998 ) TAB PH G S
dectext Boz ( 2002 ) TAB PH G S
sta Zhou and Hooker ( 2016 ) TAB PH G S
scalable- brl Yang et al. ( 2017 ) TAB IN G/L A
lore Guidotti et al. ( 2019a ) TAB PH L A
rulematrix Ming et al. ( 2019 ) TAB PH G/L A
anchor Ribeiro et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH G/L A
glocalx Setzu et al. ( 2019 ) TAB PH G/L A
skoperule Friedman and Popescu ( 2008 ) TAB PH G/L A
PR ps Bien and Tibshirani ( 2011 ) TAB IN G/L S
mmd- critic Kim et al. ( 2016 ) ANY IN G S
protodash Gurumoorthy et al. ( 2019 ) ANY IN G A
tsp Tan et al. ( 2020 ) TAB PH L S
CF cem Dhurandhar et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L S
cfx Albini et al. ( 2020 ) TAB PH L S
dice Mothilal et al. ( 2020 ) TAB PH L A
c- chave Pawelczyk et al. ( 2020 ) TAB PH L A
face Poyiadzi et al. ( 2020 ) ANY PH L A
Ares Ley et al. ( 2022 ) TAB PH G A
The methods are sorted by explanation type: Features Importance (FI), Rule-Based (RB), Counterfactuals
(CF), Prototypes (PR), and Decision Tree (DT). For every method, there is a data type on which it is possible
to apply it: only on tabular (TAB) or any data (ANY). If it is an Intrinsic Model (IN) or a Post-Hoc one
(PH), a local method (L) or a global one (G), and ﬁnally, if it is model-agnostic (A) or model-speciﬁc (S)
e={e1,e2,..., em}, in which the value ei∈eis the importance of the ithfeature for
the decision made by the black-box model b(x). For understanding the contribution of
each feature, the sign and the magnitude of each value eiare considered. W.r.t. the sign,
ifei<0, it means that the feature contributes negatively to the outcome y; otherwise,
ifei>0, the feature contributes positively. The magnitude, instead, represents how
great the contribution of the feature is to the ﬁnal prediction y. In particular, the greater
123

==== Page 11 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1729
the value of |ei|, the greater its contribution. Hence, when ei=0, it means that the
ithfeature is showing no contribution to the output decision. An example of a feature
based explanation is e={age=0.8,income =0.0,education =− 0.2},y=deny .
In this case, age is the most important feature for the decision deny ,income is not
affecting the outcome, and education has a small negative contribution.
LIME , Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ), is a
local model-agnostic explainer that returns explanations as feature importance vectors.
The main idea of lime is that the explanation may be derived locally from records gen-
erated randomly in the neighborhood of the instance that has to be explained. The keyfactor is that it samples instances both in the vicinity of x(which have a high weight)
and far away from x(low weight), exploiting π
x, a proximity measure able to capture
the locality. We denote bas the black-box and xas the instance we want to explain.
To learn the local behavior of b,lime draws samples weighted by πx. It samples these
instances around xby drawing nonzero elements of xuniformly at random. This gives
tolime a perturbed sample of instances {z∈Rd}to fed to the model band obtain b(z).
They are then used to train the explanation model g(·): a sparse linear model on the
perturbed samples. The local feature importance explanation consists of the weights
of the linear model. A number of papers focus on overcoming the limitations of lime ,
providing several variants of it. dlime (Zafar and Khan 2019 ) is a deterministic ver-
sion in which the neighbors are selected from the training data by an agglomerativehierarchical clustering. ilime (ElShawi et al. 2019 ) randomly generates the synthetic
neighborhood using weighted instances. alime (Shankaranarayana and Runje 2019 )
runs the random data generation only once at “training time”. kl- lime (Peltola
2018 ) adopts a Kullback–Leibler divergence to explain Bayesian predictive models.
qlime ( B r a m h a l le ta l . 2020 ) also consider nonlinear relationships using a quadratic
approximation. As presented in the following, lime can also be used on other data
types. In Fig. 3(upper part) are reported examples of lime
12explanations relative to
our experimentation on adult (a/b) and german (c/d).13We predicted the same
record using LG and CAT, and then we explained it. Interestingly, for adult (plots
a/b), lime considers a similar set of features as important (even if with different values
of importance) for the two models: on 6 features, only one differs. A different scenario
is obtained applying lime ongerman (plots c/d): different features are considered
important by the two classiﬁers. However, the conﬁdence of the prediction between
the two classiﬁers is quite different: both of them predict the output correctly, but CAT
has a higher value, suggesting that this could be the cause of differences between thetwo explanations.
SHAP , SHapley Additive exPlanations (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ), is a local model-
agnostic explanation method computing features importance by means of Shapley
values,
14a concept from cooperative game theory. The explanations returned by shap
areadditive feature attributions and respect the following deﬁnition: g(z/prime)=φ0+/summationtextM
i=1φiz/prime
i, where z/prime≈xas a real number, z/prime∈[0,1],φi∈Rare effects assigned
to each feature, while Mis the number of simpliﬁed input features. shap retains
12We refer to the original version of lime .
13For reproducibility reasons, we ﬁxed the random seed.
14We refer the interested reader to: https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/shapley.html .
123

==== Page 12 ====
1730 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 3 TOP :lime application on the same record for adult (a/b), german (c/d): a/c are the LG model
explanation and b/d the CAT model explanation. All the models correctly predicted the output class. BOT-
TOM : Force plot returned by shap explaining XGB on two records of adult : (e), labeled as class 1
(>50K) and, (f), labeled as class 0 ( ≤50K). Only the features that contributed more (i.e. higher values)
to the classiﬁcation are reported
three properties: (i) local accuracy , meaning that g(x)matches b(x); (ii) missingness ,
which allows for features xi=0 to have no attributed impact on the shap values; (iii)
stability , meaning that if a model changes so that the marginal contribution of a feature
value increases (or stays the same), the shap value also increases (or stays the same).
The construction of the shap values allow to employ them both locally , in which each
observation gets its own set of shap values, and globally , by exploiting collective
shap values. We highlight that shap can be realized through different explanation
models that differ in how they approximate the computation of the shap values. In
particular, there are ﬁve strategies: KernelExplainer is the model-agnostic one, while
LinearExplainer ,TreeExplainer ,GradientExplainer , and DeepExplainer are model-
speciﬁc. Besides, similarly to lime ,shap can be used on other data types. We applied
LinearExplainer to LG, TreeExplainer to XGB, and KernelExplainer to CAT. In Fig. 3
(lower part), we report the application of shap onadult through the force plot
showing each feature contributes to push the output value away from the base value,
which is an average among the training dataset’s output values. The red features are
pushing the output value higher, while the ones in blue are pushing it lower. For eachfeature, it is reported the actual value for the record under analysis. Only the features
with the highest shap values are shown in this plot. In the ﬁrst force plot, the features
that are pushing the value higher are contributing more to the output value: from a base
value of 0 .18, it is reached an actual output value of 0 .79. In the force plot on the right,
the output value is 0 .0, and Age,Relationship , and Hours Per Week are contributing to
pushing it lower. Figure 4(left and center) depicts the shap values through a decision
plots : the contribution of all the features are reported in decreasing order of importance.
The line represents the feature importance for the record under analysis, and it startsat its actual output value. In the ﬁrst plot, predicted as >50k,Occupation is the
most important feature, followed by Age andRelationship . For the second plot, Age,
Relationship , and Hours Per Week
are the most important ones. shap also offers a
123

==== Page 13 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1731
Fig. 4 shap application on adult : a record labelled >50K(top-left) and one as ≤50K(top-right). They
are obtained by applying the TreeExplainer on an XGB model and then the decision plot , in which all the
input features are shown. At the bottom, the application of shap to explain the outcome of a set of records
by XGB on adult . The interaction values among the features are reported
Fig. 5 Explanations of dalex for two records of adult :b(x)=0(≤50) (left), b(x)=1(>50K) (right)
to explain an XGB in the form of Shapley values (top), break down plots (bottom). y-axis is the feature
importance, x-axis is the positive/negative contribution
global interpretation of the model-driven by the local interpretations. Figure 4(right)
reports a global decision plot that represents the feature importance of 30 records ofadult .
DALEX (Lipovetsky 2022 ) is a local and global, post-hoc, model-agnostic expla-
nation method. dalex reveals the features importance through an implementation of
avariable attribution approach (Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko 2008 ) that consists
of a decomposition of the model’s predictions in which each decomposition can be
seen as a local gradient, and it is used to identify the contribution of each attribute.
dalex also allows the calculus of shap values. In Fig. 5are reported local explanations
returned by dalex for XGB on adult . On the left are reported two explanations for
a record classiﬁed as class >50k, while on the right, for one classiﬁed as <50k.
On the top, there is a visualization based on Shapley values, which highlights as most
important the feature Age (35 years old), followed by occupation . At the bottom, there
is aBreakdown plot, in which the green bars represent positive changes in the mean
predictions, while the red ones are negative changes. The plot also shows the intercept ,
which is the overall mean value for the predictions. It is interesting to see that Age and
123

==== Page 14 ====
1732 F. Bodria et al.
occupation are the most important features that positively contributed to the prediction
for both plots. In contrast, Sexis positively important for Shapley values but negatively
important for the Breakdown plot. In this case, there are important differences in the
feature considered most important by the two methods: for the Shapley values, Age
and Relationship are the two most important features, while in the Breakdown plot
Hours Per Week is the most important one.
MAPLE (Plumb et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer that
can also be used as a transparent model due to its internal structure. It combines
random forests with feature selection methods to return feature importance basedexplanations. In particular, maple is based on SILO , employed for obtaining a local
training distribution based on the random forest leaves, and on DStump used to rank
the features by importance. maple considers the best kfeatures from DStump to solve
a weighted linear regression problem. Similarly to lime , it returns these coefﬁcients
as features explanation.
CIU , Contextual Importance and Utility (Anjomshoae et al. 2020 ) is a local, post-
hoc, model-agnostic explainer based on the idea that a feature that might be important
in a context may be irrelevant in another one. ciuexplains the model’s outcome based
on the contextual importance (CI) approximating the overall importance of a feature
in the current context, and on the contextual utility (CU) estimating how good the
current feature values are for a certain output class. CI and CU are calculated throughMonte Carlo simulations.
EBM , Explainable Boosting Machine (Nori et al. 2019 ) is an intrinsic local and
global model speciﬁc method. ebm is a variant of a Generalized Additive Model
(gam ) (Hastie and Tibshirani 1990 ), i.e., a generalized linear model that incorporates
nonlinear forms of the predictors. For each feature, ebm uses a boosting procedure to
train the generalized linear model: it cycles over the features in a round-robin fashionto train one feature function at a time and mitigate the effects of co-linearity. In this
way, the model learns the best set of feature functions, which can be exploited to
understand how each feature contributes to the ﬁnal prediction.
NAM , Neural Additive Models (Agarwal et al. 2021 ) is a local model-speciﬁc
explainer deﬁned as a variant of gam but tailored for neural networks. nam aims at
combining the performance of deep neural networks with the inherent intelligibilityofgam .nam is able to learn graphs that describe how the prediction is computed by
training multiple deep neural networks in an additive fashion such that each network
attends to a single feature.
CoFrNets Continued Fractions Nets (Puri et al. 2021 ) is similar to nam , but instead
of approximating activations using neural networks, it uses continued functions. The
output of a neuron is calculated as a continuous fraction of the previous one until it
gets to the input layer. The propriety of continued fractions to represent every possible
real number allows CoFrNets to express any possible function as in Neural Networks.On the other hand, since it is a simple fraction calculation, it is possible to compute
the contribution of each input to the ﬁnal output and produce feature importance
explanations.
Features Importance-based Explainers Comparison. Feature importance-based
explanation methods provide an importance value for each feature of the record inthe input. The importance of the features is computed in different ways, depending
123

==== Page 15 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1733
on the kind of explanation methods exploited. The majority of the explainers are
post-hoc and local, even if there are examples of methods that also provide global
explanations, allowing an in-depth analysis of the overall behavior of the machinelearning model ( shap ,dalex and ciu). Some explainers, such as lime and all its vari-
ants, create a synthetic neighborhood set used to train a surrogate model and extract
the features’ importance from it. These methods are suitable for context in which theexplanation is online, since they are very efﬁcient, as they use randomization tech-
niques and surrogate models that are very simple and quick to train. As a weak point,
the randomicity and the simplicity of the surrogate models may not best representthe data space under analysis. On the other hand, explainers that do not require the
creation of a surrogate model but are based on some mathematical procedure, such as
game theory for shap , the decomposition of predictions exploiting local gradients for
dalex , or Monte Carlo simulations for ciumight require a longer computational time
w.r.t. lime -like approaches. In addition, their internal workings may be difﬁcult to
understand, shifting the difﬁculty from understanding the machine learning model tounderstanding how the explanation method works. Among feature importance-based
explainers, model-speciﬁc explainers, such as nam and CoFrNets , are tailored for
explaining neural networks and aim at approximating the activation functions. Over-
all, these explanation methods are fast, except for the model-agnostic variants of shap
and dalex , because they might require a greater computing time due to their differ-
ent approximations. Unfortunately, the output provided by these explainers is usually
quite difﬁcult to understand for non-experts since there are several variables, and the
plots provided are usually non-self-explanatory. As an example, we can think of shap :
in the plots in output, each feature importance is given by the output value, the base
value, and, depending on the kind of explanator exploited, one or more arrays of feature
importance.
Feature importance explainers, due to their complexity in the understating of the
explanation, may be better suited for domain experts who know the meaning ofthe features employed, while they may be too difﬁcult for ordinary end-users,
especially when obtaining such importance values is complex.
5.2 Rule-based explanation
Decision rules give the end-user an explanation about the reasons that lead to the ﬁnal
prediction. A decision rule r, also called factual orlogic rule (Guidotti et al. 2019a ), has
the form p→y, in which pis a premise, composed of a Boolean condition on feature
values, while yis the consequence of the rule. In particular, pis a conjunction of split
conditions of the form x
i∈[v(l)
i,v(u)
i], where xiis a feature and v(l)
i,v(u)
iare lower and
upper bound values in the domain of xiextended with ±∞ . An instance x satisﬁes r ,
orr covers x , if every Boolean conditions of pevaluate to true for x. If the instance x
to explain satisﬁes p,t h er u l e p→yrepresents then a candidate explanation of the
decision g(x)=y. Moreover, if the interpretable predictor mimics the behavior of the
black-box in the neighborhood of x, we further conclude that the rule is a candidate
local explanation of b(x)=g(x)=y. We highlight that, in the context of rules, we
can also ﬁnd the so-called counterfactual rules (Guidotti et al. 2019a ). Counterfactual
123

==== Page 16 ====
1734 F. Bodria et al.
x1= {Education =Bachelors,
Occupation =Prof-specialty, Sex =Male,
NativeCountry = Vietnam, Age =35,
Workclass =3, HoursWeek =40,
Race =Asian-Pac-Islander,
MaritialStatus =Married-civ,
Relationship =Husband,
CapitalGain = 0,
CapitalLoss = 0 },>50kx2= {Education =College,
Occupation =Sales, Sex =Male,
NativeCountry = US, Age =19,
Workclass =2, HoursWeek =15,
Race =White,
MaritialStatus =Married-civ,
Relationship =Husband,
CapitalGain = 2880,CapitalLoss = 0 },≤50k
r
anchor = {EducationNum >Bachelors,
Occupation ≤3.00,
HoursWeek >20,
Relationship ≤1.00,
34<Age ≤41 }→ >50kranchor = {Education ≤College,
MaritialStatus >1.00 }
→≤ 50k
rlore= {Education >5-6th, Race >0.86,
WorkClass ≤3.41,
CapitalGain ≤20000,
CapitalLoss ≤1306 }→ >50krlore= {Education ≤Masters,
Occupation >-0.34,
HoursWeek ≤40,
WorkClass ≤3.50
CapitalGain ≤10000,
Age ≤34}→≤ 50k
clore= {CapitalLoss ≥436 }→≤ 50kclore= {Education >Masters }→ >50k
{CapitalGain >20000 }→ >50k
{Occupation ≤-0.34 }→ >50k
Fig. 6 Explanations of anchor and lore foradult and XGB. xiis the input, rmethod are the rules
provided by anchor /lore , while clore are the counterfactual rules of lore
rules have the same structure as decision rules, with the only difference being that the
consequence of the rule yis different w.r.t. b(x)=y. They are important to explain
to the end-user what should be changed to obtain a different output. An example of
a rule explanation is r={age<40,income <30k,education ≤Bachelor },y=
deny . In this case, the record {age=18,income =15k,education =Highschool }
satisﬁes the rule above. A possible counterfactual rule, instead can be: r={income >
40k,education ≥Bachelor },y=allow .
ANCHOR (Ribeiro et al. 2018 ) is a global and local model-agnostic method that
outputs rules, called anchors , as explanations. The idea is that, for decisions on which
the anchor holds, changes in the rest of the instance’s feature values do not change
the outcome. Formally, given a record x,ris an anchor if r(x)=b(x). To obtain
the anchors, anchor perturbs the instance x, obtaining a set of synthetic records
employed to extract anchors with precision above a user-deﬁned threshold. anchor
exploits a multi-armed bandit algorithm (Katehakis and Jr. 1987 ) for the synthetic
generation of the dataset and relies on a bottom-up approach and a beam search to
ﬁnd the anchors. Figure 6reports some rules obtained by applying anchor to explain
XGB trained on adult . The ﬁrst rule has a high precision (0 .96%) but a very low
coverage (0 .01%). It is interesting to note that the ﬁrst rule contains Relationship and
Education Num , which are the features highlighted by most of the explainers analyzed
so far. In particular, in this case, for having a classiﬁcation >50k,t h e Relationship
should be husband and the Education Num at least a bachelor’s degree. Education
Num can also be found in the second rule, in which case has to be less or equal to
College, followed by the Maritial Status , which can be anything other than married
with a civilian. This rule has an even better precision (0 .97%) and suitable coverage
(0.37%).
123

==== Page 17 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1735
LORE , LOcal Rule-based Explainer (Guidotti et al. 2019a ), is a local model-
agnostic explainer that provides explanations in the form of rules and counterfactual
rules. lore is tailored explicitly for tabular data. It exploits a genetic algorithm to
create the neighborhood of the record to explain. Such a neighborhood produces a
more faithful and dense representation of the vicinity of xw.r.t. lime . Given a black-
box model band an instance x, with b(x)=y,lore ﬁrst generates a synthetic set Z
of neighbors through a genetic algorithm. Then, it trains a decision tree classiﬁer gon
this set labeled with the black-box outcome b(Z).F r o m g, it retrieves an explanation
that consists of (i) a factual decision rule, that corresponds to the path on the decision
tree followed by the instance xto reach the decision y, and (ii) a set of counterfactual
rules, which have a different classiﬁcation w.r.t. y. These counterfactual rules show
the conditions that can be varied on xin order to change the output decision. In
Fig.6, we report the factual and counterfactual rules of lore for the explanation of
the same records showed for anchor . It is interesting to note that, differently from
anchor and the other models proposed above, lore explanations focus more on the
Education Num ,Occupation ,Capital Gain andCapital Loss , while the features about
the relationship are not present.
RuleMatrix (Ming et al. 2019 ) is a model-agnostic explainer that provides both
local and global explanations speciﬁcally tailored for the visualization of the rules
extracted. Given a training dataset and a black-box, rulematrix executes a rule
induction step, in which a rule list is extracted by sampling the input data and their
predicted label by the black-box. Then, the rules extracted are ﬁltered based on thresh-
olds of conﬁdence and support. Finally, it outputs a visual representation of the rules.
Local rule-based explainers comparison The rule-based methods presented are all
based on creating a surrogate model from which to extract the rules. In this category,
we ﬁnd anchor and rulematrix , which provide both local and global explana-
tions by relying on simple rule extraction methods. The simplicity of these methods
makes them efﬁcient even if, as in the case of lime -like approaches, they may suffer
in terms of the goodness of explanations provided. lore is the only explainer that
provides only local explanations. Differently from the other methods, does not require
to have access to the original training data, and, due to its synthetic generation pro-
cess, provides more faithful explanations. Therefore it may be good in settings wherethe black-box training dataset is unavailable, while rulematrix and anchor need
to access the training data. Rule-based explanations are considered closer to human
reasoning w.r.t. the feature importance-based explanations. In addition, they exploiteasy to understand mechanisms, allowing users of different backgrounds to under-
stand how the explanation method works, increasing trust. However, these explainers
usually require a greater running time w.r.t. the feature importance ones.
Local rule-based explainers produce logical rules which are close to human
reasoning and make them suitable for non-experts.
Global tree-based explainers One of the most popular ways to generate explanation
rules is by extracting them from a decision tree. In particular, due to the method’s sim-plicity and interpretability, decision trees explain black-box models’ overall behavior.
Some explanation methods acting in this setting are model-speciﬁc explainers exploit-
ing structural information of the black-box model under analysis. TREPAN (Craven
123

==== Page 18 ====
1736 F. Bodria et al.
and Shavlik 1995 ) is a model-speciﬁc global explainer tailored for neural networks.
Given a neural network b,trepan generates a decision tree gthat approximates the
network by maximizing the gain ratio and the model ﬁdelity. In particular, to leverageabstraction, trepan adopts n-of-m decision rules on which only nout of mconditions
must be satisﬁed in order to ﬁre the rule. DecText is a global model-speciﬁc explainer
tailored for neural networks (Boz 2002 ).dectext resembles trepan with the differ-
ence that it considers four different splitting methods. Moreover, it also considers a
pruning strategy based on ﬁdelity to reduce the ﬁnal explanation tree’s size. In this
way, dectext can maximize the ﬁdelity while keeping the model simple. Both trepan
and dectext are presented as model-speciﬁc explainers, but they can be practically
employed to explain any black-box as they do not use any internal information of neural
networks. MSFT (Chipman et al. 1998 ) is a global, post-hoc, model-speciﬁc explainer
for random forests that returns a decision tree. msft is based on the observation that,
even if random forests contain hundreds of different trees, they are quite similar, dif-
fering only for a few nodes. Hence, it adopts dissimilarity metrics to summarize therandom forest trees using a clustering method. Then, for each cluster, an archetype is
retrieved as an explanation. CMM, Combined Multiple Model procedure (Domingos
1998 ), is another global, post-hoc, model-speciﬁc explainer for tree ensembles. The
key point of cmm is the data enrichment. Given an input dataset X,cmm ﬁrst modiﬁes
itntimes. On the nvariants of the dataset, it learns a black-box. Random records are
generated and labeled using a bagging strategy on the black-boxes. The authors were
able to increase the size of the dataset to build the ﬁnal decision tree. STA, Single
Tree Approximation (Zhou and Hooker 2016 ), is another global, post-hoc, model-
speciﬁc explainer tailored for random forests. In sta, the decision tree is constructed
by exploiting test hypothesis on the trees in the forest to ﬁnd the best splits.
The explainers proposed are tailored for a speciﬁc machine learning model: trepan
and DecText explain neural networks, while cmm and sta are tailored for random
forests and msft is for any ensemble method. Among them, some explainers exploit an
enrichment of the data to improve the extraction of the tree ( cmm ,trepan ,DecText ),
while the others exploit the training dataset by applying some strategies based on
dissimilarity metrics ( msft ) or test hypothesis ( sta). Among the different methods,
only DecText and trepan apply some strategies with the goal of maximizing the
model ﬁdelity, even if they are tailored for small feed-forward neural networks. The
exploitation of trees to explain the global behavior of a more complex machine learning
model have several beneﬁts, such as fast computation and a simple process to extractexplanations based on transparent strategies. However, the trees extracted may be
very deep, making the explanation model difﬁcult to understand even in cases of
simple datasets. Furthermore, the effectiveness of such explanations for very deepfeed forward networks has not been judged yet.
Global tree-based explainers produce a transparent model allowing the under-
standing of the general behavior of the black-box. Depending on the complexity
of the tree, the actual ease of understanding of the explanation could be affected
by this.
Global rule-based explainers In this section, we present global explainers that do
not extract decision trees as a global interpretable model but as lists or sets of rules. The
123

==== Page 19 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1737
majority of the methods described in the following extract rules by exploiting ensemble
methods or rule-based classiﬁers. The explainers considered are all agnostic. Skope-
Rules is a global, post-hoc, model-agnostic15explainer on the rulefit (Friedman and
Popescu 2008 ) idea to deﬁne an ensemble method and then extract the rules from it.
skope- rules employs fast algorithms such as bagging or gradient boosting decision
trees. After extracting all the possible rules, skope- rules removes rules redundant
or too similar by a similarity threshold. Differently from rulefit , the scoring method
does not solve the L1 regularization. Instead, the weights are given depending on the
precision score of the rule. Scalable-BRL (Yang et al. 2017 ) is an interpretable rule-
based model that optimizes the posterior probability of a Bayesian hierarchical model
over the rule lists. The theoretical part of this approach is based on (Letham et al.
2015 ). GLocalX (Setzu et al. 2021 ) is a global model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that
adopts the local to global paradigm, i.e., to derive a global explanation by subsuming
local logical rules. GLocalX starts from an array of local explanation rules and fol-
lows a hierarchical bottom-up approach merging similar records expressing the sameconditions. This small section comprises global explanation methods that extract rules
in entirely different ways: either they exploit an ensemble method ( skope- rules ),
a rule-based model ( scalable- BRL ) or several local explanations ( GLocalX ). In
terms of goodness of explanations, skope- rules and scalable- BRL are tailored
for an overall explanation of the machine learning model, focusing mostly on the datain input. GLocalX , instead, exploits local explanations and hence is able to tackle
the problem from a different point of view, merging several local explanations. The
output of these methods is a list of rules, and even if there are techniques to ﬁlter outmeaningless rules, the complexity of the explanation produced may be huge.
Global rule-based explainers produce sets of rules describing the overall behavior
of the model for each target class. Depending on the ﬁlters applied, the list of
rules extracted may be long and difﬁcult to understand.
Rules-based explainers comparison In this section, we presented a great variety
of methods that provide logical rules as explanations exploiting different strategies.
Independently from the strategy, due to the simplicity of the rules, they are often the
preferred explanation for non-expert people. The majority of the explainers presentedin this section are based on the extraction of decision trees as surrogate models ( lore ,
trepan ,cmm ,sta,dectext ,msft ), or ensemble methods based on decision trees,
such as skope- rules . The remaining methods that do not rely on decision trees extract
the rules in other ways, such as rule-based classiﬁers (again a surrogate model), as
in the case of anchor ,scalable- brl and of rulematrix . To further increase the
comprehensibility of the explanation, some explainers correlate the explanations by
graphical visualizations, such as rulematrix ,anchor , and skope- rules . Overall,
the majority of the explainers require a long computing time due to the differentenrichment of the data or the use of rule-based classiﬁers, which are among the longest
interpretable models to train. Hence, they may be better ﬁtted for ofﬂine explanations.
Depending on the complexity of the machine learning model in input, the explanationsmay be complex, such as deep trees or long lists of rules.
15https://skope-rules.readthedocs.io/en/latest/skope_rules.html .
123

==== Page 20 ====
1738 F. Bodria et al.
Rules-based explanation methods extract rules exploiting different approaches,
which may require a longer time w.r.t. feature importance methods, making them
more suitable to ofﬂine settings. However, rules-based methods are tailored forcommon end-users due to their logical structure and simplicity.
5.3 Prototype-based explanations
A prototype, also called archetype or artifact, is a record highlighting the characteris-
tics which identify a group of objects belonging to the same class. Prototypes serve as
examples, i.e., the user can understand the black-box reasoning by looking at records
similar to the prototype. Thus, a prototype is a local explanation. A prototype can be
(i) a record of the training set close to the input data x, (ii) a centroid of a cluster to
which the input xbelongs to, or (iii) even a synthetic record generated following an
ad-hoc process. Depending on the explanation method considered, different deﬁni-
tions and requirements to ﬁnd a prototype can be considered. MMD-CRITIC (Kimet al. 2016 )i sa before the model explanation method which produces prototypes and
criticisms as explanations using Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) measure. While
prototypes explain the dataset’s general behavior, criticisms represent records that arenot well explained by the prototypes. mmd- critic selects prototypes by measuring
the difference between the distribution of the instances and the instances in the whole
dataset. The set of instances nearer to the data distribution are called prototypes, andthe farthest are called criticisms. ProtoDash (Gurumoorthy et al. 2019 ) is a variant
ofmmd- critic . However, differently from mmd- critic ,protodash also returns
non-negative weights which indicate the importance of each prototype. PS, PrototypeSelection ( ps) (Bien and Tibshirani 2011 ) seeks a set of prototypes that better represent
the data under analysis by solving a set cover optimization problem with constraints
on the properties of the prototypes. After that, the prototypes are employed to learn a
nearest neighbor rule classiﬁer to be used as a model. TSP, Tree Space Prototype (Tan
et al. 2020 ), is a local post-hoc explainer tailored for explaining tree ensemble meth-
ods. The goal of tspis to ﬁnd prototypes for each class in the tree space of the tree
ensemble bw.r.t. a given notion of proximity between trees. Privacy-Preserving Expla-
nations( ppe) (Blanco-Justicia et al. 2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer
that outputs prototypes and shallow trees as explanations while considering the con-
cept of privacy in explainability while producing privacy protected explanations .T h e
trade-off between privacy and comprehensibility is obtained through micro aggrega-
tion of the data, i.e., clustering. The clusters’ centroids are used as prototypes for the
ﬁnal explanation/prediction.
The strength of prototypes is the possibility of analyzing black-box behavior by
comparison between the record under analysis and its analogs, which is a type of
reasoning widely used by humans. Moreover, they allow data analysis before and
after the black-box is applied. For this reason, in this section, we may ﬁnd explanationmethods that are before the model , i.e., they explain the dataset without considering the
black-box model, such as mmd- critic ,psand protodash . On the other hand, local
post-hoc explainers, such as tspand ppe, provide prototypes based on the decisions of
the black-boxes. Among the different methods proposed, one of the most promising
123

==== Page 21 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1739
ones is mmd- critic because it outputs both prototypes and criticisms. In this setting,
we can also ﬁnd a novel application, namely ppe, which produces privacy-protected
prototypes, creating a link between two crucial ethical concepts: transparency andprivacy. Indeed, using prototypes as explanations, although it may be useful for end-
user understanding, may release sensitive information about the users in the training
set when the explanation method exploits the training dataset.
Prototype-based explanations allow the users to reason by similarity and differ-
ences. Most of the methods in this setting are tailored to explain the data in inputand not the black-box decisions.
5.4 Counterfactual-based explanations
Counterfactual explanations suggest what should be different in the input instance to
change the outcome of the black-box model (Wachter et al. 2017 ; Lucic et al. 2020 ),
i.e., they describe a dependency on the attributes that led to a particular decision.
Counterfactual explanations can be considered as prototypes’ opposite. Thus, also
counterfactuals are local explanations. In (Guidotti 2022 ), counterfactual explana-
tions are formalized as follows. Given a black-box model bthat outputs the decision
y=b(x)for an instance x, a counterfactual explanation consists of an instance x
/prime
such that the decision for bonx/primeis different from y, i.e., b(x/prime)/negationslash=y, and such that the
difference between xandx/primeisminimal . The different values between xand a counter-
factual x/primereveal what should have been different in xfor having a different outcome.
An ideal counterfactual is minimal because it should alter the values of the variables
as little as possible to ﬁnd the closest setting under which yis returned instead of ¬y.
Concerning counterfactual explanations, there are many properties that are desired forthis kind of explanation and for the explanation methods returning them. Examples
are validity, minimality, similarity, plausibility, discriminative power, actionability,
causality, diversity, efﬁciency, robustness, etc. (Wachter et al. 2017 ; Karimi et al.
2020a ; Kanamori et al. 2020 ). To better understand the complex context and the many
available possibilities, we refer the interested reader to (Guidotti 2022 ; Artelt and
Hammer 2019 ; Verma et al. 2020 ; Byrne and Johnson-Laird 2020 ) while we brieﬂy
present only the most representative methods in this category. W ACH (Wachter et al.
2017 ) is among the ﬁrst paper to propose a counterfactual explainer and probably the
most famous one. The loss function minimized by (Wachter et al. 2017 ) is deﬁned
asλ(b(x
/prime)−y/prime)2+d(x,x/prime)where the ﬁrst term is the quadratic distance between
the desired outcome y/primeand the classiﬁer prediction on x/prime, and the second term is the
distance dbetween xand x/prime.λbalances the contribution of the ﬁrst term against the
second term. The distance function dadopted is a crucial characteristic in any counter-
factual explainer. In (Wachter et al. 2017 ) is adopted the Manhattan distance weighted
with the inverse median absolute deviation of each feature. CEM, Contrastive Expla-
nations Method (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ), is a post-hoc and model-speciﬁc explainer
tailored for neural networks. In particular, cem can return Pertinent Positives (PP) ,
which can be seen as prototypes and are the minimal and sufﬁcient factors that have
to be present to obtain the output y; and Pertinent Negatives (PN) , which are coun-
terfactuals factors, that should be minimally and necessarily absent. Given x,cem
123

==== Page 22 ====
1740 F. Bodria et al.
considers x1=x+δ, where δis a perturbation applied to x.cem is formulated
as an optimization problem over the perturbation variable δ. C-CHV AE (Pawelczyk
et al. 2020 ) is a local model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that accounts for plausi-
bility when generating counterfactuals. Indeed, the loss function optimized controls
that counterfactuals are not local outliers and that are close to correctly classiﬁed
observations. Moreover, this method can generate counterfactuals without requiring adistance function for the input space at the cost of using a Variational AutoEncoder.
DICE, Diverse Counterfactual Explanations (Mothilal et al. 2020 ) is a model-agnostic
post-hoc explainer that solves an optimization problem with constraints to account forplausibility anddiversity evaluated through distance functions. Plausibility avoids the
generation of unfeasible counterfactuals, while diversity provides different ways of
changing the outcome class. FACE, Feasible and Actionable Counterfactual Expla-nations (Poyiadzi et al. 2020 ) is a model-agnostic post-hoc explainer that focuses on
returning actionable counterfactuals, i.e., records coherent with the input data distribu-
tion. In particular, face uncovers “feasible paths” for generating counterfactuals, i.e.,
the shortest path deﬁned via density-weighted metrics starting from the input instance.
Finally, it uses a shortest path algorithm to ﬁnd all the records that satisfy the require-
ments. CFX (Albini et al. 2020 ) is a model-speciﬁc post-hoc explainer for Bayesian
Network Classiﬁers. The explanations are built from relations of inﬂuence between
variables, indicating the reasons for the classiﬁcation. In particular, this method’s mainachievement is that it can ﬁnd pivotal factors for the classiﬁcation task that, if removed,
would lead to a different classiﬁcation.
Counterfactual-based explanations are gaining attention during the past few years
due to their ability to suggest what to do to achieve a different outcome w.r.t. the
one predicted by the black-box. There are several characteristics to consider in a
counterfactual, such as plausibility, which requires the explanations to be feasible,and actionability, so that the counterfactual can not suggest changing the values of
unfeasible variables, such as age or sex. Satisfying these characteristics is of utmost
importance because otherwise, the counterfactuals obtained may not be applicable orunderstandable by the end user. For example, a counterfactual might require chang-
ing age or height, factors that cannot be changed, thus making the counterfactual
unfeasible. Among the methods proposed, c- chvae deals with the plausibility of the
counterfactuals proposed, and face tackles both the plausibility and the actionability.
The majority of the algorithms proposed solves an optimization problem based on a
distance function and some perturbation of the original data ( cem,wach ,c- chvae )
and only a few methods exploit different approaches, such as V AE, as c- chvae .M o s t
of the proposed methods are local and post-hoc, with cfxand cem speciﬁcally designed
for certain models, while the others are agnostic. Among the methods proposed, cem
is a promising solution since it provides both prototypes and counterfactuals, allowing
for an in-depth analysis, such as mmd- critic and lore .
Counterfactuals-based explanations allow the users to understand what to do
to achieve a different outcome. This kind of reasoning is close to how human
reason, hence it is becoming quite popular. To make counterfactuals as realistic
as possible, they must meet criteria such as plausibility and actionability.
123

==== Page 23 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1741
Table 2 Comparison of the ﬁdelity and the faithfulness metrics of different explanation methods
Dataset Black-Box Fidelity Faithfulness
lime shap anchor lore lime shap
adult LG 0.979 0.613 0.989 0.984 0.099 (0.30) 0.38(0.37)
XGB 0.977 0.877 0.978 0.982 0.030 (0.32) 0.36(0.49)
CAT 0.96 0.777 0.988 0.989 0.077 (0.32) 0.44(0.37)
german LG 0.984 0.910 0.730 0.983 0.23(0.60) 0.19 (0.63)
XGB 0.999 0.821 0.802 0.982 0.16 (0.26) 0.44(0.21)
CAT 0.979 0.670 0.620 0.981 0.34 (0.33) 0.43(0.32)
Bold values indicate the best results
For every evaluation, we report the mean and the standard deviation over a subset of 50 test set records
5.5 Tabular data explainers quantitative comparison
We validate explanation methods working on tabular data by considering the two
metrics most widespread in the literature, i.e., ﬁdelity andstability . We remark that we
focus our benchmarking on the subset of explanation methods that are most widely
adopted/extended in the literature and work according to different ideas to retrieveexplanations. In particular, in this section, we focus on lime ,shap ,
16anchor and
lore . Another limitation in the benchmarking is that even though these methods are
acting on the same data type, the explanations returned are of a different type. Thus, it isnot only possible to compare explainers providing different types of explanations. The
results of the ﬁdelity are reported in Table 2. The ﬁdelity values are above 90% for all
the methods highlighting that the local surrogates are good at mimicking the black-boxmodels. Regarding the feature importance-based models, lime shows higher values of
ﬁdelity w.r.t. shap , especially for adult . In particular, shap has lower values for CAT
(both german andadult ), suggesting that it may not be good in explaining this kind
of ensemble model. Concerning rule-based models, the ﬁdelity is high for both of them.
However, we notice that anchor shows lower values of ﬁdelity for CAT- german ,a
behavior which is similar to the one of shap . Besides ﬁdelity, we compare lime and
shap also on faithfulness and monotonicity. Overall, we did not ﬁnd any model to
be monotonic, and hence we do not report any results. On the other hand, the resultsfor the faithfulness are reported in Table 2.F o radult , the faithfulness is quite low,
especially for lime . The explainer with the highest faithfulness is shap explaining CAT.
Regarding german , instead, the values are higher, highlighting a better faithfulness
overall. However, also for this dataset, shap has a better faithfulness w.r.t. lime .I n
Table 3are reported the results obtained from the analysis on the stability: a high
value means that the explainer presents high instability, meaning that we can havequite different explanations for similar inputs. None of the methods is remarkably
stable according to this metric. This weakness is widely shared by many explainers
independently from the data type and explanation type. Therefore, an important insightfrom these experiments is to work toward the stabilization of these procedures. Table 4
16Since shap is not training a local surrogate, we evaluate the ﬁdelity of shap by learning a classiﬁer on
the sum of the shap ’s values.
123

==== Page 24 ====
1742 F. Bodria et al.
Table 3 Comparison on the stability metric
Dataset Black-box lime shap anchor lore
adult LG 24.37 (2.74) 1.52 (4.49) 22.36 (8.37) 21.76 (11.80)
XGB 10.16 (6.48) 2.17 (2.18) 26.53 (13.08) 30.01 (20.52)
CAT 0.35 (0.43) 0.03 (0.01) 6.51 (4.40) 27.80 (70.05)
german LG 18.87 (0.73) 19.01 (23.44) 101.07 (62.75) 622.12 (256.70)
XGB 26.08 (14.50) 38.43 (30.66) 121.40 (98.43) 725.81 (337.26)
CAT 2.49 (9.91) 15.92 (10.71) 123.79 (76.86) 756.70 (348.21)
We report the mean and the standard deviation over a subset of 30 test records
Table 4 Explanation runtime expressed in seconds for explainers of tabular classiﬁers, the standard deviation
is shown in parentheses
Dataset Black-box lime shap dalex anchor lore skoperule
adult LG 0.1 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 90 (0.09) 2 (0.10) 15 (0.32) 100 (0.32)
XGB 0.1(0.02) 0.2 (0.03) 108 (0.10) 5 (0.11) 50 (0.13) –
CAT 0.2(0.00) 3 (0.02) 110 (0.12) 3 (0.21) 35 (0.24) –
german LG 0.007 (0.00) 0.0008 (0.00) 0.8 (0.00) 2 (0.17) 2 (0.31) 70 (0.12)
XGB 0.03 (0.01) 0.002 (0.00) 2 (0.12) 2 (0.12) 4 (0.32) –
CAT 0.03 (0.00) 0.002 (0.02) 1 (0.20) 2 (0.42) 6 (0.20) –
Bold values indicate the best results
shows the explanation runtime approximated as order of magnitude. Overall, feature
importance explanation algorithms are faster w.r.t. the rule-based ones. In particular,shap is the most efﬁcient, followed by lime . We remark that the computation time of
lore depends on the number of neighbors to generate exploiting a genetic algorithm
(in this case, we considered 1000 samples). anchor , instead, requires a minimum
precision as well as skoperule (we selected min precision of 0 .40).
Overall, there are many explanation methods available for tabular data. As already
stated, we focused our analysis and benchmark on the most widely used. We redi-rect the interested reader to our XAI Living Survey for more methods and details.
Depending on the ﬁnal user, different kinds of explanations are better suited than oth-
ers. During the past few years, counterfactuals have witnessed great interest due to
their logical structure and the possibility of explaining what to do instead of obtaining
another prediction. In our opinion, even if rules, prototypes, and counterfactuals seemto be the best solutions w.r.t. human readability, features importance-based explainers
are still the most widely used mainly due to the fact that they were the ﬁrst proposed,
with well-maintained libraries, and that are typically faster than the others. Moreover,regarding rules, prototypes, and counterfactuals, there are still several open questions
and challenges, such as improving the efﬁciency and effectiveness as well as consid-
ering the constraints of the domain in which the model is being employed.
123

==== Page 25 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1743
Table 5 Explainers for black-boxes classifying image data sorted by explanation type: Maps (SM), Concept
Attributions (CA), Counterfactuals (CF), and Prototypes (PR)
Type Name References Data type IN/PH G/L A/S
SM /epsilon1-l r p Bach et al. ( 2015 ) ANY PH L S
lime Ribeiro et al. ( 2016 ) ANY PH L A
shap Lundberg and Lee ( 2017 ) ANY PH L A
grad- cam Selvaraju et al. ( 2020 )I M G P H L S
deeplift Shrikumar et al. ( 2017 ) ANY PH L S
smoothgrad Smilkov et al. ( 2017 )I M G P H L S
intgrad Sundararajan et al. ( 2017 ) ANY PH L S
grad- cam++ Chattopadhay et al. ( 2018 )I M G P H L S
rise Petsiuk et al. ( 2018 )I M G P H L S
anchor Ribeiro et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L A
extreme perturbation Fong et al. ( 2019 )I M G P H L S
xrai Kapishnikov et al. ( 2019 ) ANY PH L S
cxplain Schwab and Karlen ( 2019 )I M G P H L S
eigen- cam Muhammad and Yeasin ( 2020 )I M G P H L S
ablation- cam Desai and Ramaswamy ( 2020 )I M G P H L S
score- cam Wang et al. ( 2020 )I M G P H L S
opti- cam Zhang et al. ( 2023 )I M G P H L S
CA tcav Kim et al. ( 2018 )I M G P H L A
icnn Shen et al. ( 2021 )I M G I N G S
ace Ghorbani et al. ( 2019 )I M G P H G A
cace Goyal et al. ( 2019 )I M G I N G A
conceptshap Yeh et al. ( 2020 )I M G P H G A
pace Kamakshi et al. ( 2021 )I M G P H G S
gan style Lang et al. ( 2021 )I M G P H G A
6 Explanations for image data
In this section, we present a selection of approaches for explaining decision systems
acting on images. In particular, we distinguish the following types of explanations:
Saliency Maps (SM, Sect. 6.1,Concept Attribution (CA, Sect. 6.2),Prototypes (PR,
Sect. 6.3) and Counterfactuals (CF, Sect. 6.4). Table 5(organized as the previous one)
summarizes and categorizes the explanation methods acting on image data. As for
the previous section, after the presentation of the methods, we report the results ofexperiments for which we considered three datasets:
17mnist ,cifar in its 10 class
ﬂavor and imagenet . We selected these datasets because they are widely used as
benchmarks in ML in general and also in experimenting with XAI approaches. On thesethree datasets, we trained the models most used in literature to evaluate the explanation
methods: for mnist andcifar , we trained a CNN with two convolutions and two
17mnist :http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/ ,cifar :https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html ,a n d
imagenet :http://image-net.org/ .
123

==== Page 26 ====
1744 F. Bodria et al.
Table 5 continued
Type Name References Data type IN/PH G/L A/S
CF l2x Chen et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L A
cem Dhurandhar et al. ( 2018 )I M G P HL A
guided proto Looveren and Klaise ( 2021 )I M G P H L A
abele Guidotti et al. ( 2020a )I M G P H L A
piece Kenny and Keane ( 2021 )I M G P H L S
sedc Vermeire et al. ( 2022 )I M G P H L A
ecinn Hvilshøj et al. ( 2021 )I M G P H L A
PR mmd- critic Kim et al. ( 2016 ) ANY IN G A
influence functions K o ha n dL i a n g( 2017 ) ANY PH L A
protopnet Chen et al. ( 2019 )I M G I N G S
prototree Nauta et al. ( 2021 )I M G I N G S
deformable protopnet Donnelly et al. ( 2022 )I M G I N G S
For every method is indicated if it is possible to use it for images (IMG) only or for ANY type of data, if it
is an Intrinsic (IN) or a Post-Hoc (PH) model, Local (L) or Global (G), and if it is model-Agnostic (A) ormodel-Speciﬁc (S)
linear layers, while for imagenet , we decided to use the VGG16 network (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2015 ).
6.1 Saliency maps
ASaliency Map (SM) is an image in which a pixel’s brightness represents how salient
the pixel is. Formally, a SM is modeled as a matrix S, which dimensions are the
sizes of the image for which we want to explain a decision, and the values sijare the
saliency values of the pixels ij. The greater the value of sij, the bigger the saliency
of that pixel. To visualize a SM, divergent color maps are typically used with colors
ranging, for instance, from red to blue. A positive value (red) means that the pixel
ijhas contributed positively to the classiﬁcation, while a negative one (blue) means
that it has contributed negatively. Examples of SM are reported in Fig. 7. There are
two big families of methods for creating SMs. The ﬁrst one assigns to every pixel a
saliency value. The second one segments the image into different pixel groups using asegmentation method, and then it assigns a saliency value for each segmented group.
We underline that, from a pure interpretability perspective, SMs are the correspondent
of FI for images. Indeed, as shown in the following, data-agnostic approaches that can
be used for extracting FI explanations on tabular data can also be used for extracting
SM on images.
LIME is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer (already presented in Sect. 5)
that can also be used to retrieve SM for image classiﬁers. In particular, lime returns
segmentation-based SM where each segment is called superpixel . After the input
image segmentation, lime adopts a one-hot vector representation of the image where
the input image is a vector composed of mones if mis the number of segments
identiﬁed. Then, it creates the synthetic neighborhood by randomly substituting the
123

==== Page 27 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1745
Fig. 7 Examples of SMs obtained with the explainers presented in Sect. 6.1onmnist ,cifar and
imagenet datasets. The ﬁrst row reports the images of the datasets, while the header shows the class
predicted class from the black-box. The remaining rows report the SMs obtained
superpixels with a uniform, possibly neutral, color and by also storing the one-hot
representations. The neighborhood of synthetic images is then fed into the black-
box, and the one-hot representation of the neighborhood, together with the black-box
prediction, is used to train a sparse linear model. Finally, the coefﬁcients of the linearmodel are used as the importance of the superpixels. Examples of the explanations
returned by lime are shown in the second row of Fig. 7. A critical aspect for obtaining
a good explanation with this approach is the choice of the segmentation algorithmand its hyper-parameters. Indeed, for small-resolution images, the segmentation in
lime does not work out of the box, resulting in the algorithm selecting all the images
as a superpixel. Recently, many research improved and extended lime for image
123

==== Page 28 ====
1746 F. Bodria et al.
classiﬁers18(Shi et al. 2020 ; Peltola 2018 ; Zafar and Khan 2019 ;B r a m h a l le ta l .
2020 ).
LRP , Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (Bach et al. 2015 ), commonly known as
/epsilon1-l r p , is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer that is designed for images but
can be practically applied for any data type. /epsilon1-l r p was introduced for feed-forward
neural networks (Arras et al. 2017 ) and then adapted to different type of models. /epsilon1-l r p
decomposes the prediction ybackward using local redistribution rules until it assigns
a relevance score Rito each pixel value. The simple /epsilon1-l r p rule redistributes relevance
from layer l+1 to layer lis:Ri=/summationtext
jaiwij/summationtext
iaiwij+/epsilon1Rjwhere aiis the neuron activations
at layer l,Rjthe relevance scores associated to the neurons at layer l+1,wijthe weight
connecting neuron ito neuron j, and/epsilon1is added to prevent division by zero. Intuitively,
this rule redistributes relevance proportionally from layer l+1 to each neuron in l
based on the connection weights. The ﬁnal explanation is the relevance of the input
layer. Figure 7shows examples of /epsilon1-l r p SM in the third row. As with all the pixel-
wise explanation methods, /epsilon1-l r p works very well on datasets with low-resolution
images like mnist , while the explanations returned for more complex images such
as those of cifar andimagenet are quite unclear and only limitedly interpretable.
In the literature, are introduced other variations of the lrpalgorithm. γ-lrpfavors the
effect of positive contributions over negative contributions by separating the weights
wijintow−
ij+w+
ijand adding a multiplier to the positive ones: w−
ij+γw+
ijAnother
variant of /epsilon1-l r p isspray (Lapuschkin et al. 2019 ), which builds a spectral clustering
on top of the local instance-based /epsilon1-l r p explanations. Similarly to (Li et al. 2019 ),
it starts with the /epsilon1-l r p of the input instance and ﬁnds the LRP attribution relevance
for a single input of interest x.
INTGRAD , Integrated Gradient (Sundararajan et al. 2017 ), similarly to /epsilon1-l r p ,i s
a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc data-agnostic explainer designed for images. intgrad
utilizes the gradients of a black-box providing access to the gradient, such as a neural
network, along with sensitivity techniques. For this reason, it can be applied only to dif-
ferentiable models. Formally, given bandx, and let x/primebe the baseline input,19intgrad
constructs a path from x/primetoxand computes the gradients of points along the path. For
images, the points are taken by overlapping xonx/primeand gradually modifying the opac-
ity of x. Integrated gradients are obtained by cumulating the gradients of these points.
Formally, the integrated gradient along the ithdimension for an input xand baseline x/prime
is deﬁned as follows. Here, ∂b(x)/∂xiis the gradient of b(x)along the ithdimension.
The equation for computing the scores is: ei(x)=(xi−x/prime
i)/integraltext1
α=0∂b(x/prime+α(x−x/prime))
∂xidα.
Examples of SM produced by intgrad a r ei nF i g . 7. They tend to have more uniform
pixels with a similar saliency than /epsilon1-l r p .A si n /epsilon1-l r p ,intgrad highlighted the
background when explaining the “deer” image. However, an arbitrary choice of base-
lines could cause issues. For example, a black baseline image could cause intgrad to
lower the importance of black pixels in the source image. This problem is due to the
difference between the image’s pixel and the baseline ( xi−x/prime
i) present in the integral
equation. Expected Gradients (Erion et al. 2019 ) tries to overcome this problem by
18dlime :https://github.com/rehmanzafar/dlime_experiments .
19The baseline x/primeis generally chosen as a zero matrix or vector. For example, for the image domain, the
baseline is generally a black or a white image.
123

==== Page 29 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1747
averaging intgrad to different baselines. A different variation of intgrad is called
Adversarial Gradient Integration (AGI) . An adversarial example of an image is the
image with a different class, most similar to the original one. AGI (Pan et al. 2021 )
integrates the gradients from adversarial examples of different classes to the target
example along the curve of the steepest ascent. The contributions from the different
examples are then summed up to obtain the ﬁnal SM. By not relying on the choice ofreferences, it is possible to reduce the sparsity of intgrad .
DEEPLIFT (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ), is local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer for
differentiable models. It computes SMs in a backward fashion, similarly to /epsilon1-l r p ,
but it uses a baseline reference like intgrad .deeplift exploits the slope, instead
of the gradients, which describes how the output y=b(x)changes as the input x
differs from a baseline x
/prime.L i k e /epsilon1-l r p , an attribution value ris assigned to each unit
iof the neural network going backward from the output y. This attribution represents
the relative effect of the unit activated at the original network input xcompared to
the activation at the baseline reference x/prime.deeplift computes the starting values
of the last layer Lby the difference between the output of the input and baseline.
Then, it uses the following recursive equation to compute the attribution values of
layer lusing the attributions of layer l+1 to obtain the values of the starting layer:
r(l)
i=/summationtext
jaji−a/prime
ji/summationtext
iaji−/summationtext
ia/prime
jir(l+1)
j,aji=w(l+1,l)
jix(l)
i,a/prime
ji=w(l+1,l)
jix/prime(l)
iwhere wl+1,l
ij
are the weights of the network between the layer land the layer l+1, and aare the
activation values. As for intgrad , picking a baseline is not trivial and might require
domain experts. From Fig. 7, we notice that the SMs obtained with deeplift are very
similar to those obtained with /epsilon1-l r p .
SMOOTHGRAD (Smilkov et al. 2017 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explana-
tion method. Since SMs tend to be noisy, especially for pixel-wise SMs, smoothgrad
tries to overcome produce less noisy SM through smoothing . Usually, a SM is created
directly on the gradient of the black-box output w.r.t. the input ∂y/∂x.smoothgrad
augments this process by smoothing the gradients with a Gaussian noise kernel. More
in detail, it takes the image x, applies Gaussian noise to it, and retrieves the SM
for every perturbed image, using the gradient. The ﬁnal SM is an average of theseperturbed SMs. Formally, given a saliency method f(x)which produces a SM s, its
smoothed version ˆfcan be expressed as: ˆf=
1
n/summationtextn
1f(x+N(0,σ2))where nis
the number of samples, and N(0,σ2)is the Gaussian noise. In (Adebayo et al. 2018 ,
2020 ), some weaknesses of smoothgrad are shown: people tend to evaluate SMs on
what they are expected to see. For example, in a bird image, we want to see the shape
of a bird. However, this does not mean that this is what the network is looking at. Fig-
ure8highlights this problem. We obtained the SMs taking the gradient of the output
w.r.t. the input, and then we used smoothgrad . We observe that the SMs completely
changed their behavior, moving in the direction of the subject.
SHAP provides two versions that can be employed for deep networks tailored for
image classiﬁcation: deep- shap and grad- shap . Therefore, even though shap is a
local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer, the deep- shap and grad- shap versions are
model-speciﬁc implementations. deep- shap is a high-speed approximation algorithm
for shap values in deep learning models that builds on a connection with deeplift .
The implementation is different from the original deeplift by using as baseline a dis-
123

==== Page 30 ====
1748 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 8 Visual Comparison of SMs obtained by taking the gradient of the output yw.r.t. the input image x
(center) and smoothgrad (bottom). In the three images in the center, the SM changes drastically. In all
three cases, it focuses on the subject of the image, completely changing the original values. This is also true
for the seashore image on the far right
Fig. 9 Explanations of deep- shap onmnist (top), grad- shap onimagenet (bottom)
tribution of background samples instead of a single value and using Shapley equations
to linearise non-linear components of the black-box such as max, softmax, products,
divisions, etc. grad- shap , instead, is based on intgrad and smoothgrad (Sun-
dararajan et al. 2017 ; Smilkov et al. 2017 ).intgrad values are a bit different from
shap values and require a single reference value to integrate. As an adaptation to make
them approximate shap values, grad- shap reformulates the integral as an expectation
and combines that expectation with sampling reference values from the background
dataset as in smoothgrad . Examples of explanations of deep- shap and grad- shap
are shown in Fig. 9.grad- shap produces a single SM, while deep- shap produces a
SM for each class in the input image. Even if more expensive to compute, having a
SM for each class could be useful to compare the importance of the predicted class
with different classes.
XRAI (Kapishnikov et al. 2019 ) is based on intgrad and inherits its properties.
Differently from intgrad ,xrai ﬁrst over-segments the image. It iteratively tests each
region’s importance, fusing smaller regions into larger segments based on attribution
scores. xrai follows three steps: segmentation ,get attribution , and selecting regions .
The segmentation is repeated several times with different segments to reduce thedependency on image segmentation. For attribution, xrai uses intgrad with black and
white baselines averaged. Finally, to select regions, xrai leverages the fact that, given
two regions, the one that sums to the more positive value should be more importantto the black-box. Thus, xrai starts with an empty mask and then selectively adds the
regions that yield the maximum gain in the total attributions per area. From Fig. 7,
we notice how the SMs obtained by xrai are very different from the others already
123

==== Page 31 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1749
presented. Like all segmentation methods, xrai performs best when high-resolution
images are available. However, because the segmentation is performed on the values
obtained from intgrad and not on the raw image, good results are obtained even with
low-resolution images.
GRAD-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer
for image data. It uses the gradient information ﬂowing into the last convolutionallayer of a CNN to assign saliency values to each neuron for a particular decision.
Convolutional layers naturally retain spatial information in fully-connected layers,
so it assumes that the last convolutional layers have the best compromise betweenhigh-level semantics and detailed spatial information. To create the SM, grad- cam
takes the feature maps created at the last layer of the convolutional network a. Then,
it computes the gradient of an output of a particular class y
cfor every feature map
activations k, i.e., ∂yc/∂ak. This equation returns a tensor of dimensions [k,v,u]
where kis the number of features maps and uandvare the height and the width of the
image. grad- cam compute the saliency value for every feature map by pooling the
dimensions of the image. The ﬁnal heatmap is calculated as a weighted sum of these
values. This results in a coarse heatmap of the same size as the convolutional feature
maps. An up-sampling technique is applied to the ﬁnal result to produce a map of the
initial image dimension. From Fig. 7is clear that this coarse grain heatmap style is
very characteristic of grad- cam . These heat maps highlight very different parts of
the image compared to other methods.
GRAD-CAM++ (Chattopadhay et al. 2018 ) extends grad- cam solving the
following issue. The spatial footprint in an image is essential for grad- cam ’s visu-
alizations to be robust. Hence, if multiple objects have slightly different orientations
or views, different feature maps may be activated with differing spatial footprints.
The one with lesser footprints fades away in the ﬁnal sum. grad- cam++ ﬁx this
problem by taking a weighted average of the pixel-wise gradients. In particular, grad-
cam++ reformulates grad- cam by explicitly coding the structure of the weights αc
k
as:αc
k=/summationtext
i/summationtext
jwkc
ij·ReLU/parenleftBig
∂yc/∂ak
ij/parenrightBig
where ReLU is the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
activation function, and wkc
ijare the weighting co-efﬁcients for the pixel-wise gradi-
ents for class cand convolutional feature map ak. The idea is that wc
kcaptures the
importance of a particular activation map ak, and positive gradients are preferred to
indicate visual features that increase the output neuron’s activation rather than thosethat suppress it. Besides grad- cam++ , there are many variations of pixel masking
methods based on grad- cam .Score-CAM (Wang et al. 2020 ) gets rid of the depen-
dence on gradients by obtaining the weight of each activation map through its forwardpassing score on the target class, the ﬁnal result is obtained by a linear combination
of weights and activation maps. Eigen-CAM (Muhammad and Yeasin 2020 ) extracts
the importance scores by projecting the last convolutional layer into the ﬁrst eigen-
vector extracted from the same layer. The scores produced appear more uniform and
less sparse. Ablation-CAM (Desai and Ramaswamy 2020 ) uses ablation analysis, i.e.,
setting activation value to zero, to determine the importance of individual feature map
units with respect to class. Extreme Perturbation (Fong et al. 2019 ) are regions of an
image that, for a given area, maximally affect the activation of a class in the last layerof a neural network. As the perturbation area increases, the explainer reveals more
123

==== Page 32 ====
1750 F. Bodria et al.
of the image in order of decreasing importance. CXPlain (Schwab and Karlen 2019 )
frames the task of providing explanations as a causal learning task. It trains a causal
explainer that learns to estimate to what degree certain inputs cause outputs in anothermodel.
RISE (Petsiuk et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc model-agnostic explainer for image
data. To produce a SM for an image x,rise generate Nrandom mask M
i∈[0,1]from
Gaussian noise. The input xis element-wise multiplied with these masks Mi, and the
result is fed to the base model. The SM is obtained as a linear combination of the masks
Miwith the predictions from the black-box corresponding to the respective masked
inputs. The intuition behind this is that b(x⊙Mi)is high when pixels preserved by
mask Miare essential.
Saliency maps-based explainers comparison Saliency Maps (SM) are the most
diffused explanations for images. The literature presents a multitude of explainers that
are capable of producing such a type of explanation. As seen in Fig. 7,lime can lead
to useless SM for mnist andcifar as it segments the images in superpixels big as
the whole image in some cases. On the other hand, those produced by xrai are much
more clear. lime computes the segmentation at the very beginning of the algorithm
on the raw images. Thus, for low-resolution images, segmentation algorithms are
more difﬁcult to calibrate. xrai instead ﬁrstly compute intgrad values and then
agglomerate them using segmentation. This result seems to be much clearer, evenwith very small images. In general, we observe that segmentation methods work best
for high-resolution images where the concept of the image can be easily separated.
For instance, in the SM of the “seashore” image produced by xrai is very clear how
the method selected three parts of the image: the horizon, the sea, and the promontory.
Since pixel wise-methods produce SMs in terms of single pixels, which are low-level
features, they are useful only for an expert user who wants to check the robustnessof the black-box. Overall, we deduce that SMs returned by the segmentation methods
are more human-friendly than the ones returned by pixel-wise methods.
Pixel based explainers like deep- shap ,grad- shap ,deeplift ,intgrad , and/epsilon1-
lrp, typically return very similar results. deeplift and/epsilon1-l r p return similar results,
probably due to their similarity in the computation of the SM values. However,
deeplift is model-agnostic, while /epsilon1-l r p is model-speciﬁc, and it needs adjustments
for nonstandard neural networks. In conclusion, deeplift result to be the best com-
petitor. grad- cam ,grad- cam++ , and rise return SMs that could resemble those
returned by segmentation-based explainers. This is due to the fact that scores of theseexplainers are computed on smaller layers with lower resolution and then interpolated
on the original data resolution. grad- cam++ produces better images than grad-
cam due to the usage of the second order derivative. Another problem with SMs is
the conﬁrmation bias, i.e., a user can hardly realize if a SM is a good explanation or
only shows what the user wants to see (Adebayo et al. 2018 ).smoothgrad and most
guided methods that use the target label to alter the SM suffer from this bias, moving
the salient values from the background to the subject.
Analyzing the images by dataset: in cifar we notice that all the methods highlight
the background of the images in particular in the “deer” class. This result is a problem
in the learning phase of the black-box and should not be referred to as problems of
the explainers. On the other hand, for imagenet , we observe very different SMs.
123

==== Page 33 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1751
For instance, for the ice hockey image in Fig. 7, the class in the dataset is “puck”, i.e.,
the hockey disk. lime highlights the ice as important, while xrai and grad- cam++
highlight the stick of the player, grad- cam highlights the fans while rise the hockey
player. Thus, for the same image, we can obtain very different explanations, further
highlighting the fragility of the SMs. Regarding the second image of imagenet (the
second from the right), we can observe that all the methods capture the same pattern. Astraw hat in the background triggered the class “shower cap” while the correct one was
“mask”. Finally, in the “seashore” of imagenet ,w eh a v ea ni s l a n di nt h es e a .T h e
top three predicted classes are seashore (0 .91), promontory (0 .04), and cliff (0 .01).
Half of the tested methods like lime ,smoothgrad ,rise, and grad- cam were fooled
that the promontory is important to the class “seashore”. We can conclude that SMs
are very fragile when we have multiple classes in the image, even if these classes havea very low predicted probability.
Segmentation methods are more human-understandable than pixel-wise meth-
ods. Guided propagation methods can hardly be trusted due to conﬁrmation bias,
and therefore it is better not to adopt them.
6.2 Concept attribution
Most ML models are designed to operate on low-level features like edges and lines
in a picture that does not correspond to high-level concepts that humans can easily
understand. In (Adebayo et al. 2018 ; Yang and Kim 2019 ), the authors pointed out that
feature-based explanations applied to state-of-the-art black-box models can yield non-
sensible explanations. For example, we can consider SM as low-level explanations for
images, as they assign to every pixel a saliency value. Although it is possible to look atevery pixel and infer their numerical values, these make little to no sense to humans: we
do not say that the 5th pixel of an image has a value of 28. On the other hand, Concept
Attribution (CA) methods quantify, for instance, how much the concepts “stripes” has
contributed to the class prediction of “zebra”. Indeed, CA-based explanation methods
construct the explanation based on human-deﬁned concepts rather than representing
the inputs based on features and internal model (activation) states. Hence, this ideaof high-level features might be more familiar to humans, that can be more likely to
accept it (Hartmann et al. 2022 ; Renard et al. 2019 ). Formally, given a set of images
belonging to a concept [x
(1),x(2),..., x(i)]with x(i)∈C, CA methods can be thought
as a function f:(b,[x(i)])→ewhich assign a score eto the concept Cbasing on
the predictions and the values of the black-box bon the set [x(i)].
TCA V , Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (Kim et al. 2018 ) is a global
post-hoc model-agnostic explainer for image classiﬁers that provides a quantitative
explanation of how important a concept is for the prediction. In tcav , every concept is
represented by a particular vector called Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) created by
interpreting an internal state of a neural network in terms of human-friendly concepts.
tcav uses directional derivatives to quantify the degree to which a user-deﬁned concept
isvital to a classiﬁcation result. For example, how sensitive a prediction of “zebra” is to
the presence of “stripes”. tcav requires two main ingredients: (i) concept-containing
inputs and negative samples, i.e., random inputs, and (ii) pre-trained ML models on
123

==== Page 34 ====
1752 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 10 tcav scores for three concepts: ice, Hockey player, and cheering people (fans) for the class puck
ofimagenet . On the left is the query image; on the center, some samples of the image tested in tcav as
concepts, and on the right is the histogram of the scores with errors. The hockey players has been classiﬁed
as apuck , but the SMs are very different alongside methods. In the histogram on the left, it is possible to see
that the iceand the hockey players are important concepts, while the background fans are not signiﬁcant
which the concepts are tested. Inputs containing concepts and random inputs are fed
into the black-box to obtain predictions that will be used by tcav to test the ability of
the machine learning model to capture a particular concept. Then, a linear classiﬁer
is trained to distinguish the activation of the network due to concept-containing vs.
random inputs. The result of this training is concept activation vectors (CAVs) . Once
CA Vs are deﬁned, the directional derivative of the class probability along CA Vs canbe computed for each instance that belongs to a class. The “concept importance” for a
class is computed as a fraction of the class instances that get positively activated by the
concept containing inputs vs. random inputs. In Fig. 10, we report an example of tcav
explanation. We remark that to obtain this explanation, the user must collect concepts
like “ice”, “hockey player” and “fans”. Then tcav computes the scores unveiling
which one has more impact on the prediction.
Several extensions of tcav are present in the literature. ACE, Automated Concept-
based Explanation (Ghorbani et al. 2019 ), is the evolution of tcav , and it does not
require concepts in input as it can automatically discover them. A set of images fromthe same class is segmented with multiple resolutions resulting in a pool of segments
all coming from the same class. Then the activation space of one bottleneck layer of a
CNN classiﬁer is used as a similarity space. After that, similar segments are clusteredin the activation space, and, for each concept, its tcav importance score is computed
given its examples segments. ConceptSHAP (Yeh et al. 2020 ) is an evolution of SHAP
which tries to deﬁne an importance score for each concept discovered. conceptshap
ﬁnds the importance of each individual concept from a set of mconcept vectors
C
s={c1,c2,..., cm}by utilizing Shapley values. Similar to ace,conceptshap
aims at having concepts clustered to certain coherent spatial regions. CaCE, Causal
Concept Effect (Goyal et al. 2019 ) is another variation of tcav that looks at the causal
effect of the presence or absence of high-level concepts on the black-box prediction.Indeed, tcav can suffer from confounding concepts that could happen if the training
data instances have multiple classes, even with a low correlation. PACE (Kamakshi
et al. 2021 ) is a variation of ace that introduce the use of the black-box for identifying
concepts by automatically extracting small sub-regions of the image, called concepts,
relevant to the black-box prediction. In (Shen et al. 2021 ) is presented ICNN, an
interpretable method to modify traditional CNNs into interpretable CNN . In an inter-
123

==== Page 35 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1753
pretable CNN, each ﬁlter in a high convolutional layer represents a speciﬁc object
part. An interpretable CNNs use the same training data as ordinary CNNs without
additional annotations of object parts or textures for supervision. The interpretableCNN automatically assigns each ﬁlter in a high convolutional layer with an object
part during the learning process. The explicit knowledge of interpretable CNN can
help people understand their logic, i.e., what patterns are memorized by the CNN forprediction.
Concept attribution-based explainers comparison SMs are the best known and
most widely used type of explanation. However, they are very fragile and suffer frominterpretation problems as their usage from a cognitive perspective is unclear. On the
other hand, the usage of concepts is a new approach that seeks to overcome SMs
problems by producing high-level explanations that are more understandable by theend user. Concept-based explanations are a very recent type of explanation for images,
and they have potential improvements. It is the ﬁrst step in the direction of human-like
explanations. Human-friendly concepts make it possible to build straightforward andvaluable explanations. Humans still need to map images to concepts, but it is a small
price to pay to augment human–machine interaction. Generally, concept attribution
explainers compute a score that evaluates the probability that a selected concept has
inﬂuenced the prediction. The main problem, for now, is that this concept has to
be manually selected. tcav is the most advanced algorithm. However, the concepts
need to be provided as a set of images reﬂecting the selected concept, e.g., a set of
ice images, a set of people, and a set of stripes. Several variations of tcav have been
introduced to automate the concept selection phase. PACE is the most advanced search
when looking for concepts concerning black-box behavior. Researchers are focusing
on ﬁnding concepts in an automated way, but for the time being, there is no explainer
to ensure ﬁnding a concept that is humanly understandable.
There is a need to build an explanation in terms of higher features called concepts
for a general audience.
6.3 Prototype-based explanations
Another valid explanation type for images is a set of prototypical images that repre-
sent a particular class. Human reasoning is often prototype-based, using representative
examples as a basis for categorization and decision-making. Similarly, prototypeexplanation models use representative examples to explain and cluster data. MMD-
CRITIC (Kim et al. 2016 ), already presented in Sect. 5, is an interpretable approach
that can be applied to retrieve image prototypes and criticisms. In Fig. 11is presented
an application of mmd- critic oncifar . We can extract some interesting knowledge
from these methods. For example, from the prototype set, we can deduce that birdsusually stand on a tree or ﬂy in the sky, while, in the criticism images, we see that
planes are all on a white background or have a different shape from the usual one
used for passengers. Inﬂuence Functions (Koh and Liang 2017 ) is a global post-hoc
model-agnostic explainer that tries to ﬁnd the images most responsible for a given pre-
diction through inﬂuence functions. The usage of inﬂuence functions is a technique
from robust statistics to trace a model’s prediction through the learning algorithm and
123

==== Page 36 ====
1754 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 11 Prototypes (left) and criticisms (right) returned by mmd- critic oncifar
back to its training data, thereby identifying training points most responsible for a
given prediction. Visualizing the training points most responsible for a prediction canbe useful for more in-depth insights into the black-box behavior. PROTOPNET (Chen
et al. 2019 ) is a global interpretable model for image data that aims at identifying
prototypical parts of images (named prototypes) and using them to implement an
interpretable classiﬁcation process. A special deep learning architecture is designed
to retrieve these prototypes. The network learns a limited number of prototypical partsfrom the training set and then identiﬁes parts on the test image that look like the pro-
totypical parts. Then, it predicts based on a weighted combination of the similarity
scores between parts of the image and the learned prototypes.
Prototype-based explainers comparison Prototype explanations are not widespread
as explanations for image classiﬁers. The explainers presented have very different
approaches: mmd- critic use the Maximum Mean Discrepancy measure to select the
prototype set, protopnet instead used part of the image as prototypes. mmd- critic
is faster than protopnet but the explanations provided are more obscure.
Explanation prototypes are not very common for images because the usefulness
of such explanations is not clear.
6.4 Counterfactual-based explanations
In parallel with prototypes, also counterfactuals are another widely adopted form of
explanation for images. In this setting, counterfactual explainers for images produce
images similar to the input image but with a different prediction from the black-
box under analysis. Therefore, also in this case, counterfactual methods are post-hocexplainers. Similarly to SM, we can distinguish between counterfactual explainers
altering single pixels against those altering the whole image or part of it. CEM, Con-
trastive Explanation Method ( cem) (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ), already presented in
Sect. 5, is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc counterfactual explainer that can also be
applied on image data. In this setting, Pertinent Positives (PP) or Pertinent Negatives(PN) are the pixels that lead to the same or a different class w.r.t. the original instance.
To create PP’s and PN’s, feature-wise perturbation is done by keeping the pertur-
bations sparse and close to the original instance through an objective function thatcontains an elastic net βL
1+L2regularizer and also consider an auto-encoder trained
to reconstruct images of the training set. As a result, the perturbed instance lies close
to the training data manifold. In Fig. 12, we can see that very few pixels are obtained
123

==== Page 37 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1755
Fig. 12 Explanation on mnist .acem: input on the center PN left and PP right. bguidedproto : left to
right, input, the closest counterfactuals labeled as 6, and 8. cabele : on the left the input query and on the
right the counterfactual with 8 as target class
as the counterfactual explanation on mnist . However, from a human perspective, this
approach might seem much more adversarial than useful for an explanation (Guidotti
2022 ). An extension of CEM to resolve this problem is presented in (Luss et al. 2021 ),
where the authors leverage the usage of latent features created by a generative modelto produce more trustful perturbations. L2X (Chen et al. 2018 ) is a local post-hoc
model-agnostic explanation method that searches for the minimal number of pixels
that change the classiﬁcation. It is based on learning a function for extracting a subsetof the most informative features for each given sample using Mutual Information.
l2x adopts a variational approximation to efﬁciently compute the Mutual Informa-
tion and gives a value for a group of pixels called patches . If the value is positive,
a group contributed positively to the prediction. Otherwise, it contributed negatively.
Guided Prototypes, Interpretable Counterfactual Explanations Guided by Prototypes(guidedproto ) (Looveren and Klaise 2021 ) proposes a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc
explainer that perturbs the input image by using a loss function L=cL
pred+βL1+L2
optimized using gradient descent. The ﬁrst term, cLpred, encourages the perturbed
instance to predict another class then x, while the others are regularisation terms.
In Fig. 12, we show the application of guidedproto onmnist . It is interesting to
notice that the counterfactuals unveil how easy it is to change the class with very fewpixels. However, this kind of explanation is not easily human understandable because
the few pixels modiﬁed can barely be noticed by human eyes. ABELE, Adversarial
black-box Explainer generating Latent Exemplars) (Guidotti et al. 2019b ), is a local
post-hoc model-agnostic explainer that produces explanations composed of: (i) a set
of exemplars and counter-exemplar images, i.e., prototypes and counterfactuals, and
(ii) a SM. abele exploits an adversarial autoencoder (AAE) to generate the synthetic
images used in the neighborhood to train the surrogate model used to explain x. Indeed,
it builds a latent local decision tree that mimics the behavior of band selects prototypes
and counterfactuals from the synthetic neighborhood exploiting the tree. Finally, theSM is obtained by a pixel-by-pixel difference between xand the exemplars. In Fig. 12,
we report an example of the application of abele onmnist .
Counterfactual-based explainers comparison The goal of counterfactual explainers
is to produce examples similar to the input but with a different predicted class. They are
more intuitive than the other types of explanations because counterfactual thinking istypical from the human cognitive point of view. There is a wide offer of counterfactual
explainers (Guidotti 2022 ), and it is difﬁcult to deﬁne which counterfactual explainer
is better than the others for the image domain. If the priority is the execution time,then cem is the fastest method. Methods such as abele and guided prototypes
create more realistic counterfactuals but require training additional models such as
autoencoders which are notoriously difﬁcult to train (Doersch 2016 ).
123

==== Page 38 ====
1756 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 13 Example of insertion (left) and deletion (right) scores performed for the SM returned by lime .T h e
area under the curve is 0.215 for deletion and 0.594 for insertion
Counterfactual explanations are more user-friendly than prototypes and other
forms of explanations because they highlight the changes to make to obtain the
desired prediction.
6.5 Image explainers quantitative comparison
To quantitatively investigate the performance of the SM explainers analyzed, we com-
puted the deletion and the insertion metric, presented in Sect. 4. For the computation
of the deletion metric, we substitute with black pixels the original pixels in increasing
order of importance w.r.t. the scores given by the SM. On the other hand, for the inser-
tionmetric, we blur the whole image with a Gaussian Kernel, and then we slowly insert
highly salient pixels w.r.t the SM. For every substitution, we query the black-box with
the image, and we measure the performance. The ﬁnal score is obtained by taking thearea under the curve (AUC) (Hand and Till 2001 ) as a function of the percentage of
pixels removed/inserted. In Fig. 13, we show an example of these metrics computed
on an image of imagenet . Table 6reports the average results of the calculation
of these metrics for a set of 100 randomly selected images for every dataset. Inde-
pendently from the explainer adopted, we notice that insertion scores decrease while
augmenting the dataset dimensions because we have higher information and morepixels have to be inserted to increase the performance. On the other hand, the deletion
scores decrease. This might be tied to the fact that since we have more information, it
is easier to decrease the performance. The best explainers are highlighted in bold. Wenotice that rise is the best approach overall, followed by intgrad ,deeplift , and/epsilon1-
lrp. We notice that all these approaches are pixel-wise-based methods. Thus it seems
that this kind of evaluation can be advantageous for these explainers. On the contrary,
the segmentation-based explainers lime and xrai struggle in general and even more
when handling low-resolution images.
Table 7shows the runtime for the image explainers experimented with. For
imagenet , we only tested SMs methods due to the increasing computational costs
of the other explainers. On the contrary, we tested tcav only on imagenet astcav
needs to obtain different images representing different concepts, and this is difﬁcult
to do for very simple images like the one in mnist andcifar . From the results,
we notice that grad- cam and grad- cam++ are the fastest methods, especially for
123

==== Page 39 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1757
Table 6 Insertion (top) and deletion (bottom) metrics expressed as AUC of accuracy versus percentage of
removed/inserted pixels
mnist cifar imagenet
lime 0.807 (0.14) 0.41 (0.21) 0.34 (0.25)
/epsilon1-l r p 0.976 (0.02) 0.56 (0.20) 0.28 (0.19)
intgrad 0.975 (0.03) 0.64(0.22) 0.37 (0.23)
deeplift 0.976 (0.02) 0.57 (0.20) 0.28 (0.19)
smoothgrad 0.959 (0.03) 0.55 (0.23) 0.34 (0.26)
xrai 0.956 (0.04) 0.58 (0.21) 0.40 (0.26)
grad- cam 0.941 (0.04) 0.57 (0.20) 0.21 (0.19)
grad- cam++ 0.941 (0.04) 0.52 (0.22) 0.32 (0.26)
rise 0.978 (0.03) 0.61 (0.21) 0.50(0.26)
lime 0.388 (0.21) 0.221 (0.19) 0.051 (0.05)
/epsilon1-l r p 0.120 (0.01) 0.127 (0.11) 0.014 (0.02)
intgrad 0.128 (0.01) 0.118 (0.07) 0.019 (0.04)
deeplift 0.120 (0.01) 0.127 (0.11) 0.014 (0.02)
smoothgrad 0.135 (0.04) 0.153 (0.13) 0.033 (0.05)
xrai 0.151 (0.04) 0.144 (0.07) 0.086 (0.11)
grad- cam 0.297 (0.20) 0.153 (0.12) 0.139 (0.12)
grad- cam++ 0.252 (0.13) 0.283 (0.24) 0.081 (0.10)
rise 0.120 (0.01) 0.124 (0.07) 0.044 (0.05)
The reported value represents the mean of the scores obtained on a subset of 100 instances of the dataset,
and the value on the parenthesis is the standard deviation
complex models like the VGG network. In general, SM pixel-wise explanations are
faster to achieve because segmentation slows down a lot, especially for high-resolution
images. CA, CF, and PR methods are very slow compared to SM. This problem hap-pens because these methods require additional training or use some search algorithm
to return their explanations. CA, CF, and PR methods produce more useful explana-
tions, but since SMs are easier and faster to obtain, they are seen more applied in theliterature than the other methods making them more widespread.
7 Explanations for text data
For text data, we can distinguish the following types of explanations: Sentence
Highlighting (SH) , described in Sect. 7.1,Attention-Based methods (AB) , described
in Sect. 7.2,Other Methods , detailed in Sect. 7.4. Additional details are available
in (Danilevsky et al. 2020 ). Table 8summarizes the explanation methods acting on text
data. Text, unlike tabular and image data, does not have a regular structure. Indeed,
the variety and complexity of tasks related to text are enormous, and in literature, it isknown as Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Chowdhary 2020 ). In the following,
we analyze text classiﬁcation in detail because, among information retrieval, machine
translation, and question answering, text classiﬁcation is the main topic where XAI
123

==== Page 40 ====
1758 F. Bodria et al.Table 7 Explanation runtime of the tested methods, expressed in seconds for explainers of image classiﬁers, uncertainty is on the last decimal
Dataset Black-box lime /epsilon1- lrp intgrad deeplift smoothgrad xrai grad- cam grad- cam++ rise tcav mmd- critic cem guidedprop abele
mnist CNN 1 1 0.03 2 0.04 1 0.1 0.1 0.5 – 124 580 11 2000
cifar CNN 10 1 0.06 1 0.07 1.5 0.15 0.15 2 – 277 765 153 1800
imagenet VGG16 50 2 5 3 0.8 18 0.25 0.25 21 300 – – – –
123

==== Page 41 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1759
Table 8 Summary of methods for opening and explaining black-boxes for text data
Type Name References Data type IN/PH G/L A/S
SH shap Lundberg and Lee ( 2017 ) ANY PH L S
lime Ribeiro et al. ( 2016 ) ANY PH L A
deeplift Shrikumar et al. ( 2017 ) ANY PH L S
intgrad Sundararajan et al. ( 2017 ) ANY PH L S
l2x Chen et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L A
lionets Mollas et al. ( 2019 ) ANY PH L S
AB – Li et al. ( 2016 ) TXT PH L S
attentionmatrix Vaswani et al. ( 2017 ) TXT PH L S
exbert Hoover et al. ( 2019 ) TXT PH L S
CF sedc Martens and Provost ( 2014 ) TXT PH L A
lasts Guidotti et al. ( 2020b ) TXT PH L S
xspells Lampridis et al. ( 2020 ) TXT PH L S
cat Chemmengath et al. ( 2022 ) TXT PH L A
polyjuice Pezeshkpour et al. ( 2019 ) TXT PH L A
Other gyc Madaan et al. ( 2021 ) TXT PH L A
quint Abujabal et al. ( 2017 ) TXT PH L S
anchor Ribeiro et al. ( 2018 ) ANY PH L A
criage Pezeshkpour et al. ( 2019 ) TXT PH L S
– Rajani et al. ( 2019 ) TXT PH L S
lasts Guidotti et al. ( 2020b ) TXT PH L S
doctorxai Panigutti et al. ( 2020 ) ANY PH L S
methods exist in literature. Examples of usage in text classiﬁcation are sentiment
analysis, topic labeling, spam, and hate detection (Aggarwal and Zhai 2012 ). Text
classiﬁcation is the process of assigning tags or categories to text according to its
content. Using labeled examples as training data, a ML model can learn the different
associations between pieces of text and a particular output called tags. Tags can bethought of as labels that distinguish different types of text. For sentiment analysis, it
is possible to have tags as positive, negative, or neutral. XAI techniques are generally
applied to understand which (sets of) words are the most relevant for a speciﬁc tagassignment. We experimented on three datasets: sst ,imdb , andyelp . We selected
these datasets
20because they are the most used on sentiment classiﬁcation and have
different dimensions. On these datasets, we trained different black-box models. For
every explainer, we present an example of an application on one or more datasets.
20sst :https://nlp.stanford.edu/sentiment/index.html ,imdb :https://ai.stanford.edu/~amaas/data/
sentiment/ ,yelp :https://www.kaggle.com/yelp-dataset/yelp-dataset .
123

==== Page 42 ====
1760 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 14 Example of sentence highlighting, on top, we have the score produced by intgrad and below we
have in order, lime ,deeplift and the baseline, which consists of multiplying the input with the gradient
w.r.t. input. The sentence is taken from imdb
7.1 Sentence highlighting
As seen in Sect. 6.1, saliency-based explanations are prevalent because they present
visually perceptive explanations. Saliency Highlighting (SH) can be seen as a version
of SMs applied to text. Indeed, it practically consists of assigning to every word (or
set of words) a score based on the importance that that word (or set of words) had in
the ﬁnal prediction. Formally, Sentence Highlighting (SH) is modeled as a vector s
that explains a classiﬁcation y=b(x)of a black-box bonx. The dimensions of sare
the words present in the sentence xwe want to explain, and the value siis the saliency
value of the word i. The greater the value of si, the greater the importance of that
word. A positive value indicates a positive contribution towards y, while a negative
one means that the word has contributed negatively. Examples of SH explanations are
reported in Fig. 14.
To obtain such an explanation, it is possible to adapt some of the SMs methods
presented in Sect. 6.1. LIME (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ), presented in Sect. 5, can be applied
to text with a modiﬁcation to the perturbation of the original input. Given an input
sentence x,lime creates a neighborhood of sentences by replacing one or multiple
words with empty spaces. Another possible variation is to insert a stop word instead of
removing it to maintain the meaning of the sentence. INTGRAD (Sundararajan et al.
2017 ), presented in Sect. 6, can also be exploited to explain text classiﬁers. Indeed,
gradient-based methods are challenging to apply to NLP models because the vector
representing every word is usually averaged into a single sentence vector. Since a mean
operation gradient does not exist, the explainer cannot redistribute the signal back tothe original vectors. On the other hand, intgrad is immune to this problem because the
saliency values are computed as a difference with a baseline value. intgrad computes
the saliency value of a single word as a difference from the sentence without it. For a
fair comparison, we substituted the words with spaces as done for lime and also for
intgrad . DEEPLIFT (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ), presented in Sect. 6, can also be applied
to text following the same principle of intgrad . For the experiments, we adopt the
same preprocessing used for lime and intgrad . L2X (Chen et al. 2018 ) can produce
a SH explanation for text. In particular, for text, the patches adopted are a group ofwords. Finally, a baseline for text explainers is formed by gradient ×input that uses
the black-box gradient of the input w.r.t to the output and multiply these value by the
input values.
123

==== Page 43 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1761
Sentence highlighting explainers comparison The SM-based explainers for images
can be applied to text with minor modiﬁcations, which is why it turns out to be the most
popular type of explanation also for textual data. As said for explanations on imagesin Sect. 6, these low feature explanations are helpful to check the model’s robustness,
not to give a valuable understanding for the ﬁnal inexpert user. In addition, removing
a single word from a sentence is typically not a good measure of the goodness ofan explanation since the sentence might lose its meaning. Among the methods tried,
intgrad is the fastest and most reliable due to its use of the gradients of the black-
box. deeplift also uses the gradients, but its calculation method fails and returns
an explanation very similar to the baseline, as reported in Fig. 14.lime is the only
model-agnostic method; however, NLP models tend to be very deep and are generally
gradient-based. Thus, lime results in being very slow, and its performance is clearly
inferior to gradient-based methods.
Methods that use gradients such as intgrad perform better on the textual data
since very deep ML models are usually implemented in the NLP ﬁeld.
7.2 Attention-based explainers
Attention was ﬁrst proposed for images in (Xu et al. 2015 ) to improve the model
performance. The authors managed to show through an attention layer which parts
of the image most contributed to realize the caption. Formally, the attention layer
is indeed a layer to put on top of the model that, for each word, ijof the sentence x
generates a positive weight α
ij, i.e., the attention weight. This value can be interpreted
as the probability that a word ijis in the right place to focus on producing the next word
in the caption. Attention mechanisms allow models to look over all the informationthe original sentence holds and learn the context (Wu and Ong 2021 ; Bahdanau et al.
2015 ). Therefore, it has caught the interest of XAI researchers, who started using
these weights as an explanation. The explanation eof the instance xis composed
of the attention values ( α), one for each feature x
i. Attention is nowadays a delicate
argument, and while it is clear that it augments the performance of models, it is less
clear if it helps gain interpretability and the relationship with model outputs (Jainand Wallace 2019 ). Attention Based Heatmap (Li et al. 2016 ) is a local, intrinsic,
model-speciﬁc explainer based on the attention mechanism. It produces a heatmap
explanation similar to the one used for SMs by using the weights of the black-box. Itcan only be applied to attention-based methods, such as BERT, in which the weights
α
ijof the attention layers are used as a score for every word in the sentence. The
higher the score, the more important the word; therefore, the redder the heatmap.
Attention Matrix (Cheng et al. 2016 ) looks at the dependencies between words for
producing explanations. It is a self-attention method, sometimes called intra-attention .
attention matrix relates different positions of a single sequence to compute its
internal representation. The attention of a sentence xcomposed of Nwords can be
understood as an N×Nmatrix, where each row and columns represent a word in
the input sentence. The values of the matrix are the attention values of every possible
combination of the tokens. This matrix is a representation of values pointing from each
word to every other word (Vaswani et al. 2017 )( s e eF i g . 15). We can also visualize
123

==== Page 44 ====
1762 F. Bodria et al.
Fig. 15 Attention based heatmap matrix generated from the method presented in (Cheng et al. 2016 ). The
row and the columns of the matrix correspond to the words in the sentence: “Read the book, forget themovie!”. Each value of the matrix shows the attention weight α
ijof the annotation of the i-th word w.r.t. the
j-th
Fig. 16 Attention based representation of BERT for a sentence taken from imdb using the visualization
of (Hoover et al. 2019 ). The greater the attention between two words, the bigger the line. Here is selected
only the attention related to the word “sucks”
this matrix with a focus on the connection between words (Hoover et al. 2019 )a si n
Fig.16, where the thickness of the lines is the self-attention value between two tokens.
Attention based explainers comparison Attention is a mechanism good for improv-
ing the performance of the model but is not usable as an explanation. As described
in (Jain and Wallace 2019 ), it is unclear what relationship exists between attention
weights and model outputs. Learned attention weights are frequently uncorrelatedwith gradient-based measures of feature importance, and it is possible to identify very
different attention distributions that nonetheless yield equivalent predictions. There-
fore we might suggest focusing on other types of explanations for text data.
It is unclear if attention can be considered a valid explanation. We suggest focus-
ing on other types of explanations.
7.3 Prototype and counterfactual-based explainers
Counterfactual and prototype explanations are not very common explanations for text
data. The richness of meaning in the textual data makes it complex to generate explana-
tions since changing even a single word can deeply alter the meaning of the sentence.In this section, we report the main existing methods that attempt counterfactual or
prototype explanations for text data.
PROTOTEX (Das et al. 2022 ) is a local, intrinsic, model speciﬁc NLP classiﬁca-
tion architecture based on prototype network (Li et al. 2018 ).prototex faithfully
explains model decisions based on prototype tensors. At inference time, classiﬁcation
decisions are based on the distances between the input text and the prototype tensors,
123

==== Page 45 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1763
explained via the training examples most similar to the most inﬂuential prototypes.
SEDC (Martens and Provost 2014 ) is a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer able
to provide counterfactual instances for documents. The approach proposed is basedon a best-ﬁrst search with pruning. The idea is that, given the words in the document,
the algorithm tries to predict the label by removing a single word at a time: if the
prediction changes, then it is added as an explanation. Then, also the combinations ofwords are considered. CAT, Contrastive Attributed explanations for Text (Chemmen-
gath et al. 2022 ) is a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer for NLP which returns
contrastive explanations through a data twist that guarantees semantically meaningfulexplanations. In particular, cat rely on a minimal perturbation approach regularized
using a BERT language model (Hoover et al. 2019 ) and an attribute classiﬁer trained
on available attributes on the text. POLYJUICE (Wu et al. 2021a ) is a local, post-hoc,
model-agnostic counterfactual generator that returns a set of realistic textual counter-
factuals that can be employed for explanation purposes. In particular, it accounts for
returning counterfactuals that are grammatically correct besides being minimal andrealistic. The generation makes use of a ﬁll-in-the-blank structure to specify where
the perturbation occurs and control codes like negation, delete, insert, shufﬂe, etc., to
specify how it occurs. GYC, Generate Your Counterfactuals (Madaan et al. 2021 ), is
a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic framework to generate diverse counterfactual texts
for testing automated decision-making systems. gyc returns plausible, diverse, goal-
oriented, and effective explanations through an approach based on constraints that can
be speciﬁed to guide the generation w.r.t. custom deﬁned class labels, name-entities,
topics, etc. Like polyjuice , also this approach is not speciﬁcally designed for XAI, but
it can be easily used for interpretability purposes. XSPELLS (Lampridis et al. 2020 )i s
a local, post-hoc, model-agnostic explainer returning exemplars and counterexamples
sentences. In practice, it re-implements abele for text data by using LSTM layers in
the autoencoder. Exemplars and counter-exemplars are selected using rules extracted
from the decision tree learned in the latent space.
Prototype and counterfactual explainers comparison Counterfactuals and proto-
types explanations for text are very difﬁcult to generate. cat and sedc alter single
words to change the prediction of the model; the former is more advanced, substituting
words with an NLP model to make correct sentences. However, as seen previously,changing a single word hardly alters the meaning of the sentence and, therefore, the
black-box prediction. gyc and polyjuice are interactive tools in which human inter-
vention is needed, so they can be used for explanation purposes. xspell is the most
automatic approach, which seems to be also the best one among the others, but it
suffers from the same limitations of abele . The only prototype explanation method
we identiﬁed for text is prototex .
Prototype and Counterfactual explanations are very difﬁcult to generate for text
data due to the meaning of the sentences. Interactive methods such as polyjuice
and gyc are promising approaches that introduce the human cognitive process
that helps in the process of counterfactual generation.
123

==== Page 46 ====
1764 F. Bodria et al.
Table 9 Deletion (top) and insertion (bottom) metrics computed on Sentence Highlighting for different
datasets
sst imdb yelp
intgrad 0.6447 (0.21) 0.647 (0.21) 0.7595 (0.25)
lime 0.6199 (0.23) 0.648 (0.21) 0.7712 (0.25)
deeplift 0.6297 (0.23) 0.600 (0.15) 0.7565 (0.31)
gradient x input 0.6287 (0.23) 0.630 (0.16) 0.7590 (0.28)
intgrad 0.6107 (0.23) 0.616 (0.16) 0.7625 (0.33)
lime 0.6337 (0.23) 0.599 (0.17) 0.7513 (0.33)
deeplift 0.6137 (0.21) 0.645 (0.16) 0.7524 (0.30)
gradient x input 0.5852 (0.22) 0.632 (0.16) 0.7479 (0.31)
The reported value represents the mean of the scores obtained on a subset of 100 instances, and the value
on the parenthesis is the standard deviation
7.4 Other types of explainers
In this section, we report on other types of explainers that may not ﬁt into one of
the previous sections but are nonetheless relevant to the ﬁeld. ANCHOR (Ribeiro
et al. 2018 ), presented in Sect. 5, can be adapted to text by using as perturbation the
word UNK. It consists of perturbing a sentence by substituting words with UNK(unknown). For example, It shows how “sucks” contributed to the negative predic-
tion of the sentence, but when coupled with “love”, the sentence prediction switches
to positive. Natural Language Explanation verbalizes explanations in natural humanlanguage. Natural language can be generated with complex deep learning models ,
e.g., by training a model with natural language explanations and coupling it with a
generative model (Rajani et al. 2019 ). Besides, it can also be generated using a sim-
pletemplate-based approach (Abujabal et al. 2017 ). NLP is a very complex ﬁeld,
and ﬁnding a human-friendly explanation is challenging. Researchers are working invarious directions of creating explanations with high concept (Srivastava et al. 2017 )
and using humans to augment these types of concept (Rajani et al. 2019 ), as done
for Concept Attribution. Another possible development is the use of generative textmethods to build a friendly narrative for the ﬁnal user, which is not always an expert
in the ﬁeld.
Explanations for classiﬁers acting on text data are at the very early stages com-
pared to tabular data and images.
7.5 Text explainers quantitative comparison
Similarly to what we did for images, to quantitatively investigate the performance
of the SH explainers analyzed, we computed the deletion and the insertion metric,
presented in Sect. 4. For the computation of the deletion metric, we removed words
in order of importance. In contrast, for the insertion metric, we started with an empty
text, and we added words in order of importance. For every substitution we made, we
123

==== Page 47 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1765
queried the text to the black-box, obtaining accuracy. The ﬁnal score is obtained by
taking the area under the curve (AUC) (Hand and Till 2001 ) of accuracy as a function of
the percentage of removed words. The results are shown in Fig. 14. We notice that the
highlighted words are very different among the various methods. intgrad and lime
are the ones who return more meaningful explanations, while deeplift struggles a lot
to diversify from the baseline. We also measured the deletion/insertion and reported
the results in Table 9. For both metrics, we have very poor performance among all
the methods. However, this metric is not ideal with text since removing a single word
barely changes the meaning of the sentence. On the other hand, concerning runtime,NLP models are usually very deep and large, resulting in poor performance in terms of
runtime. In particular lime is the slowest since it queries the black-box for prediction
multiple times. deeplift and intgrad are faster since they operate on the gradients
of the black-box. Finally, AB methods are instant since they only need to extract the
weights and do not need to perform any operation.
8 Explainers for other data types
As detailed in this survey, the state-of-the-art is mainly focusing on the explanation of
black-box trained on tabular data, images, and texts. However, other types of data arelargely available, and many models are built on top of them. In this section, we shortly
summarize some explainers, which are pillars for the explanations of black-boxes
trained for time series and graph classiﬁcation.
8.1 Explanations for time series
Due to the tremendous amount of data generated by sensors over time, there is a
widespread diffusion of ML models working on time series (Theissler 2017 ). A time
series x ={t
1,t2,..., tm}∈ Rm×dis an ordered set of mreal-valued observations (or
time steps), with dimensionality d. We say that a time series is univariate when d=1,
while when d>1, we name xamultivariate time series . There are areas such as the
medical or ﬁnancial ﬁeld where temporal data is of particular importance and whereblack-box ML models are applied to provide support on decision-making for various
tasks. For this reason, recently, we have been assisting with the emerging proposal for
explainability related to time series (Theissler et al. 2022 ).
Many explainers for time series can be categorized with the taxonomy introduced in
Sect. 3. The most important difference with the other types of data relies on the type of
explanation produced. Shapelet is the most characteristic explanation for time series
data. They are time series subsequences that are maximally representative of a class.
Shapelets are more interpretable, faster, and more accurate than k-Nearest Neighbors(kNN) (Cover and Hart 1967 ), which is a traditional approach to perform time series
classiﬁcation (Lee et al. 2012 ). As usual, SMs can be used to highlight which part
of the series has contributed the most to the classiﬁcation. Finally, also the attentionmethods illustrated for text in Sect. 7.2can also be applied to time series data. In the
following, we brieﬂy illustrate some peculiar explainers for time series classiﬁcation.
123

==== Page 48 ====
1766 F. Bodria et al.
In (Geler et al. 2020 ), introduced a transparent by design method named Weighted-
kNN that extends the classic majority-voting kNN by proposing weighting schemes.
By emphasizing the nearer neighbors using a weighting scheme, it is possible toimprove the kNN classiﬁer’s quality and stability. The nearest neighbors are considered
part of the prototypical explanation. LASTS, Local Agnostic Shapelet-based Time
Series explainer ( lasts ) (Guidotti et al. 2020b ), is a variation of abele for time
series. As explanation lasts returns exemplars and counterexamples composed of
subseries with a shapelet-based rule. An example of a rule is: “if these shapelets are
present and these others not, then xis classiﬁed as y”. DOCTORXAI (Panigutti et al.
2020 ) is a local post-hoc model-speciﬁc explainer acting on sequential data in the
medical setting. In particular, it exploits a medical ontology to perturb the data and
generate neighbors. doctorxai is designed on healthcare data, but it can theoretically
be applied to every type of sequential data with an ontology. For more information on
explaining black-box models for time series, we remand the reader to the following
survey (Rojat et al. 2021 ; Theissler et al. 2022 ).
Time series explainers comparison For time series data, kNN weighting schemes
are the most common approach. Shaplet-based explanations are promising, and new
approaches using autoencoders or ontologies are being developed to improve time
series explanations.
8.2 Explanations for graphs
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become increasingly popular since many real-
world data are represented as graphs, such as social networks, chemical molecules,and ﬁnancial data. A graph can be used for speciﬁc tasks like link prediction (Cai and Ji
2020 ) or node labeling (Calamoneri 2006 ). However, many advanced GNN operations
are also proposed to improve the performance of classiﬁcation models, for example,
in graph convolution models (Kipf and Welling 2017 ). Compared with image and text
domains, the explainability of black-box models working on graphs is less explored,but it is critical for understanding to behavior of GNN.
The types of explanations available for graphs are various. The most common
one is node relevance which derives from feature relevance methods. It consists ofassigning a value to every node of the graph that represents how much that node
has contributed to the prediction. Since graphs are composed of nodes and edges,
the same operation can be accomplished with edges. The focus of the explanation isshifted toward the interactions between the nodes instead of the nodes themselves.
There are different ways to do this. The most common one is to backpropagate the
signal from the prediction to the input graph in lrp style. Other approaches learn a
surrogate model to assign values as done by lime . LRP (for Graphs) (Schwarzenberg
et al. 2019 ) extends the original LRP method for GNN. It decomposes the output
prediction score into different node importance scores. The score decomposition ruleis developed based on the hidden features and weights. GraphLIME (Huang et al. 2020 )
extends the lime for GNN and studies the importance of different node features for
node classiﬁcation tasks. Given a target node in the input graph, graphlime considers
its N-hop neighboring nodes and their predictions as its local neighborhood, where a
123

==== Page 49 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1767
reasonable choice of Nis the number of layers in the GNNs. Then a nonlinear surrogate
model is employed to ﬁt the local neighborhood. Finally, based on the weights of
different features in the surrogate model, it selects important features to explain thepredictions. XGNN (Yuan et al. 2020a ) (eXplainable GNN) is a global, post-hoc,
model-speciﬁc explainer that proposes graph patterns as explanations to investigate
which structure in the graph maximizes a speciﬁc prediction. Speciﬁcally, they traineda graph generator to generate small graphs, which pattern can be used to explain GNN
behavior. The graph generator uses reinforcement learning that starts from an empty
graph and, at each step, determines how to add an edge or node and form a new graph.This graph generator is trained based on feedback from trained graph models using a
policy gradient algorithm. CF-GNNExplainer (Lucic et al. 2022 ) is a local, post-hoc,
model-speciﬁc explainer for GNNs. It aims at ﬁnding the minimal perturbation to thegraph such that the prediction changes. In particular, cf- gnnexplainer iteratively
removes edges from the original adjacency matrix based on a matrix sparsiﬁcation
technique, keeping track of the perturbations that lead to a change in prediction andreturning the perturbation with the smallest change w.r.t. the number of edges. For
more information on explaining black-box models for graphs, we remand the reader
to the following survey (Prado-Romero et al. 2022 ; Yuan et al. 2020c ).
GNN explainers comparison GNN models are becoming more and more com-
mon in literature (Wu et al. 2021b ), and due to their similarity to neural networks,
researchers are trying to adapt existing methods to this type of black-box. graphlime
and graphlrp) are two perfect examples of that, the former adapting lime while the
latter /epsilon1-l r p . Both methods return scores for nodes, but graphlime does not output
a score for the edges features as it totally ignores the graph structure, which is more
critical for graph data. xgnn and cf- gnnexplainer are more aimed at counterfac-
tual explanations. xgnn returns more robust counterfactuals due to the reinforcement
learning policy; however, it is much slower than cf- gnnexplainer for the same
reason.
9 Explanation toolboxes
A signiﬁcant number of toolboxes for ML explanation have been proposed during the
last few years. In the following, we report the most popular Python toolkits with abrief description of the explanation models they provide.
21
AIX360 (Arya et al. 2019 ) contains both intrinsic, post-hoc, local, and global
explainers, and it can be used with every kind of input dataset. Regarding local post-hocexplanations, different methods are implemented, such as lime (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ),
shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),cem (Dhurandhar et al. 2018 ),cem- maf (Luss et al.
2019 ) and protodash (Gurumoorthy et al. 2019 )). Another interesting method pro-
posed in this toolkit is ted(Hind et al. 2019 ;D a s he ta l . 2018 ), which provides intrinsic
local explanations and provides global explanations based on rules. CaptumAI is a
21AIX360: https://github.com/Trusted-AI/AIX360 , CaptumAI: https://captum.ai/ , InterpretML: https://
github.com/interpretml/interpret , Alibi https://github.com/SeldonIO/alibi , FAT-Forensics: https://github.
com/fat-forensics/fat-forensics , What-If Tool: https://github.com/pair-code/what-if-tool , Shapash: https://
github.com/MAIF/shapash .
123

==== Page 50 ====
1768 F. Bodria et al.
library built for PyTorch models. CaptumAI divides the available algorithms into
three categories: Primary Attribution , in which there are methods able to evaluate the
contribution of each input feature to the output of a model: intgrad (Sundararajan
et al. 2017 ),grad- shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),deeplift (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ),
lime (Ribeiro et al. 2016 ),grad- cam (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ).Layer Attribution ,i n
which the focus is on the contribution of each neuron: e.g. grad- cam (Selvaraju et al.
2020 ) and layer- deeplift (Shrikumar et al. 2017 ).Neuron Attribution , in which
is analyzed the contribution of each input feature on the activation of a particular
hidden neuron: e.g. neuron- intgrad (Sundararajan et al. 2017 ),neuron- grad-
shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ). InterpretML22( N o r ie ta l . 2019 ) contains intrinsic
and post-hoc methods for Python and R. InterpretML is particularly interesting due
to the intrinsic methods it provides: Explainable Boosting Machine ( ebm), Decision
Tree, and Decision Rule List. These methods offer a user-friendly visualization of the
explanations, with several local and global charts. InterpretML also contains the most
popular methods, such as lime and shap . DALEX (Lipovetsky 2022 ) is an R and
Python package that provides post-hoc and model-agnostic explainers that allow local
and global explanations. It is tailored for tabular data and can produce different kinds
of visualization plots. Alibi provides intrinsic and post-hoc models. It can be used with
any type of input dataset andboth for classiﬁcation and regression tasks. Alibi provides
a set of counterfactual explanations, such as cem, and, interestingly, an implementa-
tion of anchor (Ribeiro et al. 2018 ). Regarding global explanation methods, Alibi
contains ale (Accumulated Local Effects) (Apley and Zhu 2016 ), which is a method
based on partial dependence plots (Guidotti et al. 2019c ). FAT-Forensics takes into
account fairness, accountability and transparency . Regarding intrinsic explainability,
it provides methods to assess explainability under three perspectives: data, models,
and predictions. For accountability , it offers a set of techniques that assesses privacy,
security, and robustness .F o r fairness , it contains methods for bias detection . What-If
Tool is a toolkit providing a visual interface from which it is possible to play without
coding. Moreover, it can work directly with ML models built on Cloud AI Platform
(https://cloud.google.com/ai-platform ). It contains a variety of approaches to get fea-
ture attribution values such as shap (Lundberg and Lee 2017 ),intgrad (Sundararajan
et al. 2017 ), and smoothgrad (Selvaraju et al. 2020 ). Shapash is a Python library
that aims to make machine learning interpretable and understandable by everyone. It
provides several types of interpretable visualization that display explicit labels that
everyone can understand. Shapash offers different types of interactive visualization,from feature importance graphs to contributions ones.
10 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a survey of the latest advances in XAI methods,
following a categorization based on the data type and explanation type. A subset of
widely adopted explainers has been benchmarked with a quantitative and qualitativecomparison. Among those explainers, lime and shap are probably the most widely
22https://github.com/interpretml/interpret .
123

==== Page 51 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1769
used methods but also among the most unstable, with lime much less stable than shap .
We observed that local explainers using surrogate models like lime suffer from a lack of
stability due to the high level of randomness in the neighborhood generation approach.The solid theoretical background of shap accounts for more faithful explanations. The
explanations returned by lime and shap are based on (individual) features importance,
an approach that is often hardly understandable, especially for tabular data. As a recenttrend, rule-based explanations and counterfactual explanations are gaining attention
since their logic formalization supports a deeper understanding of the model’s internal
decisions. Unfortunately, metrics to compare such types of models are still missingin the literature. For image data, there is a very wide variety of methods that provide
explanations through different implementations of saliency maps. According to our
experiments, the best approach is the masking method introduced by rise. Gradient
methods like intgrad ,/epsilon1-l r p and deeplift are very close runners-up in our ranking,
while segmentation methods like lime and xrai produce less convincing results.
Concept Attribution methods are extremely promising but also hard to validate, asthey require additional knowledge about involved concepts. Prototypes and counter-
exemplars have received increasing attention in recent years but suffer from a lack
of a validation framework and are difﬁcult to use in speciﬁc contexts of application.
Finally, we noticed that there are very limited explanation techniques for text data.
One of the pioneers is Sentence Highlight, that, similarly to feature importance fortabular data, gives weight to the portion of the input that contributed, positively or
negatively, to the outcome. This strategy, customized for text data, is not mature yet.
Across the different data types, different approaches tend to use similar strategies.
This is also evident if we look at the internals of these algorithms. For exam-
ple, several methods exploit the generation of a synthetic neighborhood around an
instance to reconstruct the local distribution of data around the point to investigate.This approach is prevalent when trying to produce counterfactual images. Another
widespread approach is to use the gradients of the black-box, if available. The best
results are obtained by combining the use of the gradients with a masking methodology.
In recent years the contributions in the Explainable AI area have constantly been
growing, particularly explainers for machine learning models and, to a minor extent,
novel explainable-by-design methods. To date, limited attention is devoted to the com-
parison of the explainers proposed, mostly using measures of the intrinsic, standalone
quality of an explainer, such as the metrics considered in this paper. A more holistic
validation approach is needed, that brings the user into the picture to assess whether aproposed explanation is meaningful to the user’s purpose and whether the interaction
with the AI system increases the user’s trust. This emerging approach requires the care-
ful design of user studies that evaluate the combined human-AI ecosystem, considering
the cognitive model of the user. As an early example along this line, a user study on
XAI-assisted clinical decision-making revealed that XAI-based advice yields higher(expert) user trust, compared to an AI-based advise (without explanation) (Panigutti
et al. 2022 ). Experiments like this also typically reveal the dissatisfaction of users
with the proposed explanation interface, a crucial aspect that suggests how AI-assisteddecision-making systems should be co-designed in a synergistic process where all rel-
evant stakeholders are involved from the beginning. While some preliminary results
are emerging (Guidotti 2021 ; Jeyakumar et al. 2020 ; Hase and Bansal 2020 ), there
123

==== Page 52 ====
1770 F. Bodria et al.
is still a long way to go towards explainable machine learning paradigms based on
the interaction and collaboration with the user(s), so that the decision makers and
the ML model can co-evolve together, exploiting their complementary strengths andbecoming progressively more effective and trustworthy. This is ultimately a key goal
of Human-centered AI: enhancing the capacity of humans to solve hard problems and
make wise decisions. We hope that the current developments of explainable AI mayrepresent a basis on which the novel paradigm may eventually ﬂourish.
Acknowledgements This work has been partially supported by the European Community Horizon 2020
program under the funding schemes: G.A. 871042 SoBigData++ (http://www.sobigdata.eu ), G.A. 952026
HumanE AI Net (https://www.humane-ai.eu/ ), ERC-2018-ADG G.A. 834756 XAI: Science and technology
for the eXplanation of AI decision making (https://xai-project.eu/index.html ), G.A. 952215 TAILOR (https://
tailor-network.eu/ ), and G.A. CHIST-ERA-19-XAI-010 SAI, by MUR (N. not yet available), FWF (N. I
5205), EPSRC (N. EP/V055712/1), NCN (N. 2020/02/Y/ST6/00064), ETAg (N. SLTAT21096), BNSF
(N. KP-06-AOO2/5) ( https://www.sai-project.eu/ ). And the NextGenerationEU program under the funding
schemes PNRR-PE-AI scheme (M4C2, investment 1.3, line on AI) FAIR (Future Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research), and “SoBigData.it—Strengthening the Italian RI for Social Mining and Big Data Analytics”—Prot. IR0000013. H2020 Research Infrastructures (Grant No. 654024).
Author Contributions FB, FN: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, investigation,
resources, visualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing. RG: Conceptualization,
methodology, resources, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing, visualization, supervision.
SR: Conceptualization, investigation, writing—review and editing, visualization, supervision. FG, DP:
Conceptualization, investigation, writing—review, project administration, supervision.
Funding Open access funding provided by Scuola Normale Superiore within the CRUI-CARE Agreement.
Data availability The datasets adopted in this work are open source and available at https://archive.ics.
uci.edu/ml/datasets.php foradult na n d german ,https://www.image-net.org/ forimagenet ,http://
yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/ formnist ,https://www.cs.toronto.edu/kriz/cifar.html forcifar ,https://
nlp.stanford.edu/sentiment/code.html forsst ,a n d www.kaggle.com/datasets forimdb andyelp .
Code Availability The code is open source and can be downloaded at https://github.com/kdd-lab/XAI-
Survey .
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication The authors declare that they all provide consent for publication.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
123

==== Page 53 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1771
References
Abujabal A, Roy RS, Yahya M, et al (2017) QUINT: interpretable question answering over knowledge
bases. In: Proceedings of the 2017 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing,
EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark—system demonstrations
Adadi A, Berrada M (2018) Peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
(XAI). IEEE Access
Adebayo J, Gilmer J, Muelly M, et al (2018) Sanity checks for saliency maps. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 31: annual conference on neural information processing systems
2018, NeurIPS 2018, Montréal, Canada
Adebayo J, Muelly M, Liccardi I, et al (2020) Debugging tests for model explanations. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems 33: annual conference on neural information processing
systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, virtual
Agarwal R, Melnick L, Frosst N, et al (2021) Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learning with
neural nets. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 34: annual conference on neural
information processing systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, virtual
Aggarwal CC, Zhai C (2012) A survey of text classiﬁcation algorithms. In: Mining text data. Springer, pp
163–222
Albini E, Rago A, Baroni P, et al (2020) Relation-based counterfactual explanations for bayesian network
classiﬁers. In: Proceedings of the twenty-ninth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence,
IJCAI 2020
Alvarez-Melis D, Jaakkola TS (2018) Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining neural networks.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 31: annual conference on neural information
processing systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, Montréal, Canada
Anjomshoae S, Najjar A, Calvaresi D, et al (2019) Explainable agents and robots: Results from a systematic
literature review. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on autonomous agents and
multiagent systems, AAMAS ’19, Montreal, QC, Canada
Anjomshoae S, Kampik T, Främling K (2020) Py-ciu: a python library for explaining machine learning
predictions using contextual importance and utility. In: IJCAI-PRICAI 2020 workshop on explainableartiﬁcial intelligence (XAI)
Apley DW, Zhu J (2016) Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised learning
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08468
Arras L, Montavon G, Müller K, et al (2017) Explaining recurrent neural network predictions in sentiment
analysis. In: Proceedings of the 8th workshop on computational approaches to subjectivity, sentimentand social media analysis, W ASSA@EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark
Arrieta AB, Rodríguez ND, Ser JD, et al (2020) Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI): concepts, tax-
onomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Inf Fus
Artelt A, Hammer B (2019) On the computation of counterfactual explanations—a survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.07749
Arya V , Bellamy RKE, Chen P, et al (2019) One explanation does not ﬁt all: A toolkit and taxonomy of AI
explainability techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03012
Bach S, Binder A, Montavon G et al (2015) On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions
by layer-wise relevance propagation. PLoS One 10(7):e0130140
Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y (2015) Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and trans-
late. In: 3rd International conference on learning representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA,
conference track proceedings
Bien J, Tibshirani R (2011) Prototype selection for interpretable classiﬁcation. Ann Appl Stat 2403–2424Blanco-Justicia A, Domingo-Ferrer J, Martínez S, et al (2020) Machine learning explainability via microag-
gregation and shallow decision trees. Knowl Based Syst
Boz O (2002) Extracting decision trees from trained neural networks. In: Proceedings of the eighth ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada
Bramhall S, Horn H, Tieu M et al (2020) Qlime-a quadratic local interpretable model-agnostic explanation
approach. SMU Data Sci Rev 3(1):4
Byrne RM (2019) Counterfactuals in explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI): evidence from human rea-
soning. In: IJCAI, pp 6276–6282
123

==== Page 54 ====
1772 F. Bodria et al.
Byrne RM, Johnson-Laird P (2020) If and or: real and counterfactual possibilities in their truth and proba-
bility. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 46(4):760
Cai L, Ji S (2020) A multi-scale approach for graph link prediction. In: The thirty-fourth AAAI conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence, AAAI 2020, the thirty-second innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligenceconference, IAAI 2020, the tenth AAAI symposium on educational advances in artiﬁcial intelligence,
EAAI 2020, New York, NY , USA
Calamoneri T (2006) The L(h, k)-labelling problem: a survey and annotated bibliography. Comput J
Carvalho DV , Pereira EM, Cardoso JS (2019) Machine learning interpretability: a survey on methods and
metrics. Electronics 8(8):832
Chattopadhay A, Sarkar A, Howlader P, et al (2018) Grad-cam++: generalized gradient-based visual expla-
nations for deep convolutional networks. In: 2018 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer
vision (W ACV), IEEE
Chemmengath SA, Azad AP, Luss R, et al (2022) Let the CAT out of the bag: Contrastive attributed
explanations for text. In: Proceedings of the 2022 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Chen J, Song L, Wainwright MJ, et al (2018) Learning to explain: an information-theoretic perspective on
model interpretation. In: Proceedings of the 35th international conference on machine learning, ICML2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden
Chen C, Li O, Tao D, et al (2019) This looks like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 32: annual conference on neural information
processing systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Cheng J, Dong L, Lapata M (2016) Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. In: Proceedings
of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, EMNLP 2016, Austin,
Texas, USA
Chipman H, George E, McCulloh R (1998) Making sense of a forest of trees. Comput Sci Stat
Chouldechova A (2017) Fair prediction with disparate impact: a study of bias in recidivism prediction
instruments. Big Data
Chowdhary K (2020) Natural language processing. In: Fundamentals of artiﬁcial intelligence. Springer, pp
603–649
Chowdhury T, Rahimi R, Allan J (2022) Equi-explanation maps: concise and informative global summary
explanations. In: 2022 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, FAccT ’22
Cover TM, Hart PE (1967) Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Inf Theory
Craven MW, Shavlik JW (1995) Extracting tree-structured representations of trained networks. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems 8, NIPS, Denver, CO, USA
Danilevsky M, Qian K, Aharonov R, et al (2020) A survey of the state of explainable AI for natural language
processing. In: Proceedings of the 1st conference of the Asia-Paciﬁc chapter of the association for
computational linguistics and the 10th international joint conference on natural language processing,
AACL/IJCNLP 2020, Suzhou, China
Das A, Gupta C, Kovatchev V , et al (2022) Prototex: explaining model decisions with prototype tensors. In:
Proceedings of the 60th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (vol. 1: longpapers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland
Dash S, Günlük O, Wei D (2018) Boolean decision rules via column generation. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 31: annual conference on neural information processing systems 2018,
NeurIPS 2018, Montréal, Canada
Desai S, Ramaswamy HG (2020) Ablation-cam: visual explanations for deep convolutional network via
gradient-free localization. In: IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision, W ACV
2020, Snowmass Village, CO, USA
Dhurandhar A, Chen P, Luss R, et al (2018) Explanations based on the missing: towards contrastive expla-
nations with pertinent negatives. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 31: annual
conference on neural information processing systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, Montréal, Canada
Doersch C (2016) Tutorial on variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05908
Domingos PM (1998) Knowledge discovery via multiple models. Intell Data Anal 2(1–4):187–202
Donnelly J, Barnett AJ, Chen C (2022) Deformable protopnet: an interpretable image classiﬁer using
deformable prototypes. In: CVPR. IEEE, pp 10255–10265
Doshi-Velez F, Kim B (2017) Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.08608
123

==== Page 55 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1773
Došilovi´ c FK, Brˇ ci´c M, Hlupi´ c N (2018) Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence: a survey. In: 2018 41st Inter-
national convention on information and communication technology, electronics and microelectronics
(MIPRO), IEEE, pp 0210–0215
ElShawi R, Sherif Y , Al-Mallah M, et al (2019) Ilime: local and global interpretable model-agnostic explainer
of black-box decision. In: European conference on advances in databases and information systems.
Springer, pp 53–68
Erion GG, Janizek JD, Sturmfels P, et al (2019) Learning explainable models using attribution priors. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.10670
Fong R, Patrick M, Vedaldi A (2019) Understanding deep networks via extremal perturbations and smooth
masks. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea
(South)
Freitas AA (2013) Comprehensible classiﬁcation models: a position paper. SIGKDD Explor 15(1):1–10Friedman J, Popescu BE (2008) Predictive learning via rule ensembles. Ann Appl Stat 2:916–954
Geler Z, Kurbalija V , Ivanovic M, et al (2020) Weighted KNN and constrained elastic distances for time-
series classiﬁcation. Expert Syst Appl
Ghorbani A, Wexler J, Zou JY , et al (2019) Towards automatic concept-based explanations. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems 32: annual conference on neural information processingsystems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Gilpin LH, Bau D, Yuan BZ, et al (2018) Explaining explanations: an overview of interpretability of machine
learning. In: 5th IEEE international conference on data science and advanced analytics, DSAA 2018,
Turin, Italy
Gleicher M (2016) A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling. Big Data 4(2):75–88Goebel R, Chander A, Holzinger K, et al (2018) Explainable AI: the new 42? In: Machine learning and
knowledge extraction—second IFIP TC 5, TC 8/WG 8.4, 8.9, TC 12/WG 12.9 international cross-
domain conference, CD-MAKE 2018, Hamburg, Germany, Proceedings
Goyal Y , Shalit U, Kim B (2019) Explaining classiﬁers with causal concept effect (cace). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.07165
Guidotti R (2021) Evaluating local explanation methods on ground truth. Artif Intell
Guidotti R (2022) Counterfactual explanations and how to ﬁnd them: literature review and benchmarking.
DAMI, pp 1–55
Guidotti R, Monreale A, Giannotti F, et al (2019a) Factual and counterfactual explanations for black box
decision making. IEEE Intell Syst
Guidotti R, Monreale A, Matwin S, et al (2019b) Black box explanation by learning image exemplars
in the latent feature space. In: Machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases—European
conference, ECML PKDD 2019, Würzburg, Germany, proceedings, part I
Guidotti R, Monreale A, Ruggieri S, et al (2019c) A survey of methods for explaining black box models.
ACM Comput Surv
Guidotti R, Monreale A, Matwin S, et al (2020a) Explaining image classiﬁers generating exemplars and
counter-exemplars from latent representations. In: The thirty-fourth AAAI conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence, AAAI 2020, the thirty-second innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligence conference,IAAI 2020, the tenth AAAI symposium on educational advances in artiﬁcial intelligence, EAAI 2020,
New York, NY , USA
Guidotti R, Monreale A, Spinnato F, et al (2020b) Explaining any time series classiﬁer. In: 2nd IEEE
international conference on cognitive machine intelligence, CogMI 2020, Atlanta, GA, USA
Gurumoorthy KS, Dhurandhar A, Cecchi GA, et al (2019) Efﬁcient data representation by selecting proto-
types with importance weights. In: 2019 IEEE international conference on data mining, ICDM 2019,
Beijing, China
Hand DJ, Till RJ (2001) A simple generalisation of the area under the ROC curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Mach Learn
Hartmann Y , Liu H, Lahrberg S, et al (2022) Interpretable high-level features for human activity recognition.
In: Proceedings of the 15th international joint conference on biomedical engineering systems and
technologies, BIOSTEC 2022, vol. 4: BIOSIGNALS, Online Streaming
Hase P, Bansal M (2020) Evaluating explainable AI: which algorithmic explanations help users predict
model behavior? In: Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, ACL 2020, Online
Hastie TJ, Tibshirani RJ (1990) Generalized additive models, vol 43. CRC Press
123

==== Page 56 ====
1774 F. Bodria et al.
Hind M, Wei D, Campbell M, et al (2019) TED: teaching AI to explain its decisions. In: Proceedings of the
2019 AAAI/ACM conference on AI, ethics, and society, AIES 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
Hoover B, Strobelt H, Gehrmann S (2019) exbert: a visual analysis tool to explore learned representations
in transformers models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05276
Huang Q, Yamada M, Tian Y , et al (2020) Graphlime: local interpretable model explanations for graph
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06216
Hvilshøj F, Iosiﬁdis A, Assent I (2021) ECINN: efﬁcient counterfactuals from invertible neural networks.
In: BMVC. BMV A Press, p 43
Jain S, Wallace BC (2019) Attention is not explanation. In: Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North
American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, vol. 1 (long and short papers)
Jeyakumar JV , Noor J, Cheng Y , et al (2020) How can I explain this to you? An empirical study of deep
neural network explanation methods. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 33:
annual conference on neural information processing systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, virtual
Kamakshi V , Gupta U, Krishnan NC (2021) PACE: posthoc architecture-agnostic concept extractor for
explaining CNNs. In: International joint conference on neural networks, IJCNN 2021, Shenzhen,
China
Kanamori K, Takagi T, Kobayashi K, et al (2020) DACE: distribution-aware counterfactual explanation by
mixed-integer linear optimization. In: Proceedings of the twenty-ninth international joint conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence, IJCAI 2020
Kapishnikov A, Bolukbasi T, Viégas FB, et al (2019) XRAI: better attributions through regions. In: 2019
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South)
Karimi A, Barthe G, Balle B, et al (2020a) Model-agnostic counterfactual explanations for consequential
decisions. In: The 23rd international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, AISTATS 2020,
Online [Palermo, Sicily, Italy]
Karimi A, Barthe G, Schölkopf B, et al (2020b) A survey of algorithmic recourse: deﬁnitions, formulations,
solutions, and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04050
Katehakis Jr MN, Veinott AF (1987) The multi-armed bandit problem: decomposition and computation.
Math Oper Res
Kenny EM, Keane MT (2021) On generating plausible counterfactual and semi-factual explanations for
deep learning. In: AAAI. AAAI Press, pp 11575–11585
Kim B, Chacha CM, Shah JA (2015) Inferring team task plans from human meetings: a generative modeling
approach with logic-based prior. J Artif Intell Res
Kim B, Koyejo O, Khanna R (2016) Examples are not enough, learn to criticize! criticism for interpretability.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 29: annual conference on neural informationprocessing systems 2016, Barcelona, Spain
Kim B, Wattenberg M, Gilmer J, et al (2018) Interpretability beyond feature attribution: quantitative testing
with concept activation vectors (TCA V). In: Proceedings of the 35th international conference on
machine learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden
Kipf TN, Welling M (2017) Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. In: 5th
International conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, conference track
proceedings
Koh PW, Liang P (2017) Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂuence functions. In: Proceedings of
the 34th international conference on machine learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Kurenkov A (2020) Lessons from the pulse model and discussion. The gradientLakkaraju H, Bach SH, Leskovec J (2016) Interpretable decision sets: a joint framework for description
and prediction. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining, San Francisco, CA, USA
Lampridis O, Guidotti R, Ruggieri S (2020) Explaining sentiment classiﬁcation with synthetic exemplars
and counter-exemplars. In: Discovery science—23rd international conference, DS 2020, Thessaloniki,
Greece, Proceedings
Lang O, Gandelsman Y , Yarom M, et al (2021) Explaining in style: training a GAN to explain a classiﬁer
in stylespace. In: ICCV . IEEE, pp 673–682
Lapuschkin S, Wäldchen S, Binder A, et al (2019) Unmasking clever hans predictors and assessing what
machines really learn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10178
Lee Y , Wei C, Cheng T, et al (2012) Nearest-neighbor-based approach to time-series classiﬁcation. Decis
Support Syst
123

==== Page 57 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1775
Letham B, Rudin C, McCormick TH, et al (2015) Interpretable classiﬁers using rules and Bayesian analysis:
building a better stroke prediction model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.01644
Ley D, Mishra S, Magazzeni D (2022) Global counterfactual explanations: investigations, implementations
and improvements. In: ICLR 2022 workshop on PAIR ∧2Struct: privacy, accountability, interpretabil-
ity, robustness, reasoning on structured data. https://openreview.net/forum?id=Btbgp0dOWZ9
Li J, Monroe W, Jurafsky D (2016) Understanding neural networks through representation erasure. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.08220
Li O, Liu H, Chen C, et al (2018) Deep learning for case-based reasoning through prototypes: a neural
network that explains its predictions. In: Proceedings of the thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcialintelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligence (IAAI-18), and the
8th AAAI symposium on educational advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA
Li H, Tian Y , Mueller K, et al (2019) Beyond saliency: understanding convolutional neural networks from
saliency prediction on layer-wise relevance propagation. Image Vis Comput
Lipovetsky S (2022) Explanatory model analysis: Explore, explain and examine predictive models, by
Przemyslaw Biecek, Tomasz Burzykowski, Boca Raton, FL, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Taylor & Francis
Group, 2021, xiii + 311 pp., $ 79.96 (hbk), ISBN 978-0-367-13559-1. Technometrics
Looveren A V , Klaise J (2021) Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by prototypes. In: Machine
learning and knowledge discovery in databases. Research track—European conference, ECML PKDD
2021, Bilbao, Spain, proceedings, part II
Lucic A, Haned H, de Rijke M (2020) Why does my model fail?: Contrastive local explanations for retail
forecasting. In: FAT* ’20: conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, Barcelona, Spain
Lucic A, ter Hoeve MA, Tolomei G, et al (2022) Cf-gnnexplainer: counterfactual explanations for graph
neural networks. In: International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, AISTATS 2022,
virtual event
Lundberg SM, Lee S (2017) A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 30: annual conference on neural information processing systems 2017,Long Beach, CA, USA
Luss R, Chen P, Dhurandhar A, et al (2019) Generating contrastive explanations with monotonic attribute
functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12698
Luss R, Chen P, Dhurandhar A, et al (2021) Leveraging latent features for local explanations. In: KDD ’21:
the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, virtual event, Singapore
Madaan N, Padhi I, Panwar N, et al (2021) Generate your counterfactuals: towards controlled counterfactual
generation for text. In: Thirty-ﬁfth AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, AAAI 2021, thirty-third
conference on innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligence, IAAI 2021, the eleventh symposiumon educational advances in artiﬁcial intelligence, EAAI 2021, virtual event
Martens D, Provost FJ (2014) Explaining data-driven document classiﬁcations. MIS Q
Martens D, Baesens B, Gestel TV , et al (2007) Comprehensible credit scoring models using rule extraction
from support vector machines. Eur J Oper Res
Miller T (2019) Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: insights from the social sciences. Artif IntellMing Y , Qu H, Bertini E (2019) Rulematrix: visualizing and understanding classiﬁers with rules. IEEE
Trans Vis Comput Graph
Mollas I, Bassiliades N, Tsoumakas G (2019) Lionets: local interpretation of neural networks through penul-
timate layer decoding. In: Machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases—international
workshops of ECML PKDD 2019, Würzburg, Germany, proceedings, part I
Molnar C (2022) Model-agnostic interpretable machine learning. PhD thesis, Ludwig Maximilian University
of Munich, Germany
Mothilal RK, Sharma A, Tan C (2020) Explaining machine learning classiﬁers through diverse counterfac-
tual explanations. In: FAT* ’20: conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, Barcelona,
Spain
Muhammad MB, Yeasin M (2020) Eigen-cam: Class activation map using principal components. In: 2020
International joint conference on neural networks, IJCNN 2020, Glasgow, UK
Murdoch WJ, Singh C, Kumbier K et al (2019) Deﬁnitions, methods, and applications in interpretable
machine learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci 116(44):22071–22080
Nauta M, van Bree R, Seifert C (2021) Neural prototype trees for interpretable ﬁne-grained image recog-
nition. In: CVPR. Computer vision foundation/IEEE, pp 14933–14943
123

==== Page 58 ====
1776 F. Bodria et al.
Nori H, Jenkins S, Koch P, et al (2019) Interpretml: a uniﬁed framework for machine learning interpretability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09223
Pan D, Li X, Zhu D (2021) Explaining deep neural network models with adversarial gradient integration.
In: Proceedings of the thirtieth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, IJCAI 2021,virtual event/Montreal, Canada
Panigutti C, Perotti A, Pedreschi D (2020) Doctor XAI: an ontology-based approach to black-box sequential
data classiﬁcation explanations. In: FAT* ’20: conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency,
Barcelona, Spain
Panigutti C, Beretta A, Giannotti F, et al (2022) Understanding the impact of explanations on advice-taking:
a user study for ai-based clinical decision support systems. In: CHI ’22: CHI conference on human
factors in computing systems, New Orleans, LA, USA
Pasquale F (2015) The black box society: the secret algorithms that control money and information. Harvard
University Press
Pawelczyk M, Broelemann K, Kasneci G (2020) Learning model-agnostic counterfactual explanations for
tabular data. In: WWW ’20: the web conference 2020, Taipei, Taiwan
Peltola T (2018) Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations of Bayesian predictive models via
Kullback–Leibler projections. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02678
Petsiuk V , Das A, Saenko K (2018) RISE: randomized input sampling for explanation of black-box models.
In: British machine vision conference 2018, BMVC 2018, Newcastle, UK
Pezeshkpour P, Tian Y , Singh S (2019) Investigating robustness and interpretability of link prediction via
adversarial modiﬁcations. In: 1st Conference on automated knowledge base construction, AKBC 2019,
Amherst, MA, USA
Plumb G, Molitor D, Talwalkar A (2018) Model agnostic supervised local explanations. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems 31: annual conference on neural information processing
systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, Montréal, Canada
Poyiadzi R, Sokol K, Santos-Rodríguez R, et al (2020) FACE: feasible and actionable counterfactual expla-
nations. In: AIES ’20: AAAI/ACM conference on AI, ethics, and society, New York, NY , USA
Prado-Romero MA, Prenkaj B, Stilo G, et al (2022) A survey on graph counterfactual explanations: deﬁ-
nitions, methods, evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12089
Puri I, Dhurandhar A, Pedapati T, et al (2021) Cofrnets: interpretable neural architecture inspired by contin-
ued fractions. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 34: annual conference on neural
information processing systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, virtual
Rajani NF, McCann B, Xiong C, et al (2019) Explain yourself! Leveraging language models for com-
monsense reasoning. In: Proceedings of the 57th conference of the association for computational
linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, vol 1: long papers
Renard X, Woloszko N, Aigrain J, et al (2019) Concept tree: high-level representation of variables for more
interpretable surrogate decision trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01297
Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2016) “Why should I trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any
classiﬁer. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, San Francisco, CA, USA
Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2018) Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations. In: Proceed-
ings of the thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative
applications of artiﬁcial intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI symposium on educational advances
in artiﬁcial intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Robnik-Šikonja M, Kononenko I (2008) Explaining classiﬁcations for individual instances. IEEE Trans
Knowl Data Eng 20(5)
Rojat T, Puget R, Filliat D, et al (2021) Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) on timeseries data: a survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00950
Rudin C (2019) Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
interpretable models instead. Nat Mach Intell
Samek W, Montavon G, Vedaldi A, et al (eds) (2019) Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing
deep learning, lecture notes in computer science, vol 11700. Springer
Schwab P, Karlen W (2019) Cxplain: causal explanations for model interpretation under uncertainty. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 32: annual conference on neural information
processing systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada
123

==== Page 59 ====
Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods… 1777
Schwarzenberg R, Hübner M, Harbecke D, et al (2019) Layerwise relevance visualization in convolutional
text graph classiﬁers. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth workshop on graph-based methods for natural
language processing, TextGraphs@EMNLP 2019, Hong Kong
Selvaraju RR, Cogswell M, Das A, et al (2020) Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization. Int J Comput Vis
Setzu M, Guidotti R, Monreale A, et al (2019) Global explanations with local scoring. In: Machine learning
and knowledge discovery in databases—international workshops of ECML PKDD 2019, Würzburg,
Germany, proceedings, part I
Setzu M, Guidotti R, Monreale A, et al (2021) Glocalx—from local to global explanations of black box AI
models. Artif Intell
Shankaranarayana SM, Runje D (2019) ALIME: autoencoder based approach for local interpretability. In:
Intelligent data engineering and automated learning—IDEAL 2019—20th international conference,Manchester, UK, proceedings, part I
Shen W, Wei Z, Huang S, et al (2021) Interpretable compositional convolutional neural networks. In:
Proceedings of the thirtieth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, IJCAI 2021, virtual
event/Montreal, Canada
Shi S, Zhang X, Fan W (2020) A modiﬁed perturbed sampling method for local interpretable model-agnostic
explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07434
Shrikumar A, Greenside P, Kundaje A (2017) Learning important features through propagating activation
differences. In: Proceedings of the 34th international conference on machine learning, ICML 2017,
Sydney, NSW
Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2015) Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In:
3rd International conference on learning representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, Confer-
ence track proceedings
Smilkov D, Thorat N, Kim B, et al (2017) Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03825
Snyder H (2019) Literature review as a research methodology: an overview and guidelines. J Bus Res
104:333–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.07.039
Srivastava S, Labutov I, Mitchell TM (2017) Joint concept learning and semantic parsing from natural lan-
guage explanations. In: Proceedings of the 2017 conference on empirical methods in natural languageprocessing, EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark
Suissa-Peleg A, Haehn D, Knowles-Barley S, et al (2016) Automatic neural reconstruction from petavoxel
of electron microscopy data. Microsc Microanal
Sundararajan M, Taly A, Yan Q (2017) Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In: Proceedings of the
34th international conference on machine learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Tan S, Soloviev M, Hooker G, et al (2020) Tree space prototypes: another look at making tree ensembles
interpretable. In: FODS ’20: ACM-IMS foundations of data science conference, virtual event, USA
Theissler A (2017) Detecting known and unknown faults in automotive systems using ensemble-based
anomaly detection. Knowl Based Syst
Theissler A, Spinnato F, Schlegel U, et al (2022) Explainable AI for time series classiﬁcation: a review,
taxonomy and research directions. IEEE Access
Tjoa E, Guan C (2019) A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI): towards medical XAI. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.07374
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al (2017) Attention is all you need. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30: annual conference on neural information processing systems 2017, LongBeach, CA, USA
Verma S, Dickerson JP, Hines K (2020) Counterfactual explanations for machine learning: a review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.10596
Vermeire T, Brughmans D, Goethals S et al (2022) Explainable image classiﬁcation with evidence coun-
terfactual. Pattern Anal Appl 25(2):315–335
Wachter S, Mittelstadt BD, Russell C (2017) Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box:
automated decisions and the GDPR. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00399
Wang H, Wang Z, Du M, et al (2020) Score-cam: score-weighted visual explanations for convolutional
neural networks. In: 2020 IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, CVPR
workshops 2020, Seattle, W A, USA
123

==== Page 60 ====
1778 F. Bodria et al.
Williams JJ, Kim J, Rafferty AN, et al (2016) AXIS: generating explanations at scale with learnersourcing
and machine learning. In: Proceedings of the third ACM conference on learning @ Scale, L@S 2016,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Wu Z, Ong DC (2021) Context-guided BERT for targeted aspect-based sentiment analysis. In: Thirty-
ﬁfth AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, AAAI 2021, thirty-third conference on innovative
applications of artiﬁcial intelligence, IAAI 2021, the eleventh symposium on educational advances in
artiﬁcial intelligence, EAAI 2021, virtual event
Wu T, Ribeiro MT, Heer J, et al (2021a) Polyjuice: generating counterfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and
improving models. In: Proceedings of the 59th annual meeting of the association for computationallinguistics and the 11th international joint conference on natural language processing, ACL/IJCNLP
2021, (vol 1: long papers), virtual event
Wu Z, Pan S, Chen F, et al (2021b) A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Trans Neural
Networks Learn Syst
Xu K, Ba J, Kiros R, et al (2015) Show, attend and tell: neural image caption generation with visual attention.
In: Proceedings of the 32nd international conference on machine learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France
Yang M, Kim B (2019) BIM: towards quantitative evaluation of interpretability methods with ground truth.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09701
Yang H, Rudin C, Seltzer MI (2017) Scalable Bayesian rule lists. In: Proceedings of the 34th international
conference on machine learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Yeh C, Kim B, Arik SÖ, et al (2020) On completeness-aware concept-based explanations in deep neural
networks. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 33: annual conference on neural
information processing systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, virtual
Yuan H, Tang J, Hu X, et al (2020a) XGNN: towards model-level explanations of graph neural networks.
In: KDD ’20: the 26th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, virtual
event, CA, USA, August (2020)
Yuan H, Yu H, Gui S, et al (2020b) Explainability in graph neural networks: a taxonomic survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.15445
Yuan H, Yu H, Gui S, et al (2020c) Explainability in graph neural networks: a taxonomic survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.15445
Zafar MR, Khan NM (2019) DLIME: a deterministic local interpretable model-agnostic explanations
approach for computer-aided diagnosis systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10263
Zhang Y , Chen X (2020) Explainable recommendation: a survey and new perspectives. Found Trends Inf
Retr
Zhang H, Torres F, Sicre R, et al (2023) Opti-cam: optimizing saliency maps for interpretability. CoRR
arXiv:2301.07002
Zhou Y , Hooker G (2016) Interpreting models via single tree approximation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.09036
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

