==== Page 1 ====
Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (2021) 1-48 Submitted 11/20; Revised 2/21; Published 3/21
Beyond English-Centric Multilingual Machine Translation
Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky,
Siddharth Goyal, Mandeep Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav
Chaudhary, Naman Goyal, Tom Birch, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Sergey Edunov,
Edouard Grave, Michael Auliy, Armand Jouliny
Facebook AI,LORIA
Editor: Alexander Clark
Abstract
Existing work in translation demonstrated the potential of massively multilingual machine
translation by training a single model able to translate between any pair of languages.
However, much of this work is English-Centric, training only on data which was translated
fromortoEnglish. Whilethisissupportedbylargesourcesoftrainingdata, itdoesnotreﬂect
translation needs worldwide. In this work, we create a true Many-to-Many multilingual
translation model that can translate directly between any pair of 100 languages. We build
and open-source a training data set that covers thousands of language directions with parallel
data, created through large-scale mining. Then, we explore how to eﬀectively increase model
capacity through a combination of dense scaling and language-speciﬁc sparse parameters to
create high quality models. Our focus on non-English-Centric models brings gains of more
than 10 BLEU when directly translating between non-English directions while performing
competitively to the best single systems from the Workshop on Machine Translation (WMT).
We open-source our scripts so that others may reproduce the data, evaluation, and ﬁnal m2m-
100model: https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/tree/master/examples/m2m_100 .
Keywords: many-to-many, multilingual machine translation, model scaling, bitext mining,
neural networks
1. Introduction
Multilingual Machine Translation (MMT) aims to build a single model to translate between
any pair of languages. Neural network models have been very successful for bilingual machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017) and more
recently, neural MMT models have shown promising results (Firat et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2020). Multilingual translation models factorize computation when translating to many
languages and share information between similar languages, which beneﬁts low resource
directions (Arivazhagan et al., 2019) and enables zero-shot translation (Gu et al., 2019).
However, in the past, these systems have not performed as well as bilingual models when
trained on the same language pairs (Johnson et al., 2017), as model capacity necessarily
must be split between many languages (Arivazhagan et al., 2019). This has been alleviated
by increasing model capacity (Aharoni et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), but increased model
size also necessitates larger multilingual training data sets which are laborious and diﬃcult
. Corresponding Author. Email: angelafan@fb.com .
y. Equal contribution. Order determined with coin ﬂip.
c2021 Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Mandeep
Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, Naman Goyal, Tom Birch, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Sergey
Edunov, Edouard Grave, Michael Auli, Armand Joulin.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1307.html .

==== Page 2 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
to create. To ease this challenge, most prior work has focused on English-Centric data sets
and models which translate from and to English but not between non-English languages.
This English-Centric bias in the data and resulting models is not reﬂective of how people use
translation and empirically leads to lower performance for non-English translation directions.
In this work, we create more diverse multilingual machine translation models by building a
large-scale Many-to-Many data set for 100 languages. We considerably reduce the complexity
of this task through the automatic construction of parallel corpora (Artetxe and Schwenk,
2019a; Schwenk et al., 2019b) with a novel data mining strategy that exploits language
similarity to avoid mining all directions. We also leverage backtranslation to improve the
quality of our model on zero-shot and low resource language pairs. Overall, we build the ﬁrst
true Many-to-Many data set comprising 7.5B training sentences for 100languages, providing
direct training data for thousands of translation directions.
The quantity of data in a Many-to-Many data sets increases quadratically with the number
of languages, making neural networks with standard capacity underﬁt rapidly. To that eﬀect,
we leverage progress in scaling (Kaplan et al., 2020; Arora et al., 2018) to train models that
are over 50times larger than current bilingual models with model parallelism (Huang et al.,
2019a; Shoeybi et al., 2019). Even with these tools, scaling the number of parameters hardly
follows the quadratic increase in data induced by the Many-to-Many setting, and we propose
several scaling strategies tailored to the speciﬁcs of our problem. In particular, we consider a
deterministic mixture-of-experts strategy based only on the input language to split the model
parameters into non-overlapping groups of languages which we train with a novel re-routing
strategy. Language speciﬁc capacity also reduce the need to densely update parameters and
are more parallelizable in a multi-machine setting. Overall, combining these strategies allows
us to scale the capacity of the models to a size of 15:4B parameters and still train them
eﬃciently on hundreds of GPUs.
The resulting method allows us to scale Transformers and directly translate between
100 languages without pivoting through English at a performance that is competitive with
bilingual models on many competitive benchmarks, including WMT. Figure 1 illustrates
our data mining strategy as well as our model architecture. This paper is organized as
follows: ﬁrst, we introduce several standard components of modern machine translation and
explain how they apply in the multilingual setting (Section § 2), then describe our strategy
to scale the number of language pairs to create a Many-to-Many data set (Section § 3). We
then systematically compare this Many-to-Many data set to an English-Centric approach
(Section § 4). Next, we incorporate increased model scale through both dense scaling
and sparse mixture-of-experts (Section § 5). Finally, we end with a thorough analysis,
including human evaluation, of the quality of our 100x100 Many-to-Many translation system
(Section § 6). Our models and code are open-sourced: https://github.com/pytorch/
fairseq/tree/master/examples/m2m_100 .
2. Preliminaries
In this work, we investigate how we can best translate from 100 languages to 100 languages,
or 9900 directions, using a single model. We describe our starting point in this section, and
provide preliminary context on Transformer-based neural machine translation models.
2

==== Page 3 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
每周六，在家附近的⼀个咖啡馆⾥，我坐在阳光最好的位置上Chaquesamedi, je m’assoisàma place préféréeau soleil dans le café voisin.language group ashared decoderlanguage group alanguage group blanguage group clanguage group dshared encoder<fr><zh>(c) Translating from Chinese to French with Dense + Language-Specific Sparse ModelxxxxxxxxxxxxEnglishEnglishxxxxxxxxxxxxTarget languageSource language(a) English-Centric Multilingual(b) M2M-100: Many-to-Many Multilingual ModelTarget languageSource language
Figure1:SummaryofourMany-to-Manydatasetandmultilingualmodel . English-
Centric data (top left) only contains training data to and from English, where as our Many-
to-Many multilingual setting (top right) contains data directly through various diﬀerent
directions. Our proposed model, m2m-100 , combines dense and sparse language-speciﬁc
parameters to translate directly between languages (bottom).
Sequence-to-sequence models are trained on pairs of sequences, conditioning on an input
sequence to produce an output sequence. Each sentence is split into tokens, that can be words
or characters, resulting in pairs of sequences (w1; : : : ; w S)and(v1; : : : ; v T). Most machine
translation systems are trained by maximizing the probability of the target sequence, given
the source sentence and the target language `t:
P(v1; : : : ; v Tjw1; : : : ; w S; `t)
Modernneuralmachinetranslationsystemsarebasedonseveralstandardcomponents, namely
a subword segmentation method and an encoder-decoder architecture called a Transformer.
We describe these components in the context of multilingual translation.
Segmentation with SentencePiece. The input and output of translation systems are
sequencesoftokens. Thesetokensareunitsfromadictionarybuiltwiththegoaltoreconstruct
any sentence in any language. Using words as base units is challenging, as it leads either
to vocabularies with poor coverage or to large vocabularies. This is especially true in the
multilingual setting. Another limitation of word-based systems are languages that are not
naturally split into words, like Thai. An alternative approach is to use subword units, which
are learned directly from data (Sennrich et al., 2015; Kudo and Richardson, 2018). We use
SentencePiece1as it was designed to work with languages with no segmentation, making it
1. This can be accessed here: https://github.com/google/sentencepiece .
3

==== Page 4 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
particularly suited to our setting. We train a model with 0.9995 character coverage to have
suﬃcient representation of character-based languages2.
Creating a Multilingual Dictionary. SentencePiece produces subword units depending
on their frequency in the training data set. Naively applying it to our corpora would result in
low resource languages and languages written in less frequent scripts being underrepresented
in the resulting dictionary. Randomly sampling data favors over-represented languages
because the probability of picking language `is proportional to its number of sentences,
D`, that is, p`=D`P
iDi. We circumvent this problem by adding monolingual data for low
resource languages and by using temperature sampling with T= 5. More precisely, the
probability p`is re-scaled to p1
T
`where the temperature Tcontrols the distribution. For
example, setting Tto1gives the original data distribution. Note the probability must be
re-normalized afterwards to be a valid probability. The resulting dictionary contains 128k
unique tokens that are well distributed across languages, as shown in Appendix A.
2.1 Transformers
Our multilingual machine translation model is based on the Transformer sequence-to-sequence
architecture, which is composed of two modules: the encoder and the decoder (Vaswani et al.,
2017). The encoder transforms the source token sequence into a sequence of embeddings
of the same length. Then, the decoder sequentially produces the target sentence, token
by token, or autoregressively. More precisely, the encoder takes the sequence of tokens
W= (w1; : : : ; w S)and the source language `s, and produces a sequence of embeddings
H= (h1; : : : ; h S), which are then fed to the decoder with the target language `tto produce
the sequence of target tokens V= (v1; : : : ; v T)sequentially, that is,
H=encoder (W; ` s); (1)
8i2[1; : : : ; T ]; vi+1=decoder (H; ` t; v1; : : : ; v i): (2)
Both the encoder and decoder are composed of the same type of layers, called Transformer
layers. Each Transformer layer takes a sequence of vectors as input and outputs a sequence of
vectors. In the encoder, Transformer layers are composed of two sub-layers, a self-attention
and a feed-forward layer. These are applied sequentially and are both followed by a residual
connection (He et al., 2015) and layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016):
Z=norm (X+self-attention (X)); (3)
Y=norm (Z+feed-forward (Z)): (4)
The self-attention layer is an attention layer that updates each element of the sequence by
looking at the other elements, while the feed-forward layer (FFN) passes each element of the
sequence independently through a 2-layer MLP. In the decoder, there is an additional third
sub-layer, between the self-attention and the feed-forward, which computes attention over
the output of the encoder. We refer the reader to Vaswani et al. (2017) for details of these
layers.
2.We use the recommended parameter from the SentencePiece repository: https://github.com/google/
sentencepiece .
4

==== Page 5 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Target language token. The Transformer architecture has been designed for the bilingual
case, where the target language is ﬁxed. In the case of multilingual machine translation, the
target language is not ﬁxed, and several strategies can be applied to condition the network to
produce a sentence in the desired target language. Similarly to Ha et al. (2016) and Johnson
et al. (2017), we add a special token in the encoder indicating the source language and a
special token in the decoder indicating the target language.
Training. Our starting point for improving massively multilingual translation models
is a large Transformer model, with 12 Encoder and 12 Decoder layers, with 8192 hidden
units in the FFN and 1024 embedding dimension. We share the weight matrices of the
input and output embeddings. The total parameter count is 1.2B. We train with the Adam
optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and warmup ﬁrst for 4000 updates (setting the batch
size to 4000 tokens), with label smoothing 0:1(Szegedy et al., 2015; Pereyra et al., 2017).
For regularization, we tune the dropout parameter between f0:1;0:2;0:3g. To stabilize
the training of deeper Transformers, we train with LayerDrop (Fan et al., 2019) 0.05 and
pre-normalization (Nguyen and Salazar, 2019).
To train with billions of sentences, we split the training data into 256 diﬀerent shards to
manage memory consumption. However, directly dividing mid and low resource languages
into shards would reduce the variability of each shard’s data for mid or low resource languages.
Imagine the extreme case where there are only 100sentences of a language direction per
shard—the model would easily overﬁt. Thus, each language is divided into a diﬀerent number
of shards based on resource level, such that high resource languages have more shards and
the lowest resource languages only have one shard. Subsequently, lower resource shards are
replicated until the full number of shards is reached—so sentences from lower resource shards
can appear multiple times.
Generation. Unless otherwise speciﬁed: for all results, we report single models with no
checkpoint averaging, use beam search with beam 5, and do not tune length penalty, keeping
it at 1 (meaning the model decides the length).
3. Building a Many-to-Many Parallel Data Set for 100 Languages
In this section, we provide an overview of our Many-to-Many setting: the selection of the
100languages, the evaluation benchmarks, and the construction of a large-scale training set
through data mining (Artetxe and Schwenk, 2019a) and backtranslation (Sennrich et al.,
2016a) that provides training data thousands of directions.
3.1 Creating a Multilingual Benchmark
The ﬁrst step of establishing a Many-to-Many data set is to select 100languages for which
there already exist high-quality, annotated data sets that can be used for model evaluation.
3.1.1 Language Selection
We consider several factors to select which languages to focus on. First, we include widely-
spoken languages from geographically diverse language families. We cover a diversity of
scripts and resource levels (as shown in Table 1) to have high coverage of languages worldwide.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
ISOLanguage Family Script ISOLanguage Family Script
af Afrikaans Germanic Latin jaJapanese Japonic Kanji; Kana
da Danish Germanic Latin koKorean Koreanic Hangul
nlDutch Germanic Latin viVietnamese Vietic Latin
deGerman Germanic Latin zhChinese Mandarin Chinese Chinese
enEnglish Germanic Latin bnBengali Indo-Aryan Eastern-Nagari
is Icelandic Germanic Latin gu Gujarati Indo-Aryan Gujarati
lb Luxembourgish Germanic Latin hiHindi Indo-Aryan Devanagari
no Norwegian Germanic Latin kn Kannada Tamil Kannada
svSwedish Germanic Latin mr Marathi Indo-Aryan Devanagari
fy Western Frisian Germanic Latin ne Nepali Indo-Aryan Devanagari
yi Yiddish Germanic Hebrew or Oriya Indo-Aryan Odia
ast Asturian Romance Latin pa Panjabi Indo-Aryan Gurmukhi
ca Catalan Romance Latin sd Sindhi Indo-AryanPersian
Devanagari
frFrench Romance Latin si Sinhala Indo-Aryan Sinhala
gl Galician Romance Latin ur Urdu Indo-Aryan Arabic
it Italian Romance Latin taTamil Dravidian Tamil
oc Occitan Romance Latin ceb Cebuano Malayo-Polyn. Latin
ptPortuguese Romance Latin ilo Iloko Philippine Latin
ro Romanian Romance Latin idIndonesian Malayo-Polyn. Latin
esSpanish Romance Latin jv Javanese Malayo-Polyn. Latin
be Belarusian Slavic Cyrillic mg Malagasy Malayo-Polyn. Latin
bs Bosnian Slavic Latin ms Malay Malayo-Polyn. Latin
bg Bulgarian Slavic Cyrillic ml Malayalam Dravidian Malayalam
hr Croatian Slavic Latin su Sundanese Malayo-Polyn. Latin
csCzech Slavic Latin tl Tagalog Malayo-Polyn. Latin
mk Macedonian Slavic Cyrillic my Burmese Sino-Tibetan Burmese
plPolish Slavic Latin km Central Khmer Khmer Khmer
ruRussian Slavic Cyrillic lo Lao Kra-Dai Thai; Lao
sr Serbian Slavic Cyrillic; Latin th Thai Kra-Dai Thai
sk Slovak Slavic Latin mn Mongolian Mongolic Cyrillic
sl Slovenian Slavic Latin arArabic Arabic Arabic
uk Ukrainian Slavic Cyrillic heHebrew Semitic Hebrew
et Estonian Uralic Latin ps Pashto Iranian Arabic
ﬁFinnish Uralic Latin faFarsi Iranian Arabic
huHungarian Uralic Latin am Amharic Ethopian Ge’ez
lv Latvian Baltic Latin ﬀ Fulah Niger-Congo Latin
ltLithuanian Baltic Latin ha Hausa Afro-Asiatic Latin
sq Albanian Albanian Latin ig Igbo Niger-Congo Latin
hy Armenian Armenian Armenian ln Lingala Niger-Congo Latin
ka Georgian Kartvelian Georgian lg Luganda Niger-Congo Latin
elGreek Hellenic Greek nso Northern Sotho Niger-Congo Latin
br Breton Celtic Latin so Somali Cushitic Latin
ga Irish Irish Latin swSwahili Niger-Congo Latin
gd Scottish Gaelic Celtic Latin ss Swati Niger-Congo Latin
cy Welsh Celtic Latin-Welsch tn Tswana Niger-Congo Latin
az Azerbaijani TurkicLatin; Cyrillic
Persianwo Wolof Niger-Congo Latin
ba Bashkir Turkic Cyrillic xh Xhosa Niger-Congo Latin
kk Kazakh Turkic Cyrillic yo Yoruba Niger-Congo Latin
trTurkish Turkic Latin zu Zulu Niger-Congo Latin
uz Uzbek Turkic Latin; Cyrillic ht Haitian Creole Creole Latin
Table 1:100 Languages grouped by family. For each language, we display the ISO
code, language name, language family, and script. Languages in bold are bridge languages
(Malayo-Polyn. stands for Malayo-Polynesian ).
6

==== Page 7 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Second, we use languages for which public evaluation data exists, as we must be able to
quantify model performance. Lastly, we only use languages for which monolingual data is
available, as monolingual data is a critical resource for large-scale mining. Combining these
three criteria results creates our full list of 100 languages, summarized in Table 1.
3.1.2 Evaluation Benchmarks
We use publicly available evaluation data sets to evaluate the performance of all of our
models. To cover our set of 100languages, we bring together data from a variety of sources.
We describe each evaluation data set below.
WMT—The majority of language pairs from the Workshop on Machine Translatino
(WMT) data sets go through English and the data is from the news domain. We
consider data for 13languages (Ondrej et al., 2017; Bojar et al., 2018; Barrault et al.,
2019).
WAT—The Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT) covers Asian languages paired
with English. We consider data for Burmese-English (Riza et al., 2016), which contains
news articles. WAT contains many other evaluation directions, but many of those are
covered by WMT or in a speciﬁc domain, so we focus on Burmese-English for WAT
only.
IWSLT—The International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT)
contains data from TED talks paired with English translations. We use data for 4
languages (Cettolo et al., 2017).
FLORES —FLORES3(Guzmán et al., 2019) pairs two low resource languages, Sinhala
and Nepali, with English in the Wikipedia domain.
TED—The TED Talks data set4(Ye et al., 2018) contains translations between more
than 50languages; most of the pairs do not include English. The evaluation data is
n-way parallel and contains thousands of directions.
Autshumato —Autshumato5is an 11-way parallel data set comprising 10African
languages and English from the government domain. There is no standard valid/test
split, so we use the ﬁrst half of the data set for valid and second half for test.
Tatoeba —Tatoeba Challenge6covers 692test pairs from mixed domains where sen-
tences are contributed and translated by volunteers online. The evaluation pairs we
use from Tatoeba cover 85 diﬀerent languages.
3. This can be found here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/flores .
4. This can be found here: https://github.com/neulab/word-embeddings-for-nmt .
5.This can be found here: https://repo.sadilar.org/handle/20.500.12185/506 , created by CTexT
(Centre for Text Technology, North-West University), South Africa; Department of Arts and Culture,
South Africa.
6.This can be found here: https://tatoeba.org/eng/ . Note that the sentences in this dataset are often
very short, and the evaluation is less diﬃcult compared to other data sets.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
We evaluate the quality of translations with BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002). We ﬁrst
de-tokenize all data, then apply standard tokenizers for each language before computing
BLEU. For most languages, we use the mosestokenizer (Koehn et al., 2007).7For Chinese
we use the SacreBLEU tokenizer ( tok zh) and convert all traditional characters generated
by the model to simpliﬁed characters using HanziConv8(Post, 2018),9for Indian languages
we use the Indic NLP library (Kunchukuttan, 2020),10for Japanese we use Kytea,11for Thai
we use PyThaiNLP (Phatthiyaphaibun et al., 2016),12for Arabic we use the QCRI Arabic
Normalizer,13for Korean we use Mecab,14for Burmese we use the oﬃcial segmentation
tool provided by Ding et al. (2019), for Romanian we follow Sennrich et al. (2016b) and
apply Moses tokenization, special normalization, and remove diacritics for Romanian texts,15
and ﬁnally for Serbian we transliterate the output to Latin characters before computing
BLEU.16We release the tokenization and evaluation scripts for reproducibility: https:
//github.com/pytorch/fairseq/tree/master/examples/m2m_100 . We remove all data
from all evaluation sets from our training data17.
3.2 Covering the Language Matrix by Mining Relevant Parallel Data
Supervised translation systems rely on large quantities of parallel sentences, which we refer to
as bitext data, which are traditionally derived from human translations. Most existing bitext
data sets go through English, with a few domain speciﬁc exceptions such as proceedings from
international organizations (Koehn, 2005a; Ziemski et al., 2016). These corpora are limited
in size and domain, and an alternative is to mineparallel data (Resnik, 1999; Utiyama and
Isahara, 2003) in large collections of monolingual data (Conneau et al., 2019; Wenzek et al.,
2019). In this work, we leverage and extend the corpus provided by two of these mining
projects: CCMatrix (Schwenk et al., 2019b)18and CCAligned19(El-Kishky et al., 2020).
In the following section, we describe our mining strategy and summarize the main ideas of
CCMatrix and CCAligned. We refer the reader to the references for a detailed description of
the approaches.
7.This can be found here: https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/master/scripts/
tokenizer/tokenizer.perl .
8. This can be found here: https://github.com/berniey/hanziconv .
9.The evaluation data sets for Chinese usually contained simpliﬁed characters. However, our training data
contains a mix of simpliﬁed and traditional characters, and thus the model could generate either. We
convert the generated traditional Chinese characters to simpliﬁed for consistency.
10. This can be found here: https://github.com/anoopkunchukuttan/indic_nlp_library .
11. This can be found here: https://github.com/neubig/kytea .
12. This can be found here: https://github.com/PyThaiNLP/pythainlp .
13. This can be found here: http://alt.qcri.org/tools/arabic-normalizer/ .
14. This can be found here: https://pypi.org/project/python-mecab-ko/ .
15. This can be found here: https://github.com/rsennrich/wmt16-scripts/blob/master/preprocess/ .
16.In Serbian, both Latin script and Cyrillic script are used, and often intermixed within a sentence in the
evaluation data. As the target sentence could be in either script and it is not possible to predict the
target script from the input, we transliterate before computing BLEU.
17. This must be done in advance, so all evaluation data needs to be ﬁnalized before training begins.
18.This can be downloaded here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/LASER/tree/master/tasks/
CCMatrix .
19. This can be downloaded here: http://www.statmt.org/cc-aligned .
8

==== Page 9 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Mining parallel data with LASER. Mining parallel data consists of searching for
sentences that could be potential translations in large monolingual corpora. This search
requires a measure that captures the semantic similarity between sentences in diﬀerent
languages. Most recent methods build this similarity by comparing the embeddings from a
neural network trained on multilingual data (Artetxe and Schwenk, 2019a; Chen et al., 2020;
Kvapilíková et al., 2020). We focus on the embeddings generated by the LASER encoder,
which enables the comparison of sentences in 94diﬀerent languages (Artetxe and Schwenk,
2019b). We then retrieve parallel corpora eﬃciently using FAISS indexing (Johnson et al.,
2019). LASER embeddings generalize to unseen languages, like Asturian, allowing us to mine
bitexts for 100languages. The generic data mining pipeline consists of several steps: (1)a
large corpus of text is preprocessed and divided into diﬀerent languages, (2)candidate pairs
of aligned sentences are embedded and stored in a index, (3)indexed sentences are compared
to form potential pairs, (4)the resulting candidate pairs are ﬁltered in post-processing.
CCMatrix Mining Approach. CCMatrix takes a global approach: all unique sentences
in one language are compared with all unique sentences in another language. This global
miningapproach has the advantage of considering all possible documents when searching
for the translation of a sentence. CCMatrix works on the large monolingual corpora in
the91languages of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2019), but at this scale, the global search is
computationally demanding even with fast indexing from FAISS (Johnson et al., 2019). Thus,
we apply it to a selected subset of relevant pairs, as detailed in Section § 3.2.1.
CCAligned Mining Approach. CCAligned avoids the scaling challenges of global mining
by pre-selecting documents to compare. This local mining follows a hierarchical approach:
ﬁrst, document-level language identiﬁcation along with various rules is applied to ﬁnd whole
documents that are likely to contain mutual translations (El-Kishky et al., 2020). Parallel
sentences are then mined using LASER-based alignment within the paired documents only.
Filtering (Chaudhary et al., 2019) is performed to remove unaligned data that exists because
the original webpage did not have any parallel data, only partial parallel data, or other
processing failures. One advantage of this approach is that it is very fast, scalable, and
retrieves parallel sentences with high precision. Another advantage is that each English
document is aligned to many non-English documents—thus, mining non-English pairs can
be quickly performed by joining non-English documents paired to the same source.
Postprocessing. We apply a ﬁltering step to remove sentences of greater than 50%
punctuation. The data is then de-duplicated, and we remove any sentence that appears in
any validation or test data set—even if it is associated with another language pair. Finally,
we apply length and language-speciﬁc ﬁltering. The length ﬁltering removes sentences that
are too long—more than 250subwords after segmentation with SPM—or with a length
mismatch between the sentence and its translation—if the length ratio is greater than 3.
The language-speciﬁc ﬁltering removes sentences that contain more than 50%of characters
that have not been marked as core to the identiﬁed language—speciﬁcally, characters that
are commonly used in the identiﬁed language with the exception of white space, numbers,
punctuation, and Latin characters for non-Latin script languages.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Figure 2: Depiction of an English-Only data mining setting compared to the
Bridge Language Mining Strategy . We display a data matrix, where languages are
shown on the X and Y axes. Data is mined in one direction (such as Hindi to Marathi) and
used to train bidirectionally.
3.2.1 Bridge Language Group Mining Strategy
Mining data for each and every language pair is prohibitive — previous work circumvents
this issue by focusing only on the 99pairs that go through English (Zhang et al., 2020).
An alternative to the extensive computation required to mine all possible combinations of
pairs issparse mining , or mining only a select subset of pairs. A straightforward strategy is
torandomly select pairs to mine, but this does not use any linguistic information on how
languages are related and spoken around the world.
In this work, we propose an alternative based on language families and bridge languages
that avoids exhaustively mining every possible pair. Our goal is to reduce the number of
bitext pairs while preserving translation directions of practical interest. We ﬁrst group all
the100languages into 14language groupings . All languages within a grouping are mined
against each other. For instance, within the Indic language grouping, we mine all pairs
of Bengali, Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, and so on. The motivation for this strategy is
two-fold. First, people living in areas that speak multiple languages in the same grouping
tend to communicate a lot with each other and would beneﬁt from high quality direct
translation. Second, systematically mining languages of the same grouping is helpful for
training language-speciﬁc parameter models (see Section § 5.2).
For the most part, languages are grouped by linguistic similarity, for example Germanic,
Slavic, or Malayo-Polynesian languages. However, the size of the resulting groupings varies
greatly, resulting in less mined data for the languages in the smallest groupings. We further
group languages by geographic and cultural proximity to reduce this discrepancy. For
example, Uralic and Baltic languages are gathered into a single group to increase the quantity
of mined data. The resulting groupings are shown in Table 1.
To connect languages across groupings, we deﬁne 1—3 bridge languages in each grouping,
usually those with the most resources, such as Bengali, Hindi, and Tamil for the 12languages
in the Indo-Aryan family. All 26bridge languages are highlighted in Table 1. These bridge
languages are mined against all other bridge languages. Finally, all 100languages are mined
10

==== Page 11 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
English
Spanish
French
German
Portuguese
Russian
Dutch
Swedish
Polish
Turkish
Indonesian
Chinese
Vietnamese
Arabic
Greek
Czech
Japanese
Hungarian
Finnish
Korean
Hebrew
Farsi
Lithuanian
Hindi
Bengali
Tamil
Swahili0.51.01.5Millions of Sentences1e9
Data through English
Data through family
Data through Bridge
Figure 3:Total Amount of Data through Bridge Languages on our 100x100 Train-
ing Corpus . We depict the amount of data through English (gray), amount of data through
a bridge language not counting English (orange), and amount of data through the language
grouping not counting bridge languages (blue).
against English. We illustrate this mining strategy in Figure 2. On the left, we depict what
many current approaches model: data only through English. On the right, we depict our
Many-to-Many language matrix for several example languages. Compared to English-Centric,
our data set has far greater coverage of non-English, direct translation directions.
Training Data Statistics. In total, our ﬁnal training data set contains 7.5B parallel
sentences, corresponding to 2200directions. We divide these directions by resource level
to label high, mid, and low resource language directions. While there is no clear standard,
we follow WMT’s example to roughly categorize the directions by the quantity of available
training data. Low resource languages are directions with less than 500K samples, mid
resource are directions with less than 50M samples, and high resource the remaining20. In
Figure 3, we show all bridge languages and demonstrate how their associated training data
is divided between translations with English, within a language grouping, or with bridge
languages across language groupings. Of particular interest is the comparison between
the additional Many-to-Many data and the data through English. We observe that 5—10
times more parallel data can be mined if using a Many-to-Many strategy, compared to an
English-Centric one. This is particularly beneﬁcial for mid- and low-resource languages.
3.2.2 Results
We validate the impact of several decisions made during data construction. First, we study
the impact of our bridge language strategy compared to English-Centric mining augmented
by other random pairs, as well as fully random mining. Second, we investigate the impact of
the level of sparsity chosen in our bridge strategy, focusing on a subset of 50 languages.
20.Note: In WMT20, for example, languages Tamil and Inuktitut were considered low resource directions
even though over a million sentences of monolingual data were available for backtransltion. We consider
mining and backtranslation similar approaches of augmenting training data with collections of monolingual
data online.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
All Supervised
Model Avg Low Mid High
Random 80% 11.93.6 16.1 31.5
Random 80% w/ En 16.38.9 22.4 36.6
Bridge Language, 80% 17.2 10.4 23.2 37.4
90% 80% 60% 20% 0%
Sparsity Level17.017.518.018.519.0Avg BLEU
Table 2:(left) Comparison of Sparse Mining Strategies , comparing BLEU scores. We
ﬁrst hold the sparsity level ﬁxed at 80% — compared to randomly selecting pairs to mine, the
Bridge Language mining strategy performs very well. (right) Bridge Language Strategy
at Diﬀerent Sparsity Levels , comparing BLEU scores. We analyze diﬀerent levels of
sparsity in the language matrix to understand how many pairs to mine. Based on these
results, we take 60% sparse as a tradeoﬀ point between strong performance and reasonable
quantity of mining. 0% indicates no sparsity, or a fully mined language matrix.
Bridge Language strategy versus Random and English-Centric Random. We
experimentally evaluate the impact of our bridge language mining strategy on the performance
of our baseline model in Table 2 (left). We consider two additional baselines, a fully random
mining strategy (Random 20%) and a English-Centric + Random strategy (Random 20% w/
En). In the Random strategy, mined pairs are randomly chosen, while in the English-Centric
+ Random strategy, we retain all pairs through English and only select the remaining
pairs randomly. We show that fully random mining has a substantial negative impact on
performance, as a lot of high quality data is aligned through English, so sampling fully
randomly eliminates a large portion of the potential training set. Random 20% w/ En is
worse as well. Through examination, we ﬁnd that randomly sampling pairs to mine often
selects pairs that do not produce as much data, as the pairs may not include high resource
languages. However, the bridge language strategy ensures that high resource languages are
mined, and then focuses on mining languages in related families. This produces a large
amount of bitext, and at the same time, covers many language directions.
Impact of Sparsity. We focus on a subset of 50 languages where we have a fully mined
matrix to investigate the impact of our sparse mining strategy. We control the sparsity of
our language matrix using the number of bridge languages. In Figure 2 (right), we show
the impact of sparsity on the performance of our baseline model compared to a fully mined
language matrix (0% sparse). We observe that increasing the amount of mined data to make
the matrix less sparse is helpful, but fully mining the matrix is not substantially better. The
main reason is that our mining strategy prioritizes frequently used pairs which are often
associated with the largest bitext, while the discarded pairs are often associated with small
bitext. For example, fully mining the matrix would mine a pair such as Icelandic to Chinese,
but the amount of data produced by mining this pair is quite low. This case is representative
of what occurs as the full matrix is mined—as increasingly more data is mined, the additional
pairs begin to add less data which in turn leads to diminishing quality improvements.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Figure 4: Improvements from Adding Backtranslated Data. For each of the 100
language directions we explored by adding backtranslation. The blue line indicates the
original model, where directions were selected if they had between 2 and 10 BLEU. The
orange scatter indicates the eﬀect of adding backtranslation. Languages are ordered by their
original BLEU scores before backtranslation.
3.3 Augmenting Bitext Data with Backtranslation
Backtranslation (BT) creates synthetic bitexts from unaligned monolingual data (Schwenk,
2008; Bojar and Tamchyna, 2011; Sennrich et al., 2016a; Edunov et al., 2018; Hoang et al.,
2018). The core idea is to translate monolingual sentences in the backward direction, and
add the obtained synthetic translations to the training set. More precisely, when training a
model to translate from a source language to a target language, backtranslation generates
additional data by translating monolingual target sentences into the source language. Using
backtranslation thus requires the ability to translate in both directions, which ﬁts well into
the setting of multilingual machine translation (Zhang et al., 2020; Siddhant et al., 2020).
However, generating these backtranslations is time consuming even for a single direction,
which is compounded in the Many-to-Many case. We thus focus on applying backtranslation
on speciﬁc pairs to supplement mined data where needed.
Selecting Backtranslation Pairs. Our goal is to translate between 100 languages and to
provide good translation quality for as many translation directions as possible. To this end,
we use BT to improve directions which have initially lower translation quality. We identify
these language directions by measuring the quality of our 1.2B parameter multilingual model
before applying BT. Since back-translation is computationally intensive, we focus on 100
directions with a BLEU score of between 2and10. For 50of these directions, we do not
have any bitext at all as we did not mine all 4,450 possible language pairs.
Training a Multilingual Model with Additional Backtranslations. For the selected
pairs, we ﬁrst generate synthetic translations that are added to the training set without
upsampling. Following Caswell et al. (2019), we add a special encoder-side BT token to
these translations to indicate to the model that they are synthetic. For each of the 100
target languages, we randomly sample 50million unique monolingual sentences from the
cleaned CommonCrawl corpus of Wenzek et al. (2019). The synthetic translations are then
generated with our 1:2B MMT model. We use a beam search with beam of size 5and ﬁx all
the hyper-parameters, including the length penalty, to the same values for all the directions.
13

==== Page 14 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Supervised Zero-Shot All
Data sampling Low Mid High Avg Avg Avg
Uniform 6.1 20.4 38.4 19.0 11.8 15.7
Temperature Rescaling 10.2 23.7 38.0 21.8 13.0 18.1
Sinkhorn Temp. Rescaling 10.9 24.1 38.3 22.2 13.5 18.6
Table 3: Comparison of Various Sampling Strategies. We report BLEU on the
validation set of our 1:2B base multilingual model trained with diﬀerent data sampling
schemes. Performance is broken down into diﬀerent resource-setups (low, mid, high) where
bitext data exists (supervised) or in the zero-shot setting for pairs without data.
We apply the same ﬁltering to the backtranslations as the original mined training data, which
substantially reduces the size of the resulting synthetic bitexts.
Impact of Backtranslated Data. Results are shown in Figure 4, where we compare
the original Many-to-Many model used to create the backtranslations (blue line) with the
improvements after training a multilingual model with the backtranslation added (orange
scatter). Backtranslation almost always improves performance for any direction, regardless of
the original BLEU score. As the amount of data generated with BT correlates with the length
of training time, we decide to focus on applying BT on directions with low performance
(BLEU between 2 and 10) to improve our MMT system where it under-performs.
3.4 Balancing Languages in a Many-to-Many Setting
The data distribution produced by large-scale mining is not balanced between languages,
so training a model would favor over-represented languages. A standard solution is to
re-balance each language independently with Temperature Sampling (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019), for example replacing the probability p`of a language by p1
T
`. In the English-Centric
case, changing the probability of sampling a language changes the probability of the other
languages only through the normalization. However, in the Many-to-Many case, language
distributions are more interdependent. For example, some languages are only paired with
a subset of other languages or to an over-represented language. Thus, sampling them will
aﬀect the probability of these other languages they are paired with. This strategy thus has
no guarantee to produce the target balanced distribution between languages. We describe
Sinkhorn Temperature Sampling , which extends the temperature sampling strategy to the
Many-to-Many setting.
Our goal is to design a sampling technique such that the distribution of languages on the
sourceandtarget sides is equal to a given target distribution. Unfortunately, sequentially
sampling the source language and then the target would not work, as some languages are
only paired with a subset of languages—making it impossible to sample the target language
according to a given distribution. Moreover, the sizes and distributions of bitexts greatly vary
from a language to another. Instead, we propose directly sampling a pair of languages from
a matrix of pair probabilities such that the marginal distributions of languages corresponds
to our target distribution. In practice, this means that each row and column of the matrix
14

==== Page 15 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
should sum to the probability of the corresponding language. More precisely, we estimate a
square matrix Psuch that:
max
Ptr(PQ)s.t.P1L=p1
T;P>1L=p1
T;
where pis the vector stacking the probabilities of the Llanguages and Qis the matrix of
pair probabilities. To identify a feasible solution to this problem, we use the Sinkhorn-Knopp
algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964; Sinkhorn and Knopp, 1967). The algorithm works by iteratively
operating on the rows and the columns such that it is possible to convergence to a solution
where all rows and all columns of the matrix sum to 121. The matrix Qhas entries equal to
0for pairs with no bitext and this algorithm preserves them in the solution P, hence adding
no probability mass to missing bitexts. We calculate this once before training and set the
temperature Tto5. We initialize the matrix Qwith the values from standard temperature
sampling methods, for example p1
T
`, then re-normalizing. In Table 3, we show the beneﬁts of
this strategy over temperature sampling with a constant improvement of 0:5in BLEU.
4. Many-to-Many Compared to English Centric
We have described the starting point of training Transformer-based multilingual translation
systems, and detailed how we construct a very large training and evaluation data set covering
thousands of directions and 100 languages. In this section, we investigate the importance of
our data eﬀort to create a true Many-to-Many data set that can support training direction
translation without relying on English-only data. We present a series of experiments to
better understand the performance improvements of English-Centric systems and to compare
them to our Many-to-Many setting.
Experimental Setting. We train our 1:2B model on the full 100language Many-to-Many
data set and compare it to the same model trained only on data through English. We use the
same vocabulary built with SentencePiece on the full data set in both cases. Each model has
a diﬀerent data set size and we train for 500K updates. This number of updates corresponds
to one pass over the entire Many-to-Many data set and 3:5passes on the English-Centric
data. We tune the dropout rate for each model over the values f0:1;0:2;0:3g.
4.1 Main Result
In Table 4, we compare the performance of both models on diﬀerent types of directions,
namely, any language to English (To English), English to any language (From English),
and all the directions not involving English (Non-English). Performance is aggregated over
150directions for To English and From English, and over 2500 directions for Non-English.
On the pairs including English, both models achieve similar performance, suggesting that
a1:2B model does not underﬁt even though the additional non-English data represents
98%of the directions and 74% of the data. For the non-English pairs, we consider two
translation strategies for the English-Centric model: directly translating as if the model was
trained on the pair – by using the corresponding language tokens – or by pivoting through
English. Our model outperforms direct translation with the English-Centric model by 10:2
21. There are several constraints to this, please see Sinkhorn and Knopp (1967) for full details.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Setting To English From English Non-English
Bilingual baselines 27.9 24.5 8.3
English-Centric 31.0 24.2 5.7
English-Centric with Pivot — — 10.4
Many-to-Many 31.2 24.1 15.9
Table 4:Comparison of Many-to-Many and English-Centric Systems , comparing
BLEU scores. Many-to-Many matches the performance of English-Centric on evaluation
directions involving English, but is signiﬁcantly better on non English directions.
Setting w/ bitext w/o bitext
En-Centric 5.4 7.6
En-Centric Piv. 9.8 12.4
M2M 12.3 18.5
Table 5: Many-to-Many versus
English-Centric on zero-shot di-
rections , comparing BLEU scores. We
report performance on language pairs with
and without bitext in the Many-to-Many
training data set.Setting !En En!Non-En
En-Centric 26.417.8 2.4
En-Centric Piv. — — 5.1
M2M 25.7 18.1 9.4
Table 6: Many-to-Many versus
English-Centric on one pass of
data, comparing BLEU scores. We report
performance for models after a number
of updates equivalent to the size of the
English-centric data set.
BLEU and when the English-Centric model uses pivoting by 5:5BLEU. While this result
is not surprising, it conﬁrms that a purely English-Centric model has limited potential on
non-English pairs, and there is a fundamental need for training on Many-to-Many data.
4.2 Understanding the Source of Improvement
The main impact of adding Many-to-Many data is on the directions that do not include
English. In this section, we provide a detailed study of where we observe the largest
improvements with the additional data.
Impact on Zero-shot. Many non-English pairs are not covered by our Many-to-Many
model, and we can thus study if the improvements we observe originate primarily from
directions associated with bitext data or if we observe the same improvement on directions
where the Many-to-Many model generates translations in a zero-shot fashion. In Table 5,
we show the performance if the evaluation is split between the Non-English pairs withand
withoutbitext. On directions with bitext, the Many-to-Many model outperforms the English-
Centric model by 7BLEU for direct translation, and by 3:5BLEU for English-Centric with
pivoting. This demonstrates the importance of diverse data. Not surprisingly, this gap is
even bigger on pairs without bitext. Many-to-Many performs nearly 11BLEU better than
the English-Centric model for direct translation, and with pivoting the gain remains over 6
BLEU.
16

==== Page 17 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Figure 5: Improvement of Many-to-Many over English-Centric in BLEU score
with respect to the amount of mined training data (left) and the amount of target side
language data (right). Improvement from a Many-to-Many model correlates with greater
amounts of bilingual training data with Pearson correlation 0.38 (left) and greater amounts
of target language data with Pearson correlation 0.32 (right).
Impact of the quantity of training data. A hypothesis to explain the gain between
English-Centric and Many-to-Many models is the eﬀect of additional source and target side
training data. Even if the Many-to-Many system has never seen a direction at training time, it
beneﬁts from additional source and target side data available through other training pairs. As
mining non-English language pairs creates more training data compared to English-Centric
data sets, the Many-to-Many model beneﬁts from a larger training set. In Table 6, we
compare both models after seeing the same quantity of data. We train both models for one
epoch. The English-Centric model performs better on To English directions, likely because it
only has one output language to learn, but the Many-to-Many model outperforms on From
English directions and Non-English directions.
Which Pairs Improve the Most? The main factor for improvement is the quantity of
data associated with either a pair or a language. Pairs that have a large quantity of mined
data, such as Spanish-Portuguese, greatly beneﬁt from our Many-to-Many data set. We show
this eﬀect in the left panel of Figure 5 (left). A second source of improvement is observed on
languages for which the Many-to-Many data set contains a large amount of data across many
pairs. This data beneﬁts the decoder-side language model in a way that is comparable with
BT. In the right panel of Figure 5, we show the impact of this cumulative monolingual data on
the average performance per language. Finally, we also observe a third type of improvements
from the similarity in vocabulary and syntax from related languages. A striking example is
the quality of translation between English and Belarusian, where the Many-to-Many model
achieves 12.7 BLEU on the TED evaluation set, compared to 3.2 BLEU for a bilingual model.
The number of bitexts for Belarusian is small, but Belarusian is related to Russian, and the
Many-to-Many model transfers its knowledge from Russian to Belarusian.
4.3 Understanding the Performance of English-Centric Systems
In Table 4, we conﬁrm an observation made in Arivazhagan et al. (2019) that an English-
Centric model improves the most over bilingual models on the directions into English, while
improvement in the other directions (From English) remain more modest. A hypothesis to
17

==== Page 18 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
bg-en cs-en ru-en uk-en hr-en mk-en pl-en sk-en sl-en sr-en152025303540BLEUBilingual
Many-to-English
Bilingual + BT
Figure 6: Performance of many-to-English multilingual translation compared to
bilingual baselines trained on mined data and bilingual + backtranslation. The
average performance of many-to-English is 25.1 BLEU compared to 25.2 BLEU for back-
translation while the bilingual system achieves 23.1.
explain this discrepancy between directions from and to English is that the decoder of an
English-Centric model learns a better English language model by leveraging the aggregated
English data across all through-English directions.
Result. We test this hypothesis with a controlled experiment where we compare a Many-
to-English model with bilingual models using backtranslated English data (Section § 3.3).
The experiment is based on 11 Slavic languages and we backtranslate the exact same English
data as was used to train the Many-to-English model so that both models are trained on
the same English data. Figure 6 shows that backtranslation performs comparably to the
Many-to-English approach. While this improves our understanding of Many-to-English
translation, a multilingual approach nevertheless retains the advantage of combining many
directions into a single model which greatly simpliﬁes modeling.
5. Components for Scaling Multilingual Translation Models
Our goal is to build a single model capable of translating 9;900language directions covering
100languages. This creates several challenges for models with insuﬃcient capacity to capture
that many languages and scripts adequately. To this end, previous MMT work has considered
diﬀerent types of large capacity models (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Lepikhin et al., 2020).
In this section, we investigate diﬀerent ways to add capacity to an MMT model. We ﬁrst
investigate dense scaling, where we increase the depth and width of standard Transformer
architectures. Then, we identify disadvantages of dense scaling, and propose an alternative
to eﬀectively add language-speciﬁc parameters and exploit the nature of language similarities
within the task of multilingual machine translation.
5.1 Dense Scaling
We describe how model parallel is used to scale model width and depth, then describe how
to train large model parallel models for multilingual machine translation.
18

==== Page 19 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
5.1.1 Background: Model Parallel Training
During the training of a neural network, we need to ﬁt its weights, activations, gradients,
and optimizer state in memory. This restricts the maximum capacity of a network that we
can train on a single accelerated device such as a GPU. In this section, we describe two
directions to circumvent this limitation. The ﬁrst direction focuses on ﬁtting a larger model
on single device by reducing the memory required by activations and optimizer states during
the training process. The second direction focuses on eﬃcient training of even larger models
through model parallelism, for example splitting a model across multiple devices. In this
work, we pursue both techniques to densely scale the capacity of Transformers.
Reducing Memory Consumption on a GPU. To reduce the amount of memory, we
consider optimizer state sharding and gradient checkpointing. Optimizer state sharding (Ra-
jbhandari et al., 2019) divides the optimizer state across distributed data parallel workers
so that each worker only needs to store a fraction of the optimizer state. We also apply
gradient checkpointing, which saves memory by discarding intermediate activations before
the forward pass ﬁnishes (Chen et al., 2016). During the backward pass, these activations
are recomputed again as required. This trades time for memory. In the case of a Transformer
based architecture, applying gradient checkpointing at pipeline parallel model partition
boundaries reduces the memory used by activations by almost 50%.
Models Sharded across Multiple GPUs. Reducing the memory consumption enables
ﬁtting greater model capacity on a single GPU, but the physical limitations of a single device
still apply. A solution is to split the model into separate components that are dispatched
across diﬀerent GPUs and trained in parallel. This type of solution scales model capacity
with the number of GPUs. There are two broad paradigms to split a model: along the width
or along the depth. Tensor parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019; Shazeer et al., 2018) splits by
width, while pipeline parallelism (Huang et al., 2019a; Kim et al., 2020) splits by depth,
placing diﬀerent layers on diﬀerent GPUs. We use pipeline parallelism, but both methods
work equally well with Transformers. We use the implementation from fairscale22.
5.1.2 Training Large Dense Models
We investigate several strategies to increase the capacity of a sequence-to-sequence Trans-
former model in the context of multilingual machine translation.
How to Scale: Wide or Deep? We consider increasing the capacity of a Transformer by
either increasing the number of layers (depth axis) or the dimensions of each layer, including
the feed-forward (width axis). The exact model conﬁgurations and dimensions are detailed in
the Appendix. On the left panel of Figure 7, we analyze which axis to prioritize by comparing
models with diﬀerent sizes, 1B,2B, and 10B, obtained by growing their depth or width
(see Appendix B for model conﬁgurations and dimensions). We report their performance
in BLEU and their inference speed measured in words per second (WPS). We train these
models on a data set that covers 80languages and evaluate them on 38diﬀerent benchmark
directions with more than 1k parallel sentences per direction. The main result of this study
22. Please see: https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairscale .
19

==== Page 20 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0
WPS (Log scale)22.022.523.023.524.0BLEU
10B
2B
1B
Wide
Deep
418M 1.2B 12B10203040BLEU
8.921.435.0
10.123.437.5
11.424.139.8Low Resource
Mid Resource
High Resource
Figure 7: (left) Comparison between deep versus wide models. We compare the
performance in BLEU for diﬀerent wide and deep models as a function of their words per
second(WPS)attrainingtime, evaluatingonasubsetof38directions. (right)Performance
of wide models for diﬀerent parameter sizes. We compare the performance of diﬀerent
wide models on diﬀerent pairs at low, mid, and high resource levels, evaluating on all
supervised evaluation pairs. The white lines indicate comparisons between the diﬀerent
models at the same resource level.
is that wider models scale better than deeper models in terms of performance and WPS. In
the rest of this paper, we thus focus on wider models.
Performance as a function of scale. In the right panel of Figure 7, we compare the
performance of wide models as we increase their capacity from 418M to 12B parameters.
We train these models on the full set of 100languages and evaluate them on all supervised
evaluation pairs. We report their performance in BLEU for pairs with either low, mid or
high resource training data. First, as we increase the number of parameters, we observe
that the performance increases, even on low-resource pairs . This suggest that even a 12B
parametermodelcouldbeunderﬁttingwithourmany-to-manymultilingualdataset. However,
improvements increase roughly logarithmically in the number of parameters, and we need to
scale model size by an order of magnitude to improve by a few BLEU points, for example,
+1:5BLEU from 1:2B to 12B. As we scale models densely, their runtime and memory usage
becomes too prohibitive to justify the gain in performance, and so, we consider alternatives
to increase the capacity of our models more eﬃciently.
5.2 Scaling Model Capacity with Language-Speciﬁc Parameters
In this section, we introduce a layer whose parameters are split by language or language
group based on similarity in vocabulary. Each translation direction only accesses a subset of
these parameters, allowing the model capacity to scale without signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the
training and inference time. The layer is trained with a novel re-routing scheme to improve
generalization which we detail below. Compared to previous work (Wang et al., 2018; Bapna
and Firat, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), we focus on allocating entire language-speciﬁc layers
and using this to scale model size while maintaining training speed.
20

==== Page 21 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Parallel Transformer Layer. We follow the sequence-to-sequence Transformer architec-
ture and replace layers by a set of parallel Transformer layers, one for each pre-deﬁned group
of languages. More precisely, assuming we have split the languages into Kﬁxed groups,
this parallel layer is composed of Kparallel Transformer sub-layers, one per language group.
For each translation, we then select the corresponding sub-layer among the Kpossibilities
depending on the language direction. If the parallel layer is in the encoder, we select the
sub-layer according to the source language, while if it is in the decoder, we select according
to the target language. In practice, we only add these layers to either the encoder or decoder,
not both. This enables us to split translations along with their sub-layers per GPU, leading to
faster training and eﬃcient memory usage. We replace layers of the Transformer model—in
the encoder, we replace layers closer to the input, so that the specialized capacity can be
used to learn to read diﬀerent languages and varied scripts. In the decoder, we replace layers
closer to the output, so that the specialized capacity can be used to predict diﬀerent output
vocabulary distributions based on the language. Experimentally, we vary the number of
layers being replaced to evaluate the eﬀect of adding more specialized capacity to the model.
Concretely, if we wanted to add 1 language-speciﬁc decoder layer to a Transformer model
with 6 encoder layers and 6 decoder layers, the resulting model with have 6 shared encoder
layers, 5 shared decoder layers, and 1 language-speciﬁc decoder layer closest to the output.
Such a language-speciﬁc architecture is reminiscent of a deterministic mixture-of-experts,
where one expert is activated based only on the input language. This is a much simpliﬁed
form of standard mixtures, which often learn weights based on the input data to decide
which experts to activate. This architecture is also similar to adapters (Bapna and Firat,
2019; Houlsby et al., 2019). Generally, adapters function by adding small adapter layers
between the layers of a pre-trained network, and then performing ﬁne-tuning—the adapter
layers consist of two projections separated by an activation, followed by a residual connection.
The size of the adapters can be modiﬁed and tuned to improve performance. Our language-
speciﬁc layers generalize this adapter strategy to make entire Transformer layers adaptable,
allocating much larger quantities of capacity. Adapter layers further focus on adaptation of
a pre-trained model, often achieved by freezing the original network (Houlsby et al., 2019)
rather than training the entire shared-and-specialized architecture from scratch. Finally,
these are all speciﬁc instantiations of a larger desire for modular neural networks, where
various components can be ﬂexibly added or modiﬁed to adjust the level of computation
required for a task.
Figure 8 shows an example of the resulting trunk-and-branch architecture when the
parallel layer is in the decoder.
Grouping Languages by Frequency and Similarity. We group languages based on
two criteria: the amount of training data and their vocabulary. The motivation for these
criteria is that we can learn a speciﬁc layer for a language with enough data, and for the
rest, overlapping vocabulary is a good proxy for similar languages. First, each language with
more than 100M sentences forms its own group and hence has its own sub-layer. We have
28languages that ﬁt this criteria: hu, ru, hi, ro, fr, nl, ﬁ, pt, ar, el, vi, en, ms, tr, he, id,
pl, cs, sv, fa, zh, bg, de, es, ko, ja, it, da. Second, we group the remaining languages by
vocabulary overlap, leading to 18additional groups. To create these groupings, we calculate
the vocabulary overlap between the training data of diﬀerent languages and cluster those
21

==== Page 22 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Figure 8: Language-Speciﬁc Parameters provide specialized capacity to an otherwise
fully shared multilingual encoder and decoder.
that have high overlap together. Note that some low resource languages have their own
script—such as Kannada—and are not clustered with any similar languages as the script
is unique. However, to maintain balance between groups (Wang et al., 2020), we cluster
the remaining languages together and roughly balance the amount of training data for each
group. In total, we form 46groups, each with its own sub-layer in a language-speciﬁc layer.
Random Re-Routing between Sub-layers. During training and inference, a sub-layer
is deterministically selected according to its language direction. This guarantees that our
model always uses the same memory and time during inference, regardless of the translation
pair. However, during training, this deterministic routing does not share information
between similar languages if not associated with the same sub-layer. For example, the
sub-layer associated with Ukrainian does not beneﬁt from the large quantity of Russian
training data, since Russian has its own isolated sub-layer. We mitigate this shortcoming
byrandom re-routing of translations, that is, randomly picking another sub-layer instead
of the designated one. This shares information between languages associated with diﬀerent
sub-layers, beneﬁting low resource languages by training on similar high resource languages.
The re-routing is completely random, though could be restricted to re-route only to similar
languages.
Adding Language-Speciﬁc layers to Pre-Trained Transformers. We can integrate
a language-speciﬁc layer into an already pre-trained Transformer by adding it either at the
end of the decoder or at the beginning of the encoder. We can then freeze the parameters of
the pre-trained Transformer and learn the language-speciﬁc components. These additional
language-speciﬁc layers train rapidly as the rest of the model already has strong performance.
This strategy means it is straightforward to adapt pre-trained networks to a new domain
or language by training a small number of dedicated parallel layers, and could easily be
extended to various other applications.
5.2.1 Evaluation of the Language-Specific Layer
We experiment with diﬀerent scenarios by adding a language-speciﬁc layer to the encoder or
decoder, or to a pre-trained densely scaled model. We demonstrate the importance of random
re-routing. Finally, we validate this strategy by comparing it to scaling models densely.
ParallellayerinEncoderorDecoder? Thetrunk-and-brancharchitectureforlanguage-
speciﬁc layers is general and can be used to specialize capacity for any neural architecture.
22

==== Page 23 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Model Params BLEU
Language Speciﬁc Enc 540M 17.1
920M 17.5
Language Speciﬁc Dec 540M 17.3
920M 17.8
Table 7:Comparing Language-Speciﬁc
Encoders and Decoders by BLEU score.
We add parallel language-speciﬁc layers to
either the encoder or decoder, with diﬀerent
sizes.
0% 10% 20% 30% 50%
Amount of Random Rerouting0.00.20.40.60.81.0BLEU Improvement
High
Low/MidFigure 9: Impact of Re-routing Rate on
the performance of high resource and low/mid
resource languages. We display BLEU score.
We explore adding language-speciﬁc capacity in the encoder or decoder using a smaller
setting of 10 high-resource languages. Table 7 shows that language-speciﬁc parameters are
generally more eﬀective when applied to the decoder network. Recent studies show that
encoders are more important for bilingual machine translation (Wu et al., 2019; Kasai et al.,
2020), however, these studies are based on systems modeling only a single language direction
compared to our setting. In our case, increasing the encoder or the decoder does not impact
performance signiﬁcantly, and we focus on decoder for the rest of this paper.
RandomRe-routing. Figure9showstheimpactofthere-routingstrategyonperformance
as we increase the number of training samples routed to random parallel layers as opposed
to their assigned layers. With a re-routing rate of 20%, an improvement of about 0.8 BLEU
can be achieved over no re-routing for low and mid resource languages, without aﬀecting
the performance of high resource languages. Too much stochasticity leads to performance
similar to no random re-routing for high resource languages, but still improves mid to low
resource performance compared to no re-routing.
Comparison with Large Dense Models. We compare adding language speciﬁc capacity
with densely scaling model size in Table 8 on 100languages. As language-speciﬁc layers
add many parameters, we compare to baseline models at various sizes for multiple points
of comparison. Our conclusion is that language-speciﬁc layers improve results compared to
baselines of similar parameter size, particularly for mid and high resource languages where
there is suﬃcient data to train the language-speciﬁc sub-layers. Further, compared to dense
scaling, sparse scaling only uses a fraction of the parameters in each forward pass, which
maintains fast training speed despite large total model size.
Adding Language-Speciﬁc Layers to a Pre-Trained Model. We demonstrate the
impact of adding language-speciﬁc layers to the decoder of a pre-trained 12B parameter
Transformer in Figure 10. We show that adding language-speciﬁc layers for ﬁve languages
improves results on the WMT evaluation data sets. The language-speciﬁc layer adds 3:4B
parameters and we train it for 20K updates with the rest of the network frozen. The total
size of this model is 15:4B parameters. For several directions, we observe gains of more than
1 BLEU, which validates this strategy. On average, we observe gains of 0.9 BLEU.
23

==== Page 24 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Supervised All
Model Params WPS Low Mid High Avg
Dense Transformer 1.2B 40K 10.1 23.4 37.5 17.5
Dense Transformer 3B 20K 10.3 23.8 38.0 17.9
Dense Transformer 12B 3.5K 11.824.2 39.9 18.6
Dense Transformer 1.2B
with 1 Language-Speciﬁc Layer 1.9B 38K 10.7 24.1 38.5 18.1
with 3 Language-Speciﬁc Layers 3.5B 34K 10.6 24.739.5 18.8
with 6 Language-Speciﬁc Layers 10B 26K 10.5 24.7 40.3 19.2
Table 8:Scaling Model Size with Language-Speciﬁc Parameters . We start with a
1:2B parameter baseline with 24encoder layers and 24decoder layers. We add increasingly
more decoder layers to language speciﬁc layers. For example, in the case of 1 language-
speciﬁc decoder layer, the decoder has 23 shared layers and 1 language-speciﬁc layer. We
demonstrate the eﬀect of using 1, 3, and 6 language speciﬁc layers. The additional parameters
for language-speciﬁc layers are split across all language groups. We report WPS at training
time holding the batch size ﬁxed on 8 GPUs. The 12B baseline uses model parallel. We
report BLEU score.
zh-en de-en en-de ro-en en-zh ru-en en-ro fr-en en-ru en-fr0.00.51.01.52.0BLEU2
1.4
1.10.90.80.70.6 0.60.5 0.2
Figure 10: BLEU Improvement using Dense + Sparse over Dense alone. We display
evaluation on a subset of pairs using the WMT evaluation data sets.
6. Bringing it all Together
We have explored the creation of a true many-to-many data set for the multilingual translation
of 100 languages, as well as how to eﬀectively scale Many-to-Many models through a mix of
dense and sparse scaling. In this section, we summarize our ﬁnal results, compare to existing
published work—both multilingual benchmarks and competitive directions in WMT—and
end with a human evaluation of the overall quality of our translation quality.
6.1 Real-world Settings for Many-to-Many Translation
We highlight that there are several real-world usecases of translation directions not involving
English. Many countries have oﬃcial and regional languages that are not English, which
would be natural candidates for direct translation. For example, it is intuitive to translate
Kazakh directly to Russian in Kazakhstan. In Table 9, we compare English-Centric models
to Many-to-Many on a variety of diﬀerent non-English directions. We see that across the
24

==== Page 25 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Source Target Test Set BLEU
English-Centric m2m-100 
India Hindi Bengali TED 3.9 8.7 +4.8
Hindi Marathi TED 0.4 8.4 +8.0
Hindi Tamil TED 1.1 7.5 +6.4
South Africa Afrikaans Xhosa Autshumato 0.1 3.6 +3.5
Afrikaans Zulu Autshumato 0.3 3.6 +3.3
Afrikaans Sesotho Autshumato 0.0 2.1 +2.1
Xhosa Zulu Autshumato 0.1 3.6 +3.5
Sesotho Zulu Autshumato 0.1 1.2 +1.1
Chad Arabic French TED 5.3 20.8 +15.5
DR Congo French Swahili Tatoeba 1.8 5.7 +3.9
Kazakhstan Kazakh Russian TED 0.5 4.5 +4.0
Singapore Chinese Tamil TED 0.2 8.0 +7.8
Austria German Croatian TED 9.6 21.3 +11.7
German Hungarian TED 11.3 17.4 +6.1
Belgium Dutch French TED 16.4 25.8 +9.4
Dutch German TED 18.1 26.3 +8.2
Belarus Belarusian Russian TED 10.0 18.5 +8.5
Croatia Croatian Serbian TED 22.4 29.8 +7.4
Croatian Hungarian TED 12.4 17.5 +5.1
Croatian Czech TED 15.2 22.5 +7.3
Croatian Slovak TED 13.8 24.6 +10.8
Cyprus Greek Turkish TED 4.8 12.6 +7.8
Czechia Czech Slovak TED 9.5 28.1 +18.6
Finland Finnish Swedish TED 7.9 19.2 +11.3
Italy Italian French TED 18.9 28.8 +9.9
Italian German TED 18.4 25.6 +7.2
Moldova Romanian Russian TED 8.0 19.0 +11.0
Romanian Ukrainian TED 8.7 17.3 +8.6
Montenegro Albanian Croatian TED 3.0 20.7 +17.7
Albanian Serbian TED 7.8 20.6 +12.8
Romania Romanian German TED 15.0 24.7 +9.7
Romanian Hungarian TED 11.0 16.3 +4.3
Romanian Turkish TED 5.1 12.0 +6.9
Romanian Armenian TED 0.4 8.2 +7.8
Russia Bashkir Russian Tatoeba 0.1 4.3 +4.2
Ukrainian Russian TED 18.0 23.7 +5.7
Average 8.0 15.6 +7.6
Table 9:Performance translating between oﬃcial and oﬃcial regional languages
of several nations, focusing on non-English directions.
board, our m2m-100 model has drastically better performance and on average improves over
7 BLEU across these directions.
25

==== Page 26 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
6.2 Comparison on Various Translation Benchmarks
Next, we compare our m2m-100 model to various existing work on diﬀerent benchmarks.
While the training data is not the same, we conduct this comparison to provide a reference
point for the overall strength of our model. An important note is that for each of these
benchmarks, there are various diﬀerent tokenizers used which aﬀect BLEU—we follow the
tokenization and BLEU calculation of each of these benchmarks, rather than the evaluation
methodology of our previous results. Thus, the numbers in this subsection are not comparable
to the rest of this paper, as they use the tokenization of each benchmark. Further, note this
comparison was prepared in advance, so all sentences appearing in these evaluation sets were
removed from the training data we used.
Comparison on WMT. First, we compare our Many-to-Many model to submissions to
WMT, the premier translation competition. We display results on a variety of diﬀerent
language directions, some of which are standard natural language processing machine trans-
lation benchmarks, such as English-French, English-German, and English-Russian. Results
are shown in Table 10.23Many submissions to the WMT shared task use ensembling,
in-domain ﬁne-tuning, or re-ranking methods, which are standard techniques to improve
quality. As these could be added to our system at inference time as well, we focus instead on
comparing single model results. To identify comparisons, we examine the WMT Shared Task
proceedings as well as the submissions at http://matrix.statmt.org/ .
As seen in Table 10, our m2m-100 system can achieve very competitive performance
compared to bilingual models tuned especially for individual WMT translation directions.
This shows that our model maintains strong translation quality on individual directions.
Next, we compare our models to other multilingual translation work. Table 11 displays
several previously published results on diﬀerent sets of benchmarks. Note that for each
comparison, we follow the published setting in tokenization, evaluation, and whether or not
the BLEU is tuned on the validation set to maximize comparability.
Bilingual Models. We ﬁrst compare to mBART (Liu et al., 2020), which creates bilingual
models based on ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained model on individual language directions. After
pre-training as a denoising autoencoder, publicly available bitext data is used to create
various diﬀerent bilingual models, one for each evaluation direction. Liu et al. (2020) tune
the test set BLEU on the validation set. Following their setting, we tune the generation
beam size between {5,10}, and length penalty between {0.5, 1.0, 1.5}, and the number of
checkpoints to average between {1, 5, 10}. Our model provides +0.7 BLEU improvement.
We then compare to the bilingual baselines provided in CCMatrix (Schwenk et al.,
2019b), which trained individual models for each direction. As these models generate with
no tuning, we generate on all pairs with beam size 5 and length penalty 1, using only the
23.En$De/En$Ru:we evaluated publicly available single model checkpoints prior to ﬁnetuning
from Ng et al. (2019) on WMT2019. En$Zh:we report results from Li et al. (2019) which contains
single model BLEU results on WMT2019. En$Lt:we report results from Pinnis et al. (2019) on
WMT2019; both directions are the best single model systems which use unconstrained training data.
En!Fr:we report results from Edunov et al. (2018). Fr!En:we report results from Johnson et al.
(2017) on WMT2014. En$Lv:we report results from Pinnis et al. (2017) on WMT2017. En$Tr:we
report results from Sennrich et al. (2017) on WMT17. En$Et:we report results from Pinnis et al.
(2018) on WMT18. En$Fi:we report results from Talman et al. (2019) on WMT17.
26

==== Page 27 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
BLEU
Direction Test Set Published m2m-100 
Without Improvement
English-Chinese (Li et al., 2019) WMT’19 38.2 33.2 -5.0
English-Finnish (Talman et al., 2019) WMT’17 28.6 28.2 -0.4
English-Estonian (Pinnis et al., 2018) WMT’18 24.4 24.1 -0.3
Chinese-English (Li et al., 2019) WMT’19 29.1 29.0 -0.1
With Improvement
English-French (Edunov et al., 2018) WMT’14 43.8 43.8 0
English-Latvian (Pinnis et al., 2017) WMT’17 20.0 20.5 +0.5
German-English (Ng et al., 2019) WMT’19 39.2 40.1 +0.9
Lithuanian-English (Pinnis et al., 2019) WMT’19 31.7 32.9 +1.2
English-Russian (Ng et al., 2019) WMT’19 31.9 33.3 +1.4
English-Lithuanian (Pinnis et al., 2019) WMT’19 19.1 20.7 +1.6
Finnish-English (Talman et al., 2019) WMT’17 32.7 34.3 +1.6
Estonian-English (Pinnis et al., 2018) WMT’18 30.9 33.4 +2.5
Latvian-English (Pinnis et al., 2017) WMT’17 21.9 24.5 +2.6
Russian-English (Ng et al., 2019) WMT’19 37.2 40.5 +3.3
French-English (Edunov et al., 2018) WMT’14 36.8 40.4 +3.6
English-German (Ng et al., 2019) WMT’19 38.1 43.2 +5.1
English-Turkish (Sennrich et al., 2017) WMT’17 16.2 23.7 +7.5
Turkish-English (Sennrich et al., 2017) WMT’17 20.6 28.2 +7.6
Average 30.0 31.9 +1.9
Table 10: Comparison of Many-to-Many and public results on WMT data sets.
We compare m2m-100 to published work (best single models) on WMT. To identify previous
work, we examine the WMT Shared Task proceedings for the top performing models and
check reported results on http://matrix.statmt.org/ . For these comparisons, we report
detokenized BLEU with sacrebleu (Post, 2018) on the test set.
best checkpoint. Our one Many-to-Many multilingual model achieves a 2 BLEU point gain
on average compared to training hundreds of individual models.
Multilingual Models. We next compare the performance of our multilingual system to
other published multilingual systems. We compare to the English-Centric multilingual model
from Zhang et al. (2020) on the OPUS-100 corpus. Their model is trained with noisily
aligned through-English data from OPUS (Tiedemann, 2012; Zhang et al., 2020), with online
backtranslation to improve the performance of non-English pairs. Note that Zhang et al.
(2020) train on 100 directions, but we only overlap a subset of directions. However, we
fully cover their full set of non-English evaluation pairs. Finally, the OPUS-100 non-English
directions come only with a test set, so we generate with beam size 5, length penalty 1, and
use the best checkpoint. As shown in Table 11, we improve by more than 4 BLEU.
6.3 Human Evaluation
We end with a human evaluation study to understand the quality of our model translations.
We focus on 20 diﬀerent directions, none of them involving English. We include languages
commonly spoken in the same region, such as Japanese-Chinese, Hindi-Tamil, and Russian-
27

==== Page 28 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Benchmark Model BLEU
mBARTPrevious Work (Liu et al., 2020) 23.9
m2m-100 24.6
CCMatrixPrevious Work (Schwenk et al., 2019b) 16.3
m2m-100 18.7
OPUS100Previous Work (Zhang et al., 2020) 14.1
m2m-100 18.4
Table 11: Comparison on various evaluation settings from previous work . We
display the best performing model from the published work and report average BLEU on the
test set. For these comparisons, we use the tokenization and BLEU evaluation script used
by each work for comparability. Liu et al. (2020) report Low/Mid resource directions into
and out of English and High resource directions into English, we average across all. Schwenk
et al. (2019b) report the full matrix on 28 languages, we average across all. Zhang et al.
(2020) report results on non-English directions, we average across all.
de-fr fr-de ru-uk uk-ru ja-zh zh-ja hi-ta ta-hi bn-hi hi-bn hi-mr zh-fr fr-zh fr-tr tr-fr fr-ru ru-fr fr-wo wo-fr es-ru ru-es0246810Semantic Accuracy
Related Languages Unrelated Languages
Figure 11: Human Evaluation of Translation Accuracy of m2m-100 on Non-
English Directions. Evaluators are asked to score the semantic accuracy of translations
on a scale of 1 to 10.
Ukrainian, as well as directions that cross language families, such as Chinese-French, French-
Arabic, and Russian-Spanish. We also include several very low resource directions, such as
French-Wolof, Hindi-Marathi, and Japanese-Mongolian.
We followed the human evaluation done at WMT by asking the same evaluation question
with similar setup. To source evaluators, we identiﬁed people who were ﬂuent in both
non-English languages, and were a native speaker of at least one of the languages they were
evaluating. The overall demography of evaluators: our evaluators live across the world,
though a number of them are located in France and the United States. The distribution
of gender is around 60% male and 40% female. The age ranges from roughly 25 to 65.
All evaluators are college graduates. Finally, all evaluators are ﬂuent in English, which is
necessary to understand our English-written instructions for the evaluation study.
Each evaluator rates 50 diﬀerent translations for semantic accuracy on a scale of 1 to
10. Results are shown in Figure 11. On semantic accuracy, most of our evaluations score
between 8.5 and 9.5 (with 10 being the best possible score). For lower resource directions,
the scores remain reasonable. Hindi to Tamil and Wolof to French score around 7—8. The
28

==== Page 29 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
de-fr fr-de ja-zh zh-ja bn-hi hi-bn zh-fr fr-zh fr-ru ru-fr0246810Semantic Accuracy
Related Languages Unrelated Languages English-Centric
M2M-100
Figure 12: Human Evaluation of Translation Accuracy of m2m-100 compared to
English-Centric on 10 Non-English Directions. Evaluators are asked to score the
semantic accuracy of translations on a scale of 1 to 10.
most challenging direction based on human evaluation is French into Wolof (fr-wo), likely
because there is not suﬃcient target-side Wolof data.
Next, we compare our model with an English-Centric model on 10 directions in Figure 12.
Each evaluator is asked to rate 100 sentences, 50 from each model, in a blind test. Across
the board, we ﬁnd that our Many-to-Many system scores better in translation accuracy -
both for related and unrelated languages.
6.4 Related Work
Our work builds upon advances in translation quality, both from data and modeling stand-
points. In this section, we describe related work in these two areas.
DataWork in machine translation has leveraged natural sources of aligned data. For
example, European Parliamentary Proceedings (Koehn, 2005b) and religious text such as
the Bible and Quran are translated into numerous languages (Christodouloupoulos and
Steedman, 2015; Agić and Vulić, 2019). Many translation eﬀorts contribute data sets of
human translations, which can be used for training translation systems. However, beyond
human translations, a number of automatic alignment methods have created corpora as well.
For example, methods aligned documents on metadata (Resnik, 1999) or sentences based on
Jaccard distance or neural representations (Etchegoyhen and Azpeitia, 2016; Buck and Koehn,
2016). Other work expanded to use embeddings from translation systems (Abdul-Rauf and
Schwenk, 2009; Bouamor and Sajjad, 2018).
Several previous large-scale translation mining projects have produced data in many
directions. For example, eﬀorts have aligned data in Wikipedia (Smith et al., 2010; Tuﬁs
et al., 2013) including the Wikimatrix project, which mined 1620 directions (Schwenk et al.,
2019a). Wikipedia contains high quality data, but is limited in volume. Other work has
identiﬁed parallel data in sources such as subtitles, such as the OpenSubtitles project (Lison
and Tiedemann, 2016). Eﬀorts such as Paracrawl (Esplà-Gomis et al., 2019) have mined for
data on the web and are freely usable. Our work continues this line of scalable mining on
the web, but pushes to large-scale mining to produce billions of aligned sentences.
Complementary to the eﬀort of mining training data is to use available monolingual re-
sources. As parallel data is naturally more scarce, monolingual data provides the potential for
training high quality models, particularly for low resource languages. Backtranslation (Bojar
29

==== Page 30 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
and Tamchyna, 2011; Sennrich et al., 2016a) has been an eﬀective technique, with several
improvements proposed in recent years. For example, how to balance backtranslated data
with human translations (Edunov et al., 2018) and how to use backtranslation eﬀectively for
low resource languages (Fadaee et al., 2017).
Beyond creating data itself, much work has investigated how to ﬁlter noisy data from
high quality alignments. This is especially relevant as mined corpora become more prevalent
and the scale of backtranslation increases. Shared tasks such as the WMT task on Parallel
Corpus Filtering (Koehn et al., 2018a) amongst others challenge the community to innovate
and identify techniques to better ﬁlter data.
Finally, a long direction of work focuses not on training data but the formation of
high quality evaluation data sets. Workshops such as WMT, WAT, and IWSLT have his-
torically contributed very heavily used translation data sets. Work such as the FLORES
project (Guzmán et al., 2019), LORELEI (Strassel and Tracey, 2016), and ALT (Riza et al.,
2016) contribute data sets for low resource translation directions. Further, community eﬀorts
such as masakhane (8et al., 2020) and the African Language data sets Challenge (Siminyu
et al., 2020), and workshops such as AmericasNLP24and Indigenous AI Workshops (Lewis
et al., 2020)25have contributed to increasing focus on under-resourced languages, the impor-
tance of the community driving progress, and the impact of such community contributions.
Models A long history of work exists to create automatic translation systems. Before
neural models became widespread, statistical translation models (Koehn, 2009) were used for
automatic translation. Improvements in neural systems built oﬀ of architectural components
such as LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), convolutions (Gehring et al., 2017),
and attention mechanisms (Bahdanau et al., 2015). As they increased in quality, neural
methods began to replace statistical translation techniques (Wu et al., 2016).
These improvements in translation not only focused on bilingual translation systems that
translate between two languages, but also on multilingual translation. Work encompassed
both smaller sets of languages (Firat et al., 2016) as well as investigations with hundreds
of languages by training on data from the Bible (Malaviya et al., 2017; Tiedemann, 2018).
Similar to work on multilingual sentence representations, investigations probed models to
understand if higher level representations such as interlingua were being learned (Lu et al.,
2018) or if models encompassed linguistic features (Celikkanat et al., 2020). Several studies
examined the architecture choices, resource level of diﬀerent languages, and the performance
of zero-shot cases (Tan et al., 2019b; Gu et al., 2019). Other work focused on exceptionally
low resource scenarios, such as fully zero-shot translation (Lakew et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2020).
Other directions investigate how to create multilingual translation models, proposing
multistage ﬁne-tuning (Dabre et al., 2019), slow adaptation from bilingual to multilingual
systems (Escolano et al., 2019), and ﬁne-tuning from pre-trained models (Tang et al.,
2020). To obtain stronger performance, various work has proposed clustering or grouping
languages (Tan et al., 2019a). For translation between non-English languages, much previous
work has investigated this. For example, bilingual systems can be trained between any pair
of languages given suﬃcient training data. Other systems propose pivoting (Kim et al., 2019)
24. Please see the following: http://turing.iimas.unam.mx/americasnlp/ .
25. Please see the following: http://www.indigenous-ai.net/ .
30

==== Page 31 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
or training on English-Centric data and zero-shotting non-English directions (Arivazhagan
et al., 2019).
On the architectural side, multilingual translation has spurred much research in the
direction of improved model architectures. For example, Firat et al. (2016) examined how to
share attention mechanisms between languages. Other work has focused on architectures
that have specialized components that can be adapted for certain languages, such as adaptor
layers (Houlsby et al., 2019; Pfeiﬀer et al., 2020) or language-speciﬁc layer norms and linear
transformations (Zhang et al., 2020). Similar to our language-speciﬁc trunk-and-branch
architecture, these often have deterministic components based on the input language. Other
work has focused on learning which model components to use (Li et al., 2020) or how to
better train language-speciﬁc components (Escolano et al., 2020b,a). Another large body of
work focuses on model scaling for multilingual translation applications, such as gPipe(Huang
et al., 2019b) and gShard(Lepikhin et al., 2020).
Finally, translation systems cannot be developed in a vacuum. Multilingual transla-
tion systems have clear applications in various usecases. Their quality must be carefully
measured, in part with automatic metrics such as BLEU, COMET (Rei et al., 2020), and
BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020), but also with detailed human evaluations to really understand
the challenges that still must be overcome. Looking only at numerical scores is far from
adequate to understanding the quality of a translation. Further, work has analyzed the
presence of bias in automatic translation systems (Prates et al., 2019) as well as the use
of translation systems in various applications such as medicine (Vieira et al., 2020). These
biases in training, evaluation data, and even architectures (Costa-jussà et al., 2020) require
further dedicated eﬀorts and careful examination to understand as a pre-requisite to using
these systems broadly.
6.5 Discussion
Curating High-Quality Training Data. Creating high quality data sets to train trans-
lation models has been a long-standing area of research. For example, previous work has
explored how to best ﬁlter noisy data sets (Koehn et al., 2018b, 2019). Our use of large-scale
mined training data presents large quantities of data to train multilingual models on, but
brings challenges as well. For example, our mining methods mine both simpliﬁed and tradi-
tional Chinese text, tokenized and de-tokenized text, and many examples with code switching.
We apply several data ﬁltering methods, but the cleanliness and quality of alignment is
critical for training high-quality translation systems. Further, multilingual translation can
be aﬀected by domain mismatch, as people in diﬀerent parts of the world discuss diﬀerent
topics (Shen et al., 2019), which presents additional challenges for curating good training
sets. Thus, we see the continued improvement of data quality as an important direction for
multilingual translation systems, which require a lot of data to train well.
Multilinguality at Inference Time Throughout the paper, we explored how to improve
the performance of single models, scaling the amount of data as well as the model size, but
there remain numerous directions for future investigation of multilinguality. One direction is
understanding how to exploit the nature of multilingual translation at inference time as well.
A true Many-to-Many system provides several possible directions for exploring this potential.
31

==== Page 32 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Model BLEU
Multilingual 17.3
Multi-Model Ensemble 17.5
Pivoting with Multilingual 17.0
Multi-source Self-Ensemble 17.5
Table 12: Results on zero-shot language pairs for Multi-Source Self-Ensemble
compared to various baselines. We report the average test BLEU score on 100 randomly
sampled pairs.
A known, eﬀective strategy to improve accuracy is to ensemble multiple models at
inference time. However, this requires training multiple models which substantially increases
the training compute requirements. Instead, we explored self-ensembles as a possible direction,
created by applying the multilingual model to the same source sentence in diﬀerent languages.
For example, if we wish to translate Galician to English, then instead of directly translating
between the two, we ensemble the translation of Spanish to English with the translation of
Galician to English, using the same multilingual model for both directions, and by averaging
the predicted token log-probabilities, as for standard multi-model ensembles. The additional
source is obtained by translating the input to another intermediary language. After this,
we ensemble the translation of both sources to the target. This uses the same multilingual
model for all steps.
We evaluate both pivoting and self-ensembling on zero-shot directions as these can beneﬁt
from better accuracy. We report results on 100 randomly sampled zero-shot translation
directions which have at least 1000 examples in the validation and test set. Next, for each
translation direction, we choose the intermediary language that resulted in the highest BLEU
on the validation set; the same is done to choose the intermediary language for pivoting.
We also tune a weight to balance the two language directions (Garmash and Monz, 2016).
Table 12 shows that multi-source self-ensembling improves the single model result by 0.2
BLEU on average. It also performs as well as standard multi-model ensembling but requires
training only a single model. This is particularly relevant for large models trained on vast
quantities of data, which require a lot of compute to be able to perform standard ensembling.
Overall, we ﬁnd these directions of investigation very interesting—by exploiting multi-
linguality further at inference time, the large training cost could be reduced and replaced
with inference-time techniques that are much faster. We believe further research into these
inference-time techniques, focusing on similarity between languages or selecting speciﬁc
pivot languages, or architectural modiﬁcations that can be applied during decoding—such as
adding a language model or nearest neighbors search (Khandelwal et al., 2020), are fruitful
avenues of future work.
ImprovementsonVeryLow-ResourceLanguages. Strongperformanceforlow-resource
languages remains a critical area for future improvement (Gu et al., 2018; Sennrich and Zhang,
2019). For many languages, our system still requires substantial improvements. Examples
include African languages such as Xhosa and Zulu, European languages such as Catalan and
Basque, and Southeast Asian languages such as Iloko and Cebuano. For many of these, even
monolingual resources on the internet are limited, which strongly aﬀects the quantity and
32

==== Page 33 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
quality of mined data. Using curated data, possibly supplemented by mining, may provide a
starting point for future improvement. For example, several resources for African languages
exist, including JW300 (Agić and Vulić, 2019) used in the masakhane machine translation
eﬀort (8et al., 2020) and data sets for Nigerian Pidgin (Ahia and Ogueji, 2020), Wolof (Alla
et al., 2020), Fon (Emezue and Dossou, 2020), Igbo (Ezeani et al., 2020), Amharic, Tigrigna,
Afan-Oromo, Wolaytta, and Ge’ez (Abate et al., 2018). Other lines of work present resources
for low-resource Asian languages, such as the ALT project (Riza et al., 2016; Ding et al.,
2016), Mongolian, Uyghur, and Tibetian (Anonymous, 2020), or strategies for improvement
on speciﬁc directions (Chen et al., 2019). Further research is required to bring together small
data sets of higher quality translations, mined data, and monolingual resources to create
improved translation systems for very low resource languages.
7. Conclusion
We introduced m2m-100 , a new Many-to-Many multilingual translation model that can
translate between the 9,900 directions of 100 languages. The underlying data set was mined
from CommonCrawl using a novel strategy which exploits language groupings to avoid mining
every possible direction while maintaining good accuracy. Such a large data set requires
models with increased capacity and to this end we explored densely scaling the number of
parameters as well as sparsely, through introducing language-speciﬁc parameters trained
with a novel random re-routing scheme.
Results show that m2m-100 outperforms English-Centric multilingual models trained
on data where either the source or target language is English. The system improves over
10 BLEU on average compared to an English-Centric baseline when translating directly
between non-English directions. m2m-100 is competitive with bilingual models from WMT
and improves over existing publicly available multilingual translation systems. Human judges
indicate that our model translates ﬂuently with high semantic accuracy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Yuqing Tang and Peng-Jen Chen for their work on the multilingual translation
infrastructure in fairseq. We thank Xian Li, Chau Tran, Yuqing Tang, Peng-Jen Chen, and
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato for insightful conversations. We thank our volunteer human evaluators
for closely examining the translation quality of our models through various directions.
33

==== Page 34 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Appendix A. Additional Information about Data
Dictionary Coverage Figure 13 displays the dictionary coverage for each of our 100
languages.
lgnssdsstnbskn loyoam psmr ighthehasuhiafkazhjaettlukdahu fivicssvsrenes
Languages10k20k30k40kNum Tokens
Figure 13: Dictionary Coverage per Language
Mining Data with LASER Applying a global bitext mining approach in huge collections
like Common Crawl requires a carefully optimized pipeline to tackle the computational
challenge. We outline here the main ideas and refer the reader to Schwenk et al. (2019b) for
more details. Overall, processing can be structured into four steps:
1.Text extraction: extract the textual part of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2019), segment
the paragraphs into sentences and perform language identiﬁcation;
2.Index creation: create an FAISS index for each language using aggressive vector
compression based on a 64-bit product-quantizer and 64k cells to partition the search
space.26
3.k-nn search: For each language pair, search the k-nn closest sentences in the FAISS
index of the previous step. This search is performed in both directions, that is, source
in target and target in source. The k-nn distances and indexes are stored and processed
in the next step;
4.Actual mining: We follow Artetxe and Schwenk (2019a) and use a margin criterion
to decide whether two sentences are parallel or not:
margin( x; y) =cos(x; y)
X
z2NNk(x)cos(x; z)
2k+X
z2NNk(y)cos(y; z)
2k(5)
NNk()are the kunique nearest neighbors, with k= 16. We mine for possible parallel
sentences in both directions, that is, source $target, merge the mined bitexts and
remove duplicate sentence pairs.
26. We used FAISS index type OPQ64,IVF65536,PQ64 .
34

==== Page 35 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
The data for each language is divided into multiple chunks of approximately 50M sentences
which are processed in parallel. This enables to substantially speed up processing when a
large cluster is available.Once all parts are processed, data is merged as needed, for example
global deduplication in step 1.
Step 1 and 2 process each language independently, while step 3 and 4 loop over all
requested language pairs.
The LASER encoder was trained on 93 languages, but not all of them perform equally
well. An indication of of the performance of a language pair can be obtained by multilingual
similarity search in the embedding space. For each source sentence of a parallel test set,
the closest target sentence in the test set is searched and an error is counted if it is not
the correct one. Comparative results are given in Tables 1 and 2 in Artetxe and Schwenk
(2019b).
Appendix B. Model Details
Training Times The training time for the 418M parameter model was approximately 8
days on 128 GPU. The training time for the 1.2B parameter model was approximately 11
days on 128 GPU. The main bottleneck for training time was the large quantity of data
to train through. The models converged very quickly in training but continued improving
with additional training time. The 12B model trained for 33 days on 512 GPUs. The model
converged within about 17 days with slow, but steady improvement over the remaining time.
Architectures for Deep v. Wide Table 14 shows the various model conﬁgurations
considered in our experiments when scaling dense models.
Size Embed FFN Layers
1B Wide 1024 16K 14
1B Deep 1024 4K 38
2B Wide 2048 16K 11
2B Deep 1024 8K 48
10B Wide 4096 16K 24
10B Deep 3072 12K 36
Figure 14: Architecture of Wide and Deep Models.
Appendix C. Additional Experimental Results
C.1 Language-Speciﬁc Parameters
There are various possible constructions to create language-speciﬁc parameters. For example,
instead of having an architecture where some layers are shared and others are specialized,
entire decoders could be specialized. In this section, we analyze various possible approaches
to language-speciﬁc parameters on a smaller benchmark of 9 languages: Bengali, Czech,
Hindi, French, Russian, English, Polish, Spanish, and Chinese.
35

==== Page 36 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Model Parameters Average BLEU Low-Resource BLEU
Dense Baseline 620M 15.9 9.1
Fully Separate Decoders
By Language Family 640M 16.7 9.8
By Language 1.1B 16.9 9.4
Trunk-and-Branch Decoders
By Language Family 520M 16.6 10.3
By Language 740M 16.3 9.9
Fully Separate Encoders
By Language Family 640M 16.2 9.2
By Language 1.1B 16.4 9.0
Trunk-and-Branch Encoders
By Language Family 520M 15.9 9.6
By Language 740M 16.2 9.4
Table 13: Investigation of Language-Speciﬁc Parameter Construction on a smaller
benchmark of 9 languages.
We compare full separation of parameters with our proposed partial sharing , where
certain layers form a shared trunk between all languages and then have separate, specialized
layers. We compare the results for encoder-side and decoder-side language-speciﬁc parameters.
Table 13 breaks down the result by average BLEU and low resource direction BLEU.
We observe a number of trends. First, the decoder side of multilingual translation seems
to be more important than the decoder side—the BLEU improvement of adding parameters in
the decoder is larger than the similar addition in the encoder. Second, adding parameters can
improve the average BLEU, but hurts the BLEU of low resource languages—we hypothesize
that low resource directions do not have suﬃcient data to train these additional parameters,
so performance is negatively aﬀected. This problem would be exaggerated extending from
the 9 language analysis here to a full set of 100 languages. Finally, comparing if parameters
should be allocated by language or by language family, we see similar eﬀects—high resource
languages beneﬁt from specialized parameters (for example Russian, French), but low resource
languages have decreased performance. Overall, we are interested in strong low resource
translation performance, so choose shared and specialized parameters by language family in
the decoder.
36

==== Page 37 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
References
Solomon Teferra Abate, Michael Melese, Martha Yiﬁru Tachbelie, Million Meshesha, Solomon
Atinafu, Wondwossen Mulugeta, Yaregal Assabie, Hafte Abera, Binyam Ephrem Seyoum,
Tewodros Abebe, et al. Parallel corpora for bi-directional statistical machine translation
for seven ethiopian language pairs. In Proceedings oftheFirstWorkshop onLinguistic
Resources forNaturalLanguage Processing, pages 83–90, 2018.
Sadaf Abdul-Rauf and Holger Schwenk. On the Use of Comparable Corpora to Improve SMT
performance. In EACL, pages 16–23, 2009. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
E09-1003 .
Željko Agić and Ivan Vulić. JW300: A wide-coverage parallel corpus for low-resource lan-
guages. In Proceedings ofthe57thAnnualMeeting oftheAssociation forComputational
Linguistics , pages 3204–3210, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1310. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P19-1310 .
Roee Aharoni, Melvin Johnson, and Orhan Firat. Massively multilingual neural machine
translation. In Proceedings ofthe2019Conference oftheNorthAmerican Chapter of
theAssociation forComputational Linguistics: HumanLanguage Technologies, Volume1
(LongandShortPapers), pages 3874–3884, 2019.
Orevaoghene Ahia and Kelechi Ogueji. Towards supervised and unsupervised neural machine
translation baselines for nigerian pidgin. arXivpreprint arXiv:2003.12660, 2020.
Lo Alla, Dione Cheikh Bamba, Nguer Elhadji Mamadou, Ba Sileye O Ba, and Lo Moussa.
Using lstm to translate french to senegalese local languages: Wolof as a case study. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.13840, 2020.
Anonymous. Syntactic relevance xlnet word embedding generation in low-resource machine
translation. OpenReview, 2020.
Naveen Arivazhagan, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dmitry Lepikhin, Melvin Johnson, Maxim
Krikun, Mia Xu Chen, Yuan Cao, George Foster, Colin Cherry, et al. Massively multi-
lingual neural machine translation in the wild: Findings and challenges. arXivpreprint
arXiv:1907.05019, 2019.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks:
Implicit acceleration by overparameterization. arXivpreprint arXiv:1802.06509, 2018.
Mikel Artetxe and Holger Schwenk. Margin-based parallel corpus mining with multilingual
sentence embeddings. In Proceedings ofthe57thAnnualMeeting oftheAssociation for
Computational Linguistics, pages 3197–3203, 2019a.
Mikel Artetxe and Holger Schwenk. Massively multilingual sentence embeddings for zero-shot
cross-lingual transfer and beyond. Transactions oftheAssociation forComputational
Linguistics, 7:597–610, 2019b.
37

==== Page 38 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv,
abs/1607.06450, 2016.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate. In 3rdInternational Conference onLearning
Representations, ICLR2015, 2015.
Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. Simple, scalable adaptation for neural machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings ofthe2019Conference onEmpirical Methods inNaturalLanguage
Processing andthe9thInternational JointConference onNaturalLanguage Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1538–1548, 2019.
Loïc Barrault, Ondřej Bojar, Marta R Costa-Jussà, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Shervin Malmasi, et al.
Findings of the 2019 conference on machine translation (wmt19). In Proceedings ofthe
FourthConference onMachine Translation (Volume 2:SharedTaskPapers,Day1), pages
1–61, 2019.
Ondrej Bojar and Ales Tamchyna. Improving translation model by monolingual data. In
Workshop onStatistical Machine Translation (WMT), 2011.
Ondřej Bojar, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Philipp
Koehn, and Christof Monz. Findings of the 2018 conference on machine translation
(WMT18). In Proceedings oftheThirdConference onMachine Translation: SharedTask
Papers, pages 272–303, Belgium, Brussels, October 2018. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6401. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
W18-6401 .
Houda Bouamor and Hassan Sajjad. H2@BUCC18: Parallel Sentence Extraction from
Comparable Corpora Using Multilingual Sentence Embeddings. In BUCC, may 2018.
Christian Buck and Philipp Koehn. Findings of the wmt 2016 bilingual document alignment
shared task. In Proceedings oftheFirstConference onMachine Translation , pages 554–
563, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W16/W16-2347 .
Isaac Caswell, Ciprian Chelba, and David Grangier. Tagged back-translation. In Proceedings
oftheFourthConference onMachine Translation (Volume 1:Research Papers), pages
53–63, 2019.
Hande Celikkanat, Miikka Silfverberg, and Vinit Ravishankar. Are multilingual neural
machine translation models better at capturing linguistic features? ThePragueBulletin
ofMathematical Linguistics, (115):143–162, 2020.
Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Federico, Luisa Bentivogli, Niehues Jan, Stüker Sebastian, Sudoh
Katsuitho, Yoshino Koichiro, and Federmann Christian. Overview of the iwslt 2017
evaluation campaign. In International Workshop onSpokenLanguage Translation , pages
2–14, 2017.
38

==== Page 39 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Vishrav Chaudhary, Yuqing Tang, Francisco Guzmán, Holger Schwenk, and Philipp Koehn.
Low-resource corpus ﬁltering using multilingual sentence embeddings. WMT2019, page
261, 2019.
Peng-Jen Chen, Jiajun Shen, Matthew Le, Vishrav Chaudhary, Ahmed El-Kishky, Guillaume
Wenzek, Myle Ott, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Facebook ai’s wat19 myanmar-english
translation task submission. In Proceedings ofthe6thWorkshop onAsianTranslation ,
pages 112–122, 2019.
Pinzhen Chen, Nikolay Bogoychev, Kenneth Heaﬁeld, and Faheem Kirefu. Parallel sentence
mining by constrained decoding. In ACL, 2020.
Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with
sublinear memory cost. arXiv, abs/1604.06174, 2016.
Christos Christodouloupoulos and Mark Steedman. A massively parallel corpus: the bible in
100 languages. Language resources andevaluation, 49(2):375–395, 2015.
AlexisConneau, KartikayKhandelwal, NamanGoyal, VishravChaudhary, GuillaumeWenzek,
Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Un-
supervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXivpreprint arXiv:1911.02116 ,
2019.
Marta R Costa-jussà, Carlos Escolano, Christine Basta, Javier Ferrando, Roser Batlle,
and Ksenia Kharitonova. Gender bias in multilingual neural machine translation: The
architecture matters. arXivpreprint arXiv:2012.13176, 2020.
Raj Dabre, Atsushi Fujita, and Chenhui Chu. Exploiting multilingualism through mul-
tistage ﬁne-tuning for low-resource neural machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe
2019Conference onEmpirical Methods inNatural Language Processing andthe9th
International JointConference onNaturalLanguage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,pages
1410–1416, 2019.
Chenchen Ding, Masao Utiyama, and Eiichiro Sumita. Similar southeast asian languages:
Corpus-based case study on thai-laotian and malay-indonesian. In Proceedings ofthe3rd
Workshop onAsianTranslation (WAT2016), pages 149–156, 2016.
Chenchen Ding, Hnin Thu Zar Aye, Win Pa Pa, Khin Thandar Nwet, Khin Mar Soe, Masao
Utiyama, and Eiichiro Sumita. Towards Burmese (Myanmar) morphological analysis:
Syllable-based tokenization and part-of-speech tagging. ACMTransactions onAsianand
Low-Resource Language Information Processing (TALLIP), 19(1):5, 2019.
Sergey Edunov, Myle Ott, Michael Auli, and David Grangier. Understanding back-translation
at scale. In Proc.ofEMNLP, 2018.
Ahmed El-Kishky, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzman, and Philipp Koehn. CCAligned:
A massive collection of cross-lingual web-document pairs. In Proc.ofEMNLP, 2020.
39

==== Page 40 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Chris Chinenye Emezue and Femi Pancrace Bonaventure Dossou. Ffr v1. 1: Fon-french
neural machine translation. In Proceedings oftheTheFourthWidening NaturalLanguage
Processing Workshop, pages 83–87, 2020.
Carlos Escolano, Marta R Costa-jussà, and José AR Fonollosa. From bilingual to multilingual
neural machine translation by incremental training. In Proceedings ofthe57thAnnual
Meeting oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop ,
pages 236–242, 2019.
Carlos Escolano, Marta R Costa-jussà, José AR Fonollosa, and Mikel Artetxe. Multilingual
machine translation: Closing the gap between shared and language-speciﬁc encoder-
decoders. arXivpreprint arXiv:2004.06575, 2020a.
Carlos Escolano, Marta R Costa-jussà, José AR Fonollosa, and Mikel Artetxe. Training
multilingualmachinetranslationbyalternatelyfreezinglanguage-speciﬁcencoders-decoders.
arXivpreprint arXiv:2006.01594, 2020b.
Miquel Esplà-Gomis, Mikel L Forcada, Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, and Hieu Hoang. Paracrawl:
Web-scale parallel corpora for the languages of the eu. In Proceedings ofMachine
Translation Summit XVIIVolume2:Translator, ProjectandUserTracks, pages 118–
119, 2019.
Thierry Etchegoyhen and Andoni Azpeitia. Set-Theoretic Alignment for Comparable Corpora.
InACL, pages 2009–2018, 2016. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1189. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/P16-1189 .
Ignatius Ezeani, Paul Rayson, Ikechukwu Onyenwe, Chinedu Uchechukwu, and Mark
Hepple. Igbo-english machine translation: An evaluation benchmark. arXivpreprint
arXiv:2004.00648, 2020.
Marzieh Fadaee, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz. Data augmentation for low-resource
neural machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe55thAnnualMeeting oftheAssociation
forComputational Linguistics (Volume 2:ShortPapers), pages 567–573, 2017.
Angela Fan, Edouard Grave, and Armand Joulin. Reducing transformer depth on demand
with structured dropout. In International Conference onLearning Representations , 2019.
Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Multi-way, multilingual neural machine
translation with a shared attention mechanism. In Proceedings ofthe2016Conference of
theNorthAmerican Chapter oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 866–875, 2016.
8, Wilhelmina Nekoto, Vukosi Marivate, Tshinondiwa Matsila, Timi Fasubaa, Taiwo Fagbo-
hungbe, Solomon Oluwole Akinola, Shamsuddeen Muhammad, Salomon Kabongo Kabena-
mualu, SalomeyOsei, FreshiaSackey, etal. Participatoryresearchforlow-resourcedmachine
translation: A case study in african languages. In Proceedings ofthe2020Conference on
Empirical Methods inNaturalLanguage Processing: Findings, pages 2144–2160, 2020.
Ekaterina Garmash and Christof Monz. Ensemble learning for multi-source neural machine
translation. In Proc.COLING, 2016.
40

==== Page 41 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. Convolu-
tional Sequence to Sequence Learning. In Proc.ofICML, 2017.
Jiatao Gu, Hany Hassan, Jacob Devlin, and Victor OK Li. Universal neural machine
translation for extremely low resource languages. In Proceedings ofthe2018Conference of
theNorthAmerican Chapter oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume1(LongPapers), pages 344–354, 2018.
Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor OK Li. Improved zero-shot neural
machine translation via ignoring spurious correlations. In Proceedings ofthe57thAnnual
Meeting oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics, pages 1258–1268, 2019.
Francisco Guzmán, Peng-Jen Chen, Myle Ott, Juan Pino, Guillaume Lample, Philipp
Koehn, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Two new evaluation datasets for
low-resource machine translation: Nepali-english and sinhala-english. 2019.
Francisco Guzmán, Peng-Jen Chen, Myle Ott, Juan Pino, Guillaume Lample, Philipp
Koehn, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. The ﬂores evaluation datasets
for low-resource machine translation: Nepali–english and sinhala–english. In Proceedings
ofthe2019Conference onEmpirical Methods inNatural Language Processing andthe
9thInternational JointConference onNaturalLanguage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,
pages 6100–6113, 2019.
Thanh-Le Ha, Jan Niehues, and Alexander Waibel. Toward multilingual neural machine
translation with universal encoder and decoder. arXivpreprint arXiv:1611.04798, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition. In Proc.ofCVPR, 2015.
Vu Cong Duy Hoang, Philipp Koehn, Gholamreza Haﬀari, and Trevor Cohn. Iterative
back-translation for neural machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe2ndWorkshop on
NeuralMachine Translation andGeneration, pages 18–24, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neuralcomputation , 9
(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
AndreaGesmundo, MonaAttariyan, andSylvainGelly. Parameter-eﬃcienttransferlearning
for nlp. In International Conference onMachine Learning , pages 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen,
HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Eﬃcient training
of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. In Advances inneuralinformation
processing systems, pages 103–112, 2019a.
Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Xu Chen,
HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Eﬃcient training
of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. In NeurIPS, 2019b.
41

==== Page 42 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Jeﬀ Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus.
IEEETransactions onBigData, 2019.
Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen,
Nikhil Thorat, Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado, et al. Google’s multi-
lingual neural machine translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation. Transactions
oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics, 5:339–351, 2017.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon
Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeﬀrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural
language models. arXiv, abs/2001.08361, 2020.
Jungo Kasai, Nikolaos Pappas, Hao Peng, James Cross, and Noah A. Smith. Deep encoder,
shallow decoder: Reevaluating the speed-quality tradeoﬀ in machine translation. arXiv,
2020.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Angela Fan, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Nearest
neighbor machine translation. arXivpreprint arXiv:2010.00710, 2020.
Chiheon Kim, Heungsub Lee, Myungryong Jeong, Woonhyuk Baek, Boogeon Yoon, Ildoo
Kim, Sungbin Lim, and Sungwoong Kim. torchgpipe: On-the-ﬂy pipeline parallelism for
training giant models. arXivpreprint arXiv:2004.09910, 2020.
Yunsu Kim, Petre Petrov, Pavel Petrushkov, Shahram Khadivi, and Hermann Ney. Pivot-
based transfer learning for neural machine translation between non-english languages.
InProceedings ofthe2019Conference onEmpirical Methods inNatural Language
Processing andthe9thInternational JointConference onNaturalLanguage Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 865–875, 2019.
DP Kingma and LJ Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv, 2015.
Philipp Koehn. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In MT
Summit, 2005a.
Philipp Koehn. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. Citeseer,
2005b.
Philipp Koehn. Statistical machine translation. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico,
Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens, et al. Moses:
Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe45thannual
meeting oftheACLoninteractive posteranddemonstration sessions, pages 177–180.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2007.
Philipp Koehn, Huda Khayrallah, Kenneth Heaﬁeld, and Mikel L. Forcada. Find-
ings of the wmt 2018 shared task on parallel corpus ﬁltering. In Proceedings of
theThirdConference onMachine Translation: SharedTaskPapers, pages 726–739,
Belgium, Brussels, October 2018a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-6453 .
42

==== Page 43 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Philipp Koehn, Huda Khayrallah, Kenneth Heaﬁeld, and Mikel L Forcada. Findings of the
wmt 2018 shared task on parallel corpus ﬁltering. In Proceedings oftheThirdConference
onMachine Translation: SharedTaskPapers, pages 726–739, 2018b.
Philipp Koehn, Francisco Guzmán, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Juan Pino. Findings of the WMT
2019 shared task on parallel corpus ﬁltering for low-resource conditions. In Proceedings of
theFourthConference onMachine Translation (Volume 3:SharedTaskPapers,Day2),
2019.
Taku KudoandJohnRichardson. Sentencepiece: Asimpleandlanguageindependentsubword
tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. arXivpreprint arXiv:1808.06226 ,
2018.
Anoop Kunchukuttan. The IndicNLP Library. https://github.com/anoopkunchukuttan/
indic_nlp_library/blob/master/docs/indicnlp.pdf , 2020.
Ivana Kvapilíková, Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka amd Eneko Agirre, and Ondřej Bojar.
Unsupervised multilingual sentence embeddings for parallel corpus mining. In ACL, 2020.
Surafel M Lakew, Marcello Federico, Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi. Multilingual neural
machine translation for zero-resource languages. arXivpreprint arXiv:1909.07342, 2019.
Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping
Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. Gshard: Scaling giant models
with conditional computation and automatic sharding. arXiv, 2020.
Jason Edward Lewis, Angie Abdilla, Noelani Arista, Kaipulaumakaniolono Baker, Scott
Benesiinaabandan, Michelle Brown, Melanie Cheung, Meredith Coleman, Ashley Cordes,
Joel Davison, et al. Indigenous protocol and artiﬁcial intelligence position paper. 2020.
Bei Li, Yinqiao Li, Chen Xu, Ye Lin, Jiqiang Liu, Hui Liu, Ziyang Wang, Yuhao Zhang,
Nuo Xu, Zeyang Wang, et al. The niutrans machine translation systems for wmt19. In
Proceedings oftheFourthConference onMachine Translation (Volume 2:SharedTask
Papers,Day1), pages 257–266, 2019.
Xian Li, Asa Cooper Stickland, Yuqing Tang, and Xiang Kong. Deep transformers with
latent depth. Advances inNeuralInformation Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Pierre Lison and Jörg Tiedemann. Opensubtitles2016: Extracting large parallel corpora from
movie and tv subtitles. 2016.
Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad,
Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine
translation. Transactions oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics , 8:726–742,
2020.
Yichao Lu, Phillip Keung, Faisal Ladhak, Vikas Bhardwaj, Shaonan Zhang, and Jason Sun.
A neural interlingua for multilingual machine translation. In Proceedings oftheThird
Conference onMachine Translation: Research Papers, pages 84–92, 2018.
43

==== Page 44 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Chaitanya Malaviya, Graham Neubig, and Patrick Littell. Learning language representations
for typology prediction. In Proceedings ofthe2017Conference onEmpirical Methods in
NaturalLanguage Processing, pages 2529–2535, 2017.
Nathan Ng, Kyra Yee, Alexei Baevski, Myle Ott, Michael Auli, and Sergey Edunov. Facebook
FAIR’s WMT19 news translation task submission. In Proceedings oftheFourthConference
onMachine Translation (Volume 2:SharedTaskPapers,Day1). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-5333 .
Toan Q Nguyen and Julian Salazar. Transformers without tears: Improving the normalization
of self-attention. arXivpreprint arXiv:1910.05895, 2019.
Bojar Ondrej, Rajen Chatterjee, Federmann Christian, Graham Yvette, Haddow Barry, Huck
Matthias, Koehn Philipp, Liu Qun, Logacheva Varvara, Monz Christof, et al. Findings of
the 2017 conference on machine translation (wmt17). In SecondConference onMachine
Translation, pages 169–214. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for
automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe40thannualmeeting
oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics, pages 311–318, 2002.
Gabriel Pereyra, George Tucker, Jan Chorowski, Lukasz Kaiser, and Geoﬀrey E. Hinton.
Regularizing neural networks by penalizing conﬁdent output distributions. In International
Conference onLearning Representations (ICLR)Workshop, 2017.
Jonas Pfeiﬀer, Andreas Rücklé, Clifton Poth, Aishwarya Kamath, Ivan Vulić, Sebastian
Ruder, Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapterhub: A framework for adapting
transformers. In Proceedings ofthe2020Conference onEmpirical Methods inNatural
Language Processing: SystemDemonstrations, pages 46–54, 2020.
Wannaphong Phatthiyaphaibun, Korakot Chaovavanich, Charin Polpanumas, Arthit Suriya-
wongkul, Lalita Lowphansirikul, and Pattarawat Chormai. PyThaiNLP: Thai Natural Lan-
guage Processing in Python, June 2016. URL http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3519354 .
M¯ arcis Pinnis, Rihards Krišlauks, Toms Miks, Daiga Deksne, and Valters Šics. Tilde’s
machine translation systems for WMT 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2017. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-4737 .
M¯ arcis Pinnis, Mat¯ ıss Rikters, and Rihards Krišlauks. Tilde’s machine translation systems
for WMT 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. URL https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/W18-6423 .
Marcis Pinnis, Rihards Krišlauks, and Mat¯ ıss Rikters. Tilde’s machine translation systems
for WMT 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/W19-5335 .
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings oftheThird
Conference onMachine Translation: Research Papers, pages 186–191, 2018.
44

==== Page 45 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Marcelo OR Prates, Pedro H Avelar, and Luis C Lamb. Assessing gender bias in machine
translation: a case study with google translate. NeuralComputing andApplications , pages
1–19, 2019.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeﬀ Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory
optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. ArXiv, 2019.
Ricardo Rei, Craig Stewart, Ana C Farinha, and Alon Lavie. Comet: A neural framework for
mt evaluation. In Proceedings ofthe2020Conference onEmpirical Methods inNatural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2685–2702, 2020.
Philip Resnik. Mining the Web for Bilingual Text. In ACL, 1999. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/P99-1068 .
Hammam Riza, Michael Purwoadi, Teduh Uliniansyah, Aw Ai Ti, Sharifah Mahani Aljunied,
Luong Chi Mai, Vu Tat Thang, Nguyen Phuong Thai, Vichet Chea, Sethserey Sam, et al.
Introduction of the asian language treebank. In 2016Conference ofTheOriental Chapter
ofInternational Committee forCoordination andStandardization ofSpeechDatabases
andAssessment Techniques (O-COCOSDA), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.
Holger Schwenk. Investigations on large-scale lightly-supervised training for statistical
machine translation. In IWSLT, pages 182–189, 2008.
Holger Schwenk, Vishrav Chaudhary, Shuo Sun, Hongyu Gong, and Francisco Guzmán.
Wikimatrix: Mining 135m parallel sentences in 1620 language pairs from wikipedia. 2019a.
Holger Schwenk, Guillaume Wenzek, Sergey Edunov, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Angela Fan. CCMatrix: Mining billions of high-quality parallel sentences on the web.
arXivpreprint arXiv:1911.04944, 2019b.
Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur Parikh. Bleurt: Learning robust metrics
for text generation. In Proceedings ofthe58thAnnualMeeting oftheAssociation for
Computational Linguistics, pages 7881–7892, 2020.
Rico Sennrich and Biao Zhang. Revisiting low-resource neural machine translation: A case
study. In Proceedings ofthe57thAnnualMeeting oftheAssociation forComputational
Linguistics , pages 211–221, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1021. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P19-1021 .
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare
words with subword units. arXivpreprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Improving neural machine transla-
tion models with monolingual data. Conference oftheAssociation forComputational
Linguistics (ACL), 2016a.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Edinburgh neural machine translation
systems for wmt 16. In Proceedings oftheFirstConference onMachine Translation:
Volume2,SharedTaskPapers, pages 371–376, 2016b.
45

==== Page 46 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, Anna Currey, Ulrich Germann, Barry Haddow, Kenneth
Heaﬁeld, Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Philip Williams. The University of Edin-
burgh’s neural MT systems for WMT17. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-4739 .
Noam Shazeer, Youlong Cheng, Niki Parmar, Dustin Tran, Ashish Vaswani, Penporn
Koanantakool, Peter Hawkins, HyoukJoong Lee, Mingsheng Hong, Cliﬀ Young, et al.
Mesh-tensorﬂow: Deep learning for supercomputers. In Advances inNeuralInformation
Processing Systems, pages 10414–10423, 2018.
Jiajun Shen, Peng-Jen Chen, Matt Le, Junxian He, Jiatao Gu, Myle Ott, Michael Auli,
and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. The source-target domain mismatch problem in machine
translation. arXivpreprint arXiv:1909.13151, 2019.
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and
Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using
gpu model parallelism. arXivpreprint arXiv:1909.08053, 2019.
Aditya Siddhant, Ankur Bapna, Yuan Cao, Orhan Firat, Mia Xu Chen, Sneha Kudugunta,
Naveen Arivazhagan, and Yonghui Wu. Leveraging monolingual data with self-supervision
for multilingual neural machine translation. In Proceedings ofthe58thAnnualMeeting
oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics, pages 2827–2835, 2020.
Kathleen Siminyu, Sackey Freshia, Jade Abbott, and Vukosi Marivate. Ai4d–african language
dataset challenge. arXivpreprint arXiv:2007.11865, 2020.
Richard Sinkhorn. A relationship between arbitrary positive matrices and doubly stochastic
matrices. Theannalsofmathematical statistics, 35(2):876–879, 1964.
Richard Sinkhorn and Paul Knopp. Concerning nonnegative matrices and doubly stochastic
matrices. PaciﬁcJournalofMathematics, 21(2):343–348, 1967.
Jason R. Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova. Extracting parallel sentences from
comparable corpora using document level alignment. In NAACL, pages 403–411, 2010.
Stephanie Strassel and Jennifer Tracey. Lorelei language packs: Data, tools, and resources
for technology development in low resource languages. In Proceedings oftheTenth
International Conference onLanguage Resources andEvaluation (LREC’16) , pages 3273–
3280, 2016.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioﬀe, Jonathon Shlens, and Zbigniew
Wojna. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision. arXivpreprint
arXiv:1512.00567, 2015.
Aarne Talman, Umut Sulubacak, Raúl Vázquez, Yves Scherrer, Sami Virpioja, Alessandro
Raganato, ArviHurskainen, andJörgTiedemann. TheUniversityofHelsinkisubmissionsto
the WMT19 news translation task. In Proceedings oftheFourthConference onMachine
Translation (Volume 2:SharedTaskPapers, Day1). Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-5347 .
46

==== Page 47 ====
Beyond English-Centric MMT
Xu Tan, Jiale Chen, Di He, Yingce Xia, QIN Tao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Multilingual neural
machine translation with language clustering. In Proceedings ofthe2019Conference
onEmpirical Methods inNatural Language Processing andthe9thInternational Joint
Conference onNaturalLanguage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 962–972, 2019a.
Xu Tan, Yichong Leng, Jiale Chen, Yi Ren, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. A study of multilingual
neural machine translation. arXivpreprint arXiv:1912.11625, 2019b.
Yuqing Tang, Chau Tran, Xian Li, Peng-Jen Chen, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jiatao
Gu, and Angela Fan. Multilingual translation with extensible multilingual pretraining and
ﬁnetuning. arXivpreprint arXiv:2008.00401, 2020.
Jörg Tiedemann. Parallel data, tools and interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings oftheEighth
International Conference onLanguage Resources andEvaluation (LREC’12) , pages 2214–
2218, 2012.
Jörg Tiedemann. Emerging language spaces learned from massively multilingual corpora. In
Digitalhumanities intheNordicCountries DHN2018 , pages 188–197. CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, 2018.
Dan Tuﬁs, Radu Ion, S,tefan Daniel, Dumitrescu, and Dan S,tefănescu. Wikipedia as an smt
training corpus. In ranlp, pages 702–709, 2013.
Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. Reliable Measures for Aligning Japanese-English
News Articles and Sentences. In ACL, 2003. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P03-1010 .
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances inneural
information processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
Lucas Nunes Vieira, Minako O’Hagan, and Carol O’Sullivan. Understanding the societal
impacts of machine translation: a critical review of the literature on medical and legal use
cases.Information, Communication &Society, pages 1–18, 2020.
Xinyi Wang, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Graham Neubig. Balancing training for multilingual neural
machine translation. In Proc.ofACL, 2020.
Yining Wang, Jiajun Zhang, Feifei Zhai, Jingfang Xu, and Chengqing Zong. Three strategies
to improve one-to-many multilingual translation. In Proceedings ofthe2018Conference on
Empirical Methods inNaturalLanguage Processing , pages 2955–2960, Brussels, Belgium,
October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
D18-1326. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1326 .
Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco
Guzmán, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Ccnet: Extracting high quality monolingual
datasets from web crawl data. arXivpreprint arXiv:1911.00359, 2019.
Felix Wu, Angela Fan, Alexei Baevski, Yann N. Dauphin, and Michael Auli. Pay less attention
with lightweight and dynamic convolutions. In Proc.ofICLR, 2019.
47

==== Page 48 ====
Fan, Bhosale, Schwenk, Ma, El-Kishky, Goyal, Baines, et al
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang
Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation.
arXivpreprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
Qi Ye, Sachan Devendra, Felix Matthieu, Padmanabhan Sarguna, and Neubig Graham.
When and why are pre-trained word embeddings useful for neural machine translation. In
HLT-NAACL, 2018.
Biao Zhang, Philip Williams, IvanTitov, andRico Sennrich. Improving massively multilingual
neural machine translation and zero-shot translation. In Proceedings ofthe58thAnnual
Meeting oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics, pages 1628–1639, 2020.
Michał Ziemski, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, and Bruno Pouliquen. The United Nations
parallel corpus v1.0. In LREC, May 2016.
48

