==== Page 1 ====
1 
 Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers  (BERT ):  
A sentiment analysis odyssey  
Shivaji Alaparthi1 and Manit Mishra2 
 
The purpose of the study is to investigate the relative effectiveness of four different sentiment 
analysis techniques: (1) unsupervised lexicon -based model  using Sent WordNet; (2) traditional 
supervised machine learning model  using logistic regression; (3) supervised deep learning model  
using Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM); and, (4) advanced supervised deep learning models 
using  Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers  (BERT).  We use p ublicly 
available labeled corpora of 50,000 movie reviews originally posted on internet movie database 
(IMDB)  for analysis using Sent WordNet lexicon, logistic regression, LSTM, and BERT. The first 
three models were run on CPU based system whereas BERT was run on GPU based system . The 
sentiment classification performance was evaluated based on accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 
score.  The study puts forth two key insights: (1) relative efficacy of four highly advanced and 
widely used sentiment analysis techniques ; (2) undisputed superiority of pre -trained advanced 
supervised deep learning BERT model in sentiment analysis from text data.  This study provides 
professionals in analyt ics industry and academicians working on text analysis key insight 
regarding comparative classification performance evaluation of key sentiment analysis techniques , 
including the recently developed BERT.  This is the first research endea vor to compare the 
advanced pre -trained supervised deep learning model of BERT vis -à-vis other  sentiment analysis  
models  of LSTM, logistic regression, and Sent WordNet.  
Keywords – BERT, LSTM, Sentiment analysis, Logistic regression, Sent WordNet.  
(1) Data Scientist , CenturyLink , Bengaluru , India , E-mail id:  alaparthishivaji@gmail.com  
(2) Associate Professor , International Management Institute Bhubaneswar , India , E-mail id:  
manit.mishra@imibh.edu.in  

==== Page 2 ====
2 
 Introduction  
Data is the new oil (Yi  et al. , 2014), the most sought after raw material in 21st century (Berners -
Lee and Shadbolt, 2011). It is a bottomless container of insight for organizations as every single 
day 2.5 quintillion bytes (2.5X1018 bytes) of data gets added  (Dobre and Xhafa, 2014) . Such an 
inflow is inevitable given the fact that only Walmart collects about 2.5 petabytes (2.5X1015) of 
data regarding customer transactions every hour (McAfee  et al. , 2012).  The data deluge is only 
going to be more pronounced in future with continuous emergence of new data sources (Bradlow  
et al. , 2017). A significant portion of the data being generated is text data – structured, semi -
structured, and unstructured (Sivar ajah et al. , 2017). Online consumer reviews are a formidable 
source of such text data which have been utilized in extant research for the purpose of predicting 
consumer ratings (Buschken and Allenby, 2016) ; forecasting stock market performance  (Tirunillai 
and Tellis, 2012) ; extracting underlying dimensions of consumer satisfaction with quality 
(Tirunillai and Tellis, 2014) ; analysis and visualization of market structure (Lee and Bradlow, 
2011); generating market structure and competitive landscap e insights (Netzer  et al. , 2012); and 
even for assessing box office performance of movies (Chintagunta  et al. , 2010) . Wedel and Kannan 
(2016, p. 107) underscore the significance of text data for future research in the area of marketing 
when they emphasize that “models for largescale unstructured data are still in their infancy, but 
research is starting to emerge.”  
 The opportunities notwithstanding, the challenges in deriving meaning out of text data are 
also manifold. First, it is required to derive meani ng from word or sentence in the context in which 
it has been used (Buschken and Allenby, 2016).  For example, raging bull has a different meaning 
in the review of stock market as compared to a narrative about tourist attractions in Spain. Second, 
the review itself may be fuzzy and/or incoherent thereby making it difficult to infer its meaning 

==== Page 3 ====
3 
 (Archak  et al. , 2011). For example, a movie review might read, “lackluster script saved by star 
power.” Such a dichotomous statement puts a question m ark on its valence. Third , unlike survey 
data, text data is not readily available for data analysis. It requires substantial preprocessing before 
it can be subjected to statistical analysis  (Tirunillai and Tellis, 2014). An exhaustive description of 
the va rious steps involved in preprocessing of text prior to its statistical can be found in Bird  et 
al.’s (2009) Natural Language Tool Kit (NLTK) book. Given the enormity of text mining task, 
over a period of time multiple algorithms have been made available by  programming enthusiast, 
data scientists, and even leading corporate houses such as Amazon.  
 The intent of this paper is to offer a comparative analysis of the various algorithm options 
available for an important application of text analytics - sentiment  analysis. Sentiment analysis has 
been cited as one of the most popular applications of text analytics (Sarkar, 2019). Pang and Lee 
(2008, p. 10), in one of the early attempts to summarize research on consumer sentiments, have 
defined sentiment analysis as a n “automatic analysis of evaluative text and tracking of the 
predictive judgments therein.”  A more elaborate definition has been given by Liu and Zhang 
(2012 , p. 415 ) who define sentiment analysis as “the computational study of people’s opinions, 
appraisals, attitudes, and emotions toward entities, individuals, issues, events, topics, and their 
attributes.”  Assessment of stakeholder sentiments has always been an important parameter for an 
organization’s sustenance and excellence. It is in complete alignment with the very foundational 
concepts of marketing such as market orientation (Kohli and Jaworski, 1990) . The significance of 
sentiment analysis has increased manifold since the availability of social media platforms to vent 
opinions (Liu and Zhang , 2012). However, keeping pace with the explosion in availability of text 
reflecting sentiments, multiple tools and techniques have inundated the analytics ecosystem. 
Therefore, in order to offer analytics enthusiasts a one -stop source on relative efficacy  of some of 

==== Page 4 ====
4 
 the prominent techniques of sentiment analysis , this study derives sentiments from a large corpus 
of publicly available movie reviews using four of the more widely used techniques: (1) 
unsupervised lexicon -based models  e.g., Sent WordNet ; (2) traditional supervised machine 
learning models  e.g., logistic regression ; (3) supervised deep learning models e.g., Long Short -
Term Memory (LSTM ); and, (4) advanced supervised deep learning models e.g., Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transforme rs (BERT) . Based on sentiment analysis of this corpus 
of big data, we present output quality ratings of the  above -mentioned  techniques of assessing 
sentiments from text.  To the best of our knowledge, no single comprehensive repository of 
information exists  today which covers all the techniques mentioned above. Therefore, the paper 
would serve as a source of reference for relative eff ectiveness of some of the most advanced 
techniques of conducting sentiment analysis . 
Sentiment analysis techniques: A review  
Consumer sentiments are a precursor to consumer intentions and decisions. The sentiments are 
hidden in the text uploaded onto various social media platforms by consumers in the form of 
reviews. This unstructured text data can be analyzed using senti ment analysis techniques to derive 
a qualitative as well as quantitative interpretation of the underlying sentiments. While a qualitative 
interpretation entails assessment on a positive to negative scale, a quantitative interpretation 
facilitates calculati on of sentiment polarity and subjectivity vis -à-vis objectivity proportions. The 
primary target of analysis is the body of text comprising of all reviews called as corpora. The 
corpora is made of a large number of individual text sentences or paragraphs ca lled as documents. 
It is the analysis of corpora made up of documents that leads to derivation of sentiments. Over a 
period of time there has been a gradual increase in the number and types of approaches for 
undertaking sentiment analysis.  

==== Page 5 ====
5 
 Preprocessing text data  
Text data is largely unstructured (Sivarajah  et al. , 2017) and therefore, requires substantial 
preprocessing before sentiment analysis can be carried out (Tirunillai and Tellis, 2014). There are 
a number of good sources to understan d preprocessing (e.g., Aggarwal and Zhai, 2012; Sarkar, 
2019) so we would only touch upon the major steps before moving on to the objective of this study 
– comparison of sentiment analysis techniques . The pre -processing of text data prior to conducting 
sentiment analysis involves following steps:  
1. Removing HTML tags from the text  e.g. “<”  
2. Removing accented characters e.g. “ύ”  
3. Expanding the contracted words e.g. converting “haven’t” to “have not”  
4. Removing special characters e.g. “@” and “#”  
5. Sepa rating text into sentences based on presence of punctuations and thereafter, removing 
the punctuations e.g. “,” or “.”  
6. Lemmatization to arrive at the root word e.g. the root word for “succeeding” and 
“successful” would be “success”  
7. Replacing capital letter s with lower -case letters e.g. “Positive” replaced by “positive”  
8. Removing rare words that appear in less than 1% of the documents in any corpus  
9. Removing stop words that do not contribute to the meaning e.g. “the”      
 The reviews that form part of the cor pus are generated by individuals from different 
cultures having different ways of communicating in the same language and with no incentive to 
be grammatically correct. Therefore, preprocessing of the text is essential to bring some degree of 
standardizatio n to the corpus and make it amenable to further analysis.  
 

==== Page 6 ====
6 
 Unsupervised lexicon -based model : Sent WordNet  
These set of techniques are unsupervised and based on a lexicon or dictionary  created and curated 
specifically for sentiment analysis. The lexicons contain information on words ; related positive or 
negative sentiment ; polarity as described by magnitude of positivity or negativity in the words ; 
parts of speech (POS) tag; subjectivit y classification in terms of strong, weak, or neutral etc.  
Sentiment analysis using this technique involves associating  the words in the corpus with the 
corresponding information provided in the lexicon along with contextual information in order to 
derive sentiment scores of documents constituting the corpora. Some of the popular lexicons in 
use are TextBlob, AFINN, VADER , and Sent WordNet . 
Supervised machine learning model : Logistic regression  
The traditional supervised machine learning predictive algorith m can also be  used to train the 
model into classifying sentiments . The sentiments undergo a classification into positive or negative 
based on the review content.  This is followed by model validation. One of the more popular 
technique for undertaking such a binary classification is logistic regression  (logit) . The logit model 
is based on the theory of utility maximization incorporating a random factor (Nijkamp  et al., 1992). 
Sentiment  analysis using logistic regression is based on bag of words model wherein each 
document in the corpora is considered to be a bag of unstructured words irrespective of its context , 
order, or grammar . This results i s a term-document matrix wherein each document is a row and 
each unique word is a distinct column. Thus, a corpus comprising of d documents (reviews)  and 
t unique terms (words) results in a ( d X t) matrix  which is subjected to logistic regression. The 
logit model calculates the odds of a document having a positive sentiment and based on its 
comparison with a cut -off value, is classified as either a positive or a negative sentiment. The logit 

==== Page 7 ====
7 
 model uses a sigmoidal function and takes values between -∞ to +∞. It is a useful supervised 
machine learning algorithm because it doesn’t have to assume linearity.  
Supervised deep learning model : LSTM  
The supervised deep learning models based on neural network architecture are being increasingly 
used to solve complicated problems and provide intelligent solutions (Metaxiotis and Psarras, 
2004).  Its nonparametric nature, capability  to train and build complex non -linear model s, and its 
ability to handle missing data makes it a sought after technique (Venugopal and Baets, 1994).  The 
most widely used neural network algorithm is the one based on feed forward mechanism and 
backward propagation of error which facilitates analysis ov er input, output, and multiple hidden 
layers (Shmueli  et al. , 2007). A variant of the deep neural network is the long short -term memory  
(LSTM ) displaying a recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture which has applications in 
sentiment analysis of text dat a. In recent times, the standard LSTM architecture networks “have 
become the state -of-the-art models for a variety of machine learning problems” (Greff  et al. , 2016, 
p. 2222). LSTM units generally comprise of a cell, an input gate, an output gate, and a forget gate.  
LSTMs are bidirectional networks that have been found to be more accurate in comparison to the 
traditional multilayer perceptrons as well as standard RNNs (Graves and Schmidhuber, 2005).  
Advanced supervised deep learning model:  BERT  
Sentiment  analysis from text data has undergone a colossal transformation with the arrival of pre -
trained transformer models such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
(BERT). Developed by Devlin  et al.  (2018) of Google AI Language , BERT is “designed to pretrain 
deep bidirectional representations from unlabeled text by jointly conditioning on both left and right 
context in all layers.” The state -of-the-art BERT is pre -trained on two unsupervised tasks – masked 
language modeling and next sentence prediction , thus making it an effective technique for 

==== Page 8 ====
8 
 sentiment classification  (Trivedi 2019, January 27).  BERT is an advanced as well as more realistic 
technique since it accepts the fact that a document can simultaneou sly belong to multiple classes.  
BERT is known to have achieved exceptional results in eleven natural language understanding 
(NLU) tasks (Devlin  et al. , 2018).  The credibility of BERT can be inferred from the fact that 
Google uses it in its search algorithm s (Nayak, 2019) and is currently applicable to over 70 
different languages (Roger, 2019).  
Analysis and interpretation  
Data  
The study uses publicly available movie review data from internet movie database (IMDB).  The 
dataset was first introduced and curated by Maas  et al.  (2011) in their study on vector -based 
approaches to sentiment classification.  This dataset consists of 50,000 movie reviews such that 
each movie accounts for 30 or lesser number of reviews.  Each review has been labeled a priori  as 
having either positive or negative sentiment.  There are an equal number of positive and negative 
sentiment reviews in the dataset. The reviews have a sentiment polarity score of either ≤4 or ≥7 on 
a polarity index of 10. There are no neutral reviews  in the dataset . The dataset was downloaded 
from http://ai.stanford.edu/~amaas/data/sentiment/ .  
Analysis  
For the purpose of this study, the outputs for the techniques unsupervised lexicon based model 
using Sent WordNet, unsupervised machine lear ning model using logistic regression, and 
supervised deep learning model using LSTM , were derived based on a partitioning of 60% training 
(30,000 reviews) and 40% validation (20,000 reviews) data. However, for the advanced supervised 
deep learning model using BERT, partitioning was done into 35% training (17,500 reviews), 15% 
validation (7,500 reviews), and 50% test (25,000 reviews) data. The structure of partitioning for 

==== Page 9 ====
9 
 BERT was altered due to two reasons: (1) pos sibility of overfitting since BERT is a pre -trained 
model; and, (2) requirement of greater computational power for a larger training data. The 
classification performance of the models is assessed based on their accuracy, precision, recall , and 
F1 score obt ained for sentiment classification of validation data  or test data, in case of BERT .  
 The accuracy or hit -ratio of the model  is the total number of documents correctly classified. 
It provides the overall predictive accuracy of the model in classifying the  reviews  into positive and 
negative sentiments . The precision of the model is determined from the ratio of correctly classified 
documents out of all the documents that have been predicted  as having a positive sentiment. It 
suggests success in classification within the predicted reviews belonging to important class – 
reviews having  a positive sentiment. The recall or sensitivity is the true positive ratio. It indicates 
the proportion of actual documents belonging to the important clas s that have been correctly 
classified.  Recall  is a measure of the robustness of the model because it reflects the ability of the 
model to correctly predict the reviews having a positive sentiment. While recall  gives the ability 
of the model to correctly pr edict the documents that actually belong to important class, precision 
portrays the model’s success rate out of all documents predicted to belong to the important class – 
in our case, the positive sentiment class. The F1 score of the model provides a balan ce between 
the two and is an amalgamation of both these measures. A high F1 score indicates a model that not 
only has high predictive ability of the important class but also has high success rate within the 
predictions of the important class. For all four measures of model robustness, a value closer to 1 
is considered as better. The F1 score is obtained using the formula:  
F1 score = 2 * ((precision * recall)/(precision + recall) ) 
  The classification performance of all the four techniques on the four output measures was 
derived based on their ability to classify the sentiments expressed in the reviews in validation data. 

==== Page 10 ====
10 
 The sentiment analysis of the corpora based on Sent WordNet, lo gistic regression, and LSTM was 
carried out on a central processing unit (CPU) based system whereas BERT was executed on a 
graphics processing unit (GPU) based system. The run time using BERT for 5 epochs was 100 
minutes. The derived classification perform ance outputs are given in Table 1.  
Table 1.  Classification performance outputs  
Classification  
technique  Model  Accuracy  Precision  Recall  F1 Score  
Unsupervised lexicon 
based model  Sent WordNet  0.6308  0.6747  0.6308  0.6064  
Supervised machine 
learning model  Logistic regression  0.8941  0.8975  0.8941  0.8941  
Supervised deep 
learning model  LSTM  0.8675  0.8680  0.8675  0.8675  
Advanced supervised 
deep learning model  BERT  0.9231  0.9235  0.9231  0.9231  
 
Discussion and conclusion  
The study examined the different sentiment analysis techniques on a publicly available labeled 
dataset of 50,000 IMDB movie reviews. Sentiment classification was carried out using 
unsupervised lexicon based model using Sent WordNet, supervised machine lear ning model using 
logistic regression, supervised deep learning model using LSTM, and advanced supervised deep 
learning model using pre -trained BERT. A comparative analysis of the four models reveal 
undisputed superiority of the pre -trained BERT model in se ntiment classification. BERT is capable 
of achieving “deep bidirectional representations from unlabeled text by jointly conditioning on 
both left and right context in all layers” (Devlin  et al. , 2018). This is unlike other language 
representation models. T hat explains its unmatched superiority in sentiment classification in our 
study. Our findings also stand substantiated by BERT’s 80.5% score on general language 
understanding evaluation (GLUE) benchmark  (Wang  et al. , 2018). Poor performance of LSTM in 

==== Page 11 ====
11 
 comp arison to logistic regression could be due to the fact that LSTM’s key strength lies in dealing 
with vanishing gradient problems (Sundermeyer  et al. , 2012) . Therefore, it is more suitable for 
cases having a sequence of data points e.g., videos rather than single data points e.g., text or 
images. The performance of unsupervised lexicon based model using the Sent WordNet lexicon is 
comparatively inferior to other models probably due to its unsupervised predictive algorithm.  
 The study sheds new light on comp arative classification performance evaluation of various 
sentiment analysis techniques on a labeled corpora. This is meant to aid analytics professionals 
pursuing sentiment analysis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first research endeavor to 
comp are the advanced pre -trained supervised deep learning model of BERT vis -à-vis other 
models. Even as the study broadens the horizon of work on sentiment analysis techniques, a few 
limitations need to taken note of. First, BERT demands strong computational c apabilities. A 
greater computational power could have allowed us to train the model on a larger data with more 
epochs leading to an even stronger performance by the model. Second, sentiment analysis using 
both labeled as well unlabeled data could have thro wn interesting results. Having said that, we 
have endeavored to provide a platform for future studies on sentiment analysis model comparison 
studies. The insight generated study can be used by academicians and industry experts executing 
sentiment analysis for improved sentiment classification using a proven superior technique.  
Reference  
Aggarwal, C.C. and Zhai, C. (Eds.), (2012),  Mining Text Data . Springer Science & Business 
Media, NY.  
Archak, N., Ghose, A. and Ipeirotis, P.G. (2011), “Deriving the pricing power of product features 
by mining consumer reviews”,  Management Science , Vol. 57 No. 8, pp. 1485 -1509.  

==== Page 12 ====
12 
 Berners -Lee, T., and Shadbolt, N. (2011), “There's gold to be mined from all our data”, available 
at: http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/col umnists/article3272618.ece (accessed 21 November 
2019).  
Bird, S., Loper, E. and Klein, E. (2009), Natural Language Toolkit, available at: 
http://www.nltk.org/book_1ed.  
Bradlow, E.T., Gangwar, M., Kopalle, P. and Voleti, S. (2017), “The role of big data and  predictive 
analytics in retailing,”  Journal of Retailing , Vol. 93 No. 1, pp.79 -95. 
Büschken, J. and Allenby, G.M. (2016), “Sentence -based text analysis for customer 
reviews”,  Marketing Science , Vol. 35 No. 6, pp. 953 -975. 
Chintagunta, P.K., Gopinath, S. a nd Venkataraman, S. (2010), “The effects of online user reviews 
on movie box office performance: Accounting for sequential rollout and aggregation across local 
markets”,  Marketing Science , Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 944 -957. 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K. and To utanova, K. (2018), “BERT: Pre -training of deep 
bidirectional transformers for language understanding”, available 
at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805  (accessed 07 January 2020).  
Dobre, C. and Xhafa, F. (2014), “Intelligent services for big data science”,  Future Generation 
Computer Systems , Vol. 37, pp.267 -281. 
Graves, A. and Schmidhuber, J. (2005), “Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional 
LSTM and other neural network architectures”,  Neural N etworks , Vol. 18 No. 5 -6, pp. 602 -610. 
Greff, K., Srivastava, R.K., Koutník, J., Steunebrink, B.R. and Schmidhuber, J. (2016), “LSTM: 
A search space odyssey”,  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , Vol. 28 
No. 10, pp.2222 -2232.  

==== Page 13 ====
13 
 Kohli, A .K. and Jaworski, B.J. (1990), “Market orientation: the construct, research propositions, 
and managerial implications”,  Journal of Marketing , Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 1 -18. 
Lee, T.Y. and Bradlow, E.T. (2011), “Automated marketing research using online customer 
reviews”,  Journal of Marketing Research , Vol. 48 No. 5, pp. 881 -894. 
Liu, B. and Zhang, L. (2012), “A survey of opinion mining and sentiment analysis”, in Aggarwal, 
C.C. and Zhai, C.X. (Eds.), Mining Text Data, Springer Science & Business Media, NY,  pp. 415 -
463. 
Maas, A.L., Daly, R.E., Pham, P.T., Huang, D., Ng, A.Y. and Potts, C. (2011), “Learning word 
vectors for sentiment analysis”, in  Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the association for 
computational linguistics: Human language technologies -volume 1 , Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Portland, Oregon, pp. 142 -150. 
McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., Davenport, T.H., Patil, D.J. and Barton, D. (2012), “Big data: the 
management revolution”,  Harvard Business Review , Vol. 90 No. 10, pp.60 -68. 
Meta xiotis, K. and Psarras, J. (2004), “The contribution of neural networks and genetic algorithms 
to business decision support”,  Management Decision , Vol. 42 No. 2, pp. 229 -242. 
Nayak, P. (2019), “Understanding searches better than ever before”, available at:  
https://www.blog.google/products/search/search -language -understanding -bert/ (accessed 05 
January 2020).  
Netzer, O., Feldman, R., Goldenberg, J. and Fresko, M. (201 2), “Mine your own business: Market -
structure surveillance through text mining”,  Marketing Science , Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 521 -543. 
Nijkamp, P., Reggiani, A. and Tritapepe, T. (1996), “Modelling inter -urban transport flows in 
Italy: A comparison between neural  network analysis and logit analysis”,  Transportation Research 
Part C: Emerging Technologies , Vol. 4 No. 6, pp. 323 -338. 

==== Page 14 ====
14 
 Pang, B. and Lee, L. (2008), “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis”, Foundations and Trends® 
in Information Retrieval , Vol. 2 No. 1–2, pp. 1 -135. 
Roger, M. (2019), “Google’s BERT rolls out worldwide”, available at: 
https://www.searchenginejournal.com/google -bert-rolls-out-worldwide/339359/  (accessed 05 
January 2020).  
Sarkar, D. (2019),  Text analytics with Python: a practitioner's guide to natural language 
processing , Apress, Bangalore.  
Shmueli, G., Patel, N.R. and Bruce, P.C. (2007),  Data mining for business intelligence: Concepts, 
techniques, and applications in Microsoft Office Excel with XLMiner , John Wiley and Sons, New 
Delhi.  
Sivarajah, U., Kamal, M.M., Irani, Z. and Weerakkody, V. (2017), “Critical analysis of Big Data 
challenges  and analytical methods”,  Journal of Business Research , Vol. 70, pp.263 -286. 
Sundermeyer, M., Schlüter, R. and Ney, H. (2012), “LSTM neural networks for language 
modeling”,  available at: https://www.isca -
speech.org/archive/archive_papers/interspeech_2012/i12_0194.pdf  (accessed 07 January 2020).  
Tirunillai, S. and Tellis, G.J. (2012), “Does chatter really matter? Dynamics of user -generated 
content and stock perf ormance”,  Marketing Science , Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 198 -215. 
Tirunillai, S. and Tellis, G.J. (2014), “Mining marketing meaning from online chatter: Strategic 
brand analysis of big data using latent dirichlet allocation”,  Journal of Marketing Research , Vol. 
51 No. 4, pp.463 -479. 
Trivedi, K. (2019), “Multi -label text classification using BERT – The mighty transformer”, 
available at: https: //medium.com/huggingface/multi -label -text-classification -using -bert-the-
mighty -transformer -69714fa3fb3d  (accessed 05 January 2020).  

==== Page 15 ====
15 
 Venugopal, V. and Baets, W. (1994), “Neural networks and statistical techniques in marketing 
research”,  Marketing Intelligen ce & Planning , Vol. 12 No. 7, pp. 30 -38. 
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O. and Bowman, S.R. (2018), “GLUE: A multi -
task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding”,  available at: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/180 4.07461  (accessed 07 January 2020).  
Wedel, M. and Kannan, P.K. (2016), “Marketing analytics for data -rich environments”,  Journal 
of Marketing , Vol. 80 No. 6, pp. 97 -121. 
Yi, X., Liu, F., Liu, J. and Jin, H. (2014), “Building a network highway for big data:  architecture 
and challenges”, IEEE Network , Vol. 28 No. 4, pp. 5 -13. 

