==== Page 1 ====
cancers
Article
Boosted EfﬁcientNet: Detection of Lymph Node Metastases in
Breast Cancer Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Jun Wang1, Qianying Liu2, Haotian Xie3
, Zhaogang Yang4,*
and Hefeng Zhou1,*
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Wang, J.; Liu, Q.; Xie, H.;
Yang, Z.; Zhou, H. Boosted
EfﬁcientNet: Detection of Lymph
Node Metastases in Breast Cancer
Using Convolutional Neural
Networks. Cancers 2021 ,13, 661.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
cancers13040661
Academic Editor: Maggie Chon
U Cheang
Received: 20 November 2020
Accepted: 3 February 2021
Published: 7 February 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Department of Informatics, King’s College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK; jun.1.wang@kcl.ac.uk
2College of Management, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China; qianying_liu@163.com
3Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; xie.908@osu.edu
4Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
*Correspondence: zhaogang.yang@utsouthwestern.edu (Z.Y.); hefeng.zhou@kcl.ac.uk (H.Z.);
Tel.: +44-7579-845285 (H.Z.)
Simple Summary: The assistance of computer image analysis that automatically identiﬁes tissue
or cell types has greatly improved histopathologic interpretation and diagnosis accuracy. In this
paper, the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been adapted to predict and classify lymph
node metastasis in breast cancer. We observe that image resolutions of lymph node metastasis
datasets in breast cancer usually are quite smaller than the designed model input resolution, which
defects the performance of the proposed model. To mitigate this problem, we propose a boosted
CNN architecture and a novel data augmentation method called Random Center Cropping (RCC).
Different from traditional image cropping methods only suitable for resolution images in large scale,
RCC not only enlarges the scale of datasets but also preserves the resolution and the center area
of images. In addition, the downsampling scale of the network is diminished to be more suitable
for small resolution images. Furthermore, we introduce attention and feature fusion mechanisms
to enhance the semantic information of image features extracted by CNN. Experiments illustrate
that our methods signiﬁcantly boost performance of fundamental CNN architectures, where the
best-performed method achieves an accuracy of 97.96% 0.03% and an Area Under the Curve (AUC)
of 99.68%0.01% in Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam) datasets, respectively.
Abstract: (1) Purpose: To improve the capability of EfﬁcientNet, including developing a cropping
method called Random Center Cropping (RCC) to retain the original image resolution and signiﬁcant
features on the images’ center area, reducing the downsampling scale of EfﬁcientNet to facilitate
the small resolution images of RPCam datasets, and integrating attention and Feature Fusion (FF)
mechanisms with EfﬁcientNet to obtain features containing rich semantic information. (2) Methods:
We adopt the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to detect and classify lymph node metastasis in
breast cancer. (3) Results: Experiments illustrate that our methods signiﬁcantly boost performance of
basic CNN architectures, where the best-performed method achieves an accuracy of 97.96% 0.03%
and an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 99.68% 0.01% on RPCam datasets, respectively. (4) Conclu-
sions: (1) To our limited knowledge, we are the only study to explore the power of EfﬁcientNet on
Metastatic Breast Cancer (MBC) classiﬁcation, and elaborate experiments are conducted to compare
the performance of EfﬁcientNet with other state-of-the-art CNN models. It might provide inspiration
for researchers who are interested in image-based diagnosis using Deep Learning (DL). (2) We
design a novel data augmentation method named RCC to promote the data enrichment of small
resolution datasets. (3) All of our four technological improvements boost the performance of the
original EfﬁcientNet.
Keywords: diagnosis; metastatic breast cancer; CNN; image classiﬁcation; feature fusion
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13040661 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers

==== Page 2 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 2 of 14
1. Introduction
Even though considerable advances have been made in understanding cancers and
implementing the diagnostic and therapeutic methods, breast cancer is the most com-
mon malignant cancer diagnosed globally and is the secondary leading cause of cancer-
associated death in women [ 1–3]. Metastatic Breast Cancers (MBCs), the main cause of
death from incurable breast cancer, spreads from local invasion of peripheral tissue to
lymphatic and blood vessels and ends in distant organs [ 4–6]. It is estimated that 10 to
50% of patients experience metastases eventually, despite being diagnosed with regular
breast cancer at the beginning [ 7]. Moreover, because of the primary tumor subtype, the
metastasis rate and site are heterogeneities [ 8]. Thus, prognosis, accurate diagnosis, and
treatment for MBCs remain challenging. For MBC diagnosis, one of the most important
tasks is the staging of BC that counts the recognition of Axillary Lymph Node (ALN)
metastases, which is detectable among most node-positive sufferers using Sentinel Lymph
Node (SLN) biopsies [ 9,10]. Assessing microscopy images from SLNs are conventional
techniques for evaluating ALNs. However, they require on-site pathologists to investigate
samples, which is time-consuming, laborious, and less reliable due to a certain degree of
subjectivity, particularly in cases that contain small lesions or in which the lymph nodes
are negative for cancer [11].
Consequently, developing digital pathology methods to assist in microscopic diagnosis
has evolved signiﬁcantly during the last decade [ 12,13]. Advanced scanning technology,
cost reduction, quality of spatial images, and magniﬁcation have made full digitalization
feasible for evaluating histopathologic tissues [ 14]. Multiple advantages appear with digital
pathology technology development, which include online consultation and case analysis,
thus advancing the availability of samples and waiving on-site experts. However, manual
inspection is also necessary, and the potential inconsistent diagnosis decisions may affect
the accuracy of diagnosis. In addition, hospitals are often short of advanced equipment
and pathologists to support digital pathology. It is reported that presumptive treatment
phenomena may exist widely among developing countries due to the lack of well-trained
pathologists and advanced equipment [ 15]. Moreover, the majority of the population often
has difﬁculty getting access to pathology and laboratory medicine services. Regarding
cancer, cardiovascular disease, and bone generation as examples, few communities can get
the pathology and laboratory medicine treatment [16–21].
To better facilitate digital pathology and alleviate the above mentioned problems, var-
ious analytic approaches have been proposed (e.g., deep learning, machine learning, and
some speciﬁc software) to strengthen the accuracy and sensitivity of metastatic cancer de-
tection [ 22–26]. With excellent robust ability to extract features in images, a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) becomes the most successful deep learning-based method in the
Computer Vision (CV) ﬁeld. It has been widely used in diseases diagnosed with microscopy
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) [ 27–30]. CNN automatically learns image features from multiple
dimensions in a large image dataset, which is applied to identify or classify structures and
is therefore applicable in multiple automated image-recognition biomedical areas [ 31,32].
CNN-based cancer detection has proved to be a convenient method to classify tumors from
other cells or tissues and has demonstrated satisfactory results [ 33–36]. EfﬁcientNet is one
of the most potent CNN architectures. It utilizes a compound scaling method to enlarge
the network depth, width, and resolution, obtaining state-of-the-art capacity in various
benchmark datasets while requiring fewer computation resources than other models [ 37].
Hence, the EfﬁcientNet is a suitable model, which may provide signiﬁcant medical image
classiﬁcation potentials, although there is a substantial difference between medical images
and traditional images. However, less attention has been paid to the abilities of EfﬁcientNet
in medical images, making motivation for us to conduct this work.
One core problem defecting the performance of these CNN-based models in medical
imaging is the image resolution disparity. State-of-the-art CNN models normally are
designed for large resolution images (e.g., 500 500 or larger), but the image resolution of
the lymph node metastasis datasets in breast cancer is usually quite smaller (e.g., 96 96

==== Page 3 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 3 of 14
If we follow the same CNN structure designed for large resolution images to process the
small resolution medical images, the ﬁnal extracted features could be too abstractive to
classify. In addition, before sending training images to models, the data augmentation
method cropping is utilized to uniform input resolution (e.g., 224 224) and enrich the
dataset. The performance of Deep Learning (DL) models relies heavily on the scale and
quality of training datasets since a large dataset allows researchers to train deeper networks
and improves the generalization ability of models, thus enhancing the performance of DL
methods. However, traditional cropping methods, such as center cropping and random
cropping, cannot be simply applied since they will further reduce the image size. Moreover,
the discriminative features to detect the existence of cancer cells usually concentrate on the
center areas of images on some datasets, and traditional cropping methods may lead to the
loss and incompleteness of these informative areas.
To cope with the aforementioned problems, we propose three strategies to improve
the capability of EfﬁcientNet, including developing a cropping method called Random
Center Cropping (RCC) to retain the original image resolution and discriminative features
on the center area of images, reducing the downsampling scale of EfﬁcientNet to facilitate
the small resolution images of Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam) datasets, and integrat-
ing the attention and FF mechanisms with EfﬁcientNet to obtain features containing rich
semantic information. This work has three main contributions: (1) To our limited knowl-
edge, we are the ﬁrst study to explore the power of EfﬁcientNet on MBC classiﬁcation,
and elaborate experiments are conducted to compare the performance of EfﬁcientNet
with other state-of-the-art CNN models, which might inspire those who are interested in
image-based diagnosis using Deep Learning (DL); (2) A new data augmentation method,
RCC, is investigated to promote the data enrichment of datasets with small resolution;
(3) These four technical improvements noticeably advance the performance of the original
EfﬁcientNet. The best accuracy and Area Under the Curve (AUC) achieve 97.96% 0.03%
and 99.68%0.01%, respectively, conﬁrming the applicability of utilizing CNN-based
methods for MBC diagnosis.
2. Results
2.1. Summary of Methods
Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam) was used as the benchmark dataset in our study to
verify the performance of our proposed methods for detecting BC’s lymph node metastases.
We utilized the original EfﬁcientNet-B3 as the baseline binary classiﬁer to implement our
ideas. Firstly, the training and testing performances of boosted EfﬁcientNet were eval-
uated and compared with two state-of-the-art backbone networks called ResNet50 and
DenseNet121 [ 38] and the baseline model. To investigate the capability of each strategy
(Random Center Cropping, Reduce the Downsampling Scale, Feature Fusion, and Atten-
tion) adopted in the boosted EfficientNet, ablation studies were conducted to explore the
performance of the baseline network combining with a single strategy and multiple strategies.
2.2. The Performance of Boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3
As illustrated in Table 1 and Figure 1, the basic EfﬁcientNet outperforms the boosted-
EfﬁcientNet-B3 on the training set both on the Accuracy (ACC) and AUC, while a different
pattern can be seen when applying them on the testing set. The contradictory trend is
because the basic EfﬁcientNet overﬁts the training set, while the boosted-EfﬁcientNet-B3
mitigates overﬁtting problems since RCC enables the algorithm to crop images randomly,
thus improving the diversity of training images. Although enhancing the performance
of a well-performing model is of great difﬁculty, the boosted-EfﬁcientNet-B3 signiﬁcantly
improves the ACC from 97.01% 0.03% to 97.96%0.03% and noticeably boosts AUC
from 99.24%0.01% to 99.68%0.01% compared with the basic EfﬁcientNet-B3. Further-
more, more than a 1% increase can be seen in the Sensitivity (SEN), Speciﬁcity (SPE), and
F1-Measure (F).

==== Page 4 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 4 of 14
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  4 of 14 
 
 from 99.24% ± 0.01% to 99.68% ± 0.01% compared with the basic EfficientNet-B3. Further-
more, more than a 1% increase can be seen in  the Sensitivity (SEN), Specificity (SPE), and 
F1-Measure (F). 
Similar patterns of comparison can be found when comparing EfficientNet-B3 to 
other CNN architectures. Notably, ResNet50 and DenseNet121 suffer from the overfitting 
problem severely. EfficientNet-B3 obtains better performance than ResNet50 and Dense-
Net121 for all indicators on the testing data set while using fewer parameters and compu-
tation resources, as shown in Figure 1. All these results confirm the capability of our meth-
ods, and we believe these methods can boost other state-of-the-art backbone networks. 
Therefore, we intend to extend the applicat ion scope of these meth ods in the future. Ab-
lation studies were conducted to illustrate the effectiveness and coupling degree of the 
four methods, which are elaborated in Section 2.3. 
 
Figure 1. The classification results (%) of different methods on the test set of the Rectified Patch Camelyon (RPCam) da-
taset. Boosted EfficientNet-B3 outperforms the other three models  in all evaluation metrics. Error bars represent standard 
deviation errors. ACC, Accura cy; AUC, Area Under the Curve; SEN, Sensitivity; SPE, Specificity; F, F1-Measure. 
Table 1. Classification results (%) of different methods for the RPCam dataset. 
 Training Test 
ACC  AUC  ACC  AUC  SEN  SPE F 
EfficientNet-B3 99.61 ± 0.02 99.99 ± 0.00 97.01 ± 0.03 99.24 ± 0.01 95.99 ± 0.09 96.61 ± 0.04 96.29 ± 0.05 
ResNet50 99.85 ± 0.02 100.00 ± 0.00 96.68 ± 0.04 99.13 ± 0.01 95.62 ± 0.05 96.18 ± 0.03 95.90 ± 0.05 
DenseNet121 99.78 ± 0.03 100.00 ± 0.00 97.05 ± 0.03 99.47 ± 0.01 96.08 ± 0.07 96.62 ± 0.04 96.35 ± 0.04 
Boosted EfficientNet-B3 98.02 ± 0.03 99.74 ± 0.01 97.96 ± 0.03 99.68 ± 0.01 97.29 ± 0.06 97.65 ± 0.04 97.47 ± 0.04 
2.3. Ablation Studies 
To specifically handle the MBC task of whic h the data resolution is small, we adopted 
four strategies, including Random Center Cropping (RCC), Reduce the Downsampling 
Scale (RDS), FF, and Attention, on the baseline model, which is also the difference between 
our work and predecessors. In this part, we conducted ablation experiments to illustrate 
the capacity of each strategy.  We utilized AUC and ACC as primary metrics to evaluate 
the performance of the model. 
The results reveal that these four key strategies contribute to the cancer detection, 
including increased generalizability and higher accuracy to the classifier models. Specifi-
cally, the inclusion of RCC augments the datasets and retains the most informative areas, 
Figure 1. The classiﬁcation results (%) of different methods on the test set of the Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam)
dataset. Boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 outperforms the other three models in all evaluation metrics. Error bars represent standard
deviation errors. ACC, Accuracy; AUC, Area Under the Curve; SEN, Sensitivity; SPE, Speciﬁcity; F, F1-Measure.
Table 1. Classiﬁcation results (%) of different methods for the RPCam dataset.
Training Test
ACC AUC ACC AUC SEN SPE F
EfﬁcientNet-B3 99.610.02 99.990.00 97.010.03 99.240.01 95.990.09 96.610.04 96.290.05
ResNet50 99.850.02 100.000.00 96.680.04 99.130.01 95.620.05 96.180.03 95.900.05
DenseNet121 99.780.03 100.000.00 97.050.03 99.470.01 96.080.07 96.620.04 96.350.04
Boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 98.020.03 99.740.01 97.960.03 99.680.01 97.290.06 97.650.04 97.470.04
Similar patterns of comparison can be found when comparing EfﬁcientNet-B3 to other
CNN architectures. Notably, ResNet50 and DenseNet121 suffer from the overﬁtting prob-
lem severely. EfﬁcientNet-B3 obtains better performance than ResNet50 and DenseNet121
for all indicators on the testing dataset while using fewer parameters and computation
resources, as shown in Figure 1. All these results conﬁrm the capability of our methods, and
we believe these methods can boost other state-of-the-art backbone networks. Therefore,
we intend to extend the application scope of these methods in the future. Ablation studies
were conducted to illustrate the effectiveness and coupling degree of the four methods,
which are elaborated in Section 2.3.
2.3. Ablation Studies
To speciﬁcally handle the MBC task of which the data resolution is small, we adopted
four strategies, including Random Center Cropping (RCC), Reduce the Downsampling
Scale (RDS), FF, and Attention, on the baseline model, which is also the difference between
our work and predecessors. In this part, we conducted ablation experiments to illustrate
the capacity of each strategy. We utilized AUC and ACC as primary metrics to evaluate the
performance of the model.
The results reveal that these four key strategies contribute to the cancer detection, in-
cluding increased generalizability and higher accuracy to the classiﬁer models. Speciﬁcally ,
the inclusion of RCC augments the datasets and retains the most informative areas, leading
to increased generalizability to unseen data. In addition, RDS improves feature repre-
sentation ability by adjusting the excessive downsampling multiple to a suitable scale.

==== Page 5 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 5 of 14
Simultaneously, FF and Attention mechanisms effectively improve the feature representa-
tion ability and increase the response of vital features.
2.3.1. The Inﬂuence of Random Center Cropping
From the ﬁrst two rows of Table 2, it can be observed that the RCC signiﬁcantly boosts
the performance of the algorithms by noticing the AUC increases from 99.24 to 99.54%, and
the ACC increases from 97.01 to 97.57% because RCC enhances the diversity of training
images and mitigates the overﬁtting problem.
Table 2. Classiﬁcation performance comparison of EfﬁcientNet with various strategies of the RPCam
testing set.
RCC RDS FF Attention ACC (%) AUC (%)
EfﬁcientNet97.01 99.24p97.57 99.54p97.36 99.43
97.55 99.57p97.63 99.63p p97.73 99.62p p p97.96 99.66p p p p97.96 99.68p p97.59 99.58p p p97.85 99.68
2.3.2. The Inﬂuence of Reducing the Downsampling Scale
As the ﬁrst and third rows of Table 2 show, modest improvements in ACC and AUC
(0.35 and 0.19%, respectively) are achieved because of the larger feature map. The image
resolution of the RPCam dataset is much lower than the designed input of the EfﬁcientNet-
B3, resulting in smaller and abstractive features, thus adversely affecting the performance.
It is worth noting that the improvement of the RDS is enhanced when being combined
with the RCC.
2.3.3. The Inﬂuence of Feature Fusion
FF combines low-level and high-level features to boost the performance of models. As
the results in Table 2 indicate, when adopting only one mechanism, the FF demonstrates
the largest AUC and the second-highest ACC increases among RCC, RDS, and FF, revealing
FF’s adaptability and effectiveness in EfﬁcientNet. The FF contributes to more remarkable
improvement to the model after utilizing RCC and RDS since ACC reaches the highest
value, and AUC comes to the second-highest among all methods.
2.3.4. The Inﬂuence of the Attention Mechanism
Combining the attention mechanism with FF is critical in our work. Utilizing the atten-
tion mechanism to enhance the response of cancerous tissues and suppress the background
can further boost the performance. From the fourth and ﬁfth rows of Table 2, it can be seen
that the attention mechanism improves the performance of original architectures both in the
ACC and AUC, conﬁrming its effectiveness. Then, we analyzed the last four rows. When
the ﬁrst three strategies were employed, adding attention increases the AUC by 0.02%, but
the ACC remains at a 97.96% value. Meanwhile, attention brings a signiﬁcant performance
improvement compared with models that only utilize RCC and FF, since ACC and AUC are
increased from 97.59 to 97.85% and from 99.58 to 99.68%, respectively. Although the model
using all methods demonstrates the same value of the AUC as the model only utilizing
RCC, RDS, and FF, all utilized models have a 0.11% ACC improvement. A possible reason
for the minor improvement between these two models is that RDS enlarges the size of the
ﬁnal feature maps, thus maintaining some low-level information, which is similar to the FF
and attention mechanism.

==== Page 6 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 6 of 14
3. Discussion
With the rapid development of computer vision technology, computer hardware, and
big data technology, image recognition based on DL has matured. Since AlexNet [ 39]
won the 2012 ImageNet competition, an increasing number of decent ConvNets have
been proposed (e.g., VGGNet [ 40], Inception [ 41], ResNet [ 42], DenseNet [ 43]), leading
to signiﬁcant advances in computer vision tasks. Deep Convolutional Neural Network
(DCNN) models can automatically learn image features, classify images in various ﬁelds,
and possess higher generalization ability than traditional Machine Learning (ML) methods,
which can distinguish different types of cells, allowing the diagnosis of other lesions. This
technology has also achieved remarkable advances in medical ﬁelds. In past decades, many
articles have been published relevant to applying the CNN method to cancer detection and
diagnosis [44–47].
CNNs have also been widely developed in MBC detection. Agarwal et al. [ 48] released
a CNN method for automated masses detection in digital mammograms, which used trans-
fer learning with three pre-trained models. In 2018, Ribli et al. proposed a Faster R-CNN
model-based method for the detection and classiﬁcation of BC masses [ 49].Furthermore ,
Shayma’a et al. used AlexNet and GoogleNet to test BC masses on the National Can-
cer Institute (NCI) and Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS) database [ 38].
Furthermore , Al-Antari et al. presented a DL method, including detection, segmentation,
and classiﬁcation of BC masses from digital X-ray mammograms [ 50]. They utilized the
CNN architecture You Only Look Once(YOLO) and obtained a 95.64% accuracy and an
AUC of 94.78% [ 51]. EfﬁcientNet, a state-of-the-art DCNN, that maintains competitive per-
formance while requiring remarkably lower computation resources in image recognition is
proposed [ 37]. Great successes could be seen by applying EfﬁcientNet in many benchmark
datasets and medical imaging classiﬁcations [ 52,53]. This work also utilizes EfﬁcientNet as
the backbone network, which is similar to some aforementioned works, but we focus on
the MBC task. There are eight types of EfﬁcientNet, from EfﬁcientNet-B0 to EfﬁcientNet-B7,
with an increasing network scale. EfﬁcientNet-B3 is selected as our backbone network
due to its superior performance over other architectures according to our experimental
results on RPCam datasets. In addition, quite differently from past works that usually use
BC masses datasets with large resolution, our work detects the lymph node metastases in
breast cancer, and the dataset resolution is small. To our limited knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst researchers to utilize EfﬁcientNet to detect lymph node metastases in BC. Therefore,
this work aims to examine and improve the capacity of EfﬁcientNet for BC detection.
This study has proposed four strategies, including RCC, Reducing Downsampling
Scale, Attention, and FF, to improve the accuracy of the boosted EfﬁcientNet on the RPCam
datasets. Discriminative features used for metastasis distinguishing are mainly focused
on the central area (32 32) in an image, so traditional cropping methods (random
cropping and center cropping) cannot be simply applied to this dataset as they may
lead to incompleteness or even loss of these essential areas. Therefore, a method named
Random Center Cropping (RCC) is investigated to ensure the integrity of the central
3232 area while selecting peripheral pixels randomly, allowing dataset enrichment.
Apart from retaining the signiﬁcant center areas, RCC maintains more pixels enabling
deeper network architectures.
Although EfﬁcientNet has demonstrated competitive functions in many tasks, we
observe a large disparity in image resolution between the designed model inputs and
RPCam datasets. Most models set their input resolution to 224 224 or larger, maintaining
a balance between performance and time complexity. The depth of the network is also
designed for adapting the input size. This setting performs well in most well-known
baseline image datasets (e.g., ImageNet [ 54], PASCAL VOC [ 55]) as their resolutions usually
are more than 1000 1000. However, the resolution of RPCam datasets is 96 96, which
is much less than the designed model inputs of 300 300. After the feature extraction,
the size of the ﬁnal feature will be 32 times smaller than the input (from 96 96 to 33).
This feature map is likely to be too abstractive and thus lose low-level features, which may

==== Page 7 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 7 of 14
adversely affect the performance of EfﬁcientNet. Hence, along with the RCC, we proposed
to reduce the downsampling scale to mitigate this problem, and the experimental results
prove our theory.
When viewing a picture, the human visual system tends to selectively focus on a
speciﬁc part of the picture while ignoring other visible information due to limited visual
information processing resources. For example, although the sky information primarily
covers Figure 2, people are readily able to capture the airplane in the image [ 55]. To simulate
this process in artiﬁcial neural networks, the attention mechanism is proposed and has
many successful applications including image caption [ 56,57], image classiﬁcation [ 58], and
object detection [ 59,60]. As previously stated, for RPCam datasets, the most informative
features are concentrated in the center area of images, making attention to this area more
critical. Hence, this project also adopts the attention mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-
and-Excitation block proposed by Hu et al. [61].
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  7 of 14 
 
 a balance between performance and time comp lexity. The depth of the network is also 
designed for adapting the input size. This setti ng performs well in most well-known base-
line image datasets (e.g., ImageNet [54], PA SCAL VOC [55]) as their resolutions usually 
are more than 1000 × 1000. However, the resolu tion of RPCam datasets is 96 ×96, which is 
much less than the designed model inputs of 300 × 300. After the feature extraction, the 
size of the final feature will be 32 times smaller than the input (from 96 × 96 to 3 × 3). This 
feature map is likely to be too abstractive and thus lose low-level features, which may 
adversely affect the performance of EfficientN et. Hence, along with the RCC, we proposed 
to reduce the downsampling scale to mitigate this problem, and the experimental results 
prove our theory. 
When viewing a picture, the human visual sy stem tends to selectively focus on a spe-
cific part of the picture while ignoring other visible information due to limited visual infor-
mation processing resources. For example, al though the sky information primarily covers 
Figure 2, people are readily able to capture the airplane in the image [55]. To simulate this 
process in artificial neural networks, the a ttention mechanism is proposed and has many 
successful applications including image caption [56,57], image classification [58], and object 
detection [59,60]. As previously stated, for RP Cam datasets, the most informative features 
are concentrated in the center area of images, making attention to this area more critical. 
Hence, this project also adopts the attent ion mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-and-
Excitation block proposed by Hu et al. [61]. 
Moreover, high-level features generated by deeper convolutional layers contain rich 
semantic information, but they usually lose de tails such as positions and colors that are 
helpful in the classification. In contrast, low-level features include more detailed infor-
mation but introduce non-specific noise. FF is a technique that combines low-level and 
high-level features and has been adopted in many image recognition tasks for perfor-
mance improvement [62]. Detail ed information is more consequential in our work since 
complex texture contours exist in the RPCam images despite their small resolution. Ac-
cordingly, we adopt the FF techniqu e to boost classification accuracy. 
The experimental results reveal that boos ted EfficientNet-B3 alleviates the problem 
of overfitting training images and outperfo rms the ResNet50, DenseNet121, and the basic 
EfficientNet-B3 for all indicators in testing da tasets. Furthermore, the results of the abla-
tion experiment indicate that these four strategies adopted are all helpful to enhance the 
performance of the classifier model, including generalization ability, accuracy, and com-
putational cost. 
There are some limitations in this work. Our main purpose was to propose a method 
to classify the lymph node metastases in BC , and we only tested the RPCam dataset. If 
multiple sources are applied for training, there are potentials to improve the model clas-
sification and generalization  performance. Additionally, we believe our model can be 
used for other biomedical diagnostic applications after a few modifications. 
Besides, we select features from the 4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks to perform feature 
fusion, but other combinations may obtain better performance. Due to the limited compu-
tation resources, we have not tried other a ttention mechanisms and feature fusion strate-
gies yet. 
 
Figure 2. Attention in the human visual  system. Although the image primarily involves the back-
ground, people are easily able to capt ure the airplane in the red rectangle. 
Figure 2. Attention in the human visual system. Although the image primarily involves the background, people are easily
able to capture the airplane in the red rectangle.
Moreover, high-level features generated by deeper convolutional layers contain rich
semantic information, but they usually lose details such as positions and colors that
are helpful in the classiﬁcation. In contrast, low-level features include more detailed
information but introduce non-speciﬁc noise. FF is a technique that combines low-level and
high-level features and has been adopted in many image recognition tasks for performance
improvement [ 62]. Detailed information is more consequential in our work since complex
texture contours exist in the RPCam images despite their small resolution. Accordingly, we
adopt the FF technique to boost classiﬁcation accuracy.
The experimental results reveal that boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 alleviates the problem
of overﬁtting training images and outperforms the ResNet50, DenseNet121, and the ba-
sic EfﬁcientNet-B3 for all indicators in testing datasets. Furthermore, the results of the
ablation experiment indicate that these four strategies adopted are all helpful to enhance
the performance of the classiﬁer model, including generalization ability, accuracy, and
computational cost.
There are some limitations in this work. Our main purpose was to propose a method
to classify the lymph node metastases in BC, and we only tested the RPCam dataset.
If multiple sources are applied for training, there are potentials to improve the model
classiﬁcation and generalization performance. Additionally, we believe our model can be
used for other biomedical diagnostic applications after a few modiﬁcations.
Besides, we select features from the 4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks to perform fea-
ture fusion, but other combinations may obtain better performance. Due to the limited
computation resources, we have not tried other attention mechanisms and feature fusion
strategies yet.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon Datasets
A Rectiﬁed Patch Camelyon (RPCam) dataset created by deleting duplicate images in
the PCam dataset [ 63] was sponsored by the Kaggle Competition. The dataset consisted of

==== Page 8 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 8 of 14
digital histopathology images of lymph node sections from breast cancer. These images
are in the size of 96 96 pixels and have 3 channels representing RGB (Red, Green, Blue)
colors, and some of which are shown in Figure 3.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  8 of 14 
 
 4. Materials and Methods 
4.1. Rectified Patch Camelyon Datasets 
A Rectified Patch Camelyon (RPCam) dataset created by deleting duplicate images 
in the PCam dataset [63] was sponsored by th e Kaggle Competition. The dataset consisted 
of digital histopathology imag es of lymph node sections from breast cancer. These images 
are in the size of 96 × 96 pixels and have 3 channels representing RGB (Red, Green, Blue) 
colors, and some of which are shown in Figure 3. 
More importantly, these images are associat ed with a binary label for the positive (1) 
or negative (0) of breast cancer metastasis. In  addition, the potential pathological features 
for classifying the cancerous tissues are in the center area with 32 × 32-pixel in size, as 
shown in the red dashed square of Figure 3. The RPCam data set consists of positive (1) 
and negative samples (0) with unbalanced proportions; 130,908 images in the positive class and 89,117 in the negative one. 
 
Figure 3. Lymph node sections extracted from digital histopathological microscopic scans. The significant features deter-
mine the cancer cells are in the center ar ea (32 × 32). Red dash lines define the center region in the normal samples. Yellow 
dash lines define the center region in the tumor samples.  
4.2. Random Center Cropping 
We denote I ∈ℝଽ଺×ଽ଺×ଷ as a training image in the RPCam dataset. As Figure 4 illus-
trates, RCC first enlarges image I  by padding 8 pixels around the images. The padded 
images 𝐼௣௔ௗ =𝑃 𝑎 𝑑 𝑑 𝑖 𝑛 𝑔 (𝐼, 8),𝐼௣௔ௗ ∈ℝଵଵଶ×ଵଵଶ×ଷ have random cropping performed to en-
rich the datasets. The resolu tion of the cropped image 𝐼௖௥௢௣ = 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑝൫𝐼 ௣௔ௗ,9 6×
96൯, 𝐼 ௖௥௢௣ ∈ℝଽ଺×ଽ଺×ଷ returns to the original size. Eventually, these 𝐼௖௥௢௣ images are fed 
as inputs into the CNN models to perform feature extraction and cancer detection. Despite 
enriching the dataset and improving the generalization ability of models, RCC guarantees the integrity of the center 32 × 32  areas in each 𝐼
௖௥௢௣ in the training set. As mentioned in 
Section 4.1, the potential pathological features for classifying the cancerous tissues are in 
the center area with 32 × 32 size. Hence, re taining the integrity of these areas may contrib-
ute positively to the models’ capability since training images contain informative patches rather than background noises. 
 
Figure 4. The workflow of the Random Center Cropping (RCC). ( a) is the original training im age. Images are first padded 
with eight pixels from four directions ( left, right , up, down ) to create a 112 × 112 resolution as shown in ( b). (c) demon-
strates the process that Random cropping is then performed on these modified imag es to restore a 96 × 96 resolution image 
(d). Particular center areas are shown in the red dashed  rectangular and retained after the cropping process.  
Figure 3. Lymph node sections extracted from digital histopathological microscopic scans. The signiﬁcant features determine
the cancer cells are in the center area (32 32). Red dash lines deﬁne the center region in the normal samples. Yellow dash
lines deﬁne the center region in the tumor samples.
More importantly, these images are associated with a binary label for the positive (1)
or negative (0) of breast cancer metastasis. In addition, the potential pathological features
for classifying the cancerous tissues are in the center area with 32 32-pixel in size, as
shown in the red dashed square of Figure 3. The RPCam data set consists of positive (1)
and negative samples (0) with unbalanced proportions; 130,908 images in the positive class
and 89,117 in the negative one.
4.2. Random Center Cropping
We denote I2R96963as a training image in the RPCam dataset. As Figure 4
illustrates, RCC ﬁrst enlarges image I by padding 8 pixels around the images. The padded
images Ipad=Padding (I, 8),Ipad2R1121123have random cropping performed to enrich
the datasets. The resolution of the cropped image Icrop =RandomCrop
Ipad, 9696
,
Icrop2R96963returns to the original size. Eventually, these Icropimages are fed as
inputs into the CNN models to perform feature extraction and cancer detection. Despite
enriching the dataset and improving the generalization ability of models, RCC guarantees
the integrity of the center 32 32 areas in each Icropin the training set. As mentioned
in Section 4.1, the potential pathological features for classifying the cancerous tissues are
in the center area with 32 32 size. Hence, retaining the integrity of these areas may
contribute positively to the models’ capability since training images contain informative
patches rather than background noises.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  8 of 14 
 
 4. Materials and Methods 
4.1. Rectified Patch Camelyon Datasets 
A Rectified Patch Camelyon (RPCam) dataset created by deleting duplicate images 
in the PCam dataset [63] was sponsored by th e Kaggle Competition. The dataset consisted 
of digital histopathology imag es of lymph node sections from breast cancer. These images 
are in the size of 96 × 96 pixels and have 3 channels representing RGB (Red, Green, Blue) 
colors, and some of which are shown in Figure 3. 
More importantly, these images are associat ed with a binary label for the positive (1) 
or negative (0) of breast cancer metastasis. In  addition, the potential pathological features 
for classifying the cancerous tissues are in the center area with 32 × 32-pixel in size, as 
shown in the red dashed square of Figure 3. The RPCam data set consists of positive (1) 
and negative samples (0) with unbalanced proportions; 130,908 images in the positive class and 89,117 in the negative one. 
 
Figure 3. Lymph node sections extracted from digital histopathological microscopic scans. The significant features deter-
mine the cancer cells are in the center ar ea (32 × 32). Red dash lines define the center region in the normal samples. Yellow 
dash lines define the center region in the tumor samples.  
4.2. Random Center Cropping 
We denote I ∈ℝଽ଺×ଽ଺×ଷ as a training image in the RPCam dataset. As Figure 4 illus-
trates, RCC first enlarges image I  by padding 8 pixels around the images. The padded 
images 𝐼௣௔ௗ =𝑃 𝑎 𝑑 𝑑 𝑖 𝑛 𝑔 (𝐼, 8),𝐼௣௔ௗ ∈ℝଵଵଶ×ଵଵଶ×ଷ have random cropping performed to en-
rich the datasets. The resolu tion of the cropped image 𝐼௖௥௢௣ = 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑝൫𝐼 ௣௔ௗ,9 6×
96൯, 𝐼 ௖௥௢௣ ∈ℝଽ଺×ଽ଺×ଷ returns to the original size. Eventually, these 𝐼௖௥௢௣ images are fed 
as inputs into the CNN models to perform feature extraction and cancer detection. Despite 
enriching the dataset and improving the generalization ability of models, RCC guarantees the integrity of the center 32 × 32  areas in each 𝐼
௖௥௢௣ in the training set. As mentioned in 
Section 4.1, the potential pathological features for classifying the cancerous tissues are in 
the center area with 32 × 32 size. Hence, re taining the integrity of these areas may contrib-
ute positively to the models’ capability since training images contain informative patches rather than background noises. 
 
Figure 4. The workflow of the Random Center Cropping (RCC). ( a) is the original training im age. Images are first padded 
with eight pixels from four directions ( left, right , up, down ) to create a 112 × 112 resolution as shown in ( b). (c) demon-
strates the process that Random cropping is then performed on these modified imag es to restore a 96 × 96 resolution image 
(d). Particular center areas are shown in the red dashed  rectangular and retained after the cropping process.  
Figure 4. The workﬂow of the Random Center Cropping (RCC). ( a) is the original training image. Images are ﬁrst padded
with eight pixels from four directions ( left,right ,up,down ) to create a 112112 resolution as shown in ( b). (c) demonstrates
the process that Random cropping is then performed on these modiﬁed images to restore a 96 96 resolution image ( d).
Particular center areas are shown in the red dashed rectangular and retained after the cropping process.

==== Page 9 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 9 of 14
4.3. Boosted EfﬁcientNet
The architecture of boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 is shown in Figure 5. The main building
block is MBConv [ 64,65]. The components in red dashed rectangles are different from
the original EfﬁcientNet-B3. Images are ﬁrst sent to some blocks containing multiple
convolutional layers to extract image features. Then, these features are weighted by the
attention mechanism to improve the response of features contributing to classiﬁcation.
Next, the FF mechanism is utilized, enabling features to retain some low-level information.
Consequently, images are classiﬁed according to those fused features.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  9 of 14 
 
 4.3. Boosted EfficientNet  
The architecture of boosted EfficientNet-B3 is shown in Figure 5. The main building 
block is MBConv [64,65]. The components in red dashed rectangles are different from the 
original EfficientNet-B3. Images are first sent to some blocks containing multiple convo-lutional layers to extract image features. Then , these features are weighted by the attention 
mechanism to improve the response of features  contributing to classification. Next, the FF 
mechanism is utilized, enabling features to retain some low-level information. Conse-
quently, images are classified according to those fused features. 
 
Figure 5. The architecture of boosted-EfficientN et-B3. EfficientNet first extracts im age features through its convolutional 
layers. The attention mechanism is then utilized to reweight fe atures, increasing the activation of significant parts. Next, 
we perform FF on the outputs of several convolutional layers . Subsequently, images are clas sified based on those fused 
features. Details of these methods are described in the following sections. 
4.4. Reduce the Downsampling Scale 
To mitigate the problem mentioned in the discussion, we adjusted the downsampling 
multiple in EfficientNet. Our idea is implemented by modifying the stride of the convo-
lution kernel of EfficientNet . To select the best-performed downsampling scale, multiple 
and elaborate experiments were conducted on the downsampling scale {2, 4, 6, 8, 16}, and Strategy 16 outperforms other settings. The si ze of the feature map in the best-performing 
downsampling scale (16) was 6 × 6, which is one times larger than the original downsam-
pling multiple (32). The change of the downsampling scale from 32 to 16 was implemented 
by modifying the stride of the first convolutio n layer from two to one, as shown in the red 
dashed squares on the left half of Figure 5. 
4.5. Attention Mechanism 
As an example for the attention mechanism, it can be seen from Figure 6 that the 
response to the background is large, since most parts of the image consist of the back-
ground. However, this information usually is useless for classification, so their response 
should be suppressed. On the other hand, cancerous tissue is more informative and de-
serves higher activation, so its response is enhanced after being processed by the attention 
mechanism. 
We adopted the attention mechanism impl emented by a Squeeze-and-Excitation 
block proposed by Hu et al. [61]. Briefly, the essential components are the Squeeze and 
Excitation. Suppose feature maps 𝑈 have 𝐶 channels and the size of the feature in each 
channel is 𝐻∗𝑊 . For the Squeeze operation, global average pooling is applied to 𝑈, ena-
bling features to gain a global receptive field.  After the Squeeze operation, the size of fea-
ture maps 𝑈 change from 𝐻∗𝑊∗𝐶  to 1∗1∗𝐶 .  Results are denoted as 𝑍. More pre-
cisely, this change is given by 
𝑍
௖=𝐹 ௦௤(𝑈௖)=1
𝐻×𝑊෍෍𝑈 ௖(𝑖,𝑗)ு
௝ୀଵௐ
௜ୀଵ (1)
where 𝑐 denotes 𝑐௧௛ channel of 𝑈, and 𝐹௦௤ is the Squeeze function. 
Figure 5. The architecture of boosted-EfﬁcientNet-B3. EfﬁcientNet ﬁrst extracts image features through its convolutional
layers. The attention mechanism is then utilized to reweight features, increasing the activation of signiﬁcant parts. Next, we
perform FF on the outputs of several convolutional layers. Subsequently, images are classiﬁed based on those fused features.
Details of these methods are described in the following sections.
4.4. Reduce the Downsampling Scale
To mitigate the problem mentioned in the discussion, we adjusted the downsampling
multiple in EfﬁcientNet. Our idea is implemented by modifying the stride of the convo-
lution kernel of EfﬁcientNet. To select the best-performed downsampling scale, multiple
and elaborate experiments were conducted on the downsampling scale {2, 4, 6, 8, 16}, and
Strategy 16 outperforms other settings. The size of the feature map in the best-performing
downsampling scale (16) was 6 6, which is one times larger than the original downsam-
pling multiple (32). The change of the downsampling scale from 32 to 16 was implemented
by modifying the stride of the ﬁrst convolution layer from two to one, as shown in the red
dashed squares on the left half of Figure 5.
4.5. Attention Mechanism
As an example for the attention mechanism, it can be seen from Figure 6 that the
response to the background is large, since most parts of the image consist of the background.
However, this information usually is useless for classiﬁcation, so their response should be
suppressed. On the other hand, cancerous tissue is more informative and deserves higher
activation, so its response is enhanced after being processed by the attention mechanism.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  10 of 14 
 
 Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (sca-
lar) of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Specif-
ically, two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activa-
tion function sigmoid, and Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity in-creasing. Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certifies the weight falls 
in the range of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation 
(2). 
𝑆=𝐹
௘௫(𝑍, 𝑊 )=𝜎 ൫ 𝑔 (𝑍, 𝑊 )൯=𝜎 ( 𝑊 ଶ𝛿(𝑊ଵ𝑍)) (2)
where 𝑆 is the result of the Excitation operation, 𝐹௘௫ is the Excitation function, and 𝑔 re-
fers to the gating function. 𝜎 and 𝛿 denote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. 
𝑊ଵ and 𝑊ଶ are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The final output 
is calculated by multiplying the scalar 𝑆 with the original feature maps 𝑈. 
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown 
in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism. 
4.6. Feature Fusion 
Four steps are involved during the FF techni que, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During the 
forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the 4th, 7th, 
17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features, the attention 
mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined  using the outputs of Step 2 after applying 
the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features  are then sent to the following layers to 
conduct classification. 
 
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfficientNet-B3. 
  
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism.

==== Page 10 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 10 of 14
We adopted the attention mechanism implemented by a Squeeze-and-Excitation block
proposed by Hu et al. [ 61]. Brieﬂy, the essential components are the Squeeze and Excitation.
Suppose feature maps Uhave Cchannels and the size of the feature in each channel is
HW. For the Squeeze operation, global average pooling is applied to U, enabling features
to gain a global receptive ﬁeld. After the Squeeze operation, the size of feature maps U
change from HWCto11C.Results are denoted as Z.More precisely, this change is
given by
Zc=Fsq(Uc)=1
HWW
å
i=1H
å
j=1Uc(i,j) (1)
where cdenotes cthchannel of U, and Fsqis the Squeeze function.
Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (scalar)
of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Speciﬁcally,
two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activation
function sigmoid, and Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity increasing.
Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certiﬁes the weight falls in the range
of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation (2).
S=Fex(Z,W)=s(g(Z,W))=s(W2d(W1Z)) (2)
where Sis the result of the Excitation operation, Fexis the Excitation function, and grefers
to the gating function. sand ddenote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. W1
and W2are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The ﬁnal output is
calculated by multiplying the scalar Swith the original feature maps U.
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown
in Figure 5.
4.6. Feature Fusion
Four steps are involved during the FF technique, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During
the forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the
4th, 7th, 17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features,
the attention mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential
information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined using the outputs of Step
2 after applying the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features are then sent to the
following layers to conduct classiﬁcation.
Cancers 2021 , 13, x  10 of 14 
 
 Following the Squeeze operation, the Excitation operation is to learn the weight (sca-
lar) of different channels, which is simply implemented by the gating mechanism. Specif-
ically, two fully connected layers are organized to learn the weight of features and activa-
tion function sigmoid, and Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) are applied for non-linearity in-creasing. Excepting the non-linearity, the sigmoid function also certifies the weight falls 
in the range of [0,1]. The calculation process of the scalar (weight) is shown in Equation 
(2). 
𝑆=𝐹
௘௫(𝑍, 𝑊 )=𝜎 ൫ 𝑔 (𝑍, 𝑊 )൯=𝜎 ( 𝑊 ଶ𝛿(𝑊ଵ𝑍)) (2)
where 𝑆 is the result of the Excitation operation, 𝐹௘௫ is the Excitation function, and 𝑔 re-
fers to the gating function. 𝜎 and 𝛿 denote the sigmoid and RELU function, respectively. 
𝑊ଵ and 𝑊ଶ are learnable parameters of the two fully connected layers. The final output 
is calculated by multiplying the scalar 𝑆 with the original feature maps 𝑈. 
In our work, the attention mechanism is combined with the FF technique, as shown 
in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 6. An example of the attention mechanism. The response to input is reweighted by the attention mechanism. 
4.6. Feature Fusion 
Four steps are involved during the FF techni que, as shown in Figure 7. (1) During the 
forward process, we save the outputs (features) of the convolutional layers in the 4th, 7th, 
17th, and 25th blocks. (2) After the last convolutional layer extracts features, the attention 
mechanism is applied to features recorded in Step 1 to value the essential information. (3) Low-level and high-level features are combined  using the outputs of Step 2 after applying 
the attention mechanism. (4) These fused features  are then sent to the following layers to 
conduct classification. 
 
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfficientNet-B3. 
  
Figure 7. The approach to integrate the attention and FF mechanisms to EfﬁcientNet-B3.
4.7. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluated our method on the RPCam dataset. Since the testing set was not pro-
vided, we split the original training set into a training set and a validation set and utilized

==== Page 11 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 11 of 14
the validation set to verify models. In detail, the capacities of models were evaluated
by ﬁve indicators, including AUC, Accuracy (ACC), Sensitivity (SEN), Speciﬁcity (SPE),
and F1-Measure [ 66]. AUC considers both Precision and Recall, thus comprehensively
reﬂecting the performance of a model. The value of AUC falls into the range 0.5 and 1. A
higher value indicates better performance. SEN represents the proportion of all positive
examples that are correctly classiﬁed and measures the ability of classiﬁers to recognize
positive examples, whereas SPE evaluates the ability of algorithms to recognize negative
ones. Like the AUC, the F1-Measure considers Precision and Recall and is calculated by
the weighted average of Precision and Recall. All indicators are calculated based on four
fundamental indicators: True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), False
Negative (FN). The speciﬁc calculation processes are shown in Equations (3)–(6).
ACC =TP+TN
TP+FP+TN+FN(3)
SEN =TP
TP+FN(4)
SPE =TN
TN +FP(5)
Fmeasure =2TP
2TP+FN+FP(6)
4.8. Implementation Details
Our method is built on the EfﬁcientNet-B3 model and implemented based on the
PyTorch DL framework using Python [ 67]. Four pieces of GTX 2080Ti GPUs were employed
to accelerate the training. All models were trained for 30 epochs. The gradient optimizer
was Adam. Before being fed into the network, images were normalized according to
the mean and standard deviation on their RGB-channels. In addition to the RCC, we
also employed random horizontal and vertical ﬂipping in the training time to enrich the
datasets. During the training, the initial learning rate was 0.003, which was decayed by
a factor of 10 at the 15th and 23rd epochs. The batch size was 256. The parameters of
the boosted EfﬁcientNet and other comparable models were placed as close as possible
to enhance the credibility of the comparison experiment. In detail, the parameter sizes of
these three models were increased in turn from the boosted EfﬁcientNet, DenseNet121,
and ResNet50.
5. Conclusions
The purpose of this project was to facilitate the development of digital diagnosis in
MBCs and explore the applicability of a novel CNN architecture EfﬁcientNet on MBC.
In this paper, we proposed a boosted EfﬁcientNet CNN architecture to automatically
diagnose the presence of cancer cells in the pathological tissue of breast cancers. This
boosted EfﬁcientNet alleviates the small image resolution problem, which frequently
occurs in medical imaging. Particularly, we developed a data augmentation method, RCC,
to retain the most informative parts of images and maintain the original image resolution.
Experimental results demonstrate that this method signiﬁcantly enhances the performance
of EfﬁcentNet-B3. Furthermore, RDS was designed to reduce the downsampling scale of
the basic EfﬁcientNet by adjusting the architecture of EfﬁcientNet-B3. It further facilitates
the training on small resolution images. Moreover, two mechanisms were employed to
enrich the semantic information of features. As shown in the ablation studies, both of
these methods boost the basic EfﬁcientNet-B3, and more remarkable improvements can
be obtained by combining some of them. Boosted-EfﬁcientNet-B3 was also compared
with another two state-of-the-art CNN architectures, ResNet50 and DenseNet121, and
shows superior performance. It can be expected that our methods can be utilized in other
models and lead to improved performance of other disease diagnoses in the near future.

==== Page 12 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 12 of 14
In summary, our boosted EfﬁcientNet-B3 obtains an accuracy of 97.96% 0.03% and an
AUC value of 99.68% 0.01%, respectively. Hence, it may provide an efﬁcient, reliable,
and economical alternative for medical institutions in relevant areas.
Author Contributions: J.W. and H.Z. conceived and designed the experiments. J.W., H.Z., Q.L., H.X.,
and Z.Y. analyzed and extracted data. H.Z. and Q.L. constructed ﬁgures. H.Z. and Q.L. participated
in table construction. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable to this study.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable to this study.
Data Availability Statement: All source data relating to this manuscript are available upon request.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
References
1. Aswathy, M.A.; Jagannath, M. Detection of breast cancer on digital histopathology images: Present status and future possibilities.
Inform. Med. Unlocked 2017 ,8, 74–79. [CrossRef]
2. Ma, C.; Jiang, F.; Ma, Y.; Wang, J.; Li, H.; Zhang, J. Isolation and Detection Technologies of Extracellular Vesicles and Application
on Cancer Diagnostic. Dose-Response 2019 ,17, 1559325819891004. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Zhang, J.; Nguyen, L.T.; Hickey, R.; Walters, N.; Palmer, A.F.; Re átegui, E. Immunomagnetic Sequential Ultraﬁltration (iSUF)
platform for enrichment and puriﬁcation of extracellular vesicles from bioﬂuids. bioRxiv 2020 . [CrossRef]
4. Tsuji, W.; Plock, J. Breast Cancer Metastasis. In Introduction to Cancer Metastasis ; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017;
pp. 13–31.
5. Walters, N.; Nguyen, L.T.; Zhang, J.; Shankaran, A.; Re átegui, E. Extracellular vesicles as mediators of in vitro neutrophil
swarming on a large-scale microparticle array. Lab Chip 2019 ,19, 2874–2884. [CrossRef]
6. Yang, Z.; Ma, Y.; Zhao, H.; Yuan, Y.; Kim, B.Y. Nanotechnology platforms for cancer immunotherapy. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Nanomed. Nanobiotechnology 2020 ,12, e1590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Weigelt, B.; Peterse, J.L.; Van’t V eer, L.J. Breast cancer metastasis: Markers and models. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2005 ,5, 591–602. [CrossRef]
8. Kennecke, H.; Yerushalmi, R.; Woods, R.; Cheang, M.C.U.; Voduc, D.; Speers, C.H.; Nielsen, T.O.; Gelmon, K. Metastatic Behavior
of Breast Cancer Subtypes. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010 ,28, 3271–3277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Giuliano, A.E.; Ballman, K.V .; McCall, L.; Beitsch, P .D.; Brennan, M.B.; Kelemen, P .R.; Morrow, M. Effect of axillary dissection vs
no axillary dissection on 10-year overall survival among women with invasive breast cancer and sentinel node metastasis: The
ACOSOG Z0011 (Alliance) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017 ,318, 918–926. [CrossRef]
10. Veronesi, U.; Paganelli, G.; Galimberti, V .; Viale, G.; Zurrida, S.; Bedoni, M.; Costa, A.; De Cicco, C.; Geraghty, J.G.; Luini, A.;
et al. Sentinel-node biopsy to avoid axillary dissection in breast cancer with clinically negative lymph-nodes. Lancet 1997 ,349,
1864–1867. [CrossRef]
11. Rao, R.; Euhus, D.M.; Mayo, H.G.; Balch, C.M. Axillary Node Interventions in Breast Cancer. JAMA 2013 ,310,1385–1394. [CrossRef]
12. Ghaznavi, F.; Evans, A.; Madabhushi, A.; Feldman, M. Digital Imaging in Pathology: Whole-Slide Imaging and Beyond. Annu.
Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2013 ,8, 331–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Hanna, M.G.; Reuter, V .E.; Ardon, O.; Kim, D.; Sirintrapun, S.J.; Schüfﬂer, P .J.; Busam, K.J.; Sauter, J.L.; Brogi, E.; Tan, L.K.;
et al. Validation of a digital pathology system including remote review during the COVID-19 pandemic. Mod. Pathol. 2020 ,33,
2115–2127. [CrossRef]
14. Gurcan, M.N.; Boucheron, L.E.; Can, A.; Madabhushi, A.; Rajpoot, N.M.; Yener, B. Histopathological image analysis: A review.
IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2009 ,2, 147–171. [CrossRef]
15. Xu, Y.; Jia, Z.; Wang, L.-B.; Ai, Y.; Zhang, F.; Lai, M.; Chang, E.I.-C. Large scale tissue histopathology image classiﬁcation,
segmentation, and visualization via deep convolutional activation features. BMC Bioinform. 2017 ,18, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Sayed, S.; Cherniak, W.; Lawler, M.; Tan, S.Y.; El Sadr, W.; Wolf, N.; Silkensen, S.; Brand, N.; Looi, L.M.; Pai, S.; et al. Improving
pathology and laboratory medicine in low-income and middle-income countries: Roadmap to solutions. Lancet 2018 ,391,
1939–1952. [CrossRef]
17. Shi, C.; Xie, H.; Ma, Y.; Yang, Z.; Zhang, J. Nanoscale Technologies in Highly Sensitive Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Diseases.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020 ,8. [CrossRef]
18. Liu, Y.; Ma, Y.; Zhang, J.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, J. Exosomes: A Novel Therapeutic Agent for Cartilage and Bone Tissue Regeneration.
Dose-Response 2019 ,17, 1559325819892702. [CrossRef]
19. Wang, Y.; Wu, H.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Zhu, J.; Ma, Y.; Yuan, Y. Optimized synthesis of biodegradable elastomer pegylated poly
(glycerol sebacate) and their biomedical application. Polymers 2019 ,11, 965. [CrossRef]
20. Wang, L.; Dong, S.; Liu, Y.; Ma, Y.; Zhang, J.; Yang, Z.; Yuan, Y. Fabrication of Injectable, Porous Hyaluronic Acid Hydrogel Based
on an In-Situ Bubble-Forming Hydrogel Entrapment Process. Polymers 2020 ,12, 1138. [CrossRef]

==== Page 13 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 13 of 14
21. Zhao, X.-P .; Liu, F.-F.; Hu, W.-C.; Younis, M.R.; Wang, C.; Xia, X.-H. Biomimetic Nanochannel-Ionchannel Hybrid for Ultrasensitive
and Label-Free Detection of MicroRNA in Cells. Anal. Chem. 2019 ,91, 3582–3589. [CrossRef]
22. Ahmad, J.; Farman, H.; Jan, Z. Deep Learning Methods and Applications. In Bioinformatics Techniques for Drug Discovery ; Springer
Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2018; pp. 31–42.
23. Erickson, B.J.; Korﬁatis, P .; Akkus, Z.; Kline, T.L. Machine Learning for Medical Imaging. Radiogram 2017 ,37, 505–515. [CrossRef]
24. Madabhushi, A.; Lee, G. Image analysis and machine learning in digital pathology: Challenges and opportunities. Med. Image
Anal. 2016 ,33, 170–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Niazi, M.K.K.; Parwani, A.V .; Gurcan, M.N. Digital pathology and artiﬁcial intelligence. Lancet Oncol. 2019 ,20,
e253–e261. [CrossRef]
26. Bankhead, P .; Loughrey, M.B.; Fern ández, J.A.; Dombrowski, Y.; McArt, D.G.; Dunne, P .D.; McQuaid, S.; Gray, R.T.; Murray, L.J.;
Coleman, H.G.; et al. QuPath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 1–7. [CrossRef]
27. Wang, S.; Yang, D.M.; Rong, R.; Zhan, X.; Xiao, G. Pathology Image Analysis Using Segmentation Deep Learning Algorithms.
Am. J. Pathol. 2019 ,189, 1686–1698. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Zhu, Z.; Albadawy, E.; Saha, A.; Zhang, J.; Harowicz, M.; Mazurowski, M.A. Deep learning for identifying radiogenomic
associations in breast cancer. Comput. Biol. Med. 2019 ,109, 85–90. [CrossRef]
29. Steiner, D.F.; Macdonald, R.; Liu, Y.; Truszkowski, P .; Hipp, J.D.; Gammage, C.; Thng, F.; Peng, L.; Stumpe, M.C. Impact of Deep
Learning Assistance on the Histopathologic Review of Lymph Nodes for Metastatic Breast Cancer. Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 2018 ,42,
1636–1646. [CrossRef]
30. Shen, D.; Wu, G.; Suk, H.-I. Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2017 ,19, 221–248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. LeCun, Y.; Bengio, Y.; Hinton, G. Deep Learning. Nature 521 2015 ,7553 , 436–444. [CrossRef]
32. Dinu, A.J.; Ganesan, R.; Joseph, F.; Balaji, V . A study on deep machine learning algorithms for diagnosis of diseases. Int. J. Appl.
Eng. Res 2017 ,12, 6338–6346.
33. Kermany, D.S.; Goldbaum, M.; Cai, W.; Valentim, C.C.; Liang, H.; Baxter, S.L.; McKeown, A.; Yang, G.; Wu, X.; Yan, F.; et al.
Identifying Medical Diagnoses and Treatable Diseases by Image-Based Deep Learning. Cell2018 ,172, 1122–1131.e9. [CrossRef]
34. Charan, S.; Khan, M.J.; Khurshid, K. Breast Cancer Detection in Mammograms Using Convolutional Neural Network. In
Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Computing, Mathematics and Engineering Technologies (iCoMET), Wuhan,
China, 7–8 February 2018; pp. 1–5.
35. Rakhlin, A.; Shvets, A.; Iglovikov, V .I.; Kalinin, A.A. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Breast Cancer Histology Image
Analysis. In Proceedings of the Mining Data for Financial Applications, Nevsehir, Turkey, 21–22 June 2018; Springer Nature:
Berlin, Germany, 2018; pp. 737–744.
36. Sun, Q.; Lin, X.; Zhao, Y.; Li, L.; Yan, K.; Liang, D.; Li, Z.C. Deep learning vs. radiomics for predicting axillary lymph node
metastasis of breast cancer using ultrasound images: Don’t forget the peritumoral region. Front. Oncol. 2020 ,10, 53. [CrossRef]
37. Tan, M.; Le, Q.V . Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:11946. Available
online: https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946 (accessed on 6 February 2021).
38. Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G.E. Imagenet Classiﬁcation with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of
the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Lake Tahoe, NV , USA, 3–6 December 2012; pp. 1097–1105.
39. Simonyan, K.; Zisserman, A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1409.1556.
40. Szegedy, C.; Vanhoucke, V .; Ioffe, S.; Shlens, J.; Wojna, Z. Rethinking the Inception Ar-chitecture for Computer Vision. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016.
41. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. arXiv 2015 , arXiv:1512.03385.
42. Huang, G.; Liu, Z.; Van Der Maaten, L.; Weinberger, K.Q. Densely Connected Convolutional Net-works. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017.
43. Shayma’a, A.H.; Sayed, M.S.; Abdalla, M.I.; Rashwan, M.A. Breast cancer masses classiﬁcation using deep convolutional neural
networks and transfer learning. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2020 ,79, 30735–30768.
44. Alam Khan, F.; Butt, A.U.R.; Asif, M.; Ahmad, W.; Nawaz, M.; Jamjoom, M.; Alabdulkreem, E. Computer-aided diagnosis for
burnt skin images using deep convolutional neural network. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2020 ,79, 34545–34568. [CrossRef]
45. Rehman, A.; Naz, S.; Razzak, M.I.; Akram, F.; Imran, M. A deep learning-based framework for automatic brain tumors
classiﬁcation using transfer learning. CircuitsSyst. Signal Process. 2020 ,39, 757–775. [CrossRef]
46. Kaur, T.; Gandhi, T.K. Deep convolutional neural networks with transfer learning for automated brain image classiﬁcation. Mach.
Vis. Appl. 2020 ,31, 1–16. [CrossRef]
47. Abbas, A.; Abdelsamea, M.M.; Gaber, M.M. DeTrac: Transfer Learning of Class Decomposed Medical Images in Convolutional
Neural Networks. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 74901–74913. [CrossRef]
48. Agarwal, R.; Diaz, O.; Llad ó, X.; Yap, M.H.; Mart í, R. Automatic mass detection in mammograms using deep convolutional
neural networks. J. Med. Imaging 2019 ,6, 031409. [CrossRef]
49. Ribli, D.; Horv áth, A.; Unger, Z.; Pollner, P .; Csabai, I. Detecting and classifying lesions in mammograms with Deep Learning. Sci.
Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Al-Antari, M.A.; Al-Masni, M.A.; Choi, M.-T.; Han, S.-M.; Kim, T.-S. A fully integrated computer-aided diagnosis system
for digital X-ray mammograms via deep learning detection, segmentation, and classiﬁcation. Int. J. Med. Inform. 2018 ,117,
44–54. [CrossRef]

==== Page 14 ====
Cancers 2021 ,13, 661 14 of 14
51. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You Only Look Once: Uniﬁed, Real-Time Object De-Tection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 26 June–1 July 2016.
52. Marques, G.; Agarwal, D.; D íez, I.D.L.T. Automated medical diagnosis of COVID-19 through EfﬁcientNet convolutional neural
network. Appl. Soft Comput. 2020 ,96, 106691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Miglani, V .; Bhatia, M. Skin Lesion Classiﬁcation: A Transfer Learning Approach Using EfﬁcientNets. In Proceedings of the
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Zagreb, Croatia, 2–5 December 2020; Springer Nature: Berlin, Germany, 2020;
pp. 315–324.
54. Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.J.; Li, K.; Li, F.F. Imagenet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In Proceedings of the
2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA, 20–25 June 2009; pp. 248–255.
55. Everingham, M.; Van Gool, L.; Williams, C.K.I.; Winn, J.; Zisserman, A. The Pascal Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge. Int. J.
Comput. Vis. 2010 ,88, 303–338. [CrossRef]
56. Xu, K.; Ba, J.; Kiros, R.; Cho, K.; Courville, A.; Salakhudinov, R.; Zemel, R.; Bengio, Y. Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image
Caption Generation with Visual Attention. In Proceedings of the Inter-National Conference on Machine Learning, Lille, France,
6–11 July 2015.
57. Vinyals, O.; Toshev, A.; Bengio, S.; Erhan, D. Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; pp. 3156–3164.
58. Lu, D.; Qihao, J. A Survey of Image Classiﬁcation Methods and Techniques for Improving Classiﬁcation Performance. Int. J.
Remote Sens. Weng 2007 ,28, 823–870. [CrossRef]
59. Viola, P .; Jones, M.J.C. Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features. In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2001), Kauai, HI, USA, 8–14 December 2001;
Volume 1, p. 3.
60. Papageorgiou, C.; Oren, M.; Poggio, T. A general framework for object detection. Sixth Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. 2002 , 555. [CrossRef]
61. Hu, J.; Shen, L.; Albanie, S.; Sun, G.; Wu, E. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2020 ,42,
2011–2023. [CrossRef]
62. Li, H.; Manjunath, B.S.; Mitra, S.K. Multisensor image fusion using the wavelet transform. Graph. Models Image Process. 1995 ,57,
235–245. [CrossRef]
63. Veeling, B.S.; Linmans, J.; Winkens, J.; Cohen, T.; Welling, M. Rotation Equivariant CNNs for Digital Pathology. In Proceedings of
the Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Granada, Spain, 16–20 September 2018; pp. 210–218.
64. Bejnordi, B.E.; Veta, M.; Van Diest, P .J.; Van Ginneken, B.; Karssemeijer, N.; Litjens, G. Diagnostic assessment of deep learning
algorithms for detection of lymph node metastases in women with breast cancer. JAMA 2017 ,318, 2199–2210. [CrossRef]
65. Sandler, M.; Howard, A.; Zhu, M.; Zhmoginov, A.; Chen, L.-C. MobileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks. In
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June
2018; pp. 4510–4520.
66. Hossin, M.; Sulaiman, M.N. A review on evaluation metrics for data classiﬁcation evaluations. Int. J. Data Min. Knowl. Manag.
Process 2015 ,5, 1.
67. Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Chintala, S.; Chanan, G.; Yang, E.; DeVito, Z.; Lerer, A. Automatic Differentiation in Pytorch. 2017. Available
online: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJJsrmfCZ (accessed on 6 February 2021).

