==== Page 1 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs
to Generate Scene Graphs
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University, New York NY 10027, USA
faz2407,sk4089,sc250 g@columbia.edu
Abstract. Scene graphs are powerful representations that parse images
into their abstract semantic elements, i.e., objects and their interactions,
which facilitates visual comprehension and explainable reasoning. On the
other hand, commonsense knowledge graphs are rich repositories that
encode how the world is structured, and how general concepts interact.
In this paper, we present a unied formulation of these two constructs,
where a scene graph is seen as an image-conditioned instantiation of a
commonsense knowledge graph. Based on this new perspective, we re-
formulate scene graph generation as the inference of a bridge between
the scene and commonsense graphs, where each entity or predicate in-
stance in the scene graph has to be linked to its corresponding entity
or predicate class in the commonsense graph. To this end, we propose
a novel graph-based neural network that iteratively propagates informa-
tion between the two graphs, as well as within each of them, while gradu-
ally rening their bridge in each iteration. Our Graph Bridging Network,
GB-Net , successively infers edges and nodes, allowing to simultaneously
exploit and rene the rich, heterogeneous structure of the interconnected
scene and commonsense graphs. Through extensive experimentation, we
showcase the superior accuracy of GB-Net compared to the most re-
cent methods, resulting in a new state of the art. We publicly release the
source code of our method.1
1 Introduction
Extracting structured, symbolic, semantic representations from data has a long
history in Natural Language Processing (NLP), under the umbrella terms seman-
tic parsing at the sentence level [9,8] and information extraction at the document
level [22,41]. The resulting semantic graphs orknowledge graphs have many ap-
plications such as question answering [7,17] and information retrieval [6,50]. In
computer vision, Xu et al. have recently called attention to the task of Scene
Graph Generation (SGG) [44], which aims at extracting a symbolic, graphical
representation from a given image, where every node corresponds to a local-
ized and categorized object (entity), and every edge encodes a pairwise inter-
action (predicate). This has inspired two lines of follow-up work, some improv-
ing the performance on SGG [24,31,52,47,23,43,11,10,2], and others exploiting
1https://github.com/alirezazareian/gbnetarXiv:2001.02314v4  [cs.CV]  18 Jul 2020

==== Page 2 ====
2 Alireza Zareian et al.
Fig. 1. Left: An example of a Visual Genome image and its ground truth scene graph.
Right: A relevant portion of the commonsense graph. In this paper we formulate the
task of Scene Graph Generation as the problem of creating a bridge between these
two graphs. Such bridge not only classies each scene entity and predicate, but also
creates an inter-connected heterogeneous graph whose rich structure is exploited by
our method ( GB-Net ).
such rich structures for down-stream tasks such as Visual Question Answering
(VQA) [39,38,12,54], image captioning [49,48], image retrieval [15,37], and image
synthesis [14]. In VQA for instance, SGG not only improves performance, but
also promotes interpretability and enables explainable reasoning [38].
Although several methods have been proposed, the state-of-the-art perfor-
mance for SGG is still far from acceptable. Most recently, [2] achieves only 16%
mean recall, for matching the top 100 predicted subject-predicate-object triples
against ground truth triples. This suggests the current SGG methods are in-
sucient to address the complexity of this task. Recently, a few papers have
attempted to use external commonsense knowledge to advance SGG [52,10,2],
as well as other domains [3,16]. This commonsense can range from curated knowl-
edge bases such as ConceptNet [27], ontologies such as WordNet [30], or auto-
matically extracted facts such as co-occurance frequencies [52]. The key message
of those works is that a prior knowledge about the world can be very helpful
when perceiving a complex scene. If we know the relationship of a Person and
aBike is most likely riding , we can more easily disambiguate between riding ,
on, and attachedTo , and classify their relationship more accurately. Similarly,
if we know a Manand a Woman are both sub-types of Person , even if we only
seeMan-riding -Bike in training data, we can generalize and recognize a Woman -
riding -Bike triplet at test time. Although this idea is intuitively promising,
existing methods that implement it have major limitations, as detailed in Sec-
tion 2, and we address those in the proposed method.
More specically, recent methods either use ad-hoc heuristics to integrate
limited types of commonsense into the scene graph generation process [2,52], or

==== Page 3 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 3
fail to exploit the rich, graphical structure of commonsense knowledge [10]. To
devise a general framework for incorporating any type of graphical knowledge
into the process of scene understanding, we take inspiration from early works on
knowledge representation and applying structured grammars to computer vision
problems [55,32,40], and redene those concepts in the light of the recent ad-
vances in graph-based deep learning. Simply put, we formulate both scene and
commonsense graphs as knowledge graphs with entity and predicate nodes, and
various types of edges. A scene graph node represents an entity or predicate in-
stance in a specic image, while a commonsense graph node represents an entity
or predicate class, which is a general concept independent of the image. Simi-
larly, a scene graph edge indicates the participation of an entity instance ( e.g.
as a subject or object) in a predicate instance in a scene, while a commonsense
edge states a general fact about the interaction of two concepts in the world.
Figure 1 shows an example scene graph and commonsense graph side by side.
Based on this unied perspective, we reformulate the problem of scene graph
generation from entity and predicate classication into the novel problem of
bridging those two graphs. More specically, we propose a method that given
an image, initializes potential entity and predicate nodes, and then classies
each node by connecting it to its corresponding class node in the commonsense
graph, through an edge we call a bridge . This establishes a connectivity between
instance-level, visual knowledge and generic, commonsense knowledge. To incor-
porate the rich combination of visual and commonsense information in the SGG
process, we propose a novel graphical neural network, that iteratively propagates
messages between the scene and commonsense graphs, as well as within each of
them, while gradually rening the bridge in each iteration. Our Graph Bridging
Network, GB-Net , successively infers edges and nodes, allowing to simultane-
ously exploit and rene the rich, heterogeneous structure of the interconnected
scene and commonsense graphs.
To evaluate the eectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive experi-
ments on the Visual Genome [20] dataset. The proposed GB-Net outperforms
the state of the art consistently in various performance metrics. Through abla-
tive studies, we show how each of the proposed ideas contribute to the results.
We also publicly release a comprehensive software package based on [52] and [2],
to reproduce all the numbers reported in this paper. We provide further quan-
titative, qualitative, and speed analysis in our Supplementary Material, as well
as additional implementation details.
2 Related work
2.1 Scene graph generation
Most SGG methods are based on an object detection backbone that extracts
region proposals from the input image. They utilize some kind of information
propagation module to incorporate context, and then classify each region to
an object class, as well as each pair of regions to a relation class [44,52,47,2].
Our method has two key dierences with this conventional process: rstly, our

==== Page 4 ====
4 Alireza Zareian et al.
information propagation network operates on a larger graph which consists of
not only object nodes, but also predicate nodes and commonsense graph nodes,
and has a more complex structure. Secondly, we do not classify each object
and relation using classiers, but instead use a pairwise matching mechanism to
connect them to corresponding class nodes in the commonsense graph.
More recently, a few methods [52,10,2] have used external knowledge to en-
hance scene graph generation. This external knowledge is sometimes referred
to as \commonsense", because it encodes ontological knowledge about classes,
rather than specic instances. Despite encouraging results, these methods have
major limitations. Specically, [52] used triplet frequency to bias the logits of
their predicate classier, and [2] used such frequencies to initialize edge weights
on their graphs. Such external priors have been also shown benecial for recog-
nizing objects [45,46] and relationships [26,53], that are building blocks for SGG.
Nevertheless, neither of those methods can incorporate other types or knowledge,
such as the semantic hierarchy concepts, or object aordances. Gu et al. [10] pro-
pose a more general way to incorporate knowledge in SGG, by retrieving a set of
relevant facts for each object from a pool of commonsense facts. However, their
method does not utilize the structure of the commonsense graph, and treats
knowledge as a set of triplets. Our method considers commonsense as a general
graph with several types of edges, explicitly integrates that graph with the scene
graph by connecting corresponding nodes, and incorporates the rich structure of
commonsense by graphical message passing.
2.2 Graph-based neural networks
By Graph-based Neural Networks (GNN), we refer to the family of models that
take a graph as input, and iteratively update the representation of each node by
applying a learnable function (a.k.a., message) on the node's neighbors. Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) [19], Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNN)
[25], and others are all specic implementations of this general model. Most
SGG methods use some variant of GNNs to propagate information between
region proposals [44,24,47,2]. Our message passing method, detailed in Section 4,
resembles GGNN but instead of propagating messages through a static graph, we
update (some) edges as well. Few methods exist that dynamically update edges
during message passing [35,51], but we are the rst to rene edges between a
scene graph and an external knowledge graph.
Apart from SGG, GNNs have been used in several other computer vision
tasks, often in order to propagate context information across dierent objects in
a scene. For instance, [28] injects a GNN into a Faster R-CNN [36] framework
to contextualize the features of region proposals before classifying them. This
improves the results since the presence of a table can aect the detection of a
chair . On the other hand, some methods utilize GNNs on graphs that represent
the ontology of concepts, rather than objects in a scene [29,42,21,16]. This often
enables generalization to unseen or infrequent concepts by incorporating their
relationship with frequently seen concepts. More similarly to our work, Chen et
al.[3] were the rst to bring those two ideas together, and form a graph by objects

==== Page 5 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 5
in an image as well as object classes in the ontology. Nevertheless, the class
nodes in that work were merely an auxiliary means to improve object features
before classication. In contrast, we classify the nodes by explicitly inferring their
connection to their corresponding class nodes. Moreover, we iteratively rene
the bridge between scene and commonsense graphs to enhance our prediction.
Furthermore, their task only involves objects and object classes, while we explore
a more complex structure where predicates play an important role as well.
3 Problem Formulation
In this section, we rst formalize the concepts of knowledge graph in general, and
commonsense graph and scene graph in particular. Leveraging their similarities,
we then reformulate the problem of scene graph generation as bridging these two
graphs.
3.1 Knowledge graphs
We dene a knowledge graph as a set of entity and predicate nodes ( NE;NP),
each with a semantic label, and a set of directed, weighted edges Efrom a
predened set of types. Denoting by a node type (here, either entity E or
predicate P), the set of edges encoding the relation rbetween nodes of type 
and0is dened as
E!0
rNN0!R: (1)
A commonsense graph is a type of knowledge graph in which each node repre-
sents the general concept of its semantic label, and hence each semantic label (en-
tity or predicate class) appears in exactly one node. In such a graph, each edge en-
codes a relational fact involving a pair of concepts, such as Hand-partOf-Person
andCup-usedFor-Drinking . Formally, we dene the set of commonsense entity
(CE) nodesNCEand commonsense predicate (CP) nodes NCPas all entity and
predicate classes in our task. Commonsense edges ECconsist of 4 distinct subsets,
depending on the source and destination node type:
EC=fECE!CP
rg[fECP!CE
rg[
fECE!CE
rg[fECP!CP
rg:(2)
A scene graph is a dierent type of knowledge graph where: (a) each scene entity
(SE) node is associated with a bounding box, referring to an image region, (b)
each scene predicate (SP) node is associated with an ordered pair of SE nodes,
namely a subject and an object, and (c) there are two types of undirected edges
which connect each SP to its corresponding subject and object respectively. Here
because we dene knowledge edges to be directed, we model each undirected
subject or object edge as two directed edges in the opposite directions, each

==== Page 6 ====
6 Alireza Zareian et al.
with a distinct type. More specically,
NSE[0;1]4N CE;
NSPNSEN SEN CP;
ES=fESE!SP
subjectOf;ESE!SP
objectOf;
ESP!SE
hasSubject;ESP!SE
hasObjectg;(3)
where [0;1]4is the set of possible bounding boxes, and NSEN SEN CPis
the set of all possible triples that consist of two scene entity nodes and a scene
predicate node. Figure 1 shows an example of scene graph and commonsense
graph side by side, to make their similarities clearer. Here we assume every scene
graph node has a label that exists in the commonsense graph, since in reality
some objects and predicates might belong to background classes, we consider
a special commonsense node as background entity and another for background
predicate.
3.2 Bridging knowledge graphs
Considering the similarity between the commonsense and scene graph formula-
tions, we make a subtle renement in the formulation to bridge these two graphs.
Specically, we remove the class from SE and SP nodes and instead encode it into
a set of bridge edgesEBthat connect each SE or SP node to its corresponding
class, i.e., a CE or CP node respectively:
N?
SE[0;1]4;
N?
SPN SEN SE;
EB=fESE!CE
classifiedTo;ESP!CP
classifiedTo;
ECE!SE
hasInstance;ECP!SP
hasInstanceg;(4)
where:?means the nodes are implicit, i.e., their classes are unknown. Each edge
of type classifiedTo , connects an entity or predicate to its corresponding label
in the commonsense graph, and has a reverse edge of type hasInstance which
connects the commonsense node back to the instance. Based on this reformu-
lation, we can dene the problem of SGG as the extraction of implicit entity
and predicate nodes from the image (hereafter called scene graph proposal ), and
then classifying them by connecting each entity or predicate to the correspond-
ing node in the commonsense graph. Accordingly, Given an input image Iand
a provided and xed commonsense graph, the goal of SGG with commonsense
knowledge is to maximize
p(NSE;NSP;ESjI;NCE;NCP;EC) =
p(N?
SE;N?
SP;ESjI)
p(EBjI;NCE;NCP;EC;N?
SE;N?
SP;ES):(5)

==== Page 7 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 7
Fig. 2. An illustrative example of the GB-Net process. First, we initialize the scene
graph and entity bridges using a Faster R-CNN. Then we propagate messages to update
node representations, and use them to update the entity and predicate bridges. This
is repeated Ttimes and the nal bridge determines the output label of each node.
In this paper, the rst term is implemented as a region proposal network that
infersN?
SEgiven the image, followed by a simple predicate proposal algorithm
that considers all possible entity pairs as N?
SP. The second term is fullled by the
proposed GB-Net which infers bridge edges by incorporating the rich structure
of the scene and commonsense graphs. Note that unlike most existing methods
[52,2], we do not factorize this into predicting entity classes given the image, and
then predicate classes given entities. Therefore, our formulation is more general
and allows the proposed method to classify entities and predicates jointly.
4 Method
The proposed method is illustrated in Figure 2. Given an image, our model rst
applies a Faster R-CNN [36] to detect objects, and represents them as scene
entity (SE) nodes. It also creates a scene predicate (SP) node for each pair of
entities, which forms a scene graph proposal, yet to be classied. Given this graph
and a background commonsense graph, each with xed internal connectivity, our
goal is to create bridge edges between the two graphs that connect each instance
(SE and SP node) to its corresponding class (CE and CP node). To this end, our
model initializes entity bridges by connecting each SE to the CE that matches
the label predicted by Faster R-CNN, and propagates messages among all nodes,
through every edge type with dedicated message passing parameters. Given the
updated node representations, it computes a pairwise similarity between every
SP node and every CP node, and nds maximal similarity pairs to connect scene
predicates to their corresponding classes, via predicate bridges. It also does the
same for entity nodes to potentially rene their bridges too. Given the new
bridges, it propagates messages again, and repeats this process for a predened
number of steps. The nal state of the bridge determines which class each node
belongs to, resulting in the output scene graph.

==== Page 8 ====
8 Alireza Zareian et al.
4.1 Graph initialization
The object detector outputs a set of ndetected objects, each with a bounding
boxbj, a label distribution pjand an RoI-aligned [36] feature vector vj. Then
we allocate a scene entity node (SE) for each object, and a scene predicate node
(SP) for each pair of objects, representing the potential predicate with the two
entities as its subject and object. Each entity is initialized using its RoI features
vj, and each predicate is initialized using the RoI features ujof a bounding box
enclosing the union of its subject and object. Formally, we can write, i.e.,
xSE
j=SE
init(vj);and xSP
j=SP
init(uj); (6)
whereSE
initandSP
initare two fully connected networks that are branched from
the backbone after ROI-align. To form a scene graph proposal, we connect each
predicate node to its subject and object via labeled edges. Specically, we dene
the following 4 edge types: for a triplet s p o, we connect ptosusing a
hasSubject edge,ptoousing a hasObject edge,stopusing a subjectOf
edge, andotopusing an objectOf edge. The reason we have two directions as
separate types is that in the message passing phase, the way we use predicate
information to update entities should be dierent from the way we use entities
to update predicates.
On the other hand, we initialize the commonsense graph with commonsense
entity nodes (CE) and commonsense predicate nodes (CP) using a linear projec-
tion of their word embeddings:
xCE
i=CE
init(en
i);and xCP
i=CP
init(ep
i): (7)
The commonsense graph also has various types of edges, such as UsedFor and
PartOf , as detailed in Section 5.2. Our method is independent of the types of
commonsense edges, and can utilize any provided graph from any source.
So far, we have two isolated graphs, scene and commonsense. An SE node
representing a detected Person intuitively refers to the Person concept in the
ontology, and hence the Person node in the commonsense graph. Therefore,
we connect each SE node to the CE node that corresponds the semantic label
predicted by Faster R-CNN, via a classifiedTo edge type. Instead of a hard
classication, we connect each entity to top Kbridge classes using pj(class distri-
bution predicted by Faster R-CNN) as weights. We also create a reverse connec-
tion from each CE node to corresponding SE nodes, using an hasInstance edge,
but with the same weights pj. As mentioned earlier, this is to make sure infor-
mation ows from commonsense to scene as well as scene to commonsense, but
not in the same way. We similarly dene two other edge types, classifiedTo
and hasInstance for predicates, which are initially an empty set, and will be
updated to bridge SP nodes to CP nodes as we explain in the following. These
4 edge types can be seen as exible bridges that connect the two xed graphs,
which are considered latent variables to be determined by the model.
This forms a heterogeneous graph with four types of nodes (SE, SP, CE, and
CP) and various types of edges: scene graph edges ESsuch as subjectOf , com-
monsense edgesECsuch as usedFor , and bridge edges EBsuch as classifiedTo .

==== Page 9 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 9
Next, we explain how our proposed method updates node representations and
bridge edges, while keeps commonsense and scene edges constant.
4.2 Successive message passing and bridging
Given a heterogeneous graph as described above, we employ a variant of GGNN [25]
to propagate information among nodes. First, each node representation is fed into
a fully connected network to compute outgoing messages, that is
m!
i=
send(x
i); (8)
for eachiand node type , wheresendis a trainable send head which has
shared weights across nodes of each type. After computing outgoing messages,
we send them through all outgoing edges, multiplying by the edge weight. Then
for each node, we aggregate incoming messages, by rst adding across edges
of the same type, and then concatenating across edge types. We compute the
incoming message for each node by applying another fully connected network
on the aggregated messages:
m 
j=
receive [
0Ek2E0![ X
(i;j;ak
ij)2Ekak
ijm0!
i!
; (9)
wherereceive is a trainable receive head and[denotes concatenation. Note that
the rst concatenation is over all 4 node types, the second concatenation is over
all edge types from 0to, and the sum is over all edges of that type, where i
andjare the head and tail nodes, and ak
ijis the edge weight. Given the incoming
message for each node, we update the representation of the node using a Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) update rule, following [4]:
z
j= 
W
zm 
j+U
zx
j
;
r
j= 
W
rm 
j+U
rx
j
;
h
j= tanh 
W
hm 
j+U
h(r
jx
j)
;
x
j((1 z
j)x
j+z
jh
j;(10)
whereis the sigmoid function, and W
:andU
:are trainable matrices that are
shared across nodes of the same type, but distinct for each node type . This
update rule can be seen as an extension of GGNN [25] to heterogeneous graphs,
with a more complex message aggregation strategy. Note that (means we
update the node representation. Mathematically, this means x
j(t+1)=U(x
j(t)),
whereUis the aforementioned update rule and ( t) denotes iteration number.
For simplicity, we drop this subscript throughout this paper.
So far, we have explained how to update node representations using graph
edges. Now using the new node representations, we should update the bridge

==== Page 10 ====
10 Alireza Zareian et al.
edgesEBthat connect scene nodes to commonsense nodes. To this end, we com-
pute a pairwise similarity from each SE to all CE nodes, and from each SP to
all CP nodes.
aEB
ij=exphxSE
i;xCE
jiEBP
j0exphxSE
i;xCE
j0iEB;wherehx;yiEB=SE
att(x)TCE
att(y);(11)
and similarly for predicates,
aPB
ij=exphxSP
i;xCP
jiPBP
j0exphxSP
i;xCP
j0iPB;wherehx;yiPB=SP
att(x)TCP
att(y):(12)
Here
attis a fully connected network that resembles attention head in transform-
ers. Note that since 
attis not shared across node types, our similarity metric is
asymmetric. We use each aEB
ijto set the edge weight of the classifiedTo edge
from xSE
itoxCE
j, as well as the hasInstance edge from xCE
jtoxSE
i. Similarly
we use each aPB
ijto set the weight of edges between xSP
iandxCP
j. In preliminary
experiments we realised that such fully connected bridges hurt performance in
large graphs. Hence, we only keep the top Kbridge values of aEB
ijfor eachi, and
set the rest to zero. We do the same thing for predicates, keeping the top Kbridge
values of aPB
ijfor eachi. Given the updated bridges, we propagate messages
again to update node representations, and iterate for a xed number of steps,
T. The nal values of aEB
ijandaPB
ijare the outputs of our model, which can be
used to classify each entity and predicate in the scene graph.
4.3 Training
We closely follow [2] which itself follows [52] for training procedure. Specically,
given the output and ground truth graphs, we align output entities and predi-
cates to ground truth counterparts. To align entities we use IoU and predicates
will be aligned naturally since they correspond to aligned pairs of entities. Then
we use the output probability scores of each node to dene a cross-entropy loss.
The sum of all node-level loss values will be the objective function to be mini-
mized using Adam [18].
Due to the highly imbalanced predicate statistics in Visual Genome, we
observed that best-performing models usually concentrate their performance
merely on the most frequent classes such as onandwearing . To alleviate this, we
modify the basic cross-entropy objective that is commonly used by assigning an
importance weight to each class. We follow the recently proposed class-balanced
loss [5] where the weight of each class is inversely proportional to its frequency.
More specically, we use the following loss function for each predicate node:
LP
i= 1 
1 njlogaPB
ij; (13)
wherejis the class index of the ground truth predicate aligned with i,njis
the frequency of class jin training data, and is a hyperparameter. Note that

==== Page 11 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 11
= 0 leads to a regular cross-entropy loss, and the more it approaches 1, the
more strictly it suppresses frequent classes. To be fair in comparison with other
methods, we include a variant of our method without reweighting, which still
outperforms all other methods.
5 Experiments
Following the literature, we use the large-scale Visual Genome benchmark [20]
to evaluate our method. We rst show our GB-Net outperforms the state of the
art, by extensively evaluating it on 24 performance metrics. Then we present an
ablation study to illustrate how each innovation contributes to the performance.
In the Supplementary Material, we also provide a per-class performance break-
down to show the consistency and robustness of our performance across frequent
and rare classes. That is accompanied by a computational speed analysis, and
several qualitative examples of our generated graphs compared to the state of
the art, side by side.
5.1 Task description
Visual Genome [20] consists of 108,077 images with annotated objects (entities)
and pairwise relationships (predicates), which is then post-processed by [44]
to create scene graphs. They use the most frequent 150 entity classes and 50
predicate classes to lter the annotations. Figure 1 shows an example of their
post-processed scene graphs which we use as ground truth. We closely follow
their evaluation settings such as train and test splits.
The task of scene graph generation, as described in Section 4, is equivalent to
theSGGen scenario proposed by [44] and followed ever since. Given an image,
the task of SGGen is to jointly infer entities and predicates from scratch. Since
this task is limited by the quality of the object proposals, [44] also introduced
two other tasks that more clearly evaluate entity and predicate recognition. In
SGCls , we take localization (here region proposal network) out of the picture, by
providing the model with ground truth bounding boxes during test, simulating a
perfect proposal model. In PredCls , we take object detection for granted, and
provide the model with not only ground truth bounding boxes, but also their
true entity class. In each task, the main evaluation metric is average per-image
recall of the top K subject-predicate-object triplets. The condence of a triplet
that is used for ranking is computed by multiplying the classication condence
of all three elements. Given the ground truth scene graph, each predicate forms a
triplet, which we match against the top Ktriplets in the output scene graph. A
triplet is matched if all three elements are classied correctly, and the bounding
boxes of subject and object match with an IoU of at least 0 :5. Besides the choice
ofK, there are two other choices to be made: (1) Whether or not to enforce the
so-called Graph Constraint (GC), which limits the top K triplets to only one
predicate for each ordered entity pair, and (2) Whether to compute the recall
for each predicate class separately and take the mean (mR), or compute a single

==== Page 12 ====
12 Alireza Zareian et al.
recall for all triplets (R) [2]. We comprehensively report both mean and overall
recall, both with and without GC, and conventionally use both 50 and 100 for
K, resulting in 8 metrics for each task, 24 in total.
5.2 Implementation details
We use three-layer fully connected networks with ReLU activation for all train-
able networks init,send,receive andatt. We set the dimension of node rep-
resentations to 1024, and perform 3 message passing steps, except in ablation
experiments where we try 1, 2 and 3. We tried various values for . Generally
the higher it is, mean recall improves and recall falls. We found 0 :999 is a good
trade-o, and chose Kbridge = 5 empirically. All hyperparameters are tuned us-
ing a validation set randomly selected from training data. We borrow the Faster
R-CNN trained by [52] and shared among all our baselines, which has a VGG-16
backbone and predicts 128 proposals.
In our commonsense graph, the nodes are the 151 entity classes and 51 pred-
icate classes that are xed by [44], including background. We use the GloVE
[33] embedding of category titles to initialize their node representation (via
init), and x GloVE during training. We compile our commonsense edges from
three sources, WordNet [30], ConceptNet [27], and Visual Genome. To sum-
marize, there are three groups of edge types in our commonsense graph. We
have SimilarTo from WordNet hierarchy, we have PartOf ,RelatedTo ,IsA,
MannerOf , and UsedFor from ConceptNet, and nally from VG training data we
have conditional probabilities of subject given predicate, predicate given subject,
subject given object, etc.We explain the details in the supplementary material.
The process of compiling and pruning the knowledge graph is semi-automatic
and takes less than a day from a single person. We make it publicly available
as a part of our code. We have also tried using each individual source (e.g. only
ConceptNet) independently, which requires less eort, and does not signicantly
impact the performance. There are also recent approaches to automate the pro-
cess of commonsense knowledge graph construction [1,13], which can be utilized
to further reduce the manual labor.
5.3 Main results
Table 1 summarizes our results in comparison to the state of the art. IMP+ refers
to the re-implementation of [44] by [52] using their new Faster R-CNN backbone.
That method does not use any external knowledge and only uses message passing
among the entities and predicates and then classies each. Hence, it can be seen
as a strong, but knowledge-free baseline. FREQ is a simple baseline proposed
by [52], which predicts the most frequent predicate for any given pair of entity
classes, solely based on statistics from the training data. FREQ surprisingly
outperforms IMP+, conrming the ecacy of commonsense in SGG.
SMN [52] applies bi-directional LSTMs on top of the entity features, then
classies each entity and each pair. They bias their classier logits using statis-
tics from FREQ, which improves their total recall signicantly, at the expense of

==== Page 13 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 13
Table 1. Evaluation in terms of mean and overall triplet recall, at top 50 and top
100, with and without Graph Constraint (GC), for the three tasks of SGGen ,SGCls
andPredCls . Numbers are in percentage. All baseline numbers were borrowed from
[2]. Top two methods for each metric is shown in bold anditalic respectively.
Task Metric GCMethod
IMP+ FREQ SMN KERN GB-Net GB-Net -
SGGenmR@50Y 3.8 4.3 5.3 6.4 6.1 7.1
N 5.4 5.9 9.3 11.7 9.8 11.7
mR@100Y 4.8 5.6 6.1 7.3 7.3 8.5
N 8.0 8.9 12.9 16.0 14.0 16.6
R@50Y20.7 23.5 27.2 27.1 26.4 26.3
N22.0 25.3 30.5 30.9 29.4 29.3
R@100Y24.5 27.6 30.3 29.8 30.0 29.9
N27.4 30.9 35.8 35.8 35.1 35.0
SGClsmR@50Y 5.8 6.8 7.1 9.4 9.6 12.7
N12.1 13.5 15.4 19.8 21.4 25.6
mR@100Y 6.0 7.8 7.6 10.0 10.2 13.4
N16.9 19.6 20.6 26.2 29.1 32.1
R@50Y34.6 32.4 35.8 36.7 38.0 37.3
N43.4 40.5 44.5 45.9 47.7 46.9
R@100Y35.4 34.0 36.5 37.4 38.8 38.0
N47.2 43.7 47.7 49.0 51.1 50.3
PredClsmR@50Y 9.8 13.3 13.3 17.7 19.3 22.1
N20.3 24.8 27.5 36.3 41.1 44.5
mR@100Y10.5 15.8 14.4 19.2 20.9 24.0
N28.9 37.3 37.9 49.0 55.4 58.7
R@50Y59.3 59.9 65.2 65.8 66.6 66.6
N75.2 71.3 81.1 81.9 83.6 83.5
R@100Y61.3 64.1 67.1 67.6 68.2 68.2
N83.6 81.2 88.3 88.9 90.5 90.3
higher bias against less frequent classes, as revealed by [2]. More recently, KERN
[2] encodes VG statistics into the edge weights of the graph, which is then in-
corporated by propagating messages. Since it encodes statistics more implicitly,
KERN is less biased compared to SMN, which improves mR. Our method im-
proves both R and mR signicantly, and our class-balanced model, GB-Net -,
further enhances mR (+2 :7% in average) without hurting R by much (  0:2%).
We observed that the state of the art performance has been saturated in the
SGGen setting, especially for overall recall. This is partly because object detec-
tion performance is a bottleneck that limits the performance. It is worth noting
that mean recall is a more important metric than overall recall, since most SGG
methods tend to score a high overall recall by investing on few most frequent
classes, and ignoring the rest [2]. As shown in Table 1, our method achieves sig-
nicant improvements in mean recall. We provide in-depth performance analysis

==== Page 14 ====
14 Alireza Zareian et al.
Table 2. Ablation study on Visual Genome. All numbers are in percentage, and graph
constraint is enforced.
MethodSGGen PredCls
mR@50 mR@100 R@50 R@100 mR@50 mR@100 R@50 R@100
No Knowledge 5.5 6.6 25.3 28.8 15.4 16.8 62.5 64.5
T= 1 5.6 6.7 24.9 28.5 15.6 17.1 62.1 64.2
T= 2 5.7 6.9 26.1 29.7 18.2 19.7 66.7 68.4
GB-Net 6.1 7.3 26.4 30.0 18.2 19.7 67.0 68.6
by comparing our recall per predicate class with that of the state of the art, as
well as qualitative analysis in the Supplementary Material.
There are other recent SGG methods that are not used for comparison here,
because their evaluation settings are not identical to ours, and their code is not
publicly available to the best of our knowledge [10,34]. For instance, [34] reports
only 8 out of our 24 evaluation metrics, and although our method is superior in
6 metrics out of those 8, that is not sucient to fairly compare the two methods.
5.4 Ablation study
To further explain our performance improvement, Table 2 compares our full
method with its weaker variants. Specically, to investigate the eectiveness of
commonsense knowledge, we remove the commonsense graph and instead classify
each node in our graph using a 2-layer fully connected classier after message
passing. This negatively impacts performance in all metrics, proving our method
is able to exploit commonsense knowledge through the proposed bridging tech-
nique. Moreover, to highlight the importance of our proposed message passing
and bridge renement process, we repeated the experiments with fewer steps.
We observe the performance drops signicantly with fewer steps, proving the
eectiveness of our model, but it saturates as we go beyond 3 steps.
6 Conclusion
We proposed a new method for Scene Graph Generation that incorporates exter-
nal commonsense knowledge in a novel, graphical neural framework. We unied
the formulation of scene graph and commonsense graph as two types of knowl-
edge graph, which are fused into a single graph through a dynamic message
passing and bridging algorithm. Our method iteratively propagates messages to
update nodes, then compares nodes to update bridge edges, and repeats until the
two graphs are carefully connected. Through extensive experiments, we showed
our method outperforms the state of the art in various metrics.
Acknowledgement This work was supported in part by Contract N6600119C4032
(NIWC and DARPA). The views expressed are those of the authors and do not
reect the ocial policy of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.

==== Page 15 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 15
References
1. Bosselut, A., Rashkin, H., Sap, M., Malaviya, C., Celikyilmaz, A., Choi, Y.: Comet:
Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05317 (2019)
2. Chen, T., Yu, W., Chen, R., Lin, L.: Knowledge-embedded routing network for
scene graph generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6163{6171 (2019)
3. Chen, X., Li, L.J., Fei-Fei, L., Gupta, A.: Iterative visual reasoning beyond convo-
lutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 7239{7248 (2018)
4. Cho, K., Van Merri enboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk,
H., Bengio, Y.: Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 (2014)
5. Cui, Y., Jia, M., Lin, T.Y., Song, Y., Belongie, S.: Class-balanced loss based on
eective number of samples. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9268{9277 (2019)
6. Dietz, L., Kotov, A., Meij, E.: Utilizing knowledge graphs for text-centric informa-
tion retrieval. In: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research &
Development in Information Retrieval. pp. 1387{1390. ACM (2018)
7. Fader, A., Zettlemoyer, L., Etzioni, O.: Open question answering over curated and
extracted knowledge bases. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 1156{1165. ACM
(2014)
8. Flanigan, J., Thomson, S., Carbonell, J., Dyer, C., Smith, N.A.: A discriminative
graph-based parser for the abstract meaning representation. In: Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers). pp. 1426{1436 (2014)
9. Gardner, M., Dasigi, P., Iyer, S., Suhr, A., Zettlemoyer, L.: Neural semantic pars-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts. pp. 17{18 (2018)
10. Gu, J., Zhao, H., Lin, Z., Li, S., Cai, J., Ling, M.: Scene graph generation with
external knowledge and image reconstruction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1969{1978 (2019)
11. Herzig, R., Raboh, M., Chechik, G., Berant, J., Globerson, A.: Mapping images
to scene graphs with permutation-invariant structured prediction. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 7211{7221 (2018)
12. Hudson, D.A., Manning, C.D.: Learning by abstraction: The neural state machine.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.03950 (2019)
13. Ilievski, F., Szekely, P., Cheng, J., Zhang, F., Qasemi, E.: Consolidating common-
sense knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06114 (2020)
14. Johnson, J., Gupta, A., Fei-Fei, L.: Image generation from scene graphs. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 1219{1228 (2018)
15. Johnson, J., Krishna, R., Stark, M., Li, L.J., Shamma, D., Bernstein, M., Fei-Fei,
L.: Image retrieval using scene graphs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 3668{3678 (2015)
16. Kato, K., Li, Y., Gupta, A.: Compositional learning for human object interaction.
In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). pp.
234{251 (2018)

==== Page 16 ====
16 Alireza Zareian et al.
17. Khashabi, D., Khot, T., Sabharwal, A., Roth, D.: Question answering as global
reasoning over semantic abstractions. In: Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Ar-
ticial Intelligence (2018)
18. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
19. Kipf, T.N., Welling, M.: Semi-supervised classication with graph convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016)
20. Krishna, R., Zhu, Y., Groth, O., Johnson, J., Hata, K., Kravitz, J., Chen, S.,
Kalantidis, Y., Li, L.J., Shamma, D.A., et al.: Visual genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International Journal of
Computer Vision 123(1), 32{73 (2017)
21. Lee, C.W., Fang, W., Yeh, C.K., Frank Wang, Y.C.: Multi-label zero-shot learning
with structured knowledge graphs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1576{1585 (2018)
22. Li, M., Lin, Y., Hoover, J., Whitehead, S., Voss, C., Dehghani, M., Ji, H.: Multilin-
gual entity, relation, event and human value extraction. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Demonstrations). pp. 110{115 (2019)
23. Li, Y., Ouyang, W., Zhou, B., Shi, J., Zhang, C., Wang, X.: Factorizable net: an
ecient subgraph-based framework for scene graph generation. In: Proceedings of
the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). pp. 335{351 (2018)
24. Li, Y., Ouyang, W., Zhou, B., Wang, K., Wang, X.: Scene graph generation from
objects, phrases and region captions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 1261{1270 (2017)
25. Li, Y., Tarlow, D., Brockschmidt, M., Zemel, R.: Gated graph sequence neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05493 (2015)
26. Liang, K., Guo, Y., Chang, H., Chen, X.: Visual relationship detection with deep
structural ranking. In: Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence
(2018)
27. Liu, H., Singh, P.: Conceptneta practical commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT tech-
nology journal 22(4), 211{226 (2004)
28. Liu, Y., Wang, R., Shan, S., Chen, X.: Structure inference net: Object detection
using scene-level context and instance-level relationships. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 6985{6994 (2018)
29. Marino, K., Salakhutdinov, R., Gupta, A.: The more you know: Using knowledge
graphs for image classication. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04844 (2016)
30. Miller, G.A.: Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM
38(11), 39{41 (1995)
31. Newell, A., Deng, J.: Pixels to graphs by associative embedding. In: Advances in
neural information processing systems. pp. 2171{2180 (2017)
32. Pei, M., Jia, Y., Zhu, S.C.: Parsing video events with goal inference and intent
prediction. In: 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 487{494.
IEEE (2011)
33. Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.: Glove: Global vectors for word repre-
sentation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing (EMNLP). pp. 1532{1543 (2014)
34. Qi, M., Li, W., Yang, Z., Wang, Y., Luo, J.: Attentive relational networks for map-
ping images to scene graphs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3957{3966 (2019)

==== Page 17 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 17
35. Qi, S., Wang, W., Jia, B., Shen, J., Zhu, S.C.: Learning human-object interactions
by graph parsing neural networks. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV). pp. 401{417 (2018)
36. Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J.: Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detec-
tion with region proposal networks. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems. pp. 91{99 (2015)
37. Schuster, S., Krishna, R., Chang, A., Fei-Fei, L., Manning, C.D.: Generating seman-
tically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved image retrieval.
In: Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and language. pp. 70{80 (2015)
38. Shi, J., Zhang, H., Li, J.: Explainable and explicit visual reasoning over scene
graphs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 8376{8384 (2019)
39. Teney, D., Liu, L., van den Hengel, A.: Graph-structured representations for visual
question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1{9 (2017)
40. Tu, K., Meng, M., Lee, M.W., Choe, T.E., Zhu, S.C.: Joint video and text parsing
for understanding events and answering queries. IEEE MultiMedia 21(2), 42{70
(2014)
41. Wadden, D., Wennberg, U., Luan, Y., Hajishirzi, H.: Entity, relation, and event ex-
traction with contextualized span representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03546
(2019)
42. Wang, X., Ye, Y., Gupta, A.: Zero-shot recognition via semantic embeddings and
knowledge graphs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6857{6866 (2018)
43. Woo, S., Kim, D., Cho, D., Kweon, I.S.: Linknet: Relational embedding for scene
graph. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 560{570 (2018)
44. Xu, D., Zhu, Y., Choy, C.B., Fei-Fei, L.: Scene graph generation by iterative mes-
sage passing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. pp. 5410{5419 (2017)
45. Xu, H., Jiang, C., Liang, X., Li, Z.: Spatial-aware graph relation network for large-
scale object detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9298{9307 (2019)
46. Xu, H., Jiang, C., Liang, X., Lin, L., Li, Z.: Reasoning-rcnn: Unifying adaptive
global reasoning into large-scale object detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6419{6428 (2019)
47. Yang, J., Lu, J., Lee, S., Batra, D., Parikh, D.: Graph r-cnn for scene graph gener-
ation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
pp. 670{685 (2018)
48. Yang, X., Tang, K., Zhang, H., Cai, J.: Auto-encoding scene graphs for image cap-
tioning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 10685{10694 (2019)
49. Yao, T., Pan, Y., Li, Y., Mei, T.: Exploring visual relationship for image captioning.
In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). pp.
684{699 (2018)
50. Yu, J., Lu, Y., Qin, Z., Zhang, W., Liu, Y., Tan, J., Guo, L.: Modeling text with
graph convolutional network for cross-modal information retrieval. In: Pacic Rim
Conference on Multimedia. pp. 223{234. Springer (2018)
51. Zareian, A., Karaman, S., Chang, S.F.: Weakly supervised visual semantic parsing.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 3736{3745 (2020)

==== Page 18 ====
18 Alireza Zareian et al.
52. Zellers, R., Yatskar, M., Thomson, S., Choi, Y.: Neural motifs: Scene graph parsing
with global context. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5831{5840 (2018)
53. Zhan, Y., Yu, J., Yu, T., Tao, D.: On exploring undetermined relationships for
visual relationship detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5128{5137 (2019)
54. Zhang, C., Chao, W.L., Xuan, D.: An empirical study on leveraging scene graphs
for visual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.12133 (2019)
55. Zhao, Y., Zhu, S.C.: Image parsing with stochastic scene grammar. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 73{81 (2011)

==== Page 19 ====
Supplementary Material
Fig. 1. Comparison of our method GB-Net with KERN [2] in terms of recall at 50 per
predicate class, without graph constraint. The horizontal axis was ordered decreasingly
based on frequency in VG.
In this document, we provide additional details that were omitted from the
main manuscript due to the space constraint. We start by an analysis of our
quantitative results, were we show our method addresses the shortcoming of
the state of the art in modeling the tail of the predicate distribution. We then
report an empirical analysis of the computational cost of our method, showing
it is signicantly faster than the state of the art, while also more accurate. After
that, we clearly describe the process of creating our commonsense graph, and
we provide a set of qualitative examples to illustrate how our method exploits
such commonsense knowledge. We conclude by describing the code that we will
provide to reproduce the results.
A Per-class performance
Figure 1 illustrates the recall of our method for each predicate class separately,
where predicates are ordered decreasingly according to their frequency in the
training set. While state-of-the-art methods such as KERN [2] obtain much lower
performance on the tail of the distribution, our method signicantly improves
the performance of the tail without losing on the frequent predicates, resulting
in a more reliable and consistent performance overall.
B Computational cost
We compute the training and test speed of our method and compare to KERN
[2] using identical hardware, with one GPU of type NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080

==== Page 20 ====
20 Alireza Zareian et al.
Table 1. Time and memory cost of our method compared to the state of the art
MethodTest time Train time # parameters
(sec/image) (min/epoch) (million)
KERN [2] 0.79 401.2 405.2
GB-Net 0.52 191.6 444.6
Ti with 11 gigabytes of memory, and summarize the results in Table 1. Perhaps
the most important aspect of computation is the run time when deploying the
model on new images. To this end, we run each trained model on the entire test
set of Visual Genome (VG), i.e.26446 images, and get the average run time over
all images in terms of seconds. Our method is 34% faster than the state of the
art, while being signicantly more accurate as demonstrated in Table 1 of the
main paper.
Another important factor is the duration of training. We record the time it
takes to train each model on one epoch of the VG training set, i.e.56224 images,
and get the average over 10 training epochs. As Table 1 shows, our method is
more than twice faster than the state of the art. One of the reasons is that
KERN has two stages of message passing, each with three steps, rst to infer
entities, and then to infer predicates, while our method infers both entities and
predicates jointly, through 3 steps of global message passing.
Finally, we compare the number of trainable parameters each method has.
Our method has 10% more parameters than KERN, while it is 52% and 34%
faster than KERN during training and test respectively. Note that in all methods,
139.8 millions of the parameters belong to the Faster R-CNN detector, which we
x while training for scene graph generation.
C Commonsense graph construction
Our method utilizes a background knowledge graph which encodes commonsense
knowledge about the target entity and predicate classes. Such information have
been proved to be eective for scene graph generation [2,10]. Intuitively, this is
because they can help the model disambiguate between possible visual classes,
using higher-level semantic meanings and relationships of classes. For instance,
object aordance is a type of commonsense, because a typical human knows
aBike can be used for riding . This fact can be used by the model when it
perceives a bounding box of Person above a bounding box of Bike , and it is not
sure whether to classify their relationship as riding oronTopOf ormountedOn .
Commonsense does not have to be homogeneous. Besides aordance, onto-
logical hierarchy is another type of useful information for scene graph generation.
A typical human knows ManandWoman are both subtypes of Person , and hence
can generalize the properties of MantoWoman . Another example is statistical
commonsense, where an average human knows a Vase is more likely to be on

==== Page 21 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 21
aTable than anywhere else, not because of its semantic characteristics, but
because it is usually that way.
Our method is independent of the content of the commonsense graph, as
long as its nodes are exactly the set of classes required by the target task,
and every fact is encoded as a directed, typed, weighted edge. Accordingly, our
commonsense graph has 150 entities and 50 predicates as conventionally used in
the SGG task, and we compile the edges ( i.e.facts) from a variety of sources,
to make it as rich and comprehensive as possible. To this end, we rst manually
nd for each of the 200 VG classes, the WordNet Synset [30] that represents
its meaning. This step is required to x a deterministic meaning for each class,
such that for instance, Cabinet always represents the furniture piece and is not
confused with its meaning in politics.
Given the 200 nodes that are grounded on WordNet, we start collecting com-
monsense facts to encode as edges. The most prominent repository of common-
sense knowledge is ConceptNet [27], which is a large-scale graph where nodes
areconcepts , including but not limited to entity and predicate classes, and edges
encode relational facts about pairs of concepts. There are over 21 million edges
of 34 types connecting over 8 million nodes in ConceptNet. We query each of
our 200 nodes to nd its semantically closest node in ConceptNet, by using the
WordNet Synset title and the ConceptNet search API. Then we query all Con-
ceptNet edges between each pair of those 200 nodes, and further manually clean
and prune those edges, leading to 104 edges of 5 types. Those 5 edge types are:
partOf as in Hand-partOf-Person ,relatedTo as in Lamp-relatedTo-Light ,
isAas in Dog-isA-Animal ,mannerOf as in MountedOn-mannerOf-AttachedTo ,
and usedFor as in Bike-usedFor-Riding . Further, for asymmetric relation-
ships (all except relatedTo ), we create a reverse edge with a distinct type. For
instance, because we have Hand -partOf -Person , we also create the fact Person -
hasPart -Hand . Our message passing framework, unlike conventional ones, only
propagates messages in the direction of each edge, and not backwards. Hence,
the way the Person node is aected by Hand would be dierent from how Hand
is aected by Person , because we do not share parameters across edge types.
Since there is no edge condence in ConceptNet, these edges all have a binary
weight (1:0 if exists and 0 :0 if not).
Besides ConceptNet, we also use WordNet to get ontological similarity of
words. Although WordNet is not originally identied as a commonsense graph,
the knowledge we extract from it is trivial, generally known information, and
hence can be considered commonsense. Inspired in part by [16], we use three sim-
ilarity metrics of the WordNet API (namely path similarity, Leacock Chordorow
(LCH) similarity, and Wu-Palmer (WUP) similarity [30]), and a manually tuned
threshold for each, to determine whether two entity classes are relevant or not.
This is encoded in the edge type WordNetSimilarTo with binary weights. This
strategy does not work well for predicate classes, so this edge is only between
pairs of entities.
Finally, we use the VG training set to get co-occurrence statistics between
categories, inspired by [52] but in a more comprehensive manner. We estimate

==== Page 22 ====
22 Alireza Zareian et al.
conditional probabilities of subject given predicate, object given predicate, pred-
icate given subject, predicate given object, subject given object, and object given
subject, as well as the correlation of entity classes as they connect to the same
predicate, and the correlation of predicate classes as they connect to the same
entity. These edge types capture a variety of statistical interactions between
classes. Each of those statistics result in a pairwise matrix, which we then spar-
sify by keeping the top 5 element in each row and setting the rest to zero. For
instance, riding is connected to its top 5 most likely objects, namely Horse ,
Bike ,Skateboard ,Motorcycle andWave . Note that although riding is not con-
nected to Elephant , its 6th most likely object, Elephant and Horse are both
connected to Animal through isAedges, and they are connected to each other
through WordNetSimilarTo , allowing our message passing framework to exploit
this rich structure and infer Elephant can be ridden too.
Overall, these three sources lead to 19 edge types (including backward edge
types for asymmetric relationships). Carefully compiled from multiple sources,
our commonsense graph is more sophisticated and complete, compared to those
made for recent knowledge-aware computer vision systems such as [3] and [16].
Note that none of those papers publicized their knowledge graph, so we were
unable to compare. The process of graph generation involves manual eort, thus
we have made our commonsense graph publicly available as a part of our code.
D Qualitative results
To demonstrate the performance of our method qualitatively, Figures 2-10 show
examples of scene graphs generated by our method, compared to the ones gener-
ated by KERN. These examples illustrate how our method predicts more com-
monsensical graphs despite visual ambiguities in the scene. We observed several
patterns in which our method outperforms KERN. Since KERN (and most other
SGG methods such as [52]) rst classify each entity and then classify predicates,
they are unable to utilize predicate semantics to enhance entity classication.
Thus in many cases, KERN misclassies an entity, due to visual ambiguity and
clutter, while our method makes the correct prediction that might be less ap-
parent visually, but lead to a more consistent scene graph semantically. In some
other cases, KERN misclassies an entity not because it is visually cluttered, but
because the bounding box is too loose and covers a big portion of background.
Our method is more robust to such bounding box inaccuracies, resulting a higher
overall performance. Finally, in some cases entities are classied correctly by
KERN, but the choice of predicates is inappropriate. Our method usually picks
the correct predicate, in accordance to commonsense knowledge, such as object
aordances. More detailed discussion can be found in each gure's caption.
E Software package
We will provide a software package that reproduces every single reported num-
ber, i.e., all numbers in Table 1 and 2 of the main paper. To make it easy to

==== Page 23 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 23
laptop
book
laptop_1table
table_1laptop_2
laptop_3
laptop
book
laptop_1room (table)
desk (table_1)laptop_2
laptop_3
laptop
tableon
booknear
on
table_1onlaptop_1onwith
with
laptop_2on
laptop_3on
laptop
room (table)in (on)
booknear
on
desk (table_1)onlaptop_1in (on)with
with
laptop_2on
laptop_3in (on)
Fig. 2. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
Misclassied entities and predicates are colored red, and the correct class is included
in parentheses. KERN misclassies the table as a room, possibly because the bounding
box contains the entire scene, but this leads to incorrect triplets such as laptop on
room. Our method predicts the more appropriate class table, that makes every triplet
more commonsensical.

==== Page 24 ====
24 Alireza Zareian et al.
building
clock
face
hand
building
clock
clock_1 (face)
hand
building
clockon (attached to)
facehas
onhandon
building
clockon (attached to)
clock_1 (face)has
onhandon
Fig. 3. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
The concept of a clock face is challenging for KERN but our method can produce such
output, by exploiting the prior knowledge and statistics that clocks can have faces and
the face would be on the clock. KERN predicts the triplet clock has clock, which does
not make sense.
reproduce, we provide an IPython Notebook for each experiment. We also pro-
vide a README le with a step by step guide, as well as a mapping between
the notebook les and table cells in the paper. To reproduce the results from
scratch, one would run the training notebook of each experiment followed by the
evaluation notebook. To bypass training, we provide all the parameter check-
points through a link in the README. This way the readers only need to run
the evaluation notebook. In case a GPU is not available for deploying the model,
we also provide a link to the pre-computed model outputs in the README. Fi-
nally, the notebooks already contain the saved evaluation results within them,
which can be checked without running evaluation at all.

==== Page 25 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 25
benchboy
earhair
handnosesidewalk
benchfence (boy)
earhair
handnosesidewalk
bench sidewalkonboyear
has
hairhas
handhas
nosehas
bench sidewalkonfence (boy)earhas
hair has
handbehind (has)
nosehas
Fig. 4. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies the boy as fence, which leads to the nonsensical triplets fence has
ear, fence has nose, etc. Our method is less likely to make such meaningless predictions.

==== Page 26 ====
26 Alireza Zareian et al.
bananabanana_1 pant (jean)man
shirt
tablewoman
bananabanana_1 pant (jean)man
shirt
fruit (table)woman
banana
tableon
banana_1onpant (jean)man shirtwearing
womanwearing
banana
fruit (table)in (on)
banana_1in (on)pant (jean)man shirtwearing
womanwearing
Fig. 5. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies the table as fruit, possibly because it is entirely covered by fruites.
But this leads to nonsensical triplet banana in fruit. Our method correctly classies
the table, which leads to a more commonsensical scene graph.

==== Page 27 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 27
beach
girl
kite
beach
girl
tail (kite)
beach
girlon (walking on)
kiteholding
beach
girlon (walking on)
tail (kite)with (holding)
Fig. 6. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies the kite as a tail, because it actually looks more like a tail. Our
method predicts kite that is visually less clear, but leads to a more commonsensical
graph overall.
curtaincurtain_1
desklamp (laptop)window
curtaincurtain_1
desklamp (laptop)curtain_2 (window)
curtain
windowon
curtain_1ondesk lamp (laptop)on
curtain
curtain_2 (window)on
curtain_1near (on)desk lamp (laptop)on
Fig. 7. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right). Our
method correctly detects the two pieces of curtain on window, while KERN predicts
the less appropriate triplet curtain on curtain, possibly because the bounding box of
the window contains the curtain as well.

==== Page 28 ====
28 Alireza Zareian et al.
bear
bear_1
faceheadleg
bear
rock (bear_1)
faceheadleg
bearbear_1faceof
headof
legof
bearrock (bear_1)face on (of)
headon (of)
legof
Fig. 8. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies the bear as rock, possibly due to the too loose bounding box that
includes rocks as well. This leads to nonsensical triplets such as face on rock and head
on rock, while our method produces more likely and accurate triplets face of bear and
head of bear.

==== Page 29 ====
Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 29
fencegiraffe
legleg_1leg_2neck
fencefence_1 (giraffe)
legleg_1leg_2neck
fence
giraffenear (in front of)
leg has
leg_1has
leg_2hasneckof
fence
fence_1 (giraffe)on (in front of)
leg has
leg_1has
leg_2hasneckon (of)
Fig. 9. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies the girae as a fence, leading to nonsensical triplets such as fence
on fence, fence has leg, etc. Our method avoids such inappropriates compositions.
car windshield
street (car) windshield
car windshieldon
street (car) windshieldon
Fig. 10. Example comparison of our method GB-Net (left) with KERN [2] (right).
KERN misclassies car as street due to the extreme occlusion, while our method ex-
ploits the fact that cars are more likely to have windshields than streets.

