==== Page 1 ====
Captum: A unied and generic model
interpretability library for PyTorch
Narine Kokhlikyan, Vivek Miglani, Miguel Martin,
Edward Wang, Bilal Alsallakh, Jonathan Reynolds,
Alexander Melnikov, Natalia Kliushkina,
Carlos Araya, Siqi Yan, Orion Reblitz-Richardson
Facebook AI
fnarine, vivekm, miguelmartin, hack, bilalsal,
jonreynolds, sanekmelnikov, natalial, caraya,
siqi, orionrg@fb.com
Abstract
In this paper we introduce a novel, unied, open-source model inter-
pretability library for PyTorch [12]. The library contains generic imple-
mentations of a number of gradient and perturbation-based attribution
algorithms, also known as feature, neuron and layer importance algo-
rithms, as well as a set of evaluation metrics for these algorithms. It
can be used for both classication and non-classication models including
graph-structured models built on Neural Networks (NN). In this paper we
give a high-level overview of supported attribution algorithms and show
how to perform memory-ecient and scalable computations. We empha-
size that the three main characteristics of the library are multimodality,
extensibility and ease of use. Multimodality supports dierent modality
of inputs such as image, text, audio or video. Extensibility allows adding
new algorithms and features. The library is also designed for easy under-
standing and use. Besides, we also introduce an interactive visualization
tool called Captum Insights that is built on top of Captum library and
allows sample-based model debugging and visualization using feature im-
portance metrics.
Keywords: Interpretability, Attribution, Multi-Modal, Model Un-
derstanding
1 Introduction
Given the complexity and black-box nature of NN models, there is a strong de-
mand for clear understanding of how those models reason. Model interpretabil-
ity aims to describe model internals in human understandable terms and is an
Equal Contribution
1

==== Page 2 ====
important eld of Explainable AI [6]. While building interpretable models is
encouraged, many existing state-of-the-art NNs are not designed to be inter-
pretable, thus the development of algorithms that explain black-box models
becomes highly desirable. This is particularly important when AI is used in
domains such as healthcare, nance or self-driving vehicles where establishing
trust in AI-driven systems is critical.
Some of the fundamental approaches that interpret black-box models are
feature, neuron and layer importance algorithms, also known as attribution
algorithms. Existing frameworks such as DeepExplain [3], Alibi [8] and Inter-
pretML [11] have been developed to unify those algorithms in one framework and
make them accessible to all machine learning model developers and practition-
ers. These frameworks, however, have insucient support for PyTorch models.
In Captum, we provide generic implementations of a number of gradient and
perturbation-based attribution algorithms that can be applied to any PyTorch
model of any modality. The library is easily extensible and lets users scale com-
putations across multiple GPUs and handles large-sized input by dividing them
into smaller pieces, thereby preventing out of memory situations.
Another important aspect is that both qualitative and quantitative evalua-
tion of attributions are dicult. Visual explanations can be misleading [1] and
evaluation metrics are subjective or domain specic [18]. To address these issues,
we provide generic implementations of two evaluation metrics called indelity
and max-sensitivity proposed in [19]. These metrics can be used in combination
with any PyTorch model and most attribution algorithms.
Lastly, model understanding research largely focuses on the Computer Vi-
sion (CV) domain whereas there are many unexplored NN applications that
desperately need model understanding tools. Adapting CV-specic implemen-
tations for those applications is not always straightforward, thus the need for a
well-tested and generic library that can be easily applied to multiple domains
across research and production.
2 An Overview of the Algorithms
The attribution algorithms in Captum can be grouped into three main cate-
gories: primary-, neuron- and layer- attributions, as shown in Figure 1. Pri-
mary attribution algorithms are the traditional feature importance algorithms
that allow us to attribute output predictions to model inputs. Layer attribution
variants allow us to attribute output predictions to all neurons in a hidden layer
and neuron attribution methods allow us to attribute an internal, hidden neuron
to the inputs of the model. In most cases, both neuron and layer variants are
slight modications of the primary attribution algorithms.
Most attribution algorithms in Captum can be categorized into gradient and
perturbation-based approaches as also depicted in Figure 2. Some of these al-
gorithms such as GradCam [13], GuidedGradCam [13], GuidedBackProp [16],
Deconvolution [20] and Occlusion [20] are more popular in the CV community,
where they stem from. However, our implementations of those algorithms are
2

==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1: An overview of all three types of attribution variants with example
code snippets. The rst variant depicted on the far-left side of the diagram rep-
resents primary attribution. The algorithms that belong to this group attribute
the outputs of the model to its inputs. The middle one allows to attribute in-
ternal neurons to the inputs of the model and the one on the right-most side
allows to attribute the outputs of the models to all neurons in a hidden layer.
generic and can be applied to any model that meets certain requirements dic-
tated by those approaches. For example, GradCam and GuidedGradCam only
makes sense for convolutional models.
NoiseTunnel includes generic implementations of SmoothGrad, SmoothGrad
Square and VarGrad smoothing techniques proposed in [15]. These methods
help to mitigate noise in the attributions and can be used in combination with
most attribution algorithms depicted in Figure 2.
The attribution quality of a number of algorithms such as Integrated Gradi-
ents [17], DeepLift [14], SHAP variants [9], Feature Ablation and Occlusion [20]
depend on the choice of baseline, also known as reference, that needs to be care-
fully chosen by the user. Baselines express the absence of some input feature
and are an integral part of many feature importance equations. For example,
black and white images or the average of those two are common baselines for
image classication tasks.
From the implementation and usage perspective, all algorithms follow a uni-
ed API and signature. This makes it easy to compare the algorithms and
switch from one attribution approach to another. The code snippets in Figure
1 demonstrate examples of how to use primary, neuron and layer attribution
algorithms in Captum.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Figure 2: An overview of all the attribution algorithms in Captum. The al-
gorithms grouped on the left side of the diagram are the primary and neuron
attribution algorithms. The ones on the right side of the diagram are layer
attribution variants. Besides that we can also recognize color-coding of orange
for gradient, green for perturbation and blue for algorithms that are neither
perturbation nor gradient-based.
2.1 Scalability
Many state-of-the-art Neural Networks with a large number of model parame-
ters use large-sized inputs which, ultimately, leads to computationally expensive
forward and backward passes. We want to make sure we leverage available mem-
ory and CPU/GPU resources eciently when performing attribution. In order
to avoid out of memory situations for certain algorithms, especially the ones
with internal input expansion, we slice inputs into smaller chunks, perform the
computations sequentially on each chunk and aggregate resulting attributions.
This is especially useful for algorithms such as Integrated Gradients [17] and
Layer Conductance [4] because they internally expand the inputs based on the
number of integral approximation steps. Being able to chunk the inputs into
smaller sizes can theoretically allow us to perform integral approximation for
innite number of steps.
In case of feature perturbation, if the inputs are small and we have enough
memory resources available, we can perturb multiple features together in one
input batch. This requires that we expand the inputs by the number of features
that we perturb together and helps to improve runtime performance of all our
feature perturbation algorithms.
In addition to this, all algorithms support PyTorch DataParallel, which per-
forms model forward and backward passes simultaneously on multiple GPUs
4

==== Page 5 ====
Table 1: Runtime performance of Integrated Gradients and Feature ablation for
VGG19 with a single input image of shape: 3 x 224 x 224
Number of GPUs Execution Time in seconds
Int. Grads Feature Abl.
1 41.62 140.4
4 26.41 38.39
8 15.06 22.02
and improves attribution runtime signicantly. We made this available for all
layer and neuron attribution algorithms, including Layer Activation and Noise-
Tunnel.
In one of our experiments, we used Integrated Gradients on a pre-trained
VGG19 model, for a single 3 x 224 x 224 input image in a GPU environment that
has 8 GPUs, each 16GB memory available and gradually increased the number
of GPUs while keeping the number of integral approximation steps constant (in
this case 2990). From the second column of Table 1 we can see how the execution
time decreases substantially as we increase the number of GPUs. In the second
experiment we used the same execution environment, pre-trained model, input
image and performed feature ablation by ablating multiple features in one batch
using model's single forward pass. Based on the experimental results shown in
third column of Table 1 we can tell that by increasing the number of GPUs from
1 to 8 the execution time drops by approximately 85%.
3 Evaluation
As mentioned in the sections above, both qualitative and quantitative evalu-
ation of feature, neuron and layer importances are challenging research areas.
Human annotations based on visual perception are often subjective, and many
quantitative evaluation metrics rely on priors of a dataset domain. We imple-
mented two metrics, indelity and maximum sensitivity proposed in [19], in a
generic manner for use with any PyTorch model and most Captum algorithms.
Similar to other algorithms, we can perform multiple perturbations simultane-
ously which ultimately helps to improve runtime performance. Indelity is the
generalization of sensitivity-n [3] metric that relies on the completeness axiom,
an important property of many attribution algorithms, that states that the sum
of the attributions is equal to the dierences of the NN function at its input and
baseline. Given x2 RNas input,y2 Ras output, a NN model represented by
a continuous function F: RN! R, an attribution function  : F RN! RN
and a meaningful perturbation I2 RNwith a probability measure I, the
indelity of the attribution function  for input sample xand NN predictor
functionFis dened as:
5

==== Page 6 ====
INFDI(;F;x ) = EII[(IT(F;x) (F(x) F(x I)))2] (1)
The formulation 1 is for real-valued perturbations Iand local attribution func-
tions  that describes the changes of the output when the inputs are slightly
perturbed based on the denitions in [3]. Examples of these type of attribu-
tion functions are Saliency, GuidedBackprop, Deconvolution, GradCam, Guid-
edGradCam and DeepLift and Integrated Gradients without multiplying by
x x0, wherex02 RNis the baseline chosen for input x.
Global attribution functions describe marginal eects of the inputs on the
outputs of the model with respect to a chosen baseline [3]. Examples of such at-
tribution functions are Integrated Gradients, DeepLift, SHAP variant of DeepLift
and Gradient SHAP aka Expected Gradients [5]. The mathematical formula-
tions of those methods multiply the resulting saliency maps by x x0.
In case of global attributions, x0baseline represents the perturbed input
corresponding to xand ifx x06= 0, then we can compute the indelity score
without multiplying ( F;x) with the ITreal-valued perturbations. This is
because (F;x) already multiplies the sensitivity scores by x x0. In this case
ITis reassigned a new role indicating the presence of x x0perturbations using
a binary representation. Hence, in case of global attributions, ITrepresents an
indicator function I(i2Sk), whereSkNandiis theithfeature of the x x0
perturbation.
The other metric, called maximum sensitivity, measures the extent of the
attribution change when the input is slightly perturbed. Maximum sensitivity
is measured using Monte-Carlo approximation by sampling multiple samples
from anLpball using a perturbation radius r2 R. It is a more robust variant
of Lipschitz Continuity metric [2] and does not require the attribution function
to be continuous everywhere. The users of Captum can use any perturbation
function that computes perturbations within any Lpball. We provide a default
implementation that samples uniformly from L1ball.
Givenx2 RNas input,y2 RNas perturbed input, a NN model represented
by a continuous function F: RN! R, an attribution function  : F RN!
RNand perturbation radius r2 R, maximum sensitivity is dened as:
SENSMAX (;F;x;r ) =max
jjy xjjrjj(F;y) (F;x)jj
jj(F;x)jj(2)
In the next section we demonstrate results of these two metrics in dierent
applications.
4 Applications
The generality of Captum library allows us to apply it to dierent types of
NNs. One of the commonly used applications is text classication. We used
a pre-trained text classication model on IMDB dataset [10] and Integrated
Gradients to identify most salient tokens in the text. Figure 3 visualizes color-
coded contributions of each token to the output predictions. We also computed
6

==== Page 7 ====
indelity and max-sensitivity scores. The perturbations for indelity metric are
sampled uniformly from a normal distribution N(0;0:03) and for max-sensitivity
from aL1ball with a radius of 0.03. The norm jj:jjused in max-sensitivity
computations is the L2norm.
Figure 3: Visualizing salient tokens computed by integrated gradients that con-
tribute to the predicted class using a binary classication model trained on
IMDB dataset. Green means that those tokens pull towards and red that they
pull away from the predicted class. The intensity of the color signies the mag-
nitude of the signal.
Classication models are not the only types of models that Captum supports.
As an example, we built a regression model using Boston house prices dataset [7]
and a simple four layer NN using linear layers and ReLUs. We attributed the
output predictions to the last linear layer using layer conductance algorithm
and plotted them together with the learned weights of that same layer as shown
in Figure 4. Here we can see that the weights and the attribution scores are
aligned with each other. Both scores were normalized using L1norm.
In order to improve model debugging experience, we developed an interactive
visualization tool called Captum Insights. The tool allows to sub-sample input
examples and interactively attribute dierent output classes to the inputs of the
model using dierent types of attribution algorithms depicted in Figure 5.
4.1 Multimodality
The support for multi-modal Neural Networks is one of the core motivations
of Captum library. This allows us to apply Captum to machine-learning mod-
els that are built using features stemming from dierent sources such as audio,
video, image, text, categorical or dense features. Aggregated feature importance
scores for each input modality can reveal which modalities are most impactful.
In the example of attributions computed for a multi-modal Visual Question An-
swering model depicted in Figure 5, we can tell whether the stronger predictive
signal is coming from text or image.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Figure 4: Visualizing normalized attribution scores and weights for all ten neu-
rons in the last linear layer of a simple four MLP model trained on Boston house
prices dataset.
5 Conclusion
We presented a unied model interpretability library for PyTorch, called Cap-
tum, that supports generic implementations of a number of gradient and pertur-
bation -based attribution algorithms. Captum can be applied to NN models of
any type and used both in research and production environments. Furthermore,
we described how the computations are scaled and how we handle large-sized
inputs. In addition to that, we also added support for two generic quantitative
evaluation metrics called indelity and maximum-sensitivity. Lastly, we walked
through dierent types of applications including multi-modal models and intro-
duced Captum Insights model debugging tool.
6 Future Work
Our future work involves both expanding the list of attribution algorithms and
looking beyond attribution methods for model understanding. Beyond feature,
neuron and layer attribution we are also looking into adversarial robustness
and the intersection between these two elds of research. Concept-based model
interpretability that aims to explain the models globally using human under-
standable concepts is another interesting direction to explore. Besides that,
visualizing high-dimensional embedding vectors in the latent layers and being
able to debug the models and understand what information a single or a group
of neurons in the layers encode are other interesting avenues to explore.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Figure 5: Captum Insights interactive visualization tool after applying inte-
grated gradients to the Visual Question Answering multi-modal model. The
tool also visualizes aggregated attribution magnitudes of each modality.
7 Acknowledgements
We are grateful to all Captum contributors and users both external and in-
ternal, and PyTorch community for their support, contributions and feedback.
Their input and contributions helped us to create a self-contained model under-
standing library that can be used both in research and production. We would
like to say thank you to Soumith Chintala, Joe Spisak, Alban Desmaison and
Francisco Massa from core PyTorch team for supporting us with Open Source
and PyTorch related questions. Davide Testuggine for his support and initial
discussions on model interpretability and integrated gradients. We would also
like to thank Tucker Hart for implementing the initial prototype of Captum
Insights, Jessica Lin for helping us with the documentation and Fuchun Peng
for reviewing this paper and providing valuable feedback.
References
[1] Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz
Hardt, and Been Kim. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Gar-
9

==== Page 10 ====
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 , pages
9505{9515. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
[2] David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S. Jaakkola. On the robustness of inter-
pretability methods. ArXiv , abs/1806.08049, 2018.
[3] Marco B Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz Oztireli, and Markus Gross. To-
wards better understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for deep
neural networks. In ICLR , 2018.
[4] Kedar Dhamdhere, Mukund Sundararajan, and Qiqi Yan. How important
is a neuron? In ICML , 2019.
[5] Gabriel Erion, Joseph D. Janizek, Pascal Sturmfels, Scott Lundberg, and
Su-In Lee. Learning explainable models using attribution priors, 2019.
[6] L. H. Gilpin, D. Bau, B. Z. Yuan, A. Bajwa, M. Specter, and L. Kagal. Ex-
plaining explanations: An overview of interpretability of machine learning.
In2018 IEEE 5th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced
Analytics (DSAA) , pages 80{89, 2018.
[7] David Harrison and Daniel L Rubinfeld. Hedonic housing prices and the de-
mand for clean air. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management ,
5(1):81 { 102, 1978.
[8] Janis Klaise, Arnaud Van Looveren, Giovanni Vacanti, and Alexandru
Coca. Alibi: Algorithms for monitoring and explaining machine learning
models, 2019.
[9] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unied approach to interpreting model
predictions. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30 , pages 4765{4774. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[10] Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, An-
drew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 142{
150, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[11] Harsha Nori, Samuel Jenkins, Paul Koch, and Rich Caruana. Interpretml:
A unied framework for machine learning interpretability, 2019.
[12] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury,
Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas K opf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito, Mar-
tin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS , 2019.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[13] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. Ba-
tra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based
localization. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , pages 618{626, 2017.
[14] Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning im-
portant features through propagating activation dierences. In Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70 ,
ICML'17, page 3145{3153. JMLR.org, 2017.
[15] Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda B. Vi egas, and Mar-
tin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding noise. ArXiv ,
abs/1706.03825, 2017.
[16] Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Mar-
tin A. Riedmiller. Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net. CoRR ,
abs/1412.6806, 2015.
[17] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution
for deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning - Volume 70 , ICML'17, page 3319{3328. JMLR.org,
2017.
[18] Mengjiao Yang and Been Kim. Benchmarking attribution methods with
relative feature importance, 2019.
[19] Chih-Kuan Yeh, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Arun Sai Suggala, David I. Inouye, and
Pradeep D. Ravikumar. On the (in)delity and sensitivity of explanations.
InNeurIPS , 2019.
[20] Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convo-
lutional networks. In David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne
Tuytelaars, editors, Computer Vision { ECCV 2014 , pages 818{833, Cham,
2014. Springer International Publishing.
11

