==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01330-w
OPEN FORUM
Caring in the in‑between: a proposal to introduce responsible AI 
and robotics to healthcare
Núria Vallès‑Peris1  · Miquel Domènech1 
Received: 26 June 2021 / Accepted: 24 November 2021 / Published online: 16 December 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In the scenario of growing polarization of promises and dangers that surround artificial intelligence (AI), how to introduce 
responsible AI and robotics in healthcare? In this paper, we develop an ethical–political approach to introduce democratic 
mechanisms to technological development, what we call “Caring in the In-Between”. Focusing on the multiple possibilities 
for action that emerge in the realm of uncertainty, we propose an ethical and responsible framework focused on care actions 
in between fears and hopes. Using the theoretical perspective of Science and Technology Studies and empirical research, 
“Caring in the In-Between” is based on three movements: the first is a change of focus from the world of promises and 
dangers to the world of uncertainties; the second is a conceptual shift from assuming a relationship with robotics based on 
a Human–Robot Interaction to another focused on the network in which the robot is embedded (the “Robot Embedded in a 
Network”); and the last is an ethical shift from a general normative framework to a discussion on the context of use. Based 
on these suggestions, “Caring in the In-Between” implies institutional challenges, as well as new practices in healthcare 
systems. It is articulated around three simultaneous processes, each of them related to practical actions in the “in-between” 
dimensions considered: monitoring relations and caring processes, through public engagement and institutional changes; 
including concerns and priorities of stakeholders, with the organization of participatory processes and alternative forms 
of representation; and making fears and hopes commensurable, through the choice of progressive and reversible actions.
Keywords Ethics of care · Science and technology studies · Robot embedded in a network (REN) · Measured action · Care 
robots
1 Introduction
In the landscape of imaginaries that surround artificial intel-
ligence (AI) and robotics in healthcare, there is a prominent 
debate regarding utopian and dystopian scenarios, whereby 
social and ethical discussions are polarized between the 
promises and the dangers of AI. This paper is grounded in a 
realm that is far removed from the so-called ‘abyss’ between 
utopias and dystopias, and is instead situated in the terrain 
that lies between the fears and hopes, and where the multiple 
possibilities are experienced (de Sousa Santos 2016). Using the theoretical approach of Science and Technology Stud-
ies (STS), we propose a set of actions in these in-between 
spaces to introduce responsible AI and robotics to health-
care. However, we do not propose any kind of action, but 
actions based on the ethics of care. We do so by exploring 
a particular case that could exemplify some of the common 
dynamics of medical AI, namely that of care robots in a 
children’s hospital (i.e., socially assistive robots).
1.1  The narrative of promises and dangers in AI
There is an increasing narrative in public and academic 
domains that assumes that the solution to the main clinical, 
economic, and general well-being problems that healthcare 
systems are facing around the world will come from AI 
(Morley et al. 2020; Topol 2019). Medical AI offers plenty 
of promise: early diagnosis using image analysis in radiol-
ogy, pathology, and dermatology, with excellent diagnostic 
speed and accuracy when working in parallel with medical  * Núria Vallès-Peris 
 nuria.valles@uab.cat
 Miquel Domènech 
 miquel.domenech@uab.cat
1 Barcelona Science and Technology Studies Group (STS-B), 
Department of Social Psychology, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

==== Page 2 ====
1686 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
experts; personalized treatments that optimize the care tra-
jectory of chronically ill patients; precision therapies for 
complex illnesses; reduction of medical errors; and greater 
enrolment for clinical trials (Miller and Brown 2018). Lead-
ing healthcare and computer scientists have argued that AI 
will help healthcare systems achieve greater efficiency in 
two ways: on the one hand by improving the timeframe 
and accuracy of patient diagnosis and treatment and, when 
possible, helping with early prevention; and, on the other 
hand, streamlining the workload, using staff more efficiently 
(Kerasidou 2020). Robotics is considered to be a specific 
sub-category of medical AI (Shoham et al 2018). In the time 
of so-called New Robotics, a new family of robots devoted 
to healthcare applications has become particularly prolific 
(Schaal 2007). This new era of robotics enables safe robot 
interactions with humans, easy programming and adjustment 
to particular needs, and the possibility for robots to func-
tion as mobile, interactive information systems in hospitals, 
nursing homes and other healthcare settings. Due to their 
capacity to interact with humans, these robots open up an 
interesting scenario for working on the emotional and social 
dimensions of health.
The impetus of AI and robotics science, and the deep 
learning subtype in particular, facilitated by the use of 
so-called big data, along with highly enhanced comput-
ing power and cloud storage, enables greater automation 
in a variety of sectors. However, although automation has 
a long-standing impact on employment, productivity and 
the economic performance of companies and nations, the 
introduction of AI systems to healthcare environments has 
had an unprecedented impact on the automation of care. 
(Vallès-Peris and Domènech 2020; Sampath and Khargon-
ekar 2018). Thus, along with the narrative on the promises 
of AI, these innovative technologies are also the source of 
many of the uncertainties of our time.
The field is certainly high on promise and relatively low 
on data and proof. Moreover, many problems have been 
associated directly to AI and robotics, such as social bias, 
privacy and security, and lack of transparency (Topol 2019). 
The possibility of machines performing activities that are 
traditionally associated with the exclusively human condi -
tion -such as abstract problem-solving, perceptual recog-
nition, social interaction and natural language (Vallor and 
Bekey 2017)-generates many dangers. These dangers relate 
to a hypothetical scenario of future AI functionalities, rather 
than real, current ones, and are associated with the “sup-
posed” possibility of humans being replaced by technologi-
cal systems or of care for dependent and ill persons becom-
ing "dehumanised" (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021a).
Although it is undeniable that the development of AI and 
robotics is exponentially real, there is a gap between the ethi-
cal concerns around its supposed functionalities and the real 
possibilities of contemporary AI (Hagendorff 2020). If the debate focuses only on a utopian or dystopian development 
of robotics, some issues are exaggerated, while the identi-
fication of contexts, situations and controversies regarding 
artefacts that do not respond to this promised future remains 
unclear. At the same time, it is difficult to identify problems 
and generate an ethical debate around some robots that are 
already in use (that do not integrate the complex functionali-
ties and capabilities expected of highly intelligent autono -
mous robots).
As a proposal to go beyond this scenario of promises/
dangers, we develop an approach to introduce responsible 
AI and robotics to healthcare based on three movements: 
(a) the first is a change of focus from the world of promises 
and dangers to the world of uncertainties; (b) the second is 
a conceptual shift from assuming a relationship with robot-
ics based on a Human–Robot Interaction (HRI) to another 
focused on the network in which the robot is embedded (the 
“Robot Embedded in a Network-REN”); and the last is (c) 
an ethical shift from a general normative framework to a 
discussion on the context of use, from the logic of the eth-
ics of care. Based on these suggestions, we define a new 
ethical–political proposal for introducing responsible AI and 
robotics, what we call “Caring in the In-Between”.
In order to develop our proposal, this paper is organized 
in seven sections. The one that follows contextualizes our 
research on care robots; we then develop the three move-
ments on which we base our proposal: in Sect.  3 we focus on 
the movement from the world of promises and dangers to the 
world of uncertainties, in Sect.  4 we explore the movement 
from HRI to a REN relation and, in Sect.  5 we explain the 
movement from an general ethical framework to the context 
of use, from the ethics of care; in Sect.  6 we outline our 
ethical–political proposal to introduce responsible robotics 
and AI to healthcare and; finally, we summarize the main 
conclusions.
2  Empirical research on care robots 
in a children’s hospital
Our proposal for responsible AI and robotics is based on a 
series of empirical studies that we carried out on the intro-
duction of care robots to a children’s hospital in Barcelona. 
In children’s health settings, robots for care are typically 
considered to be those that are used in specific therapeu-
tic interventions, e.g., with autistic children (Heerink et al 
2016) or in rehabilitation processes (Meyer-Heim and van 
Hedel 2013). Care robots are also those involved in the 
extensive line of research and application of robots to reduce 
pain and anxiety when children are subjected to some type 
of intervention (Crossman et al 2018) or simply to make 
hospital stays more pleasant (Díaz-Boladeras et al 2016). In 
engineering and computer science, the care robots to which 

==== Page 3 ====
1687 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
we refer in this paper are usually included in the field of so-
called “socially assistive robotics”. In general terms, this 
field is focused on providing artificially intelligent robotic 
systems to aid end-users with special physical or cognitive 
needs in their daily activities (Pareto Boada et al. 2021).
Since 2015, we have been involved in the research being 
done by a children’s hospital in Barcelona to design and 
introduce care robots. As social scientists, our work together 
with an interdisciplinary team of physicians, nurses and 
engineers involved identifying the ethical and social implica-
tions of introducing such robots to the hospital. Throughout 
the process, we conducted three empirical research projects 
that shared the common objective of exploring the fears and 
hopes of the different actors that, in one way or another, 
established or would have to establish a relationship with a 
robot for care.
Some details of these research projects are the following:
– A participatory process with children to design a robot 
for care for a children’s hospital. For three months, we 
conducted a participatory process in a school with 60 
six-year-old children. Children were organized into two 
large groups of 30, and 12 sessions were held with each 
group (24 sessions in total). The participatory process 
employed design-thinking techniques.
– A Vision-Assessment process to identify the risks and 
benefits associated with future visions of robots for care 
among the different categories of people involved in care 
at a children’s hospital. We organized: three focus groups 
with nurses, with a total of 22 people; three focus groups 
with hospital volunteers, also with 22 people taking part; 
one focus group with the relatives of hospitalized chil-
dren—after previously holding a workshop with them on 
robotic technologies in care—with 10 people participat-
ing; and three interviews with physicians who were heads 
of units at a children’s hospital.
– A set of interviews with roboticists to identify their con-
cerns regarding robots for care. Eleven face-to-face semi-
structured interviews were conducted with roboticists 
working in the field of care robots.
The framework of reference for the various participants 
and the fieldwork carried out during the investigations, 
was the robots that were being implemented in that hospi-
tal (already introduced or in pilot/prospective phases): pet 
robots used to reduce anxiety in pre-operative and diagnostic 
tests, as well as to make the hospital stay more pleasant for 
children with long admissions; therapy robots for children 
with autism and; tele-communication robotic systems, for 
diagnostic visits by doctors or to facilitate communication 
with their school in the case of hospitalised children. This 
does not mean that our proposal refers only to this type of 
robot, but that our proposal is nurtured by a study of the implementation of these artefacts. The fact that our study 
was carried out on robots used with hospitalised children 
meant we could identify particularly sensitive issues and 
highly delicate situations more easily.
We analysed the collected data using qualitative tech -
niques, i.e. thematic analysis for the interviews and focus 
groups (Clarke and Braun 2014) and thick description for the 
participatory process (Ponterotto 2006). However, the goal 
of this paper is not to present the analysis and results of these 
three research projects, but to build a responsible approach 
to AI and robotics that embraces the practices and concerns 
of the different groups of actors identified in those projects.
3  From the world of promises and dangers 
to the world of uncertainties
As explained in the introduction, the social and ethical 
debates surrounding AI and robotics are often articulated 
around utopian or dystopian scenarios (Shatzer 2013), or 
focused on the identification of risks and benefits (Verbeek 
2006), which contributes to a growing polarization of prom-
ises and dangers. As sociologist de Sousa Santos (2016) 
warns, in our technologically modified world, fear and hope 
are collapsing in the face of the growing polarization of hope 
without fear (the health innovation sector and markets with 
exponential benefits) and fear without hope (anyone who 
believes that technological progress cannot be stopped and 
that we will need to adapt to whatever changes may come 
about). In this situation, uncertainties become abysmal, and 
leave no room for action.
Inspired by Spinoza's notions, de Sousa Santos (2016) 
examines the unequal epistemological and experiential dis-
tribution of fear and hope. In addition to the idea of abysmal 
uncertainties, uncertainty is also the experience of the pos-
sibilities that arise from the multiple relationships that can 
exist between fear and hope. Since the relationships between 
different groups and actors are different, the types of uncer -
tainty are also different. Fear and hope are not equally dis-
tributed among all social groups or historical epochs. In rela-
tion to technologies, fear and hope are defined by parameters 
that tend to benefit social groups that have greater access to 
scientific knowledge and technology. For these groups, the 
belief in scientific progress and innovation is strong enough 
to neutralise any fear regarding the limitations of current 
knowledge. For those who have less access to scientific and 
technological knowledge, this is experienced as inferiority 
that generates uncertainty. For them, uncertainty is gener -
ated by their place in a world that is defined and legislated 
by powerful and alien knowledge that affects them and over 
which they have little or no control. This knowledge is pro-
duced about them and eventually against them, but never 
with them (de Sousa Santos 2016).

==== Page 4 ====
1688 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
In the dreamscape of promises and dangers that surround 
medical AI, we defend the need for ethical and social discus -
sion to move away from a speculative scenario that consid-
ers an abyss between utopias and dystopias. In contrast, we 
situate ourselves in the terrain that lies in between fears and 
hopes, where multiple possibilities arise (de Sousa Santos 
2016). In this terrain, uncertainty is situated and negoti-
ated, embedded in the actors that participate in healthcare 
relations. So, in order to develop more responsible AI in 
healthcare, which is particularly addressed at social needs 
and guaranteeing individual and collective well-being, we 
propose a focus on care (caring as action) in the spaces in 
between that are opened by a particular artifact (i.e. robots 
for care in paediatric hospitals).
The literature on ethics and robots primarily addresses 
the interests of what the community focused on study in 
this field considers important, while the opinions of other 
stakeholders, such as robotics researchers, health profession-
als and patients, are not directly discussed. In the public 
debate, questions about whether humans are replaceable by 
robots or whether robots should have rights seem to take 
precedence over the current and more real challenges that 
could arise from their use in specific applications (van der 
Plat et al. 2010). This “a priori” philosophical approach has 
some limitations (Stahl and Coeckelbergh 2016), including 
the difficulty of establishing a normative framework to guide 
and orient everyday problems that may arise in hospitals or 
other health settings when care robots are introduced.
Our proposal to go beyond a discussion centred on the 
promises of AI is based on an analysis of how fears and 
hopes are articulated and negotiated with different actors. 
While looking into the controversies that the several actors 
involved in care processes with robots have to deal with, 
we came to study the practices and values of the different 
actors that participate in healthcare relations in a children’s 
hospital. Callon et al (2009) maintain that the controversies 
over the use of certain technologies create uncertainty and 
bring about unforeseen concerns. Instead of simply seeking 
consensus or general principles, if we wish to enrich the 
debate around technologies, it is important to call attention 
to the importance of collective discussion of the matter. As 
observed by Epstein (1995), the participation of non-special-
ists in the development of knowledge that actually concerns 
them may lead to problems being formulated and research 
results being disseminated and implemented in a different 
way. Following this view, what we try do here with regard to 
care robots is to reflect the importance of collective discus-
sion of the controversies surrounding medical AI to thereby 
enrich the formulation of problems and propose alternative 
frameworks.
Given that the level of innovation in robotics and AI is 
accelerating and surpassing our capacity to anticipate its 
consequences and influences on our lives, the responsible introduction of these technologies to healthcare is situated 
in the realm of uncertainty that lies between fears and hopes. 
In these contexts of the uncertain impact of technologies, 
Callon et al (2009) call for precaution with regard to the 
potential harm, impact or causal relation of a technological 
innovation. The action that may better represent precaution 
is the so-called “measured action”, meaning a progressive 
action motivated by feedback and constant debate that con-
siders the consequences of that action. “Measured action 
implies an active, open, contingent and revisable approach, 
exactly the opposite of a clear final decision. And then, this 
approach rests on a deepening of knowledge, but not only 
of the knowledge provided by the scientific disciplines of 
isolated research. The proportionality of actions for soci-
ety, acceptability and economic cost also have their place in 
deliberation” (Callon et al. 2009: 210).
This position leads us away from the realm of abysmal 
uncertainties between utopian promises and dystopian dan-
gers. This is uncertainty about desired futures, about what 
a care robot is, about the risk of introducing such devices 
to children’s care, and so on. In our proposal, uncertainty 
and precaution are the most relevant characteristics of AI 
and robotics, and are thus a privileged space for responsi-
ble introduction of these technologies to healthcare. This 
idea is grounded on an STS theoretical background and on 
a particular way of understanding robots, as well as on the 
centrality of the ethics of care when considering responsible 
technologies. In the following sections, we develop each of 
these issues.
4  From human–robot interaction (HRI) 
to a robot embedded in a network (REN)
Care robots are used to perform a number of specific tasks-
such as facilitating the relationship between patients and 
places outside the hospital, reducing distress in pre-operative 
care, and modifying the ways that healthcare staff perform 
certain actions—such as measuring vital signs, perform-
ing detailed interventions, etc. When thinking about and 
designing a robot’s agency in medical settings, as well as 
its ability to interact with children, it is relevant to take into 
account how artefacts or devices are embedded in a network 
of caring relationships that involves several actors(López-
Gómez 2015). Children’s well-being is not only defined by 
the robot’s ability to interact with them, but also by its ability 
to interact with the whole social system of care relationships. 
However, in engineering and the related ethical debates, the 
relationship between children and AI robots is often concep-
tualized by the notion of Children-Robot Interaction (CHRI), 
which is the children’s equivalent of Human–Robot Interac -
tion (HRI), and which describes two isolated entities inter -
acting with each other: a human and a robot.

==== Page 5 ====
1689 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
Most STS approaches, such as the Actor Network Theory 
and social constructivism of technology, postulate a more 
or less open ontological universe in which it is difficult to 
establish rigid boundaries between the social, the human, 
the natural and the technological (Karakayali 2015). With 
the abandonment of the notions of nature and society as 
separate entities, a new entity emerges: a heterogene-
ous network (Callon and Latour 1992). In this view, any 
technological innovation is explained by its relational and 
contextual nature, i.e. how it makes sense in its network 
of relationships (Domènech and Tirado 2009). Therefore, a 
technological innovation is not only an artefact, but a whole 
network of devices, processes and actors (Latour 1999). 
From this perspective, care robots are a conglomerate of 
material, social and semiotic relations in which technical, 
scientific, political, economic, social and ethical considera-
tions are intimately entwined within a single actor (Latour 
1999). This idea of heterogeneity can be accompanied by 
relational materialism, according to which the elements do 
not exist for reason of any essence but are constituted from 
the networks of which they are part. This approach could be 
carried to its logical conclusion by assuming that objects, 
entities or actors are nodes in a network. These nodes are 
also constituted interactively, and do not exist outside their 
interactions. Artefacts, people, institutions, protocols… eve-
rything is an effect or a product (Law and Mol 1995).
Some authors use the concept of interpretive flexibility to 
classify robots for care. According to this concept, a robot 
could be classified by its context of use, the function for 
which it is used, and the user (Howcroft et al 2004). This 
notion highlights the impossibility of separating the defini-
tion of technical problems from the socio-economic frame-
work to which they are associated (Bijker 2009). Therefore, 
a robot can be called a care robot when it is used in a hospi-
tal to reduce children’s anxiety in preoperative spaces, but 
the same robot can also be classified as an entertainment 
robot when it is used by engineering students to compete in 
international robot soccer leagues. Likewise, a robot that is 
used by nursing staff to lift patients with little or no mobility 
can be classified as a robot for care, but when it is used by 
workers in a factory to lift heavy objects, it can be consid-
ered an industrial robot (van Wynsberghe 2015).
When technologies are used, they always help to shape 
the context in which they fulfil their function. They help to 
shape human actions and perceptions, and create new prac-
tices and ways of living. Latour ( 1999 ) calls this phenom -
enon “technological mediation”: technologies mediate the 
experiences and practices of their users. Such mediations 
have at least as much moral relevance as technological risks 
and disaster prevention (Ihde 1999; Verbeek 2006). Tech-
nologies help to shape the quality of our lives and, more 
importantly, they help to shape our moral actions and deci-
sions. Robots for care can help medical staff in healthcare settings, for example, by monitoring vital signs and thus 
preventing certain situations in critical paediatric patients, 
or by personalizing and adjusting therapies with autistic 
children. However, some studies have warned us that the 
introduction of telemedicine devices (technologies that are 
often built into AI robots) has changed healthcare practices 
and knowledge (Mort et al 2003). The heterogeneity of care, 
as well as robot heterogeneity, implies that the practices and 
values of care are transformed when new nodes are intro -
duced to healthcare networks. When a robot is introduced to 
a network of care relations in a hospital, it and the network 
are transformed. Technologies enable certain relationships 
between human beings and the world that would not oth -
erwise be possible. However, technologies are not neutral 
intermediaries, but active mediators that contribute to the 
formation of human perceptions and interpretations of real-
ity (Verbeek 2006). Robots mediate the way we understand 
and practice care processes, just as the robot is reconstructed 
from the assemblage of social relations in which it partici-
pates (Law and Mol 1995).
Following the idea that, in the use of technologies, forms 
of mediation are performed that are pre-inscribed in the 
artefact—what Peter-Paul Verbeek (2006) called the mate-
rialized morality—, we analysed how children performed 
when designing a robot for care (Vallès-Peris et al. 2018). 
Children’s representations of well-being in healthcare set -
tings typically include the presence of their relatives or other 
people. Their representation of themselves alone while hos-
pitalized or sick is a sad one, while that of being surrounded 
by relatives, siblings or medical personnel is a happy one. 
Prospective interactions with a robot that produce a feeling 
of well-being are imagined in a network with other people. 
In the same manner, assessment of a robot made by those 
responsible for care in a hospital (in this case, the focus 
groups of nurses and volunteers who evaluated the risks and 
benefits of a dinosaur-shaped robot introduced to the hos-
pital in a pilot phase) is based on the robot’s capacity to be 
integrated into the relationship network that accompanies 
the child during his or her hospitalization.
Going beyond the conceptualization of human–robot 
relationships in a binary model represented by the HRI, 
the interest of the Robot Embedded in a Network approach 
(REN) lies in the uncertainties and controversies that appear 
in daily care in children’s hospitals, such as: how tasks are 
distributed between nurses and robots, for example, if the 
nurse is accompanied by a robot that takes the patient's vital 
signs; how a hospital integrates the psychology staff’s opin -
ions when deciding whether to take part in a pilot program 
to introduce this type of device to therapies for children with 
autism; how nurses take advantage of the presence of a robot 
to entertain a child when trying to insert an IV (intravenous 
line); how parents and doctors can assess whether it is nec-
essary to collect facial expression data to monitor a child 

==== Page 6 ====
1690 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
when in the ICU, etc. Knowing how to manage and solve 
these uncertainties requires alternative ethical frameworks 
that go beyond “big” philosophical issues about robotics for 
care; issues that, in turn, are based on “hypothetical” devel-
opments of robots for care, not on “real” functionalities and 
tasks that they can perform nowadays.
5  From an ethical general framework 
to the context of use, using the ethics 
of care
This conceptualization of technological innovation raises 
questions about the traditional ethical approach to AI while 
delving deeper into the relational theory in bioethics that 
includes a more-than-human-approach (Lupton 2020). Rela-
tional theory reshapes the notion of autonomy, emphasizing 
the patients’ social and contextual circumstances, highlight-
ing that people are always part of social networks and all 
ethical considerations have to take such networks of relation-
ships into account (Sherwin and Stockdale 2017). Deborah 
Lupton (2020) proposes consideration of the role of techno-
logical artefacts in such networks for a better understanding 
of digital health and bioethical considerations. In her view, 
this more-than-human analysis highlights the complexities 
involved when robots for care or other digital health tech-
nologies are introduced to medical settings (Lupton 2020). 
In this same line of thought, we situate ethical and social 
controversies around care robotics in the network made up 
by a diverse range of actors: technology designers, health-
care professionals, relatives, patients and robots. Our focus 
would not be on AI technologies, but on identifying the rel-
evant variables that shape healthcare relationships when AI 
technologies are introduced.
To develop an ethical framework, together with the STS 
tradition, we use the notion of the ethics of care. From the 
different approaches to this field, our proposal is based on 
the perspective developed by Joan C. Tronto that seeks to 
understand care from political philosophy. The starting point 
of Tronto’s approach is that the core definition of the human 
is its relational involvement with others, in a network of rela-
tionships in which each individual has to reconcile different 
forms of care responsibilities (Vallès-Peris and Domènech 
2020). In these relationships, the morality of care is bound 
to concrete situations rather than being abstract and based on 
principles (Cockburn 2005). From these bases, analysis of 
care processes provides us with a useful guide for thinking 
about how we perform a particular care task and its ethical 
dimensions (Tronto 1998). Likewise, and in line with the 
idea that not all collectives face uncertainty under the same 
conditions, the perspective of the ethics of care engages with 
those who have difficulties voicing their concerns (Puig de la 
Bellacasa 2011 ). In medical AI and robotics, this also means identifying prevailing care issues in technological develop-
ment, what power relations the artefacts generate and what 
relations they contribute to.
Care experiences and practices can be identified, 
researched and understood concretely and empirically. 
However, “care” is ambivalent in its meaning and ontol-
ogy (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017). Assuming this complex-
ity and diversity in its understanding, Fisher and Tronto 
(1990) propose it should be viewed from a heterogeneous 
perspective, inseparable from the economic, political, sym-
bolic and material considerations that shape it. For them, 
care includes: the practices of care, what is usually consid-
ered domestic work; the affections and emotional meaning 
involved in care; and the organisational and political concep-
tion that involves managing and regulating everything that 
sustains care relationships. In STS focused on health tech-
nologies, this perspective has been included in the notion of 
“empirical ethics of care” (Vallès-Peris 2021a), from which 
the analysis of care relationships implies rejecting the logic 
according to which there is prior and true knowledge about 
how care should be provided. Thus, the empirical ethics of 
care revolve around the idea that it is located in the prac-
tices of people who, with the help of processes, protocols, 
routines or machines, act to achieve good care (Willems and 
Pols 2010).
From the idea of heterogeneity, the emergence of any 
artefact has to do with the diverse biases, values or politi -
cal and economic relations existing during its creation and 
design process, conditions that are inscribed in that artefact 
(Bijker 2009; Callon 1998). Hence, the creation and design 
of care robots cannot be disassociated from the neoliberal 
logic in which we live, from the low social and political 
value attributed to care, nor from the sexual division of labor 
that organizes care in an unequal way between women and 
men (Tronto 2018). It is in a similar vein that Maibaum et al. 
(2021) propose that robotics should be approached from its 
political reality. It is commonplace to say that we are living 
a care crisis, which has to do with the pressure caused by 
the lack of nurses, teachers, carers and domestic staff, aggra-
vated by demographic change and the ageing of the popu -
lation (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021b). In the neoliberal model, 
the solution to the so-called care crisis is articulated by the 
market: after years of state downsizing promoted precisely 
by this neoliberal model, the solution proposed is that the 
market should be set up to meet human needs (Tronto 2018).
In this context, the growth of robotics in the field of 
healthcare cannot be separated from its powerful economic 
impact on the technological innovation market. Despite 
the fact that the care crisis is one of the arguments that are 
most often used to explain the need to develop care robotics 
(Maibaum et al. 2021), the issue of care tends to be vir -
tually absent from the debates surrounding it—although 
there are some exceptional proposals, such as those by van 

==== Page 7 ====
1691 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
Wynsberghe (2013). This issue can be seen, for example, in 
the scarce attention given to the tensions that might arise 
between commercial or business interests and issues linked 
to the needs and organization of care, in the various guide-
lines and regulatory mechanisms for AI systems, including 
robots (Hagendorff 2020).
From this approach, it is understood that the ethical 
debate surrounding AI and robotics cannot focus solely on 
major philosophical issues, but must also consider aspects 
linked to healthcare management and everyday practices. 
Thus, in the case of care robots, the interest should not 
only lie in questions such as whether it is appropriate to 
replace humans with robots (Sharkey 2008), whether it is 
desirable to establish affective bonds (Sharkey and Sharkey 
2012; Sparrow and Sparrow 2006), or liability in the event 
of harm or damage (Matsuzaki and Lindemann 2016). The 
debate from the ethics of care also looks at identifying the 
practices, fears and hopes that shape care relationships when 
robots are introduced to specific contexts and situations. For 
example, how a nurse in a pediatric ward gets the children 
in the different rooms to go out into the corridor to feed the 
pet robot; or how it might be decided at a meeting that from 
now on, therapies with autistic children will use robots that 
have been donated by a large robotics company.
From a REN approach, we turn away from the standard 
discussion about utopian or dystopian scenarios based on 
the risks and benefits of promised care robots, an approach 
that seems addressed at building trust and anticipation of 
objections and reticence (Nordmann and Rip 2009). The 
possibilities for mediation with regard to care robots are con-
figured by the technical elements of a concrete AI device in 
its interaction with a network of healthcare relations. Thus, 
it is in that network of social relations that the robot medi-
ates; specific mediations with a particular device within a 
particular social context (Feng and Feenberg 2008). Andrew 
Feenberg (1999) illustrates this idea in his instrumentaliza-
tion theory. The technical dispositions of a robot for care 
determine the conditions of the robot’s functional possibili-
ties in the network, and these have to do with its design and 
production history. However, these features are reoriented 
when they are integrated into a given environment. Robots 
have their (instrumental) rationality, but when they enter a 
children’s hospital, what they are and the mediations they 
make possible depend on their use in that hospital, and in 
a particular Care Unit with specific protocols and actors 
(Feenberg 2010).
Next to the door to the operating theatre, a mother strokes 
a robot pet that her child was holding 10 min before and that 
calms her down while her child is being operated, it is then 
when the robot becomes a robot for care for the mother. 
In that situation, controversies and ethical discussions arise 
about, for example, the dangers of establishing emotional 
ties with artificial objects. It is in the specific daily practices of different actors involved in healthcare relations in a hos-
pital (patients, relatives, medical staff, volunteers, protocols, 
units, tests, etc.) that the problems and the rules to solve 
such problems emerge. Thus, the point of reference of our 
research is not the robot, but the relationships in which it 
participates. There is no prominent actor in analysis of and 
reflection on ethical and social controversies, but rather 
various actors that are involved in healthcare relations in a 
children’s hospital.
It is in the collective network of care relations in a par -
ticular environment where we situate research on social and 
ethical issues on medical AI, approaching the topic from 
a notion close to the empirical ethics of care in which the-
ory around “good care” is localized in practices, and not 
just underlying them or guiding actions (Willems and Pols 
2010). Consequently, the results of this type of approach 
are not prescriptive solutions. They do not give answers to 
questions such as whether or not to install a robot with a 
webcam in order to monitor paediatric patients in the ICU 
at all times but to offer suggestive proposals in relation to 
specific problems. Continuing with the example, what are 
the arguments for and against installing a webcam, what 
are the views of relatives, patients, medical staff, innovation 
departments, etc., and how can we tweak the robot to fit 
routines, needs and concerns in this context? (Vallès-Peris 
and Domènech 2020).
6  Caring in the in‑between
The heuristics of research on ethical and social issues around 
care robots, from the three defined movements, could be 
summarized in three assumptions: (1) if a robot is a network 
of actors and processes making up an assembly, then the 
identification of such actors and processes, as well as knowl-
edge of their relations and forms of negotiation, becomes the 
starting point of any ethical reflection. (2) Since the robot is 
not only the artefact, but is inscribed within a full network 
of care, the ethical implications are specific to each context 
of application, to the way in which the robot changes or 
modifies the articulation of specific care relationships. (3) 
Therefore, a responsible framework guiding the introduction 
of robots to hospitals or other healthcare settings must be 
particularly linked to these contexts and their ethical prin -
ciples and values.
As explained in the previous sections, if our conception 
of robots from the ethics of care assumes heterogeneity, the 
focus of ethics shifts to the healthcare relationships that are 
interactively constituted when a robot for care is introduced, 
and debates on how to introduce responsible robots come to 
revolve around REN. From a REN perspective, the focus of 
the analysis is on the network of care relationships in which 
the robot participates, not on the specific functionalities or 

==== Page 8 ====
1692 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
characteristics of a robot taken as an isolated entity, nor in 
the dyadic interaction between individual entities. The net-
work of relationships between multiple agents (the robot, 
the child, family members, hospital protocols, healthcare 
staff, etc.) constitutes the only framework for discussion. It 
is within this framework of particular and specific everyday 
practices, imaginaries, narratives, etc., that the problems and 
rules for solving these problems emerge.
From this approach, for example, it is possible to analyze 
how the introduction of certain robotic devices can change 
the care relationship between the hospital and the patient, or 
how the diagnosis or treatment skills of healthcare staff are 
transformed (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021a). Focusing attention 
on REN, we can identify those elements that are considered 
necessary to ensure that the introduction of a robot does not 
undermine the ethical values that shape medical practice and 
care relationships in a particular context. So, it will not be 
the same to introduce a robot to make a remote diagnostic 
visit to a child in hospital, while the doctor is elsewhere, as 
it will be to perform the same visit while the patient is at 
home. Similarly, it will not be the same when the same robot 
is used in the hospital to make a follow-up visit to a pediatric 
patient admitted to the trauma unit, as it is to a patient admit-
ted to the mental health unit.
6.1  An ethical–political proposal to ensure 
responsible introduction of AI and robotics 
to healthcare
Focusing on the multiple possibilities for action that emerge 
in the realm of uncertainty, we propose an ethical and 
responsible framework focused on care actions in between 
fears and hopes. From this idea, we take the notion of meas-
ured action from an ethics of care. According to Callon et al 
(2009), measured action occurs through three interrelated 
dimensions: (1) a surveillance system: precaution is only 
possible when formalised socio-technical devices are used to 
collect information and thereby enable us to move from sur -
veillance to alarm; (2) the deepening of knowledge, through 
the exploration and identification of excesses. Precaution 
requires a preliminary assessment of the associated risks 
and dangers in order to evaluate their severity and (3) the 
choice of temporary measures to be taken, which must be 
adapted to each of the situations to which they are applied, 
guaranteeing their follow-up and update according to the 
constant polemics that arise. In each of these three dimen-
sions, there may be specific actors, with particular modes of 
action and different levels of responsibility. Measured action 
replaces clear and forceful decisions with a series of “small” 
decisions in each of the three dimensions. Small decisions 
represent gradual advances, but none of them entails irrevo-
cable commitments.We adapt the measured action proposed from the ethics 
of care to discuss care robots and thereby define a responsi-
ble framework for introducing these technologies based on 
“caring in the in-between”. The primary argument regard -
ing the ethics of care is that in order for interdependent 
living to be conceivable, care is the common element that 
makes the relationships we establish between our lives and 
our environment possible. Thus, if we take care seriously, it 
represents a necessary ethical and political proposition for 
thinking about the technologies that surround us. This idea 
problematises a deontological approach according to which 
ethical standards can only be realised through the declaration 
of principles. These principles describe moral aspirations, 
but do not make it possible to think critically or to develop 
transformative practices (Tronto and Kohlen 2018). Thus, 
responsible robotics, from its conceptualisation as REN, 
requires institutional changes to the framework in which 
robotic care is organised, managed and practised. From the 
integration of measured action and the ethics of care, car -
ing in the in-between is defined as a triadic process or rela-
tionship: (a) between the nodes, in the threads of the web; 
actions as movements of care relations and care processes 
in which healthcare technologies participate; (b) between 
the different actors in a network; actions as an exercise of 
listening to the voices and different concerns of all the actors 
involved in healthcare settings and integrating their formula -
tions of problems and solutions into the ethical debate; and 
(c) between fears and hopes, in the realm of uncertainty; 
actions as a tool for overcoming the polarization between 
the promises and the dangers of medical AI, thus offering 
an alternative to abysmal uncertainty.
This proposal focuses on the possibilities for mediation 
inscribed in the robot, configured by the design of a specific 
AI device in its interaction with a network of healthcare 
relations. Thus, broadening and complexifying the process 
of responsible development of care robots, caring in the in-
between is a complement to other proposals that focus on the 
design process of the artefacts that also integrate the ethics 
of care -such as the Care Centered Value-Sensitive Design 
proposed by van Wynsberghe (2013). From these bases, car -
ing in the in-between is a proposal of responsible robotics 
that implies institutional challenges, as well as new practices 
in healthcare systems. It is articulated around three simul-
taneous processes, each of them related to practical actions 
in one of the in-between dimensions considered: monitor -
ing relations and caring processes; considering stakeholders’ 
opinions; and making fears and hopes commensurable. Each 
of these processes could be defined as:
• Monitoring relations and caring processes The creation 
of local public health systems to monitor the design and 
introduction of medical AI technologies. This implies the 
creation of follow-up and assessment procedures to also 

==== Page 9 ====
1693 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
be applied to pilot or experimental projects. Care is car -
ried out by “all the hospital”, by the networks of material, 
semiotic and social fluxes that occur every day among 
all the actors in which technologies participate. If care 
relations and care practices are placed at the centre of the 
debate, and the whole hospital is in charge of giving care, 
then we need to put mechanisms in place that encompass 
hospitals and other healthcare settings, mechanisms that 
ensure that the introduction of these devices responds to 
medical and care values and priorities and not, for exam-
ple, to commercial or prestige interests. This process of 
monitoring relations and care processes particularly 
needs public entities to ensure that the introduction of 
AI and robotic systems to healthcare settings responds to 
collective health and well-being needs; and to guarantee 
that market or innovation interests in AI and robotics are 
not detrimental to the ethical and social criteria govern-
ing public health systems.
• Considering stakeholders’ opinions  The development 
of inclusiveness and public participation strategies to 
establish a prioritisation strategy for the development of 
IA in health, as well as to identify the main concerns 
around its introduction. In view of this need, multiple 
strategies are traditionally developed from STS and what 
is known as the “participatory turn” in science and tech-
nology (hybrid forums, citizen conferences, etc.). The 
idea of heterogeneity is central to these types of propos-
als, using diverse mechanisms to integrate the knowl-
edge and expertise of multiple actors (engineers, medical 
practitioners, formal and informal caregivers, patients or 
relatives). But it is not enough to speak of heterogeneous 
assemblies, because in these assemblies not all the agents 
involved are the same, nor do they participate in the same 
way, nor are uncertainties distributed equally. Different 
groups are not equal in their capacity to impose their 
logic and some groups represent more than others the 
dominant economic-instrumental interpretation of care 
inscribed in technology (Hergesell and Maibaum 2018). 
The limitations of participatory processes to address 
these inequalities are well-known, so there is a need to 
develop complementary strategies to allow for alternative 
forms of inclusion and representation in matters related 
to the introduction of AI and robotics systems to health-
care. In this sense, we propose the need to explore sys-
tematic methods to integrate informal and spontaneous 
popular movements and expression of the population’s 
fears and hopes (also viewed as potential patients, rela-
tives, and caregivers of the health system).
• Making fears and hopes commensurable The choice of 
progressive, small actions to “keep under control” the 
effects or consequences of a development, small actions 
based on progressive feedback loops with monitoring 
systems and constant debate with all the stakeholders of each hospital or healthcare setting. Such feedback loops 
will ensure that the introduction of AI devices is in line 
with care procedures in a specific hospital or healthcare 
setting and integrates the concerns of all the different 
actors involved. Undoubtedly, the introduction of forms 
of feed-back loops also implies slowing down the pro-
cesses of designing and implementing AI systems in 
healthcare. We understand that a slowdown is necessary 
as a prerequisite for radically integrating responsiveness 
into the design of healthcare technologies.
From this perspective, then, the responsibility to intro-
duce robotic and AI devices in accordance with ethical cri-
teria and societal needs and priorities does not only refer to 
the technical design process of such devices, nor is it lim-
ited to establishing strong legal frameworks to regulate their 
use. The development of robotics and AI in consideration of 
ethical and social concerns requires public engagement and 
institutional changes to health systems on the path towards 
more responsible technologies. Monitoring relations and 
caring processes, considering the opinions of stakeholders 
and making fears and hopes commensurable are, as a whole, 
a way to introduce democratic mechanisms to technological 
development. And, it is no doubt impossible to talk about 
responsible AI and robotics if technology and democracy do 
not go together. It is also impossible to talk about democracy 
in AI and robotics if care is not integrated as a central ethi-
cal and political proposition in all processes and relations 
involved in the development of healthcare technologies, 
what we call “caring in the in-between”.
7  Conclusions
Just as a single technology cannot undertake all care or cure 
alone, studies of AI and robotics in healthcare cannot be 
focused only on a particular device. In this paper, we develop 
an approach grounded on the uncertainty surrounding AI 
and robotics, on the heterogeneity and mediations that the 
robot makes possible (what we call the REN approach) and 
on the ethical and social debate regarding its context of use. 
Within this framework, we propose a method for responsible 
introduction of AI and robotics based on an ethical–political 
proposal called “Caring in the In-Between.” This proposal 
for action looks into the eyes of uncertainties to collectively 
discuss ways to design and use technological devices in 
healthcare settings, while respecting the values that guide 
public health practice and its networks of care. Using the 
ethics of care and the notion of measured action developed 
from the STS, we propose responsible AI and robotics by 
focusing on the mediations of concrete devices in their inter -
action with a network of healthcare relations. We articulate 
AI and responsible robotics around the action that occurs in 

==== Page 10 ====
1694 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
between fears and hopes, and which revolve around three 
dimensions of action: (a) caring as monitoring the rela-
tions that occur when introducing AI and robotic systems 
to healthcare settings, through the creation of local public 
health systems for the purpose of monitoring; (b) caring as 
including concerns and priorities of the most distanced col-
lectives from the creation and design of knowledge and tech -
nologies, with the organization of participatory processes 
and alternative forms of stakeholder representation; and (c) 
caring as making fears and hopes commensurable, through 
the choice of progressive and reversible actions.
Author contributions All authors contributed to the study conception 
and design. The first draft of the manuscript was written by NV-P and 
MD commented on and edited previous versions. All authors read and 
approved the final manuscript.
Funding Open Access Funding provided by Universitat Autonoma de 
Barcelona. This study was supported by “la Caixa” Foundation under 
agreement LCF/PR/RC17/10110004.
Availability of data and material Not applicable.
Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Anderson SL, Anderson M (2015) Towards a principle-based health-
care agent. In: van Rysewyk SP, Pontier M (eds) Machine medical 
ethics. Springer, Cham, pp 67–78
Bijker WE (2009) How is technology made? That is the question! 
Camb J Econ 34(1):63–76
Boada Pareto J, Román Maestre B, Torras Genís C (2021) The ethi-
cal issues of social assistive robotics: a critical literature review. 
Technol Soc 67:101726
Cabibihan JJ, Javed H, Ang M, Aljunied SM (2013) Why robots? A 
survey on the roles and benefits of social robots in the therapy of 
children with autism. Int J Soc Robot 5(4):593–618
Callon M (1998) El proceso de construcción de la sociedad. El estudio 
de la tecnología como herramienta para el análisis sociológico. 
In: Domènech M, Tirado FJ (eds) Sociología simétrica. Ensayos 
sobre ciencia, tecnología y sociedad. Gedisa, p 143–170Callon M, Latour B (1992) Don’t throw the baby out with the bath school! 
A reply to Collins and Yearley. In: Pickering A (ed) Science as prac-
tice and culture. The Univer, Chicago and London, pp 343–368
Callon M, Lascoumes P, Barthe Y (2009) Acting in an uncertain world: 
an essay on technical democracy. MIT Press, Cambridge
Calo R (2017) Artificial Intelligence Policy: A Primer and Roadmap. 
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3015350 or http://  
dx. doi. org/ 10. 2139/ ssrn. 30153 50
Clarke V, Braun V (2014) Thematic analysis. In: Michalos AC (ed) 
Encyclopaedia of quality of life and well-being research. Springer, 
Dordrecht, pp 6626–6628
Cockburn T (2005) Children and the feminist ethics of care. Childhood 
12(1):71–89
Coeckelbergh M, Pop C, Simut R, Peca A, Pintea S, David D, Van-
derborght B (2016) A survey of expectations about the role of 
robots in robot-assisted therapy for children with ASD: ethical 
acceptability, trust, sociability, appearance, and attachment. Sci 
Eng Ethics 22(1):47–65
Coninx A, Baxter P, Oleari E, Bellini S, Bierman B, Blanson Hen-
kemans O, Belpaeme T (2016) Towards long-term social child-
robot interaction: using multi-activity switching to engage 
young users. J Hum Robot Interact 5(1):32–67
Crossman MK, Kazdin AE, Kitt ER (2018) The influence of a 
socially assistive robot on mood, anxiety, and arousal in chil-
dren. Prof Psychol Res Pract 49(1):48–56
de Sousa SB (2016) La incertidumbre: entre el miedo y la esperanza. 
América Latina: la democracia en la encrucijada. CLACSO, 
Buenos Aires, pp p161-169
DeCanio S (2016) Robots and humans-complements or substitutes? 
J Macroecon 49:280–291
Díaz-Boladeras M, Angulo C, Domènech M, Albo-Canals J, Serral-
longa N, Raya C, Barco A (2016) Assessing pediatrics patients’ 
psychological states from biomedical signals in a cloud of social 
robots. In: XIV Mediterranean Conference on medical and bio-
logical engineering and computing, vol. 57, p 1179–1184
Domènech M, Tirado F (2009) El problema de la materialidad en 
los estudios de la ciencia y la tecnología. In: Gatti G, Martínez 
de Albéniz I, Tejerina B (eds.) Tecnología, cultura experta e 
identidad en la sociedad del conocimiento. Euskal Herriko 
Unibertsitatea, Argitalpen Zerbitzua Servicio Editorial, p 25–51
Epstein S (1995) The construction of lay expertise: AIDS activism 
and the forging of credibility in the reform of clinical trials. Sci 
Technol Human Values 20(4):408–437
Feenberg A (1999) Questioning technology. Routledge, London
Feenberg A (2010) Between reason and experience. essays in tech-
nology and modernity. The MIT Press, Cambridge
Feil-Seifer BD, Matari MJ (2011) Ethical issues related to technol-
ogy. Robot Autom Mag 18(1):24–31
Feng P, Feenberg A (2008) Thinking about design: critical theory 
of technology and the design process. Philosopy and design. 
From engineering to architecure. Springer, Berlin, pp 105–118
Fisher B, Tronto J (1990) Toward a feminist theory for caring. In: 
Abel EK, Nelson MK (eds) Circles of care: work and identity 
in women’s lives. SUNY Press, pp 35–62
Frith L (2012) Symbiotic empirical ethics: a practical methodology. 
Bioethics 26(4):198–206
Hagendorff T (2020) The ethics of AI ethics: an evaluation of guide-
lines. Mind Mach 30(1):99–120
Heerink M, Vanderborght B, Broekens J, Albó-Canals J (2016) New 
friends: social robots in therapy and education. Int J Soc Robot 
8(4):443–444
Hergesell J, Maibaum A (2018) Interests and side effects in geriatic 
care. In: Weidner R, Karafilidis A (eds) Developing support 
technologies—integrating multiple perspectives to create sup-
port that people really want. VS-Verlag, Wiesbaden, pp 163–168

==== Page 11 ====
1695 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
Howcroft D, Mitev N, Wilson M (2004) What we may learn from the 
social shaping of technology approach. In: Mingers J, Willcocks 
L (eds) Social theory and philosophy for information systems. 
John Wiley and Sons, West Sussex, pp 329–371
Ihde D (1999) Technology and prognostic predicaments. AI Soc 
13(1–2):44–51
Iosa M, Morone G, Cherubini A, Paolucci S (2016) The three laws 
of neurorobotics: a review on what neurorehabilitation robots 
should do for patients and clinicians. J Med Biol Eng 36(1):1–11
Jenkins S, Draper H (2015) Care, monitoring, and companionship: 
views on care robots from older people and their carers. Int J 
Soc Robot 7(5):673–683
Karakayali N (2015) Two Ontological Orientations in Sociology: 
Building Social Ontologies and Blurring the Boundaries of the 
‘Social.’ Sociology 49(4):732–747
Kerasidou A (2020) Artificial intelligence and the ongoing need for 
empathy, compassion and trust in healthcare. Bull World Health 
Organ 98(4):245–250
Latour B (1999) Pandora’s hope: essays on the reality of science stud-
ies. Harvard University Press
Law J, Mol A (1995) Notes on materiality and sociality. Sociol Rev 
43(2):274–294
López Gómez D (2015) Little arrangements that matter. Rethinking 
autonomy-enabling innovations for later life. Technol Forecast 
Soc Chang 93:91–101
Lupton D (2020) A more-than-human approach to bioethics: the exam-
ple of digital health. Bioethics
Maibaum A, Bischof A, Hergesell J, Lipp B (2021) A critique of robot-
ics in health care. AI Soc 0123456789.
Matsuzaki H, Lindemann G (2016) The autonomy-safety-paradox of 
service robotics in Europe and Japan: a comparative analysis. AI 
Soc 31(4):501–517
Mejia C, Kajikawa Y (2017) Bibliometric analysis of social robotics 
research: identifying research trends and knowledgebase. Appl 
Sci 7(12):1316
Meyer-Heim A, van Hedel HJA (2013) Robot-assisted and computer-
enhanced therapies for children with cerebral palsy: current state 
and clinical implementation. Semin Pediatr Neurol 20(2):139–145
Morley J et al (2020) The ethics of AI in health care: a mapping review. 
Soc Sci Med 260:113172
Mort M, May CR, Williams T (2003) Remote doctors and absent 
patients: acting at a distance in telemedicine? Sci Technol Human 
Values 28(2):274–295
Muller VC (2020) Ethics of artificial intelligence and robotics (Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Stanford Encycl Philos 1–30
Nordmann A, Rip A (2009) Mind the gap revisited. Nat Nanotechnol 
4:273–274
Pistono F, Yampolskiy RV (2016) Unethical research: how to create a 
malevolent artificial intelligence
Ponterotto JG (2006) Brief Note on the Origins, Evolution, and Mean-
ing of the Qualitative Research Concept Thick Description. The 
Qualitative Report 11(3):538–549
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2011) Matters of care in technoscience: assem-
bling neglected things. Soc Stud Sci 41(1):85–106
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2017) Matters of care. Speculative ethics in 
more than human worlds. University of Minnesota Press.
Russell SJ, Norvig P (2003) Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. 
Prentice Hall Series in Artificial Intelligence, New Jersey
Sabanovic S, Reeder S, Kechavarzi B (2014) Designing robots in the 
wild: in situ prototype evaluation for a break management robot. 
J Hum Robot Interact Ion 3(1):70–88
Sampath M, Khargonekar P (2018) Socially responsible automation: a 
framework for shaping future. Nat Acad Eng Bridge 48(4):45–52
Schaal S (2007) The new robotics—towards human-centered machines. 
HFSP Journal 1(2):115–126Sharkey A, Sharkey N (2011) Children, the elderly, and interactive 
robots: anthropomorphism and deception in robot care and com-
panionship. IEEE Robot Autom Mag 18(1):32–38
Sharkey N, Sharkey A (2012) The eldercare factory. Gerontology 
58(3):282–288
Sherwin S, Stockdale K (2017) Whither bioethics now? The promise 
of relational theory. Int J Fem Approach Bioethics 10(1):7–29
Shoham Y, Perrault R, Brynjolfsson E, Clark J, Manyika J, Niebles JC, 
Bauer Z (2018) AI Index 2018. Annual report 1–94
Sparrow R (2016) Robots in aged care: a dystopian future? Introduc-
tion. AI Soc 31(4):445–454
Sparrow R, Sparrow L (2006) In the hands of machines? The future of 
aged care. Minds Mach 16(2):141–161
Stahl BC, Coeckelbergh M (2016) Ethics of healthcare robotics: 
towards responsible research and innovation. Robot Auton
Steels L, Mantaras RLD (2018) The Barcelona declaration for the 
proper development and usage of artificial intelligence in Europe. 
AI Commun 31:485–494
Stone P, Brooks R, Brynjolfsson E, Calo R, Etzioni O, Hager G, Teller 
A (2016) Artificial intelligence and life in 2030: one hundred year 
study on artificial intelligence. Stanford University, Stanford
Topol EJ (2019) High-performance medicine: the convergence of 
human and artificial intelligence. Nat Med 25(1):44–56
Tronto JC (1998) An ethic of care. J Am Soc Aging 22(3):15–20
Tronto J (2018) La democracia del cuidado como antídoto frente al 
neoliberalismo. In: Domínguez Alcón C, Kohlen H, Tronto J (Eds) 
El futuro del cuidado. Comprensión de la ética del cuidado y prác-
tica enfermera. Ediciones San Juan de Dios, p 7–19
Tronto J, Kohlen H (2018) ¿Puede ser codificada la ética del cuidado? 
In: Domínguez Alcón C, Tronto J, Kohlen H (eds) El futuro del 
cuidado. Comprensión de la ética del cuidado y práctica enfer -
mera. Ediciones San Juan de Dios, p 20–32
Vallès-Peris N (2021) Repensar la robótica y la inteligencia artificial 
desde la ética de los cuidados Teknokultura. Rev De Cult Digit y 
Mov Soc 18(2):137–146
Vallès-Peris N, Domènech M (2020) Roboticists’ imaginaries of robots 
for care: the radical imaginary as a tool for an ethical discussion. 
Eng Stud 12(3):157–176
Vallès-Peris N, Angulo C, Domènech M (2018) Children’s imaginaries 
of human–robot interaction in healthcare. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 15(5):970–988
Vallès-Peris N, Argudo-Portal V, Domènech M (2021a) Manufacturing 
life, what life? Ethical debates around biobanks and social robots. 
NanoEthics 1–14.
Vallès-Peris N, Barat-Auleda O, Domènech M (2021b) Robots in Health-
care? What Patients Say. Int J Environ Res Public Health 18:9933
Vallor S, Bekey GA (2017) Artificial intelligence and the ethics of self-
learning robots. In: Lin P, Abney K, Jenkins R (eds) Robot ethics. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 338–353
van der Plas A, Smits M, Wehrmann C (2010) Beyond speculative 
robot ethics: a vision assessment study on the future of the robotic 
caretaker. Account Res 17(6):299–315
van Wynsberghe A (2013) Designing robots for care: care centered 
value-sensitive design. Sci Eng Ethics 19(2):407–433
van Wynsberghe A (2015) Healthcare robots. Ethics, design and imple-
mentation. Routledge, London
Verbeek P-P (2006) Materializing morality: design ethics and tech-
nological mediation. Sci Technol Human Values 31(3):361–380
Volti R (2005) Society and technological change. Macmillan
Willems D, Pols J (2010) Goodness! The empirical turn in health care 
ethics. Med Antropol 22(1):161–170
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

