==== Page 1 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of
Disentangled Representations
Francesco Locatello12Stefan Bauer2Mario Lucic3Gunnar Rätsch1Sylvain Gelly3Bernhard Schölkopf2
Olivier Bachem3
Abstract
The key idea behind the unsupervised learning
ofdisentangled representations is that real-world
data is generated by a few explanatory factors of
variation which can be recovered by unsupervised
learning algorithms. In this paper, we provide
a sober look at recent progress in the ﬁeld and
challenge some common assumptions. We
ﬁrst theoretically show that the unsupervised
learning of disentangled representations is
fundamentally impossible without inductive
biases on both the models and the data. Then,
we train more than 12 000 models covering most
prominent methods and evaluation metrics in a
reproducible large-scale experimental study on
seven different data sets. We observe that while
the different methods successfully enforce prop-
erties “encouraged” by the corresponding losses,
well-disentangled models seemingly cannot be
identiﬁed without supervision. Furthermore,
increased disentanglement does not seem to lead
to a decreased sample complexity of learning
for downstream tasks. Our results suggest that
future work on disentanglement learning should
be explicit about the role of inductive biases and
(implicit) supervision, investigate concrete ben-
eﬁts of enforcing disentanglement of the learned
representations, and consider a reproducible
experimental setup covering several data sets.
1. Introduction
In representation learning it is often assumed that real-world
observations x(e.g., images or videos) are generated by
1ETH Zurich, Department for Computer Science2Max-
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems3Google Research,
Brain Team. Correspondence to: Francesco Locatello
<francesco.locatello@tuebingen.mpg.de>, Olivier Bachem
<bachem@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).a two-step generative process. First, a multivariate latent
random variable zis sampled from a distribution P(z). In-
tuitively, zcorresponds to semantically meaningful factors
of variation of the observations (e.g., content + position of
objects in an image). Then, in a second step, the observation
xis sampled from the conditional distribution P(x|z). The
key idea behind this model is that the high-dimensional data
xcan be explained by the substantially lower dimensional
and semantically meaningful latent variable zwhich is
mapped to the higher-dimensional space of observations
x. Informally, the goal of representation learning is to ﬁnd
useful transformations r(x)ofxthat “make it easier to
extract useful information when building classiﬁers or other
predictors” ( Bengio et al. ,2013).
A recent line of work has argued that representations that
aredisentangled are an important step towards a better
representation learning ( Bengio et al. ,2013 ;Peters et al. ,
2017;LeCun et al. ,2015;Bengio et al. ,2007;Schmidhuber ,
1992 ;Lake et al. ,2017 ;Tschannen et al. ,2018 ). They
should contain all the information present in xin a compact
and interpretable structure ( Bengio et al. ,2013 ;Kulkarni
et al. ,2015 ;Chen et al. ,2016 ) while being independent
from the task at hand ( Goodfellow et al. ,2009 ;Lenc &
Vedaldi ,2015). They should be useful for (semi-)supervised
learning of downstream tasks, transfer and few shot
learning ( Bengio et al. ,2013;Schölkopf et al. ,2012;Peters
et al.,2017 ). They should enable to integrate out nuisance
factors ( Kumar et al. ,2017 ), to perform interventions, and
to answer counterfactual questions ( Pearl ,2009 ;Spirtes
et al.,1993;Peters et al. ,2017).
While there is no single formalized notion of disentangle-
ment (yet) which is widely accepted, the key intuition is that
a disentangled representation should separate the distinct,
informative factors of variations in the data ( Bengio et al. ,
2013 ). A change in a single underlying factor of variation
zishould lead to a change in a single factor in the learned
representation r(x). This assumption can be extended to
groups of factors as, for instance, in Bouchacourt et al.
(2018) orSuter et al. (2018). Based on this idea, a variety of
disentanglement evaluation protocols have been proposed
leveraging the statistical relations between the learned

==== Page 2 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
representation and the ground-truth factor of variations.
Disentanglement is then measured as a particular structural
property of these relations ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;Kim &
Mnih ,2018 ;Eastwood & Williams ,2018 ;Kumar et al. ,
2017;Chen et al. ,2018;Ridgeway & Mozer ,2018).
State-of-the-art approaches for unsupervised disentangle-
ment learning are largely based on Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling ,2014): One assumes a speciﬁc
prior P(z)on the latent space and then uses a deep neural
network to parameterize the conditional probability P(x|z).
Similarly, the distribution P(z|x)is approximated using a
variational distribution Q(z|x), again parametrized using a
deep neural network. The model is then trained by minimiz-
ing a suitable approximation to the negative log-likelihood.
The representation for r(x)is usually taken to be the mean
of the approximate posterior distribution Q(z|x). Several
variations of V AEs were proposed with the motivation that
they lead to better disentanglement ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;
Burgess et al. ,2017;Kim & Mnih ,2018;Chen et al. ,2018;
Kumar et al. ,2017 ;Rubenstein et al. ,2018 ). The common
theme behind all these approaches is that they try to enforce
a factorized aggregated posteriorR
xQ(z|x)P(x)dx, which
should encourage disentanglement.
Our contributions. In this paper, we challenge commonly
held assumptions in this ﬁeld in both theory and practice.
Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We theoretically prove that (perhaps unsurprisingly) the
unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is
fundamentally impossible without inductive biases both
on the considered learning approaches and the data sets.
•We investigate current approaches and their inductive
biases in a reproducible large-scale experimental study1
with a sound experimental protocol for unsupervised dis-
entanglement learning. We implement six recent unsu-
pervised disentanglement learning methods as well as six
disentanglement measures from scratch and train more
than12 000 models on seven data sets.
•We release disentanglement_lib2, a new library
to train and evaluate disentangled representations. As re-
producing our results requires substantial computational
effort, we also release more than 10 000 trained models
which can be used as baselines for future research.
•We analyze our experimental results and challenge com-
mon beliefs in unsupervised disentanglement learning: (i)
While all considered methods prove effective at ensuring
that the individual dimensions of the aggregated posterior
(which is sampled) are not correlated, we observe that the
1Reproducing these experiments requires approximately 2.52
GPU years (NVIDIA P100).
2https://github.com/google-research/
disentanglement_libdimensions of the representation (which is taken to be the
mean) are correlated. (ii) We do not ﬁnd any evidence
that the considered models can be used to reliably learn
disentangled representations in an unsupervised manner
as random seeds and hyperparameters seem to matter
more than the model choice. Furthermore, good trained
models seemingly cannot be identiﬁed without access
to ground-truth labels even if we are allowed to transfer
good hyperparameter values across data sets. (iii) For
the considered models and data sets, we cannot validate
the assumption that disentanglement is useful for down-
stream tasks, for example through a decreased sample
complexity of learning.
•Based on these empirical evidence, we suggest three crit-
ical areas of further research: (i) The role of inductive bi-
ases and implicit and explicit supervision should be made
explicit: unsupervised model selection persists as a key
question. (ii) The concrete practical beneﬁts of enforcing
a speciﬁc notion of disentanglement of the learned rep-
resentations should be demonstrated. (iii) Experiments
should be conducted in a reproducible experimental setup
on data sets of varying degrees of difﬁculty.
2. Other related work
In a similar spirit to disentanglement, (non-)linear indepen-
dent component analysis ( Comon ,1994 ;Bach & Jordan ,
2002 ;Jutten & Karhunen ,2003 ;Hyvarinen & Morioka ,
2016 ) studies the problem of recovering independent com-
ponents of a signal. The underlying assumption is that there
is a generative model for the signal composed of the com-
bination of statistically independent non-Gaussian compo-
nents. While the identiﬁability result for linear ICA ( Comon ,
1994 ) proved to be a milestone for the classical theory of
factor analysis, similar results are in general not obtainable
for the nonlinear case and the underlying sources gener-
ating the data cannot be identiﬁed ( Hyvarinen & Pajunen ,
1999 ). The lack of almost any identiﬁability result in non-
linear ICA has been a main bottleneck for the utility of the
approach ( Hyvarinen et al. ,2018 ) and partially motivated
alternative machine learning approaches ( Desjardins et al. ,
2012;Schmidhuber ,1992;Cohen & Welling ,2015). Given
that unsupervised algorithms did not initially perform well
on realistic settings most of the other works have consid-
ered some more or less explicit form of supervision ( Reed
et al. ,2014 ;Zhu et al. ,2014 ;Yang et al. ,2015 ;Kulka-
rni et al. ,2015 ;Cheung et al. ,2015 ;Mathieu et al. ,2016 ;
Narayanaswamy et al. ,2017 ;Suter et al. ,2018 ). (Hinton
et al.,2011 ;Cohen & Welling ,2014 ) assume some knowl-
edge of the effect of the factors of variations even though
they are not observed. One can also exploit known relations
between factors in different samples ( Karaletsos et al. ,2015;
Goroshin et al. ,2015 ;Whitney et al. ,2016 ;Fraccaro et al. ,

==== Page 3 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
2017;Denton & Birodkar ,2017;Hsu et al. ,2017;Yingzhen
& Mandt ,2018) or explicit inductive biases ( Locatello et al. ,
2018 ). This is not a limiting assumption especially in se-
quential data, i.e., for videos. We focus our study on the
setting where factors of variations are not observable at all,
i.e. we only observe samples from P(x).
3. Impossibility result
The ﬁrst question that we investigate is whether unsuper-
vised disentanglement learning is even possible for arbitrary
generative models. Theorem 1essentially shows that with-
out inductive biases both on models and data sets the task
is fundamentally impossible. The proof is provided in Ap-
pendix A.
Theorem 1. Ford>1, letz⇠Pdenote any distribution
which admits a density p(z)=Qd
i=1p(zi). Then, there
exists an inﬁnite family of bijective functions f:s u p p ( z)!
supp( z)such that@fi(u)
@uj6=0 almost everywhere for all
iand j(i.e., zand f(z)are completely entangled) and
P(zu)=P(f(z)u)for all u2supp( z)(i.e., they
have the same marginal distribution).
Consider the commonly used “intuitive” notion of disentan-
glement which advocates that a change in a single ground-
truth factor should lead to a single change in the repre-
sentation. In that setting, Theorem 1implies that unsu-
pervised disentanglement learning is impossible for arbi-
trary generative models with a factorized prior3in the fol-
lowing sense: Assume we have p(z)and some P(x|z)
deﬁning a generative model. Consider any unsupervised
disentanglement method and assume that it ﬁnds a repre-
sentation r(x)that is perfectly disentangled with respect
tozin the generative model. Then, Theorem 1implies
that there is an equivalent generative model with the la-
tent variable ˆz=f(z)where ˆzis completely entangled
with respect to zand thus also r(x): as all the entries
in the Jacobian of fare non-zero, a change in a single
dimension of zimplies that all dimensions of ˆzchange.
Furthermore, since fis deterministic and p(z)=p(ˆz)al-
most everywhere, both generative models have the same
marginal distribution of the observations xby construction,
i.e.,P(x)=R
p(x|z)p(z)dz=R
p(x|ˆz)p(ˆz)dˆz. Since the
(unsupervised) disentanglement method only has access to
observations x, it hence cannot distinguish between the two
equivalent generative models and thus has to be entangled
to at least one of them.
This may not be surprising to readers familiar with the
causality and ICA literature as it is consistent with the
following argument: After observing x, we can construct
3Theorem 1only applies to factorized priors; however, we
expect that a similar result can be extended to non-factorizing
priors.inﬁnitely many generative models which have the same
marginal distribution of x. Any one of these models could
be the true causal generative model for the data, and the
right model cannot be identiﬁed given only the distribution
ofx(Peters et al. ,2017). Similar results have been obtained
in the context of non-linear ICA ( Hyvarinen & Pajunen ,
1999 ). The main novelty of Theorem 1is that it allows the
explicit construction of latent spaces zandˆzthat are com-
pletely entangled with each other in the sense of ( Bengio
et al.,2013). We note that while this result is very intuitive
for multivariate Gaussians it also holds for distributions
which are not invariant to rotation, for example multivariate
uniform distributions.
While Theorem 1shows that unsupervised disentanglement
learning is fundamentally impossible for arbitrary genera-
tive models, this does not necessarily mean it is an impossi-
ble endeavour in practice. After all, real world generative
models may have a certain structure that could be exploited
through suitably chosen inductive biases. However, Theo-
rem1clearly shows that inductive biases are required both
for the models (so that we ﬁnd a speciﬁc set of solutions)
and for the data sets (such that these solutions match the true
generative model). We hence argue that the role of inductive
biases should be made explicit and investigated further as
done in the following experimental study.
4. Experimental design
Considered methods. All the considered methods augment
the V AE loss with a regularizer: The  -V AE ( Higgins et al. ,
2017a ), introduces a hyperparameter in front of the KL reg-
ularizer of vanilla VAEs to constrain the capacity of the
VAE bottleneck. The AnnealedVAE ( Burgess et al. ,2017 )
progressively increase the bottleneck capacity so that the
encoder can focus on learning one factor of variation at the
time (the one that most contribute to a small reconstruc-
tion error). The FactorVAE ( Kim & Mnih ,2018 ) and the
 -TCVAE ( Chen et al. ,2018 ) penalize the total correla-
tion ( Watanabe ,1960 ) with adversarial training ( Nguyen
et al.,2010 ;Sugiyama et al. ,2012 ) or with a tractable but
biased Monte-Carlo estimator respectively. The DIP-V AE-I
and the DIP-V AE-II ( Kumar et al. ,2017) both penalize the
mismatch between the aggregated posterior and a factorized
prior. Implementation details and further discussion on the
methods can be found in Appendix BandG.
Considered metrics. TheBetaVAE metric ( Higgins et al. ,
2017a ) measures disentanglement as the accuracy of a linear
classiﬁer that predicts the index of a ﬁxed factor of variation.
Kim & Mnih (2018) address several issues with this metric
in their FactorVAE metric by using a majority vote classiﬁer
on a different feature vector which accounts for a corner
case in the BetaV AE metric. The Mutual Information Gap
(MIG) (Chen et al. ,2018 ) measures for each factor of vari-

==== Page 4 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
ation the normalized gap in mutual information between the
highest and second highest coordinate in r(x). Instead, the
Modularity (Ridgeway & Mozer ,2018 ) measures if each
dimension of r(x)depends on at most a factor of variation
using their mutual information. The Disentanglement metric
ofEastwood & Williams (2018) (which we call DCI Disen-
tanglement for clarity) computes the entropy of the distribu-
tion obtained by normalizing the importance of each dimen-
sion of the learned representation for predicting the value of
a factor of variation. The SAP score (Kumar et al. ,2017) is
the average difference of the prediction error of the two most
predictive latent dimensions for each factor. Implementation
details and further descriptions can be found in Appendix C.
Data sets. We consider four data sets in which xis ob-
tained as a deterministic function of z:dSprites (Higgins
et al.,2017a ),Cars3D (Reed et al. ,2015),SmallNORB (Le-
Cun et al. ,2004 ),Shapes3D (Kim & Mnih ,2018 ). We
also introduce three data sets where the observations xare
stochastic given the factor of variations z:Color-dSprites ,
Noisy-dSprites andScream-dSprites . InColor-dSprites , the
shapes are colored with a random color. In Noisy-dSprites ,
we consider white-colored shapes on a noisy background.
Finally, in Scream-dSprites the background is replaced with
a random patch in a random color shade extracted from the
famous The Scream painting ( Munch ,1893 ). The dSprites
shape is embedded into the image by inverting the color of
its pixels. Further details on the preprocessing of the data
can be found in Appendix H.
Inductive biases. To fairly evaluate the different ap-
proaches, we separate the effect of regularization (in the
form of model choice and regularization strength) from the
other inductive biases (e.g., the choice of the neural architec-
ture). Each method uses the same convolutional architecture,
optimizer, hyperparameters of the optimizer and batch size.
All methods use a Gaussian encoder where the mean and the
log variance of each latent factor is parametrized by the deep
neural network, a Bernoulli decoder and latent dimension
ﬁxed to 10. We note that these are all standard choices in
prior work ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;Kim & Mnih ,2018).
We choose six different regularization strengths, i.e., hy-
perparameter values, for each of the considered methods.
The key idea was to take a wide enough set to ensure that
there are useful hyperparameters for different settings for
each method and not to focus on speciﬁc values known to
work for speciﬁc data sets. However, the values are par-
tially based on the ranges that are prescribed in the literature
(including the hyperparameters suggested by the authors).
We ﬁx our experimental setup in advance and we run all the
considered methods on each data set for 50 different random
seeds and evaluate them on the considered metrics. The
full details on the experimental setup are provided in the
Appendix G. Our experimental setup, the limitations of thisstudy, and the differences with previous implementations
are extensively discussed in Appendices D-F.
5. Key experimental results
In this section, we highlight our key ﬁndings with plots
speciﬁcally picked to be representative of our main results.
In Appendix I, we provide the full experimental results with
a complete set of plots for different methods, data sets and
disentanglement metrics.
5.1. Can current methods enforce a uncorrelated
aggregated posterior and representation?
While many of the considered methods aim to enforce a
factorizing and thus uncorrelated aggregated posterior (e.g.,
regularizing the total correlation of the sampled representa-
tion), they use the mean vector of the Gaussian encoder as
the representation and not a sample from the Gaussian en-
coder. This may seem like a minor, irrelevant modiﬁcation;
however, it is not clear whether a factorizing aggregated
posterior also ensures that the dimensions of the mean rep-
resentation are uncorrelated. To test the impact of this, we
compute the total correlation of both the mean and the sam-
pled representation based on ﬁtting Gaussian distributions
for each data set, model and hyperparameter value (see
Appendix CandI.2for details).
Figure 1(left) shows the total correlation based on a ﬁtted
Gaussian of the sampled representation plotted against the
regularization strength for each method except Annealed-
V AE on Color-dSprites. We observe that the total correlation
of the sampled representation generally decreases with the
regularization strength. One the other hand, Figure 1(right)
shows the total correlation of the mean representation plot-
ted against the regularization strength. It is evident that the
total correlation of the mean representation generally in-
creases with the regularization strength. The only exception
is DIP-V AE-I for which we observe that the total correlation
Figure 1. Total correlation based on a ﬁtted Gaussian of the sam-
pled (left) and the mean representation (right) plotted against reg-
ularization strength for Color-dSprites and approaches (except
AnnealedV AE). The total correlation of the sampled representation
decreases while the total correlation of the mean representation
increases as the regularization strength is increased.

==== Page 5 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
of the mean representation is consistently low. This is not
surprising as the DIP-V AE-I objective directly optimizes the
covariance matrix of the mean representation to be diagonal
which implies that the corresponding total correlation (as
we measure it) is low. These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by our
detailed experimental results in Appendix I.2(in particular
Figures 8-9) which considers all different data sets. Further-
more, we observe largely the same pattern if we consider the
average mutual information between different dimension
of the representation instead of the total correlation (see
Figures 27-28in Appendix J).
Implications. Overall, these results lead us to conclude
with minor exceptions that the considered methods are effec-
tive at enforcing an aggregated posterior whose individual
dimensions are not correlated but that this does not seem
to imply that the dimensions of the mean representation
(usually used for representation) are uncorrelated.
Figure 2. Rank correlation of different metrics on Noisy-dSprites.
Overall, we observe that all metrics except Modularity seem mildly
correlated with the pairs BetaV AE and FactorV AE, and MIG and
DCI Disentanglement strongly correlated with each other.
5.2. How much do the disentanglement metrics agree?
As there exists no single, common deﬁnition of disentangle-
ment, an interesting question is to see how much different
proposed metrics agree. Figure 2shows the Spearman rank
correlation between different disentanglement metrics on
Noisy-dSprites whereas Figure 12in Appendix I.3shows the
correlation for all the different data sets. We observe that all
metrics except Modularity seem to be correlated strongly on
the data sets dSprites, Color-dSprites and Scream-dSprites
and mildly on the other data sets. There appear to be two
pairs among these metrics that capture particularly similar
notions: the BetaVAE and the FactorVAE score as well as
the MIG and DCI Disentanglement.
Implication. All disentanglement metrics except Modular-
ity appear to be correlated. However, the level of correlation
changes between different data sets.
5.3. How important are different models and
hyperparameters for disentanglement?
The primary motivation behind the considered methods is
that they should lead to improved disentanglement. This
Figure 3.(left) FactorVAE score for each method on Cars3D.Models are abbreviated (0= -VAE, 1=FactorVAE, 2= -TCVAE,3=DIP-V AE-I, 4=DIP-V AE-II, 5=AnnealedV AE). The variance isdue to different hyperparameters and random seeds. The scores areheavily overlapping. (right) Distribution of FactorV AE scores forFactorV AE model for different regularization strengths on Cars3D.In this case, the variance is only due to the different random seeds.We observe that randomness (in the form of different randomseeds) has a substantial impact on the attained result and that agood run with a bad hyperparameter can beat a bad run with agood hyperparameter.raises the question how disentanglement is affected by themodel choice, the hyperparameter selection and randomness(in the form of different random seeds). To investigate this,we compute all the considered disentanglement metrics foreach of our trained models.In Figure3(left), we show the range of attainable Factor-VAE scores for each method on Cars3D. We observe thatthese ranges are heavily overlapping for different modelsleading us to (qualitatively) conclude that the choice of hy-perparameters and the random seed seems to be substantiallymore important than the choice of objective function. Theseresults are conﬁrmed by the full experimental results on allthe data sets presented in Figure13of AppendixI.4: Whilecertain models seem to attain better maximum scores onspeciﬁc data sets and disentanglement metrics, we do notobserve any consistent pattern that one model is consistentlybetter than the other. At this point, we note that in our studywe have ﬁxed the range of hyperparametersa priorito sixdifferent values for each model and did not explore addi-tional hyperparameters based on the results (as that wouldbias our study). However, this also means that speciﬁc mod-els may have performed better than in Figure13(left) if wehad chosen a different set of hyperparameters.In Figure3(right), we further show the impact of random-ness in the form of random seeds on the disentanglementscores. Each violin plot shows the distribution of the Fac-torV AE metric across all 50 trained FactorV AE models foreach hyperparameter setting on Cars3D. We clearly see thatrandomness (in the form of different random seeds) has asubstantial impact on the attained result and that a goodrun with a bad hyperparameter can beat a bad run with agood hyperparameter in many cases. Again, these ﬁndings

==== Page 6 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Figure 4.(left) FactorVAE score vs hyperparameters for each score on Cars3d. There seems to be no model dominating all the othersand for each model there does not seem to be a consistent strategy in choosing the regularization strength. (center) Unsupervised scoresvs disentanglement metrics on Shapes3D. Metrics are abbreviated ((A)=BetaVAE Score, (B)=FactorVAE Score, (C)=MIG , (D)=DCIDisentanglement, (E)=Modularity, (F)=SAP). The unsupervised scores we consider do not seem to be useful for model selection. (right)Rank-correlation of DCI disentanglement metric across different data sets. Good hyperparameters only seem to transfer between dSpritesand Color-dSprites but not in between the other data sets.are consistent with the complete set of plots provided inFigure14of AppendixI.4.Finally, we perform a variance analysis by trying to predictthe different disentanglement scores using ordinary leastsquares for each data set: If we allow the score to dependonly on the objective function (treated as a categorical vari-able), we are only able to explain37%of the variance of thescores on average (see Table5in AppendixI.4for furtherdetails). Similarly, if the score depends on the Cartesianproduct of objective function and regularization strength(again categorical), we are able to explain59%of the vari-ance while the rest is due to the random seed.Implication.The disentanglement scores of unsupervisedmodels are heavily inﬂuenced by randomness (in the formof the random seed) and the choice of the hyperparameter(in the form of the regularization strength). The objectivefunction appears to have less impact.5.4. Are there reliable recipes for model selection?In this section, we investigate how good hyperparameterscan be chosen and how we can distinguish between goodand bad training runs. In this paper, we advocate that thatmodel selectionshould notdepend on the considered dis-entanglement score for the following reasons: The point ofunsupervised learning of disentangled representation is thatthere is no access to the labels as otherwise we could incor-porate them and would have to compare to semi-supervisedand fully supervised methods. All the disentanglement met-rics considered in this paper require a substantial amountof ground-truth labels or the full generative model (for ex-ample for the BetaV AE and the FactorV AE metric). Hence,one may substantially bias the results of a study by tun-ing hyperparameters based on (supervised) disentanglementmetrics. Furthermore, we argue that it is not sufﬁcient to ﬁxa set of hyperparametersa prioriand then show that one ofthose hyperparameters and a speciﬁc random seed achievesa good disentanglement score as it amounts to showing theexistence of a good model, but does not guide the practi-tioner in ﬁnding it. Finally, in many practical settings, wemight not even have access to adequate labels as it maybe hard to identify the true underlying factor of variations,in particular, if we consider data modalities that are lesssuitable to human interpretation than images.In the remainder of this section, we hence investigate andassess different ways how hyperparameters and good modelruns could be chosen. In this study, we focus on choosingthe learning model and the regularization strength corre-sponding to that loss function. However, we note that inpractice this problem is likely even harder as a practitionermight also want to tune other modeling choices such archi-tecture or optimizer.General recipes for hyperparameter selection.We ﬁrstinvestigate whether we may ﬁnd generally applicable “rulesof thumb” for choosing the hyperparameters. For this, weplot in Figure4(left) the FactorV AE score against differentregularization strengths for each model on the Cars3D dataset whereas Figure16in AppendixI.5shows the same plotfor all data sets and disentanglement metrics. The valuescorrespond to the median obtained values across 50 randomseeds for each model, hyperparameter and data set. Overall,there seems to be no model consistently dominating allthe others and for each model there does not seem to be aconsistent strategy in choosing the regularization strength tomaximize disentanglement scores. Furthermore, even if wecould identify a good objective function and correspondinghyperparameter value, we still could not distinguish betweena good and a bad training run.Model selection based on unsupervised scores.Anotherapproach could be to select hyperparameters based on un-supervised scores such as the reconstruction error, the KLdivergence between the prior and the approximate posterior,the Evidence Lower BOund or the estimated total corre-lation of the sampled representation (mean representationgives similar results). This would have the advantage that

==== Page 7 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Table 1. Probability of outperforming random model selection on a
different random seed. A random disentanglement metric and data
set is sampled and used for model selection. That model is then
compared to a randomly selected model: (i) on the same metric
and data set, (ii) on the same metric and a random different data
set, (iii) on a random different metric and the same data set, and
(iv) on a random different metric and a random different data set.
The results are averaged across 10 000 random draws.
Random data set Same data set
Random metric 54.9% 62.6%
Same metric 59.3% 80.7%
we could select speciﬁc trained models and not just good
hyperparameter settings whose median trained model would
perform well. To test whether such an approach is fruitful,
we compute the rank correlation between these unsuper-
vised metrics and the disentanglement metrics and present
it in Figure 4(center) for Shapes3D and in Figure 16of
Appendix I.5for all the different data sets. While we do
observe some correlations, no clear pattern emerges which
leads us to conclude that this approach is unlikely to be
successful in practice.
Hyperparameter selection based on transfer. The ﬁnal
strategy for hyperparameter selection that we consider is
based on transferring good settings across data sets. The
key idea is that good hyperparameter settings may be in-
ferred on data sets where we have labels available (such as
dSprites) and then applied to novel data sets. Figure 4(right)
shows the rank correlations obtained between different data
sets for the DCI disentanglement (whereas Figure 17in Ap-
pendix I.5shows it for all data sets). We ﬁnd a strong and
consistent correlation between dSprites and Color-dSprites.
While these results suggest that some transfer of hyper-
parameters is possible, it does not allow us to distinguish
between good and bad random seeds on the target data set.
To illustrate this, we compare such a transfer based approach
to hyperparameter selection to random model selection as
follows: First, we sample one of our 50 random seeds, a
random disentanglement metric and a data set and use them
to select the hyperparameter setting with the highest attained
score. Then, we compare that selected hyperparameter set-
ting to a randomly selected model on either the same or
a random different data set, based on either the same or a
random different metric and for a randomly sampled seed.
Finally, we report the percentage of trials in which this
transfer strategy outperforms or performs equally well as
random model selection across 10 000 trials in Table 1. If
we choose the same metric and the same data set (but a dif-
ferent random seed), we obtain a score of 80.7%. If we aim
to transfer for the same metric across data sets, we achieve
around 59.3%. Finally, if we transfer both across metrics
and data sets, our performance drops to 54.9%.
Figure 5. Rank correlations between disentanglement metrics and
downstream performance (accuracy and efﬁciency) on dSprites.
Implications. Unsupervised model selection remains an un-
solved problem. Transfer of good hyperparameters between
metrics and data sets does not seem to work as there appears
to be no unsupervised way to distinguish between good and
bad random seeds on the target task.
5.5. Are these disentangled representations useful for
downstream tasks in terms of the sample
complexity of learning?
One of the key motivations behind disentangled rep-
resentations is that they are assumed to be useful for
later downstream tasks. In particular, it is argued that
disentanglement should lead to a better sample complexity
of learning ( Bengio et al. ,2013 ;Schölkopf et al. ,2012 ;
Peters et al. ,2017). In this section, we consider the simplest
downstream classiﬁcation task where the goal is to recover
the true factors of variations from the learned representation
using either multi-class logistic regression (LR) or gradient
boosted trees (GBT).
Figure 5shows the rank correlations between the disen-
tanglement metrics and the downstream performance on
dSprites. We observe that all metrics except Modularity
seem to be correlated with increased downstream perfor-
mance on the different variations of dSprites and to some
degree on Shapes3D but not on the other data sets. However,
it is not clear whether this is due to the fact that disentangled
representations perform better or whether some of these
scores actually also (partially) capture the informativeness
of the evaluated representation. Furthermore, the full results
in Figure 19of Appendix I.6indicate that the correlation is
weaker or inexistent on other data sets (e.g. Cars3D).
To assess the sample complexity argument we compute
for each trained model a statistical efﬁciency score which
we deﬁne as the average accuracy based on 100samples
divided by the average accuracy based on 10 000 samples.
Figure 6show the sample efﬁciency of learning (based on
GBT) versus the FactorV AE Score on dSprites. We do not
observe that higher disentanglement scores reliably lead to
a higher sample efﬁciency. This ﬁnding which appears to be
consistent with the results in Figures 20-23of Appendix I.6.

==== Page 8 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Figure 6. Statistical efﬁciency of the FactorV AE Score for learning
a GBT downstream task on dSprites.
Implications. While the empirical results in this section
are negative, they should also be interpreted with care.
After all, we have seen in previous sections that the
models considered in this study fail to reliably produce
disentangled representations. Hence, the results in this
section might change if one were to consider a different set
of models, for example semi-supervised or fully supervised
one. Furthermore, there are many more potential notions
of usefulness such as interpretability and fairness that
we have not considered in our experimental evaluation.
Nevertheless, we argue that the lack of concrete examples of
useful disentangled representations necessitates that future
work on disentanglement methods should make this point
more explicit. While prior work ( Steenbrugge et al. ,2018 ;
Laversanne-Finot et al. ,2018 ;Nair et al. ,2018 ;Higgins
et al.,2017b ;2018 ) successfully applied disentanglement
methods such as  -VAE on a variety of downstream tasks,
it is not clear to us that these approaches and trained models
performed well because of disentanglement .
6. Conclusions
In this work we ﬁrst theoretically show that the unsupervised
learning of disentangled representations is fundamentally
impossible without inductive biases. We then performed
a large-scale empirical study with six state-of-the-art
disentanglement methods, six disentanglement metrics on
seven data sets and conclude the following: (i) A factorizing
aggregated posterior (which is sampled) does not seem to
necessarily imply that the dimensions in the representation
(which is taken to be the mean) are uncorrelated. (ii)
Random seeds and hyperparameters seem to matter more
than the model but tuning seem to require supervision. (iii)
We did not observe that increased disentanglement implies
a decreased sample complexity of learning downstream
tasks. Based on these ﬁndings, we suggest three main
directions for future research:Inductive biases and implicit and explicit supervision.
Our theoretical impossibility result in Section 3highlights
the need of inductive biases while our experimental
results indicate that the role of supervision is crucial. As
currently there does not seem to exist a reliable strategy
to choose hyperparameters in the unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations, we argue that future work
should make the role of inductive biases and implicit and
explicit supervision more explicit. We would encourage
and motivate future work on disentangled representation
learning that deviates from the static, purely unsupervised
setting considered in this work. Promising settings (that
have been explored to some degree) seem to be for example
(i) disentanglement learning with interactions ( Thomas
et al. ,2017 ), (ii) when weak forms of supervision e.g.
through grouping information are available ( Bouchacourt
et al. ,2018 ), or (iii) when temporal structure is available
for the learning problem. The last setting seems to be
particularly interesting given recent identiﬁability results
in non-linear ICA ( Hyvarinen & Morioka ,2016).
Concrete practical beneﬁts of disentangled representa-
tions. In our experiments we investigated whether higher
disentanglement scores lead to increased sample efﬁciency
for downstream tasks and did not ﬁnd evidence that this
is the case. While these results only apply to the setting
and downstream task used in our study, we are also not
aware of other prior work that compellingly shows the
usefulness of disentangled representations. Hence, we
argue that future work should aim to show concrete beneﬁts
of disentangled representations. Interpretability and fairness
as well as interactive settings seem to be particularly
promising candidates to evaluate usefulness. One potential
approach to include inductive biases, offer interpretability,
and generalization is the concept of independent causal
mechanisms and the framework of causal inference ( Pearl ,
2009;Peters et al. ,2017).
Experimental setup and diversity of data sets. Our
study also highlights the need for a sound, robust, and
reproducible experimental setup on a diverse set of data sets
in order to draw valid conclusions. We have observed that
it is easy to draw spurious conclusions from experimental
results if one only considers a subset of methods, metrics
and data sets. Hence, we argue that it is crucial for future
work to perform experiments on a wide variety of data
sets to see whether conclusions and insights are generally
applicable. This is particularly important in the setting
of disentanglement learning as experiments are largely
performed on toy-like data sets. For this reason, we released
disentanglement_lib , the library we created to train
and evaluate the different disentanglement methods on
multiple data sets. We also released more than 10 000
trained models to provide a solid baseline for future
methods and metrics.

==== Page 9 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Ilya Tolstikhin, Paul Rubenstein and Josip
Djolonga for helpful discussions and comments. This re-
search was partially supported by the Max Planck ETH
Center for Learning Systems and by an ETH core grant
(to Gunnar Rätsch). This work was partially done while
Francesco Locatello was at Google Research Zurich.
References
Arcones, M. A. and Gine, E. On the bootstrap of u and v
statistics. The Annals of Statistics , pp. 655–674, 1992.
Bach, F. R. and Jordan, M. I. Kernel independent component
analysis. Journal of machine learning research , 3(Jul):
1–48, 2002.
Bengio, Y., LeCun, Y., et al. Scaling learning algorithms
towards ai. Large-scale kernel machines , 34(5):1–41,
2007.
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE transac-
tions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 35(8):
1798–1828, 2013.
Bouchacourt, D., Tomioka, R., and Nowozin, S. Multi-level
variational autoencoder: Learning disentangled represen-
tations from grouped observations. In AAAI , 2018.
Burgess, C. P., Higgins, I., Pal, A., Matthey, L., Watters, N.,
Desjardins, G., and Lerchner, A. Understanding disentan-
gling in beta-vae. In Workshop on Learning Disentangled
Representations at the 31st Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 2017.
Chen, T. Q., Li, X., Grosse, R. B., and Duvenaud, D. K.
Isolating sources of disentanglement in variational autoen-
coders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 2615–2625, 2018.
Chen, X., Duan, Y., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Sutskever,
I., and Abbeel, P. Infogan: Interpretable representation
learning by information maximizing generative adversar-
ial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 2172–2180, 2016.
Cheung, B., Livezey, J. A., Bansal, A. K., and Olshausen,
B. A. Discovering hidden factors of variation in deep
networks. In Workshop at International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2015.
Cohen, T. and Welling, M. Learning the irreducible repre-
sentations of commutative lie groups. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1755–1763, 2014.Cohen, T. S. and Welling, M. Transformation properties of
learned visual representations. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations , 2015.
Comon, P. Independent component analysis, a new concept?
Signal processing , 36(3):287–314, 1994.
Denton, E. L. and Birodkar, v. Unsupervised learning of
disentangled representations from video. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 4414–4423,
2017.
Desjardins, G., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. Disentan-
gling factors of variation via generative entangling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1210.5474 , 2012.
Eastwood, C. and Williams, C. K. I. A framework for the
quantitative evaluation of disentangled representations.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations ,
2018.
Fraccaro, M., Kamronn, S., Paquet, U., and Winther, O. A
disentangled recognition and nonlinear dynamics model
for unsupervised learning. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , pp. 3601–3610, 2017.
Goodfellow, I., Lee, H., Le, Q. V., Saxe, A., and Ng, A. Y.
Measuring invariances in deep networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 646–654,
2009.
Goroshin, R., Mathieu, M. F., and LeCun, Y. Learning
to linearize under uncertainty. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 1234–1242, 2015.
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X.,
Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., and Lerchner, A. beta-
vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained
variational framework. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2017a.
Higgins, I., Pal, A., Rusu, A., Matthey, L., Burgess, C.,
Pritzel, A., Botvinick, M., Blundell, C., and Lerchner,
A. Darla: Improving zero-shot transfer in reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pp. 1480–1490, 2017b.
Higgins, I., Sonnerat, N., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C. P.,
Bošnjak, M., Shanahan, M., Botvinick, M., Hassabis, D.,
and Lerchner, A. Scan: Learning hierarchical composi-
tional visual concepts. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2018.
Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., and Wang, S. D. Trans-
forming auto-encoders. In International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , pp. 44–51. Springer, 2011.

==== Page 10 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Hsu, W.-N., Zhang, Y., and Glass, J. Unsupervised learning
of disentangled and interpretable representations from
sequential data. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pp. 1878–1889, 2017.
Hyvarinen, A. and Morioka, H. Unsupervised feature ex-
traction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ica.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 3765–3773, 2016.
Hyvarinen, A. and Pajunen, P. Nonlinear independent com-
ponent analysis: Existence and uniqueness results. Neural
Networks , 12(3):429–439, 1999.
Hyvarinen, A., Sasaki, H., and Turner, R. E. Nonlinear
ica using auxiliary variables and generalized contrastive
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08651 , 2018.
Jutten, C. and Karhunen, J. Advances in nonlinear blind
source separation. In Proc. of the 4th Int. Symp. on Inde-
pendent Component Analysis and Blind Signal Separation
(ICA2003) , pp. 245–256, 2003.
Karaletsos, T., Belongie, S., and Rätsch, G. Bayesian repre-
sentation learning with oracle constraints. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.05011 , 2015.
Kim, H. and Mnih, A. Disentangling by factorising. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , pp. 2649–2658, 2018.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
bayes. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2014.
Kulkarni, T. D., Whitney, W. F., Kohli, P., and Tenenbaum,
J. Deep convolutional inverse graphics network. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
2539–2547, 2015.
Kumar, A., Sattigeri, P., and Balakrishnan, A. Variational
inference of disentangled latent concepts from unlabeled
observations. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2017.
Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gersh-
man, S. J. Building machines that learn and think like
people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 40, 2017.
Laversanne-Finot, A., Pere, A., and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Curiosity
driven exploration of learned disentangled goal spaces.
InConference on Robot Learning , pp. 487–504, 2018.
LeCun, Y., Huang, F. J., and Bottou, L. Learning methods
for generic object recognition with invariance to pose and
lighting. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2004. CVPR 2004. Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Com-
puter Society Conference on , volume 2, pp. II–104. IEEE,
2004.LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. Deep learning. nature ,
521(7553):436, 2015.
Lenc, K. and Vedaldi, A. Understanding image representa-
tions by measuring their equivariance and equivalence. In
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pp. 991–999, 2015.
Locatello, F., Vincent, D., Tolstikhin, I., Rätsch, G., Gelly,
S., and Schölkopf, B. Competitive training of mixtures
of independent deep generative models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.11130 , 2018.
Mathieu, M. F., Zhao, J. J., Zhao, J., Ramesh, A., Sprech-
mann, P., and LeCun, Y. Disentangling factors of varia-
tion in deep representation using adversarial training. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp.
5040–5048, 2016.
Munch, E. The scream, 1893.
Nair, A. V., Pong, V., Dalal, M., Bahl, S., Lin, S., and
Levine, S. Visual reinforcement learning with imagined
goals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 9209–9220, 2018.
Narayanaswamy, S., Paige, T. B., Van de Meent, J.-W.,
Desmaison, A., Goodman, N., Kohli, P., Wood, F., and
Torr, P. Learning disentangled representations with semi-
supervised deep generative models. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 5925–5935,
2017.
Nguyen, X., Wainwright, M. J., and Jordan, M. I. Estimating
divergence functionals and the likelihood ratio by convex
risk minimization. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory , 56(11):5847–5861, 2010.
Pearl, J. Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V.,
Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P.,
Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cour-
napeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., and Duchesnay, E.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Elements of causal
inference: foundations and learning algorithms . MIT
press, 2017.
Reed, S., Sohn, K., Zhang, Y., and Lee, H. Learning to
disentangle factors of variation with manifold interaction.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning , pp.
1431–1439, 2014.
Reed, S. E., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., and Lee, H. Deep visual
analogy-making. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 1252–1260, 2015.

==== Page 11 ====
Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Ridgeway, K. and Mozer, M. C. Learning deep disentan-
gled embeddings with the f-statistic loss. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 185–194,
2018.
Rubenstein, P. K., Schoelkopf, B., and Tolstikhin, I. Learn-
ing disentangled representations with wasserstein auto-
encoders. In Workshop at International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2018.
Schmidhuber, J. Learning factorial codes by predictability
minimization. Neural Computation , 4(6):863–879, 1992.
Schölkopf, B., Janzing, D., Peters, J., Sgouritsa, E., Zhang,
K., and Mooij, J. On causal and anticausal learning.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning , pp.
1255–1262, 2012.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. Causation, pre-
diction, and search . Springer-Verlag. (2nd edition MIT
Press 2000), 1993.
Steenbrugge, X., Leroux, S., Verbelen, T., and Dhoedt, B.
Improving generalization for abstract reasoning tasks us-
ing disentangled feature representations. In Workshop
on Relational Representation Learning at Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
Sugiyama, M., Suzuki, T., and Kanamori, T. Density-ratio
matching under the bregman divergence: a uniﬁed frame-
work of density-ratio estimation. Annals of the Institute
of Statistical Mathematics , 64(5):1009–1044, 2012.
Suter, R., Miladinovi ´c, Ð., Bauer, S., and Schölkopf, B.
Interventional robustness of deep latent variable models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00007 , 2018.
Thomas, V., Bengio, E., Fedus, W., Pondard, J., Beaudoin,
P., Larochelle, H., Pineau, J., Precup, D., and Bengio,
Y. Disentangling the independently controllable factors
of variation by interacting with the world. In Workshop
on Learning Disentangled Representations at the 31st
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2017.
Tschannen, M., Bachem, O., and Lucic, M. Recent advances
in autoencoder-based representation learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.05069 , 2018.
Watanabe, S. Information theoretical analysis of multivari-
ate correlation. IBM Journal of research and development ,
4(1):66–82, 1960.
Whitney, W. F., Chang, M., Kulkarni, T., and Tenenbaum,
J. B. Understanding visual concepts with continuation
learning. In Workshop at International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2016.Yang, J., Reed, S. E., Yang, M.-H., and Lee, H. Weakly-
supervised disentangling with recurrent transformations
for 3d view synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 1099–1107, 2015.
Yingzhen, L. and Mandt, S. Disentangled sequential autoen-
coder. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pp. 5656–5665, 2018.
Zhu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Multi-view per-
ceptron: a deep model for learning face identity and view
representations. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pp. 217–225, 2014.

