==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1904.12901v1  [cs.LG]  29 Apr 2019Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold1Daniel Mankowitz2Todd Hester3
Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven its
worth in a series of artiﬁcial domains, and is be-
ginning to show some successes in real-world
scenarios. However, much of the research ad-
vances in RL are often hard to leverage in real-
world systems due to a series of assumptions
that are rarely satisﬁed in practice. We present
a set of nine unique challenges that must be ad-
dressed to productionize RL to real world prob-
lems. For each of these challenges, we spec-
ify the exact meaning of the challenge, present
some approaches from the literature, and spec-
ify some metrics for evaluating that challenge.
An approach that addresses all nine challenges
would be applicable to a large number of real
world problems. We also present an example do-
main that has been modiﬁed to present these chal-
lenges as a testbed for practical RL research.
1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) ( Sutton & Barto ,2018 ) is a
powerful algorithmic paradigm encompassing a wide ar-
ray of contemporary algorithmic approaches ( Mnih et al. ,
2015 ;Silver et al. ,2016 ;Hafner et al. ,2018 ). RL methods
have been shown to be effective on a large set of simu-
lated environments ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ;Silver et al. ,2016 ;
Lillicrap et al. ,2015 ;OpenAI ), but uptake in real-world
problems has been much slower. We posit that this is due
in large part to a too-wide divide between the casting of
current experimental RL setups and the generally poorly
deﬁned realities of real-world systems.
In this paper, we present the main challenges that make RL
in the real-world more difﬁcult than RL in research. At a
high-level these challenges are:
1Google Brain, Paris, France2DeepMind, London, United
Kingdom3DeepMind, Seattle, WA, United States. Correspon-
dence to: Gabriel Dulac-Arnold <dulacarnold@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).1. Training off-line from the ﬁxed logs of an external be-
havior policy.
2. Learning on the real system from limited samples.
3. High-dimensional continuous state and action spaces.
4. Safety constraints that should never or at least rarely
be violated.
5. Tasks that may be partially observable, alternatively
viewed as non-stationary or stochastic.
6. Reward functions that are unspeciﬁed, multi-objective,
or risk-sensitive.
7. System operators who desire explainable policies and
actions.
8. Inference that must happen in real-time at the control
frequency of the system.
9. Large and/or unknown delays in the system actuators,
sensors, or rewards.
While there has been research focusing on these challenges
individually, there has been little research on algorithms
that address all of these challenges together. We hope that
these challenges can guide researchers towards developing
more applicable RL algorithms. For each challenge above,
we motivate its importance, specify it, present approaches
for addressing the challenge, and provide methods for eval-
uating that particular challenge. Finally, we illustrate t hese
challenges on a toy-problem, a control suite ( Tassa et al. ,
2018 ) task modiﬁed to present all of the challenges de-
scribed above.
We consider control systems grounded in the physical
world, optimization of software systems, and systems that
interact with users such as recommender systems and smart
phones. These systems can range in size from a small drone
to a datacenter, in complexity from a one-dimensional ther-
mostat to a self-driving car, and in cost from a calculator
to a spaceship. In all these scenarios there are recurring
themes: there is rarely a good simulator, the systems are
stochastic & non-stationary, have strong safety constrain ts,
and running them is expensive and/or slow. This is very
different from training on a simulated environment where
data is effectively unlimited, consequences for poor actio ns
are non-existent and system dynamics are clean and often
deterministic.
Although current RL algorithms can learn superhuman poli-
cies for systems we can properly simulate ( Silver et al. ,

==== Page 2 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2016 ;Mnih et al. ,2015 ;OpenAI ), for many real-world sys-
tems, not only is there no existing simulator, but building
one can be extremely difﬁcult. Many interesting systems
are either too complex to model properly (datacenter cool-
ing plants or deformable object manipulation tasks), or suf -
ﬁciently varied (arbitrary object assembly with the same
robot arm) that modelling each instance would be impracti-
cal. This lack of available simulators means learning must
be done using data from the real system, and all acting
and exploring must be done on the real system. Thus, we
cannot simply collect massive datasets to solve these chal-
lenges, nor can we ignore safety during training.
To deploy RL to a real production system, robust evalua-
tion is required. Many research papers in RL look at av-
erage episodic return to evaluate the quality of their agent
(although they train with discounted return). This makes
sense when the only optimization criteria is the return it-
self, however in real systems there are other aspects of
agent behavior which are equivalently important. In many
cases, it may be important to evaluate performance for the
worst case user, or the worst case object for manipulation,
rather than the average reward. For many real world ap-
plications, respecting safety can be much more important
than maximizing returns. Additionally, because the global
reward function is generally a balance of multiple sub-goal s
(e.g.reducing both time-to-target and energy use), a proper
evaluation should explicitly separate the individual comp o-
nents of the reward function to better understand the pol-
icy’s tradeoffs.
2. Practical Challenges
In this section we present a series of practical challenges
that appear when using RL on real world systems. Not all
of these challenges will be present in every real system, but
in many cases all of the challenges are present to some de-
gree. To guide practitioners working on applications of RL,
we present current research directions from the literature
for each challenge. To guide researchers who wish to re-
search only a subset of challenges at a time, we present
evaluation criteria for that particular challenge. We beli eve
that an RL algorithm that addresses all of these challenges
would be applicable to a vast number of real world prob-
lems.
For this work, we assume the standard Markov Decision
Process (MDP) formulation. An MDP is represented by a
tuple/a\}bracketle{tS,A,P,r,γ/a\}bracketri}htwhereSis the state space, Athe action
space,Pis the stochastic transition function p(s′|s,a),
andr(s,a)is the reward function which returns a reward
for given state-action. A tuple of experience is of the
form(st,at,rt,st+1). The policy πproduces an action
asat∼π(·|st). Our notation describes a discrete state
and action space but generalizes to continuous ones. Later,we consider modiﬁcations of this formalism for safety con-
straints, robustness, non-stationarity and partial obser vabil-
ity. As there will likely be multiple iterations of the polic y
through time we index them as πito indicate the learning
iteration. An existing system is often controlled by an exis t-
ing policy, either in the form of human operators or black-
box controllers; we call this a behavior policy and denote
itπB.
2.1. Batch Off-line and Off-Policy Training
As mentioned above, many systems cannot be trained on di-
rectly and need to be learned from ﬁxed logs of the system’s
behavior. In many cases, we are deploying an RL approach
to replace a previous control system, and logs from that pol-
icy are available. In future training iterations, batches o f
data will be available from the most recent iteration of the
control algorithm. This setup is an off-line and off-policy
training regime where the policy needs to be trained from
batches of data. We begin by proposing a basic framework
and then discuss possible design choices.
We consider an ordered set of experience tuples produced
by policy πB,DπB= [{s0,a0,r0,...,s T,aT,rT}1≤i≤n].
The initial policy π0is trained from data from the pre-
vious controller of the system, DπB.π0generates data
forDπ0which is used to train π1and so-on1. The de-
tails of policy training are left up to the implementer. The
general framework is that of batched reinforcement learn-
ing ( Scherrer et al. ,2012 ), which we recall in Algorithm
1for clarity. We note that the RL algorithm used to train
the policy after each batch is not restricted; it could be
policy iteration, value function based, policy gradient, e tc.
(Sutton & Barto ,2018 ).
Algorithm 1 Batch RL Training
1:procedure BRT(DπB,Train,N,L )
2:π0←Train(DπB)
3: fori= 0,···,Ndo
4:Dπi←{}
5: fort= 0,···,Ldo
6: at←πi(st)
7:Dπi←Dπi∪(st,at,rt(st,at))
8: st+1∼P(·|st,at)
9: end for
10: πi+1←Train(Dπi)
11: end for
12:end procedure
For a production system where drops in performance could
be very costly, we want to ensure that the new policy im-
proves upon the previous policy. Estimating the policy’s
performance without running it on the real system is termed
1We consider that any mix of previous experience is accept-
able for training the policy, one does not have to limit train ing to
Dπt−1.

==== Page 3 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
off-policy evaluation ( Precup et al. ,2000 ). Off-policy eval-
uation becomes more challenging as the difference between
the policies and the resulting state distributions grows.
The simplest approach to off-policy evaluation is im-
portance sampling ( Precup et al. ,2000 ), which accounts
for the difference between the behavior and target poli-
cies. Alternatively, the direct method learns a tran-
sition model and uses that for evaluation. Doubly-
robust estimators ( Dud´ ık et al. ,2011 ;Jiang & Li ,2015 )
combine both and get the best evaluations from both
worlds. There are many more approaches such as
MAGIC ( Thomas & Brunskill ,2016 ) or more robust dou-
bly robust ( Farajtabar et al. ,2018 ) that can be considered
as well.
The performance of the initial policy π0often dictates
whether access to a system will be granted by system own-
ers as there is usually a minimum performance threshold
the system must respect. Therefore, an important quantity
to evaluate for a new learning algorithm is the warm-start
performance given the behavior policy’s data:
Jstart=R(Train(DπB)), (1)
where R is the cumulative return from the policy
Train(DπB). Evaluating the training algorithm’s perfor-
mance on different sizes of DπB, as well as for differ-
ent quality behavior policies can help understand the algo-
rithm’s ability at ﬁnding a starting policy even in the face
of sub-optimal, over-ﬁt, or insufﬁcient data.
2.2. Learning On the Real System from Limited
Samples
Unlike much of the research performed in deep reinforce-
ment learning ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ;Hester et al. ,2018 ), real
systems do not have separate training and evaluation envi-
ronments. All training data comes from the real system,
and the agent cannot have a separate exploration policy
during training as its exploratory actions do not come for
free. Instead, the agent must perform reasonably well and
act safely throughout learning. For many systems, this
means that exploration must be limited, and the resulting
data is low-variance – very little of the state space may
be covered in the logs. In addition, since there is often
only one instance of the system, approaches that instanti-
ate hundreds or thousands of environments to collect more
data for distributed training are usually not compatible
with this setup ( Horgan et al. ,2018 ;Espeholt et al. ,2018 ;
Adamski et al. ,2018 ).
Almost all of these real-world systems are either slow-
moving, fragile, or expensive enough that the data they pro-
duce is costly, and policy learning must be data-efﬁcient. I n
the case where there are off-line logs of the system, these
might not contain anywhere near the amount of data or datacoverage that current RL algorithms expect. Learning iter-
ations on a real system can take a long time, as slower con-
trol frequencies might range from 1-hour to multi-month
timesteps, and reward horizons could be on the order of
months (e.g. online advertisement, drug therapies). Even
in the case of higher-frequency control tasks, the learning
algorithm needs to learn quickly from potential mistakes
without needing to repeat them multiple times before ﬁxing
them. Thus, learning on a real system requires an algorithm
to be both sample-efﬁcient and performant in its operation
of the system.
There are a number of related works that deal with RL
on real systems and, in particular, focus on sample efﬁ-
ciency. One such work is Model Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML) ( Finn et al. ,2017 ) that focuses on learning about
tasks within a distribution and then, with few shot learning ,
quickly adapting to solving a new in-distribution task that
it has not seen previously. Bootstrap DQN ( Osband et al. ,
2016 ) learns an ensemble of Q-networks and uses Thomp-
son Sampling to drive exploration and improve sample efﬁ-
ciency.
Another approach to improving sample efﬁciency is to
use expert demonstrations to bootstrap the agent, rather
than learning from scratch. This approach has been
combined with DQN ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ) and demon-
strated on Atari ( Hester et al. ,2018 ), as well as combined
with DDPG ( Lillicrap et al. ,2015 ) for insertion tasks on
robots ( Vecer´ ık et al. ). Recent Model-based deep RL ap-
proaches ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,2018 ), where the
algorithm plans against a learned transition model of the
environment, show a lot of promise for improving sam-
ple efﬁciency. A common approach is to learn ensem-
bles of transition models and use various sampling strate-
gies from those models to drive exploration and improve
sample efﬁciency ( Hester & Stone ,2013 ;Chua et al. ,2018 ;
Buckman et al. ,2018 ).
To evaluate the data efﬁciency of a particular method, a
simple yet useful measure is to look at the amount of data
necessary to achieve a certain performance threshold:
Jeff.= min|Di|s.t.R(Train(Di))> R min, (2)
whereRminis the desired performance threshold. Similar
approaches have been used in model-based RL literature
to demonstrate efﬁciency ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,
2018 ).
2.3. High-Dimensional Continuous State and Action
Spaces
Many practical real world problems have large and continu-
ous state and action spaces. For example, consider the huge
action spaces in recommender systems ( Covington et al. ,
2016 ), or the number of sensors and actuators to con-

==== Page 4 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
trol cooling in a Google data center ( Evans & Gao ).
These large state and action spaces can present seri-
ous issues for traditional RL algorithms, as identiﬁed in
(Dulac-Arnold et al. ,2015 ).
There are a number of recent works focused on addressing
this challenge. Dulac-Arnold et al. present an approach
based on generating a vector for a candidate action and
then doing nearest neighbor search to ﬁnd the closest real
action available. Zahavy et al. propose an Action Elimi-
nation Deep Q Network (AE-DQN) that uses a contextual
bandit to eliminate irrelevant actions. He et al. present the
Deep Reinforcement Relevance Network (DRRN) for eval-
uating continuous action spaces in text-based games.
We propose evaluating policy performance according to
two dimensions: number of actions, and relation over the
actions. Millions of related actions are much easier to lear n
than a couple hundred completely unrelated actions, as the
agent needs to sufﬁciently sample each individual action in
the latter case.
2.4. Satisfying Safety Constraints
Almost all physical systems can destroy or degrade them-
selves and their environment. As such, considering these
systems’ safety is fundamentally necessary to controlling
them. Safety is important during system operation, but also
during exploratory learning phases as well. These could
be safety considerations either of the system itself (lim-
iting system temperatures, contact forces or maintaining
minimum battery levels) or of its environment (avoiding
dynamic obstacles, limiting end effector velocities). The re
may exist a fallback watchdog controller, which would take
over if the learned policy violates the safety constraints, but
we consider that it should not be explicitly relied upon.
Recent work in RL safety ( Dalal et al. ,2018 ;Achiam et al. ,
2017 ) has cast safety in the context of Constrained MDPs
(CMDPs) ( Altman ,1999 ), and we will concentrate on pre-
deﬁned constraints on the environment in this context. Con-
strained MDPs deﬁne a constrained optimization problem
and can be expressed as:
max
π∈ΠR(π)subject to Ck(π)≤Vk,k= 1,...,K.
Here,Ris the cumulative reward of a policy πfor a given
MDP, and Ck(π)describes the incurred cumulative cost
of a certain policy πrelative to constraint k. The CMDP
framework describes multiple ways to consider cumulative
cost of a policy π: the total cost until task completion, the
discounted cost, or the average cost. Speciﬁc constraints
are deﬁned as ck(s,a).
The CMDP setup allows for arbitrary constraints on state
and action to be expressed. In the context of a physical sys-
tem these can be as simple as box constraints on a speciﬁcstate variable, or more complex such as dynamic collision
avoidance constraints. One major challenge with address-
ing these safety concerns in real systems is that safety viol a-
tions will likely be very rare in logs of the system. In many
cases, safety constraints are assumed and are not even spec-
iﬁed by the system operator or product manager.
An alternative to CMDPs is budgeted
MDPs ( Boutilier & Lu ,2016 ;Carrara et al. ,2018 ).
While for a CMDP, the constraint level Vkis given, for
budgeted MDPs, it is unknown. Instead, the policy is
learned as a function of constraint level. Then the user
can examine the trade-offs between expected return and
constraint level and choose the constraint level that best
works for the data. This more closely matches the common
real-world scenario where the constraints may not be
absolute, but small violations may be allowed for a large
improvement in expected returns.
Recently, there has a been a lot of work focused on the
problem of safety in reinforcement learning. One focus
has been the addition of a safety layer to the network
(Dalal et al. ,2018 ;Pham et al. ,2017 ). This type of ap-
proach has enabled an agent to learn a task with zero
safety violations as well as transfer some problems to
the real world. These approaches focus on safety during
training. There are other approaches ( Achiam et al. ,2017 ;
Tessler et al. ,2018 ;Bohez et al. ,2019 ) that learn a pol-
icy that violates constraints during training but produce a
trained policy that respects the safety constraints.
Other RL approaches include using Lyapunov functions
to learn safe policies ( Chow et al. ,2018 ) and safe ex-
ploration strategies that predict the safety of neighborin g
states ( Turchetta et al. ,2016 ;Wachi et al. ,2018 ). A Proba-
bilistic Goal MDP ( Mankowitz et al. ,2016 ) is another type
of objective that encourages an agent to consider whether it
should do something risky for large reward or be more con-
servative for smaller rewards within a pre-deﬁned period of
time.
To evaluate the safety of an RL algorithm, we consider
counting the number of safety violations for each individ-
ual constraint. Accumulating all these violations into a
single number has been proposed previously ( Dalal et al. ,
2018 ) and provides a good global summary. We propose
also maintaining each individual constraint’s count of vio -
lations:
Jsafety(π) =/parenleftBiggT/summationdisplay
i=1cj(si,ai)/parenrightBigg
1≤j≤K∈RK,(3)
whereKis the number of safety constraints in the CMDP.
Visualizing this vector’s evolution during both training a nd
once running on the environment is essential to understand-
ing the policy’s behavior relative to the provided safety co n-
straints.

==== Page 5 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2.5. Partial Observability and Non-Stationarity
Almost all real systems where we would want to deploy re-
inforcement learning are partially observable. For exampl e,
on a physical system, we likely do not have observations of
the wear and tear on motors or joints, or the amount of
buildup in pipes or vents. On systems that interact with
users such as recommender systems, we have no observa-
tions of the mental state of the users. Often times, these
partial observabilities appear as non-stationarity (e.g. as a
pump’s efﬁciency degrades) or as stochasticity (e.g. as eac h
robot being operated behaves differently).
Partially observable problems are typically formulated as
a partially observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP).
The key difference from the MDP formulation is that the
agent’s observation x∈Xis now separate from the state,
with an observation function O(x|s)giving the probabil-
ity of observing xgiven the environment state s.
There are two common approaches to handling partial ob-
servability in the literature. First is to incorporate hist ory
into the observation of the agent. DQN ( Mnih et al. ,2015 )
stacks four Atari frames together as the agent’s observatio n
to account for partial observability. An alternate approac h
is to use recurrent networks within the agent, enabling them
to track and recover hidden state. Hausknecht & Stone ap-
ply such an approach to DQN, and show that the recurrent
version can perform equally well in Atari games when only
given a single frame as input. Nagabandi et al. propose
an approach modeling the system as non-stationary with
a time-varying reward function, and use meta-learning to
ﬁnd policies that will adapt to this non-stationarity.
Much of the recent work on transferring learned policies
from simulation to real system also focuses on this area,
as the underlying differences between the systems are not
observable ( Andrychowicz et al. ,2018 ;Peng et al. ,2018 ).
Real world systems are often stochastic and noisy com-
pared to most simulated environments. In addition, sensor
and action noise as well as action delays add to the pertur-
bations an agent may experience in the real-world setting.
There are a number of RL approaches that have been uti-
lized to ensure that an agent is robust to different subsets o f
these factors. We will focus on the Robust MDP formalism,
domain randomization and system identiﬁcation as frame-
works for dealing with noisy, non-stationary systems.
A Robust MDP is deﬁned by a tuple /a\}bracketle{tS,A,P,r,γ/a\}bracketri}htwhere
S,A,r andγare as previously deﬁned; Pis a set of tran-
sition matrices referred to as the uncertainty set ( Iyengar ,
2005 ). The objective that we optimize is the worst case
value function deﬁned as:
J(π) = inf
p∈PEp/bracketleftbigg∞/summationdisplay
t=0γtrt|P,π/bracketrightbigg
. (4)
At each step, nature chooses a transition function that theagent transitions with so as to minimize the long term value.
The agent learns a policy that maximizes this worst case
value function. Recently, a number of works have sur-
faced that have shown this formulation to yield robust poli-
cies that are agnostic to a range of perturbations in the
environment ( Tamar et al. ,2014 ;Mankowitz et al. ,2018 ;
Shashua & Mannor ,2017 ). The solutions do tend to be
overly conservative but some work has been done to yield
less conservative, ‘soft-robust’ solutions ( Derman et al. ,
2018 ).
In addition to the robust MDP formalism, the practitioner
may be interested in both robustness due to domain ran-
domization and system identiﬁcation. Domain randomiza-
tion ( Peng et al. ,2018 ) involves explicitly training an agent
on various perturbations of the environment and averaging
these learning errors together during training. System ide n-
tiﬁcation involves training a policy that can determine on-
line the environment in which it is operating and modify
the policy accordingly ( Finn et al. ,2017 ;Nagabandi et al. ,
2018 ).
We can train a policy to be robust, but the question arises
as to how we can evaluate the performance of such a policy.
Robustness to noisy measurements (possibly both sensor
and action noise), as well as action delays, can be evalu-
ated by executing the policy in Ktest environments that
exhibits these types of perturbations. Comparing the aver-
age test performance of the policy across the Kperturbed
test environments can provide a notion of robustness. That
is,
Jrobust(π) =1
K/summationdisplay
p∈PEp/bracketleftbiggT/summationdisplay
i=1γi−1r(si,ai)/bracketrightbigg
,(5)
wherepis a perturbed test environment within the test set
P. This has previously been applied in a number of differ-
ent works ( Mankowitz et al. ,2018 ;Di Castro et al. ,2012 ;
Derman et al. ,2018 ). Evaluating the performance of a pol-
icy on a stream of constantly changing environment per-
turbations and its ability to adapt online to these pertur-
bations provides another notion of robustness. In each of
these cases, for a given task, experiment designers must
decide which dimensions of the perturbations are pertinent
and look at the effects of variations in these dimensions on
policy performance.
2.6. Unspeciﬁed and Multi-Objective Reward
Functions
Reinforcement learning frames policy learning through the
lens of optimizing a global reward function, yet most sys-
tems have multi-dimensional costs to be minimized. In
many cases, system or product owners do not have a clear
picture of what they want to optimize. When an agent is

==== Page 6 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
trained to optimize one metric, other metrics are discovere d
that also need to be maintained or improved. Thus, a lot of
the work on deploying RL to real systems is in formulating
the reward function, which may be multi-dimensional. Be-
cause the global reward function is generally a balance of
multiple sub-goals ( e.g. reducing both time-to-target and
energy use), a proper evaluation should explicitly separat e
the individual components of the reward function to better
understand the policy’s tradeoffs.
In addition, it may be desired that the policy performs well
for all task instances and not just in expectation. For exam-
ple, an algorithm deployed to a factory needs to work on ev-
ery robot, not just on average, and a recommender system
must work for every user, not just on average. Therefore,
policy quality cannot be summarized by a single scalar de-
scribing cumulative reward, but must consider both multi-
ple dimensions of the policy’s behavior and the full distri-
bution of behaviors both during training and testing.
A typical approach to evaluate the full distribution of
reward across groups is to use a Conditional Value at
Risk (CVaR) objective ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ), which looks
at a given percentile of the reward distribution, rather
than expected reward. Tamar et al. show that by op-
timizing reward percentiles, the agent is able to im-
prove upon its worst-case performance. Distributional
DQN ( Dabney et al. ,2018 ;Bellemare et al. ,2017 ) explic-
itly models the distribution over returns, and it would be
straight-forward to extend it to use a CVaR objective.
There are a number of works devoted to recover-
ing an underlying reward function from demonstrations,
such as inverse reinforcement learning ( Russell ,1998 ;
Ng et al. ,2000 ;Abbeel & Ng ,2004 ;Ross et al. ,2011 ).
Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. examine how to infer the truly in-
tended reward function from the given reward function and
training MDPs, to ensure that the agent performs as in-
tended in new scenarios.
For problems with multi-objective reward functions, there
are approaches to learning the pareto-optimal reward func-
tion ( Roijers et al. ,2013 ), but none of these have been
scaled to the deep reinforcement learning setting yet.
Van Seijen et al. present an approach that takes advantage
of multi-objective reward signals to learn super-human per -
formance in the Atari game Mc-PacMan.
We propose a simple multi-objective analysis of return.
If we consider that the global reward function is de-
ﬁned as a linear combination of sub-rewards, r(s,a) =/summationtextK
j=1αjrj(s,a), then we can consider the vector of per-
component rewards for evaluation:
Jmulti(π) =/parenleftBiggTn/summationdisplay
i=1rj(si,ai)/parenrightBigg
1≤j≤K∈RK.(6)When dealing with multi-objective reward functions, it
is important to track the different objectives individuall y
when evaluating a policy. This way, problem stakeholders
can understand the different tradeoffs the policy is making
and choose which compromises they consider best.
To evaluate the performance of the algorithm across the
full distribution of scenarios (e.g. users, tasks, robots, ob-
jects,etc.), we independently analyze the performance of
the algorithm on each cohort. This is also important for en-
suring fairness of an algorithm when interacting with popu-
lations of users. Another approach is to analyze the CVaR
return rather than expected returns ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ).
One evaluation procedure is to determine whether rare
catastrophic rewards are minimized ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ;a).
Another evaluation procedure is to observe behavioural
changes when an agent needs to be risk-averse or risk-
seeking such as in football ( Mankowitz et al. ,2016 ).
2.7. Explainability
Another essential aspect of real systems is that they are
owned and operated by humans, who need to be reassured
about the controllers’ intentions and require insights re-
garding failure cases. For this reason, policy explainabil -
ity is important for real-world policies. Especially in cas es
where the policy might ﬁnd an alternative and unexpected
approach to controlling a system, understanding the longer -
term intent of the policy is important for obtaining stake-
holder buy-in. In the event of policy errors, being able to
understand the error’s origins a posteriori is essential.
Verma et al. deﬁne their policies using a domain-speciﬁc
programming language, and then use a local search algo-
rithm to distill a learned neural network policy into an ex-
plicit program. Additionally, the domain-speciﬁc languag e
is veriﬁable, which allows the learned policies to be veriﬁ-
ably correct. There are many methods to attempt to elicit
the intent of deep neural networks ( Montavon et al. ,2018 )
which could also be used to understand a learned policy.
Additionally, model-based methods with explicit rollouts
used for planning ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,2018 )
can provide insights on what the policy’s ‘intent’ may have
been.
In the case of ( Verma et al. ,2018 ), evaluation is centered
on looking at the performance of the programatically de-
ﬁned policy, since the policy is inherently deﬁned as a
human-readable program. Evaluating actual explainabil-
ity comes down to evaluating how well a human under-
stands the intent of the policy’s expression, which can be
done through A/B experiments with users on mechanical
turk ( Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. ,2018 ).

==== Page 7 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2.8. Real-Time Inference
To deploy RL to a production system, policy inference
must be done in real-time at the control frequency of the
system. This may be on the order of milliseconds for a
recommender system ( Covington et al. ,2016 ) responding
to a user request or the control of a physical robot, and
up to the order of minutes for building control systems
(Evans & Gao ). This constraint both limits us from running
the task faster than real-time to generate massive amounts
of data quickly ( Silver et al. ,2016 ;Espeholt et al. ,2018 )
and limits us from running slower than real-time to perform
more computationally expensive approaches (e.g. some
forms of model-based planning).
There has been literature focused on this problem in the
case of robotics. Hester et al. present a real-time archi-
tecture to do model-based RL on a physical robot that
uses Monte Carlo Tree Search and returns actions when
required by the task, but will improve given more time
and more rollouts. Other rollout-based approaches like
AlphaGo ( Silver et al. ,2016 ) will improve with more roll-
outs, but are not engineered to run at a speciﬁc frequency.
Wawrzy´ nski analyzes the potential gains to be had by al-
lowing more computation time than is possible on a true
real-time system.
2.9. System Delays
Finally, most real systems have delays in either the sensa-
tion of the state, the actuators, or the reward feedback. For
example, Hester & Stone focus on controlling a robot ve-
hicle with signiﬁcant delays in the control of the braking
system. They incorporate recent history into the state of
the agent so that the learning algorithm can learn the delay
effects itself. Mann et al. look at delays in recommender
systems, where the true reward is based on the user’s inter-
action with the recommended item, which may take weeks
to determine. They present a factored learning approach
that is able to take advantage of intermediate reward sig-
nals to improve learning in these delayed tasks.
Hung et al. introduce a method to better assign rewards
that arrive signiﬁcantly after a causative event. They use
a memory-based agent, and leverage the memory retrieval
system to properly allocate credit to distant past events th at
are useful in predicting the value function in the current
timestep. They show that this mechanism is able to solve
previously unsolveable delayed reward tasks.
Arjona-Medina et al. introduce the RUDDER algorithm,
which uses a backwards-view of a task to generate a
return-equivalent MDP where the delayed rewards are re-
distributed more evenly throughout time. This return-
equivalent MDP is easier to learn and is guaranteed to have
the same optimal policy as the original MDP. They im-provements using this approach in Atari tasks with long
delays.
Evaluation in this context depends on the source of delay.
Delays in the state & action domain can be patched onto
existing environments, and the correlation between delay
magnitude and the policy’s cumulative reward can be used
to evaluate the policy’s robustness to these perturbations .
3. Example Environment
In this section, we present an example environment from
the DeepMind control suite ( Tassa et al. ,2018 ), and the
modiﬁcations required to make it present all of the chal-
lenges for real world RL that we have presented in this pa-
per2. We also describe how to perform speciﬁc evaluations
for each challenge where it makes sense. Our goal is both
that this environment and its modiﬁcations drive research
in real-world RL as well as help evaluate candidate algo-
rithms’ applicability to real-world problems.
Humanoid Variables: θ,u,F
Type Constraint
StaticLimit joint angles.
Enforce uprightness.
Avoid dynamic obstacles.
Kinematic Limit joint velocities.
DynamicLimit foot contact forces.
Encourage falls on pelvis.
Table 1. Safety constraints for the Humanoid environment.
We start from the control suite’s humanoid task, as it al-
ready has a high-dimensional continuous state and action
space. Next, we present a set of modiﬁcations to the task to
make it present all nine challenges.
First, the training must be done in the batch RL regime
as presented in Sec. 1. To imitate the situation where
we are taking over control from a system with an existing
controller, we recommend ﬁrst training a policy on the task
with a different algorithm than the one being evaluated, and
then generating a dataset from this policy to serve as the ini -
tialD(πb). As the size, quality, and coverage of this dataset
can be critical, we suggest evaluating algorithms with a va-
riety of datasets of different sizes, converged performanc es,
and policy entropies.
Second, we are constrained to act on-line in the domain,
meaning there cannot be separate runs for training and eval-
uation, but instead only training episodes. For the third
challenge, the humanoid domain already presents a high-
dimensional continuous state and action space. Table 1pro-
2A more complete task description, as well as three other pro-
posed tasks are presented in the Appendix.

==== Page 8 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
poses safety constraints for the humanoid task. In the case
of physical systems, we can generally consider that safety
constraints involve one or many of static, kinematic and dy-
namic aspects of the system.
To evaluate algorithm performance in the face of non-
stationarity and partial observability, we recommend sam-
pling a new set of domain parameters (frictions, CoGs,
masses) from a distribution every evaluation episode. For
multi-objective reward, we consider rewards for distance
moved as well as for energy used in movement. We also
consider worse-case reward for each sampled episode; we
want the agent to perform well in every perturbation, not
just on average.
For explainability, there is not a modiﬁcation to the do-
main, but evaluation must be performed qualititatively wit h
humans determining the quality of the explainability (e.g.
perhaps with mechanical turk ( Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. ,
2018 )). We require that real-time inference be enforced and
that the physics simulation be run in real-time. Finally, we
can introduce artiﬁcial delays on the system actuators, sto r-
ing the requested actions in an n-step queue before passing
them to the simulator.
Metric (Challenges) Deﬁnition
Average Return
Warm-Start (1) Equation ( 1)
Time-to-Rmin(2) Equation ( 2)
Safety Violations (4) Equation ( 3)
Worst-Case Perf. (5, 6) Equation ( 4)
Robust Performance (5) Equation ( 5)
CVaR Return (6) (Tamar et al. ,2015b )
Multi-Objective (6) Equation ( 6)
Explainability (7) User Evals
Table 2. The full set of evaluation metrics to consider to address
all the challenges of real world RL, along with which challen ges
they are relevant for.
In addition to evaluating the average rewards achieved dur-
ing the trials, we can also look at speciﬁc metrics to evalu-
ate individual challenges (Table 2). We look at the warm-
start performance after the training on the behavior policy
data (Eq. 1). For sample efﬁciency, we examine the number
of data samples required to reach a minimum performance
level (Eq. 2). We also track the number of safety violations
for every safety constraint (Eq. 3). We evaluate the worst-
case reward over sampled perturbations (Eq. 4). We inde-
pendently evaluate the reward on both objectives (Eq. 6).
Finally, we want to qualitatively evaluate the explainabil ity
of the agent’s policies. Only by looking at all these evalua-
tors can we truly get an idea of an algorithm’s aptitude for
real-world use. Our goal is for this task to present a testbed
for other researchers who wish to develop new algorithms
that address the challenges of real world RL.4. Related Work
While we covered related work speciﬁc to each chal-
lenge in the sections above, there are a few other
works related to our goal of practical reinforcement learn-
ing. Hester & Stone similarly present a list of challenges
for real world RL, but speciﬁcally for RL on robots.
They present four challenges (sample efﬁciency, high-
dimensional continuous state and action spaces, sensor and
actuator delays, and real-time inference), all of which we
include in our set of challenges as well. They do not include
our other challenges such as robust performance, learn-
ing from ﬁxed logs, non-stationarity, safety constraints,
etc. Their approach is to setup a real-time architecture
for model-based learning where ensembles of models are
learned to improve robustness and sample efﬁciency.
Henderson et al. investigate the effects of existing degrees
of variability between various RL setups and their effects
on algorithm performance. Although restricted to the do-
main of existing environments, Henderson et al. propose
more robust performance estimators for RL learning algo-
rithms which complement those presented here. The paper
ends with the question ”In what setting would [a given algo-
rithm] be useful?” to which we try to contribute by propos-
ing a speciﬁc setting in which well-adapted work should
hopefully stand out. Wagstaff argue similarly to us regard-
ing supervised ML, and its overt distancing from real-world
applications in ML conferences and the subsequent impact
on research directions this can have. Irpan discusses a
complementary series of difﬁculties of getting RL systems
working on real systems. Some of these are more practi-
cal considerations, such as using RL for ﬁne-tuning, and
others are directions for future research such as taking int o
consideration domain-speciﬁc priors, or densifying the re -
ward signal.
5. Conclusion
We argue that real-world problems in RL contain multiple
challenges which are not often considered in the current lit -
erature. We have presented nine such challenges for prac-
tical RL. For each one, we have motivated the challenge,
presented examples, and speciﬁed the challenge more for-
mally. For practitioners wishing to deploy RL to their own
problems, we have pointed the reader to relevant references
for each challenge that may guide them in deploying RL
to a production system. For RL researchers, we have pre-
sented an example environment and evaluation criteria with
which to measure progress on these challenges. There have
been many recent works on each of these challenges indi-
vidually, but little work on approaches that address all nin e
challenges.
There are a few themes that appear across the related works

==== Page 9 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
for each challenge. While model-based RL seems espe-
cially promising to address the issue of sample efﬁciency,
it can also help address off-policy evaluation, robustness ,
and explainability. Ensembles are useful both to improve
sample efﬁciency and robustness. One very important com-
ponent of deploying RL to any real product is interacting
with the product owner or other human experts. We must
work closely with the experts to formulate the right reward
objectives and safety constraints, to get expert demonstra -
tions to warm-start learning, and we must explain the algo-
rithm’s actions enough that they have enough conﬁdence in
the system to deploy it. These themes should point the way
towards research that can address all these challenges and
be deployed on more real world systems and products.
References
Abbeel, P. and Ng, A. Y . Apprenticeship learning via
inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
twenty-ﬁrst international conference on Machine learn-
ing, pp. 1. ACM, 2004.
Achiam, J., Held, D., Tamar, A., and
Abbeel, P. Constrained policy optimiza-
tion. CoRR , abs/1705.10528, 2017. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1705 .10528 .
Adamski, I., Adamski, R., Grel, T., Jedrych, A., Kacz-
marek, K., and Michalewski, H. Distributed deep rein-
forcement learning: Learn how to play atari games in
21 minutes. In International Conference on High Perfor-
mance Computing , pp. 370–388. Springer, 2018.
Altman, E. Constrained Markov decision processes , vol-
ume 7. CRC Press, 1999.
Andrychowicz, M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Jozefowicz, R.,
McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M., Pow-
ell, G., Ray, A., et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manip-
ulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.00177 , 2018.
Arjona-Medina, J. A., Gillhofer, M., Widrich, M., Un-
terthiner, T., and Hochreiter, S. Rudder: Return
decomposition for delayed rewards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.07857 , 2018.
Bellemare, M. G., Dabney, W., and Munos, R.
A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning. CoRR , abs/1707.06887, 2017. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1707 .06887 .
Bohez, S., Abdolmaleki, A., Neunert, M., Buchli, J., Heess,
N., and Hadsell, R. Value constrained model-free contin-
uous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04623 , 2019.
Boutilier, C. and Lu, T. Budget allocation using weakly
coupled, constrained markov decision processes. In Pro-ceedings of the 32nd Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (UAI-16) , pp. 52–61, New York, NY ,
2016.
Buckman, J., Hafner, D., Tucker, G., Brevdo, E., and Lee,
H. Sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning with stochas-
tic ensemble value expansion. CoRR , abs/1807.01675,
2018.
Carrara, N., Laroche, R., Bouraoui, J., Urvoy, T., Olivier, T.
D. S., and Pietquin, O. A ﬁtted-q algorithm for budgeted
mdps. In EWRL 2018 , 2018.
Chow, Y ., Nachum, O., Duenez-Guzman, E., and
Ghavamzadeh, M. A lyapunov-based approach to safe
reinforcement learning. In Bengio, S., Wallach, H.,
Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Gar-
nett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 31 , pp. 8092–8101. 2018.
Chua, K., Calandra, R., McAllister, R., and Levine, S.
Deep reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using
probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 4754–4765, 2018.
Covington, P., Adams, J., and Sargin, E. Deep neural net-
works for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM conference on recommender systems , pp.
191–198. ACM, 2016.
Dabney, W., Ostrovski, G., Silver, D., and Munos, R. Im-
plicit quantile networks for distributional reinforcemen t
learning. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings
of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research , pp. 1096–1105, Stockholmsmssan,
Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL
http://proceedings .mlr.press/v80/dabney18a .html .
Dalal, G., Dvijotham, K., Vecerik, M., Hester, T., Padu-
raru, C., and Tassa, Y . Safe exploration in continu-
ous action spaces. CoRR , abs/1801.08757, 2018. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1801 .08757 .
Derman, E., Mankowitz, D. J., Mann, T. A., and Mannor, S.
Soft-robust actor-critic policy-gradient. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.04848 , 2018.
Di Castro, D., Tamar, A., and Mannor, S. Policy gradi-
ents with variance related risk criteria. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1206.6404 , 2012.
Dud´ ık, M., Langford, J., and Li, L. Doubly robust policy
evaluation and learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.4601 ,
2011.
Dulac-Arnold, G., Evans, R., van Hasselt, H., Sunehag, P.,
Lillicrap, T., Hunt, J., Mann, T., Weber, T., Degris, T.,

==== Page 10 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
and Coppin, B. Deep reinforcement learning in large
discrete action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07679 ,
2015.
Espeholt, L., Soyer, H., Munos, R., Simonyan, K., Mnih,
V ., Ward, T., Doron, Y ., Firoiu, V ., Harley, T., Dunning,
I., Legg, S., and Kavukcuoglu, K. IMPALA: Scalable
distributed deep-RL with importance weighted actor-
learner architectures. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research , pp. 1407–1416, Stockholmsmssan,
Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL
http://proceedings .mlr.press/v80/espeholt18a .html .
Evans, R. and Gao, J. Deepmind ai reduces
google data centre cooling bill by 40%.
https://deepmind .com/blog/deepmind-ai-reduces-google-data-centre-coo ling-bill-40/ .
Farajtabar, M., Chow, Y ., and Ghavamzadeh, M.
More robust doubly robust off-policy evalu-
ation. CoRR , abs/1802.03493, 2018. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1802 .03493 .
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning-Volume 70 , pp. 1126–1135. JMLR. org,
2017.
Hadﬁeld-Menell, D., Milli, S., Abbeel, P., Russell, S. J.,
and Dragan, A. D. Inverse reward design. CoRR ,
abs/1711.02827, 2017.
Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D. ,
Lee, H., and Davidson, J. Learning latent dynamics for
planning from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.04551 ,
2018.
Hausknecht, M. J. and Stone, P. Deep recurrent q-learning
for partially observable mdps. CoRR , abs/1507.06527,
2015.
He, J., Chen, J., He, X., Gao, J., Li, L., Deng, L., and Os-
tendorf, M. Deep reinforcement learning with a natural
language action space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04636 ,
2015.
Henderson, P., Islam, R., Bachman, P., Pineau, J., Precup,
D., and Meger, D. Deep reinforcement learning that mat-
ters. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence , 2018.
Hester, T. and Stone, P. TEXPLORE: Real-
time sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning
for robots. Machine Learning , 90(3), 2013.
doi: 10 .1007 / s10994 - 012 - 5322 - 7. URL
http://dx .doi.org/10.1007/s10994-012-5322-7 .Hester, T., Quinlan, M., and Stone, P. RTMBA: A real-
time model-based reinforcement learning architecture
for robot control. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2012.
Hester, T., Vecerik, M., Pietquin, O., Lanctot, M.,
Schaul, T., Piot, B., Horgan, D., Quan, J., Sendonaris,
A., Osband, I., Dulac-Arnold, G., Agapiou, J.,
Leibo, J. Z., and Gruslys, A. Deep q-learning
from demonstrations. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, (AAAI-18) , pp. 3223–3230, 2018. URL
https://www .aaai.org/ocs/index .php/AAAI/AAAI18/paper/view/16976 .
Horgan, D., Quan, J., Budden, D., Barth-Maron, G., Hessel,
M., van Hasselt, H., and Silver, D. Distributed prioritized
experience replay. CoRR , abs/1803.00933, 2018. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1803 .00933 .
Hung, C.-C., Lillicrap, T., Abramson, J., Wu, Y ., Mirza,
M., Carnevale, F., Ahuja, A., and Wayne, G. Optimiz-
ing agent behavior over long time scales by transporting
value. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.06721 , 2018.
Irpan, A. Deep reinforcement learning doesn’t work yet.
https://www .alexirpan .com/2018/02/14/rl-hard .html ,
2018.
Iyengar, G. N. Robust dynamic programming. Mathemat-
ics of Operations Research , 30(2):257–280, 2005.
Jiang, N. and Li, L. Doubly robust off-policy value
evaluation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.03722 , 2015.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T .,
Tassa, Y ., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous con-
trol with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971 , 2015.
Mankowitz, D. J., Tamar, A., and Mannor, S. Situa-
tional awareness by risk-conscious skills. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.02847 , 2016.
Mankowitz, D. J., Mann, T. A., Bacon, P.-L., Precup,
D., and Mannor, S. Learning robust options. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence , 2018.
Mann, T. A., Gowal, S., Jiang, R., Hu, H., Lakshmi-
narayanan, B., and Gy¨ orgy, A. Learning from de-
layed outcomes with intermediate observations. CoRR ,
abs/1807.09387, 2018.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Ve-
ness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M.,
Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level con-
trol through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518
(7540):529, 2015.

==== Page 11 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
Montavon, G., Samek, W., and M¨ uller, K.-R. Methods
for interpreting and understanding deep neural networks.
Digital Signal Processing , 73:1–15, 2018.
Nagabandi, A., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Deep online learn-
ing via meta-learning: Continual adaptation for model-
based RL. CoRR , abs/1812.07671, 2018.
Ng, A. Y ., Russell, S. J., et al. Algorithms for inverse rein-
forcement learning. In Icml, volume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
OpenAI. Openai ﬁve.
https://blog .openai.com/openai-five/ .
Osband, I., Blundell, C., Pritzel, A., and Van Roy,
B. Deep exploration via bootstrapped dqn. In
Lee, D. D., Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V .,
Guyon, I., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 29 , pp.
4026–4034. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. URL
http://papers .nips.cc/paper/6501-deep-exploration-via-bootstrapped-dqn .pdf.
Peng, X. B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W., and Abbeel,
P. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynam-
ics randomization. In 2018 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 1–8. IEEE,
2018.
Pham, T., Magistris, G. D., and Tachibana, R.
Optlayer - practical constrained optimization
for deep reinforcement learning in the real
world. CoRR , abs/1709.07643, 2017. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1709 .07643 .
Poursabzi-Sangdeh, F., Goldstein, D. G., Hofman, J. M.,
Vaughan, J. W., and Wallach, H. M. Manipulat-
ing and measuring model interpretability. CoRR ,
abs/1802.07810, 2018.
Precup, D., Sutton, R. S., and Singh, S. P. Eligibility
traces for off-policy policy evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventeenth International Conference
on Machine Learning , ICML ’00, pp. 759–766,
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1-55860-707-2. URL
http://dl .acm.org/citation .cfm?id=645529 .658134 .
Roijers, D. M., Vamplew, P., Whiteson, S., and Dazeley, R.
A survey of multi-objective sequential decision-making.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 48:67–113,
2013.
Ross, S., Gordon, G., and Bagnell, D. A reduction of imi-
tation learning and structured prediction to no-regret on-
line learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth interna-
tional conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistic s,
pp. 627–635, 2011.Russell, S. J. Learning agents for uncertain environments.
InCOLT , volume 98, pp. 101–103, 1998.
Scherrer, B., Gabillon, V ., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Geist, M.
Approximate modiﬁed policy iteration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1205.3054 , 2012.
Shashua, S. D.-C. and Mannor, S. Deep robust kalman ﬁlter.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02310 , 2017.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V ., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.
nature , 529(7587):484, 2016.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction . MIT press, 2018.
Tamar, A., Mannor, S., and Xu, H. Scaling up robust mdps
using function approximation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , pp. 181–189, 2014.
Tamar, A., Chow, Y ., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Mannor, S.
Policy gradient for coherent risk measures. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1468–
1476, 2015a.
Tamar, A., Glassner, Y ., and Mannor, S. Optimizing the
cvar via sampling. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2015b.
Tassa, Y ., Doron, Y ., Muldal, A., Erez, T., Li, Y ., Casas, D.
d. L., Budden, D., Abdolmaleki, A., Merel, J., Lefrancq,
A., et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.00690 , 2018.
Tessler, C., Mankowitz, D. J., and Mannor, S. Re-
ward constrained policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.11074 , 2018.
Thomas, P. and Brunskill, E. Data-efﬁcient off-policy pol-
icy evaluation for reinforcement learning. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2139–2148,
2016.
Turchetta, M., Berkenkamp, F., and Krause, A. Safe ex-
ploration in ﬁnite markov decision processes with gaus-
sian processes. CoRR , abs/1606.04753, 2016. URL
http://arxiv .org/abs/1606 .04753 .
Van Seijen, H., Fatemi, M., Romoff, J., Laroche, R.,
Barnes, T., and Tsang, J. Hybrid reward archi-
tecture for reinforcement learning. In Guyon, I.,
Luxburg, U. V ., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus,
R., Vishwanathan, S., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 ,
pp. 5392–5402. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL
http://papers .nips.cc/paper/7123-hybrid-reward-architecture-for-reinfo rcement-learning .pdf.

==== Page 12 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
Vecer´ ık, M., Sushkov, O., Barker, D., Roth¨ orl, T., Hester ,
T., and Scholz, J. A practical approach to insertion with
variable socket position using deep reinforcement learn-
ing.
Verma, A., Murali, V ., Singh, R., Kohli, P., and Chaudhuri,
S. Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02477 , 2018.
Wachi, A., Sui, Y ., Yue, Y ., and Ono, M. Safe explo-
ration and optimization of constrained mdps using gaus-
sian processes. In AAAI , pp. 6548–6556. AAAI Press,
2018.
Wagstaff, K. Machine learning that matters. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1206.4656 , 2012.
Wawrzy´ nski, P. Real-time reinforcement learning by
sequential actor-critics and experience replay. Neural
Netw. , 22(10):1484–1497, December 2009. ISSN
0893-6080. doi: 10 .1016/j.neunet.2009.05.011. URL
http://dx .doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2009.05.011.
Zahavy, T., Haroush, M., Merlis, N., Mankowitz, D. J., and
Mannor, S. Learn what not to learn: Action elimination
with deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 3562–3573, 2018.

==== Page 13 ====
Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
Appendix
Cart-Pole Variables: x,θ
Type Constraint
StaticLimit range:
xl< x < x r
KinematicLimit velocity near goal:
|θc−θ|> θL∨˙θ <˙θV
DynamicLimit cart acceleration:
¨x < A max
Walker Variables: θ,u,F
Type Constraint
StaticLimit joint angles:
θL<θ<θU
Enforce uprightness:
0<ux
KinematicLimit joint velocities:
maxi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle˙θi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle< L˙θ
DynamicLimit foot contact forces:
Ffoot< F max
Manipulator Variables: θ,F,M
Type Constraint
StaticLimit joint angles
θL<θ<θU
Avoid dynamic obstacles
M∩M O,i=∅
Avoid self-contact
M∩M =M
Kinematic Limit joint velocities:
maxi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle˙θi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle< L˙θ
DynamicAcceleration Limits:
maxi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle¨θi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle< L¨θ
Limit end effector forces:
FEE< F max
Humanoid Variables: θ,u,F
Type Constraint
StaticLimit joint angles:
θL,i<θi< θU,i
Enforce uprightness:
0<ux
Kinematic Limit joint velocities:
maxi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle˙θi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle< L˙θ
DynamicLimit foot contact forces.
FFoot< F max
Encourage falls on posterior
Fi< F max,1∀i∈ C \ipost
Fpost< F max,2
Table 3. Safety-constrained control environments.Additional Environments
We extend four example environments from the DeepMind
Control Suite ( Tassa et al. ,2018 ) with both safety and non-
stationarity contraints (which can be considered indepen-
dently or together) to illustrate the challenges proposed i n
this paper. Our goal is both that these environments drive
research in real-world RL as well as help evaluate candi-
date algorithms’ applicability to real-world problems. Fu -
ture work involves developing an open-source benchmark
around these safety constraints.
We chose the Cart-Pole, Quadruped, Reacher, and Hu-
manoid tasks for their increasing difﬁculty and closeness
to real-world control systems.
Safety
In the case of physical systems, we can generally consider
that safety constraints involve one or many of static, kine-
matic and dynamic aspects of the system. We present safety
constraints of these environments in Table 3.
Robustness
Env. Noise Non-Stationarity
Cart-PoleActuator and sen-
sor delaysTrack friction in-
creasing with time
WalkerNoisy perception
of terrainOccasionally non-
responsive leg ac-
tuator
ManipulatorImprecise proprio-
ceptionChanges in grip-
per friction
HumanoidReduced torque
on leg actuatorVarying payload
CoGs
Table 4. Possible perturbations to environments to illustrate nois e
& non-stationarity.
Table 4presents some ideas of speciﬁc noise and non-
stationarity perturbations for each of the proposed enviro n-
ments. The possibilities are effectively endless, and cer-
tain choices could make for impossible to learn, so well-
designed environments will be important for useful evalua-
tions.

