==== Page 1 ====
1 
 
 
 
1 Faculty of Computer Science, Nahda University, Egypt  
                                    2 Faculty of Computers and Information, Mansoura University, Egypt  
                                                      3 Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Egypt  
 
 
Abstract  
Due to the superiority and noteworthy progress of Quantum Comput ing (QC) in a lot of applications such as cryptography, 
chemistry, Big data, machine learning, optimization, Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain, communication, and many more. 
Fully towards to combine classical machine learning (ML) with Quantum Informati on Processing (QIP) to build a new field in 
the quantum world is called Quantum Machine Learning (QML) to solve and improve problems that displayed in classical 
machine learning (e.g. time and energy consumption, kernel estimation). The aim of this paper p resents and summarizes a 
comprehensive survey of the state -of-the-art advances in Quantum Machine Learning (QML). Especially, recent QML 
classification works. Also, we cover about 30 publications that are published lately in Quantum Machine Learning (QML).  we 
propose a classification scheme in the quantum world and discuss encoding methods for mapping classical data to quantum 
data. Then, we provide quantum subroutines and some methods of Quantum Computing (QC) in improving performance and 
speed up of class ical Machine Learning (ML). And also some of QML applications in various fields, challenges, and future vision 
will be presented.  
 
KEYWORDS  
Quantum Machine Learning, Quantum Computing, Quantum Bit (Qubit), Quantum Inspired, Hybrid Quantum -Classical, 
Varia tional Quantum Classifier, Quantum Cl assification, Machine Learning.  
 
1 | INTRODUCTION  
 
As is well known t he role of machine learning (1-4)  in data   analysis , feature selection, making decision, pattern 
classificati on and future predictions of various applications with achieving better accuracy and performance without 
human decisions. but an enormous increase in typ es of data (i.e., images, text, videos , and record audio s) and current 
computational resources appeared  problems of machine learning such as high -cost learning and kernel estimation.  
Over the last three decades, we noticed using quantum computing (QC) in various applications as cryptography (5), 
artific ial intelligence (AI)  (6), and communication (7). As a result of the superiority and advancement of quantum 
computing for solving many problems as factorization by Shor’s algorithm (8), and search in an unstructured da tabase 
by Grover’s algorithm (9). 
Quantum computing based on postulates and characteristics of quantum mechanics (i.e., quantum bits (Qub its), 
interference, superposition, and entanglement) to informati on processing . qubit can be one state, zero state, or a 
combination of two states at the same time known as linear superposition , unlike classical bit that can represent one 
value either 0 or  1 to store information (7). Qubit state is  a unit vector in Hilbert space. mathematically to represent 
qubit state, we use ket - notation, qubit in state zero is |0 ⟩= [1    0]T and qubit in state one is |1 ⟩ ⟩= [0    1]T . a qubit 
is represented as a linear  superposition of both basis states simultaneously:  
 
                Zainab Abohashima 1 | Mohamed Elhoseny 2 | Essam H. Houssein 3 | Waleed M. Mohamed 3 Classification  with Quantum Machine Learning: 
A Survey  

==== Page 2 ====
2 
 
                                                                               |ψ⟩= (α 
𝛽)= α|0 ⟩ + 𝛽|1⟩                                   (1)  
Where the coefficients α and 𝛽 are probability amplitude s may be complex numbers and | α2 |   + | 𝛽2 |   = 1.  
Recently, different algorithms and approaches have been published in machine learning (ML) depends on quantum 
computing laws to introduce the new concept called quantum machine learning (QML) )4( (10, 11)  with goal 
improvement of classical ML (12). QML appeared in more than a paradigm. the first paradigm, quantum ML, in 2014 
Rebentrost, p et al )24 (present ed a quantum version of support vector machine (QSVM) for classification of big data. 
QSVM achieved logarithmic speed up over classical counterparts. The second paradigm, Quantum inspired ML, in 
2019 Sergioli et al. )28( proposed a binary quantum classifie r inspired by the formalism of quantum theory and this 
classifier achieved a higher performance compared with different classical models. In 2019 Havlicek et al. )40( 
presented a quantum -classical classifier depends on the concept of the variational quantu m circuit and this paradigm 
named hybrid quantum -classical ML. Also, various models have developed in Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) such 
as QNNs )25(, Quantum inspired NNs )37(, Quantum multi perceptron NNs, quantum dot NNs , and quantum 
convolutional NNs.  in detail, all these paradigms will be presented and comparison among them in section 2. QML is 
used in several applications as medical data classification )30,43 (, recommendation systems, and big data processing 
)24(. 
Quantum subroutines are the lifebloo d of quantum and QML algorithms. Quantum subroutines have a major role in 
speed up and improve the performance of algorithms such as HHL algorithms )88( for solving “linear system 
equations” in exponential speed up based on quantum phase estimation (QPE) a nd quantum matrix - inversion 
subroutines and Grover’s algorithm based on amplitude amplification. Other subroutines as sampling, quantum 
annealing, and quantum fourier transform (QFT).  
The main objectives of this survey introduce a classification scheme wi th QML. To implement a classical algorithm on 
a quantum computer or in general any quantum algorithm  consists of  the main three phases (13, 14) : encoding, 
quantu m computation, and decoding phase. first of all, the encoding phase that means mapping data from classical 
to quantum states. In the second step, quantum computation depends on type QML algorithms. the last step, 
decoding phase. In addition to illustrating  the major phases of quantum classification problems to answer the 
question of survey what is the classification scheme with quantum machine learning?  
We will open a discussion about two questions in QML algorithms. Why do we proceed towards Quantum Machin e 
learning (QML)? How does the concept of quantum computing enhance classical machine learning? The main 
objectives of this survey are:  
1. Summarize and organize the most recent research works to pave the way for researchers in quantum 
machine learning.  
2. Analy ze techniques and show the best and most used methods in classification real problems.  
3. Provide the readers with various quantum methods to enhance classical ML and some of the quantum 
subroutines.  
4. Introduce quantum classification scheme in the quantum worl d. 
5. Present some of the challenges, future directions, and applications of quantum machine learning  
 
The remainder of the survey can be divided into six sections: section 2 presents the major and recent approaches to 
quantum machine learning techniques espe cially quantum classification algorithms classified into 3 categories QML, 
quantum -inspired ML, and hybrid quantum -classical  ML. A lso, summa rizes these techniques in table 1. Next, we 
present the concept of classification with QML, two methods of encoding data, variational quantum circuits, and, 
proposed quantum cl assification scheme in section 3 . Thereafter, a discussion of the survey questions in section 4.  
section 5  introduces some of the challenges and future directions of QML. We provide many applicat ions of QML in 
section 6 Finally, concludes the survey in section 7 
2   | LITERATURE  REVIEW    
 
Here, we present ex haustive previous work about QML.  As well as, we  classify quantum machine learning algorithms 

==== Page 3 ====
3 
 
into three approaches : QML, quantum -inspired ML, a nd Hybrid quantum -classical ML  and summarized in table 1  & 
table 2 . The classification of approaches based on information processing devices (a type of algorithm) is classical or 
quantum and type of  data are classical or quantum  (15, 16) .  
Montanaro, A. (17) introduced an overview of quantum algorithms and  some of the applications in diff erent areas. 
Jeswal, S. et al. (18) presented  various quantum neural network techniques and their applications in real -world 
problems. the authors discussed each technique in detail and noted that QNNs are more powerful and enhance 
computational efficiency in contrast to classical NNs. Benedetti, M et al . (19) offered  an overview of hybrid quantum -
classical models based on parameterized quantum circuits and the application of hybrid systems in supervised and 
generative learning. They also provided a framework for  components of models as an example, variational circuit and 
encoder circuit.  In  (20), the authors given  an overview of the progress of quantum computing and applications. Also, 
the authors discuss ed various quantum technologies for quantum computers scalability such as error correcti on and 
going forward. Ciliberto, C et al. (21)  present ed a review about QML and challenges. AS well , the authors provided  
some quantum subroutines especially quantum linear algebra and how a quantum computer works with data. 
Besides, this review illustrates Quantum neural networks.  
 
A. Quantum machine learning algorithms  
 
The first approach, quantum machine learning algorithms are quantum versions from conventional ML. as wel l, 
algorithms that can be executed on the real quantum device. Dennis, et al.  (22) implemented SVM on quantum 
annealer device  (23) (DW2000Q) called QA -SVM. The authors used quantum annealer to train and optimize SVM 
depends on QUBO equation to minimize cost energy. As well, the authors utilized some of feature of quantum 
annealing (i.e. re verse annealing, and special annealing schedules to improve final results. Rebentrost, P. et al (24) 
presented SVM algorithm runs quantum computer on and depends on a non -sparse matrix called QSVM. QSV M is a 
big data binary classifier. As well, it works with a large number of features and samples in complexity logarithmic. da 
Silva, A. et al (25) intro duced a new quantum neural network named “quantum perceptron over a field” (QPF) and 
its learning algorithm (SAL). the learning algorithm (SAL) based on superposition feature and quantum operator. Also, 
it performs NN architecture with polynomial time. QPF  overcomes on limitations of quantum perceptron models. In 
(26) the authors proposed a version of linear regression called quantum linear regression.it works on quantum data 
with N - dimensions of features in logarithmic  time.  
 
B. Quantum -inspired machine learning  
 
The second approach, quantum -inspired machine learning that applies the principles of Quantum Computing (QC) to 
improve classical methods of machine learning (ML).  
Prayag et al. (27) introduced a new quantum -inspired binar y classifier (QIBC), the basic idea is based on decision 
theory, classical ML  and theory of quantum detection that utilize one of the laws of quantum mechanics, 
superposition to increase the higher degree of freedom in decision making. The proposed classif ier can be achieved 
high precision, recall and F -measure comparable with KNN, and SVM and other classical techniques. Sergioli et al. 
(28) proposed a novel quantum -inspired classifier for binary supervised learning called Helstrom Quantum Centroid 
(HQC) based on  density matrices and formalism of quantum theory. The authors evaluated the performance of their 
model by fourteen datasets compared to different classical models.  Ding et al. (29) proposed a novel algorithm 
inspired by the quantum support vector machines(SVM) to solve classif ication problems in exponential speedup. The 
main idea for the algorithm based on linear transformation.  
Sergioli et al. (30) introduced a Quantum Nearest Mean Classifier (QNMC) based on the idea of classical minimum 
distance classifier. The algorithm consists  of three main steps: firstly, density pattern (Encod ing) to transform each 
classical data point to a quantum object. Seco ndly, Quantum c entroid to calcu late a distance among density patterns 
in order to classify unknown quantum objects to the right class. lastly, decoding to transform the final classification 
result into the classified data. The algorithm achieved higher accuracy in many medical data sets than the classical 
counterpart (NMC) e xclusively cancer data set. Dang, Y et al. (31) proposed a new model based on  Quantum KNN 

==== Page 4 ====
4 
 
and parallel compu ting for image cla ssification. their model improved eﬃciency and classification p erformance. Chen, 
H. et al. (32) used powerful parallel computing to introduce an inspired Quantum K Nearest -Neighbor (QKNN) based 
on one of the well -known properties of QC is superposition to obta in parallel computing and “quantum minimum 
search algorithm” to achieve speed up the search.  
 Lu, S et al (33) proposed a quantum version for decision tree classifier. The quantum model depends on quantum 
entropy impurity and quan tum fidelity measure. In (34) the authors  developed a new model Quantum Support 
Vector Clustering for big data depended on Quantum SVM, quantum Gaussian kernel and quan tum polynomial 
kernel. In  (35), The  authors proposed new framework quantum clustering based on th e Schrödinger equation. Yu, 
C.et al. (36) presented improved quantum techniques for ridge regression. This algorithm bas ed on two subroutines 
quantum K -fold cross -validation and quantum state encoding. In (37) the authors introduced a novel Quantum 
inspired Neural network. they named Autonomous Perceptron Model (APM) depends on one from quantum 
mechanics characteristics a quantum bit. The proposed model accomplished higher accuracy with less complexity 
time comparable to other tradition -al algorithms.  
 
C. Hybrid quantum -classical machine learning  
 
The last approach, hybrid quantum -classic al machine learning  are the algorithms that combine quantum algorithms 
and classical (traditional algorithms) to obtain higher performance and decrease in the learning cost.  
 Soumik et al. (38) used the quantum circuit to present a new variational quantum classifier with  a single quantum 
system (Qu N it) to encode data in N -dimensional with a training algorithm called “single -shot training”. the key 
advant age of single -shot training uses a fewer parameter for training and achieve a higher precision. In  (39), the 
authors introduced a new quantum al gorithms based on many subroutines as a quantum oracle, counting, amplitude 
amplification, and quantum amplitude estimation for feature selection named (HQFSA) with purpose enhancement 
of performance ML techniques. The proposed algorithm accomplished quadr atic time complexity and better 
performance in some of the cases. The main disadvantage of HQFSA is running on a quantum simulator only.  
Havlicek et al. (40) suggested two different models of quantum support vector machines. the first, t he variational 
quantum SVM based on quantum variation circuit. The variational quantum SVM classifier requires two algorithms 
to classify. The one to quantum variational training phase, in this phase, the authors used four steps to compute the 
hyperplane b etween training data and another to quantum variational classification phase to classify new datum to 
correct label. The second model is a SVM quantum kernel -based algorithm based on quantum kernel estimation.  
Maria Schuld et al. (41) proposed two - hybrid quantum techniques for classification problems. Schuld showed that 
quantum computing enhances cla ssical ML algorithms like kernel methods. Quantum computing performs complex 
computations in Hilbert space more eﬃcient. The authors focused on using feature maps and kernel methods in the 
quantum computing world.  
 
 Mitarai, K et al  (42) presented a hybrid quantum -classical technique to perform different tasks like classification, 
regression, and clustering to can implement it on the small -scale quantum devices. Jessica  Pointing introduced (43) 
in the Ph.D. thesis a novel quantum -classical algorithm to handing missing values in data is named “a Quant um 
Algorithm for Handling Missing Data”. The main advantage of the algorithm calculates the probability distribution to 
handle missing data values.  
 
Ruan, Y et al. (44) presented a q uantum KNN algorithm based on the hamming distance matrix. QKNN is a good analog 
for the classical KNN algorithm, which avoids the defect of  the simplified assumption of the task of classification 
QKNN outperforms Centroid and QNN on time performance and classification accuracy.  Grant, E et al. (45) introduced 
a new hybrid classifier based on a hierarchical structure for quantum circuits  for binary  classification problems. Zhang, 
D. B et al  (46) presented  a quantum version of nonlinear regression rely on the hybrid quantum device. also,  the 
authors proposed a new encoding method. Benedetti, M. (47) introduced a framework gene rative model named 
“data -driven  quantum circuit learning” (DDQCL). DDQCL approach is unsupervised hybrid quantum - classic al for the 
characterization of NISQ hardware for solving sampling problems such as bars and stripes (BAS) and random thermal 

==== Page 5 ====
5 
 
data sets by using shallow quantum circuits.  
                                                   
Research  Model  Class  Task  Applica tion 
Soumik et al  (38). Single -shot 
training  Hybrid  Classification  Cancer, Sonar, and Iris  
Sanjay, et al. (39) HQFSA  Hybrid  Feature 
selection  Breast Cancer, Iris, Wine, Vehicle, 
Glass, Sonar, and Ionosphere.  
Dennis, et al. (22) QA_SVM  Quantum  Classifica tion 
and optimization  Real and synthetic   data  
Prayag et al.  (27) QIBC In-spired  Classification  Text  and image Corpora data set  
Sergioli et al. (28) HQC In-spired  Classification  - 
da Silva, A. et al (25) QPF Quantum  Classification  - 
Ding et al.  (29) QiSVM  In-spired  Classification  - 
Casaña -Eslava, R. 
(35) Probabilistic 
Quantum 
Clustering (PQC)  In-spired  Clustering  Local densities &  
Two spirals  
Yu, C. (36) - In-spired  Regression  - 
Benedetti, M. (47) DDQCL  Hybrid  Generative 
model  Synthetic data  
Jessi ca Pointing (43) - Hybrid  Handling missing 
values  Heart data set  
Maria Schuld et al. ( 
41) - Hybrid  Classification  - 
Lu, S et al (33) MERA and TTN  Hybrid  Classification  MNIST digit and  synthetic  data 
set 
Sergioli et al. (30) QNMC  In-spired  Classificat ion Medical Data  
Dang, Y et al. (31) QKNN  In-spired  classification  Graz -01 and Caltech -10 datasets  
Schuld, M et al (48) Circuit -centric  
quantum classifier  Hybrid  classification   
Cancer  and MNIST  
Bishwas, A. (34) Binary clustering 
QSVM  In-spired  Clustering  Big Data  
Zhang, D. B et al (46)  Hybrid  Regression   
Ruan, Y et al (44) QKNN  Hybrid  Classification  MNIST digit data set  
Schuld, M et al (26) Quantum linear 
regression  Quantum  Regression  - 
Chen, H. et al (32) QKNN  In-spired  Classification  - 
Rebentrost, P et al. 
(24) QSVM  Quantum  Classification big 
data  - 
Lu, S et al (33) Quantum decision 
tree In-spired  Classification  - 
Sagheer, A et al (37) APM In-spired  Classification  Breast cancer and synthetic data  
Mita rai, K et al (42) QCL Hybrid  Classification & 
Clustering  - 
TABLE 1 Summarizes  quantum machine learning algorithms  

==== Page 6 ====
6 
 
 
3 | QUANTUM  CLASSIFICATION SCHEME  
 
Throughout this section, we  present the concept of quantum classification,  encoding methods, v ariational quantum 
circuits and Finally, we disc uss the quantum classification scheme . 
 
a) Classification concept in quantum domain  
Classification is a popular task in a supervised learning domain that maps given inputs data (x)  to discrete target 
output (y) through a function approximation f as follows y  = f(x). The main purpose of classification is an accurate 
prediction model. Classification problems can be classified into two main problems: classification with two -classes is 
known as binary classification (for instance cancer diagnosis and spam detectio n). Classification with more than two -
classes is known as multi -class classification (for instance image and digit classification). classification problem can be 
represented with classical ML domain as C = {𝑐1,𝑐2,…,𝑐n} where C is target labels and a set of data in training phase 
with as 𝐷𝑛= {(𝑥1, 𝑦1), …, ( 𝑥i, 𝑦𝑖), …, ( 𝑥n, 𝑦𝑛)} where xi  is some of the features (n) on the properties of order of data 
point (i) and 𝑦𝑖 is the corresponding of that data point. In the case of binary classification 𝑦𝑖∈ {𝑐1, 𝑐2 }  and xi ∈ 𝑅𝑑. in 
the case of multi -class classification 𝑦𝑖 ∈ {𝑐1, ….., 𝑐n } where  xi ∈  𝑅𝑑   and d is real -valued attributes.  To can describe 
classification problems with the QML domain, we should convert classical data to quantum data then we can be 
represented quantum data in training data as 𝐷𝑛 = {( |𝜓1⟩,𝑦1 ), … , ( |𝜓𝑖⟩,𝑦𝑖 ),…, ( |𝜓𝑛⟩,𝑦𝑛)} where  |𝜓𝑖⟩ is the order 
(i) of the quantum state of 𝐷𝑛, |𝜓𝑖⟩ ∈ ∁2𝑑and 𝑦𝑖∈ {c1, c2 } [33], (49) .in the case of binary classification , How to map 
data to quantum form?  There is more than method (or technique) for encoding classical data to quantum data such 
as basis encoding and amplitude encoding for  in detail (in next sub section b) - Encoding methods)  Algorithm  Classification Type  Based Idea  Q 
Data  Data Set  Advantages  Limitations  
QIBC  Binary  Quantum 
detection theory  ✔ image and 
text corpora 
data set  High precision, recall, 
and F -measure.  
Less computation time 
compared to S VM and 
KNN.  Need to many features to 
improve performance.  
Increase computation cost 
with large number copies.  
 
HQC  Binary  distinguishability 
between  
quantum states  ✔ Appendicitis 
and other 
data sets  Improve classification 
rate.  Don’t work efficiently with  
many features vectors in 
large data set.  
QNMC  Binary &  
Multi -class  quantum 
formalism  ✔ Diabetes, 
Liver  
Cancer  
Ionosphere  Achieve higher 
accuracy than classical 
NMC  Don’t achieve better 
performance  with cancer  
data.  
variational 
quantum 
classifier  Binary &  
Multi -class  Quantum  
Variational  
circuit  ✔ Breast 
Cancer  
and wine 
data  Higher performance  
Classy binary & multi - 
class efficiently.  
 High cost  
QSVM  Binary &  
Multi -class  Run on real 
quantum device  ✔ Breast 
Cancer and 
wine data 
set Better accuracy from 
classical  SVM.  Difficult implementation  
APM  Binary &  
Multi -class  Quantum Bit  x Breast 
Cancer 
Wine 
Vintage  
synthetic 
data  Classify specific 
nonl inear problems 
with one neuron only.  
Take a few instances to 
train model and 
achieve higher 
accuracy.  Work on classical computer 
only.  
  
TABLE 2  
A comparative table among QML classification from through classification type, based idea for algorithm, Q da ta refers to 
algorithm works on quantum data ( ✔) or not (x), data sets that algorithm use it for evaluation the performance, Advantages 
and limitations of algorithm.  
 

==== Page 7 ====
7 
 
 
b) Encoding methods  
There are a lot of encoding methods from classical data to quantum data  in a Hilbert space.  In other words, 
encoding data means loading classical data in to quantum computer  (quantum states ). We  outline two 
methods. for other methods, we refer the reader to (41) (50) (72). 
 
Basis Encoding  is the simplest method to encode data to quantum data.  This meth od associates  between n -bit 
classical input and the computational basis of n -qubit input. For example, ( 1100)  classical input string is encoded to 
four qubits ( |1 100 ⟩) quantum states.  In general, to encode data set by basis method, in other word, to represent 
data in computational basis states of qubits, we use the following equation.  
                                                        |𝐷⟩=1 
√M  ∑   |𝑋𝑚⟩𝑀
𝑚=1                                                 (2) 
Where D = { 𝑋1, 𝑋2,….., 𝑋𝑀} is  classical dat a that is in form binary string  , 𝑋𝑚={𝑏1,𝑏2,…𝑏𝑁}, 𝑏𝑖 ∈ {0,1}  , i ∈ { 
1,2,….,N} and N is number  of features.  
 
Amplitude Encoding  is the most used and popular method enc oding in QML algorithms is amplitude encoding. The 
main idea of amplitude encoding based on association classical data with quantum state amplitudes. To encode 
classical data vector to quantum amplitudes. We should convert the classical vector to a normali zed classical vector 
(28,49). 
                                                                   X =[ 𝑥1
  𝑥2
::  𝑥2𝑛]                                                                  (3) 
Where X is normalized classical vector , x ∈  Ϲ2𝑛, and  is  Ϲ complex numbers.  
quantum state amplitudes can be encoded as follows:  
                                                             |𝜓𝑥⟩=∑   𝑥𝑖|i⟩2𝑛−1
𝑖=1                                                             (4) 
                                                             
 where |𝜓⟩ ∈  Hilbert space( ℋ) and  ∑|𝑥𝑖|𝑖2 =1  
    
c) Variational quantum circuit  
Variational quantum circuits also known as  paramete rized quantum circuits, most hybrid quantum -classical 
algorithms    rely on these circuits  (51). The key idea of the variational circuit is optimiz ing the parameters according 
to an objective function.     variational quantum circuits consist of two phases  (see Figur e 1): the  quantum phase and 
classical phase . The quantum phase includes state preparation, quantum circuit  is the heart of the variational circuit 
that parameterizes input (X) based on numbers of parameters (θ) and measurement. The classical phase includes the 
output of the circuit, objective function and learn ing algorithm .” quantum variational circuit” can be optimized by 
classical optimi zation algorithms as gradient  descent, stochastic gradient descent and particle swarm optimization . 
some of  the uses of v ariational quantum circuit such as machine learning (40-41), optimization (52), deep learning 
(53) and The variational circuit also uses in solving the complicated optimization problems.  
 
d) Classical proposed quantum classification scheme  
 
We propose a new a quantum classification scheme consists of six phases as collect datasets, pre -processing  & 
encoding,  training, validation (ev aluate and optimize model), testing phase  and decoding phase . (as shown in Figure  
2-part A). Also, we show a classical  classification scheme (as shown in Figure  2 -part B), we describe these phases as 
following:  
 
 
 
 

==== Page 8 ====
8 
 
 
  
Figure  1. Illustration two phases of the variational circuit (parametrized quantum c ircuit) for Hybrid quantum -classical applications in a quantum 
machine le arning (QML) and quantum neural networks (QNNS). Quantum phase that includes a quantum circuit that consists of state 
preparation, circuit, and measurement. another phase is a classical phase that inc ludes output after measurement and consists of cost func tion 
and learning algorith ms which updates parameters (θ) . 
 
 
1. collect datasets  
According to the classifier, we can determine  whether it works on quantum or classical data. Some of the quantum -
inspired ML works on classical data for instance (37). and other works on quantum data (27). Also, Hybrid quantum -
classical classifiers work on quantum data as (33).  
 
2. Pre-processing & Encoding  
The preprocessing  phase may be applied by classical or quantum technique s. For example, for handling missing 
values, we can use classical or quantum technique s. Then, reduce number of  the features to are compatible with 
available limi ted numbers of qubits on quantum device and split data to training, validation  and test  set. Then, apply 
the encoding for mapping data from  classical data (X) to quantum data ( |𝜓𝑥⟩) in order to  prepare data as quantum 
states . Next, applying a quantum classifier .  
 
3. Training  
Training phase varies according to quantum classifier type.  For example, in the case of quantum -inspired  classifier , 
we train model on classical machine. In the case of quantum kernel classifier, we estimate kernel on a quantum 
device) for  instance , IBM Q  computer or quantum  simulator  (. 
 
4. Validation  
We evaluate and update  parameters to decrease cost function and improve performance of model . 
 
5. Testing  
We t est model performance  by confusion matrix and calculate test time.   
 
6. Decoding (or readout)  
To calculate output data and translate into classical  form  (i.e. C = { −1,1}  ).    
 
4 | DISCUSSION   
Quantum algorithms are quantum model s when running a real quantum computer on but don’t run their classical 
counterparts on such as Shor’s algorithm (8), Grover’s algorithm (9], addition on a quantum computer (54). for more 
details about these algorithms, see (13), (25), (55). 


==== Page 9 ====
9 
 
Quantum machine learning (Q ML) has become a new growth research field and has appeared in many applications 
and countries. the progress and success of quantum computing have observed significantly So, we need to apply the 
advantages and properties of QM with the machine learning bra nch.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Due to the success of S hor’s algorithm for solving factorization problems with exponential speedup, Grover’s 
algorithm search problem in unstructured data with a quad ratic speedup, and HHL algorithm (56) to solve linear 
systems equations.  Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization problem is NP -hard problems that are hard to the 
classical hardware and algorithms solve it. QUBO p roblem is solved by quantum annealing (57) (see table 3)  .  
 
It’s time to discuss the survey questions: Why do we proceed towards Quantum Machine Learning (QML)?  To solve 
challenges and difficult tasks that still exist  in classical machine learning. With increasing size of data, learning phase 
training time and memory consumption to increase during the learning phase. to achieve low -cost learning with 
higher accuracy and performance is a challenging task with classical algorithms. It’s hard to estimate kernel functions 
in higher dimensions  (58-60).  it hard to determine the eigenvector (60) and solve complex optimization problems.    
 
 
 
 B  
 
A 
                                  Figure 2. proposed quantum scheme for classification and prediction  pipeline.  
Above p art (A): the quantum classification and prediction  scheme consist of preprocessing, encoding, train, test, and  
decoding steps. The quantum classifier requires two main st eps encoding and decoding (read out) data.  First, the s tep 
of preprocessing  & encoding  in the quantum model may be applied by classical or quantum techniques. Many 
quantum classifiers work on data and others work on classical often in quantum -inspired classifiers. In the case of  
quantum inspired classifiers that work on quantum data, w e should map classical data (X) to quantum data ( |𝜓𝑥⟩) 
.thirdly, train ing phase, this step varies  by quantum classifier type. For example, in the case of quantum -inspired, we 
train a model on the classical machine. In case of quantum kernel classifier, w e kernel on a quantum device . Last, 
Decoding (measurement) to convert output labels data to classical. Below part (A): classical classification and 
prediction  pipeline consists of preprocessing, Training & validation, testing and  predication phase.  
 
 
 

==== Page 10 ====
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Dunjko, V et al.   (15) Quantum ML can improve in run -time and efficiency. D -wave introduced Quadrant 
algorithms based on Central Processing Unit (CPU), Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) and Quantum annealing 
computer . Quadrant  ML algorit hms  can achieve more performance with low -cost training data with large data over 
classical deep learning and  traditional algorithms (61) (62). 
 
Secondly, how does the concept of quantum computing  enhance classical machine learning? Quantum computing 
can boost traditional algorithms by two different methods: The first metho d, implement classical algorithms on 
quantum computers or simulators. This method needs to encode classical data into quantum data. Another method, 
build QML algorithms depend on Quantum algorithms or quantum subroutines (63) such as Amplitude Amplification, 
Grover’s algorithm, Quantum matrix -inversion, the quantum phase estimation, Variational quantum (48), quantum 
annealing, Sampling (47). 
 
Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) (64) is the heart of other  quantum algorithms such as Quantum Phase Estimation 
algorit hm and Shor’s algorithm. Quantum Fourier Transform is a quantum version of inverse discrete Fourier 
Transform. QFT ac hieves exponential speed -up.  The idea of QFT depends on mapping amplitudes of the current 
quantum state (R) to the next amplitudes of the quantum state (Q).  𝑥𝑖 
Where |R⟩= ∑  𝑥𝑖|¡⟩ 𝑁−1
𝑖=1     ,  |Q⟩= ∑   𝑦𝑗|j⟩𝑁−1
𝑗=1  with 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑗   are complex numbers  and  mapping equation  as following 
[60,75]  : 
                                                                              Qj=  1
√𝑁 ∑ 𝑋𝑛𝑁−1
𝑛=1  𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝑗𝑘
𝑁                                                     (5) 
 
Where j= 1, 2,….,N -1. 
 
Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE)  (65, 66)  is one of the most important subroutines in many quantum algorithms 
[8,63] and quantum machine learning algorithms. QPE algorithm is based on Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) 
subroutine. The goal of Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE) algorithm is to find the eig envalue  (  𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝜃 ) of the unitary 
matrix (U) or find the optimal approximation of the phase ( 𝜃) asthe following equation.  
 
                                                U|φ⟩= 𝑒2𝜋𝑖 𝜃|φ⟩                                                                    (6)   
 
Where 0 ≤ θ < 1 and | φ⟩ is eigenvecto r.  
 
Amplitude Amplification (AA) (67) (also called Quantum Interfere nce) is one of the fundamental   subroutines and is 
the key  idea for the famous Grover’s algorithm, and Grover’s algor ithm is a subroutine for many different algorithms. 
The key objective of Amplitude Amplification (AA) is boosting the solution probability of the amplitude (Р) from Problem  Solved By  Speed up  
Factorization  Shor’s algorithm  (8) Exponential  
Searching in unstructured 
data  Grover’s algorithm (9) Quadratic  
Linear sy stems equations  HHL algorithm (56) Exponential  
Quadratic Unconstrained 
Binary Optimization (QUBO)  D-Wave  quantum computer 
(70) - 
 
IBM's Neurosynaptic 
hardware (71) 
            TABLE 3     Problems solved by quantum computing.  

==== Page 11 ====
11 
 
arbitrary state to target state overall iterations  (68, 69) . To make amplify the successfu l probability of the amplitude 
by using the following formula:  
 
                                                                        1 - (𝑚2
3 (Р)) (𝑚2 (Р))                                                               (7) 
 
Where m is the number of iterations and Р is success probability.  
 
From table 4 that summarizes quantum subroutines and applications of each subroutine. We note that quantum  
Fourier transform (QFT)  and var iational quantum circuit   is the most common and used subroutine s in most 
algorithms and applications.  
 
 
 
                                                                                   
    
 
5 |   CHALLENGES AND FUTURE  DIRECTIONS  
 
In this section, we outline and present challen ges and future directions in QML as small -scale quantum computer, 
Limited quantum bits , encoding methods and develop  a new QML techniques.  
 
1. Small -scale  quantum computer  
the big and key challenge is to build quantum computer s with  a large number  of qubits  to implement, test QML  
algorithms and work with large different data  in the near future . As shown in Figure  3, numbers o f qubits achieved 
by different technology companies  (75) such as Rigetti,  IBM, Q -Wave, Xanadu, Google, and Microsoft . Up to now , the 
quantum computer is developed  in small -scale  and t his restricts us use a limited amount of data  (76). So, researchers Subroutine Applications Refs.  
Amplitude amplification/Grover’s 
algorithm Quantum counting and searching (9,67) 
sampling Quantum deep learning &” boson 
sampling ”  (47) 
Quantum phase estimation Quantum counting (8 ,55) 
Quantum Matrix - inversion/HHL 
Algorithms QSVM ,  kernel least squares and 
machine learning (55,56) 
Quantum Fourier Transform Shor’s algorithm ,  
Cryptography ,  
Information processing, 
Communication,  Discrete logarithm  
and 
Phase estim ation  (13,54,64) 
Variational quantum circuit Optimization, classification (33,48,40,51,53) 
Quantum Annealing Eigen state solver 
Machine learning 
Optimization 
Nurse Scheduling 
Healthcare (22), (72, 73) , (74) 
TABLE 4 show  quantum subroutines that enhanced classical ML techniques, algorithms applied 
based on it.  To build QML algorithms and some of subroutines applications.  

==== Page 12 ====
12 
 
develop algorithms work on available small -scale  and “ noisy intermediate -scale quantum “ (NISQ) quant um hardware 
compatible with number of qubits hardware (77).limited qubits number usi ng a less  number of features that lead to 
losing a lot of important data and with limited qubit s can’t apply big data processing on quantum device s  (78, 79)  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3. A chart shows  the progress  of quantum computer with numbers Quantum Bits: Source (75), Numbers of 
qubits achieved by different companies. The first quantum co mputer with 2 -qubits build by IBM, the MIT Media Lab, 
and UC Berkeley in 1997.IBM achieved in 2017, 50 qubits.20 years to i ncrease 48 qubits .in 2019, Rigetti achieved 
128 qubits.in 2 years 78 qubits increased. If numbers of qubits increase with a high err or rate don’t make  a powerful 
quantum processor (80). Powerful quantum processer with a low error rate will increase exponential ly by increasing 
numbers of quantum bits . 
 
 
2. Encodi ng methods  
Encoding data to quantum states is one of QML challenges, this process takes high consumption time and power for 
mapping from classical data into quantum data  (74) (i.e. image and big data ). So , design new techniques for encoding 
data is an inte resting future direction for research.  In 2020, LaRose et al (81).presented  a binary quantum classifier 
in order to robust with noise quantum states based on the selection  of the best encoding method to load data into 
the quantum system. Furthermore, the authors discussed different methods for encod ing with quantum binary 
classifier. also, the authors applied several encoding data on the same data and showed that encoding data 
techniques can be im proved the model accuracy . In 2020,  the authors  (74) introduced a new method for encoding  
large amount of  image data into a few number of qubits  after  compression to reduce of image based on “quantum 
annealing computer.  As well , the authors trained “restricted boltzmann machine” to classify images data . 
 
3. A new QML techniques  
 In near future,  we think that  researchers will develop new theoretical and applied ML algorithms  that are compatible 
with available quantum hardware. using quantum information theory or quantum subroutines for solving ML 
problems and improve performance. As well, create versions for cur rent algorithms in several fields. For example, 
quantum neural networks (QNNs), quantum deep Learning, quantum -inspired ML , and quantum -enhanced ML (82).in 
addition to, develop new classification techniques based on quantum “variational circuit”  and working on reducing 
the depth  of quantum circuit . And also, implementation of classical techniques on real quantum machine s or 
2
 3
 5
50
 49
72
128
IBM, THE 
MIT MEDIA 
LAB, AND 
UC 
BERKELEY 
1997RIGETTI 
2016IBM 2016 IBM 2017 INTEL 2018 GOOGLE 
2018RIGETTI 
2019020406080100120140Progress of quantum computer & Numbers of
Quantum Bits
Quantum ComputerQubits 

==== Page 13 ====
13 
 
simulator s. using quantum annealing and adiabatic computation with classical ML to develop new QML paradigms 
and solve complicated optimization problems relat ed to ML problems.  
6 | APPLICATIONS  
 
 Quantum Machine Learning (QML) techniques are more effective in many real -world applications comparable to 
traditional machine learning in speedup and accuracy as big  data classification [24], forecasting series, spam 
dete ction, ima ge compression, medical domain (30,43, 37) (i.e., cervical cancer detection   (83), electronic calculations  
(84) ,decision games  (85), nat ural language processing (NLP) , recommendation systems (86, 87)  , speech recognition  
(88), image classification  (27,44 ) , and electrocardiogram signals  classification  (89) .Applica tions related to hybrid 
quantum -classical approach such as scheduling problems  (90), and classification task (40-41). 
7 | CONCLUSION  
 
This survey p aper reviewed the most recent articles for quantum machine learning techniques for various problems 
that improve and handle different problems more effectively and accurately from traditional techniques in 
conventional computing. And also, we compared betw een quantum -inspired and hybrid - quantum -classical 
algorithms. as mentioned  in section 2. (literature review ), QML algorithms outperformed classical ML in performance 
and speed up. In addition, we presented th e quantum scheme for classifica tion problems o r in general in supervised 
learning then we outline two methods for mapping data. We discussed methods of quantum to enhance machine 
learning such as quantum subroutines. We present ed applications of QML in different fields and future vision, to 
open new a venues for use of quantum machine learning in the research field. Our future work, we will apply 
quantum -inspired and hybrid quantum -classical algorithm on real -world data to compare its performance.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
We are grateful to prof. Giuseppe Serg ioli for helpful discussion.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Alpaydin E. Introduction to machine learning: MIT press; 2020.  
2. Mehta P, Bukov M, Wang C -H, Day AG, Richardson C, Fisher CK, et al. A high -bias, low -variance introduction to 
machine learnin g for physicists. Physics reports. 2019.  
3. Kubat M. An introduction to machine learning: Springer; 2017.  
4. Biamonte J, Wittek P, Pancotti N, Rebentrost P, Wiebe N, Lloyd S. Quantum machine learning. Nature. 
2017;549(7671):195 -202.  
5. Broadbent A, Schaffn er C. Quantum cryptography beyond quantum key distribution. Designs, Codes and 
Cryptography. 2016;78(1):351 -82. 
6. Dunjko V, Briegel HJ. Machine learning & artificial intelligence in the quantum domain: a review of recent progress. 
Reports on Progress in P hysics. 2018;81(7):074001.  
7. Farouk A, Tarawneh O, Elhoseny M, Batle J, Naseri M, Hassanien AE, et al. Quantum computing and cryptography: 
an overview.  Quantum Computing: An Environment for Intelligent Large Scale Real Application: Springer; 2018. p. 
63-100.  
8. Shor PW. Polynomial -time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer. 
SIAM review. 1999;41(2):303 -32. 
9. Grover LK, editor A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. Proceedings of the twenty -eight h 
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing; 1996.  
10. Schuld M, Sinayskiy I, Petruccione F. An introduction to quantum machine learning. Contemporary Physics. 
2015;56(2):172 -85. 
11. Wittek P. Quantum machine learning: what quantum computing means to dat a mining: Academic Press; 2014.  

==== Page 14 ====
14 
 
12. Sharma S. QEML (Quantum Enhanced Machine Learning): Using Quantum Computing to Enhance ML Classifiers 
and Feature Spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:200210453. 2020.  
13. Coles PJ, Eidenbenz S, Pakin S, Adedoyin A, Ambrosiano J , Anisimov P, et al. Quantum algorithm implementations 
for beginners. arXiv preprint arXiv:180403719. 2018.  
14. Nakahara M, Wan Y, Sasaki Y. Diversities in Quantum Computation and Quantum Information: World Scientific; 
2012.  
15. Dunjko V, Taylor JM, Briege l HJ. Quantum -enhanced machine learning. Physical review letters. 
2016;117(13):130501.  
16. Aïmeur E, Brassard G, Gambs S, editors. Machine learning in a quantum world. Conference of the Canadian 
Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence; 2006: Spri nger.  
17. Montanaro A. Quantum algorithms: an overview. npj Quantum Information. 2016;2(1):1 -8. 
18. Jeswal S, Chakraverty S. Recent developments and applications in quantum neural network: A review. Archives 
of Computational Methods in Engineering. 2019;26 (4):793 -807.  
19. Benedetti M, Lloyd E, Sack S, Fiorentini M. Parameterized quantum circuits as machine learning models. 
Quantum Science and Technology. 2019;4(4):043001.  
20. Resch S, Karpuzcu UR. Quantum computing: an overview across the system stack. arXi v preprint 
arXiv:190507240. 2019.  
21. Ciliberto C, Herbster M, Ialongo AD, Pontil M, Rocchetto A, Severini S, et al. Quantum machine learning: a classical 
perspective. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 
2018;474(2209):20170551.  
22. Willsch D, Willsch M, De Raedt H, Michielsen K. Support vector machines on the D -Wave quantum annealer. 
Computer Physics Communications. 2020;248:107006.  
23. Headquarters C. Technical Description of the D -Wave Quantum Processing U nit. 2019.  
24. Rebentrost P, Mohseni M, Lloyd S. Quantum support vector machine for big data classification. Physical review 
letters. 2014;113(13):130503.  
25. da Silva AJ, Ludermir TB, de Oliveira WR. Quantum perceptron over a field and neural network arch itecture 
selection in a quantum computer. Neural Networks. 2016;76:55 -64. 
26. Schuld M, Sinayskiy I, Petruccione F. Prediction by linear regression on a quantum computer. Physical Review A. 
2016;94(2):022342.  
27. Tiwari P, Melucci M. Towards a quantum -inspired binary classifier. IEEE Access. 2019;7:42354 -72. 
28. Sergioli G, Giuntini R, Freytes H. A new quantum approach to binary classification. PloS one. 2019;14(5).  
29. Ding C, Bao T -Y, Huang H -L. Quantum -Inspired Support Vector Machine. arXiv preprint arXi v:190608902. 2019.  
30. Sergioli G, Russo G, Santucci E, Stefano A, Torrisi SE, Palmucci S, et al. Quantum -inspired minimum distance 
classification in a biomedical context. International Journal of Quantum Information. 2018;16(08):1840011.  
31. Dang Y, Jiang  N, Hu H, Ji Z, Zhang W. Image classification based on quantum K -Nearest -Neighbor algorithm. 
Quantum Information Processing. 2018;17(9):239.  
32. Chen H, Gao Y, Zhang J. Quantum k -nearest neighbor algorithm. Dongnan Daxue Xuebao. 2015;45(4):647 -51. 
33. Lu S, Braunstein SL. Quantum decision tree classifier. Quantum information processing. 2014;13(3):757 -70. 
34. Bishwas AK, Mani A, Palade V. Big Data Quantum Support Vector Clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:180410905. 
2018.  
35. Casaña -Eslava RV, Lisboa PJ, Orteg a-Martorell S, Jarman IH, Martín -Guerrero JD. A Probabilistic framework for 
Quantum Clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:190205578. 2019.  
36. Yu C -H, Gao F, Wen Q. An improved quantum algorithm for ridge regression. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engi neering. 2019.  
37. Sagheer A, Zidan M, Abdelsamea MM. A novel autonomous perceptron model for pattern classification 
applications. Entropy. 2019;21(8):763.  
38. Adhikary S, Dangwal S, Bhowmik D. Supervised learning with a quantum classifier using multi -level systems. 
Quantum Information Processing. 2020;19(3):89.  
39. Chakraborty S, Shaikh SH, Chakrabarti A, Ghosh R. A hybrid quantum feature selection algorithm using a quantum 
inspired graph theoretic approach. Applied Intelligence. 2020:1 -19. 

==== Page 15 ====
15 
 
40. Havlíček V,  Córcoles AD, Temme K, Harrow AW, Kandala A, Chow JM, et al. Supervised learning with quantum -
enhanced feature spaces. Nature. 2019;567(7747):209 -12. 
41. Schuld M, Killoran N. Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces. Physical review letters. 
2019;122(4):040504.  
42. Mitarai K, Negoro M, Kitagawa M, Fujii K. Quantum circuit learning. Physical Review A. 2018;98(3):032309.  
43. Pointing J. Quantum Algorithm for Handling Missing Data. harvard. 2018.  
44. Ruan Y, Xue X, Liu H, Tan J, Li X. Quantum algori thm for k -nearest neighbors classification based on the metric of 
hamming distance. International Journal of Theoretical Physics. 2017;56(11):3496 -507.  
45. Grant E, Benedetti M, Cao S, Hallam A, Lockhart J, Stojevic V, et al. Hierarchical quantum classifie rs. npj Quantum 
Information. 2018;4(1):1 -8. 
46. Zhang D -B, Zhu S -L, Wang Z. Nonlinear regression based on a hybrid quantum computer. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:180809607. 2018.  
47. Benedetti M, Garcia -Pintos D, Perdomo O, Leyton -Ortega V, Nam Y, Perdomo -Ortiz A.  A generative modeling 
approach for benchmarking and training shallow quantum circuits. npj Quantum Information. 2019;5(1):1 -9. 
48. Schuld M, Bocharov A, Svore KM, Wiebe N. Circuit -centric quantum classifiers. Physical Review A. 
2020;101(3):032308.  
49. Gam bs S. Quantum classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:08090444. 2008.  
50. Schuld M, Petruccione F. Supervised learning with quantum computers: Springer; 2018.  
51. McClean JR, Romero J, Babbush R, Aspuru -Guzik A. The theory of variational hybrid quantum -classi cal algorithms. 
New Journal of Physics. 2016;18(2):023023.  
52. Moll N, Barkoutsos P, Bishop LS, Chow JM, Cross A, Egger DJ, et al. Quantum optimization using variational 
algorithms on near -term quantum devices. Quantum Science and Technology. 2018;3(3):030503.  
53. Chen SY -C, Goan H -S. Variational Quantum Circuits and Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:190700397. 2019.  
54. Draper TG. Addition on a quantum computer. arXiv preprint quant -ph/0008033. 2000.  
55. Hales L, Hallgren S, editors. An improved quantum Fourier transform algorithm and applications.  Proceedings 
41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science; 2000: IEEE.  
56. Harrow AW, Hassidim A, Lloyd S. Quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations. Physical review letters. 
2009;103(15):150502.  
57. Lewis M, Glover F. Quadratic unconst rained binary optimization problem preprocessing: Theory and empirical 
analysis. Networks. 2017;70(2):79 -97. 
58. Silverman B. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis.[EPub]. New York: Routledge; 2018.  
59. Hansen BE. Lecture notes on nonparametr ics. Lecture notes. 2009.  
60. Wang W, Yang N, Zhang Y, Wang F, Cao T, Eklund P. A review of road extraction from remote sensing images. 
Journal of traffic and transportation engineering (english edition). 2016;3(3):271 -82. 
61. Li RY, Di Felice R, Rohs R, L idar DA. Quantum annealing versus classical machine learning applied to a simplified 
computational biology problem. NPJ quantum information. 2018;4(1):1 -10. 
62. Systems D -W. D -Wave Announces Quadrant Machine Learning Business Unit. 2018.  
 https://ww w.dwavesys.com/press -releases/d -wave -announces -quadrant -machine -learning -business -unit 
63. Schuld M, Petr uccione F. Quantum Machine Learning. 2017.  
64. Coppersmith D. An approximate Fourier transform useful in quantum factoring. arXiv preprint quant -
ph/0201067. 2002.  
65. Luis A, Peřina J. Optimum phase -shift estimation and the quantum description of the phase  difference. Physical 
review A. 1996;54(5):4564.  
66. Cleve R, Ekert A, Macchiavello C, Mosca M. Quantum algorithms revisited. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 1998;454(1969):339 -54. 
67. Brassard G, Hoyer P, Mosca M, Tapp A. Quantum amplitude amplification and estimation. Contemporary 
Mathematics. 2002;305:53 -74. 
68. Brassard G, Høyer P, Tapp A, editors. Quantum counting. International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and 
Programming; 199 8: Springer.  

==== Page 16 ====
16 
 
69. Ambainis A, editor Variable time amplitude amplification and quantum algorithms for linear algebra 
problems2012.  
70. Neukart F, Compostella G, Seidel C, Von Dollen D, Yarkoni S, Parney B. Traffic flow optimization using a quantum 
annealer.  Frontiers in ICT. 2017;4:29.  
71. Alom MZ, Van Essen B, Moody AT, Widemann DP, Taha TM, editors. Quadratic Unconstrained Binary 
Optimization (QUBO) on neuromorphic computing system. 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 
(IJCNN); 2017: IEEE . 
72. Mott A, Job J, Vlimant J -R, Lidar D, Spiropulu M. Solving a Higgs optimization problem with quantum annealing 
for machine learning. Nature. 2017;550(7676):375 -9. 
73. Adachi SH, Henderson MP. Application of quantum annealing to training of deep neural  networks. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:151006356. 2015.  
74. Sahner D. A Potential Role for Quantum Annealing in the Enhancement of Patient  
Outcomes?2018.  
  https://www.dwavesys.com/sites/default/files/Sahner.2018.pdf  
75. Marcos Allende López , Silva MD. Quantum Technologies  : Digital transformation, social impact, and cross -sector 
disruption2019. 14 -5 p. 
https://publications.iadb.org/publications/english/document/Quantum_Technologies_Digital_Transformation_Soci
al_Impact_and_Crosssector_Disruption.pdf  
76. Herbster M, Mountney P, Piat S, Severini S. Data encoding and classification. Google Patents; 2020.  
77. Preskill J. Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum. 2018;2:79.  
78. Perdomo -Ortiz A, Benedetti M, Real pe-Gómez J, Biswas R. Opportunities and challenges for quantum -assisted 
machine learning in near -term quantum computers. Quantum Science and Technology. 2018;3(3):030502.  
79. Shiba K, Sakamoto K, Yamaguchi K, Malla DB, Sogabe T. Convolution filter embedded  quantum gate autoencoder. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:190601196. 2019.  
80. Gambetta JM, Chow JM, Steffen M. Building logical qubits in a superconducting quantum computing system. npj 
Quantum Information. 2017;3(1):1 -7. 
81. LaRose R, Coyle B. Robust data encoding s for quantum classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:200301695. 2020.  
82. Dunjko V, Wittek P. A non -review of Quantum Machine Learning: trends and explorations. Quantum Views. 
2020;4:32.  
83. Iliyasu AM, Fatichah C. A quantum hybrid PSO combined with fuzzy k -NN approach to feature selection and cell 
classification in cervical cancer detection. Sensors. 2017;17(12):2935.  
84. Xia R, Kais S. Quantum machine learning for electronic structure calculations. Nature communications. 
2018;9(1):1 -6. 
85. Clausen J, Briegel H J. Quantum machine learning with glow for episodic tasks and decision games. Physical 
Review A. 2018;97(2):022303.  
86. Tang E, editor A quantum -inspired classical algorithm for recommendation systems. Proceedings of the 51st 
Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing; 2019.  
87. Kerenidis I, Prakash A. Quantum recommendation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:160308675. 2016.  
88. Kafian S, Yaghoobi M, Attari I. P65: Speech Recognition Based on Bbrain Signals by the Quantum Support Vector 
Machine for Infla mmatory Patient ALS. The Neuroscience Journal of Shefaye Khatam. 2018;6(2):96 -. 
89. Tang X, Shu L. Classification of electrocardiogram signals with RS and quantum neural networks. International 
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering. 2014;9(2):36 3-72. 
90. Tran TT, Do M, Rieffel EG, Frank J, Wang Z, O'Gorman B, et al., editors. A hybrid quantum -classical approach to 
solving scheduling problems. Ninth annual symposium on combinatorial search; 2016.  
  
 
 

