==== Page 1 ====
CLIPstyler: Image Style Transfer with a Single Text Condition
Gihyun Kwon1Jong Chul Ye1,2
Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering1, Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI2, KAIST
{cyclomon,jong.ye }@kaist.ac.kr
Figure 1. Our style transfer results on various text conditions. Translated images have spatial structure of the content images with realistic
textures corresponding to the text.
Abstract
Existing neural style transfer methods require reference
style images to transfer texture information of style images
to content images. However, in many practical situations,
users may not have reference style images but still be inter-
ested in transferring styles by just imagining them. In order
to deal with such applications, we propose a new frame-
work that enables a style transfer ‘without’ a style image,
but only with a text description of the desired style. Using
the pre-trained text-image embedding model of CLIP , we
demonstrate the modulation of the style of content imagesonly with a single text condition. Specifically, we propose
a patch-wise text-image matching loss with multiview aug-
mentations for realistic texture transfer. Extensive experi-
mental results confirmed the successful image style transfer
with realistic textures that reflect semantic query texts.
1. Introduction
Style transfer aims to transform a content image by trans-
ferring the semantic texture of a style image. The seminar
work of neural style transfer proposed by Gatys et al. [7]
uses a pre-trained VGG network to transfer the style texture
18062


==== Page 2 ====
by calculating the style loss that matches the Gram matrices
of the content and style features. Their style loss has be-
come a standard in later works including stylization through
pixel optimization for a single content image [3], arbitrary
style transfer which operates in real-time for various style
images [9, 16, 18, 27], and optimizing feedforward network
for stylizing each image [10, 24].
Although these approaches for style transfer can success-
fully create visually pleasing new artworks by transferring
styles of famous artworks to common images, they require
a reference style image to change the texture of the content
image. However, in many practical applications, reference
style images are not available to users, but the users are still
interested in ‘imitiating’ the texture of the style images. For
example, users can imagine being able to convert their own
photos into Monet or Van Gogh styles without ever owning
paintings by the famous painters. Or you can convert your
daylight images into night images by mere imagination. In
fact, to overcome this limitation of the existing style trans-
fer and create a truly creative artwork, we should be able to
transfer a completely novel style that we imagine.
Toward this goal, several methods have attempted to ma-
nipulate images with a text condition which conveys the de-
sired style. Using pre-trained text-image embedding mod-
els, these method usually deliver semantic information of
text condition to the visual domain. However, these meth-
ods often have disadvantages in that semantics are not prop-
erly reflected due to the performance limitations of the em-
bedding model [28, 29], and the manipulation is restricted
to a specific content domain (such as human face) as the
method heavily rely on pre-trained generative models [20].
To address this, here we propose a novel image style
transfer method to deliver the semantic textures of text
conditions using recently proposed text-image embedding
model of CLIP [21]. Specifically, rather than resorting to
pixel-optimization or manipulating the instance normaliza-
tion layer as in AdaIN [9], we propose to train a lightweight
CNN network that can express the texture information with
respect to text conditions and produce realistic and color-
ful results. More specifically, the content image is trans-
formed by the lightweight CNN to follow the text condition
by matching the similarity between the CLIP model output
of transferred image and the text condition. Furthermore,
when the network is trained for multiple content images,
our method enables text-driven style transfer regardless of
content images.
Our method comes from several technical innovations in
the implementation. First, instead of optimizing the loss
by using the image directly, we propose to use a patch-
wise CLIP loss to guide the network to function as a brush-
stroke. Specifically, to calculate the proposed loss, we first
sample patches of the output image and apply augmenta-
tion with different perspective views. Afterwards, we ob-tain the CLIP loss by calculating the similarity between the
query text condition and the processed patches. By apply-
ing this patch-wise CLIP loss, we found that we can transfer
styles to each local area of the content image. Furthermore,
the augmentation induces the patch style to be more vivid
and diverse. Additionally, to overcome the patch-dependent
over-stylization problem, we propose a novel threshold reg-
ularization so that the patches with abnormally high scores
do not affect the network training.
Extensive experimental results show that our model can
transfer a variety of unique styles based on text conditions,
which enable a wider range of style transfer than the exist-
ing methods using style images.
2. Related works
2.1. Style Transfer
Inspired by Gatys et al. [7] who proposed an iterative
pixel-optimization by jointly minimizing content and style
losses, Johnson et al. [10] and Ulyanov et al. [24] proposed
to train a stylization feed-forward network with using the
same loss function by Gatys et al. [7]. By extending the
aforementioned single-content style transfer approaches, Li
et al. [16, 17] proposed the whitening and coloring trans-
form (WCT) method to transform the content features to
follow the statistic of style features. Huang et al. [9] pro-
posed Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) in which
the mean and standard deviation of the style image features
are applied to normalized feature statistics of content im-
ages. Li et al. [15] proposed a linear transformation between
content and style features for fast style transfer on images
and videos.
Recently, Yoo et al. [27] proposed a wavelet transform
based WCT for better preservation of content information
for photo-realistic style transfer. Park et al. [19] proposed
a style attentional network (SANet) so that the style can
refer the content feature information. Svoboda et al. [23]
proposed style transfer with graph convolutional network to
combine style and content in latent spaces. Deng et al. [2]
suggested multiple adaptation module which use spatial at-
tention as content feature and channel attention as style fea-
tures.
More recently, Liu et al. [18] proposed adaptive attention
normalization as a improved attention-based style transfer
of SANet [19]. Xu et al. [26] proposed a new framework
of dynamic residual block to integrate style and content
features of generative models. Hong et al. [8] introduce
a domain-aware style transfer method in which the model
transfer the domain-aware information along with style.
Kotovenko et al. [13] focused on the brushstroke property
of Bezier curves, and proposed to optimize parameters of
modelled quadratic Bezier curves instead of pixels.
Although these methods have shown successful results,
18063


==== Page 3 ====
the methods require style images in order to make the con-
tent image to follow the texture of the target style.
2.2. Text-guided synthesis
In the existing text-guided image synthesis, the encoders
for text embedding work as guide conditions for generative
models. Zhang et al. [28, 29] integrated text conditions to
multi-scale generative model for high-quality image syn-
thesis. AttnGAN [25] further improved the performance
with attention mechanism on text and image features. Mani-
GAN [14] proposed a modules for simultaneously embed-
ding the text and image features.
Recently, OpenAI introduced CLIP [21] which is a
high-performance text-image embedding models trained on
400M text-image pairs. CLIP model have shown a state-
of-the-art performance on connecting text and image do-
main. With powerful representation embedding of CLIP,
there are several approaches which can manipulate the im-
age with text conditions. StyleCLIP [20] performed at-
tribute manipulation with exploring learned latent space of
StyleGAN [12]. They successfully controlled the genera-
tion process by finding an appropriate vector direction to-
wards the given text condition. However, StyleCLIP has
limitation as the latent exploration can manipulate images
within the trained domain. Therefore, StyleGAN-NADA
[6] proposed a model modification method with using text
condition only, and modulates the trained model into a novel
domain without additional training images.
Although these models could manipulate the images
with text conditions, they are heavily dependent on pre-
trained generative models. Therefore, the generated images
are confined to trained image domains. In our model, we
can transfer the texture of text conditions to the source im-
age regardless of the domain of images, which was not con-
sidered in the aforementioned generative model based ma-
nipulations.
3. Method
3.1. Basic framework of CLIPstyler
As emphasized before, the purpose of our framework is
to transfer the semantic style of target text tstyto the con-
tent image Icthrough the pre-trained text-image embedding
model CLIP [21]. The major difference from the existing
methods is that in our model, there is no style image Isto
use as a reference.
Since our model aims to obtain semantically transformed
images with a sole supervision from CLIP, we have several
technical issues to solve: 1) how to extract the semantic
‘texture’ information from CLIP model and apply the tex-
ture to the content image, and 2) how to regularize the train-
ing so that the output image is not qualitatively impaired.
The specified architecture of our method is shown in
Figure 2. Overall schematics of our proposed patch-wise CLIP
loss. We optimize the neural network fusing the loss functions.
Fig. 2. When a content image Icis given, we aim to ob-
tain the style transfer output Ics. Unfortunately, we experi-
mentally found that the desired texture is not reflected when
using traditional pixel optimization method. To solve the
problem, we introduced a CNN encoder-decoder model f
that can capture the hierarchical visual features of the con-
tent image and simultaneously stylize the image in deep fea-
ture space to obtain a realistic texture representation. There-
fore, our stylized image Icsisf(Ic), and our final goal is to
optimize the parameter of fso that it can make the output
to have target texture.
3.2. Loss function
CLIP loss: To guide the content image to follow the se-
mantic of target text, the simplest CLIP-based image ma-
nipulation approach [20] is to minimize the global clip loss
function which is formulated as:
Lglobal =DCLIP(f(Ic), tsty), (1)
where DCLIP is the CLIP-space cosine distance. This loss
function transforms the output image of the whole frame
to follow the semantic of the textual condition. However,
when such global CLIP loss is used, often the output qual-
ity is corrupted, and the stability is low in the optimization
process.
To solve the problem, StyleGAN-NADA [6] proposed a
directional CLIP loss that aligns the CLIP-space direction
between the text-image pairs of source and output. So, we
also employ the directional CLIP loss, which can be defined
in our case as:
∆T=ET(tsty)−ET(tsrc),
∆I=EI(f(Ic))−EI(Ic),
Ldir= 1−∆I·∆T
|∆I||∆T|, (2)
where EIandETare the image and text encoders of CLIP,
respectively; and tsty,tsrcare the semantic text of the style
18064


==== Page 4 ====
target and the input content, respectively. When we use nat-
ural images for content, tsrcis simply set as “Photo”.
PatchCLIP loss: Although the proposed Ldirshows good
performance in modifying the pre-trained generative model,
it does not perfectly match to ours because our goal is to
apply the semantic texture of tstyto a given content image.
It is also shown in our result that solely using Ldirin our
framework decreased the quality of the output.
To overcome the shortcomings of existing CLIP losses,
we propose a novel PatchCLIP loss for texture transfer. In-
spired by the idea of the original style loss in Gatys et al. [7],
which is to deliver the spatially invariant information, we
found that a similar effect can be obtained by minimizing
CLIP loss functions with respect to group of patches that
are extracted from Icsin arbitrary locations.
Specifically, we randomly crop sufficient number of
patches from Ics. At this stage, the size of the cropped im-
age is fixed. For all of Ncropped patches ˆIN
cs, we apply
random geometrical augmentation to the cropped patches
before calculating the CLIP directional loss. Inspired by
Frans et al. [5], we found that using augmentations on each
patch assist the network to represent more vivid and diverse
textures.
Although there are many possible types of augmenta-
tions, we propose to use perspective augmentation. With
using perspective augmentation, all patches are guided to
have the same semantic when viewed in multiple points so
that the semantic information of the CLIP model can be re-
constructed as more 3D-like structures.
Threshold rejection: Due to the stochastic randomness of
patch sampling and augmentations, our method often suffer
from over-stylization in which the style network fis opti-
mized on specific patches that are easy to minimize the loss
scores. To alleviate the problem, we include regularization
to reject the gradient optimization process for high-scored
patches. With a given threshold value τ, we simply nullify
the calculated loss of corresponding patches. Therefore, our
proposed patch-wise CLIP loss is defined as:
∆T=ET(tsty)−ET(tsrc),
∆I=EI(aug(ˆIi
cs))−EI(Ic),
li
patch = 1−∆I·∆T
|∆I||∆T|,
Lpatch =1
NNX
iR(li
patch, τ) (3)
where R(s, τ) =(
0,ifs≤τ
s, otherwise
where ˆIi
csis the i-th cropped patch from the output image,
augis random perspective augmentation, and R(·,·)repre-
sents the threshold function.Total loss: For overall loss function, we use four differ-
ent losses. First, we use standard directional CLIP loss
Ldirto modulate the whole part of the content image (e.g.
color tone, global semantics). Second, we add our proposed
PatchCLIP loss Lpatch for local texture stylization. On top
of CLIP loss functions, to maintain the content information
of input image, we include the content loss Lcwith calcu-
lating the mean-square error between the features of content
and output images extracted from the pre-trained VGG-19
networks similar to the existing work by Gatys et al. [7]. Fi-
nally, to alleviate the side artifacts from irregular pixels, we
include the total variation regularization loss Ltv. There-
fore, our total loss function is formulated as:
Ltotal=λdLdir+λpLpatch+λcLc+λtvLtv (4)
4. Results
4.1. Experiment settings
Our content image can have any resolution sizes, but
considering the resource capacity, we use 512 ×512 reso-
lution for all content images. For training, we set λd,λp,
λc, andλtvas5×102,9×103,150, and2×10−3, respec-
tively. For the content loss, similar to Gatys et al. [7], we
use the features of layers “conv4 2” and “conv5 2” for the
content loss.
For the neural network f, we use lightweight U-net [22]
architecture which has three downsample and three upsam-
ple layers, in which the channel sizes are 16,32 and 64 for
each downsample layers. For stable training, we include
sigmoid function at the last layer of f, so that the pixel value
range is within the range of [0,1]. For training the network,
we use Adam optimizer with learning rate of 5×10−4. The
total training iteration is set as 200, and we decreased the
learning rate to half at the iteration of 100. The training
time is about 40 seconds per text on a single RTX2080Ti
GPU.
For patch cropping, we use the patch size of 128 as our
default setting since it shows best perceptual quality. We
can obtain various effects with varying the crop size. The
total number of cropped patches is set as n= 64 . For per-
spective augmentation, we use the function provided by Py-
torch library. Detailed implementation is in Supplementary
Materials. For threshold rejection, we set τas 0.7 in which
the result has the best visual quality.
In order to reduce the noise of text embedding, we use
a prompt engineering technique proposed by Radford et al.
[21]. Specifically, we make several texts with same mean-
ing, and feed them to the text encoder. Then we use the
averaged embedding instead of original single text condi-
tions. Finally, for better visualization for readers, we ap-
ply same contrast enhancement techniques for all outputs
including baselines. Please refer to our Github repository:
https://github.com/cyclomon/CLIPstyler.
18065


==== Page 5 ====
Figure 3. Style transfer results on various query text conditions. Our method can synthesize realistic textures which reflect the text
conditions. Additional results are in our Supplementary Materials.
4.2. Qualitative evaluations
Figure 1 and 3 show representative style transfer results
from our methods. With corresponding text conditions, we
can successfully convert image style that matches the text
condition without changing the content of the image. In the
result images, we can do style transfer not only for artistic
styles, but also for a wide range of general texture styles. In
particular, since we give conditions through text conditions,
it is possible to control not only the texture type, but also
the detailed conditions of each style. For example, we can
give additional information of color with textures in using
text conditions such as “white wool” and “green crystal”.
We can also choose which kind of ‘object’ to use as target
texture. In the results of Figure 1, we can choose the texture
type (“oil painting”) and pattern object (“flowers”) simulta-
neously, so that more abundant effects can be obtained by
our method.
4.3. Comparison with baselines
Comparison with existing style transfer: Although our
method does not follow the conventional framework of styletransfer which require style images, we can indirectly com-
pare our results with existing style transfer methods. Since
the CLIP model is trained on a wide range of natural im-
ages as well as artistic images, we can transfer the styles
of famous artworks with corresponding text conditions and
compare them with the existing methods. For baselines, we
choose various state-of-the-art artistic style transfer meth-
ods which includes arbitrary style transfer (AdaAttn [18],
SANet [19], CST [23], and AdaIN [9]), and pixel optimiza-
tion [7].
In Fig. 4, the results from our method show similar style
transfer results to the baseline method in spite of using only
text conditions. In the first to third rows, we compare the
artistic style transfer performance of our text-guided style
transfer with those of the baselines. For the case of early
baseline models of AdaIN [9] and Gatys et. al. [7], the out-
puts show limitation in expressing the target texture style
with only concentrating on major color changes. The re-
sults by the recent style transfer methods of AdaAttn [18],
SANet [19], and CST [23] have complex texture informa-
tion with preserving the structure of content images. Our
18066


==== Page 6 ====
Figure 4. Comparison results with baseline style transfer methods. In contrast to the baselines, the results from our method is stylized only
using a text condition without any style image. Although our method does not have style reference, the output image has complex texture
which follows the semantics of the text conditions.
result has also vivid texture patterns of artworks in various
locations, without damaging the structure of original con-
tent shape.
For further comparison with non-artistic styles, we in-
clude style transfer result in the last row of Fig. 4. Since the
baseline style transfer methods are mostly trained on art-
works, we can see that the baseline style transfer methods
have difficulty in transferring the texture of the non-artistic
styles. However, our method can successfully extract the
semantic textures from the query text and apply them to the
content image.
Comparison with text-guided manipulation models:
Figure 5 shows the result of comparison between our model
and the baseline text-guided manipulation methods. As for
baselines, we choose state-of-the-art methods which use
CLIP model and a pre-trained StyleGAN. Since the base-
line models are trained on human face, we experimented
with images of CelebA-HQ [11]. In the results, our method
can express realistic textures on the content images, which
are matched to the query text conditions.
Specifically, in the result of StyleGAN-NADA [6], the
content images are modified to follow the text condition,
but only a part of the content image can be changed, or the
changes do not sufficiently reflect the semantics of the text
condition. The result in the last row of Figure 5 shows how
our approach and StyleGAN-NADA differ in the way they
accept text conditions. Since our model focus on textures,
the model apply artistic style (e.g. Van Gogh style) to the
entire image, but Style-NADA changed the face identity as
it focused on the text condition itself. In the results of Style-
Figure 5. Comparison with other text-guided manipulation mod-
els. Our results have more realistic textures on the entire location.
Baseline models show limited change, and in some cases the con-
tents of the image are modified.
CLIP [20], since the method can manipulate images within
the learned latent domain, all of the results except for the
third row failed to transform the images.
For further comparison, as our method is based on the
network weight optimization (or fine-tuning) using CLIP
loss, we also investigate whether other manipulation ap-
proaches can produce better style transfer by combining
with CLIP loss. First, we combine CLIP-loss with the pixel
optimization similar to Gatys et al. [7]. Second, we only
18067


==== Page 7 ====
Figure 6. Ablation study results. Each columns annotated with alphabets are the style transfer outputs (a) with using entire losses, (b) with
removing Ldir, (c) with removing threshold rejection, (d) with removing augmentation, (e) with replacing perspective augmentation to
random affine transformation, (f) with removing our proposed Lpatch .
Figure 7. Comparison study on various manipulation approaches.
Top: outputs with “A fauvism style painting”. Bottom: outputs
with “Leather”.
apply AdaIN code optimization using CLIP-loss on a pre-
trained style transfer network by Huang et al. [9]. Finally,
we also compare with the latent code optimization on a pre-
trained VQGAN [4] using CLIP-loss by using the source
code of VQGAN-CLIP1. The results in Fig. 7 show that
our method of optimizing network fshows superior quality
compared to baselines. More specifically, with pixel opti-
mization, the image could not reflect the semantic of text
conditions. In case of VQGAN+CLIP and AdaIN+CLIP,
the textures are applied to the contents, but the content
structures are severely deteriorated. In Supplementary Ma-
terials, we additionally show comparison results with two
different baselines of 1) applying the existing style transfer
method by using the text- retrieved image as a style im-
age, and 2) using the image generated by the text-to-image
generation model as a style image. More comparisons with
quantitative user study are also included in our Supplemen-
tary Materials.
4.4. Ablation studies
In order to verify the necessity of each component in our
method, we conducted ablation studies. Figure 6 shows our
ablation study results. When we use all the proposed loss
functions (Fig. 6(a)), we can obtain the best results in per-
1https://github.com/nerdyrodent/VQGAN-CLIP
Figure 8. Training framework of our fast style transfer methods.
We use cropped patches as content images, and used the same pro-
posed loss functions to train the decoder of VGG19 networks.
ceptual domain. In particular, as well as three-dimensional
texture, we could obtain a clean image without artifacts in
terms of color. If the whole image CLIP loss Ldiris not
used (Fig. 6(b)), the global semantic cannot be captured, so
we can see the color mapped in irregular patterns. When
the threshold rejection is removed (Fig. 6(c)), the image is
over-focused on a specific patch and an over-stylized image
is derived. When augmentation was not used (Fig. 6(d)), the
three-dimensional realistic texture was not reflected. When
using the commonly used affine transform instead of our
proposed perspective augmentation (Fig. 6(e)), there are un-
wanted artifacts. Finally, when only directional CLIP Loss
which is a loss function for the whole image was used, there
is only little change in texture except for color (Fig. 6(f)).
For further evaluation, we show user study results on vari-
ous ablation experiments in Supplementary Materials.
5. Further Extensions
5.1. Fast style transfer
In our default framework, we should train the style net-
work ffor single content image to apply a given style. To
overcome this, we are interested in a method that trains f
using various texture patches instead of single content im-
age. Once the network is trained in such a way, the trained
network can be used in various content images.
Our proposed fast training scheme is illustrated in Fig. 8.
As a training set, we randomly cropped the patches from
18068


==== Page 8 ====
Figure 9. Results from our fast style transfer methods.
high-resolution texture images of DIV2k [1]. For faster
training, we employ a pre-trained VGG encoder-decoder
network rather than the U-Net as the style network f, and
only the decoder network is fine-tuned. In training step,
we used the same loss functions, but we did not crop the
sub-patches because the input patches are already cropped
from large images. We update the model for 200 steps with
Adam optimizer using learning rate of 1×10−4. The over-
all training time is ∼40 seconds. For inference, it take less
than 0.5sec per content image. Further details are in Sup-
plementary Material.
Fig. 9 is the results from our fast style transfer method.
Since we trained the model with diverse texture inputs, we
can conduct style transfer on arbitrary content images in
real-time. We can see that the result images reflected the
semantic texture of the text condition. Comparing with our
results trained with single content image in Figs. 1 and 3,
we can obtain similar texture transfer quality in our faster
style transfer settings. Also, the results can adapt to any
kind of content inputs with different structural diversities.
However, in some cases (e.g. “Neon Light”,“Fire”), the
images have textures on unnecessary regions such as back-
ground. Still, the results show that our fast transfer enables
high-quality style transfer for arbitrary content images.
Figure 10. High-resolution style transfer results from our fast style
transfer methods. Left: content image. Right: style transfer output
with text condition of “A sketch with black pencil”. Image resolu-
tion is 3000 ×2000. It takes about 4 seconds to process the image.
5.2. High-resolution style transfer
Since our fast style transfer can be adapted to any kinds
of content images with patch-based training, we can transfer
the style with higher resolution content images. The train-
ing scheme is same as our fast style transfer method. After
training the VGG model, we can feed the high-resolution
image to trained network for style transfer. In Figure 10,
we can change the style of input to given text conditions
while maintaining the details of the content. More results
are in Supplementary Materials.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a novel image style transfer
framework to transfer the semantic texture information
only using text condition. Using novel patchCLIP loss and
augmentation scheme, we obtained realistic style transfer
results by simply changing the text conditions without ever
requiring any style images. Experimental results demon-
strated that our framework produced the state-of-the-art
image style transfer. For the discussions on limitations and
social impacts, please refer to our Supplementary Materials.
Acknowledgement: This research was supported by Field-
oriented Technology Development Project for Customs
Administration through National Research Foundation of
Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT and
Korea Customs Service(NRF-2021M3I1A1097938), and
supported by Institute of Information & communications
Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIT) (No.2019-0-00075, Artificial
Intelligence Graduate School Program(KAIST))
18069


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Eirikur Agustsson and Radu Timofte. Ntire 2017 challenge
on single image super-resolution: Dataset and study. In The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR) Workshops , July 2017. 8
[2] Yingying Deng, Fan Tang, Weiming Dong, Wen Sun, Feiyue
Huang, and Changsheng Xu. Arbitrary style transfer via
multi-adaptation network. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia , pages 2719–2727,
2020. 2
[3] Michael Elad and Peyman Milanfar. Style transfer via tex-
ture synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,
26(5):2338–2351, 2017. 2
[4] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 12873–12883, 2021. 7
[5] Kevin Frans, LB Soros, and Olaf Witkowski. Clipdraw:
exploring text-to-drawing synthesis through language-image
encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14843 , 2021. 4
[6] Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik,
and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided do-
main adaptation of image generators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.00946 , 2021. 3, 6
[7] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Im-
age style transfer using convolutional neural networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 2414–2423, 2016. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6
[8] Kibeom Hong, Seogkyu Jeon, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu, and
Hyeran Byun. Domain-aware universal style transfer. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision , pages 14609–14617, 2021. 2
[9] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in
real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. , pages 1501–1510, 2017. 2, 5, 7
[10] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual
losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In
European conference on computer vision , pages 694–711.
Springer, 2016. 2
[11] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability,
and variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196 , 2017. 6
[12] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. , pages 4401–4410,
2019. 3
[13] Dmytro Kotovenko, Matthias Wright, Arthur Heimbrecht,
and Bjorn Ommer. Rethinking style transfer: From pix-
els to parameterized brushstrokes. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 12196–12205, 2021. 2
[14] Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip HS
Torr. Manigan: Text-guided image manipulation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 7880–7889, 2020. 3
[15] Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
Learning linear transformations for fast image and videostyle transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3809–
3817, 2019. 2
[16] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal style transfer via feature
transforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08086 , 2017. 2
[17] Yijun Li, Ming-Yu Liu, Xueting Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and
Jan Kautz. A closed-form solution to photorealistic image
stylization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 453–468, 2018. 2
[18] Songhua Liu, Tianwei Lin, Dongliang He, Fu Li, Meiling
Wang, Xin Li, Zhengxing Sun, Qian Li, and Errui Ding.
Adaattn: Revisit attention mechanism in arbitrary neural
style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision , pages 6649–6658, 2021. 2,
5
[19] Dae Young Park and Kwang Hee Lee. Arbitrary style
transfer with style-attentional networks. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 5880–5888, 2019. 2, 5
[20] Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or,
and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-driven manipulation of
stylegan imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision , pages 2085–2094,
2021. 2, 3, 6
[21] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-
ing transferable visual models from natural language super-
vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020 , 2021. 2, 3, 4
[22] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-
net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmen-
tation. In International Conference on Medical image com-
puting and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241.
Springer, 2015. 4
[23] Jan Svoboda, Asha Anoosheh, Christian Osendorfer, and
Jonathan Masci. Two-stage peer-regularized feature recom-
bination for arbitrary image style transfer. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 13816–13825, 2020. 2, 5
[24] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Im-
proved texture networks: Maximizing quality and diversity
in feed-forward stylization and texture synthesis. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 6924–6932, 2017. 2
[25] Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang,
Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong He. Attngan: Fine-
grained text to image generation with attentional generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1316–
1324, 2018. 3
[26] Wenju Xu, Chengjiang Long, Ruisheng Wang, and Guanghui
Wang. Drb-gan: A dynamic resblock generative adversar-
ial network for artistic style transfer. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 6383–6392, 2021. 2
[27] Jaejun Yoo, Youngjung Uh, Sanghyuk Chun, Byeongkyu
Kang, and Jung-Woo Ha. Photorealistic style transfer via
18070


==== Page 10 ====
wavelet transforms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision , pages 9036–9045,
2019. 2
[28] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiao-
gang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Stack-
gan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked
generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pages 5907–
5915, 2017. 2, 3
[29] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiao-
gang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Stack-
gan++: Realistic image synthesis with stacked generative ad-
versarial networks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 41(8):1947–1962, 2018. 2, 3
18071


