==== Page 1 ====
electronics
Review
CNN Variants for Computer Vision: History, Architecture,
Application, Challenges and Future Scope
Dulari Bhatt1, Chirag Patel2,*, Hardik Talsania1, Jigar Patel1, Rasmika Vaghela1, Sharnil Pandya3
,
Kirit Modi4
and Hemant Ghayvat5
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Bhatt, D.; Patel, C.; Talsania,
H.; Patel, J.; Vaghela, R.; Pandya, S.;
Modi, K.; Ghayvat, H. CNN Variants
for Computer Vision: History,
Architecture, Application, Challenges
and Future Scope. Electronics 2021 ,10,
2470. https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics10202470
Academic Editor: Giovanni Dimauro
Received: 2 September 2021
Accepted: 25 September 2021
Published: 11 October 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Research Scholar, Parul University, Gujarat 382030, India; dulari.bos@gmail.com (D.B.);
hardik.talsania@gujgov.edu.in (H.T.); jigarsharp@gmail.com (J.P .); rashmika.vaghela@gujgov.edu.in (R.V .)
2Computer Science & Engineering, DEPSTAR, Changa, Gujarat 388421, India
3Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International (Deemed) University, Pune 412115, India;
sharnil.pandya@sitpune.edu.in
4Sankalchand Patel College of Engineering, Sankalchand Patel University, Visnagar 384315, India;
kjmodi.fet@spu.ac.in
5Computer Science Department, Faculty of Technology, Linnaeus University, P G Vejdes väg,
351 95 Växjö, Sweden; hemant.ghayvat@lnu.se
*Correspondence: chiragpatel.dce@charusat.ac.in or chirag453@gmail.com
Abstract: Computer vision is becoming an increasingly trendy word in the area of image processing.
With the emergence of computer vision applications, there is a signiﬁcant demand to recognize objects
automatically. Deep CNN (convolution neural network) has beneﬁted the computer vision commu-
nity by producing excellent results in video processing, object recognition, picture classiﬁcation and
segmentation, natural language processing, speech recognition, and many other ﬁelds. Furthermore,
the introduction of large amounts of data and readily available hardware has opened new avenues
for CNN study. Several inspirational concepts for the progress of CNN have been investigated,
including alternative activation functions, regularization, parameter optimization, and architectural
advances. Furthermore, achieving innovations in architecture results in a tremendous enhancement
in the capacity of the deep CNN. Signiﬁcant emphasis has been given to leveraging channel and
spatial information, with a depth of architecture and information processing via multi-path. This
survey paper focuses mainly on the primary taxonomy and newly released deep CNN architectures,
and it divides numerous recent developments in CNN architectures into eight groups. Spatial
exploitation, multi-path, depth, breadth, dimension, channel boosting, feature-map exploitation,
and attention-based CNN are the eight categories. The main contribution of this manuscript is
in comparing various architectural evolutions in CNN by its architectural change, strengths, and
weaknesses. Besides, it also includes an explanation of the CNN’s components, the strengths and
weaknesses of various CNN variants, research gap or open challenges, CNN applications, and the
future research direction.
Keywords: CNN; feature-map exploitation; attention-based CNN; deep CNN; object recognition;
computer vision
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence is bridging the gap between machine and human talents at a
breakneck pace. Many academics and enthusiasts are working on various AI ﬁeld elements
to develop incredible things. One such incredible ﬁeld includes the domain of computer
vision. The primary goal of computer vision is to make machines see the world the same
way as humans. Well-known computer vision tasks include image detection, image tagging,
image recognition, image classiﬁcation, image analysis, video analysis, natural language
processing, and so on. Deep learning advancements in computer vision have piqued the
interest of numerous academics over the years. CNN is used to construct the majority of
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10202470 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics

==== Page 2 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 2 of 28
computer vision algorithms. A convolutional neural network is a method of deep learning
that takes an input image and assigns importance (learnable biases and weights) to various
objects in the image, distinguishing one from the other [1].
In comparison to other methods, CNN requires less preprocessing. Therefore, a CNN
is the most effective learning algorithm for comprehending picture material [ 1]. Further-
more, it has demonstrated exceptional image classiﬁcation, recognition, segmentation, and
retrieval [ 2]. The accomplishment of CNN has piqued the interest of people outside of
academia. Microsoft, Google, AT&T, NEC, and Facebook are among the companies engag-
ing in the development and advancement of CNN architecture [ 3]. In addition, they have
active research groups that are investigating novel CNN designs. At the moment, deep
CNN-based models are being used by the majority of front-runners in image processing
and computer vision competitions. As a result, there are several variants of the basic CNN
design. This manuscript covers an introduction to CNN, the evolution of CNN over time,
various features of CNN design, and the architectural analysis of each type of CNN with
its beneﬁts and drawbacks.
CNN reassembles regular neural networks, but it has an appealing characteristic made
up of neurons with learnable weights and biases. Every neuron receives many inputs
and then performs a dot product, which is optionally followed by nonlinearity [ 4]. As
a result, CNN functions as a feed-forward kernel, undergoing many modiﬁcations [ 4].
The primary goal of convolution is to extract meaningful features from locally associated
data sources. The convolutional kernels’ output is then fed into the activation function,
which aids in learning intellections and embeds nonlinearity in the feature space. This
nonlinearity produces different activation functions for each reaction, making it easier to
learn meaningful dissimilarities in images. Furthermore, a nonlinear activation function
produces an output that is frequently trailed by subsampling; this supports summarizing
the outputs, which makes the input insensitive to geometrical deceptions.
Najafabadi, in 2015, investigated that CNN has an automatic feature extraction capa-
bility that eliminates the requirement for a distinct feature extractor [ 5]. As a result, CNN
can learn from a good representation of internal raw pixels without exhausting processing.
Automatic feature extraction, multitasking, weight sharing, and hierarchical learning are
some of CNN’s appealing features [6].
CNN was formerly known as LeNet. LeNet was named after its creator, Yann LeCun.
Yann LeCun created a network for handwritten digit identiﬁcation in 1989, building on
the work of Kunihiko Fukushima, a Japanese scientist who designed the neocognitron
(essential image recognition neural network). The LeNet-5, which describes the primitive
components of CNN, might be regarded as the beginning of CNN. LeNet-5 was not well-
known because of hardware equipment paucity, particularly GPUs (graphics processing
units). As a result, there was little research on CNN between 1990 and 2000. The success
of AlexNet in 2012 opened the door for computer vision applications, and many various
forms of CNNs, such as the R-CNN series, have been raised. CNN models now are quite
different from LeNet, although they are all based on it.
In recent years, several exciting survey papers have been published on deep CNN. For
example, (Asifullah Khan et al., 2018) examined prominent structures from 2012 to 2018 and
their major components. (Alzubaidi et al., 2021) reviewed deep learning concepts, CNN
architecture, challenges, and future trends. This paper was the ﬁrst paper to include various
DL aspects. It also includes the impact of CPU, GPU, and FPGA on various deep learning
approaches. It includes one section about the introduction to CNN and its architecture.
(Smarandache et al., 2019) reviewed trends in convolutional neural network architecture.
This paper primarily focuses on the design of the architecture of around 10 well-known
CNN models.
Similarly, there are many authors, such as Liu (2017), LeCun (2010), Guo (2016), and
Srinivas (2016), who have discussed CNN’s many applications and tactics [ 4,6–8]. As a
result, this survey exempliﬁes the essential taxonomy discovered in the most recent and
well-known CNN designs reported between 2012 and 2021. This manuscript includes

==== Page 3 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 3 of 28
around eight major categories of CNN based on its architecture evolution. This investiga-
tion reveals the fundamental structure of CNN, as well as its roots. It also represents a wide
range of CNN architectures, from their conception to their most current advancements
and achievements. This survey will assist readers in developing architectural novelties in
convolutional neural networks by providing a more profound theoretical knowledge of
CNN design concepts.
The primary goal of this survey is to highlight the most signiﬁcant components of
CNN to provide readers with a comprehensive picture of CNN from a single survey
paper. In addition, this survey will assist readers in learning more about CNN and CNN
variants, which helps to improve the ﬁeld. The contributions of this survey paper are
summarized below:
This is the ﬁrst review that almost provides each detail about CNN for computer
vision, its history, CNN architecture designs, its merits and demerits, application, and the
future work to take upon in a single paper.
 This review assists readers in making sound decisions about their research work in
the area of CNN for computer vision;
 This manuscript includes existing CNN architectures and their architectural limita-
tions, leading it to design new architecture. Furthermore, it clearly explains the merits
and demerits of almost all popular CNN variants;
 It divides the CNN architecture into eight categories based on their implementation
criteria, which is an exciting part of this survey paper;
 Various applications of CNN are also explained so that readers can also take on any
other application area of CNN other than computer vision;
 It provides a clear listing of future research trends in the area of CNN for computer vision.
The organization of this survey paper includes the ﬁrst section, which presents a
methodical comprehension of CNN. Then, it explains CNN’s similarities to the primate’s
visual brain. Section 2, the Literature Review, is divided into two subsections. The outline
of the CNN components is explained in Section 2.1, and Section 2.2 describes various
profound CNN architectural evolutions. It also includes CNN’s eight broad categories of
architectural advancements. Section 3 explores CNN applications in a variety of disciplines,
Section 4 discusses current issues in CNN architecture, and Section 5 discusses the future
scope of research. Finally, Section 6 concludes a survey of various CNN variants.
2. Literature Review
This section includes fundamental components of the convolutional neural network. It
describes the basic architecture of CNN to further understand CNN architectural variants.
It also includes various competitive recent advancements in CNN architectures.
2.1. CNN Fundamentals
CNN is a computer vision deep learning network that can recognize and classify
picture features. CNN architecture was inﬂuenced by the organization and functions
of the visual cortex. It is designed to resemble the connections between neurons in the
human brain.
Image recognition is a task that humans have been performing from childhood. Chil-
dren were taught to identify fruits and vegetables, such as apples, bananas, and watermel-
ons. Is it possible to teach computers to perform the same thing? Is it feasible for a human
to build a machine that can see and understand just like humans? The answer is yes to all
of these questions. Humans must demonstrate an algorithm of millions of images before
a computer can generalize the input and make predictions for images that it has never
seen before, just as humans must demonstrate an algorithm of millions of images before a
computer can generalize the input and make predictions for images that it has never seen
before. The question is: how does the image appear to computers? Figure 1 Humans can
see the rose, but computers can see the numerical data. As a result, developing a computer
that can analyze and recognize images is a complex task.

==== Page 4 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 4 of 28
Figure 1. How computers visualize an image.
People used to add the numbers of an image of roses or, for example, target images
in the database and write a program to compare the target image with the database to
see if it contained a rose or a speciﬁc target image, but the main limitation was that it
could not recognize any single image that was not in the database. As a result, there was a
high demand for a network that automatically recognized and identiﬁed spatial properties
in images.
Figure 2 shows various CNN components. To learn the advancements in CNN architec-
ture, it is very important to understand the various CNN components and their applications.
Figure 2. CNN components.
2.1.1. Input Image
Pixels are the building blocks of a computer image. They are the visual data’s binary
representation. A succession of pixels ranging from 0–255 are arranged in a matrix-like
arrangement in the digital image. Its pixel value speciﬁes each pixel’s brightness and hue.
When humans see an image, their brains process a vast amount of information in the ﬁrst
second. Each neuron in the human brain has its own receptive ﬁeld and is connected to
other neurons in order to cover the full visual ﬁeld. The receptive ﬁeld is a small proportion
of the visual ﬁeld, where each neuron in the biological vision system responds to stimuli.
In the same way, each neuron in CNN analyzes data in only its receptive area. The CNN
layers are programmed to identify simpler patterns ﬁrst, such as lines and curves, before
progressing to more complex patterns, such as faces and objects. As a result, it is plausible
to claim that using a CNN may provide vision to computers.
2.1.2. Convolution Layer
The convolution layer is very important layer in the CNN architecture. It takes an
image as an input and uses a 3 3 or 5 5 ﬁlter, as shown in Figure 3.

==== Page 5 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 5 of 28
Figure 3. Convolution layer [7].
In Figure 4, the green ﬁlter slides over the input image, which is displayed in blue,
one pixel at a time, starting at the top left. As it moves over the image, the ﬁlter multiplies
its values with the image’s overlapping values, and then adds them all together to generate
a single value output for each overlap until the entire image is visited.
Figure 4. Input and ﬁlter image [8].
The kernel has the same depth as the input image when images have many channels,
such as RGB (red, green, blue). As shown in Figure 5, matrix multiplication is conducted
between the Kn and In stacks ([K1, I1], [K2,I2], [K3,I3]), and the results are then combined
with the bias to produce a dense one-depth channel. Overlying receptive ﬁelds exist
for each neuron in the output matrix. The ﬁrst ConvLayer usually captures low-level
characteristics, such as the gradient orientation, edges, color, and so forth. The design
adapts to the high-level characteristics by adding layers, giving us a network with a
comprehensive comprehension of the images in the dataset. Figures 5 and 6 shows the
steps of convolution.
Figure 5. Calculation of ﬁlter slides over input image [8].

==== Page 6 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 6 of 28
Figure 6. First step of convolution [8].
Feature Extraction
CNN is well-known for its ability to extract characteristics automatically. Figure 7
shows matrix calculation for RGB image. Padding is frequently employed in CNN in order
to keep the size of the feature maps from shrinking at each layer, which is undesirable. The
operation produces two types of outcomes:
1. A type in which the dimensionality of the convoluted feature is reduced in comparison
to the input;
2. A type in which the dimensionality is not reduced but is either enhanced or main-
tained. Padding is used to satisfy this task.
Figure 7. Matrix calculation.
For example, when the 5 51 picture is reinforced into a 7 71 image and then
applied to the 3 31 kernel over it, the complex matrix is observed to be of dimensions
551, as shown in Figure 8. It indicates that the output image has the same dimensions
as the input image (same padding). If the same procedure is conducted without padding,
an image with reduced dimensions can be received in the output. As a result, a 5 51
image will become a 3 31 image.

==== Page 7 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 7 of 28
Figure 8. Padding [8].
The kernel passes through the width and height of the picture during the forwarding
pass. It generates a visual representation of the receptive region in question. It generates
an activation map, a two-dimensional representation of the image that shows the kernel’s
response at each spatial position of the image. A stride is the size of the kernel when it
slides. Assume the input image is WWDin size. If the number of kernels with a
spatial dimension of F, stride S, and padding Pis unknown, the output volume can be
calculated using the following formula:
Wout =W F+2P
S+1
This will produce an output with size Wout WoutDout.
2.1.3. Pooling Layer
After obtaining the feature maps, it is necessary to add a pooling (sub-sampling)
layer in CNN, next to a convolution layer. The job of the pooling layer is to shrink the
convolved feature’s spatial size. As a result of the dimensionality reduction, the computer
power required to process the data is reduced. This also aids in the extraction of leading
characteristics that are positional and rotational invariant, which preserves the model’s
practical training. Pooling reduces the training time while also preventing over-ﬁtting.
There are two forms of pooling: maximum pooling and average pooling.
Maximum Pooling
The tensor is the input to the pooling layer. A kernel of size n n (22 in the
aforementioned example) is moved across the matrix in the case of maximum pooling, as
illustrated in Figure 9, and the maximum value is chosen and placed in the appropriate
location of the output matrix.
Figure 9. Max pooling [8].

==== Page 8 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 8 of 28
Average Pooling
A kernel of size n n is shifted across the matrix in the average pooling, and the
average of all of the values is obtained for each point and placed in the corresponding
position of the output matrix. This is repeated for each of the input tensor’s channels. As
a result, we have the output tensor. It is important to keep in mind that, while pooling
reduces the image’s height and breadth, the number of channels (depth) remains the same.
The pooling layer calculates a summary statistic of the surrounding outputs to replace
the network output at certain points. As a result, it aids in reducing the representation’s
spatial dimension, which reduces the amount of computation and weights required. The
pooling procedure is carried out independently on each slice of the representation. The
average of the rectangle neighborhood, the L2 norm of the rectangle neighborhood, and a
weighted average depending on the distance from the central pixel are all pooling functions
as shown in Figure 10. The most frequent method, however, is maximum pooling, which
reports the neighborhood’s most signiﬁcant output.
Figure 10. Average pooling [8].
2.1.4. Nonlinearity Layer (Activation Function)
The activation function plays a vital role in CNN layers. The output of the ﬁlter is
provided to another mathematical function called an activation function. ReLu, which
stands for rectiﬁed linear unit, is the most common activation function used in CNN feature
extraction. The main motive behind using the activation function is to conclude the output
of neural networks, such as yes or no. The activation function maps the output values
between  1 to 1 or 0 to 1, etc. (it depends on the activation function). The activation
functions can be categorized into two types:
1. Linear Activation Function This uses function F(x) = CY. It takes the input and
multiplies it with constant c (weight of each neuron), and produces the output signal
proportional to the input. The linear function can be better than the step function, as
it only give the yes or no answer and not the multiple answers.
2. Non-linear Activation Functions In modern neural networks, non-linear activation
functions are used. They enable the model to build complicated mappings between
the network’s inputs and outputs, which are critical for learning and modelling
complex data, including images, video, audio, and non-linear or high-dimensional
data sets.
2.1.5. Fully Connected Layer
A fully connected layer is nothing more than a feed-forward neural network as shown
in Figure 11. Fully connected layers are found at the network’s very bottom layers. A fully
connected layer receives input from the ﬁnal pooling or convolutional layer’s output layer,
which is ﬂattened before being delivered as input. Flattening the output entails unrolling
all values from the output that were obtained after the last pooling or convolutional layer
into a vector (3D matrix).

==== Page 9 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 9 of 28
Figure 11. Fully connected Layer [8].
Adding an FC layer is a simple technique to learn nonlinear combinations of high-level
features represented by the convolutional layer’s output. In that space, the FC layer is
learning a possibly nonlinear function.
2.2. Architectural Evolution of Deep CNNs
Figure 12. Describes the various architectural categories of CNN variants. This section
explains those all categories in detail.
Figure 12. CNN variants categories.

==== Page 10 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 10 of 28
2.2.1. Spatial Exploitation-Based CNNs
There are many parameters in CNN, including biases, weights, the number of layers,
neurons, activation function, stride, ﬁlter size, learning rate, and so on. Different correlation
levels can be investigated using different ﬁlter sizes because convolutional operations
consider the vicinity (locality) of input pixels. Different ﬁlter sizes encompass diverse
levels of granularity; typically, ﬁne-grained information is extracted by ﬁlters in small sizes,
whereas coarse-grained information is extracted by ﬁlters in large sizes. As a result, in
the early 2000s, spatial ﬁlters were used by investigators to increase performance. It was
observed that there is relationship between a spatial ﬁlter and network learning. Various
experiments undertaken during this time period indicated that, by adjusting ﬁlters, CNN
could perform more effectively on coarse and ﬁne-grained details.
2.2.2. CNN Based on Depth
The main idea behind deep CNN architecture is that, with the help of additional map-
pings (nonlinear) and more advanced feature hierarchies, the network can approximate the
goal function effectively [ 9]. The network’s depth has been an important parameter for su-
pervised training. Deep networks represent speciﬁc function classes more effectively than
shallow systems. In 2001, [ 10] proposed a theorem called “universal approximation”. It
explained that a single hidden layer may approximate any function. However, this happens
at the cost of an exponentially enormous number of neurons and a computationally unreal-
istic result. Bengio and Delalleau postulated in 2011 that deeper networks can maintain
the network’s theatrical impact at a lesser cost [ 11,12]. Deep networks are computationally
more efﬁcient for complicated operations, according to Bengio, who demonstrated this
empirically in 2013 [ 11]. VGG and Inception performed best in the ILSVRC-2014 competi-
tion, reinforcing the notion that depth is an important parameter in regulating the learning
ability of networks [13–17].
2.2.3. CNNs with Multiple Paths
Deep CNNs are often good at complicated jobs. Sometimes they may suffer from
performance degradation, explosion issues, or gradient disappearing, which are produced
by increasing the depth rather than overﬁtting. The vanishing gradient problem leads to
an increased test error and training error [ 18]. The theory of cross-layer connectivity or
multi-path was proposed for deep training networks. Shortcut connections or numerous
pathways can have a connection from one layer to another analytically by evading some
in-between levels, allowing for the customized ﬂow of information between the layers [ 19].
The network is split into the sections using cross-layer connectivity. These pathways solves
the vanishing gradient problem by extending the gradient to lower layers.
2.2.4. Feature-Map Exploitation Based CNNs
CNN became popular for MV tasks due to its capacity to carry out hierarchical learning
and automatic feature extraction [ 4]. The performance of classiﬁcation, segmentation,
and detection modules is heavily inﬂuenced by feature selection. CNN selects features
dynamically by adjusting the weights associated with a kernel, also known as a mask.
Furthermore, different feature extraction stages are performed, allowing for various types
of features (known as feature maps or channels in CNN). However, some of the feature
maps have little or no function in object discrimination [ 20]. Excessive feature sets may
provide a noise effect, leading to the over-ﬁtting of the network. This implies that, in
addition to network engineering, the selection of feature maps can play a crucial role in
increasing network generalization.
2.2.5. Multi-Connection Depending on the Width
During CNN advancements, the emphasis was mainly on leveraging the potential
of the depth and the efﬁciency of connections in network regularization during 2012 to
2015. Kawaguchi, in 2019, discovered that the network width is equally essential [ 21].

==== Page 11 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 11 of 28
This implies that, in addition to depth, width is an important component in developing
learning philosophies. It is shown that neural networks with ReLU activation functions
must be wide enough to retain a universal approximation property while also increasing
in depth [ 22]. One signiﬁcant issue with deep neural network architectures is that several
layers may fail to learn valuable features. Although stacking many layers (raising depth)
may learn varied feature representations, it does not always boost the NN’s learning power.
Furthermore, any deep network cannot arbitrarily approximate a class of continuous
functions on a compact set if the network’s maximum width is not greater than the input
dimension [ 23]. Thus, the research focus switched from deep and narrow designs to wide
and thin architectures to address this issue.
2.2.6. Exploitation-Based Feature-Map (ChannelFMap) CNNs
Because of its capacity to perform hierarchical learning and automatic feature extrac-
tion, CNN has received many interests in computer vision problems [ 4]. The performance
of classiﬁcation, segmentation, and detection modules is heavily inﬂuenced by feature
selection. CNN selects features dynamically by adjusting the weights linked with a kernel,
also known as a mask. In addition, many feature extraction phases are employed in CNN to
mine various types of features. However, some feature maps have little or no signiﬁcance in
object discrimination. Massive feature sets may provide a noise effect, causing the network
to overﬁt. This implies that, in addition to network engineering, the selection of feature
maps can play an essential role in increasing network generalization. Feature maps and
channel terms are frequently used interchangeably in the literature.
2.2.7. CNNs That Are Based on Attention
Diverse levels of abstraction play an essential role in determining the NN’s discrimi-
nation power. Different hierarchies of abstractions focused on attributes relevant to picture
localization and recognition play an essential role in learning. This effect is known as
attention in the human visual system. Humans can view any scene by integrating partial
glances of it and focusing on context-relevant aspects. This approach focuses on speciﬁed
regions and comprehends numerous interpretations of items at a speciﬁc spot, hence im-
proving visual structure capture. RNN and LSTM incorporate a more or less comparable
interpretation. RNN and LSTM networks use attention modules as progressive feature,
and the new tasters are weighted based on their recurrence in earlier rounds. The concept
of attention in the convolutional neural network is used by various scholars to improve
representation and overcome computational limitations. This concept of attention also con-
tributes to CNN becoming intelligent enough to distinguish items even in busy backdrops
and complex scenarios.
2.2.8. Dimension-Based CNN
The classic convolutions layer encodes both channel-wise and spatial information
simultaneously, but it is computationally expensive. The efﬁciency of ordinary convolu-
tions was enhanced by the introduction of separable (or depth-wise separable) convolu-
tions [ 7], which encode spatial and channel-wise information separately using point-wise
and depth-wise convolutions, respectively. This factorization is far more efﬁcient, but it
places a considerable computational burden on point-wise convolutions, making them
a computational bottleneck. Table 1 shows summary of various CNN variants with its
architectural categories.

==== Page 12 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 12 of 28
Table 1. Performance summary of various CNN variants with its architectural categories.
Architecture Name Year Category Main Role Parameter Error Rate
LeNet 1998 Spatial ExploitationIt was the ﬁrst prevalent
CNN architecture0.060 Mdist]MNIST: 0.8
MNIST: 0.95
AlexNet 2012 Spatial Exploitation Deeper and wider
compared to LeNet
 Used RELU, dropout
and overlap pooling
GPUs NVIDIA GTX 58060 M ImageNet: 16.4
ZfNet 2014 Spatial ExploitationProvided visualization of
intermediate layers60 M ImageNet: 11.7
VGG 2014 Spatial ExploitationIt used small-sized kernels
and had homogeneous
topology138 M ImageNet: 7.3
GoogleNet 2015 Spatial ExploitationIt was ﬁrst architecture to
introduce block concept. It
used split transform and
then merge idea4 M ImageNet: 6.7
InceptionV-3 2015 Depth + WidthIt was able to handle
bottleneck issue and
applied small ﬁlters rather
than using large ﬁlters23.6 MImageNet: 3.5
Multi-Crop: 3.58
Single-Crop: 5.6
Highway Network 2015 Depth + Multi-PathFirst architecture to
introduce the idea of multi
path2.3 M CIFAR-10: 7.76
Inception V-4 2016 Depth + WidthIt used asymmetric ﬁlters
with split transform and
merge concept35 M ImageNet: 4.01
Inception ResNet 2016Depth + Width +
Multi-PathIt used residual link with
split transform and merge
concept55.8 M ImageNet: 3.52
ResNet 2016 Depth + Multi-PathIdentiﬁed mapping-based
skip connections with
residual learning25.6 M 1.7 MImageNet: 3.6
CIFAR-10: 6.43
Deluge Net 2016 Multi-pathAllowed cross layer
information ﬂow in deep
networks20.2 MCIFAR-10: 3.76
CIFAR-100: 19.02
Fractal Net 2016 Multi-pathVarious path lengths
interacted with each other
without any residual
connection38.6 MCIFAR-10: 7.27
CIFAR-10+: 4.60
CIFAR-10++: 4.59
CIFAR-100: 28.20
CIFAR-100+: 22.49
CIFAR100++: 21.49
WideResNet 2016 WidthWidth was increased in
comparison to depth36.5 MCIFAR-10: 3.89
CIFAR-100: 18.85
Xception 2017 WidthDepth-based convolution
was followed by
point-based convolution22.8 M ImageNet: 0.055
Residual Attention
Neural Network2017 AttentionFirst architecture to
introduce attention
mechanism8.6 MCIFAR-10: 3.90
CIFAR-100: 20.4
ImageNet: 4.8
ResNext 2017 WidthIntroduced cardinality,
homogeneous topology and
grouped convolution68.1 MCIFAR-10: 3.58
CIFAR-100: 17.31
ImageNet: 4.4
Squeeze and
Excittation Network2017Feature-Map
ExploitationModeled interdependencies
between feature maps27.5 M ImageNet 2.3

==== Page 13 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 13 of 28
Table 1. Cont.
Architecture Name Year Category Main Role Parameter Error Rate
DenseNet 2017 Multi-PathCrosslayer information
ﬂow25.6 M 25.6 M 15.3 M
15.3 MCIFAR-10+: 3.46
CIFAR100+: 17.18
CIFAR-10: 5.19
CIFAR-100: 19.64
PolyNet 2017 WidthImplemented structural
diversity and
poly-inception module and
generalized residual unit92 MImageNet: Single:
4.25 Multi: 3.45
PyramidalNet 2017 WidthIncreased width gradually
per unit116.4 M 27.0 M
27.0 MImageNet: 4.7
CIFAR-10: 3.48
CIFAR-100: 17.01
Convolutional Block
Attention Module
(ResNeXt101 (32x4d)
+ CBAM)2018 AttentionIt exploited both spatial and
feature map information48.96 M ImageNet: 5.59
Concurrent Spatial
and Channel
Excitation
Mechanism2018 AttentionImplemented spatial
attention, feature-map
attention, and concurrent
placement of spatial and
channel attention-MALC: 0.12
Visceral: 0.09
Channel Boosted
CNN2018 Channel BoostingBoosted original channels
with additional information
by artiﬁcial channels- -
Competitive Squeeze
and Excitation
Network
CMPE_SE_WRN_282018Feature-Map
ExploitationIdentity mapping and
residual mapping were
both used36.92 M 36.90 MCIFAR-10: 3.58
CIFAR-100: 18.47
EdgeNet 2019 Dimension BasedIntroduced concept of
visual intelligence at the
edge.- -
ESPNetV2 2019 Dimension BasedUsed light-weight and
power-efﬁcient general
purpose CNN- 68% accuracy
DiceNET 2021 Dimension BasedIntroduced
dimension-based CNN,
including height, width,
and depth- 75.1% Accuracy
CNN Competitive Architectures
In the last ﬁve to seven years, around 367 papers showcased an architectural change
in CNN as per dblp (computer science bibliography). These networks have become so
large and deep that visualizing the complete model has become incredibly difﬁcult. In the
year 2000, there were around 100 papers, and 2021 had almost 60 papers until August 2021.
This manuscript showcases some of the benchmarking CNN variants.
Mask R-CNN (2017)
This is a Faster R-CNN extension that improves a branch for forecasting an object mask
simultaneously to the present bounding box branch identiﬁcation. It is straightforward to
train and adds only a minor amount of complexity. Overhead to a faster R-CNN running
at ﬁve frames per second, it is easy to generalize other applications, such as human pose
estimations, within the same framework [24].
G-RCNN (Graph Recognition Convolutional Neural Network) (2021)
This analyses a given image using deep CNN and turns the resulting information into
a program code. It is a network that shares a rich convolutional feature vector calculation
while simultaneously predicting edge and node information. A ﬂow chart is a diagram

==== Page 14 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 14 of 28
that depicts a program’s workﬂow. It is commonly used in textbooks to teach coding
and illustrate applications. Furthermore, ﬂow charts are simple to use, allowing users to
concentrate on programming ideas rather than language intricacies [25].
MFRNet: (2021) (Multi-Level Feature Review Network)
This is a unique CNN architecture for video compression by performing in-loop
ﬁltering and post-processing. It has four multi-level feature review residual dense blocks
(MFRB) linked together in a cascade fashion. A multi-level residual learning framework
and dense collections are used for each MFRB, which collects features from multiple
convolutional layers. To optimize the information ﬂow between these blocks even further,
each reuses high-dimensional features provided by previous MFRB [26].
DDGD: Disentangled Dynamic Graph Deep Generation (2021)
This has demonstrated encouraging results in a variety of disciplines, including
chemical design and protein structure prediction. Existing research, however, has mostly
focused on static graphs. There is much less research carried out on dynamic graphs, which
are important in protein folding, chemical reactions, and human movement applications.
Encompassing existing deep generative models, from static to dynamic, is a difﬁcult
task that necessitates the factorization of static and dynamic features, as well as mutual
interactions between node and edge patterns. This study develops a novel framework of
factorized deep generative models for creating interpretable dynamic graphs [27].
YOLOv4 (2020)
The CNN accuracy is supposed to be improved through plenty of features. The practi-
cal testing of such feature combinations on large datasets is required, as is the theoretical
justiﬁcation of the results. Some aspects, such as batch normalization and residual con-
nections, are only appropriate to speciﬁc models and issues or to small-scale datasets, but
others are suitable to the broad majority of models, tasks, and datasets. To achieve cutting-
edge results, this paper employs novel features, such as cross-mini batch-normalization,
self-adversarial training, cross-stage partial connections, weighted residual connections,
Mish activation, DropBlock regularization, and Mosaic data augmentation, as well as
combining some of them [28].
Net2Vis (2021)
Appropriate visuals are critical for communicating neural network topologies in arti-
cles. While most contemporary deep learning publications include such visualizations, they
are typically constructed shortly before publication, resulting in a lack of standard visual
grammar, signiﬁcant time investment, inaccuracies, and ambiguities. Current automatic
network visualization techniques are designed to diagnose the network and are unsuitable
for creating published visuals. As a result, they have provided a method for automating
this process by converting Keras-speciﬁed network architectures into visualizations directly
inserted into any publication [29].
Sketch-R2CNN (2021)
Sketches in today’s large-scale datasets, such as the recently released QuickDraw
collection, are commonly kept in vector format, with strokes composed of consecutively
sampled points. In contrast, most recent sketch identiﬁcation systems rasterize vector
sketches as binary images before utilizing image classiﬁcation techniques. This paper
proposed a novel single branch network architecture to utilize vector of sketches for
recognition [30].
DeepThin (2021)
For automated car driving applications, a powerful and accurate trafﬁc sign detection
system is necessary. This study created a novel energy-efﬁcient thin but deep convolutional

==== Page 15 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 15 of 28
neural network architecture for trafﬁc sign recognition. It comprises fewer than 50 features
in each convolutional layer, allowing CNN to be trained quickly, even without the assistance
of a GPU [31].
YOLOX: Exceeding YOLO Series in 2021 (2021)
In this study, they offer some substantial improvements to the YOLO series, resulting
in creating a new high-performance detector called YOLOX. To achieve state-of-the-art
results over many models, they switch the YOLO detector to an anchor-free mode and use
other sophisticated detection approaches, such as a decoupled head and the leading label
assignment scheme SimOTA. For YOLO-Nano, with only 0.91 M parameters and 1.08 G
FLOPs, they achieve 25.3 percent AP on COCO, outperforming NanoDet by 1.8 percent
AP; for YOLOv3, one of the most widely used detectors in the industry, they achieve
47.3 percent AP on COCO, outperforming the current best practice by 3.0 percent AP; and
for YOLOX-L, it has roughly the same number of parameters as YOLOv4. Furthermore,
employing a single YOLOX-L model, they achieved ﬁrst place in the Streaming Perception
Challenge (Workshop on Autonomous Driving at CVPR 2021). This paper will beneﬁt
developers and researchers in real-world scenarios, who will also deploy versions that
support ONNX, TensorRT, NCNN, and Openvino [32].
ChebNet: Chebyshev Polynomial Based Graph Convolution (2016)
ChebNet is regarded as one of the ﬁrst and most inﬂuential papers on spectral graph
learning. The multiplication of a signal (node features/attributes) by a kernel is a spectral
convolution. It is analogous to how convolutions work on images, where a kernel value
is multiplied by a pixel value. A spectral convolution kernel is composed by Chebyshev
polynomials. Chebyshev polynomials are orthogonal polynomials with properties that
make them excellent at tasks such as function approximation [33].
GCN: Graph Convolutional Network (2016)
Graphs can be found in a variety of application disciplines, including as bioinfor-
matics, social analysis, and computer vision. The capacity of graphs to capture structural
links among data allows for more insights than evaluating data in isolation. However,
solving learning problems on graphs is generally difﬁcult because (1) many forms of data,
including as photos and text data, are not initially structured as graphs, and (2) the under-
lying connectivity patterns for graph-structured data are frequently complex and diverse.
Representation learning, on the other hand, has found considerable success in a multitude
of disciplines. As a result, learning how to represent graphs in a low-dimensional Euclidean
space while preserving graph features is one feasible answer [34].
FastGCN: Minibatch Training for Graph Convolutional Network (2018)
The recently suggested GCN is an operational graph model for semi-supervised
learning. Furthermore, because of the recursive neighborhood expansion across layers,
training with large, dense graphs possesses time and memory issues. To avoid having
test data accessible at the same time, this paper interprets graph convolutions as integral
transformations of embedding functions. Thus, it uses Monte Carlo techniques to reliably
guess the integrals, which leads to the batched training scheme [35].
LanczosNet (2019)
The Lanczos network (LanczosNet) is a graph convolution network that uses the
Lanczos algorithm to generate low-rank approximations of the graph Laplacian. Using
the Lanczos algorithm’s tridiagonal decomposition, we not only efﬁciently exploit mul-
tiscale information via the quick approximated computation of the matrix power, but
we also develop learnable spectral ﬁlters. LanczosNet, because it is fully differentiable,
allows for both graph kernel learning and learning node embeddings. We demonstrate
the relationship between our LanczosNet and graph-based manifold learning methods,

==== Page 16 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 16 of 28
particularly diffusion maps. On citation networks and the QM8 quantum chemistry dataset,
we compare our model to other recent deep graph networks. Experiment ﬁndings reveal
that our model outperforms the competition in the majority of tasks [36].
SplineCNN (2018)
This is a deep neural network that processes an input that is irregularly structured
and geometric, such as graphs or meshes. The fundamental contribution of the study is
a unique B-spline-based convolution operator that, due to the local support property of
B-spline basis functions, renders the calculation time independent of the kernel size. They
generalize the classic CNN convolution operator by using continuous kernel functions
with a ﬁxed number of trainable weights. In contrast to comparable algorithms that ﬁlter in
the spectrum domain, the suggested method aggregates characteristics only in the spatial
domain. Furthermore, SplineCNN enables complete end-to-end deep architecture training
through using simply the geometric structure as an input rather than handcrafted feature
descriptors [37].
ECC: Edge-Conditioned Convolution (2017)
A prediction of graph-structured data can be used for a wide range of problems. In
this study, they extended the convolution operator from normal grids to random graphs
while avoiding the spectral domain, allowing them to handle graphs of various sizes
and connectivity. Filter weights are conditioned on the speciﬁc edge labels in a vertex’s
proximity to go beyond essential diffusion. They examined the development of deep neural
networks for graph classiﬁcation in conjunction with the selection of the appropriate graph
coarsening [38].
GAT: Graph Attention Network (2017) Ioffe 2013
These are novel architectures that operate on graph-structured data and employ
masked self-attentional layers to address the shortcomings of previous systems that relied
on graph convolutions or their approximations. For example, this paper allows (implicitly)
for specifying different weights to different nodes in a neighborhood by stacking layers
in which nodes can attend over the features of their neighborhoods without requiring
costly matrix operations (such as inversion) or relying on prior knowledge of the graph
structure. As a result, they address a number of critical challenges associated with spectral-
based graph neural networks at the same time, and our model is easily adaptable to both
inductive and transductive situations [39].
3. CNN Application
CNN is used for computer vision tasks, which solve image processing and ML-based
problems, such as object identiﬁcation, image recognition, image classiﬁcation, image
segmentation, and so on [ 40]. However, for training, CNN requires a huge amount of
data. CNN has mostly demonstrated remarkable success in trafﬁc sign identiﬁcation,
medical picture segmentation, face detection, and object identiﬁcation in natural photos,
where there is sufﬁcient labeled data available for training. Figure 13. Shows various
CNN applications.
3.1. Computer Vision and Associated Applications
Computer vision (CV) is the study of creating an artiﬁcial system that can perceive
and extract usable information from visual data, such as photographs and movies. Face
recognition, position estimation, activity recognition, and other applications are all covered
by CV . Face recognition is one of the CV’s most burdensome duties. Face recognition
systems must deal with variances induced by lighting, changes in posture, and various
face emotions. Deep CNN was proposed by Farfade in 2015 for face detection from various
positions and occluded faces [ 41]. In 2016, Zhang used a new multitasking cascaded CNN
for face detection in another study [ 42]. Compared to state-of-the-art approaches, Zhang’s

==== Page 17 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 17 of 28
technique yielded encouraging results. As there is considerable diversity in the body pose,
“pose estimation in human” is the most challenging computer vision task. In 2016, Bulat
and Tzimiropoulos proposed another cascade-based CNN approach [ 43]. The initial heat
maps are recognized in their cascaded architecture, and then the regression is carried
out on the detected heat maps in the second phase. One of the key aspects of activity
detection is action recognition. While creating an action recognition system, there is a key
difﬁculty in solving translations and distortions of features in diverse patterns that belong
to the same action class. Earlier methods included creating motion history photographs,
HMM (hidden Markov models), and action sketch generation. In 2017, Wang suggested
a 3D CNN architecture paired with LSTM for identifying diverse activities from video
frames [ 44]. Wang’s technique surpasses other activity recognition-based algorithms in
tests, according to the results [ 45]. Ji, in 2010, proposed another 3D CNN-based action
recognition system. He used 3D CNN to extract information from many channels of
input frames in his research [ 46]. On the combined extracted feature space, the ﬁnal
action recognition-based model is created. The proposed three-dimensional CNN model is
supervised, trained, and can recognize activities in real-world scenarios.
Figure 13. Applications of CNN.
3.2. Natural Language Processing (NLP)
The main task of natural language processing is to convert the language into a
computer-friendly format. Although RNNs are well-suited to NLP applications, CNN
has also been used in NLP-based applications, including language modeling and analysis.
Since CNN was introduced as a new representation learning method, language modeling,

==== Page 18 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 18 of 28
or sentence shaping, has taken a new turn. Sentence modeling is used to understand
the semantics of sentences to create new and appealing applications that meet customers’
needs. Data are analyzed using traditional information retrieval methods based on words
or attributes, but the essence of the statement is ignored. During training, Kalchbrenner
presented both a dynamic CNN and k-max pooling in 2014. This method discovers word
relationships without relying on external sources, such as a parser or a dictionary [ 47].
Similarly, Collobert and Weston developed a CNN variant to execute multiple NLP-related
tasks simultaneously, such as language modeling, chunking, named entity recognition,
and semantic role modeling. In 2011, Hu proposed a general CNN variant that conducts
sentence matching and can thus be used in various languages in another paper.
3.3. Object Detection and Segmentation
Object detection is concerned with identifying various items in photographs. R-CNN
has recently become popular for object detection. In 2015, Ren proposed a rapid R-CNN for
object detection as an enhancement over R-CNN (a fully connected convolutional neural
network), which is employed in their research for feature extraction and is able to recognize
the boundary and score of objects at various positions concurrently. Similarly, in 2016, Dai
proposed employing fully connected CNNs to detect objects depending on their location.
Gidaris et al. describe another object detection technique based on a multi-region-based
deep CNN that aids in learning semantic aware features [ 48]. On the PASCAL VOC 2007
and 2012 datasets, Gidaris’ method detects items with reasonable accuracy. AutoEncoder-
based CNN architectures have recently demonstrated success in segmentation challenges.
Various appealing CNN designs, including a fully convolutional network, SegNet, mask
region-based CNN (R-CNN), U-Net, and others, have been described in this regard for
both semantic and instance-based segmentation tasks [49].
3.4. Image Classiﬁcation
CNN is widely used for image classiﬁcation tasks. Medical images are one of CNN’s
critical uses, particularly for cancer diagnosis and utilizing histological images. Ref. [ 50]
employed CNN to diagnose breast cancer photos and compared the results to a pre-trained
network with a dataset using handmade descriptors. To deal with the problem of class
skewness, data augmentation is used in the second phase. There are several popular image
classiﬁcation pre-trained networks available. Image classiﬁcation can be easy if a labelled
dataset can be produced for the target image.
3.5. Recognition of Speech
CNN is often regarded as the most effective method to deal with image processing
tasks. However, recent research has revealed that it is also capable of performing well
for speech recognition tasks. Hamid, in 2012, disclosed a speaker-independent voice
recognition system using CNN [ 51]. In comparison to previously published methodologies,
experimental results revealed a ten percent reduction in the mistake rate. Furthermore, after
establishing the network, the performance of CNN is tested utilizing the pre-training phase.
Experiments revealed that almost all of the architectures investigated perform well in the
vocabulary and phone recognition tasks. CNN is becoming recognized for speech emotion
recognition these days. For identifying speech emotions, Huang et al. employed CNN
in conjunction with LSTM [ 52]. CNN was trained on both verbal and nonverbal portions
of speech in Huang’s technique, and CNN learned characteristics that were employed by
LSTM to recognize speech emotions.
3.6. Video Processing
Video processing algorithms use the temporal and spatial information of videos. Many
researchers have employed CNN to solve challenges connected to video processing [ 53].
For example, a straightforward border detecting method based on CNN was suggested.
TAGs are created using CNN in Tong’s method [ 19]. During the experiment, TAGs are

==== Page 19 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 19 of 28
merged against a single shot to annotate that particular video. In 2016, Wang used 3D CNN
and LSTM to distinguish activity in the video. In 2016, Frizzi employed CNN in another
technique to identify some emergencies, such as ﬁre or smoke, in the video [ 54]. According
to Frizzi, CNN architecture is able to extract prominent characteristics and also perform
the classiﬁcation task. However, the collecting of geographical and temporal information is
a time-consuming operation in action recognition. Shi Y, in 2017, presented a three-stream-
based structure to solve the shortcomings of existing feature descriptors [ 55]. This structure
is capable of extracting spatial–temporal characteristics as well as short and long-term
motion inside the video. CNN uses bi-directional LSTM to recognize activity in the video,
as stated in the paper of [ 56]. Their strategy is divided into two parts. First, the sixth
frame of the videos is used to extract features in the ﬁrst phase. Then, the bi-directional
LSTM framework is used in the second phase to utilize sequential information between
frame features.
3.7. Images with Low Resolution
Different researchers in ML have employed CNN-based image enhancement ap-
proaches to improve image resolution [ 57–59]. Peng et al. employed a deep CNN-based
technique to identify items in low-resolution pictures [ 58]. LR-CNN was introduced by
Chevalier et al. for low-resolution picture categorization [ 57]. Kawashima et al. describe
another deep-learning-based technique in which convolutional layers and an LSTM layer
are used to discern action from low-resolution thermal pictures [59].
3.8. System with Limited Resources
In 2017, Bettoni built CNN on top of the FPGA architecture to deal with power
efﬁciency and mobility for embedded devices. Despite its high processing cost, CNN has
been effectively used to develop several machine-learning-based embedded devices. For
example, the number plate recognition system, created by Lee et al. is able to instantly
recognize the number written on the license plate [ 60]. This embedded recognition system
is based on a deep learning approach, which is based on a simple AlexNet architecture.
Another solution uses the FPGA embedded platform to efﬁciently perform various CNN-
based machine learning tasks [ 61]. Similarly, CNN designs with fewer resources, such as
MobileNet, ShufﬂeNet, ANTNets, and others, are ideal for mobile devices [ 62]. Researchers
have combined the MobileNet architecture with SSD to use MobileNet’s lightweight
architecture, which can be quickly installed on resource-constrained hardware and can
learn enhanced representations from incoming [63].
3.9. CNN for Various Dimensional Data
Not only has CNN performed well on images, but it has also performed well on 1D
data. As a result of its high feature extraction ability, 1D-CNN is becoming more popular
than other ML methods. For intrusion detection in network trafﬁc, Vinayakumar, in 2017,
used 1D-CNN in conjunction with LSTM, RNN, and gated recurrent units [ 64]. Vinaykumar
and co-researchers tested the proposed models and found that CNN outperforms classical
ML models by a large margin. They developed an end-to-end system that can automatically
extract damage-sensitive features from accelerated signals for detection purposes. Similarly,
Yildirim et al. showed the successful use of CNN for the 1D biomedical dataset [ 65]. Three-
dimensional shape models are becoming more readily available and easier to collect,
making 3D data essential for item classiﬁcation advancement. To overcome this challenge,
current state-of-the-art approaches rely on CNN. CNN based on volumetric representations
and CNN based on multi-view representations are two forms of CNN that have recently
been developed. Existing volumetric CNN architectures and techniques cannot completely
harness the power of 3D representations, as evidenced by empirical results from these two
types of CNN. According to a comprehensive review of existing techniques, this work
tries to improve both the volumetric CNN and multi-view CNN. To that purpose, two
distinct network architectures of volumetric CNN are introduced. In addition, we look into

==== Page 20 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 20 of 28
multi-view CNN, where multi-resolution ﬁltering is used in 3D. Overall, both volumetric
CNN and multi-view CNN outperform existing state-of-the-art approaches. Extensive
experiments are provided to test underlying design decisions, allowing us to better grasp
the space of object categorization algorithms possible for 3D data.
3.10. Object Counting
One of the essential jobs in computer vision is counting objects in images. This has
a wide range of applications, including microbiology (e.g., counting bacterial colonies
in a Petri dish), surveillance (e.g., counting people), agriculture (e.g., counting fruits or
vegetables), medicine (e.g., counting tumor cells in histopathological images), and wildlife
conservation (e.g., counting animals). Counting things is a simple task for humans, but
it can be difﬁcult for computers. Pre-trained YOLO can count the number of objects by
removing the bottom prediction layer and feeding the characteristics to a classiﬁcation
feed-forward layer.
4. CNN Challenges
Deep CNNs have shown to be effective for data that are either time-series or have
a grid-like structure. Deep CNN architectures have also been used to solve several addi-
tional problems.
Different researchers have enthralling arguments about the performance of CNN on
various ML tasks. The following are some of the difﬁculties encountered while training
deep CNN models:
 As deep CNNs are typically a black box, they may be challenging to comprehend and
explain. As a result, verifying them can be challenging at times;
 According to Szegedy et al. (2013), training a CNN on noisy picture data can increase
the misclassiﬁcation error (Szegedy et al., 2014). Adding a small amount of random
noise to the input image can deceive the network, causing the original and slightly
agitated variant to be classiﬁed incorrectly;
 Each CNN layer is organized in such a manner that it extracts problem-speciﬁc
information associated with the task automatically. In some of the cases, before
classiﬁcation, some jobs require knowledge of the behavior of features retrieved by
deep CNN. Thus, the feature visualization concept in CNN may be helpful. Similarly,
Hinton stated that lower levels should only pass on their knowledge to the relevant
neurons of the following layer. Hinton presented an intriguing capsule network
technique in this area [66];
 Deep CNNs use supervised learning processes, which require huge amount of an-
notated data to train the network. Humans, on the other hand, can learn from a
few examples;
 The choice of hyper-parameters has a signiﬁcant impact on the CNN performance.
A slight change can inﬂuence the overall performance of a CNN in hyper-parameter
values. As a result, selecting hyper-parameters with care is a critical design issue that
must be addressed using an appropriate optimization technique;
 Effective CNN training necessitates the use of robust hardware resources, such as
GPUs. However, the effective use of CNNs in embedded and intelligent devices is
still required [53,67];
 One of CNN’s limitations in vision-related jobs is that it rarely performs well when
used to estimate an object’s pose, orientation, or location. In 2012, AlexNet attempted
to address this difﬁculty by developing data augmentation, which solved the problem
to some extent. In addition, data augmentation aids CNN in learning a variety of
internal representations, potentially improving its performance.
Spatial exploitation: Since convolutional operations take into account the neighbor-
hood (correlation) of input pixels, different levels of the correlation can be examined by
utilizing different ﬁlter sizes. Table 2 describes major challenges in spatial exploitation
based CNN architecture.

==== Page 21 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 21 of 28
Table 2. Major issues linked with the deployment of CNN architectures based on spatial exploitation.
Architecture Merits Demerits
LeNet Used spatial correlation to minimize computation and
parameter count;
 Feature hierarchies were automatically learned. Poor scaling to various picture classes;
 Large size ﬁlters;
 Low level feature extraction.
AlexNet Extraction of low, mid, and high-level features
utilizing large and small size ﬁlters on the initial (5 5
and 11 11) and ﬁnal layers (3 3);
 Introduced regularization in CNN to give a notion of
deep and extensive CNN architecture;
 Began using GPUs as an accelerator in parallel to deal
with complex architectures. Neurons in the ﬁrst and second layers that
are dormant;
 Aliasing artefacts in trained feature-maps as a
result of excessive ﬁlter size.
ZfNet Demonstrated parameter adjustment by seeing the
output of intermediary layers;
 Reduced the ﬁlter size and stride in AlexNet’s ﬁrst two
layers. Visualization needs additional information
processing.
VGG Proposed the concept of an effective receptive ﬁeld;
 Introduced the concept of simple and homogeneous
topology. The use of computationally costly fully
linked layers.
GoogleNet Presented the concept of utilizing multi-scale ﬁlters
within the layers;
 Introduced the concept of divide, transform, and
merge;
 Introduced the concept of divide, transform, and
merge;
 Used auxiliary classiﬁers to boost convergence rate. Difﬁcult parameter tuning owing to
heterogeneous topology;
 Due to a representational bottleneck, useful
information may be lost.
Depth-Based: The network can better approximate the target function using a number
of nonlinear mappings and enhanced feature representations as its depth increases. The
main hurdle that deep architectures face is the issue of vanishing gradients and negative
learning. Table 3 describes major challenges in depth based CNN architecture.
Table 3. Major issues linked with the deployment of depth-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Inception-V3 Asymmetric ﬁlters and a bottleneck layer were
used to reduce the computational cost of deep
systems. Architecture design is complex;
 Deﬁciency of homogeneity.
Highway
Networks Added a training method for deep neural
networks;
 Auxiliary connections were used in addition to
direct connections. Difﬁcult to implement parametric gating
mechanism.
Inception-ResNet The power of residual learning and the inception
block have been combined.
Inception-V4 Deep feature hierarchies, multilevel feature
representation. Learning is slow.
ResNet Reduced the error rate for deeper networks;
 Introduced the concept of residual learning;
 Mitigated the effect of the vanishing gradient
problem. A little complicated architecture;
 Degraded feature-map information in feed
forwarding;
 Over-adaption of hyper-parameters for
speciﬁc job owing to module stacking.
Multi-Path : Shortcut paths provide the option to skip some layers. Different types
of shortcut connections used in literature are zero padded, projection, dropout, 1 1
connections, etc. Table 4 describes major challenges in multi path based CNN architecture.

==== Page 22 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 22 of 28
Table 4. Major issues linked with the deployment of multi-path-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Highway NetworksBy introducing cross-layer connectivity, it
mitigates the constraints of deep networks.Because gates are data dependent, they may
become expensive.
Resent Use of identity-based skip connections to
provide cross-layer connectivity;
 Data independence and parameter-free
information ﬂow gates;
 Signal can be readily passed in both
directions, forward and backward. Many layers may offer very little or no
information;
 Redundant feature-maps may be re-learned.
DenseNet Introduced depth or cross-layer dimension;
 Ensures maximum data ﬂow between
network layers;
 Avoids relearning of redundant feature-maps;
 Both low and high level features are
accessible to decision layers. Signiﬁcant parameter increase due to an
increase in the number of feature-maps at
each layer.
Width-Based : Previously, it was considered that increasing the number of layers
would improve the accuracy. However, when the number of layers increases, the vanishing
gradient problem develops, and training may become slow. As a result, the concept of
layer widening was also examined. Table 5 describes major challenges in width based
CNN architecture.
Table 5. Major issues linked with the deployment of width-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Wide ResNet Demonstrates the usefulness of parallel transformation
utilization by expanding the breadth of ResNet while
decreasing its depth;
 Allows for feature reuse;
 Has demonstrated that dropouts between the
convolutional layer are more effective. There is a possibility of over-ﬁtting;
 There are more parameters than in thin deep
networks.
Pyramidal
Net Introduced the concept of progressively increasing the
width each unit;
 Avoids rapid information loss;
 Covers all feasible locations rather than retaining the
same dimension until the last unit. High spatial and time complexity;
 May become quite complex, if layers are
substantially increased.
Xception Introduced the concept that learning ﬁlters in 2D
followed by 1D are easier than learning ﬁlters in 3D
space;
 Introduced depth-wise separable convolution;
 Uses cardinality to discover good abstractions. Computational cost is high.
Inception Using varying size ﬁlters within the inception module
boosts the output of the intermediate layers;
 Using different size ﬁlters might help you to capture
the variation in high-detail photographs. Space and time complexity will increase.
ResNeXt Added cardinality to provide various transformations
at each layer;
 Homogeneous topology allows for easy parameter
customization. Computational cost is high.
Feature-Map Selection : As the deep learning topology is extended, an increasing
amount of features maps are generated at each step. Many of the feature-maps might be
important for the classiﬁcation task, whereas others might be redundant or less important.
Hence, feature-map selection is another important dimension in deep learning architectures.
Table 6 describes major challenges in feature map based CNN architecture.

==== Page 23 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 23 of 28
Table 6. Major issues linked with the deployment of feature-map-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Squeeze and Excitation Network It is a block-based concept;
 It introduced a generic block that,
due to its simplicity, can be simply
incorporated to any CNN model
 It squeezes fewer important
characteristics, and vice versa. In ResNet, the weight of each
channel is determined only by the
residual information.
Competitive Squeeze and Excitation
Networks Makes use of feature-map statistics
derived from both residual and
identity mapping-based features;
 Puts residual and identiﬁcation
feature-maps to the test. Doesn’t accompany the concept of
attention.
Channel Boosting : CNN learning is also dependent on the input representation. The
CNN performance may be hampered by a lack of diversity and class discernible information
in the input. To that end, the notion of channel boosting (input channel dimension) utilizing
auxiliary learners is introduced in CNN to improve the network’s representation [ 1].Table 7
describes major challenges in channel-boosting based CNN architecture.
Table 7. Major issues linked with the deployment of channel-boosting-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Channel Boosted CNN using Transfer
Learning It increases the number of input
channels to improve the network’s
representational capacity;
 Inductive transfer learning is
employed in an innovative
approach to generate a boosted
input representation for CNN. Increases in computational burden
may occur as a result of the creation
of auxiliary channels.
Attention-Based : There are many advantages of attention networks in determining
which patch is the focus or most essential in a picture. Table 8 describes major challenges
in attention based CNN architecture.
Table 8. Major issues linked with the deployment of attention-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Residual Attention Neural
Network Creates attention-aware feature-maps that are easy
to scale up because of residual learning;
 Provides distinct representations of the targeted
patches;
 Adds soft weights to features using bottom-up
top-down feed-forward attention. High complexity in model.
Convolutional Block Attention
Module CBAM is a generic building block for feed-forward
convolutional neural networks;
 Produces both a feature-map and spatial attention
in a sequential fashion.
 Channel attention maps assist in determining
where to focus one’s attention;
 Spatial attention aids in determining where to
focus;
 Improves the ﬂow of information;
 Employs both global average pooling and
maximum pooling at the same time. There are chances of a high
computational load.

==== Page 24 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 24 of 28
Dimension-Based : Dimension-wise convolutions use light-weight convolutional ﬁl-
tering across each dimension of the input tensor, whereas dimension-wise fusion merges
these dimension-wise representations efﬁciently. Table 9 describes major challenges in
dimension based CNN architecture.
Table 9. Major issues linked with the deployment of dimension-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Dice-Net It includes two main novel aspects:
dimension-wise convolutions and
dimension-wise fusion;
 Dimension-wise convolutions use
light-weight convolutional ﬁltering
on each dimension of the input
tensor;
 Dimension-wise fusion mixes these
dimension-wise representations
efﬁciently;
 High accuracy in image recognition. It may increase the time for
producing results.
5. Future Directions
The use of numerous novel concepts in CNN’s architecture has shifted research
priorities, particularly in the ﬁeld of computer vision. To study innovations in CNN’s
architecture is an encouraging study area, and has the potential to become one of the
utmost utilized AI techniques.
 Ensemble learning is an upcoming research area in CNN. By extracting distinct se-
mantic representations, the model can improve the generalization and resilience of
many categories of images by combining multiple and diverse designs;
 In picture segmentation tasks, although it performs well, a CNN’s ability as a “genera-
tive learner” is limited. The use of CNNs’ generative learning capabilities throughout
feature extraction phases can improve the model’s representational power. At the
intermediate phases of CNN, fresh examples can be incorporated to improve the
learning capability by using auxiliary learners (Khan et al., 2018a);
 Attention is a crucial process in the human visual system for acquiring information
from images. Furthermore, the attention mechanism collects the crucial information
from the image and stores its context in relation to the other visual components. In the
future, the research could be conducted to preserve the spatial importance of objects
and their distinguishing characteristics during subsequent stages of learning;
 It is observed that the learning capability of a CNN is mainly increased by increasing
the network’s size, and this may be achieved by modern advanced hardware tech-
nologies, such as the Nvidia DGX-2 supercomputer. Nonetheless, training more deep
and high-capacity CNN architectures consumes a substantial amount of memory and
computing resources [68,69];
 The fundamental disadvantage of CNNs is their inability to be applied in real-time.
Furthermore, the CNN is delayed in compact hardware due to its high computational
cost, particularly in mobile systems. Therefore, various hardware accelerators are
necessary for this scenario to reduce the execution time and power consumption.
Thus far, numerous highly interesting accelerators have been presented in this ﬁeld.
Examples include Eyeriss, FPGA, and application-speciﬁc integrated circuits (Moons
and Verhelst 2017);
 The activation function (e.g., RELU, sigmoid, etc.), number of neurons per layer,
kernel size, layer organization, and other hyper-parameters of deep CNN are critical.
There is a trade-off between the selection of hyper-parameters and the evaluation
time. Hyper-parameter tuning is a time-consuming and intuitive process that cannot
be speciﬁed explicitly. In this case, genetic algorithms can be used to automatically

==== Page 25 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 25 of 28
enhance hyper-parameters by conducting searches both at random and by directing
searches based on previous results (Khan et al., 2019);
 Deep and broad CNN poses a signiﬁcant difﬁculty in developing and executing them
on devices with limited resources;
 Pipeline parallelism can be utilized to scale up in-depth CNN training to overcome
hardware limitations. The Google group has presented GPipe, a distributed machine
learning library that includes a model parallelism option for training. Pipelining could
be utilized in the future to speed up the training of big models and scale performance
without having to tune hyper parameters;
 Cloud-based platforms’ promise in creating computationally expensive CNN applica-
tions is projected to be fully realized in the future. Cloud computing helps the user to
deal with large amounts of data and provides them with an exceptional computational
efﬁciency at a reasonable cost. Amazon, Microsoft, Google, and IBM, among others,
provide public cloud computing resources with superb scalability, speed, and ﬂexibil-
ity for training-resource-intensive CNN designs. Furthermore, the cloud environment
makes it simple for researchers and new practitioners to set up libraries;
 As CNN primarily uses image processing, implementing state-of-the-art CNN archi-
tectures on sequential data necessitates transforming 1D data to 2D data. The trend
of using 1D-CNNs for sequential data is being advocated because of their excellent
feature extraction capabilities and efﬁcient computations with a small number of
parameters [70];
 High-energy researchers at CERN have recently used CNN’s learning capabilities to
investigate particle collisions. The use of machine learning, speciﬁcally deep CNN, in
high-energy physics is projected to increase [70,71].
 Human activity recognition is trending research area in the ﬁeld of CNN. Refer-
ences [ 72,73] have described the various CNN variants for human activity and
pose recognition.
6. Conclusions
In the recent decade, convolutional neural networks have received much attention.
They have a large impact on image processing and vision-related tasks, which has piqued
academics’ curiosity. Many academics have carried out outstanding work in this area,
modifying the CNN design to improve its performance. Changes in activation func-
tions, developing or modifying loss functions, optimization, architectural innovations,
application-speciﬁc modiﬁcations in architecture, developing various learning algorithms,
and regularization are some of the categories in which researchers have made advance-
ments in CNN. This manuscript summarizes recent developments in CNN architectures.
The eight fundamental architectural advances in CNN are spatial exploitation, depth,
multi-path, breadth, dimension, feature-map exploitation, channel boosting, and attention.
It can be concluded by surveying various architectural modiﬁcations in CNN that CNN’s
block-based architecture supports modular learning, making the architecture more basic
and accessible. Another dimension-based category has a positive impact on CNN’s total
performance. Dimension-based CNN can also be used to recognize three-dimensional
objects. Training CNN for an exemplary performance in 3D object recognition is a promis-
ing and complicated research ﬁeld. Researchers in this area can still work on 3D object
recognition and NAS-based techniques. Modular or block-based architecture has shown
excellent optimization in both time and accuracy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.B. and C.P .; methodology, D.B.; software, H.T.; vali-
dation, J.P ., R.V . and K.M.; formal analysis, S.P .; investigation, H.G.; resources, D.B.; data curation,
C.P .; writing—original draft preparation, D.B.; writing—review and editing, C.P .; visualization, H.T.;
supervision, K.M.; project administration, D.B.; funding acquisition, C.P . All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.

==== Page 26 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 26 of 28
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions
which helped in improving the quality of this paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Khan, A.; Sohail, A.; Zahoora, U.; Qureshi, A.S. A Survey of the Recent Architectures of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks.
Artif. Intell. Rev. 2020 ,53, 5455–5516. [CrossRef]
2. Liu, X. Recent progress in semantic image segmentation. Artiﬁcal Intell. Rev. 2019 ,52, 1089–1106. [CrossRef]
3. Deng, L.; Dong, Y. Deep Learning: Methods and Applications. In Foundations and Trends R in Signal Process ; Now Publishers Inc.:
Boston, MA, USA, 2013.
4. LeCun, Y. Convolutional networks and applications. ISCAS IEEE 2010 , 253–256. [CrossRef]
5. Najafabadi, M.M. Deep learning applications and. J. Big Data 2015 ,2, 1–21. [CrossRef]
6. Guo, Y. Deep learning for visual understanding: A review. Neurocomupting 2016 ,187, 27–48. [CrossRef]
7. Towards Datascience. Available online: https://towardsdatascience.com/activation-functions-neural-networks-1cbd9f8d91d6
(accessed on 27 July 2021).
8. Towards Datascience. Available online: https://towardsdatascience.com/convolutional-neural-networks-explained-9cc5188c493
9 (accessed on 29 July 2021).
9. Bengio, Y. Deep learning of representations: Looking forward. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Statistical
Language and Speech Processing, Tarragona, Spain, 29–31 July 2013; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013.
10. Balázs, C.C. Approximation with Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. Master’s Thesis, Eötvös Lor ánd University , Budapest, Hungary , 2001.
11. Delalleau, O. Shallow vs. deep sum-product networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2011 , 666–674. [CrossRef]
12. Szegedy, C. Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on Learning. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:160207261v2.
13. Ioffe, S. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. arXiv 2015 ,
arXiv:1502.03167.
14. Szegedy, C. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2015; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
15. Szegedy, C. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
16. Simonyan, K. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. ILCR 2014 ,75, 398–406.
17. Dong, C. Image super-resolution using deep convolutional networks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach Intell. 2016 ,38, 295–307.
[CrossRef]
18. Tong, T. Image super-resolution using dense skip connections. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017.
19. Hu, J. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June 2018.
20. Kawaguchi, K. Effect of depth and width on local minima in deep learning. Neural Comput. 2019 ,31, 1462–1498. [CrossRef]
21. Hanin, B. Approximating Continuous Functions by ReLU Nets of Minimal width. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:171011278.
22. Nguyen, Q. Neural Networks Should Be Wide Enough to Learn Disconnected Decision Regions. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:180300094.
23. He, K. Mask R-CNN. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1703.06870.
24. Lin, C. GRCNN: Graph Recognition Convolutional Neural Network for Synthesizing Programs from Flow Charts. arXiv 2020 ,
arXiv:2011.05980.
25. Ma, D. MFRNet: A New CNN Architecture for Post-Processing and In-loop Filtering. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2007.07099v2.
26. Zhang, W. Disentangled Dynamic Graph Deep Generation. arXiv 2021 , arXiv:2010.07276v2.
27. Alexey, B. YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2004.10934v1.
28. Aex, B. Net2Vis—A Visual Grammar for Automatically Generating Publication-Tailored CNN Architecture Visualizations.
arXiv 2021 , arXiv:1902.04394v6.
29. Zou, C.; Zheng, Y.; Su, Q.; Fu, H. Chiew-Lan Tai Sketch-R2CNN: An Attentive Network for Vector Sketch Recognition. arXiv 2018 ,
arXiv:1811.08170v1.
30. Haque, W.A. DeepThin: A novel lightweight CNN architecture for trafﬁc sign recognition without GPU requirements. In Expert
Systems with Applications ; Elseveir: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2021; Volume 168.
31. Zheng, G. YOLOX: Exceeding YOLO Series in 2021. arXiv 2021 , arXiv:2107.08430v2.
32. Defferrard, M. Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2016 ,
3844–3852.
33. Kipf, T.N. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1609.02907.
34. Chen, J. Fastgcn: Fast learning with graph convolutional networks via importance sampling. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1801.10247.
35. Liao, R. Lanczosnet: Multiscale deep graph convolutional networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1901.01484.
36. Fey, M. Splinecnn: Ffast geometric deep learning with continuous b-spline kernels. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–26 June 2018; pp. 869–877.

==== Page 27 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 27 of 28
37. Simonovsky, M. Dynamic edge-conditioned ﬁlters in convolutional neural networks on graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 June 2017; pp. 3693–3702.
38. Velickovic, P . Graph attention networks. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1710.10903.
39. Chouhan, N.; Khan, A.; Khan, H.-R. Network anomaly detection using channel boosted and residual learning based deep
convolutional neural network. Appl. Soft Comput. 2019 ,83, 105612. [CrossRef]
40. Farfade, S.S. Multi-view Face Detection Using Deep Convolutional Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM on
International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval—ICMR ’15, Shanghai, China, 23–26 June 2015; ACM Press: New York, NY,
USA, 2015; pp. 643–650.
41. Zhang, K. Joint face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional networks. IeeexploreIeeeOrg 2016 ,23,
1499–1503. [CrossRef]
42. Bulat, A.; Tzimiropoulos, G. Human Pose Estimation via Convolutional Part Heatmap Regression BT. In Computer Vision—ECCV
2016 ; Leibe, B., Matas, J., Sebe, N., Welling, M., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 717–732.
43. Wang, X. Beyond Frame-level CNN: Saliency-Aware 3-D CNN With LSTM for Video Action Recognition. IEEE Signal Process.
Lett. 2016 ,24, 510–514. [CrossRef]
44. Wang, H.; Schmid, C. Action recognition with improved trajectories. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, Sydney, Australia, 1–8 December 2013; pp. 3551–3558.
45. Ji, S.; Xu, W.; Yang, M.; Yu, K. 3D convolutional neural networks for human action recognition. ICML Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. 2010 ,
35, 221–231. [CrossRef]
46. Kalchbrenner, N.; Grefenstette, E.; Blunsom, P . A convolutional neural network for modelling sentences. arXiv 2014 ,
arXiv:14042188.
47. Gidaris, S.; Komodakis, N. Object detection via a multi-region and semantic segmentation aware U model. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference On Computer Vision, Santiago, Chile, 7–13 December 2015; pp. 1134–1142.
48. Kendall, A.; Cipolla, R.; Badrinarayanan, V . SegNet: A Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Image Segmentation.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2017 ,39, 2481–2495.
49. Spanhol, F.A.; Oliveira, L.S.; Petitjean, C.; Heutte, L. A dataset for breast cancer histopathological image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 2016 ,63, 1455–1462. [CrossRef]
50. Abdel-Hamid, O. Applying convolutional neural networks concepts to hybrid NN-HMM model for speech recognition. In
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Kyoto, Japan, 25–30
March 2012; pp. 4277–4280.
51. Huang, K.Y. Speech Emotion Recognition Using Deep Neural Network Considering Verbal and Nonverbal Speech Sounds. In
Proceedings of the ICASSP 2019–2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
Brighton, UK, 12–17 May 2019.
52. Lu, Z. The expressive power of neural networks: A view from the width. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, Long Beach, CA, USA, 4–9 December 2017; pp. 6231–6239.
53. Frizzi, S. Convolutional neural network for video ﬁre and smoke detection. In Proceedings of the IECON 2016-42nd Annual
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Florence, Italy, 23–26 October 2016; pp. 877–882.
54. Shi, Y. Sequential deep trajectory descriptor for action recognition with three-stream CNN. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 2017 ,19,
1510–1520. [CrossRef]
55. Ullah, A. Action recognition in video sequences using deep bi-directional LSTM with CNN features. IEEE Access 2017 ,6,
1155–1166. [CrossRef]
56. Chevalier, M. LR-CNN for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation with varying resolution. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), Quebec City, QC, Canada, 27–30 September 2015; pp. 3101–3105.
57. Peng, X. Fine-to-coarse knowledge transfer for low-res image classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), Phoenix, AZ, USA, 25–28 September 2016; pp. 3683–3687.
58. Kawashima, T. Action recognition from extremely low-resolution thermal image sequence. In Proceedings of the 2017 14th IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, AVSS 2017, Lecce, Italy, 29 August–1 September
2017; pp. 1–6.
59. Lee, S. Car Plate Recognition Based on CNN Using Embedded System with GPU. In Proceedings of the 2017 10th International
Conference on Human System Interactions (HSI), Ulsan, Korea, 17–19 July 2017; pp. 239–241.
60. Xie, W. An Energy-Efﬁcient FPGA-Based Embedded System for CNN Application. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Electron Devices and Solid State Circuits (EDSSC), Shenzhen, China, 6–8 June 2018; pp. 1–2.
61. Zhang, X. ShufﬂeNet: An Extremely Efﬁcient Convolutional Neural Network for Mobile Devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018.
62. Shakeel, M.F. Detecting Driver Drowsiness in Real Time through Deep Learning Based Object Detection. In Lecture Notes in
Computer Science in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Bioinformatics ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019.
63. Vinayakumar, R. Applying convolutional neural network for network intrusion detection. In Proceedings of the 2017 International
Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics, ICACCI 2017, Udupi, India, 13–16 September 2017.
64. Yıldırım, Ö. Arrhythmia detection using deep convolutional neural network with long duration ECG signals. Comput. Biol. Med.
2018 ,102, 411–420. [CrossRef]

==== Page 28 ====
Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 28 of 28
65. De Vries, H. Deep learning vector quantization. In Proceedings of the European Symposium on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks,
Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning, Bruges, Belgium, 27–29 April 2016.
66. Hinton, G. Matrix capsules with EM routing. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 30 April–3 May 2018.
67. Justus, D. Predicting the Computational Cost of Deep Learning Models. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Big Data Big Data, Seattle, WA, USA, 10–13 December 2018.
68. Sze, V . Efﬁcient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017.
69. Madrazo, C.F. Application of a Convolutional Neural Network for image classiﬁcation for the analysis of collisions in High
Energy. EPJ Web Conf. 2019 ,214, 06017. [CrossRef]
70. Aurisano, A. A convolutional neural network neutrino event classiﬁer. J. Instrum. 2016 ,11, P09001. [CrossRef]
71. Liu, W. A survey of deep neural network architectures and their applications. Neurocomputing 2017 ,234, 11–26. [CrossRef]
72. Patel, C.I.; Labana, D.; Pandya, S.; Modi, K.; Ghayvat, H.; Awais, M. Histogram of Oriented Gradient-Based Fusion of Features
for Human Action Recognition in Action Video Sequences. Sensors 2020 ,20, 7299. [CrossRef]
73. Patel, C.I.; Garg, S.; Zaveri, T.; Banerjee, A.; Patel, R. Human action recognition using fusion of features for unconstrained video
sequences. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2018 ,70, 284–301. [CrossRef]

