==== Page 1 ====
Collaborative Distillation for Ultra-Resolution Universal Style Transfer
Huan Wang1,2∗, Yijun Li3, Yuehai Wang1, Haoji Hu1†, Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1Zhejiang University2Notheastern University3Adobe Research4UC Merced5Google Research
wang.huan@husky.neu.edu yijli@adobe.com {wyuehai,haoji hu}@zju.edu.cn mhyang@ucmerced.edu
Figure 1: An ultra-resolution stylized sample ( 10240×4096 pixels), rendered in about 31seconds on a single Tesla P100
(12GB) GPU. On the upper left are the content and style. Four close-ups ( 539×248) are shown under the stylized image.
Abstract
Universal style transfer methods typically leverage rich
representations from deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) models (e.g., VGG-19) pre-trained on large collec-
tions of images. Despite the effectiveness, its application
is heavily constrained by the large model size to handle
ultra-resolution images given limited memory. In this work,
we present a new knowledge distillation method (named
Collaborative Distillation) for encoder-decoder based neu-
ral style transfer to reduce the convolutional ﬁlters. The
main idea is underpinned by a ﬁnding that the encoder-
decoder pairs construct an exclusive collaborative relation-
ship, which is regarded as a new kind of knowledge for style
* This work is mainly done when Huan Wang was with the Depart-
ment of ISEE, Zhejiang University, China. †Corresponding author.transfer models. Moreover, to overcome the feature size
mismatch when applying collaborative distillation, a linear
embedding loss is introduced to drive the student network to
learn a linear embedding of the teacher’s features. Exten-
sive experiments show the effectiveness of our method when
applied to different universal style transfer approaches
(WCT and AdaIN), even if the model size is reduced by
15.5 times. Especially, on WCT with the compressed mod-
els, we achieve ultra-resolution (over 40 megapixels) uni-
versal style transfer on a 12GB GPU for the ﬁrst time. Fur-
ther experiments on optimization-based stylization scheme
show the generality of our algorithm on different stylization
paradigms. Our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/mingsun-tse/collaborative-distillation .
1
1860


==== Page 2 ====
1. Introduction
Universal neural style transfer (NST) focuses on com-
posing a content image with new styles from any reference
image. This often requires a model with considerable ca-
pacity to extract effective representations for capturing the
statistics of arbitrary styles. Recent universal style transfer
methods based on neural networks [ 13,4,24,39,40,37]
consistently show that employing the representations ex-
tracted by a pre-trained deep neural network like VGG-
19 [51] achieves both visually pleasing transferred results
and generalization ability on arbitrary style images. How-
ever, given limited memory on hardware, the large model
size of VGG-19 greatly constrains the input image resolu-
tion. Up to now, current universal style transfer approaches
only report results around one megapixels ( e.g.,1024×1024
pixels) on one single GPU with 12GB memory. Although it
is likely to achieve higher resolution style transfer through
multiple GPUs, the fundamental problem of the massive
model size of VGG-19 remains, hindering NST from prac-
tical applications, especially on mobile devices.
Meanwhile, recent years have witnessed rapid develop-
ment in the area of model compression [ 17,21,36,19],
which aims at reducing the parameters of a large CNN
model without considerable performance loss. Despite
the progress, most model compression methods only fo-
cus on high-level tasks, e.g., classiﬁcation [ 18,58,56,48]
and detection [ 63,19]. Compressing models for low-
level vision tasks is still less explored. Knowledge distil-
lation (KD) [ 2,1,21] is a promising model compression
method by transferring the knowledge of large networks
(called teacher) to small networks (called student), where
the knowledge can be softened probability (which can re-
ﬂect the inherent class similarity structure known as dark
knowledge ) or sample relations (which can reﬂect the sim-
ilarity structure among different samples) [ 44,46,60,47].
This knowledge works as extra information on top of the
one-hot labels and hence can boost the student’s perfor-
mance. However, this extra information is mainly label-
dependent , thus hardly applicable to low-level tasks. What
is the dark knowledge in low-level vision tasks ( e.g., neu-
ral style transfer) remains an open question. Meanwhile,
encoder-decoder based models are extensively employed in
neural style transfer, where the decoder is typically trained
via the knowledge of encoder. Notably, they together con-
struct an exclusive collaborative relationship in the styliza-
tion process, shown in Fig. 2. Since the decoder Dis trained
to exclusively work with the encoder E, if another encoder
E′can also work with D, it means E′can functionally play
the role of E. Based on this idea, we propose a new knowl-
edge to distill the deep models in neural style transfer: the
collaborative relationship between the encoder and decoder.
Given a redundant large encoder ( e.g., VGG-19), we pro-
pose a two-step compression scheme: First, train a collab-
Input E1+D1 E2+D2 E1+D2 E2+D1
Figure 2: Examples of the exclusive collaboration phe-
nomenon on two different encoder-decoder collaborative re-
lationships: image reconstruction of WCT [ 39] (Row1) and
style transfer of AdaIN [ 24] (Row2). Column 1is the in-
put, the other four columns show the outputs using different
encoder-decoder combinations. If the two encoder-decoder
pairs (E1-D1, E2-D2) are trained independently, the en-
coder can only work with its matching decoder.
orator network for the encoder, namely, the decoder in our
context; second, replace the large encoder with a small en-
coder, then train the small encoder with the collaborator
ﬁxed . Since the small encoder typically has fewer chan-
nels, its output feature has a smaller dimension than that
of the large encoder. Therefore, the small network cannot
directly work with the collaborator. To resolve this, we pro-
pose to restrict the student to learn a linear embedding of
the teacher’s output, so that the teacher’s output can be re-
constructed through a simple linear combination of the stu-
dent’s output before being fed into the collaborator.
Notably, we do not restrict the speciﬁc collaboration
form in our approach. In this paper, we will show it can be
applied to two different state-of-the-art universal style trans-
fer schemes: WCT [ 39] (where the collaboration is image
reconstruction) and AdaIN [ 24] (where the collaboration is
style transfer). The main contributions of this work are:
•We propose a new knowledge distillation method for
universal neural style transfer. The exclusive collabo-
rative relationship between the encoder and its decoder
is identiﬁed as a new kind of knowledge, which can be
applied to different collaborative relationships.
•To resolve the feature dimension mismatch problem
between the student and teacher networks in our algo-
rithm, we propose to restrict the student to learn linear
embedding of the teacher’s output, which also acts as
a regularizer to fuse more supervision into the middle
layers of the student so as to boost its learning.
•Extensive experiments show the merits of our method
with different stylization frameworks (WCT [ 39],
AdaIN [ 24], and Gatys [ 13]),15.5×parameter reduc-
tion with comparable to even better visual effect. Es-
pecially, on WCT, the compressed models enable us
to conduct ultra-resolution ( 40megapixels) universal
style transfer for the ﬁrst time on a single 12GB GPU.
1861


==== Page 3 ====
2. Related Work
Style transfer. Prior to the deep learning era, image
style transfer is mainly tackled by non-parametric sam-
pling [ 9], non-photorealistic rendering [ 15,52] or image
analogy [ 20]. However, these methods are designed for
some speciﬁc styles and rely on low-level statistics. Re-
cently, Gatys et al. [13] propose the neural style transfer,
which employs deep features from the pre-trained VGG-
19 model [ 51] and achieves the stylization by matching
the second-order statistics between the generated image
and given style image. Numerous methods have been de-
veloped to improve the visual quality [ 34,57,49,64],
speed [ 35,54,29,11,37], user controls [ 41,59,14], style
diversities [ 8,3,38,24,39]. However, one common limita-
tion of all those neural network based approaches is that
they cannot handle the ultra-resolution content and style
images given limited memory. Some approaches [ 54,29,
49] achieve high-resolution stylization results (up to 10
megapixels, e.g., 3000×3000 pixels) by learning a small
feedforward network for a speciﬁc style example or cate-
gory, but they do not generalize to other unseen styles. In
contrast, our goal is to realize the ultra-resolution image
style transfer for universal styles with onemodel only.
Model compression. Model compression and acceleration
have also attracted much attention recently, which aim to
obtain a smaller and faster model without a considerable
compromise in performance. Existing methods broadly fall
into ﬁve categories, i.e., low-rank decomposition [ 7,27,
32,63], pruning [ 33,18,17,36,58,19,56,55], quanti-
zation [ 5,48,65,25], knowledge distillation [ 2,1,21,61]
and compact architecture redesign or search [ 26,23,50,62,
45,53,10]. However, these methods are mainly explored in
high-level vision tasks, typically the classiﬁcation and de-
tection. Few approaches have paid attention to low-level
vision tasks such as style transfer, where many methods are
also limited by the massive model size of CNNs. Unlike the
CNN compression for high-level vision where it only needs
to maintain the global semantic information of features to
retain accuracies, the extra challenge of model compression
for low-level vision may be how to maintain the local struc-
tures, e.g., local textures and color diversity in style transfer.
In this work, we develop a deeply-supervised knowledge
distillation method to learn a much smaller model from pre-
trained redundant VGG-19 [ 51]. The compressed model en-
joys more than 15×parameter and computation reduction.
More importantly, the decrease of model size enables uni-
versal style transfer on ultra-resolution images. To our best
knowledge, only one recent work [ 30] employs GAN [ 16]
to learn unpaired style transfer network on ultra-resolution
images. However, they achieve this by working on image
subsamples and then merging them back to a whole image.
In contrast, our method fundamentally reduces the modelcomplexity, which can directly process the whole image.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Collaborative distillation
Style-agnostic stylization methods typically adopt an
encoder-decoder scheme to learn deep representations for
style rendering and then invert them back into the styl-
ized images. Since the style information is not directly en-
coded in the model, the encoder part needs to be expressive
enough to extract informative representations for universal
styles. Existing methods [ 13,4,24,39] commonly choose
VGG-19 [ 51] as the encoder considering its massive capac-
ity and hierarchical architecture. As for the decoder, de-
pending on different stylization schemes, it can have differ-
ent collaborative relationships with the encoder. Two state-
of-the-art arbitrary style transfer approaches, WCT [ 39] and
AdaIN [ 24], are discussed here. (i) For WCT, the stylization
process is to apply Whitening and Coloring Transform [ 22]
to the content features using the second-order statistics of
style feature. Then the transformed content feature is in-
verted to an image by the decoder. Hence, the decoder
training is not directly involved with stylization. The col-
laborative relationship in WCT is essentially image recon-
struction. (ii) For AdaIN, unlike WCT, its decoder training
is directly involved in the stylization. Two images (content
and style) are fed into the encoder, then in the feature space,
the content feature is rendered by the statistics (mean and
variance) of the style feature. Finally, the decoder inverts
the rendered content feature back to stylized images. The
stylized images are supposed to be close to the content (or
style) in terms of content (or style) distance. Therefore, the
collaborative relationship for AdaIN is style transfer.
Despite paradigm difference for the above two schemes,
they are both encoder-decoder based, and the decoder is
trained through the knowledge of the encoder. This means,
during the training of the decoder, the knowledge of the en-
coder is leaked into the decoder. Presumably and conﬁrmed
empirically, the decoder Dcan only work with its matching
encoderElike a nut with its bolt. For another encoder E′,
even if it has the same architecture as E,DandE′cannot
work together (see Fig. 2). This exclusivity shows the de-
coder has some inherent information speciﬁc to its encoder.
If we can ﬁnd a way to make the network E′compatible
withDtoo, it means E′can functionally replace the orig-
inal encoder E. IfE′is meanwhile much smaller than E,
then we achieve the model compression goal. Based on this
idea, we propose a new distillation method speciﬁc to NST,
named Collaborative Distillation , consisting of two steps.
For the ﬁrst step, based on the task at hand, we train a
collaborator network for the large encoder. As shown in
Fig.3(a), for WCT [ 39], the decoder is trained to invert the
feature to be as faithful to the input image as possible ( i.e.,
1862


==== Page 4 ====
Input image
Reconstructed image
Content / Style LossEncoder
(fixed)
SEncoder
Encoder
(fixed)
SEncoderStylized image
Content
StyleDecoder
DecoderEncoder
(fixed)Perceptual loss
Encoder
(fixed)Encoder
(fixed)
SEncoderLinear embedding
AdaIN
(a)
(b) (c)Figure 3: Illustration of the proposed Collaborative Distillation framework (best viewed in color). (a) and (b) depict two kinds
of the encoder-decoder collaborative relationship for universal neural style transfer: image reconstruction for WCT [ 39] and
style transfer for AdaIN [ 24], respectively. Blue arrows show the forward path when training the collaborator network
(namely, the decoder). Green arrows show the forward path when the small encoder (“SEncoder”) is trained to functionally
replace the original encoder (“Encoder”). (c) shows the proposed linear embedding scheme to resolve the feature size
mismatch problem and infuse more supervision into the middle layers of the small encoder.
image reconstruction), where both the pixel reconstruction
loss and the perceptual loss [ 29] are employed,
L(k)
r=/bardblIr−Io/bardbl2
2+λpk/summationdisplay
i=1/bardblF(i)
r−F(i)
o/bardbl2
2,(1)
wherek∈ {1,2,3,4,5}denotes the kth stage of VGG-19;
F(i)denotes the feature maps of the ReLU_i_1 layer;λp
is the weight to balance the perceptual loss and pixel re-
construction loss; IoandIrdenote the original image and
reconstructed image, respectively. For AdaIN [ 24], the de-
coder is involved in style transfer directly. Thus, its decoder
loss is made up of both the content loss and the style loss,
Lst=/bardblF(4)
st−F(4)
c/bardbl2
2+λs4/summationdisplay
i=1/bardblG(i)
st−G(i)
s/bardbl2
2, (2)
whereGis the Gram matrix to describe style [ 12,13],λs
is the weight to balance the style loss and the content loss;
subscript “st”, “ c”, and “s” represent the stylized image,
content image, and style image, respectively.
After we have the collaborator, the second step of our
algorithm is to replace the original encoder Ewith a small
encoderE′. For simplicity, in this work we use E′with the
same architecture of Ebut fewer ﬁlters in each layer. We
expect that the small encoder E′can functionally equiva-
lent to the original encoder E, as shown in (a) and (b) of
Fig. 3. Similar to the ﬁrst step, the collaborator network
loss, denoted as Lcollab, can take different forms depending
on the speciﬁc collaboration tasks. In the context of this
work,Lcollab=Lrfor WCT and Lcollab=Lstfor AdaIN.3.2. Linear embedding
In the proposed collaborative distillation method, the
small encoder is connected with the decoder network. In
their interface comes a feature size mismatch problem.
Speciﬁcally, if the original encoder outputs a feature of size
C×H×W, and thus the input of the decoder is also sup-
posed to be of size C×H×W. However, because the
small encoder has fewer ﬁlters, it will output a feature of
sizeC′×H×W(C′< C), which cannot be accepted by
the decoder. To resolve this, we ﬁrst look at how the channel
numbers play a role in the stylization process. As pioneered
by Gatys [ 12,13], the style of an image is described by the
gram matrix of the deep features extracted from VGG-19,
G=F ·FT, (3)
whereFis the deep feature of size C×HW extracted from
certain convolutional layer of VGG-19; Gdenotes the Gram
matrix of size C×C;Tstands for matrix transpose. Since
we aim to compress these features, i.e., they are regarded as
redundant, it can be formulated as that Fis a linear combi-
nation of some feature basis vectors in a lower dimension,
F=Q·F′, (4)
whereQis a transform matrix of size C×C′,F′is the fea-
ture basis matrix of size C′×HW , which can be viewed as
the linear embedding of the original deep feature F. Then
it is easy to see that the Gram matrix G′=F′· F′Tfor
the new feature F′has the same number of eigenvalues as
1863


==== Page 5 ====
the original Gram matrix G. In other words, the style de-
scription power is maintained if we adopt F′in place of the
original redundant F. In the context of our method, Fis the
output of the original encoder, F′is the output of the small
encoder. The transformation matrix Qis learned through
a fully-connected layer without non-linear activation func-
tion to realize the linearity assumption. Hence, the linear
embedding loss can be formulated as
Lembed=||F −Q·F′||2
2. (5)
One more step forward, the proposed solution above is
not limited to the ﬁnal output layer. For the middle lay-
ers of the small encoder, it can also ﬁnd an application.
Concretely, we apply the linear embedding to the other
four middle layers ( ReLU_k_1 ,k∈ {1,2,3,4}) between
the original encoder and the small encoder, as shown in
Fig. 3(c). We have two motivations for this. First, in the
proposed method, when the small encoder is trained with
the SGD algorithm, its only gradient source would be the
decoder, passed through the fully-connected layer Q. How-
ever,Qdoes not have many parameters, so it will actually
form an information bottleneck, slowing down the learning
of the student. With these branches plugged into the middle
layers of the network, they will infuse more gradients into
the student and thus boost its learning, especially for deep
networks that are prone to gradient vanishing. Second, in
neural style transfer, the style of an image is typically de-
scribed by the features of many middle layers [ 13,24,39].
Therefore, adding more supervision to these layers is neces-
sary to ensure that they do not lose much the style descrip-
tion power for subsequent use in style transfer.
To this end, the total loss to train the small encoder in
our proposed algorithm can be summarized as
Ltotal=βk/summationdisplay
i=1Lembed+Lcollab, (6)
whereβis the weight factor to balance the two loss terms.
4. Experimental Results
In this section, we will ﬁrst demonstrate the effective-
ness of our compressed VGG-19 compared with the origi-
nal VGG-19 within the universal style transfer frameworks
WCT [ 39]. Then we show the proposed collaborative dis-
tillation is not limited to one kind of collaborative relation-
ship on AdaIN [ 24]. Finally, to show the generality of the
proposed approach, we also evaluate on the optimization-
based style transfer using Gatys [ 13], where the collabora-
tive relationship is the same as WCT, i.e., image reconstruc-
tion. We ﬁrst conduct comparisons in the maximal image
resolution which the original VGG-19 can possibly handle
(3000×3000), then show some stylized samples in larger
resolutions ( i.e., ultra-resolutions) with the small models.All experiments are conducted on one Tesla P100 12GB
GPU, namely, given the same limited memory.
Evaluated compression method. Since there are few
model compression methods speciﬁcally designed for low-
level image synthesis tasks, we compare our method with a
typical compression algorithm in the high-level image clas-
siﬁcation task, i.e., ﬁlter pruning (FP) [ 36]. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst apply FP to VGG-19 in classiﬁcation to obtain a com-
pressed model with the same architecture as ours. It is then
ﬁne-tuned on ImageNet [ 6] to regain performance. Finally,
its decoder is obtained by optimizing the loss in ( 1).
4.1. Style transfer on WCT
Since we need the original decoder as collaborator , we
ﬁrst train a decoder with the mirrored architecture of VGG-
19 on the MS-COCO dataset [ 42] for image reconstruction.
During the training, the encoder is ﬁxed , withλp= 1. We
randomly crop 256×256patches from 300×300images
as input. Adam [ 31] is used as optimization solver with
ﬁxed learning rate 10−4, batch size 16. In WCT [ 39], a
cascaded coarse-to-ﬁne stylization procedure is employed
for best results, so the decoders of the 5-stage VGG-19 (up
toReLU_k_1 ,k∈ {1,2,3,4,5}) are all trained. Then
an encoder-decoder network is constructed with loss ( 6),
in which βis set to 10. The compressed encoder can
be randomly initialized, but we empirically ﬁnd using the
largest ﬁlters (based on L1-norms) from the original VGG-
19 as initialization will help the compressed model con-
verge faster, so we use this initialization scheme in all our
experiments. After 20-epoch training, we obtain the com-
pressed encoders. Their mirrored decoders are trained by
the same rule as the ﬁrst step using the loss ( 1).
Fig.4shows the comparison of the stylized results. Gen-
erally, our model achieves comparable or even more visu-
ally pleasing stylized images with much fewer parameters.
Stylized images produced by original VGG-19 model and
our compressed model are fairly better-looking (more color-
ful and sharper) than those by the FP-slimmed model. Com-
pared with the original VGG-19 model, our compressed
model tends to produce results with fewer messy textures,
while the original model often highlights too many textures
in a stylized image. For example, sky and water usually
look smooth in an image, but actually, there are no abso-
lutely smooth parts in natural images, so there are still nu-
ances in the sky and water area. In Fig. 5, the original
VGG-19 model tends to highlight these nuances to so ob-
vious an extent that the whole image looks messy, while
our model only emphasizes the most semantically salient
parts. This phenomenon can be explained since a model
with fewer parameters has limited capacity, which is less
prone to overﬁtting. It is natural that an over-parameterized
model will spend its extra capacity ﬁtting the noises in data,
e.g., the nuanced textures of the sky and water in this con-
1864


==== Page 6 ====
(a) Content (b) Style (c) Original (d) FP (e) Ours
Figure 4: Comparison of stylized images in 3000 ×3000 produced by three different models, i.e., the original VGG-19,
FP-slimmed VGG-19 and our compressed VGG-19 (best viewed in color and zoomed in).
text. Meanwhile, even though a compressed model tends
to be less overﬁtting, the model pruned by FP [ 36] has a
problem of losing description power, which is embodied in
two aspects in Fig. 4. First, as we see, FP-slimmed model
tends to produce the stylized images with lesscolor diver-
sity. Second, when looked closer, the stylized images by
FP-slimmed model have serious checkerboard artifacts.
User study . Style transfer has an open problem of lacking
broadly-accepted comparison criteria [ 28], mainly because
stylization is quite subjective. For a more objective compar-
ison, previous works [ 39] conducted user studies to inves-
tigate user preference over different stylized results. Here
we adopt this idea by investigating which is the most vi-
sually pleasing among the stylized images produced by the
three models. We generate 20-pair stylized images using the
three models. Among them, 10pairs are randomly selected
for each subject to choose which one is the most visually
pleasing. In this part, we received 600valid votes. The user
study results are shown in Tab. 1, where the stylized images
by our compressed model are top-rated on average, in line
with the qualitative comparison in Fig. 4.
(a) Content (b) Original (c) Ours
Figure 5: Stylization detail comparison of the nuanced tex-
tures ( e.g., the sky and water area) in content images, using
the original model and our compressed model.
Style distance . To further quantitatively evaluate the three
models, we explore the style similarity between the stylized
image and the style image. Intuitively, a more successfully
stylized image should be closer to the style image in the
1865


==== Page 7 ====
Table 1: User study of preference over different deep mod-
els within three universal artistic style transfer frameworks.
Stylization scheme Original FP-slimmed Ours
WCT [ 39] 33.0% 24 .3%42.7%
AdaIN [ 24] 51.1% 6 .5% 42 .4%
Gatys [ 13] 46.5% 22 .3% 31 .2%
Table 2: Style distance comparison among three models.
Values are the style distances deﬁned as Eq. ( 7) based on
the5-stage deep features (smaller is better).
Model Conv1 Conv2 Conv3 Conv4 Conv5
Original 25.544.6236.3465.5 476.5
FP-slimmed 43.8 64.3 416.4 597.8 482.1
Ours 28.143.8269.7446.4 399.0
style space, so we deﬁne style distance as
D(k)
style=/bardblG(F(k)(Istylized))−G(F(k)(Istyle))/bardbl2,(7)
whereGis the Gram matrix. Particularly, we feed the 20-
pair stylized images in the user study to the original VGG-
19 to extract features of the 5-stage layers ( ReLU_k_1 ,k∈
{1,2,3,4,5}), then the style distances are calculated based
on these features. Tab. 2shows that the stylized images
generated by the original and our compressed models are
signiﬁcantly closer to the style images than those by the FP-
slimmed model. Our model is fairly comparable with the
original one, which agrees with the user preference (Tab. 1).
Aside from the high-resolution stylized images shown
above, we show an ultra-resolution stylized image in Fig. 1.
The shapes and textures are still very clear even zoomed in
on a large scale. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrsttime
that we can obtain ultra-resolution universal style transfer
results using a single 12GB GPU. We also report the statis-
tics about the model size and speedup in Tab. 3. Our com-
pressed model is 15.5×smaller and 3.6×faster than the
original VGG-19 on GPU. Note that the total size for all the
5-stage models is only 10MB, easy to ﬁt in mobile devices.
Ablation study . Here we explore the effect of the two pro-
posed sub-schemes, collaborative distillation ( Lcollab) and
linear embedding ( Lembed ). The ablation results in Fig. 6
show that, both the linear embedding and collaboration
losses can transfer considerable knowledge from the teacher
to the student. Generally, both schemes can independently
produce fairly comparable results as the original models
even if15.5×smaller. Between the two losses, Lembed only
transfers the information of feature domain rather than im-
age domain, so its results have more distortion and also
some checkerboard effects (please zoom in and see the de-
tails of Fig. 6(c)). Meanwhile, Lcollab mainly focuses on
the image reconstruction, so it produces sharper results with
(a) C/S (b) Original (c) Lembed (d)Lcollab (e) Both
Figure 6: Ablation study of the two proposed losses on
WCT. (a) Content and style. (b) Use the original models.
(c) UseLembed . (d) Use Lcollab. (e) Both losses are used.
Content Style Original FP Ours
Figure 7: Comparison of the three models with AdaIN.
less distortion, which conﬁrms our intuition that the decoder
has considerable knowledge which we can leverage to train
a small encoder. When both losses employed, we obtain
the sweet spot of the two: The results do not have checker-
boards, and also properly maintain the artistic distortion.
4.2. Style transfer on AdaIN
We further evaluate the proposed method on AdaIN,
where the encoder-decoder collaboration task is style trans-
fer. The training process and network architectures are set
the same way as Sec. 4.1, except that the Lst(Eq. 2) is now
utilized as the collaborator loss. λsis set to10andβis
set to10. The results are shown in Fig. 7, where our com-
pressed encoder produces visually comparable results with
the original one, while FP-slimmed model degrades the vi-
sual effect signiﬁcantly. This visual evaluation is further
justiﬁed by the user study in Tab. 1, where ours and the
original model receive similar votes, signiﬁcantly more than
those of the model compressed by the FP algorithm [ 36].
4.3. Optimization­based style transfer
Although the work of [ 13] is not encoder-decoder based,
it is worthwhile to check whether the small encoder com-
pressed by our method can still perform well in this case.
Layers ofConv_k_1 (k∈ {1,2,3,4,5}) are selected for
style matching and layer Conv4_2 selected for content
matching. The L-BFGS [ 43] is used as the optimization
solver. Fig. 8shows that the compressed model can achieve
1866


==== Page 8 ====
Table 3: Summary of the original models and our compressed models. Storage is measured in PyTorch model. GFLOPs and
Inference time are measured when the content and style are both RGB images of 3000×3000 pixels. Max input resolution
is measured on GPU using PyTorch implementation, with content and style are square RGB images of the same size.
Model # Params ( 106) Storage (MB) # GFLOPs Inference time (GPU/CPU, s) Max resolution
Original 17.1 66 .6 6961 .7 31 .2/937.7 3000 ×3000
Ours 1.1(15.5×) 5.2(12.8×) 451.6(15.4×) 8.6(3.6×)/366.0(2.6×) 6000 ×6000
Content Style Original FP Ours
Figure 8: Comparison of stylized images using the method
by Gatys et al. [13], with the original model and our com-
pressed model (best viewed in color and zoomed in).
fairly comparable results with those generated by the orig-
inal VGG-19. Similar to the experiments of artistic style
transfer in Sec. 4.1, we also conduct a user study for a
more objective comparison. Results in Tab. 1show that our
compressed model is slightly less popular than the original
model (which is reasonable considering that the compressed
model has 15.5×fewer parameters), while still more pre-
ferred than the model compressed by the FP method.
5. Discussions
We brieﬂy explain why existing knowledge distillation
methods [ 44,46,60,47] generally work less effectively for
style transfer. The FP-pruned VGG-19 (called A) in our
paper achieves a top-5 accuracy of 83.47% on ImageNet.
We had an intermediate model (called B) in the middle of
the ﬁne-tuning process of A, with a lower top-5 accuracy
80.55%. We compare the stylization quality of AandB
with WCT and ﬁnd that the results of Adoes notshow any
advantage over those of Bas the unpleasant messy textures
still remain (Fig. 9, Row 1). This implies that a small accu-
racy gain in classiﬁcation (typically less than 3%, which is
what the state-of-the-art distillation methods [ 44,46,60,47]
can achieve at most) cannot really translate to the perceptual
improvement in neural style transfer. In addition, we only
apply the proposed method to distilling the encoder, not the
decoder , because it will simply degrade the visual quality
otherwise, as shown in Fig. 9(Row 2). The reason is that,
the decoder is responsible for image reconstruction, which
is already trained with proper supervisions, i.e., the pixel
and perceptual losses in Eq. ( 1). When applying distillation
(a) C/S (b) FP ( A) (c) FP ( B) (d) Ours
(a) C/S (b) Original (c) Ours KD (d) Ours No KD
Figure 9: Row 1: Stylization comparison of FP-pruned
modelAandB. Row 2: Stylization comparison between de-
coders using and not using KD with the WCT framework.
to the small decoder, the extra supervision from the original
decoder does not help but undermining the effect of loss ( 1),
thus deteriorating the visual quality of stylized results.
6. Conclusion
Input resolution is an important limitation for universal
neural style transfer due to the large model size of CNNs. In
this work, we present a new knowledge distillation method
(i.e., Collaborative Distillation) to reduce the model size
of VGG-19, which exploits the phenomenon that encoder-
decoder pairs in universal style transfer construct an exclu-
sive collaborative relationship. To resolve the feature size
mismatch problem, a linear embedding scheme is further
proposed. Extensive experiments show the merits of our
method on two universal stylization approaches (WCT and
AdaIN). Further experiments within the Gatys stylization
framework demonstrate the generality of our approach on
the optimization-based style transfer paradigm. Although
we mainly focus on neural style transfer in this work, the
encoder-decoder scheme is also generally utilized in other
low-level vision tasks like super-resolution and image in-
painting. The performance of our method on these tasks is
worth exploring, which we leave as the future work.
Acknowledgment
We thank Wei Gao and Lixin Liu for helpful discussions.
This work is supported in part by the Natural Key R&D Pro-
gram of China under Grant No.2017YFB1002400 and US
National Science Foundation CAREER Grant No.1149783.
1867


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be
deep? In NeurIPS , 2014. 2,3
[2] Cristian Bucilu ˇa, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-
Mizil. Model compression. In SIGKDD , 2006. 2,3
[3] Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Jing Liao, Nenghai Yu, and Gang
Hua. Stylebank: An explicit representation for neural image
style transfer. In CVPR , 2017. 3
[4] Tian Qi Chen and Mark Schmidt. Fast patch-based style
transfer of arbitrary style. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04337 ,
2016. 2,3
[5] Matthieu Courbariaux, Itay Hubara, Daniel Soudry, Ran
El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. Binarized neural networks:
Training deep neural networks with weights and activations
constrained to +1 or -1. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02830 ,
2016. 3
[6] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In CVPR , 2009. 5
[7] Emily L Denton, Wojciech Zaremba, Joan Bruna, Yann Le-
Cun, and Rob Fergus. Exploiting linear structure within
convolutional networks for efﬁcient evaluation. In NeurIPS ,
2014. 3
[8] Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur.
A learned representation for artistic style. In ICLR , 2017. 3
[9] Alexei A Efros and Thomas K Leung. Texture synthesis by
non-parametric sampling. In ICCV , 1999. 3
[10] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter.
Neural architecture search: A survey. JMLR , 20(55):1–21,
2019. 3
[11] Wei Gao, Yijun Li, Yihang Yin, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Fast
video multi-style transfer. In WACV , 2020. 3
[12] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge.
Texture synthesis using convolutional neural networks. In
NeurIPS , 2015. 4
[13] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Im-
age style transfer using convolutional neural networks. In
CVPR , 2016. 2,3,4,5,7,8
[14] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, Aaron
Hertzmann, and Eli Shechtman. Controlling perceptual fac-
tors in neural style transfer. In CVPR , 2017. 3
[15] Bruce Gooch and Amy Gooch. Non-photorealistic render-
ing. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2001. 3
[16] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS ,
2014. 3
[17] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep com-
pression: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning,
trained quantization and huffman coding. In ICLR , 2016. 2,
3
[18] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William J Dally. Learn-
ing both weights and connections for efﬁcient neural net-
work. In NeurIPS , 2015. 2,3
[19] Yihui He, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jian Sun. Channel pruning
for accelerating very deep neural networks. In ICCV , 2017.
2,3[20] Aaron Hertzmann, Charles E Jacobs, Nuria Oliver, Brian
Curless, and David H Salesin. Image analogies. In SIG-
GRAPH , 2001. 3
[21] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distill-
ing the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015. 2,3
[22] Miliha Hossain. Whitening and coloring transforms for mul-
tivariate gaussian random variables. Project Rhea , 2016. 3
[23] Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry
Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco An-
dreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convolu-
tional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.04861 , 2017. 3
[24] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in
real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In ICCV ,
2017. 2,3,4,5,7
[25] Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-
Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. Quantized neural networks:
Training neural networks with low precision weights and ac-
tivations. JMLR , 18(1):6869–6898, 2017. 3
[26] Forrest N Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W Moskewicz,
Khalid Ashraf, William J Dally, and Kurt Keutzer.
Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer pa-
rameters and <0.5 mb model size. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07360 , 2016. 3
[27] Max Jaderberg, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman.
Speeding up convolutional neural networks with low rank
expansions. In BMVC , 2014. 3
[28] Yongcheng Jing, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng, Jingwen Ye,
and Mingli Song. Neural style transfer: A review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.04058 , 2017. 6
[29] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual
losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In
ECCV , 2016. 3,4
[30] Andrej Junginger, Markus Hanselmann, Thilo Strauss, Se-
bastian Boblest, Jens Buchner, and Holger Ulmer. Unpaired
high-resolution and scalable style transfer using generative
adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05724 ,
2018. 3
[31] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In ICLR , 2015. 5
[32] Vadim Lebedev, Yaroslav Ganin, Maksim Rakhuba, Ivan Os-
eledets, and Victor Lempitsky. Speeding-up convolutional
neural networks using ﬁne-tuned cp-decomposition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6553 , 2014. 3
[33] Yann LeCun, John S Denker, and Sara A Solla. Optimal
brain damage. In NeurIPS , 1990. 3
[34] Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Combining markov random
ﬁelds and convolutional neural networks for image synthesis.
InCVPR , 2016. 3
[35] Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Precomputed real-time texture
synthesis with markovian generative adversarial networks. In
ECCV , 2016. 3
[36] Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan Samet, and
Hans Peter Graf. Pruning ﬁlters for efﬁcient convnets. In
ICLR , 2017. 2,3,5,6,7
1868


==== Page 10 ====
[37] Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
Learning linear transformations for fast arbitrary style trans-
fer. In CVPR , 2019. 2,3
[38] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diversiﬁed texture synthesis with
feed-forward networks. In CVPR , 2017. 3
[39] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal style transfer via feature
transforms. In NeurIPS , 2017. 2,3,4,5,6,7
[40] Yijun Li, Ming-Yu Liu, Xueting Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and
Jan Kautz. A closed-form solution to photorealistic image
stylization. In ECCV , 2018. 2
[41] Jing Liao, Yuan Yao, Lu Yuan, Gang Hua, and Sing Bing
Kang. Visual attribute transfer through deep image analogy.
ACM Transactions on Graphics , 36(4):1–15, 2017. 3
[42] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays,
Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll ´ar, and C Lawrence
Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In
ECCV , 2014. 5
[43] Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs
method for large scale optimization. Mathematical Program-
ming , 45(1-3):503–528, 1989. 7
[44] Yufan Liu, Jiajiong Cao, Bing Li, Chunfeng Yuan, Weiming
Hu, Yangxi Li, and Yunqiang Duan. Knowledge distillation
via instance relationship graph. In CVPR , 2019. 2,8
[45] Ningning Ma, Xiangyu Zhang, Hai-Tao Zheng, and Jian Sun.
Shufﬂenet v2: Practical guidelines for efﬁcient cnn architec-
ture design. In ECCV , 2018. 3
[46] Wonpyo Park, Dongju Kim, Yan Lu, and Minsu Cho. Rela-
tional knowledge distillation. In CVPR , 2019. 2,8
[47] Baoyun Peng, Xiao Jin, Jiaheng Liu, Dongsheng Li, Yichao
Wu, Yu Liu, Shunfeng Zhou, and Zhaoning Zhang. Correla-
tion congruence for knowledge distillation. In ICCV , 2019.
2,8
[48] Mohammad Rastegari, Vicente Ordonez, Joseph Redmon,
and Ali Farhadi. Xnor-net: Imagenet classiﬁcation using bi-
nary convolutional neural networks. In ECCV , 2016. 2,3
[49] Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Dmytro Kotovenko, Sabine Lang, and
Bj¨orn Ommer. A style-aware content loss for real-time hd
style transfer. In ECCV , 2018. 3
[50] Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zh-
moginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mobilenetv2: Inverted
residuals and linear bottlenecks. In CVPR , 2018. 3
[51] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convo-
lutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014. 2,3
[52] Thomas Strothotte and Stefan Schlechtweg. Non-
photorealistic computer graphics: modeling, rendering, and
animation . Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. 3
[53] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model
scaling for convolutional neural networks. In ICML , 2019. 3
[54] Dmitry Ulyanov, Vadim Lebedev, Andrea Vedaldi, and Vic-
tor Lempitsky. Texture networks: Feed-forward synthesis of
textures and stylized images. In ICML , 2016. 3
[55] Huan Wang, Xinyi Hu, Qiming Zhang, Yuehai Wang, Lu
Yu, and Haoji Hu. Structured pruning for efﬁcient con-
volutional neural networks via incremental regularization.
JSTSP , 2019. 3[56] Huan Wang, Qiming Zhang, Yuehai Wang, and Haoji Hu.
Structured probabilistic pruning for convolutional neural net-
work acceleration. In BMVC , 2018. 2,3
[57] Xin Wang, Geoffrey Oxholm, Da Zhang, and Yuan-Fang
Wang. Multimodal transfer: A hierarchical deep convolu-
tional neural network for fast artistic style transfer. In CVPR ,
2017. 3
[58] Wei Wen, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and
Hai Li. Learning structured sparsity in deep neural networks.
InNeurIPS , 2016. 2,3
[59] Pierre Wilmot, Eric Risser, and Connelly Barnes. Stable and
controllable neural texture synthesis and style transfer using
histogram losses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08893 , 2017. 3
[60] Lu Yu, Vacit Oguz Yazici, Xialei Liu, Joost van de Wei-
jer, Yongmei Cheng, and Arnau Ramisa. Learning metrics
from teachers: Compact networks for image embedding. In
CVPR , 2019. 2,8
[61] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Paying more at-
tention to attention: Improving the performance of convolu-
tional neural networks via attention transfer. In ICLR , 2017.
3
[62] Xiangyu Zhang, Xinyu Zhou, Mengxiao Lin, and Jian Sun.
Shufﬂenet: An extremely efﬁcient convolutional neural net-
work for mobile devices. In CVPR , 2018. 3
[63] X. Zhang, J. Zou, K. He, and J. Sun. Accelerating very
deep convolutional networks for classiﬁcation and detection.
TPAMI , 38(10):1943–1955, 2016. 2,3
[64] Yulun Zhang, Chen Fang, Yilin Wang, Zhaowen Wang, Zhe
Lin, Yun Fu, and Jimei Yang. Multimodal style transfer via
graph cuts. In ICCV , 2019. 3
[65] Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen,
and Yuheng Zou. Dorefa-net: Training low bitwidth convo-
lutional neural networks with low bitwidth gradients. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.06160 , 2016. 3
1869


