==== Page 1 ====
Combining Deep Reinforcement Learning and Search
for Imperfect-Information Games
Noam BrownAnton BakhtinAdam Lerer Qucheng Gong
Facebook AI Research
{noambrown,yolo,alerer,qucheng}@fb.com
Abstract
The combination of deep reinforcement learning and search at both training and test
time is a powerful paradigm that has led to a number of successes in single-agent
settings and perfect-information games, best exempliﬁed by AlphaZero. However,
prior algorithms of this form cannot cope with imperfect-information games. This
paper presents ReBeL, a general framework for self-play reinforcement learning
and search that provably converges to a Nash equilibrium in any two-player zero-
sum game. In the simpler setting of perfect-information games, ReBeL reduces to
an algorithm similar to AlphaZero. Results in two different imperfect-information
games show ReBeL converges to an approximate Nash equilibrium. We also show
ReBeL achieves superhuman performance in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em
poker, while using far less domain knowledge than any prior poker AI.
1 Introduction
Combining reinforcement learning with search at both training and test time (RL+Search) has led to
a number of major successes in AI in recent years. For example, the AlphaZero algorithm achieves
state-of-the-art performance in the perfect-information games of Go, chess, and shogi [55].
However, prior RL+Search algorithms do not work in imperfect-information games because they
make a number of assumptions that no longer hold in these settings. An example of this is illustrated
in Figure 1a, which shows a modiﬁed form of Rock-Paper-Scissors in which the winner receives two
points (and the loser loses two points) when either player chooses Scissors [ 15]. The ﬁgure shows the
game in a sequential form in which player 2 acts after player 1 but does not observe player 1’s action.
𝑷𝟏 
𝑷𝟐 
 𝑷𝟐 
 𝑷𝟐 
Paper  𝑃=0.4 𝑃=0.2 𝑃=0.4 
Paper  
0,0 -1,1 2,-2 Paper  
1,-1 0,0 -2,2 Paper  
-2,2 2,-2 0,0 
(1a) Variant of Rock-Paper-Scissors in which the opti-
mal player 1 policy is (R=0.4, P=0.4, S=0.2). Terminal
values are color-coded. The dotted lines mean player 2
does not know which node they are in.
𝑷𝟏 Paper  
0 0 0 (1b) The player 1 subgame when using perfect-
information one-ply search. Leaf values are deter-
mined by the full-game equilibrium. There is insufﬁ-
cient information for ﬁnding (R=0.4, P=0.4, S=0.2).
The optimal policy for both players in this modiﬁed version of the game is to choose Rock and Paper
with 40% probability, and Scissors with 20%. In that case, each action results in an expected value of
zero. However, as shown in Figure 1b, if player 1 were to conduct one-ply lookahead search as is
Equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
done in perfect-information games (in which the equilibrium value of a state is substituted at a leaf
node), then there would not be enough information for player 1 to arrive at this optimal policy.
This illustrates a critical challenge of imperfect-information games: unlike perfect-information
games and single-agent settings, the value of an action may depend on the probability it is chosen.
Thus, a state deﬁned only by the sequence of actions and observations does not have a unique
value and therefore existing RL+Search algorithms such as AlphaZero are not sound in imperfect-
information games. Recent AI breakthroughs in imperfect-information games have highlighted the
importance of search at test time [ 40,12,14,37], but combining RL and search during training in
imperfect-information games has been an open problem.
This paper introduces ReBeL (Recursive Belief-based Learning), a general RL+Search framework
that converges to a Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games. ReBeL builds on prior work in
which the notion of “state” is expanded to include the probabilistic belief distribution of all agents
about what state they may be in, based on common knowledge observations and policies for all
agents. Our algorithm trains a value network and a policy network for these expanded states through
self-play reinforcement learning. Additionally, the algorithm uses the value and policy network for
search during self play.
ReBeL provably converges to a Nash equilibrium in all two-player zero-sum games. In perfect-
information games, ReBeL simpliﬁes to an algorithm similar to AlphaZero, with the major difference
being in the type of search algorithm used. Experimental results show that ReBeL is effective in
large-scale games and defeats a top human professional with statistical signiﬁcance in the benchmark
game of heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker while using far less expert domain knowledge than
any previous poker AI. We also show that ReBeL approximates a Nash equilibrium in Liar’s Dice,
another benchmark imperfect-information game, and open source our implementation of it.2
2 Related Work
At a high level, ReBeL resembles past RL+Search algorithms used in perfect-information games [ 59,
56,1,55,50]. These algorithms train a value network through self play. During training, a search
algorithm is used in which the values of leaf nodes are determined via the value function. Additionally,
a policy network may be used to guide search. These forms of RL+Search have been critical to
achieving superhuman performance in benchmark perfect-information games. For example, so far no
AI agent has achieved superhuman performance in Go without using search at both training and test
time. However, these RL+Search algorithms are not theoretically sound in imperfect-information
games and have not been shown to be successful in such settings.
A critical element of our imperfect-information RL+Search framework is to use an expanded notion of
“state”, which we refer to as a public belief state (PBS) . PBSs are deﬁned by a common-knowledge
belief distribution over states, determined by the public observations shared by all agents and the
policies of all agents. PBSs can be viewed as a multi-agent generalization of belief states used in
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [ 31]. The concept of PBSs originated
in work on decentralized multi-agent POMDPs [ 43,45,19] and has been widely used since then in
imperfect-information games more broadly [40, 20, 53, 29].
ReBeL builds upon the idea of using a PBS value function during search, which was previously
used in the poker AI DeepStack [ 40]. However, DeepStack’s value function was trained not through
self-play RL, but rather by generating random PBSs, including random probability distributions, and
estimating their values using search. This would be like learning a value function for Go by randomly
placing stones on the board. This is not an efﬁcient way of learning a value function because the vast
majority of randomly generated situations would not be relevant in actual play. DeepStack coped with
this by using handcrafted features to reduce the dimensionality of the public belief state space, by
sampling PBSs from a distribution based on expert domain knowledge, and by using domain-speciﬁc
abstractions to circumvent the need for a value network when close to the end of the game.
An alternative approach for depth-limited search in imperfect-information games that does not use
a value function for PBSs was used in the Pluribus poker AI to defeat elite humans in multiplayer
poker [ 15,14]. This approach trains a population of “blueprint” policies without using search. At
test time, the approach conducts depth-limited search by allowing each agent to choose a blueprint
policy from the population at leaf nodes. The value of the leaf node is the expected value of each
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/rebel
2

==== Page 3 ====
agent playing their chosen blueprint policy against all the other agents’ choice for the rest of the
game. While this approach has been successful in poker, it does not use search during training and
therefore requires strong blueprint policies to be computed without search. Also, the computational
cost of the search algorithm grows linearly with the number of blueprint policies.
3 Notation and Background
We assume that the rules of the game and the agents’ policies (including search algorithms) are
common knowledge [2].3That is, they are known by all agents, all agents know they are known by
all agents, etc. However, the outcome of stochastic algorithms (i.e., the random seeds) are not known.
In Section 6 we show how to remove the assumption that we know another player’s policy.
Our notation is based on that of factored observation games [ 34] which is a modiﬁcation of partially
observable stochastic games [ 26] that distinguishes between private and public observations. We
consider a game with N=f1;2;:::;Ngagents.
Aworld state w2W is a state in the game. A=A1A 2:::ANis the space of joint actions.
Ai(w)denotes the legal actions for agent iatwanda= (a1;a2;:::;aN)2A denotes a joint action.
After a joint action ais chosen, a transition function Tdetermines the next world state w0drawn from
the probability distribution T(w;a)2W. After joint action a, agentireceives a rewardRi(w;a).
Upon transition from world state wtow0via joint action a, agentireceives a private observation
from a functionOpriv(i)(w;a;w0). Additionally, all agents receive a public observation from a
functionOpub(w;a;w0). Public observations may include observations of publicly taken actions by
agents. For example, in many recreational games, including poker, all betting actions are public.
Ahistory (also called a trajectory) is a ﬁnite sequence of legal actions and world states, denoted
h= (w0;a0;w1;a1;:::;wt). An infostate (also called an action-observation history (AOH) ) for
agentiis a sequence of an agent’s observations and actions si= (O0
i;a0
i;O1
i;a1
i;:::;Ot
i)where
Ok
i= 
Opriv(i)(wk 1;ak 1;wk);Opub(wk 1;ak 1;wk)
. The unique infostate corresponding to a
historyhfor agentiis denotedsi(h). The set of histories that correspond to siis denotedH(si).
Apublic state is a sequence spub= (O0
pub;O1
pub;:::;Ot
pub)of public observations. The unique public
state corresponding to a history hand an infostate siis denotedspub(h)andspub(si), respectively.
The set of histories that match the sequence of public observation of spubis denotedH(spub).
For example, consider a game where two players roll two six-sided dice each. One die of each player
is publicly visible; the other die is only observed by the player who rolled it. Suppose player 1rolls a
3and a 4(with 3being the hidden die), and player 2rolls a 5and a 6(with 5being the hidden die).
The history (and world state) is h= 
(3;4);(5;6)
. The set of histories corresponding to player 2’s
infostate isH(s2) = 
(x;4);(5;6)
jx2f1;2;3;4;5;6g	
, sojH(s2)j= 6. The set of histories
corresponding to spubisH(spub) = 
(x;4);(y;6)
jx;y2f1;2;3;4;5;6g	
, sojH(spub)j= 36 .
Public states provide an easy way to reason about common knowledge in a game. All agents observe
the same public sequence spub, and therefore it is common knowledge among all agents that the true
history is some h2H(spub).4
An agent’s policyiis a function mapping from an infostate to a probability distribution over actions.
Apolicy proﬁle is a tuple of policies (1;2;:::;N). The expected sum of future rewards (also
called the expected value (EV) ) for agentiin historyhwhen all agents play policy proﬁle is
denotedv
i(h). The EV for the entire game is denoted vi(). ANash equilibrium is a policy proﬁle
such that no agent can achieve a higher EV by switching to a different policy [ 42]. Formally, is
a Nash equilibrium if for every agent i,vi() = maxivi(i;
 i)where idenotes the policy
of all agents other than i. A Nash equilibrium policy is a policy
ithat is part of some Nash
equilibrium .
Asubgame is deﬁned by a root history hin a perfect-information game and all histories that can
be reached going forward. In other words, it is identical to the original game except it starts at h.
3This is a common assumption in game theory. One argument for it is that in repeated play an adversary
would eventually determine an agent’s policy.
4As explained in [ 34], it may be possible for agents to infer common knowledge beyond just public
observations. However, doing this additional reasoning is inefﬁcient both theoretically and practically.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Adepth-limited subgame is a subgame that extends only for a limited number of actions into the
future. Histories at the bottom of a depth-limited subgame (i.e., histories that have no legal actions
in the depth-limited subgame) but that have at least one legal action in the full game are called leaf
nodes . In this paper, we assume for simplicity that search is performed over ﬁxed-size depth-limited
subgame (as opposed to Monte Carlo Tree Search, which grows the subgame over time [23]).
A game is two-player zero-sum (2p0s) if there are exactly two players and R1(w;a) = R2(w;a)
for every world state wand actiona. In 2p0s perfect-information games, there always exists a Nash
equilibrium that depends only on the current world state wrather than the entire history h. Thus, in
2p0s perfect-information games a policy can be deﬁned for world states and a subgame can be deﬁned
as rooted at a world state. Additionally, in 2p0s perfect-information games every world state whas
a unique value vi(w)for each agent i, wherev1(w) = v2(w), deﬁned by both agents playing a
Nash equilibrium in any subgame rooted at that world state. Our theoretical and empirical results are
limited to 2p0s games, though related techniques have been empirically successful in some settings
with more players [ 14]. A typical goal for RL in 2p0s perfect-information games is to learn vi. With
that value function, an agent can compute its optimal next move by solving a depth-limited subgame
that is rooted at its current world state and where the value of every leaf node zis set tovi(z)[54,49].
4 From World States to Public Belief States
In this section we describe a mechanism for converting any imperfect-information game into a
continuous state (and action) space perfect-information game where the state description contains the
probabilistic belief distribution of all agents. In this way, techniques that have been applied to perfect-
information games can also be applied to imperfect-information games (with some modiﬁcations).
For intuition, consider a game in which one of 52 cards is privately dealt to each player. On each
turn, a player chooses between three actions: fold, call, and raise. Eventually the game ends and
players receive a reward. Now consider a modiﬁcation of this game in which the players cannot see
their private cards; instead, their cards are seen by a “referee”. On a player’s turn, they announce the
probability they would take each action with each possible private card. The referee then samples an
action on the player’s behalf from the announced probability distribution for the player’s true private
card. When this game starts, each player’s belief distribution about their private card is uniform
random. However, after each action by the referee, players can update their belief distribution about
which card they are holding via Bayes’ Rule. Likewise, players can update their belief distribution
about the opponent’s private card through the same operation. Thus, the probability that each player
is holding each private card is common knowledge among all players at all times in this game.
A critical insight is that these two games are strategically identical , but the latter contains no private
information and is instead a continuous state (and action) space perfect-information game. While
players do not announce their action probabilities for each possible card in the ﬁrst game, we assume
(as stated in Section 3) that all players’ policies are common knowledge, and therefore the probability
that a player would choose each action for each possible card is indeed known by all players. Of
course, at test time (e.g., when our agent actually plays against a human opponent) the opponent does
not actually announce their entire policy and therefore our agent does not know the true probability
distribution over opponent cards. We later address this problem in Section 6.
We refer to the ﬁrst game as the discrete representation and the second game as the belief repre-
sentation . In the example above, a history in the belief representation, which we refer to as a public
belief state (PBS) , is described by the sequence of public observations and 104 probabilities (the
probability that each player holds each of the 52 possible private card); an “action” is described by
156 probabilities (one per discrete action per private card). In general terms, a PBS is described by a
joint probability distribution over the agents’ possible infostates [ 43,45,19].5Formally, let Si(spub)
be the set of infostates that player imay be in given a public state spuband let S1(spub)denote a
probability distribution over the elements of S1(spub). Then PBS= (S1(spub);:::;SN(spub)).6
In perfect-information games, the discrete representation and belief representation are identical.
5One could alternatively deﬁne a PBS as a probability distribution over histories in H(spub)for public state
spub. However, it is proven that any PBS that can arise in play can always be described by a joint probability
distribution over the agents’ possible infostates [45, 52], so we use this latter deﬁnition for simplicity.
6Frequently, a PBS can be compactly summarized by discarding parts of the history that are no longer
relevant. For example, in poker we do not need to track the entire history of actions, but just the amount of
money each player has in the pot, the public board cards, and whether there were any bets in the current round.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Since a PBS is a history of the perfect-information belief-representation game, a subgame can be
rooted at a PBS.7The discrete-representation interpretation of such a subgame is that at the start of
the subgame a history is sampled from the joint probability distribution of the PBS, and then the
game proceeds as it would in the original game. The value for agent iof PBSwhen all players play
policy proﬁle isV
i() =P
h2H(spub())(p(hj)v
i(h)). Just as world states have unique values in
2p0s perfect-information games, in 2p0s games (both perfect-information and imperfect-information)
every PBShas a unique value Vi()for each agent i, whereV1() = V2(), deﬁned by both
players playing a Nash equilibrium in the subgame rooted at the PBS.
Since any imperfect-information game can be viewed as a perfect-information game consisting of
PBSs (i.e., the belief representation), in theory we could approximate a solution of any 2p0s imperfect-
information game by running a perfect-information RL+Search algorithm on a discretization of the
belief representation. However, as shown in the example above, belief representations can be very
high-dimensional continuous spaces, so conducting search (i.e., approximating the optimal policy in a
depth-limited subgame) as is done in perfect-information games would be intractable. Fortunately, in
2p0s games, these high-dimensional belief representations are convex optimization problems. ReBeL
leverages this fact by conducting search via an iterative gradient-ascent-like algorithm.
ReBeL’s search algorithm operates on supergradients (the equivalent of subgradients but for concave
functions) of the PBS value function at leaf nodes, rather than on PBS values directly. Speciﬁcally,
the search algorithms require the values of infostates for PBSs [ 16,40]. In a 2p0sum game, the value
of infostatesiinassuming all other players play Nash equilibrium is the maximum value that
playericould obtain for sithrough any policy in the subgame rooted at . Formally,
v
i(sij) = max
iX
h2H(si)p(hjsi; i)vhi;
 ii
i (h) (1)
wherep(hjsi; i)is the probability of being in history hassumingsiis reached and the joint
probability distribution over infostates for players other than iis i. Theorem 1 proves that infostate
values can be interpreted as a supergradient of the PBS value function in 2p0s games.
Theorem 1. For any PBS = (1;2)(for the beliefs over player 1 and 2 infostates respectively)
and any policy that is a Nash equilibrium of the subgame rooted at ,
v
1(s1j) =V1() + g^s1 (2)
where gis a supergradient of an extension of V1()to unnormalized belief distributions and ^s1is the
unit vector in direction s1.
All proofs are presented in the appendix.
Since ReBeL’s search algorithm uses infostate values, so rather than learn a PBS value function
ReBeL instead learns an infostate-value function ^v:B!RjS1j+jS2jthat directly approximates for
eachsithe average of the sampled v
i(sij)values produced by ReBeL at .8
5 Self Play Reinforcement Learning and Search for Public Belief States
In this section we describe ReBeL and prove that it approximates a Nash equilibrium in 2p0s games.
At the start of the game, a depth-limited subgame rooted at the initial PBS ris generated. This
subgame is solved (i.e., a Nash equilibrium is approximated) by running Titerations of an iterative
equilibrium-ﬁnding algorithm in the discrete representation of the game, but using the learned value
network ^vto approximate leaf values on every iteration. During training, the infostate values at r
computed during search are added as training examples for ^vand (optionally) the subgame policies
are added as training examples for the policy network. Next, a leaf node zis sampled and the process
repeats with the PBS at zbeing the new subgame root. Appendix B shows detailed pseudocode.
7Past work deﬁnes a subgame to be rooted at a public state [ 16,8,41,40,11,33,57,52]. However,
imperfect-information subgames rooted at a public state do not have well-deﬁned values.
8Unlike the PBS value Vi(), the infostate values may not be unique and may depend on which Nash
equilibrium is played in the subgame. Nevertheless, any linear combination of supergradients is itself a
supergradient since the set of all supergradients is a convex set [48].
5

==== Page 6 ====
Algorithm 1 ReBeL: RL and Search for Imperfect-Information Games
function SELFPLAY(r;v;;Dv;D) .ris the current PBS
while !ISTERMINAL (r)do
G CONSTRUCT SUBGAME (r)
;twarm INITIALIZE POLICY (G;).twarm= 0and0is uniform if no warm start
G SETLEAFVALUES (G;;twarm;v)
v(r) COMPUTE EV(G;twarm)
tsampleunifftwarm+ 1;Tg .Sample an iteration
fort= (twarm+ 1)::Tdo
ift=tsample then
0
r SAMPLE LEAF(G;t 1) .Sample one or multiple leaf PBSs
t UPDATE POLICY (G;t 1)
 t
t+1+1
t+1t
G SETLEAFVALUES (G;;t;v)
v(r) t
t+1v(r) +1
t+1COMPUTE EV(G;t)
Addfr;v(r)gtoDv.Add to value net training data
for2Gdo .Loop over the PBS at every public state in G
Addf;()gtoD.Add to policy net training data (optional)
r 0
r
5.1 Search in a depth-limited imperfect-information subgame
In this section we describe the search algorithm ReBeL uses to solve depth-limited subgames. We
assume for simplicity that the depth of the subgame is pre-determined and ﬁxed. The subgame is
solved in the discrete representation and the solution is then converted to the belief representation.
There exist a number of iterative algorithms for solving imperfect-information games [ 5,61,28,
36,35]. We describe ReBeL assuming the counterfactual regret minimization - decomposition
(CFR-D) algorithm is used [61, 16, 40]. CFR is the most popular equilibrium-ﬁnding algorithm for
imperfect-information games, and CFR-D is an algorithm that solves depth-limited subgames via
CFR. However, ReBeL is ﬂexible with respect to the choice of search algorithm and in Section 8 we
also show experimental results for ﬁctitious play (FP) [5].
On each iteration t, CFR-D determines a policy proﬁle tin the subgame. Next, the value of every
discrete representation leaf node zis set to ^v(si(z)jt
z), wheret
zdenotes the PBS at zwhen
agents play according to t. This means that the value of a leaf node during search is conditional
ont. Thus, the leaf node values change every iteration. Given tand the leaf node values, each
infostate in rhas a well-deﬁned value. This vector of values, denoted vt(r), is stored. Next,
CFR-D chooses a new policy proﬁle t+1, and the process repeats for Titerations.
When using CFR-D, the average policy proﬁle Tconverges to a Nash equilibrium as T!1 , rather
than the policy on the ﬁnal iteration. Therefore, after running CFR-D for Titerations in the subgame
rooted at PBS r, the value vector (PT
t=1vt(r))=Tis added to the training data for ^v(r).
Appendix I introduces CFR-A VG , a modiﬁcation of CFR-D that sets the value of leaf node zto
^v(si(z)jt
z)rather than ^v(si(z)jt
z), where tdenotes the average policy proﬁle up to iteration t.
CFR-A VG addresses some weaknesses of CFR-D.
5.2 Self-play reinforcement learning
We now explain how ReBeL trains a PBS value network through self play. After solving a subgame
rooted at PBS rvia search (as described in Section 5.1), the value vector for the root infostates is
added to the training dataset for ^v. Next, a leaf PBS 0
ris sampled and a new subgame rooted at 0
ris
solved. This process repeats until the game ends.
Since the subgames are solved using an iterative algorithm, we want ^vto be accurate for leaf PBSs
on every iteration. Therefore, a leaf node zis sampled according to ton a random iteration
tuniff0;T 1g, whereTis the number of iterations of the search algorithm.9To ensure sufﬁcient
9For FP, we pick a random agent iand sample according to (t
i;t
 i)to reﬂect the search operation.
6

==== Page 7 ====
exploration, one agent samples random actions with probabilility  >0.10In CFR-D0
r=t
z,
while in CFR-A VG and FP 0
r=t
z.
Theorem 2 states that, with perfect function approximation, running Algorithm 1 will produce a
value network whose error is bounded by O(1p
T)for any PBS that could be encountered during play,
whereTis the number of CFR iterations being run in subgames.
Theorem 2. Consider an idealized value approximator that returns the most recent sample of the
value for sampled PBSs, and 0 otherwise. Running Algorithm 1 with Titerations of CFR in each
subgame will produce a value approximator that has error of at mostCp
Tfor any PBS that could be
encountered during play, where Cis a game-dependent constant.
ReBeL as described so far trains the value network through bootstrapping. One could alternatively
train the value network using rewards actually received over the course of the game when the agents do
not go off-policy. There is a trade-off between bias and variance between these two approaches [ 51].
5.3 Adding a policy network
Algorithm 1 will result in ^vconverging correctly even if a policy network is not used. However,
initializing the subgame policy via a policy network may reduce the number of iterations needed
to closely approximate a Nash equilibrium. Additionally, it may improve the accuracy of the value
network by allowing the value network to focus on predicting PBS values over a more narrow domain.
Algorithm 1 can train a policy network ^ :!(A)jS1j+jS2jby adding T()for each PBS in
the subgame to a training dataset each time a subgame is solved (i.e., Titerations of CFR have been
run in the subgame). Appendix J describes a technique, based on [ 10], for warm starting equilibrium
ﬁnding given the initial policy from the policy network.
6 Playing According to an Equilibrium at Test Time
This section proves that running Algorithm 1 at test time with an accurately trained PBS value
network will result in playing a Nash equilibrium policy in expectation even if we do not know the
opponent’s policy. During self play training we assumed, as stated in Section 3, that both players’
policies are common knowledge. This allows us to exactly compute the PBS we are in. However, at
test time we do not know our opponent’s entire policy, and therefore we do not know the PBS. This is
a problem for conducting search, because search is always rooted at a PBS. For example, consider
again the game of modiﬁed Rock-Paper-Scissors illustrated in Figure 1a. For simplicity, assume that
^vis perfect. Suppose that we are player 2 and player 1 has just acted. In order to now conduct search
as player 2, our algorithm requires a root PBS. What should this PBS be?
An intuitive choice, referred to as unsafe search [ 25,22], is to ﬁrst run CFR for Titerations for
player 1’s ﬁrst move (for some large T), which results in a player 1 policy such as (R= 0:4001;P=
0:3999;S= 0:2). Unsafe search passes down the beliefs resulting from that policy, and then
computes our optimal policy as player 2. This would result in a policy of (R= 0;P= 1;S= 0) for
player 2. Clearly, this is not a Nash equilibrium. Moreover, if our opponent knew we would end up
playing this policy (which we assume they would know since we assume they know the algorithm we
run to generate the policy), then they could exploit us by playing (R= 0;P= 0;S= 1) .
This problem demonstrates the need for safe search, which is a search algorithm that ensures we
play a Nash equilibrium policy in expectation. Importantly, it is notnecessary for the policy that the
algorithm outputs to always be a Nash equilibrium. It is only necessary that the algorithm outputs a
Nash equilibrium policy in expectation . For example, in modiﬁed Rock-Paper-Scissors it is ﬁne for
an algorithm to output a policy of 100% Rock, so long as the probability it outputs that policy is 40%.
All past safe search approaches introduce additional constraints to the search algorithm [ 16,41,11,
57]. Those additional constraints hurt performance in practice compared to unsafe search [ 16,11]
and greatly complicate search, so they were never fully used in any competitive agent. Instead,
all previous search-based imperfect-information game agents used unsafe search either partially or
entirely [ 40,12,15,14,53]. Moreover, using prior safe search techniques at test time may result in
the agent encountering PBSs that were not encountered during self-play training and therefore may
result in poor approximations from the value and policy network.
10The algorithm is still correct if all agents sample random actions with probability , but that is less efﬁcient
because the value of a leaf node that can only be reached if both agents go off policy is irrelevant.
7

==== Page 8 ====
We now prove that safe search can be achieved without any additional constraints by simply running
the same algorithm at test time that we described for training . This result applies regardless of
how the value network was trained and so can be applied to prior algorithms that use PBS value
functions [ 40,53]. Speciﬁcally, when conducting search at test time we pick a random iteration and
assume all players’ policies match the policies on that iteration. Theorem 3, the proof of which is in
Section G, states that once a value network is trained according to Theorem 2, using Algorithm 1 at
test time (without off-policy exploration) will approximate a Nash equilibrium.
Theorem 3. If Algorithm 1 is run at test time with no off-policy exploration, a value network with
error at most for any leaf PBS that was trained to convergence as described in Theorem 2, and with
Titerations of CFR being used to solve subgames, then the algorithm plays a (C1+C2p
T)-Nash
equilibrium, where C1;C2are game-speciﬁc constants.
Since a random iteration is selected, we may select a very early iteration, or even the ﬁrst iteration,
in which the policy is extremely poor. This can be mitigated by using modern equilibrium-ﬁnding
algorithms, such as Linear CFR [13], that assign little or no weight to the early iterations.
7 Experimental Setup
We measure exploitability of a policy, which isP
i2Nmaxvi(;
 i)=jNj. All CFR experi-
ments use alternating-updates Linear CFR [ 13]. All FP experiments use alternating-updates Linear
Optimistic FP, which is a novel variant we present in Appendix H.
We evaluate on the benchmark imperfect-information games of heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em
poker (HUNL) and Liar’s Dice. The rules for both games are provided in Appendix C. We also
evaluate our techniques on turn endgame hold’em (TEH), a variant of no-limit Texas hold’em in
which both players automatically check/call for the ﬁrst two of the four betting rounds in the game.
In HUNL and TEH, we reduce the action space to at most nine actions using domain knowledge of
typical bet sizes. However, our agent responds to any “off-tree” action at test time by adding the
action to the subgame [ 15,14]. The bet sizes and stack sizes are randomized during training. For
TEH we train on the full game and measure exploitability on the case of both players having $20,000,
unperturbed bet sizes, and the ﬁrst four board cards being 37~T}K. For HUNL, our agent uses
far less domain knowledge than any prior competitive AI agent. Appendix D discusses the poker
domain knowledge we leveraged in ReBeL.
We approximate the value and policy functions using artiﬁcial neural networks. Both networks are
MLPs with GeLU [ 27] activation functions and LayerNorm [ 3]. Both networks are trained with
Adam [ 32]. We use pointwise Huber loss as the criterion for the value function and mean squared
error (MSE) over probabilities for the policy. In preliminary experiments we found MSE for the value
network and cross entropy for the policy network did worse. See Appendix E for the hyperparameters.
We use PyTorch [ 46] to train the networks. We found data generation to be the bottleneck due to the
sequential nature of the FP and CFR algorithms and the evaluation of all leaf nodes on each iteration.
For this reason we use a single machine for training and up to 128 machines with 8 GPUs each for
data generation.
8 Experimental Results
Figure 2 shows ReBeL reaches a level of exploitability in TEH equivalent to running about 125
iterations of full-game tabular CFR. For context, top poker agents typically use between 100 and
1,000 tabular CFR iterations [ 4,40,12,15,14]. Our self-play algorithm is key to this success;
Figure 2 shows a value network trained on random PBSs fails to learn anything valuable.
Table 1 shows results for ReBeL in HUNL. We compare ReBeL to BabyTartanian8 [ 9] and Slumbot,
prior champions of the Computer Poker Competition, and to the local best response (LBR) [ 39]
algorithm. We also present results against Dong Kim, a top human HUNL expert that did best among
the four top humans that played against Libratus. Kim played 7,500 hands. Variance was reduced
by using AIV AT [ 17]. ReBeL played faster than 2 seconds per hand and never needed more than 5
seconds for a decision.
Beyond just poker, Table 2 shows ReBeL also converges to an approximate Nash in several versions
of Liar’s Dice. Of course, tabular CFR does better than ReBeL when using the same number of CFR
iterations, but tabular CFR quickly becomes intractable to run as the game grows in size.
8

==== Page 9 ====
0 50 100 150 200 250
Search Iterations103
102
101
Exploitabilityn
(Relative to Initial Pot Size)
Random Beliefs Value Net
Full Game
Perfect Value Net
Self-Play Value Net
Self-Play Value/Policy Net
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Training Epochs
Self-Play Value Net (250 Search Iterations)Figure 2: Convergence of different techniques in TEH. All subgames are solved using CFR-A VG. Perfect Value
Net uses an oracle function to return the exact value of leaf nodes on each iteration. Self-Play Value Net uses a
value function trained through self play. Self-Play Value/Policy Net additionally uses a policy network to warm
start CFR. Random Beliefs trains the value net by sampling PBSs at random.
Bot Name Slumbot BabyTartanian8 [9] LBR [39] Top Humans
DeepStack [40] - - 383112 -
Libratus [12] - 6314 - 147 39
Modicum [15] 115 63 - -
ReBeL (Ours) 455 94 88194 16569
Table 1: Head-to-head results of our agent against benchmark bots BabyTartanian8 and Slumbot, as well as top
human expert Dong Kim, measured in thousandths of a big blind per game. We also show performance against
LBR [ 39] where the LBR agent must call for the ﬁrst two betting rounds, and can either fold, call, bet 1 pot, or
bet all-in on the last two rounds. The shows one standard deviation. For Libratus, we list the score against all
top humans in aggregate; Libratus beat Dong Kim by 29 with an estimated of 78.
Algorithm 1x4f 1x5f 1x6f 2x3f
Full-game FP 0.012 0.024 0.039 0.057
Full-game CFR 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002
ReBeL FP 0.041 0.020 0.040 0.020
ReBeL CFR-D 0.017 0.015 0.024 0.017
Table 2: Exploitability of different algorithms of 4 variants of Liar’s Dice: 1 die with 4, 5, or 6 faces and 2 dice
with 3 faces. The top two rows represent baseline numbers when a tabular version of the algorithms is run on the
entire game for 1,024 iterations. The bottom 2 lines show the performance of ReBeL operating on subgames of
depth 2 with 1,024 search iterations. For exploitability computation of the bottom two rows, we averaged the
policies of 1,024 playthroughs and thus the numbers are upper bounds on exploitability.
9 Conclusions
We present ReBeL, an algorithm that generalizes the paradigm of self-play reinforcement learning
and search to imperfect-information games. We prove that ReBeL computes an approximate Nash
equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games, demonstrate convergence in Liar’s Dice, and demonstrate
that it produces superhuman performance in the benchmark game of heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em.
ReBeL has some limitations that present avenues for future research. Most prominently, the input to
its value and policy functions currently grows linearly with the number of infostates in a public state.
This is intractable in games such as Recon Chess [ 44] that have strategic depth but very little common
knowledge. ReBeL’s theoretical guarantees are also limited only to two-player zero-sum games.
Nevertheless, ReBeL achieves low exploitability in benchmark games and superhuman performance
in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em while leveraging far less expert knowledge than any prior bot.
We view this as a major step toward developing universal techniques for multi-agent interactions.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Broader Impact
We believe ReBeL is a major step toward general equilibrium-ﬁnding algorithms that can be deployed
in large-scale multi-agent settings while requiring relatively little domain knowledge. There are
numerous potential future applications of this work, including auctions, negotiations, cybersecurity,
and autonomous vehicle navigation, all of which are imperfect-information multi-agent interactions.
The most immediate risk posed by this work is its potential for cheating in recreational games such as
poker. While AI algorithms already exist that can achieve superhuman performance in poker, these
algorithms generally assume that participants have a certain number of chips or use certain bet sizes.
Retraining the algorithms to account for arbitrary chip stacks or unanticipated bet sizes requires more
computation than is feasible in real time. However, ReBeL can compute a policy for arbitrary stack
sizes and arbitrary bet sizes in seconds.
Partly for this reason, we have decided not to release the code for poker. We instead open source our
implementation for Liar’s Dice, a recreational game that is not played as competitively by humans.
The implementation in Liar’s Dice is also easier to understand and the size of Liar’s Dice can be more
easily adjusted, which we believe makes the game more suitable as a domain for research.
References
[1]Thomas Anthony, Zheng Tian, and David Barber. Thinking fast and slow with deep learning
and tree search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 5360–5370,
2017.
[2] Robert J Aumann. Agreeing to disagree. The annals of statistics , pages 1236–1239, 1976.
[3]Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
[4]Michael Bowling, Neil Burch, Michael Johanson, and Oskari Tammelin. Heads-up limit
hold’em poker is solved. Science , 347(6218):145–149, 2015.
[5]George W Brown. Iterative solution of games by ﬁctitious play. Activity analysis of production
and allocation , 13(1):374–376, 1951.
[6]Noam Brown, Sam Ganzfried, and Tuomas Sandholm. Hierarchical abstraction, distributed
equilibrium computation, and post-processing, with application to a champion no-limit texas
hold’em agent. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems , pages 7–15. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, 2015.
[7]Noam Brown, Adam Lerer, Sam Gross, and Tuomas Sandholm. Deep counterfactual regret
minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 793–802, 2019.
[8]Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Simultaneous abstraction and equilibrium ﬁnding in
games. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2015.
[9]Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Baby tartanian8: Winning agent from the 2016 annual
computer poker competition. In IJCAI , pages 4238–4239, 2016.
[10] Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Strategy-based warm starting for regret minimization in
games. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2016.
[11] Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Safe and nested subgame solving for imperfect-
information games. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 689–699,
2017.
[12] Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman AI for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus
beats top professionals. Science , page eaao1733, 2017.
[13] Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Solving imperfect-information games via discounted re-
gret minimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33,
pages 1829–1836, 2019.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[14] Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman AI for multiplayer poker. Science , page
eaay2400, 2019.
[15] Noam Brown, Tuomas Sandholm, and Brandon Amos. Depth-limited solving for imperfect-
information games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 7663–7674,
2018.
[16] Neil Burch, Michael Johanson, and Michael Bowling. Solving imperfect information games
using decomposition. In Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2014.
[17] Neil Burch, Martin Schmid, Matej Moravcik, Dustin Morill, and Michael Bowling. Aivat:
A new variance reduction technique for agent evaluation in imperfect information games. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[18] Chao-Kai Chiang, Tianbao Yang, Chia-Jung Lee, Mehrdad Mahdavi, Chi-Jen Lu, Rong Jin,
and Shenghuo Zhu. Online optimization with gradual variations. In Conference on Learning
Theory , pages 6–1, 2012.
[19] Jilles Steeve Dibangoye, Christopher Amato, Olivier Buffet, and François Charpillet. Optimally
solving dec-pomdps as continuous-state mdps. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research ,
55:443–497, 2016.
[20] Jakob Foerster, Francis Song, Edward Hughes, Neil Burch, Iain Dunning, Shimon Whiteson,
Matthew Botvinick, and Michael Bowling. Bayesian action decoder for deep multi-agent
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1942–1951,
2019.
[21] Sam Ganzfried and Tuomas Sandholm. Potential-aware imperfect-recall abstraction with earth
mover’s distance in imperfect-information games. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 682–690, 2014.
[22] Sam Ganzfried and Tuomas Sandholm. Endgame solving in large imperfect-information games.
InProceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Sys-
tems, pages 37–45. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
2015.
[23] Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Combining online and ofﬂine knowledge in uct. In Proceedings
of the 24th international conference on Machine learning , pages 273–280, 2007.
[24] Andrew Gilpin and Tuomas Sandholm. Optimal rhode island hold’em poker. In Proceedings of
the 20th national conference on Artiﬁcial intelligence-Volume 4 , pages 1684–1685, 2005.
[25] Andrew Gilpin and Tuomas Sandholm. A competitive texas hold’em poker player via automated
abstraction and real-time equilibrium computation. In Proceedings of the National Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 21, page 1007. Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, MA; London;
AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999, 2006.
[26] Eric A Hansen, Daniel S Bernstein, and Shlomo Zilberstein. Dynamic programming for partially
observable stochastic games. In AAAI , volume 4, pages 709–715, 2004.
[27] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.08415 , 2016.
[28] Samid Hoda, Andrew Gilpin, Javier Pena, and Tuomas Sandholm. Smoothing techniques
for computing nash equilibria of sequential games. Mathematics of Operations Research ,
35(2):494–512, 2010.
[29] Karel Horák and Branislav Bošansk `y. Solving partially observable stochastic games with public
observations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33,
pages 2029–2036, 2019.
[30] Michael Johanson, Nolan Bard, Neil Burch, and Michael Bowling. Finding optimal abstract
strategies in extensive-form games. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1371–1379, 2012.
11

==== Page 12 ====
[31] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
partially observable stochastic domains. Artiﬁcial intelligence , 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
[32] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[33] V ojtˇech Kova ˇrík and Viliam Lis `y. Problems with the efg formalism: a solution attempt using
observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06291 , 2019.
[34] V ojtˇech Kova ˇrík, Martin Schmid, Neil Burch, Michael Bowling, and Viliam Lis `y. Re-
thinking formal models of partially observable multiagent decision making. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.11110 , 2019.
[35] Christian Kroer, Gabriele Farina, and Tuomas Sandholm. Solving large sequential games with
the excessive gap technique. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
864–874, 2018.
[36] Christian Kroer, Kevin Waugh, Fatma Kılınç-Karzan, and Tuomas Sandholm. Faster algo-
rithms for extensive-form game solving via improved smoothing functions. Mathematical
Programming , pages 1–33, 2018.
[37] Adam Lerer, Hengyuan Hu, Jakob Foerster, and Noam Brown. Improving policies via search in
cooperative partially observable games. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2020.
[38] David S Leslie and Edmund J Collins. Generalised weakened ﬁctitious play. Games and
Economic Behavior , 56(2):285–298, 2006.
[39] Viliam Lisy and Michael Bowling. Eqilibrium approximation quality of current no-limit poker
bots. In Workshops at the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2017.
[40] Matej Morav ˇcík, Martin Schmid, Neil Burch, Viliam Lis `y, Dustin Morrill, Nolan Bard, Trevor
Davis, Kevin Waugh, Michael Johanson, and Michael Bowling. Deepstack: Expert-level
artiﬁcial intelligence in heads-up no-limit poker. Science , 356(6337):508–513, 2017.
[41] Matej Moravcik, Martin Schmid, Karel Ha, Milan Hladik, and Stephen J Gaukrodger. Reﬁning
subgames in large imperfect information games. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2016.
[42] John Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of mathematics , pages 286–295, 1951.
[43] Ashutosh Nayyar, Aditya Mahajan, and Demosthenis Teneketzis. Decentralized stochastic
control with partial history sharing: A common information approach. IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control , 58(7):1644–1658, 2013.
[44] Andrew J Newman, Casey L Richardson, Sean M Kain, Paul G Stankiewicz, Paul R Guseman,
Blake A Schreurs, and Jeffrey A Dunne. Reconnaissance blind multi-chess: an experimen-
tation platform for isr sensor fusion and resource management. In Signal Processing, Sen-
sor/Information Fusion, and Target Recognition XXV , volume 9842, page 984209. International
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2016.
[45] Frans Adriaan Oliehoek. Sufﬁcient plan-time statistics for decentralized pomdps. In Twenty-
Third International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2013.
[46] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 8026–8037, 2019.
[47] Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Online learning with predictable sequences. 2013.
[48] R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Convex analysis . Number 28. Princeton university press, 1970.
[49] Arthur L Samuel. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal
of research and development , 3(3):210–229, 1959.
12

==== Page 13 ====
[50] Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Si-
mon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering
atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08265 ,
2019.
[51] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2016.
[52] Dominik Seitz, V ojtech Kovarík, Viliam Lis `y, Jan Rudolf, Shuo Sun, and Karel Ha. Value
functions for depth-limited solving in imperfect-information games beyond poker. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.06412 , 2019.
[53] Jack Serrino, Max Kleiman-Weiner, David C Parkes, and Josh Tenenbaum. Finding friend
and foe in multi-agent games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
1249–1259, 2019.
[54] Claude E Shannon. Programming a computer for playing chess. The London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science , 41(314):256–275, 1950.
[55] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur
Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science ,
362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.
[56] David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur
Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of
go without human knowledge. Nature , 550(7676):354, 2017.
[57] Michal Šustr, V ojt ˇech Kova ˇrík, and Viliam Lis `y. Monte carlo continual resolving for online
strategy computation in imperfect information games. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 224–232. International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2019.
[58] Vasilis Syrgkanis, Alekh Agarwal, Haipeng Luo, and Robert E Schapire. Fast convergence of
regularized learning in games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
2989–2997, 2015.
[59] Gerald Tesauro. TD-Gammon, a self-teaching backgammon program, achieves master-level
play. Neural computation , 6(2):215–219, 1994.
[60] Ben Van der Genugten. A weakened form of ﬁctitious play in two-person zero-sum games.
International Game Theory Review , 2(04):307–328, 2000.
[61] Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret mini-
mization in games with incomplete information. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 1729–1736, 2008.
13

