==== Page 1 ====
Content and Style Disentanglement for Artistic Style Transfer
Dmytro Kotovenko Artsiom Sanakoyeu Sabine Lang Bj ¨orn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR, Heidelberg University
Abstract
Artists rarely paint in a single style throughout their ca-
reer. More often they change styles or develop variations of
it. In addition, artworks in different styles and even within
one style depict real content differently: while Picasso’s
Blue Period displays a vase in a blueish tone but as a whole,
his Cubist works deconstruct the object. To produce artis-
tically convincing stylizations, style transfer models must
be able to reﬂect these changes and variations. Recently
many works have aimed to improve the style transfer task,
but neglected to address the described observations. We
present a novel approach which captures particularities of
style and the variations within and separates style and con-
tent. This is achieved by introducing two novel losses: a
ﬁxpoint triplet style loss to learn subtle variations within one
style or between different styles and a disentanglement loss
to ensure that the stylization is not conditioned on the real
input photo. In addition the paper proposes various evalu-
ation methods to measure the importance of both losses on
the validity, quality and variability of ﬁnal stylizations. We
provide qualitative results to demonstrate the performance
of our approach.
1. Introduction
Style transfer models synthesize a real image in the style
of a given artwork. To achieve a convincing stylization, mod-
els must preserve the content of the real image and closely
resemble the chosen artistic style. This raises the following
questions: “what does it mean to maintain the content” and
“what characteristics deﬁne style”.
Artworks show different renderings of content: While some
styles disregard content, such as Jackson Pollock’s Abstract
Expressionism or Wassily Kandinsky’s highly abstract style,
others display content but alter it in a speciﬁc manner. The
modern paintings of Marc Chagall or Henri Rousseau trans-
form reality into staged almost dream like scenes. These
observations lead to the conclusion that a more in-depth
study of the relation between artistic style and content is re-
quired to obtain a better image stylization. However, there is
†compvis.github.io/content-style-disentangled-ST/
Figure 1. Stylization examples generated by our network. Paul
Cezanne (top), Vincent van Gogh (middle) and Paul Gauguin and
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (bottom). Full sized images can be found
in the supplementary material and on our project page†.
no tool which measures the degree to which an artist altered
content. Indeed this would require original content photos
which display the exact content an artist has painted in a spe-
ciﬁc artwork. Let us assume the converse scenario: imagine
we do have a set of photos and a simple way to approximate
4422


==== Page 2 ====
the artist’s stylization. Then we are given a collection of
content-stylization-pairs, which can be used to solve the con-
tent alteration problem described above (and if we disregard
the fact that the stylization is still only approximated and not
yet optimized). Thus, if we stylize the same content photo in
two different styles, the results should reﬂect the differences
in style while displaying the same content. On the contrary
if we use the same style but different content images, we
should obtain stylizations in the same style but with different
content. The latter constraint warrants an independence of
style from content. We formulate this objective as a ﬁxpoint
disentanglement loss.
Recently there has been a great interest in the task of style
transfer; existing works produce stylized images by extract-
ing style features from a single artwork [ 7,13,28,18,10,
4,31] or a collection of images [ 24,33]. Although these
approaches reproduce a given style, they lack sensitivity to
subtle variations in style and a comprehensive understanding
of style. Instead of learning all possible variations of a style,
previous models only learn visual clues most dominant in
the style and ignore the rest of the style manifold. How-
ever, artists rarely maintain a single style throughout their
career, but more often change styles or develop variations
of it. While still working in an Impressionist style, Monet’s
later works display a more loose and expressive brushstroke
compared to earlier paintings due to declining health. To
capture these small variations in style, we need a framework
able to simulate this. We thus propose a novel method which
learns the particular style of an artist as a single entity and
adjusts the stylization to the particular example of style by
introducing style similarities and discrepancies within a sin-
gle style. This is achieved by stylizing the same content with
two similar style samples and forcing stylizations which dis-
play identical content to still lie apart in the style space. We
address this objective by introducing a ﬁxpoint triplet style
loss.
We propose the ﬁrst approach which extracts style from a
group of examples of the same overall style but with subtle
variations therein, while still providing ﬁne control over the
stylization. We make the following contributions: (i) we
propose two novel losses, namely a ﬁxpoint disentanglement
loss and a ﬁxpoint triplet style loss to allow for a ﬁner styl-
ization of images and a better coverage of style distributions.
(ii) Moreover we provide an approach to disentangle style
and content of an artwork resulting in artistically compelling
stylizations and a better content preservation as shown in the
experiments section. (iii) Our model also provides a smooth
style space and thus allows to interpolate within one style
and across different styles. We also produce smooth video
stylizations with our method; examples can be found on our
project page.2. Related Work
Style transfer Style transfer methods generate new im-
ages in the style of a speciﬁc artist by rendering an input
content image utilizing style information extracted from an
image of a real artwork. Gatys et al. [ 7] ﬁrst proposed a
neural style transfer to encode the style of an image using
the pairwise correlation matrix between feature activations
of a pretrained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Given
a single content image and a single reference style image the
stylization is then produced by an iterative optimization pro-
cedure which matches the style representation of a content
image to a style image. Selim et al. [ 26] further extended
the neural style transfer method [ 7] and applied it to portraits
of faces. To enable faster stylization, other research works
used neural networks [ 13,10,18,30,17] which approxi-
mated the slow iterative algorithm of [ 7]. To model multiple
artistic styles within a single model Dumoulin et al. [ 4] pro-
posed a conditional instance normalization, which enables
to synthesize interpolations between different styles. [ 8,12]
introduced additional control over the results of stylization
by altering color, scale and stroke size. [ 16] introduced a
content transformation module between the encoder and de-
coder to achieve a content-and-style-aware stylization. They
used similar content in photos and style to further learn an
object-speciﬁc stylization.
Most of existing style transfer approaches extract style repre-
sentations from a single artwork [ 7,13,28,18,10,4,17,31]
and treat each artwork as an independent style example. To
the best of our knowledge, only [ 24,33] learn style from a
collection of related style examples. However, they cannot
model multiple styles simultaneously, lack ﬂexibility and
do not have control over the stylization process. In contrast,
our approach utilizes the rich information which is given in
a group of very similar style samples taken from an image
collection of one style, combines multiple styles in the same
network and provides a more ﬁne-grained control over the
stylization process.
Latent space in generative models Learning an inter-
pretable latent space representation has been a prevalent
focus of deep learning research, especially in the ﬁeld of gen-
erative models[ 3,21,1]. In recent years conditional image
synthesis received much attention [ 11,21]. Other research
presents more theoretical approaches such as [ 20,3] or state-
of-the-art approaches, which show good results for image
synthesis of natural images [ 2] and human faces[ 14,15] but
require immense computation power. Recently a lot of works
have focused on the disentanglement of object shape and
appearance [ 6,19,5].
3. Approach
Our initial task can be described as follows: given a
collection of artworks (y,s)∼Y, whereyis an art image
4423


==== Page 3 ====
Figure 2. The training iteration is performed on a pair of content images with content representations c1,c2and a pair of style images having
style representations s1,s2. In a next step, image pairs are fed into the content encoder Ecand style encoder Esrespectively. Now we
generate all possible pairs of content and style representations using the decoder D. The resulting images are fed into the style encoder Es
one more time to compute the LFPT−style on two triplets that share c2|s1by comparing the style representations of generated images with
the styles c1|s1,c2|s1,c1|s2,c2|s2to the styles s1,s2of the input style images. The resulting images are given to the discriminator Dto
compute a conditional adversarial loss Ladvand toEcto compute the discrepancy LFP−content between the stylizations c2|s2,c1|c1and
the original c1,c2. Both depicted encoders Esare shared as well as both encoders Ec.
andsis a style class label, and a collection of photos
x∼X, we want to learn a transformation G:X−→Y.
To measure how well the mapping Gapproximates the
distribution Y, we introduce a discriminator Dwhose task
it is to distinguish between a real sample y∈Yand a
generated sample G(x)forx∈X. In our framework, this
task is equivalent to learning an arbitrary mapping from the
photo domain to the domain of artworks.
On its own this approach induces no constraints on the
original content preservation and therefore can make the
original content of the photo unrecognizable. To prevent this
we force the generated image to be similar to the stylized
image in the pixel domain, namely by minimizing the L2
distance/bardblG(x)−x/bardbl2.
As stated before, we want our image to be conditioned on
the query style image G(x|y)allowing for ﬁner style control.
This requires a conditioning of the generated image on the
input style image y. We propose to condition the output
using the style encoder Esby extracting style Es(y)from
the style image yand then condition the generative network
on this style vector.
Works on unsupervised and supervised domain
translation[ 33,11,22] have shown that the task of
image-to-image translation can be solved by exploiting the
encoder-decoder architectures. We deﬁne our generator
as a combination of three networks: content encoder Ec,
decoderDand style encoder Es. The former two are fully
convolutional feed-forward neural networks responsible for
the task of image generation, while the latter network infers
a style vector Es(y)from the image y. The conditioning of
the generator network is performed by substituting the offset
and scale parameters of the instance normalization layers
[29] of the decoder D. The decision which losses should beminimized depends on our deﬁned goals. First, we aim to
generate artistically convincing stylizations by preserving
the style class of the given painting. Hence, we formulate
the conditional adversarial loss as follows:
Ladv:=E
(y,s)∼Y[log(D(y|s))]+
E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[log(1−D(D(Ec(x),Es(y))|s))](1)
Second, the stylization obtained from a style image (y,s)
and the input content image xshould resemble the input
content image x. Thus we enforce a reconstruction loss
between the input content image xand stylization result:
Lpixel:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardbl(D(Ec(x),Es(y)))−x/bardbl2
2].(2)
We do not, however, aim for a simple pixel-level similar-
ity to the input content photo. Indeed such a loss is adversely
to the style transfer task, because many artists tend to al-
ter color and shape severely, thus a pixel-level loss might
obstruct the stylization task. Considering this, we let the
content encoder Ecto determine which features are relevant
for content preservation and which can be neglected. This is
achieved by using a ﬁxpoint content loss:
LFP−content:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardblEc((D(Ec(x),Es(y))))−Ec(x)/bardbl2
2].
(3)
Although these losses are sufﬁcient to obtain convincing
stylizations for one particular artist, they are not suitable to
train a model capable to incorporate stylizations for multiple
artists within a single network. Our ablations in Tab. 2show
that these losses do not support the model to be susceptible
4424


==== Page 4 ====
to subtle style changes in the query style images, even if
examples were taken from the same style.
Another issue is that if the model is only trained with these
three losses, it inadvertently conditions the stylization on the
input content. To overcome this, we introduce two additional
losses which are novel to the task of style transfer: a ﬁxpoint
triplet style loss and ﬁxpoint disentanglement loss.
3.1. Fixpoint Triplet Loss
If the objective is a weighted combination of the three
losses 1,2and3deﬁned above, we immediately observe
that the style encoder Esis only driven by the conditional
adversarial loss Ladv. This loss is minimized by learning
to partition the domain of values of (Es)into distinctive
regions. Thus, we are not able to force the encoder to learn a
smooth space of a style representation displaying continuous
transitions between different styles and pronounced transi-
tions within a single style. To alleviate this we introduce a
ﬁxpoint triplet loss:
LFP−style:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardblEs(s)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(s)))/bardbl2],
(4)
which is similar to LFP−content deﬁned in 3. The loss
forces the network to preserve input style. However it shows
a similar behavior as described above when visually very dif-
ferent examples of the same style (y1,s),(y2,s)∼Yare
mapped onto the same point, namely Es(y1)≡Es(y2);
resulting in identical stylizations D(Ec(x),Es(y1))≡
D(Ec(x),Es(y2)).
This reasoning could be formalized as follows: ﬁrst, we
want the stylization to be similar to the input style ex-
ample in the style space. Secondly, a stylization ob-
tained by a different style must also be distant in the
style representation space. This resembles a triplet loss
widely used in metric learning [ 25,9]. In our case, for
the style examples (y1,s1),(y2,s2)∼Yand content
photox∼X, the anchor is the encoded style Es(y1),
the positive sample is Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y1))), the negative
Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y2)))respectively. For a margin rwe de-
ﬁne a ﬁxpoint triplet loss for a style:
LFPT−style:= E
x∼X
(y1,s1),(y2,s2)∼Ymax/parenleftBig
0,
r+/bardblEs(y1)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y1)))/bardbl2−
/bardblEs(y1)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y2)))/bardbl2/parenrightBig
.(5)
3.2. Disentanglement Loss
The content within an image can be indicative for the style.
For instance particular pieces of clothing may hint at the time
and style of the painting. Thus, the content and style are
entangled. The generated stylizations are also conditionallydependent on the content target of the photo and not only
on the style target. To separate both characteristics, it is
necessary to make the target style independent from the
target content. This could be achieved by minimizing the
following loss:
E[/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(D(Ec(x2),Es(y)))/bardbl2].
(6)
However, this loss is too strict and obstructs a successful
training of the model. Therefore we soften the constraint:
instead of minimizing it we simply bind it from the top using
the ﬁxpoint style loss LFP−style. This loss is minimized
by decreasing the LFPT−style loss. Hence, we also mini-
mize 6. In summary: for an input style sample (y,s)∼Y
and two random photos x1,x2∼Xwe deﬁne the ﬁxpoint
disentanglement loss LFPD :
LFPD=E
x1,x2∼X
(y,s)∼Ymax/parenleftBig
0,
/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(D(Ec(x2),Es(y)))/bardbl2−
/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(y)/bardbl2/parenrightBig
.
(7)
TheLFPD penalizes the model for perturbations which are
too large in the style representation: if given the style vector
s=Es(y), then the style discrepancy of two stylizations is
larger than the discrepancy between stylization and original
style.
The main difference to the ﬁxpoint triplet loss is that the latter
prevents different stylizations from collapsing into the same
style, while the ﬁxpoint disentanglement loss alleviates the
inﬂuence of the content image on the resulting stylization.
3.3. Training and Model Architecture
We summarize all aforementioned losses given the loss
weightsλadv, λpixel, λFP−content, λFPT−style, λFPD
to generate the compound loss L∗. We use it as the ﬁnal
objective for the discriminator-generator minimax game:
min
Gmax
DL∗.The detailed model architecture and training
step descriptions are provided in the supplementary material.
4. Experiments
4.1. Stylization Assessment
The quality of stylized images and thus the representation
of artistic style can be measured in several ways. We assess
the performance with four different methods, in 1:
Expert preference rate We ﬁrst stylize various photos in
the style of one artist using different methods listed in Tab. 1.
In a second step we cut out patches of the same size from all
stylized images and create a batch. We then show different
patches to experts from art history and have them select the
patch which best represents the style of the respective artist.
4425


==== Page 5 ====
Figure 3. Interpolation between given style samples of Paul Cezanne (column 2) and Vincent van Gogh (column 6). Magniﬁed regions show
that our method mimics not only colors but also contours and textures speciﬁc to the style. Video interpolations are provided on our project
page.
We then measure how frequently each approach is preferred.
Expert deception rate. An identical approach as described
in the previous experiment is taken for expert deception rate.
Again we show a group of patches, which have been cropped
from the stylized images, to art historians. However this
time we add a patch from a real artwork by an artist; we
compute the number of times art historians identify a patch
to be from a real artwork instead of a stylized image.
Non-expert deception rate. The same evaluation as de-
scribed for the expert deception rate is performed with non-
experts that have no prior training in art history.
Deception rate. This approach for assessing the quality of
a stylized image was introduced by [ 24]: a stylized image
is presented to a network, which was trained on artist clas-
siﬁcation. Given a stylized image, the deception rate is the
frequency that a pretrained network predicts the artist used
for stylization correctly.
The experiment is performed on patches and not full-size
images for the following reason: content images are pho-
tos from the Places365 dataset[ 32]. Almost every image
contains details which unambiguously refer to our time, i.e.
a car, a train, sneakers or a cell phone. Thus humans can
easily identify images as not being authentic paintings when
spotting these objects. By cropping out patches from the
stylized images we signiﬁcantly mitigate this effect.
We run all experiments for ten different artists and sum-
marize the averaged results in Tab. 1. From the table we can
conclude that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-
of-the-art AST model [ 24]. Also note that the art history
expert deception rate is higher than the non-expert deception
rate since the latter group partially consists of computer vi-Table 1. Measuring on image patches how compelling a stylization
is (higher is better). The preference rate measures how often art
historians prefer a particular stylization technique over others. De-
ception rates indicate how often stylized patches deceive the viewer,
experts and non-experts respectively. Scores are averaged over 10
different styles. A Wikiart-test gives accuracy on real artworks
from the test set.
Method Deception Non-Expert Expert Expert
rate deception rate deception rate preference rate
CycleGan 0.130 0.025 0.032 0.012
WCT [ 18] 0.023 0.035 0.002 0.011
AdaIn 0.061 0.032 0.022 0.021
Johnson et al. 0.080 0.016 0.003 0.014
PatchBased 0.063 0.135 0.010 0.030
Gatys et al. 0.251 0.094 0.069 0.148
AST [ 24] 0.450 0.050 0.122 0.329
Ours 0.562 0.182 0.240 0.486
Wikiart test 0.626 0.497 0.599 -
Photos 0.003 - - -
sion students - therefore they were better at spotting artifacts
typical for generative models. The supplementary material
provides additional details on the evaluations.
4.2. Disentanglement of Style and Content
We introduce the ﬁxpoint disentanglement loss to disen-
tangle style and content. In order to measure the entangle-
ment, we propose the following two experiments.
Style discrepancy. Our model is able to preserve ﬁne style
details independent of changes in the content target photo.
To validate this we ﬁrst measure the average style variation
in real artworks for a selected style, which is represented
by a collection of artworks S. For measuring, we take a
pretrained network used for artist classiﬁcation /tildewideEs[24] and
4426


==== Page 6 ====
Figure 4. Which patch is taken from a real painting and which from
a stylized image? Each row contains a few real patches. Styles (top
to bottom): Cezanne, Gauguin, Morisot, van Gogh, Monet. The
solution can be found on the last page.
extract activations of the ﬁrst fully connected layer from a
real artwork s∈ S, denoted by /tildewideEfc
s(s). Eventually this
allows us to approximate a distribution of style variation for
a styleSwith
{/bardbl/tildewideEfc
s(s1)−/tildewideEfc
s(s2)/bardbl2|s1,s2∈ S}. (8)
Then we measure the variation in style for our stylized image
given distinctive input photos x1,x2and a ﬁxed style sample
s:
{/bardbl/tildewideEfc
s(D(Ec(x1),Es(s)))−/tildewideEfc
s(D(Ec(x2),Es(s)))/bardbl2|
s∈ S, x1,x2∈X}.
(9)
In a ﬁnal step we compute the same distribution 9but for a
model trained without the disentanglement loss.
The three distributions are summarized in Fig. 5by visualiz-
ing their probability density function depicted in red, blue
and green respectively. The plot indicates that the model
with disentanglement loss produces stylizations which rep-
resent a selected style better than the model where the loss
is missing. In addition we observe that different content af-
fects stylization results for one style less than style variations
within a collection of paintings by an artist. show that
Content discrepancy. In the second experiment we estab-
lish how much a change of style inﬂuences content preserva-
tion. The content similarity is formulated as a L2distance in
the feature space of the ﬁrst fully connected layer denoted by
/tildewideEfc
c(·)of the VGG16 network[ 27]; the network is pretrained
on the ImageNet dataset[ 23].
First we require a baseline distribution representing subtle
Figure 5. Impact of content on style: we take two different content
images, stylize them using the same style example and measure
euclidean distance of /tildewideEfc
s(·)activations (see Sec. 4.2). The experi-
ment is repeated for all content pairs and different style examples to
obtain a style distance distribution. This experiment is performed
for a model with (blue) and without (green) disentanglement loss.
As a reference we compute the distribution between activations of
different artworks (red).
changes in content. Therefore we measure the content sim-
ilarity between nearest neighbors in the /tildewideEfc
c(·)space and
plot the distribution. Let Cidenote a dataset of ImageNet
photos of class i. Then the baseline distribution of content
similarity between nearest neighbors from the ImageNet set
in the/tildewideEfc
c(·)space is:
{/bardbl/tildewideEfc
c(x)−/tildewideEfc
c(NN(x))/bardbl2|x∈ Ci∀i} (10)
whereNN(x)denotes the nearest neighbor of sample xin
the/tildewideEfc
c(·)space among all the ImageNet samples of the
same class.
We now evaluate a change of content in images stylized with
different art styles. For two style datasets S1,S2we estimate
the distribution:
{/bardbl/tildewideEfc
c(D(Ec(x1),Es(s)))−/tildewideEfc
c(D(Ec(x2),Es(s)))/bardbl2|
s1∈ S1,s2∈ S2x∈ Ci∀i}.
(11)
We estimate an identical distribution as deﬁned above for
images stylized by a model without the ﬁxpoint disentan-
glement loss. The probability density functions for all three
distributions are plotted in Fig. 7.
This experiment indicates that a change of stylized images
introduces less perturbation to the content than distance to
the nearest neighbor in the same class.
Qualitative experiments. We provide qualitative results of
our approach in Fig. 3,4and6. Fig. 3shows that our model
captures subtle variations between two styles. In addition
our approach learns ﬁner artistic properties (i.e. variations in
brushwork) (see Fig. 4), reduces the number of artifacts and
artiﬁcial structures and disentangles style and content (see
Fig.6).
4427


==== Page 7 ====
Figure 6. Stylized results from different models (from left to right): ours (in red), AST, Gatys et al. and CycleGAN. We provide style and
content images in row one and two to allow a qualitative judgment of stylizations. The ﬁgure highlights improvements in quality for images
obtained by our model. Images show less artiﬁcial structures (as seen in images of Picasso or Kirchner), contain no artifacts in homogeneous
regions (see Cezanne) and most importantly highlight the successful disentanglement of style and content. This can be seen in the stylized
example of Monet. In comparison the AST model produced ’ﬂowers’, which are common in similar landscape paintings of the artist but not
present in the content image. Results are best seen on screen and zoomed in. Full sized images are provided in the supplementary.
4.3. Distribution Divergence
Next we study how well our method covers the variability
of the style distribution it aims to replicate. We compute the
Kullback-Leibler divergence DKLbetween the true style dis-
tribution and the style distribution of images we have stylized
to measure how well our model represents the distribution
of style it aims to represent.
We use a network /tildewideEstrained to classify the style of paint-
ings to obtain the style distribution as approximated by the
activations of the ﬁrst fully connected layer, namely /tildewideEfc
s.
The true style distribution Part
sis approximated by the /tildewideEfc
s
activations on real artworks. Next we extract activations /tildewideEfc
s
of the stylized images to approximate Pstylized
s and com-pute the divergence between the style distribution of real
artworks and the style distribution of the stylized images
DKL(Pstylized
s/bardblPart
s). We repeat this process for a model
trained without the ﬁxpoint triplet style loss LFPT−style (4)
to compute DKL(PnoLFPT−styles /bardblPart
s). Tab. 2summa-
rizes the style divergences.
Now we visualize style distributions for different styl-
ization approaches. First we ﬁx two artists and train one
model with LFPT−style loss and one without.Then we styl-
ize an identical set of content images using both models
and compute the activations of the network /tildewideEfc
s[24]. As a
reference we compute the distribution of style for the real
artworks for the two selected artists. Next, we run a PCA
on these activations and visualize projections on the ﬁrst
4428


==== Page 8 ====
Figure 7. Disentanglement of content across different styles. The
same content image is stylized using two different style examples;
the difference in content of two stylzations is computed as L2
norm between activations of the ﬁrst FC-layer of the VGG-16
network[ 27]. All distances are accumulated and presented as a
distribution(blue). The experiment is performed for the model
with(blue) and without(green) disentanglement. Additionally, we
compute the content distance from a photo to its nearest neighbor
as a reference(red). See Sec. 4.2for further explanation.
Table 2. The deception rate indicates how close an obtained styliza-
tion is to the target style (higher is better). Classiﬁcation accuracy
shows how much content of an input photo is left after stylization
(higher is better). Style divergence shows a divergence between the
style distribution obtained by stylization and true style distribution
(lower is better).
Method Deception Classiﬁcation True style
rate accuracy divergence
AST [ 24] 0.45 0.09 1.12
Ours w/o LFPT−style 0.45 0.16 1.14
Ours w/o LFPD 0.52 0.08 0.32
Ours 0.562 0.17 0.21
principal component as a probability density function (see
Fig.8). We observe that the model utilizing LFPT−style can
better match the target distribution of real artworks then the
model without this loss.
4.4. Ablations
To summarize the inﬂuence of the proposed losses on the
ﬁnal model we use three metrics: deception rate, style diver-
gence and classiﬁcation accuracy. The latter corresponds to
the classiﬁcation accuracy of the VGG-16 network on the
ImageNet stylized images.
We take the AST [ 24] model as a baseline, because it is
trained to extract style from a collection of images. The abla-
tion results are summarized in Tab. 2. They indicate that the
LFPT−style is crucial to incorporate style in its entirety. The
LFPD on the other hand is mostly responsible for a better
content preservation but also improves the performance of
the stylization task.
Figure 8. Projection of style features on the ﬁrst principal compo-
nent of the PCA decomposition. Style features are computed for
real artworks (red), stylized images (blue) and images stylized by a
model without the ﬁxpoint triplet style loss (green). The stylized
examples and artworks are taken from two artists only, hence the
bimodal distribution. Evidently the model utilizing a ﬁxpoint triplet
style loss can approximate the distribution of style features of real
artworks better.
5. Conclusion
Although previous works concentrated on improving the
stylization task, they lack a formal investigation of the ques-
tions How much variation do we ﬁnd within one style or
between different styles? andWhat is the relation between
style and content? – both are relevant to understand style.
This paper presents a novel style transfer approach, which
is able to capture subtle variations of style while also being
able to distinguish different styles and disentangle content
and style. We achieve the former by introducing a ﬁxpoint
triplet loss to the trained network. We further demonstrated
that the introduction of a disentanglement loss makes styl-
ization independent to changes in content. We studied the
inﬂuence of content and style on ﬁnal stylizations by mea-
suring the preservation of content and representation of style
in stylized images. Our approach offers control over the
stylization process and enables art historians to study, for
example, stylistic developments of an artist in detail.
Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG) - 421703927 and a hardware donation from
NVIDIA Corporation.
Solution to Fig. 4:
Cezanne: fake, real, fake, real, real, fake
Gauguin: fake, real, fake, fake, real, real
Morisot: fake, fake, real, fake, fake, real
van Gogh: fake, real, fake, fake, real, real
Monet: fake, real, real, fake, real, fake
4429


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1]Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, David Lopez-Paz, and
Arthur Szlam. Optimizing the latent space of generative
networks. In ICML , 2018. 2
[2]Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large
scale gan training for high ﬁdelity natural image synthesis.
CoRR , abs/1809.11096, 2018. 2
[3]Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya
Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan: Interpretable rep-
resentation learning by information maximizing generative
adversarial nets. In NIPS , 2016. 2
[4]Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur.
A learned representation for artistic style. Proc. of ICLR ,
2017. 2
[5]Patrick Esser, Johannes Haux, and Bj ¨orn Ommer. Unsuper-
vised robust disentangling of latent characteristics for image
synthesis. In Proceedings of the Intl. Conf. on Computer
Vision (ICCV) , 2019. 2
[6]Patrick Esser, Ekaterina Sutter, and Bj ¨orn Ommer. A varia-
tional u-net for conditional appearance and shape generation.
InThe IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , July 2018. 2
[7]Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge.
Image style transfer using convolutional neural networks.
InComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016
IEEE Conference on , pages 2414–2423. IEEE, 2016. 2
[8]Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, Aaron
Hertzmann, and Eli Shechtman. Controlling perceptual fac-
tors in neural style transfer. In IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017. 2
[9]Alexander Hermans, Lucas Beyer, and Bastian Leibe. In
defense of the triplet loss for person re-identiﬁcation. CoRR ,
abs/1703.07737, 2017. 4
[10] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in
real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In ICCV ,
2017. 2
[11] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A.
Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adver-
sarial networks. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5967–5976, 2017. 2,
3
[12] Yongcheng Jing, Yang Liu, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng,
Yizhou Yu, Dacheng Tao, and Mingli Song. Stroke con-
trollable fast style transfer with adaptive receptive ﬁelds. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV) , pages 238–254, 2018. 2
[13] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual
losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In
European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 694–711.
Springer, 2016. 2
[14] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability,
and variation. CoRR , abs/1710.10196, 2017. 2
[15] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
CoRR , abs/1812.04948, 2018. 2[16] Dmytro Kotovenko, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Pingchuan Ma,
Sabine Lang, and Bjorn Ommer. A content transformation
block for image style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 10032–10041, 2019. 2
[17] Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Precomputed real-time texture
synthesis with markovian generative adversarial networks. In
European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 702–716.
Springer, 2016. 2
[18] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal style transfer via feature
transforms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 385–395, 2017. 2,5
[19] Dominik Lorenz, Leonard Bereska, Timo Milbich, and Bj ¨orn
Ommer. Unsupervised part-based disentangling of object
shape and appearance. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (Oral +
Best paper ﬁnalist: top 45 / 5160 submissions) , 2019. 2
[20] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative
adversarial nets. CoRR , abs/1411.1784, 2014. 2
[21] Augustus Odena, Christopher Olah, and Jonathon Shlens.
Conditional image synthesis with auxiliary classiﬁer gans. In
ICML , 2017. 2
[22] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
InMICCAI , 2015. 3
[23] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, San-
jeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy,
Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li
Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) , 115(3):211–
252, 2015. 6
[24] Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Dmytro Kotovenko, Sabine Lang, and
Bj¨orn Ommer. A style-aware content loss for real-time hd
style transfer. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 2,5,7,8
[25] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin.
Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face recognition and clus-
tering. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 815–823, 2015. 4
[26] Ahmed Selim, Mohamed Elgharib, and Linda Doyle. Painting
style transfer for head portraits using convolutional neural
networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) , 35(4):129,
2016. 2
[27] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convo-
lutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014. 6,8
[28] Dmitry Ulyanov, Vadim Lebedev, Andrea Vedaldi, and Vic-
tor S Lempitsky. Texture networks: Feed-forward synthesis
of textures and stylized images. In ICML , pages 1349–1357,
2016. 2
[29] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. In-
stance normalization: The missing ingredient for fast styliza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022 , 2016. 3
[30] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Im-
proved texture networks: Maximizing quality and diversity
in feed-forward stylization and texture synthesis. In Proc.
CVPR , 2017. 2
4430


==== Page 10 ====
[31] Hongmin Xu, Qiang Li, Wenbo Zhang, and Wen Zheng.
Styleremix: An interpretable representation for neural im-
age style transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10425 , 2019.
2
[32] Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Jianxiong Xiao, Antonio Tor-
ralba, and Aude Oliva. Learning deep features for scene
recognition using places database. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 487–495, 2014. 5
[33] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros.
Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent
adversarial networks. In IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision , 2017. 2,3
4431


