==== Page 1 ====
Controllable Artistic Text Style Transfer via Shape-Matching GAN
Shuai Yang1,2, Zhangyang Wang2, Zhaowen Wang3, Ning Xu3, Jiaying Liu∗1and Zongming Guo1
1Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2Texas A&M University3Adobe Research
(a) source image
Increasing deformation degreeLegibility Artistry (b) adjustable stylistic degree of glyph
 (c) stylized text
 (d) application
(e) liquid artistic text rendering
 (f) smoke artistic text rendering
Figure 1: We propose a novel style transfer framework for rendering artistic text from a source style image in a scale-controllable manner.
Our framework allows users to (b) adjust the stylistic degree of the glyph ( i.e.deformation degree) in a continuous and real-time way, and
therefore to (c) select the artistic text that is most ideal for both legibility and style consistency. The generated diverse artistic text will
facilitate users to design (d) exquisite posters and (e)(f) dynamic typography.
Abstract
Artistic text style transfer is the task of migrating the
style from a source image to the target text to create artis-
tic typography. Recent style transfer methods have consid-
ered texture control to enhance usability. However, con-
trolling the stylistic degree in terms of shape deformation
remains an important open challenge. In this paper, we
present the ﬁrst text style transfer network that allows for
real-time control of the crucial stylistic degree of the glyph
through an adjustable parameter. Our key contribution is
a novel bidirectional shape matching framework to estab-
lish an effective glyph-style mapping at various deformation
levels without paired ground truth. Based on this idea, we
propose a scale-controllable module to empower a single
network to continuously characterize the multi-scale shape
features of the style image and transfer these features to the
target text. The proposed method demonstrates its superi-
ority over previous state-of-the-arts in generating diverse,
∗Corresponding author
The work was done when Shuai Yang was a visiting student at TAMU.controllable and high-quality stylized text.
1. Introduction
Artistic text style transfer aims to render text in the style
speciﬁed by a reference image, which is widely desired in
many visual creation tasks such as poster and advertisement
design. Depending on the reference image, text can be styl-
ized either by making analogy of existing well-designed
text effects [ 28], or by imitating the visual features from
more general free-form style images [ 30]: the latter pro-
vides more ﬂexibility and creativity.
For general style images as reference, since text is sig-
niﬁcantly different from and more structured than natural
images, more attention should be paid to its stroke shape in
the stylization of text. For example, one needs to manipu-
late the stylistic degree or shape deformations of a glyph to
resemble the style subject ﬂames in Fig. 1(b). Meanwhile,
the glyph legibility needs to be maintained so that the styl-
ized text is still recognizable. Such a delicate balance is
subjective and hard to attain automatically. Therefore, a
4442


==== Page 2 ====
practical tool allowing users to control the stylistic degree
of the glyph is of great value. Further, as users are prone
to trying various settings before obtaining desired effects,
real-time response to online adjustment is important.
In the literature, some efforts have been devoted to ad-
dressing fast scale-controllable style transfer . They trained
fast feed-forward networks, with the main focus on the scale
of textures like the texture strength [ 2], or the size of tex-
ture patterns [ 17]. Up to our best knowledge, there has been
no work discussing the real-time control of glyph defor-
mations , which is rather crucial for text style transfer.
In view of the above, we are motivated to investigate a
new problem of fast controllable artistic text style transfer
from a single style image. We aim at the real-time adjust-
ment for the stylistic degree of the glyph in terms of shape
deformations. It can allow users to navigate around dif-
ferent forms of the rendered text and select the most de-
sired one, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b)(c). The challenges of
fast controllable artistic text style transfer lie in two as-
pects. On one hand , in contrast to well-deﬁned scales such
as the texture strength that can be straightforwardly mod-
elled by hyper-parameters, the glyph deformation degree
is subjective, neither clearly deﬁned nor easy to parame-
terize. On the other hand , there does not exist a large-scale
paired training set with both source text images and the cor-
responding results stylized (deformed) in different degrees.
Usually, only one reference image is available for a certain
style. It is thus also not straightforward to train data-driven
models to learn multi-scale glyph stylization.
In this work, we propose a novel Shape-Matching GAN
to address these challenges. Our key idea is a bidirectional
shape matching strategy to establish the shape mapping be-
tween source styles and target glyphs through both back-
ward and forward transfers. We ﬁrst show that the glyph
deformation can be modelled as a coarse-to-ﬁne shape map-
ping of the style image, where the deformation degree is
controlled by the coarse level. Based on this idea, we de-
velop a sketch module that simpliﬁes the style image to var-
ious coarse levels by backward transferring the shape fea-
tures from the text to the style image. Resulting coarse-
ﬁne image pairs provide a robust multi-scale shape map-
ping for data-driven learning. With this obtained data, we
build a scale-controllable module, Controllable ResBlock ,
that empowers the network to learn to characterize and infer
the style features on a continuous scale from the mapping.
Eventually, we can forward transfer the features of any
speciﬁed scale to target glyphs to achieve scale-controllable
style transfer. In summary, our contributions are threefold:
•We investigate the new problem of fast controllable
artistic text style transfer, in terms of glyph deforma-
tions, and propose a novel bidirectional shape match-
ing framework to solve it.
•We develop a sketch module to match the shape fromthe style to the glyph, which transforms a single style
image to paired training data at various scales and thus
enables learning robust glyph-style mappings.
•We present Shape-Matching GAN to transfer text
styles, with a scale-controllable module designed to al-
low for adjusting the stylistic degree of the glyph with
a continuous parameter as user input and generating
diversiﬁed artistic text in real-time.
2. Related Work
Image style transfer . Leveraging the powerful repre-
sentation ability of neural networks, Gatys et al. pioneered
on the Neural Style Transfer [ 10], where the style was effec-
tively formulated as the Gram matrix [ 9] of deep features.
Johnson et al. trained a feed-forward StyleNet [ 18] using
the loss of Neural Style Transfer [ 10] for fast style trans-
fer [26,15,22,21,6]. In parallel, Li et al. [19,20] repre-
sented styles by neural patches, which can better preserve
structures for photo-realistic styles. Meanwhile, other re-
searchers regard style transfer as an image-to-image transla-
tion problem [ 16,31], and exploited Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [ 12] to transfer specialized styles such as
cartoons [ 7], paintings [ 25] and makeups [ 8,5]. Compared
to Gram-based and patch-based methods, GAN learns the
style representation directly from the data, which can po-
tentially yield more artistically rich results.
Artistic text style transfer . The problem of artistic text
style transfer was ﬁrst raised by Yang et al. [28]. The au-
thors represented the text style using image patches, which
suffered from a heavy computational burden due to the
patch matching procedure. Driven by the progress of neural
network, Azadi et al. [1] trained an MC-GAN for fast text
style transfer, which, however, can only render 26capital
letters. Yang et al. [29] recently collected a large dataset
of text effects to train the network to transfer text effects
for any glyph. Unlike the aforementioned methods that
assume the input style to be well-designed text effects, a
patch-based model UT-Effect [ 30] stylized the text with ar-
bitrary textures and achieved glyph deformations by shape
synthesis [ 24], which shows promise for more application
scenarios. Compared to UT-Effect [ 30], our GAN-based
method further enables the continuous adjustment of glyph
deformations via a controllable parameter in real-time.
Multi-scale style control . To the best of our knowledge,
the research on the multi-scale style control currently fo-
cuses on two kinds of scales: the strength and the stoke
size of the texture. The texture strength determines the
texture similarity between the result and the style image
(Fig. 2(c)). It is mainly controlled by a hyper-parameter
to balance the content loss and style loss [ 10]. As a result,
one has to re-train the model for different texture strengths.
Babaeizadeh et al. [2] performed efﬁcient adjustment of
4443


==== Page 3 ====
(b) stylistic degree of glyph (c) strength (d) stroke size
 (a) input
Figure 2: Comparing different scale effects in text style trans-
fer. (a) shows the reference style and target text. In remaining
columns, each shows the results with increasing (b) glyph defor-
mation degree; (c) texture strength; and (d) stroke size. Results in
(b) are generated by our proposed method, while (c) and (d) are
generated by Neural Style Transfer [ 10].
the texture strength, with an auxiliary network to input ad-
ditional parameters to modulate the style transfer process.
Meanwhile, the stroke size depicts the scale of texture pat-
terns (Fig. 2(d)), e.g., size or spatial frequency. Jing et
al.[17] proposed a stroke-controllable neural style trans-
fer network (SC-NST) with adaptive receptive ﬁelds for
stroke size control. Our work explores the glyph deforma-
tion degree (Fig. 2(b)), a different and important dimension
of “scale” that is unexplored in prior work.
3. Problem Overview
We start by giving operative requirements for our new
task. Considering the maple style for instance, it will look
weird to have artistic text with the texture of leaves, but
without the leave-like shapes (see an example in Fig. 9),
demonstrating the need of shape deformation and matching
in addition to merely transferring texture patterns. Mean-
while, the optimal scale to balance the legibility and artistry
can vary a lot for different styles and text contents, not
to mention the subjective variation among people. Taking
Fig.2(b) for example, one may see that the glyph with more
complex strokes is more vulnerable to large glyph deforma-
tion [ 27]. Therefore, users will enjoy the freedom to navi-
gate through the possible scale space of glyph deformations,
without the hassle of re-training one model per scale. Con-
cretely, a controllable artistic text style transfer shall ensure:
•Artistry : The stylized text should mimic the shape
characteristics of the style reference, at any scale.
•Controllability : The glyph deformation degree needs
be adjusted in a quick and continuous way.
The two requirements distinguish our problem from those
studied by previous multi-scale style transfer methods,
which are either unable to adjust the shape at all [ 2,17]
(e.g., Fig. 2(c)(d)) or fail to do so efﬁciently [ 30].
(a)
(b)(c)(a)
(b)(c)
(a) (b) (c)Structure map X Slightly simplified X
Heavily simplified X Mildly simplified XFigure 3: Illustration of bidirectional shape matching. Left two
columns: a leaf-shaped structure map and its three backward sim-
pliﬁed versions. Right columns: forward shape mappings under
(a) slight, (b) moderate, and (c) heavy deformations.
Our solution to this problem is a novel bidirectional
shape matching strategy. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the tar-
get structure map is ﬁrst (backward ) simpliﬁed to differ-
ent coarse levels, and then its stylish shape features can
be characterized by the (forward ) multi-level coarse-to-ﬁne
shape mappings, to realize multi-scale transfer. As shown
in Fig. 3(a)-(c), similar horizontal strokes at different levels
are mapped to different shapes, and the coarser the level,
the greater the deformation between the mapped shapes.
Artistry is met since the targets in these mappings are ex-
actly the reference ﬁne-level stylish shapes while Control-
lability can be achieved via training a feed-forward network.
To sum up, we formulate the new task of scale-
controllable artistic text style transfer as learning the func-
tion to map the style image from different coarse levels back
to itself in a fast feed-forward way . Still, two technical road-
blocks remain to be cleared. First, how to simplify the shape
to make the obtained mapping applicable to the text images.
Second, how to learn the many-to-one (multiple coarse lev-
els to a ﬁne level) mapping without model collapse. Sec. 4
will detail how we address these challenges with our net-
work design.
4. Shape-Matching GAN
Assume that YandIdenote the style image and text im-
age provided by users, respectively. We study the problem
of designing a feed-forward stylization model Gto render
artistic text under different deformation degrees controlled
by a parameter ℓ∈[0,1], where larger ℓcorresponds to
greater deformations. We further decompose the style trans-
fer process into two successive stages: structure transfer and
texture transfer, which are modelled by generators GSand
GT, separately. The advantage of such decomposition is
that we can disentangle the inﬂuence of textures and ﬁrst
focus on the key shape deformation problem. We denote
G=GT◦GS, and formulate the stylization process as:
IY
ℓ=GT(GS(I,ℓ)), IY
ℓ∼p(IY
ℓ|I,Y,ℓ), (1)
where the target statistic p(IY
ℓ)of the stylized image IY
ℓis
characterized by the text image I, the style image Yand the
4444


==== Page 4 ====
LTadvLT
matting
Stage I: Input Preprocessing (Backward Structure Transfer)
Stage II: Forward Style (Structure and Texture) Transfer 
Sketch
Module
GBℓ
Input  Y
cropping{
x yStructure  X}
Glyph
GSTexture
GT
Glyph
GSTexture
GTDS DT
LSStage II
Train and test on text images  Train on input style
Loss functionℓ
xℓ~
Sketchy structure Xℓ~
ℓ
ℓ
glyLSrecLSadv
rec
LTstyleFigure 4: Overview of our bidirectional shape matching framework.
controllable parameter ℓ.
As outlined in Sec. 3, our solution to structure transfer
is bidirectional shape matching. Assume the structure map
Xto mask the shape of the style subject in Yis given,
which can be easily obtained by image editing tools such
as Photoshop or existing image matting algorithms. In the
stage of backward structure transfer, we preprocess Xto ob-
tain training pairs {˜Xℓ,X}forGS, where˜Xℓis a sketchy
(coarse) version of Xwith the shape characteristics of the
text, andℓcontrols the coarse level. In the stage of forward
structure transfer, GSlearns from {˜Xℓ,X}to stylize the
glyph with various deformation degrees. Fig. 4summarizes
the overall framework built upon two main components:
•Glyph Network GS: It learns to map ˜Xℓwith defor-
mation degree ℓtoXduring training. In testing, it
transfers the shape style of Xonto the target text im-
ageI, producing the structure transfer result IX
ℓ.
•Texture Network GT: It renders the texture in the
style image YonIX
ℓto yield the ﬁnal artistic text IY
ℓ.
The generators are accompanied with corresponding dis-
criminators DSandDTto improve the quality of the results
through adversarial learning. In the following, we present
the details of our bidirectional shape matching and the pro-
posed controllable module that enables GSto learn multi-
scale glyph deformations in Sec. 4.1. The texture transfer
networkGTis then introduced in Sec. 4.2.
4.1. Bidirectional Structure Transfer ( GS)
Backward structure transfer. To transfer the glyph
characteristics to Xat different coarse levels, we propose a
sketch module GBcomposed of a smoothness block and a
transformation block, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Inspired by the
Source domain Target domain DBTestTrain
Sketch Module GBSmooth domain 
Smoothness block
ℓ
ℓTransformation 
block
(a) Overview of our sketch module
Y X sigmoid (Xℓ ) t Xℓ~ -
(b) Effect of the transformation blockFigure 5: Backward structure transfer by sketch module GB
Gaussian scale-space representation [ 3,23] for simplifying
images at different scales, our smoothness block is set as a
ﬁxed convolutional layer with Gaussian kernel, whose stan-
dard deviation σ=f(ℓ)is controlled by ℓand a linear func-
tionf(·). Our key idea is to bridge the source style domain
and the target text domain using the smoothness block that
maps the text image and Xinto a smooth domain, where the
details are eliminated and the contours demonstrate similar
smoothness. Structure transfer is then achieved by training
the transformation block to map the smoothed text images
back to the text domain to learn the glyph characteristics.
The advantages of our sketch module are twofold: 1) the
coarse level (and thus the deformation degree) can be natu-
rally parameterized by σ; and 2) the training process of GB
only requires easily accessible text images. Once trained, it
can be applied to arbitrary input styles.
4445


==== Page 5 ====
For training GB, we sample a text image tfrom the text
dataset provided by [ 29] and a parameter value ℓfrom[0,1].
GBis tasked to reconstruct t:
Lrec
B=Et,ℓ[/bardblGB(t,ℓ)−t/bardbl1]. (2)
In addition, we impose a conditional adversarial loss to
forceGBto generate more text-like contours:
Ladv
B=Et,ℓ[logDB(t,ℓ,¯tℓ)]
+Et,ℓ[log(1−DB(GB(t,ℓ),ℓ,¯tℓ))],(3)
whereDBlearns to determine the authenticity of the input
image and whether it matches the given smoothed image ¯tℓ
and the parameter ℓ. Thus, the total loss takes the form of
min
GBmax
DBλadv
BLadv
B+λrec
BLrec
B. (4)
Finally, by applying trained GBtoXwith various
levelℓ, we can obtain the corresponding sketchy shape
˜Xℓ=GB(X,ℓ). An example is shown in Fig. 5(b). The
simply thresholded Gaussian representation sigmoid(¯Xℓ)
(by replacing the transformation block with a sigmoid layer)
does not match the shape of the text. In contrast, our sketch
module effectively simpliﬁes the ﬂame proﬁle to the shape
of strokes in the red box regions, thus providing a more ro-
bust shape mapping for the glyph network.
Forward structure transfer. Having obtained {˜Xℓ},
ℓ∈[0,1], we now train the glyph network GSto map them
to the original Xso thatGScan characterize the shape fea-
tures ofXand transfer these features to the target text. Note
that our task is a many-to-one mapping, and we only have
a single example X. The network should be carefully de-
signed to avoid just memorizing the ground truth Xand
falling into model collapse, namely, yielding very similar
results regardless of the parameter ℓduring testing.
To tackle this challenging task, we employ two strate-
gies: data augmentation andControllable ResBlock . First,
Xand˜Xℓare randomly cropped into sub-image pairs
{x,˜xℓ}to gather as a training set. Second, we build GS
upon the architecture of StyleNet [ 18], and propose a very
simple yet effective Controllable ResBlock to replace the
original ResBlock [ 13] in the middle layers of StyleNet.
Our Controllable ResBlock is a linear combination of two
ResBlocks weighted by ℓ, as shown in Fig. 6. Forℓ= 1(0) ,
GSdegrades into the original StyleNet, and is solely tasked
with the greatest (tiniest) shape deformation to avoid the
many-to-one problem. Meanwhile for ℓ∈(0,1),GStries
to compromise between the two extremes.
In terms of the loss, GSaims to approach the ground
truthXin anL1sense and confuse the discriminator DS:
Lrec
S=Ex,ℓ[/bardblGS(˜xℓ,ℓ)−x/bardbl1], (5)
Ladv
S=Ex[logDS(x)]
+Ex,ℓ[log(1−DS(GS(˜xℓ,ℓ)))].(6)
Conv+BN
Conv+BNrelu
reluConv+BN
Conv+BNrelu
reluConv+BN
Conv+BNrelu
(a) ResBlock (b) Controllable ResBlock×ℓ × (1- ℓ)Figure 6: Controllable ResBlock
For some styles with large ℓ, the texttcould be too severely
deformed to be recognized. Thus we propose an optional
glyph legibility loss to force the structure transfer result
GS(t,ℓ)to maintain the main stroke part of t:
Lgly
S=Et,ℓ[/bardbl(GS(t,ℓ)−t)⊗M(t)/bardbl1], (7)
where⊗is the element-wise multiplication operator, and
M(t)is a weighting map based on distance ﬁeld whose
pixel value increases with its distance to the nearest text
contour point of t. The overall loss for GSis as follows:
min
GSmax
DSλadv
SLadv
S+λrec
SLrec
S+λgly
SLgly
S. (8)
4.2. Texture Transfer ( GT)
Given the structure transfer result IX
ℓ=GS(I,ℓ), the
texture rendering task can be formulated as a standard im-
age analogy problem such that X:Y::IX
ℓ:IY
ℓ[14],
which can be well solved by existing algorithms like the
greedy-based Image Analogy [ 14] and the optimization-
based Neural Doodle [ 4]. To build an end-to-end fast text
stylization model, we instead train a feed-forward network
GTfor texture rendering. Similar as in training GS, we
ﬁrst use random cropping to obtain adequate training pairs
{x,y}fromXandY. Then we train GTusing the recon-
struction loss and conditional adversarial loss:
Lrec
T=Ex,y[/bardblGT(x)−y/bardbl1], (9)
Ladv
T=Ex,y[logDT(x,y)]
+Ex,y[log(1−DT(x,GT(x)))].(10)
The overall style rendering performance on the sampled text
imagetis further taken into account by adding the style loss
Lstyle
Tproposed in Neural Style Transfer [ 10]. Finally, the
objective of texture transfer can be deﬁned as:
min
GTmax
DTλadv
TLadv
T+λrec
TLrec
T+λstyle
TLstyle
T. (11)
5. Experimental Results
5.1. Implementation Details
Network architecture . We adapt our generators from
the Encoder-Decoder architecture of StyleNet [ 18] with
4446


==== Page 6 ====
(a) Input style (b) Target text (c) Image Analogy (d) NST-mask (e) Doodle (f) T-Effect (g) UT-Effect (h) Ours
Figure 7: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on various styles. (a) Input style with its structure map in the lower-left corner. (b)
Target text. (c) Image Analogy [ 14]. (d) Neural Style Transfer [ 10] with spatial control [ 11]. (e) Neural Doodle [ 4]. (f) T-Effect [ 28]. (g)
UT-Effect [ 30]. (h) Our style transfer results. We manually select the suitable deformation degrees for UT-Effect [ 30] and out method.
six ResBlocks, except that GSuses the proposed Control-
lable ResBlock instead. Our discriminators follow Patch-
GAN [ 16]. Since the structure map contains many satu-
rated areas, we add gaussian noises onto the input of GS
andGTto avoid ambiguous problem. It also empow-
ers our network to generate diversiﬁed results during test-
ing. Code and pretrained models are available at: https:
//github.com/TAMU-VITA/ShapeMatchingGAN .
Network training . We randomly crop the style image to
256×256sub-images for training. The Adam optimizer is
adopted with a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.0002 . To stabilize the
training of GS, we gradually increase the sampling range of
ℓ. Speciﬁcally, GSis ﬁrst trained with a ﬁxed ℓ= 1 to
learn the greatest deformation. Then we copy the param-
eters from the trained half part in Controllable ResBlocks
to the other half part and use ℓ∈ {0,1}to learn two ex-
tremes. Finally, GSis tuned on ℓ∈ {i/K}i=0,...,K . We
ﬁnd thatK= 3 is sufﬁcient for GSto infer the remaining
intermediate scales. The linear function to control the stan-
dard deviation of the Gaussian kernel is f(ℓ) = 16ℓ+ 8.
For all experiments, we set λrec
B=λrec
S=λrec
T= 100 ,
λadv
B=λadv
T= 1,λadv
S= 0.1, andλstyle
T= 0.01.
5.2. Comparisons with State­of­the­Art Methods
Artistic text style transfer . In Fig 7, we present the
qualitative comparison with ﬁve state-of-the-art style trans-
fer methods: Image Analogy [ 14], NST [ 11], Doodle [ 4], T-Effect [ 28] and UT-Effect [ 30]1. These methods are selected
because they are all one-shot supervised (or can be adapted
to a supervised version) for a fair comparison, which trans-
fer styles with a single style image and its structure map.
Image Analogy [ 14] and T-Effect [ 28] directly copy the
texture patches to the text region, yielding rigid and unnat-
ural contours. NST [ 11] and Doodle [ 4] are deep learning-
based methods, where the shape characteristics of the style
are implicitly represented by deep features. Thus these
methods could modify the glyph contours but often lead to
unrecognizable text. In terms of texture, they suffer from
color deviations and checkerboard artifacts. UT-Effect [ 30]
explicitly matches the glyph to the style at a patch level.
However, image patches are not always robust. For exam-
ple, in the maple style, the leaf shapes are not fully trans-
ferred to the vertical stroke. In addition, texture details are
lost due to the patch blending procedure. By comparison,
our network is able to learn accurate shape characteristics
through the proposed bidirectional shape matching strategy,
and transfers vivid textures via adversarial learning, which
together leads to the most visually appealing results.
Scale-controllable style transfer . In Fig. 8, we present
the qualitative comparison with two scale-controllable style
transfer methods: SC-NST [ 17] and UT-Effect [ 30]. SC-
1For NST, We build upon its public model and implement the spatial
control function introduced in [ 11]. Meanwhile, results of other methods
are obtained by public models or provided by the authors.
4447


==== Page 7 ====
(a)
(b)
(c)
Input Artistic text style transfer results under the control of continuously changing paramet ers
Figure 8: Qualitative comparison between the proposed method and other scale-controllable style transfer methods. For the ﬁrst column,
from top to bottom: target text, style image, the enlarged patches from the style image and their corresponding structure maps. Remaining
columns: Results by (a) stroke-controllable neural style transfer (SC-NST) [ 17] with stroke size evenly increasing from 256to768; (b)
UT-Effect [ 30] with resolution level evenly increasing from 1to7; (c) the proposed method with ℓevenly increasing from 0to1. All
results are produced by one single model for each method. For UT-Effect [ 30] and our method, the red box region is shown enlarged in the
bottom with the corresponding structure map provided for better visual comparison.
NST [ 17] does not synthesize the textures in the correct re-
gion due to its unsupervised setting. Regardless of this fac-
tor, it can adjust the texture size, but is ineffective in control-
ling the glyph deformation. UT-Effect [ 30] matches bound-
ary patches at multiple resolutions for structure transfer,
which has several drawbacks: First, as shown in Fig. 8(b),
the greedy-based patch matching fails to global consistently
stylize the glyph. Second, the patch blending procedure
inevitably eliminates many shape details. Third, the con-
tinuous transformation is not supported. On the contrary,
the proposed method achieves continuous transformation
with ﬁne details, showing a smooth growing process of the
leaves as they turn more luxuriant. In terms of efﬁciency, for
256×256images in Fig. 8, the released MATLAB-based
UT-Effect [ 30] requires about 100 s per image with Intel
Core i7-6500U CPU (no GPU version available). In com-
parison, our feed-forward method only takes about 0.43 s
per image with Intel Xeon E5-2650 CPU and 16 ms per
image with a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU, which implies a
potential of nearly real-time user interaction.
5.3. Ablation Study
Network architecture . To analyze each component in
our model, we design the following experiments with dif-
ferent conﬁgurations:
•Baseline: Our baseline model contains only a texture
network trained to directly map the structure map X
back to the style image Y.
•W/o CR: This model contains a na ¨ıve glyph networkand a texture network. The na ¨ıve glyph network is con-
trolled by ℓvia the commonly used label concatenation
instead of using the Controllable ResRlock (CR).
•W/o TN: This model contains a single glyph network
without the Texture Network (TN), and is trained to
directly map the sketchy structure map ˜XℓtoY.
•Full model: The proposed model with both the glyph
network and the texture network.
Fig.9displays the stylization results of these models. With-
out structure transfer, the contours of the stylized text by
baseline model are rigid, showing poor shape consistency
with the reference style. The na ¨ıve glyph network could
create leaf-like shapes, but fails to learn the challenging
many-to-one mapping. It simply ignores the conditional
ℓ, and generates very similar results. This problem is well
solved by the proposed Controllable ResBlock. As shown
in the fourth column of Fig. 9, our glyph network can even
learn the multi-scale structure transfer and texture transfer
simultaneously, although the rendered texture is ﬂat and has
checkerboard artifacts. By handing the texture transfer task
over to a separate texture network, our full model can syn-
thesize high-quality artistic text, with both shape and texture
consistency w.r.t. the reference style.
Sketch module . In Fig. 10, we examine the effect of
the sketch module GBthrough a comparative experiment.
As introduced in Sec. 4.1, our sketch module aims to trans-
fer the shape characteristics of the text to the style image
to provide a robust mapping between the source and tar-
get domains. To make a comparison, we replace the Trans-
4448


==== Page 8 ====
baseline w/o CR full model w/o TN(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9: Analysis for the network conﬁgurations in controllable
artistic text style transfer. For the ﬁrst column, from top to bot-
tom: target text, style image, the enlarged patches from the results
without and with the texture network, respectively. Remaining
columns: (a)-(c) Results with ℓ= 0.0,0.5,1.0, respectively.
(a) style image (b) target text (c) w/o TB (d) full model
Figure 10: Effect of the proposed sketch module. The red box area
is enlarged and the contrast is enhanced in the top right corner for
better visual comparison.
formation Block (TB) in GBwith a simple sigmoid layer.
The resulting na ¨ıve sketch module is still able to simplify
the shape, but cannot match it with the glyph. Without
robust mappings, the shape of the stylized text is not cor-
rectly adjusted and is as rigid as the input text as shown in
Fig.10(c). By contrast, our full model successfully synthe-
sizes a rounded h-shaped balloon in Fig. 10(d).
Loss function . We study the effect of the glyph legibil-
ity loss (Eq. ( 7)) in Fig. 11. When transferring a trickle of
wafting smoke onto a rigid Chinese character with a high
deformation degree ℓ= 0.75, the strokes of this character
demonstrate irregular shapes, uneven thickness, and even
fractures in Fig. 11(c). Although very similar to the style,
the character is unrecognizable. As shown in Fig. 11(d), by
settingλgly
S= 1, our glyph legibility loss effectively pre-
serves the trunk of the strokes, while allowing a high free-
dom to deform the contours of the strokes, thus achieving a
balance between legibility and artistry.
5.4. Applications
In addition to the poster and dynamic typography design
shown in Fig. 1(d)-(f), we further present two other appli-
cations of our method as follows.
Structure/texture mash-up . The disentanglement of
structures and textures enables us to combine different
styles to create some brand-new text styles. Some exam-
(a) style image (b) target text (c) w/o Lgly(d) full modelSFigure 11: Effect of the glyph legibility loss Lgly
S.
(a) diverse structure/texture mixture
(b) stroke-based art design 
Figure 12: Applications of our method.
ples are shown in Fig. 12(a), where we apply the textures of
maple ,water andsmoke to the text with the shape charac-
teristics of maple , respectively.
Stroke-based art design . Since no step specially tai-
lored for the text is used, our method can be easily extended
to style transfer on more general shapes such as symbols
and icons. In Fig. 12(b), we show an example for synthesiz-
ing wings made of maple leaves from a user-provided icon.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we present a fast artistic text style transfer
deep network that allows for ﬂexible, continuous control of
the stylistic degree of the glyph. We formulate the task of
glyph deformation as a coarse-to-ﬁne mapping problem and
propose a bidirectional shape matching framework. A novel
sketch module is proposed to reduce the structural discrep-
ancy between the glyph and style to provide robust map-
pings. Exploiting the proposed Controllable ResBlock, our
network is able to effectively learn the many-to-one shape
mapping for multi-scale style transfer. We validate the ef-
fectiveness and robustness of our method by comparisons
with state-of-the-art style transfer algorithms.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported in part by Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
No. 61772043, and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under contract No. L182002 and No. 4192025. This work was
supported by China Scholarship Council. We thank the Unsplash
users (Aaron Burden, Andre Benz, Brandon Morgan, Brooke Ca-
gle, Florian Klauer, Grant Mccurdy and Stephen Hocking) who
put their photos under the Unsplash license for public use.
4449


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Samaneh Azadi, Matthew Fisher, Vladimir Kim, Zhaowen
Wang, Eli Shechtman, and Trevor Darrell. Multi-content
gan for few-shot font style transfer. In Proc. IEEE Int’l
Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018. 2
[2] Mohammad Babaeizadeh and Golnaz Ghiasi. Adjustable
real-time style transfer. 2018. arXiv:1811.08560. 2,3
[3] Jean Babaud, Andrew P Witkin, Michel Baudin, and
Richard O Duda. Uniqueness of the gaussian kernel for
scale-space ﬁltering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence , (1):26–33, 1986. 4
[4] Alex J. Champandard. Semantic style transfer and turning
two-bit doodles into ﬁne artworks. 2016. arXiv:1603.01768.
5,6
[5] Huiwen Chang, Jingwan Lu, Fisher Yu, and Adam Finkel-
stein. Pairedcyclegan: Asymmetric style transfer for apply-
ing and removing makeup. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 40–48, 2018. 2
[6] Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Jing Liao, Nenghai Yu, and Gang
Hua. Stylebank: An explicit representation for neural image
style transfer. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2017. 2
[7] Yang Chen, Yu-Kun Lai, and Yong-Jin Liu. Cartoongan:
Generative adversarial networks for photo cartoonization. In
Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition , pages 9465–9474, 2018. 2
[8] Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung Woo Ha,
Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. Stargan: Uniﬁed genera-
tive adversarial networks for multi-domain image-to-image
translation. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2018. 2
[9] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge.
Texture synthesis using convolutional neural networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
262–270, 2015. 2
[10] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Im-
age style transfer using convolutional neural networks. In
Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition , pages 2414–2423, 2016. 2,3,5,6
[11] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, Aaron
Hertzmann, and Eli Shechtman. Controlling perceptual fac-
tors in neural style transfer. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3985–3993,
2017. 6
[12] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2672–2680,
2014. 2
[13] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proc. IEEE
Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
770–778, 2016. 5
[14] Aaron Hertzmann, Charles E. Jacobs, Nuria Oliver, Brian
Curless, and David H. Salesin. Image analogies. In Proc.
Conf. Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages
327–340, 2001. 5,6[15] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in
real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In Proc. Int’l
Conf. Computer Vision , pages 1510–1519, 2017. 2
[16] Phillip Isola, Jun Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A.
Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adver-
sarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 5967–5976, 2017. 2,6
[17] Yongcheng Jing, Yang Liu, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng,
Yizhou Yu, Dacheng Tao, and Mingli Song. Stroke con-
trollable fast style transfer with adaptive receptive ﬁelds.
InProc. European Conf. Computer Vision , pages 238–254,
2018. 2,3,6,7
[18] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Fei Fei Li. Percep-
tual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
InProc. European Conf. Computer Vision , pages 694–711,
2016. 2,5
[19] Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Combining markov random
ﬁelds and convolutional neural networks for image synthe-
sis. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 2479–2486, 2016. 2
[20] Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Precomputed real-time texture
synthesis with markovian generative adversarial networks.
InProc. European Conf. Computer Vision , pages 702–716,
2016. 2
[21] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diversiﬁed texture synthesis with
feed-forward networks. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017. 2
[22] Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal style transfer via feature
transforms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 386–396, 2017. 2
[23] Pietro Perona and Jitendra Malik. Scale-space and edge de-
tection using anisotropic diffusion. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 12(7):629–639,
1990. 4
[24] Amir Rosenberger, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski.
Layered shape synthesis: automatic generation of control
maps for non-stationary textures. ACM Transactions on
Graphics , 28(5):107, 2009. 2
[25] Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Dmytro Kotovenko, Sabine Lang, and
Bjorn Ommer. A style-aware content loss for real-time hd
style transfer. In Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision ,
pages 698–714, 2018. 2
[26] Xin Wang, Geoffrey Oxholm, Da Zhang, and Yuan Fang
Wang. Multimodal transfer: A hierarchical deep convo-
lutional neural network for fast artistic style transfer. In
Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition , 2017. 2
[27] Zhangyang Wang, Jianchao Yang, Hailin Jin, Eli Shechtman,
Aseem Agarwala, Jonathan Brandt, and Thomas S Huang.
Deepfont: Identify your font from an image. In Proc. ACM
Int’l Conf. Multimedia , pages 451–459, 2015. 3
[28] Shuai Yang, Jiaying Liu, Zhouhui Lian, and Zongming Guo.
Awesome typography: Statistics-based text effects trans-
fer. In Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 7464–7473, 2017. 1,2,6
4450


==== Page 10 ====
[29] Shuai Yang, Jiaying Liu, Wenjing Wang, and Zongming
Guo. Tet-gan: Text effects transfer via stylization and destyl-
ization. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2019.
2,5
[30] Shuai Yang, Jiaying Liu, Wenhan Yang, and Zongming Guo.
Context-aware text-based binary image stylization and syn-
thesis. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 2019. 1,2,
3,6,7
[31] Jun Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A.
Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-
consistent adversarial networks. In Proc. Int’l Conf. Com-
puter Vision , pages 2242–2251, 2017. 2
4451


