==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-020-00540-3
REVIEW ARTICLE
Convolutional neural networks in medical image understanding: 
a survey
D. R. Sarvamangala1  · Raghavendra V. Kulkarni2
Received: 25 March 2020 / Revised: 5 October 2020 / Accepted: 22 November 2020 / Published online: 3 January 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Imaging techniques are used to capture anomalies of the human body. The captured images must be understood for diag-
nosis, prognosis and treatment planning of the anomalies. Medical image understanding is generally performed by skilled 
medical professionals. However, the scarce availability of human experts and the fatigue and rough estimate procedures 
involved with them limit the effectiveness of image understanding performed by skilled medical professionals. Convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs) are effective tools for image understanding. They have outperformed human experts in many 
image understanding tasks. This article aims to provide a comprehensive survey of applications of CNNs in medical image 
understanding. The underlying objective is to motivate medical image understanding researchers to extensively apply CNNs 
in their research and diagnosis. A brief introduction to CNNs has been presented. A discussion on CNN and its various 
award-winning frameworks have been presented. The major medical image understanding tasks, namely image classification, 
segmentation, localization and detection have been introduced. Applications of CNN in medical image understanding of the 
ailments of brain, breast, lung and other organs have been surveyed critically and comprehensively. A critical discussion on 
some of the challenges is also presented.
Keywords Classification · Convolutional neural networks · Detection · Image understanding · Localization · Segmentation
1 Introduction
Loss of human lives can be prevented or the medical trauma 
experienced in an injury or a disease can be reduced through 
the timely diagnosis of medical anomalies. Medical anoma-
lies include glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, tumors [34], 
interstitial lung diseases [44], heart diseases and tubercu-
losis. Diagnosis and prognosis involve the understanding 
of the images of the affected area obtained using X-ray, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography 
(CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon 
emission computed tomography or ultrasound scanning. 
Image understanding involves the detection of anomalies, 
ascertaining their locations and borders, and estimating their sizes and severity. The scarce availability of human experts 
and their fatigue, high consultation charges and rough esti-
mate procedures limit the effectiveness of image understand-
ing. Further, shapes, locations and structures of the medical 
anomalies are highly variable [55]. This makes diagnosis dif-
ficult even for specialized physicians [4 ]. Therefore, human 
experts often feel a need for support tools to aid in precise 
understanding of medical images. This is the motivation for 
intelligent image understanding systems.
Image understanding systems that exploit machine learn-
ing (ML) techniques are fast evolving in recent years. ML 
techniques include decision tree learning [35], clustering, 
support vector machines (SVMs) [47], k-means nearest 
neighbor (K-NN), restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) 
[42] and random forests (RFs) [28]. The pre-requisite for 
ML techniques to work efficiently is the extraction of discri-
minant features. And these features are generally unknown 
and is also a very challenging task especially for applica-
tions involving image understanding and is still a topic of 
research. A logical step to overcome was to create intelli-
gent machines which could learn features needed for image 
understanding and extract it on its own. One such intelligent  * D. R. Sarvamangala 
 sarvamangala.dr@reva.edu.in
 Raghavendra V. Kulkarni 
 arvie@ieee.org
1 REVA University, Bengaluru, India
2 Ramaiah University of Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, India

==== Page 2 ====
2 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
and successful model is the convolutional neural network 
(CNN) model, which automatically learns the needed fea-
tures and extracts it for medical image understanding. The 
CNN model is made of convolutional filters whose primary 
function is to learn and extract necessary features for effi-
cient medical image understanding. CNN started gaining 
popularity in the year 2012, due to AlexNet [41], a CNN 
model, which defeated all the others models with a record 
accuracy and low error rate in imageNet challenge 2012. 
CNN has been used by corporate giants for providing inter -
net services, automatic tagging in images, product recom-
mendations, home feed personalization and autonomous cars 
[59]. The major applications of the CNN are in image and 
signal processing, natural language processing and data ana-
lytics. The CNN had a major breakthrough when GoogleNet 
used it to detect cancer at an accuracy of 89% while human 
pathologists could achieve the accuracy of only 70% [3 ].
1.1  Motivation and purpose
CNNs have contributed significantly in the areas of image 
understanding. CNN-based approaches are placed in the 
leader board of the many image understanding challenges, 
such as Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted 
Intervention (MICCAI) biomedical challenge, Brain Tumor 
segmentation (BRATS) Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmen-
tation challenge [48], Imagenet classification challenge, 
challenges of International Conference on Pattern Recogni-
tion (ICPR) [31] and Ischemic Stroke Lesion Segmentation 
(ISLES) challenge [32]. CNN has become a powerful choice 
as a technique for medical image understanding. Researchers 
have successfully applied CNNs for many medical image 
understanding applications like detection of tumors and their 
classification into benign and malignant [52], detection of 
skin lesions [ 50], detection of optical coherence tomography 
images [39], detection of colon cancer [71], blood cancer, 
anomalies of the heart [40], breast [36], chest, eye etc. Also 
CNN-based models like CheXNet [56, 58], used for classify -
ing 14 different ailments of the chest achieved better results 
compared to the average performance of human experts.
CNNs have also dominated the area of COVID-19 detec-
tion using chest X-rays/CT scans. Research involving CNNs 
is now a dominant topic at major conferences. In addition, 
there are special issues reserved in reputed journals for 
solving challenges using deep learning models. The vast 
amount of literature available on CNNs is the testimonial 
of their efficiency and the widespread use. However, vari-
ous research communities are developing these applications 
concurrently and the dissemination results are scattered in 
a wide and diverse range of conference proceedings and 
journals.
A large number of surveys on deep learning have been 
published recently. A review of deep learning techniques applied in medical imaging, bioinformatics and pervasive 
sensing has been presented in [60]. A thorough review of 
deep learning techniques for segmentation of MRI images 
of brain has been presented in [2 ]. Survey of deep learning 
techniques for medical image segmentation, their achieve -
ments and challenges involved in medical image segmenta-
tion has been presented in [27] Though literature is replete 
with many survey papers, most of them concentrate on deep 
learning models which include CNN, recurrent neural net -
work, generative adversial network or on a particular appli-
cation. There is also no coverage of the application of CNN 
in early detection of COVID-19 as well as many other areas.
The survey includes research papers on various applica-
tions of CNNs in medical image understanding. The papers 
for the survey are queried from various journal websites. 
Additionally, arxiv, conference proceedings of various medi-
cal image challenges are also included in the survey. Also 
the references of these papers are checked. The query used 
are: “CNN” or “deep learning” or “convolutional neural 
network” or terms related to medical image understanding. 
These terms had to be present either in title or abstract to 
be considered.
The objective of this survey is to offer a comprehensive 
overview of applications and methodology of CNNs and 
its variants, in the fields of medical image understanding 
including the detection of latest global pandemic COVID-
19. The survey includes overview tables which can be used 
for quick reference. The authors leverage experiences of 
their own and that of the research fraternity on the applica-
tions of CNNs to provide an insight into various state of 
the art CNN models, challenges involved in designing CNN 
model, overview of research trends in the field, and to moti-
vate medical image understanding researchers and medical 
professionals to extensively apply CNNs in their research 
and diagnosis, respectively.
1.2  Contributions and the structure
Primary contributions of this article are as follows: 
1. To briefly introduce medical image understanding and 
CNN.
2. To convey that CNN has percolated in the field of medi-
cal image understanding.
3. To identify the various challenges in medical image 
understanding.
4. To highlight contributions of CNN to overcome those 
challenges
The remainder of this article has been organized as follows: 
Medical image understanding has been briefly introduced 
in Sect.  2. A brief introduction of CNN and its architecture 
has been presented in Sect.  3. The applications of CNN in 

==== Page 3 ====
3 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
medical image understanding have been surveyed compre -
hensively through Sects. 4 –7. Finally, concluding remarks 
and a projection of the trends in CNN applications in image 
understanding have been presented in Sect.  8.
2  Medical image understanding
Medical imaging is necessary for the visualization of inter -
nal organs for the detection of abnormalities in their anat-
omy or functioning. Medical image capturing devices, such 
as X-ray, CT, MRI, PET and ultrasound scanners capture 
the anatomy or functioning of the internal organs and pre-
sent them as images or videos. The images and videos must 
be understood for the accurate detection of anomalies or 
the diagnosis of functional abnormalities. If an abnormality 
is detected, then its exact location, size and shape must be 
determined. These tasks are traditionally performed by the 
trained physicians based on their judgment and experience. 
Intelligent healthcare systems aim to perform these tasks 
using intelligent medical image understanding. Medical 
image classification, segmentation, detection and localiza-
tion are the important tasks in medical image understanding.
2.1  Medical image classification
Medical image classification involves determining and 
assigning labels to medical images from a fixed set. The 
task involves the extraction of features from the image, and 
assigning labels using the extracted features. Let I  denote 
an image made of pixels and c1,c2,…,cr denote the labels. 
For each pixel x , a feature vector /u1D701 , consisting of values f(xi) 
is extracted from the neighborhood N (x) using ( 1), where 
xi∈N(x) for i=0, 1,…,k.
A label from the list of labels c1,c2,…,cr is assigned to the 
image based on /u1D701.
2.2  Medical image segmentation
Medical image segmentation helps in image understanding, 
feature extraction and recognition, and quantitative assess-
ment of lesions or other abnormalities. It provides valuable 
information for the analysis of pathologies, and subsequently 
helps in diagnosis and treatment planning. The objective of 
segmentation is to divide an image into regions that have 
strong correlations. Segmentation involves dividing the 
image I into a finite set of regions R1,R1,…,RS as expressed 
in (2).(1) /u1D701=(f(x0),f(x1),…,f(xk))2.3  Medical image localization
Automatic localization of pathology in images is quite an 
important step towards automatic acquisition planning and 
post imaging analysis tasks, such as segmentation and func-
tional analysis. Localization involves predicting the object 
in an image, drawing a bounding box around the object and 
labeling the object.
The localization function f(I) on an image I computes 
c,lx,ly,lw,lh , which represent respectively, class label, cen-
troid x and y  coordinates, and the proportion of the bound-
ing box with respect to width and height of the image as 
expressed in (3 ).
2.4  Medical image detection
Image detection aims at the classification and the locali -
zation of regions of interest by drawing bounding boxes 
around multiple regions of interest and labeling them. This 
helps in determining the exact locations of different organs 
and their orientation. Let I  be an image with n  objects or 
regions of interest. Then detection function D (I) computes 
ci,xi,yi,wi,hi and these are respectively the class label, 
centroid x and y  coordinates, proportion of the bounding 
box with respect to width and height of the image I  as given 
in the (4 )
2.5  Evaluation metrics for image understanding
There are many metrics used for the evaluation of perfor -
mance of medical image understanding algorithms. The con-
fusion matrix, also known as the error matrix, is the table 
used for visualizing the performance of an algorithm and 
for calculation of various evaluation metrics. It provides 
an insight about the types of errors that are made by the 
classifier. It is a square matrix in which rows represent the 
instances of actual results and the columns represent the 
instances of predicted results of the algorithm. The confu-
sion matrix of a binary classifier is shown in Table  1.
Here, TP indicates correctly identified positives, TN indi-
cates correctly identified negatives, FP indicates incorrectly 
identified positives and FN indicates incorrectly identified 
negatives. FP is also known as false error and FN is known (2) I=s
∪
i=1Ri,Ri∩Rj=� and i≠j.
(3) f(I)=( c,lx,ly,lw,lh).
(4)n
∪
i=1ci,xi,yi,wi,hi=D(I).

==== Page 4 ====
4 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
as miss. The sum of correct and incorrect predictions is rep-
resented as T and expressed as in (5 ).
Performance metrics can be determined with the help of 
confusion matrix and are given in Table  2.
3  A brief introduction to CNNs
Image understanding by animals is a very fascinating pro-
cess, and a very simple task for them. But for a machine, to 
understand an image, there are lot of hidden complexities 
during the process. What animals feel is the eyes capturing (5) T=TP+TN+FP+FN.the image, which is processed by the neurons and sent to the 
brain for interpretation. CNN is a deep learning algorithm 
inspired by the visual cortex of animal brain [30] and aims 
to imitate the visual machinery of animals. CNNs repre-
sents a quantum leap in the field of image understanding, 
involving image classification, segmentation, localization, 
detection etc. The efficacy of CNNs in image understanding 
is the main reason of its abundant use. CNNs are made of 
convolutions having learnable weights and biases similar to 
neurons (nerve cells) of the animal. Convolutional layers, 
activation functions, pooling and fully-connected layers are 
the core building blocks of CNNs, as depicted in Fig.  1. Very 
brief introduction to CNNs has been presented in this paper. 
Detailed discussions on CNNs are presented in [9 , 41].
3.1  Convolution layers (Conv layers)
The visual cortex of the animal brain is made of neuronal 
cells which extract features of the images. Each neuronal 
cell extracts different features, which help in image under -
standing. The conv layer is modeled over the neuronal cells 
and its objective is to extract features, such as edges, colors, Table 1  Confusion matrix
Total test samples Predicted positive Predicted negative
Actual positive True positives ( TP) False negatives ( FN)
Actual negative False positives ( FP) True negatives ( TN)
Table 2  Performance evaluation metrics for image processing
Evaluation metric To determine Formula Preferred value
Accuracy Overall how often the result is trueTP+TN
THigh (≈1)
Misclassification result (error rate) Overall how often the result is falseFP−FN
TLow (≈0)
True positive rate ( TPR ) (recall or sensitivity) When it is actually true, how often does it predict trueTP
FN+TPHigh (≈1)
False positive rate ( FPR) When its actually false, how often does it predict trueFP
FP+TNLow (≈0)
False negative rate ( FNR)FN
FN+TPLow (≈0)
Specificity When its actually false, how often does it predict falseTN
FP+TNHigh (≈1)
Precision (positive predictive value ( PPV)) When it predicts true, how often is it correct?TP
FP+TPHigh (≈1)
F-Score (Dice similarity coefficient) Harmonic mean of recall and precision. 2×PPV×TPR
PPV+TPRHigh (≈1)
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) Commonly used graph to summarizes the perfor -
mance of a classifier over all possible thresholds.Plot of recall verses FPR High (≈1)
Area under ROC (AUC) The area under ROC Plots TPR versus FPR High (≈1)
Fig. 1  Building blocks of a 
CNN


==== Page 5 ====
5 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
texture and gradient orientation. Conv layers are made of 
learnable filters called convolutional filters, or kernels, of 
size n×m×d , where d is the depth of the image. During the 
forward pass, the kernels are convolved across the width and 
height of input volume and dot product is computed between 
the entries of the filter and the input. Intuitively, the CNN 
learns filters that gets activated when they come across edge, 
colors, texture etc. The output of the conv layer is fed into an 
activation function layer.
3.2  Activation functions or nonlinear functions
Since data in real world is mostly nonlinear, activation func-
tions are used for nonlinear transformation of the data. It is 
used to ensure that the representation in the input space is 
mapped to a different output space as per the requirements. 
The different activation functions are discussed in Sects. 
3.2.1– 3.2.3.
3.2.1  Sigmoid
It takes a real-valued number x  and squashes it into range 
between 0 and 1. In particular, large negative and positive 
inputs are placed very close to 0 and unity, respectively. It 
is expressed as in (6 ).
3.2.2  Tan hyperbolic
It takes a real valued number x  and squashes it between −1 
to 1 as expressed in (7 ).
3.2.3  Rectified linear unit (ReLU)
This nonlinear function takes a real valued number x  and 
converts x to 0 if x  is negative. ReLU is the most often used 
nonlinear function for CNN, takes less computation time 
and hence faster compared to the other two and is expressed 
in (8).
3.3  Pooling
Pooling layer performs a nonlinear down sampling of 
convolved feature. It decreases the computational power 
required to process the data through dimensionality (6) f(x)=1
1+e−x.
(7) f(x)=1−e−2x
1+e−2x.
(8) f(x)=max(0, x).reduction. It reduces the spatial size by aggregating data 
over space or feature type, controls overfitting and over -
comes translation and rotational variance of images. Pool-
ing operation results in partitioning of its input into a set 
of rectangle patches. Each patch gets replaced by a single 
value depending on the type of pooling selected. The dif-
ferent types are maximum pooling and average pooling.
3.4  Fully connected (FC) layer
FC layer is similar to artificial neural network, where each 
node has incoming connections from all the inputs and all 
the connections have weights associated with them. The 
output is sum of all the inputs multiplied by the corre-
sponding weights. FC layer is followed by sigmoid activa-
tion function and performs the classifier job.
3.5  Data preprocessing and augmentation
The raw images obtained from imaging modalities need to 
be preprocessed and augmented before sending to CNN. 
The raw image data might be skewed, altered by bias dis-
tortion [55], having intensity inhomogeneity during cap-
ture, and hence needs to be preprocessed. Multiple data 
preprocessing methods exist and the preferred methods 
are mean subtraction and normalization. CNN needs to be 
trained on a larger dataset to achieve the best performance. 
Data augmentation increases the existing set of images by 
horizontal and vertical flips, transformations, scaling, ran-
dom cropping, color jittering and intensity variations. The 
preprocessed, augmented image data is then fed into CNN.
3.6  CNN architectures and frameworks
Many CNN architectures have been proposed by research-
ers depending on kind of task to be performed. A few 
award-winning architectures are listed in Table  3. CNN 
frameworks (toolkits) enable the efficient development 
and implementation of deep learning methods. Various 
frameworks used by researchers and developers is listed 
in Table  4.
Table 3  Various award winning CNN architectures
Architecture References Architecture References
LeNet-5 [43] VGGNet [70]
AlexNet [41] GoogLeNet [3]
Overfeat [65] ResNet [26]
ZFNet [79] Xception [12]

==== Page 6 ====
6 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
4  CNN applications in medical image 
classification
4.1  Lung diseases
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is the disorder of lung paren-
chyma in which lung tissues get scarred leading to res-
piratory difficulty. High resolution computed tomography 
(HRCT) imaging is used to differentiate between different 
types of ILDs. HRCT images have a high visual variation 
between different classes and high visual similarity within 
the same class. Therefore, accurate classification is quite 
challenging.
4.1.1  Ensemble CNN
Ensemble of rf and overfeat for classification of pulmo-
nary peri fissural nodules of lungs was proposed in [ 14]. 
The complexity of the input was reduced by extracting two-
dimensional views from three-dimensional volume. The 
performance was enhanced by using a combination of over -
feat followed by rf. The bagging technique of rf boosted the 
performance of the model. The proposed model obtained 
an AUC of 86.8% .
4.1.2  Small‑kernel CNN
Low level textual information and more non linear activa-
tions enhances performance of classification was empha -
sized by [4 ]. The authors shrinked the kernel size to 2×2 
to involve more non linear activations. The receptive fields 
were kept smaller to capture low level textual information. 
Also, to handle increasing complexity of the structures, the 
number of kernels were made proportional to the number 
of receptive field of its neurons. The model classified the 
lung tissue image into seven classes (a healthy tissue and six 
different ILD patterns). The results were compared against 
AlexNet and VGGNet and the ROC curves. The structure 
took only 20 s to classify the whole lung area in 30 slices of 
an average size HRCT scan image. AlexNet and VGG-Net 
took 136 s and 160 s for classification. The model delivered 
a classification accuracy of 85% , while the traditional meth -
ods delivered an accuracy of 78%.
4.1.3  Whole image CNN
Smaller image patches to prevent loss of spatial information 
and different attenuation ranges to enhance better visibil-
ity was proposed in [18]. Since the images were RGB, the 
proposed CNN model used three lung attenuation ranges 
namely, lower attenuation, normal attenuation and higher attenuation. To avoid overfitting, the images were augmented 
by jitter and cropping. A simple Alexnet model with the 
above variations was implemented and compared against 
other CNN models implemented to work on image patches. 
The performance metrics were accuracy and F-score. The 
model obtained an F-score of 100%  and the average accuracy 
of 87.9% .
4.1.4  Multicrop pooling CNN
Limitation of reduced training samples can be overcome by 
extraction of salient multi scale features. The features were 
extracted using multicrop pooling for automatic lung nod-
ule malignancy suspicious classification in [68]. The model 
was a simple 3 layered CNN architecture but with multicrop 
pooling and randomized leaky ReLu as activation. The pro-
posed method obtained accuracy and AUC of 87.4%  and 
93% . Fivefold cross validation was used for evaluation.
The CNN applications in lung classification is summa -
rized in Table  5.
4.2  Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19)
COVID-19 is a global pandemic disease spreading rapidly 
around the world. Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (RT-PCR) is a commonly employed test for detec-
tion of COVID-19 infection. RT-PCR testing is the gold 
standard for COVID-19 testing, RT-PCR is very compli -
cated, time-consuming and labor-intensive process, sparse 
availability and not very accurate. Chest X-ray could be used 
for the initial screening of the COVID-19 in places having 
shortage of RT-PCR kits and is more accurate at diagnosis. 
Many researchers have used deep learning to classify if the 
chest infection is due to COVID-19 or other ailments.
4.2.1  Customized CNN
One of the initial model proposed for detection of COVID-
19 was a simple pretrained AlexNet model proposed in [45] 
and fine tuned on chest X-ray images. The results were very 
promising with accuracy of classifying positive and nega-
tive patients of around 95% . Use of pretrained with trans-
fer learning ResNet and InceptionNet CNN models were 
also proposed. These models demonstrated that the transfer 
learning models were also efficient and achieved a test accu-
racy of 93%.
4.2.2  Bayesian CNN
Uncertainty was explored to enhance the diagnostic per -
formance of classification of COVID-19 datasets in [22]. 
The primary aim of proposed method was to avoid COVID-
19 misdiagnoses. The method explored Monte-Carlo 

==== Page 7 ====
7 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
Table 4  Various existing CNN frameworks
Deep learning frameworks Developed at Implemented using Pros Cons
Caffe [33] Berkeley Vision and Learning Centre C++ Cross platform, easy to deploy, fast, has good 
Matlab and Python interface, models can be 
trained without writing codeUsability drops outside ConvNets, not very 
good with new architectures
Keras [11] Francois Chollet, Google Python Easiest deep learning framework, clean API, 
huge active community, easily extensible, 
user-friendly, works with Theano and Ten-
sorFlowPoor support for multi node training, cannot be 
used efficiently as an independent framework
TensorFlow [1] Google Brainteam Python, C++ Has modular architecture, supports multiple 
front ends and execution platforms, avail-
ability of tensorboard for visualizationSlow, slower than Theano and Torch in terms 
of execution time, lacks many pre-trained 
models, not completely open source
Torch [15] New York University Lua Modular architecture, easy to setup, displays 
helpful error messages and has a large 
amount of tutorialsDifficult to integrate since it is implemented in 
Lua and its data science stack in R or Python
PyTorch [53] Facebook artificial intelligence group Python, C++, CUDA Fast, minimal framework overhead, under -
standing error messages and stack traces 
is easy and hence easy to debug, good for 
research and developmentDepends on Matplotlib and Seaborn for visuali-
zation, lacks distributed training
Theano [3] Python Expressive Python syntax, large help on net, 
supports high level wrappersCross platform, needs secondary libraries for 
deploying, supports single GPU, error mes-
sages are not helpful
Neon [51] Nervana Systems Python Very fast due to fast matrix operations, the 
same code runs on GPU and CPUToo many errors with scattered dependencies, 
less material on web, architecture not user 
friendly, not general-purpose
Deeplearning4j [59] Java Performance equal to Caffe and better than 
TensorFlow or Torch, fastGenerally not preferred because Java is unpopu-
lar in ML circles
Cognitive Toolkit (CNTK) [64] Microsoft C++ Fast, accurate scalable over GPUs, flexible, 
allows distributed training, supports C++, 
Java, Python and C#Lacks visualizations, crashes with error, no 
Matlab or Python bindings

==== Page 8 ====
8 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
Dropweights Bayesian CNN to estimate uncertainty in 
deep learning, to better the diagnostic performance of 
human-machine decisions. The method showed that there 
is a strong correlation between classification accuracy and 
estimated uncertainty in predictions. The proposed method 
used ResNet50v2 model. The softmax layer was preceded by 
dropweights. Dropweights were applied as an approximation 
to the Gaussian Process, which was used to estimate mean-
ingful model uncertainty. The softmax layer finally outputs 
each possible class label’s probability distribution.
4.2.3  PDCOVIDNET
Use of dilation to detect dominant features in the image 
was explored in [13]. The authors proposed parallel dilated 
CNN model. The dilated module involved skipping of pix-
els during convolution process. Parallel CNN branches are 
proposed with different dilation rates. The features obtained 
from parallel branches were concatenated and input to the 
next convolution layer. Concatenation-convolution operation 
was used to explore feature relationship of dilated convo-
lutions so as to detect dominant features for classification. 
The model also used Grad-CAM and Grad-CAM++ to high-
light the regions of class-discriminative saliency maps. The 
performance metrics used were accuracy, precision, recall, 
F1-score with ROC/AUC and are 96.58%, 95%, 91%, 93%  
and 0.991 respectively.
4.2.4  CVR‑Net
To prevent degrading of final prediction and to compensate 
for lesser number of datasets, multi scale multi encoder 
ensemble CNN model for classification of COVID-19 was 
proposed in [24]. The proposed model ensembled feature 
maps at different scales obtained from different encoders. 
To avoid overfitting, geometry based image augmenta-
tions and transfer learning was proposed. To overcome vanishing gradients, each encoder consisted of residual 
and convolutional blocks to allow gradients to pass, like in 
resNet architecture. Moreover Depth-wise separable con-
volution was used to create a light weight network. The 
depth information of feature map was enhanced by con-
catenating different 2D feature maps of different encoders 
in channel-wise. The performance metrics for classifying 
images into positive and negative were recall, precision, 
f1-score and accuracy. The model showed a very efficient 
performance with score of nearly 98% for all the metrics.
4.2.5  Twice transfer learning CNN
A denseNet model trained twice using transfer learning 
approach was proposed in [6 ]. The denseNet201 model 
was trained initially on imageNet dataset , followed by 
chest X-ray 14 dataset and then fine tuned on COVID-
19 dataset. Various combinations of training the model 
first with single transfer learning, twice transfer learn-
ing, twice transfer learning with output neuron keeping 
were experimented. The model with twice transfer learn-
ing with output neuron keeping achieved the best perfor -
mance accuracy of 98.9%  over the other models. Transfer 
learning on chest X-ray 14 dataset enhanced the result, as 
the model had learnt most of the features related to chest 
abnormalities.
4.3  Immune response abnormalities
Autoimmune diseases result from an abnormal immune 
response to a normal body part. The immune system of 
the body attacks the healthy cells in such diseases. Indirect 
immunofluorescence (IIF) on human epithelial-2 (HEp-2) 
cells is used to diagnose an autoimmune disease. Manual 
identification of these patterns is a time-consuming process.Table 5  A summary of CNN applications in ILD image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[44] Normalized with unit 
variance and zero-
meanConv, ReLU, maxpool, 
FC ×3 , backpropaga-
tion, batch processing, 
dropout of 0.6ILD SIFT, LBP, unsuper -
vised feature learning 
using RBMRecall, precision
[4] Augmentation by rotat-
ing(Conv, Leaky ReLU, 
avgpool) ×5 , three FC, 
softmax classifierILD from University 
of Geneva and Bern 
University hospitalAlexNet, VGGNet Time, ROC, AUC 
[18] Augmentation by adding 
jitter and croppingAlexNet architecture Public ILD database CNN patch based 
methodsAccuracy 87.9%  com-
pared to 86.1%  using 
patch based methods
[68] Augmentation (Conv, ReLU, maxpool 
with multicrop) ×3 + 
FC, softmaxLIDC-IDRI dataset HOG, LBP Accuracy 87.4%  and AUC 
93%

==== Page 9 ====
9 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
4.3.1  CUDA ConvNet CNN
Preprocessing using histogram equalization and zero-mean 
with unit variance increases classification accuracy by an 
additional 10% with augmentation was proposed in [7 ]. The 
experiments also demonstrate that pretraining, followed by 
fine tuning boosts performance. It achieved an average clas-
sification accuracy of 80.3%  which was greater than the pre-
vious best of 75.6%  . The authors used Caffe library [33] and 
CUDA ConvNet model architecture to extract CNN-based 
features for classification of HEp-2 cells.
4.3.2  Six‑layer CNN
Preprocessing and augmentation enhanced the mean clas-
sification accuracy of HEp-2 cell images and was shown 
in [21]. The framework consisted of three stages of image 
preprocessing, network training and feature extraction with 
classification. Mean classification accuracy of 96.7%  on 
ICPR-2012 dataset was obtained. The CNN approaches for 
HEp-2 cell classification are summarized in Table  6.
4.4  Breast tumors
Breast cancer is the most common cancer that affects women 
across the world. It can be detected by the analysis of mam-
mographs. Two radiologists independently reading the 
same mammogram has been advocated to overcome any 
misjudgement.
4.4.1  Stopping monitoring CNN
Stopping monitoring to reduce the computation time is 
proposed in [ 52]. Stopping monitoring was performed 
using AUC on validation set. The model extracted region 
of interest (ROI) by cropping. The images were augmented 
to increase the number of samples and also to prevent over -
fitting. The CNN model proposed was for classification of 
breast tumors. The result was compared against the state-
of-the-art image descriptors HOG and HOG divergence. The proposed method resulted in AUC of 82.2%  compared 
to 78.7%  for other methods.
4.4.2  Ensemble CNN
Fine tuning enhanced the performance in the case of lim-
ited dataset was proposed in [34]. The proposed model 
was similar to AlexNet and was pretrained on imagenet, 
followed by fine tuning on breast images due to short-
age of breast images. The middle and high level features 
were extracted from different layers of the network and fed 
into SVM classifiers for training. The model classified the 
breast masses into malignant and benign. Due to extrac-
tion of efficient features by deep network, simple classifier 
also resulted in accuracy of 96.7%  . The proposed method 
was compared against bag-of-words, HOG and SIFT and 
it outperformed all of them.
4.4.3  Semi‑supervised CNN
CNN can also be used in scenarios involving sparse 
labeled data and abundant unlabeled data. To overcome 
the sparse labeled data problem, a new graph based semi 
supervised learning techniques for breast cancer diagno-
sis was proposed in [73]. For removal of redundancies 
and feature correlations, dimensionality reduction was 
employed. The method used four modules, feature extrac-
tion to extract 21 features from breast masses, data weigh-
ing to minimize the influence of noisy data and division of 
co-training data labeling followed by the CNN. It involved 
sub patches extraction of ROIs which were input to three 
pairs of conv layers, maxpooling and FC layer. Three mod-
els CNN, SVM and ANN are compared. The AUC for 
CNN for mixture of labeled and unlabeled data was 88% 
compared to 85% of SVM and 84% of ANN and accuracy 
for CNN with mixed data was 82% compared to 80% for 
SVM and 80% for ANN. The CNN approaches for breast 
tumor classification are summarized in Table  7.
Table 6  A summary of CNN applications in HEp-2 cell classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Perfromance metric
[7] Augmented by affine transform 
and intensity variations, 
green channel images usedConv, maxpool, ReLU, conv, 
avgpool, ReLU, conv, 
avgpool, FC with dropout, 
weight decay, softmax with 
multinomial logistic regres-
sionICPR 2014 ICPR 2012 benchmark and 
winners modelAverage classifica-
tion accuracy 81%
[21] Normalized using zero mean 
and unit variance, and 
rotated(Conv, tanh, maxpool)  ×3 , 
FC ×2 , softmax regression, 
outputs six classesICPR 2014 ICPR 2012 classification 
contestantsAccuracy 96.17%

==== Page 10 ====
10 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
4.5  Heart diseases
Electrocardiogram (ECG) is used for the assessment of the 
electrical activity of the heart to detect anomalies in the 
heart.
4.5.1  One‑dimensional CNN
ECG classification using CNN model demonstrates supe -
rior performance with classification accuracy of 95% was 
proposed in [40]. The model comprised of one-dimensional 
CNN with three conv layers and two FC layers that fused 
feature extraction and classification into a single learning 
body. Once the dedicated CNN was trained for a particular 
patient, it could be solely used to classify ECG records in a 
fast and accurate manner.
4.5.2  Fused CNN
Classification of echocardiography videos require both 
spatial and temporal data. Fused CNN architecture using 
both spatial and temporal data was proposed in [20]. It used 
a two-path CNN, one along the spatial direction and the 
other along temporal direction. Each individual CNN path 
executed individually and was fused only after obtaining the 
final classification scores. The spatial CNN learnt the spa-
tial information automatically from the original normalised 
echo video images. Temporal CNN learnt from acceleration 
images along the time direction of the echo videos. The out-
puts of both CNNs were fused and applied to softmax classi -
fier for the final classification. The proposed model achieved 
an average accuracy of 92% compared to 89.5%  for single 
path CNN, 87.9%  for three-dimensional KAZE, 73.8%  for 
three-dimensional SIFT. The long time required for initial training was the disadvantage of this approach. The CNN 
approaches to heart classification are summarized in Table  8.
4.6  Eye diseases
4.6.1  Gaussian initialized CNN
Initial training time can be reduced by Gaussian initiali-
zation, and overfitting can be avoided by weighted class 
weights. This was proposed for classifying diabetic retinopa-
thy (DR) in fundus imagery in [57]. The performance was 
compared with SVM and other methods that required feature 
extraction prior to classification. The method achieved 95% 
specificity but less sensitivity of 30% . The trained CNN did 
a quick diagnosis and gave an immediate response to the 
patient during screening.
4.6.2  Hyper parameter tuning inception‑v4
Automated hyper parameter tuning inception-v4 (HPTI-
v4) model for DR in color fundus images classification and 
detection is proposed in [67]. The images are preprocessed 
using CLAHE to enhance contrast level, segmented using 
histogram based segmentation model. Hyper parameter tun-
ing is done using Bayesian optimization method, as Bayesian 
model has the ability to analyze the previous validation out-
come, to create a probabilistic model. Classification is done 
using HPTI-v4 model followed by multi layer perceptron. 
The classification is applied on MESSIDOR DR dataset. 
The CNN model performance was extraordinary with the 
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of 99.49%  , 98.83%  , and 
99.68%  respectively.Table 7  A summary of CNN applications in breast medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Comparison against Performance metric
[34] Normalized by subtracting 
mean, dividing by standard 
deviation, augmented by 
flipping(Conv, ReLU, maxpool)  ×5 , 
(FC + ReLU)  ×2 + FC, sto-
chastic gradient descentBOW, HOG, SIFT, VGGNet ROC and accuracy 96.7%
[52] Crop, augmentation by flipping 
and rotating, global contrast 
normalization, local contrast 
normalization(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 + 
FCHOG, HGD AUC 82.2%
[73] Feature extraction, data weigh-
ing, data labeling(Conv, maxpool)  ×3 , FC SVM, ANN, labeled data, unla-
beled data and mixed dataAccuracy 82.43%  , AUC 88.18%
[78] Image oversegmented into 
atomic regions using super -
pixel based scheme(Conv, maxpool) ×2 , FC ×2 , 
softmax classifierLinder, Bianconi, 
DCNN-Ncut + SVM, 
DCNN-Ncut + SMC, 
DCNN-Ncut + SVM, 
DCNN-SLIC-SVM, DCNN-
SLIC-SMCROC, AUC, accuracy

==== Page 11 ====
11 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
4.7  Colon cancer
4.7.1  Ensemble CNN
Usage of small patches increased the amount of training 
data and localized the analysis to small nuclei in images. 
This enhanced the performance of detecting and classify -
ing nuclei in H&E stained histopathology images of colo-
rectal adenocarcinoma. This was proposed in [71]. The 
model also demonstrated locality sensitive deep learning 
approach with neighboring ensemble predictor (NEP) in 
conjunction with a standard softmax CNN and eliminated 
need of segmentation. The model used dropout to avoid 
overfitting. The model obtained an AUC of 91.7%  and 
F-score of 78.4%
The CNN approaches for colon cancer classification 
are summarized in Table  9.
4.8  Brain disorders
Alzheimer’s disease causes the destruction of brain cells 
leading to memory loss. Classification of Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) has been challenging since it involves selec-
tion of discriminative features.4.8.1  Fused CNN
Fusion of two-dimensional CNN and three-dimensional 
CNN achieves better accuracy was demonstrated in [19]. 
Information along Z direction acts very crucial for analy -
sis of brain images and three-dimensional CNN was used 
to retain this information. Since the thickness of brain CT 
images is thicker than MRI images, geometric normalization 
of CT images were performed. Output of the last conv layer 
of two-dimensional CNN was fused with three-dimensional 
convoluted data to get three classes (Alzheimer’s, lesions, 
and healthy data). It was compared with two hand-crafted 
approaches SIFT and KAZE for accuracy and achieved bet-
ter accuracy of 86.7%, 78.9%  and 95.6%  for AD, lesion and 
normal class, respectively.
4.8.2  Input cascaded CNN
Lack of training data can be overcome by extensive aug-
mentation and fine tuning was proposed in [62]. Multi-grade 
brain tumor classification was performed by segmenting 
the tumor regions from an MR image using input cascaded 
CNN, extensive augmentation and then fine-tuned using data 
augmented. The performance was compared against state-of-
art methods. It resulted in an accuracy of 94.58%  , sensitivity 
of 88.41%  and specificity of 96.58% .Table 8  A summary of CNN applications in heart classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[40] ECG signals filtered using 
bandpass filter at 0.1-100 
Hz and digitized at 360 
Hz.One-dimensional CNN 
with conv ×3 , FC ×2MIT/BIH arrhythmia 
databaseOther existing methods Accuracy, sensitiv -
ity, specificity
[20] Image resized to 
175×200×26Two path CNN of seven 
layers (conv, ReLU, 
maxpool)  ×2 , (conv, 
ReLU)  ×2 , (conv, ReLU, 
maxpool), (conv, drop-
out) ×2Tsinghua University 
Hospital, Beijing and 
Fuzhou University Hos-
pital, ChinaSIFT, KAZE Accuracy 92.1%
Table 9  A summary of CNN applications in colon medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Preprocessing Architecture Comparison against Performance metric
[71] Augmented using small patches NEP with standard softmax 
CNN, ReLU, dropoutAUC 91.7%  , F-score 78.4% .
[78] Image subdivided into 80×80 
using sliding window, and 
border padding to prevent 
artifacts(Conv, maxpool) ×2 , FC ×2 , 
softmaxLinder, Bianconi, DCNN-SW-
SVM, DCNN-SW-SMCROC, AUC, accuracy
[61] Normalized by subtracting 
mean, dividing by standard 
deviation, augmented by 
flipping(Conv, pool)  ×2 , conv, FC with 
dropout, softmaxBFD, SSF, DT-CTW, MB-LBP, 
SIFTAccuracy 90.96%

==== Page 12 ====
12 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
The CNN approaches for medical image classification 
discussed above are summarized in Table  10.
5  CNN applications in medical image 
segmentation
CNNs have been applied to implement efficient segmen-
tation of images of brain tumors, hearts, breasts, retina, 
fetal abdomen, stromal and epithelial tissues.
5.1  Brain tumors
MRI is used to obtain detailed images of the brain to diag -
nose tumors. Automatic segmentation of a brain tumor 
is very challenging because it involves the extraction of 
high level features.
5.1.1  Small kernel CNN
Patch-wise training and use of small filter sizes ( 3×3 ) 
was proposed for segmentation of gliomas in [54]. This 
provided an advantage of deep architecture, while retain-
ing the same receptive fields. Two separate models were 
trained for high and low gliomas. High glioma model 
consisted of eight conv layers and three dense layers. 
Low glioma model contained four conv layers and three 
dense layers. Maxpooling was used along with dropout for 
dense layers. It ranked fourth in the BRATS-2015 chal-
lenge. Data augmentation was achieved by rotation which 
enhanced the performance of segmentation of gliomas.5.1.2  Fully blown CNN
Fully blown MRI two-dimensional images enhances perfor -
mance of segmentation of sub-cortical human brain struc-
ture. This was shown in [66]. The proposed model applied 
Markov random field on CNN output to impose volumetric 
homogeneity to the final results. It outperformed several 
state-of-the-art methods.
5.1.3  Multipath CNN
Two pathways, one for convolution and the other for decon-
volution, enhances segmentation output was shown in [8 ]. 
The model was used for automatic MS lesions segmenta-
tion. The model had convolutional pathway consisting of 
alternating conv, pool layers, and a deconvolutional pathway 
consisting of alternate deconv layer and unpooling layer. 
The pretraining was performed by convolutional RBMs 
(convRBM). Both pretraining and fine training were per -
formed on a highly optimized GPU-accelerated implemen-
tation of three-dimensional convRBMs and convolutional 
encoder networks (CEN). It was compared with five publicly 
available methods and established as comparison reference 
points. The model performance was evaluated using evalu-
ation metrics DSC, TPR and FPR. TPR and FPR achieved 
were comparatively better than the previous models devel-
oped. However, it achieved lesser DSC in comparison to 
other methods.
5.1.4  Cascaded CNN
In case of imbalanced label distributions, two phase training 
could be used. Global contextual features and local detailed 
features can be learned simultaneously by two-pathway 
Table 10  A summary of CNN applications in medical image classification surveyed in Sect. 4
References Organ Preprocessing Architecture Dataset Performance metric
[19] Brain Geometric normalization 
of CT imagesConv ×5 , (conv + drop-
out)  ×3 , fusion with 
3-D convoluted data3-D datasets from 282 
subjects (51 with AD, 
118 with lesions, 117 
normal)Accuracy 86.7%, 78.9%  and 
95.6%  for AD, lesion and 
normal class
[63] Brain Motion correction, 
skull stripping, spatial 
smoothingLeNet ADNI dataset Accuracy 96.86%
[62] Brain Data augmentation Input cascaded CNN for 
segmentation, VGG-19 
with transfer learningRadiopedia and brain 
tumorAccuracy 94.58%  , sensitiv -
ity 88.41%  , specificity 
96.58%
[57] Eye, retinopathy Color normalization, 
image size reduced to 
512Conv ×10 , FC ×3 with 
softmax classifierKaggle Specificity 95% but less 
sensitivity 30%
[82] Digestive organs (Conv, maxpool) ×3 , FC 
×2 , mini batch stochastic 
gradient descentReal clinical data of wire-
less capsule endoscopy 
imagesAccuracy 95%

==== Page 13 ====
13 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
architecture for brain segmentation and was proposed in 
[25]. The advantage of two-pathway was, it could recognize 
fine details of the tumor at a local scale and correct labels 
at a global scale to yield a better segmentation. Slice-by-
slice segmentation from the axial view due to less resolution 
in the third dimension was performed. The cascaded CNN 
achieved better rank than two-pathway CNN and was ranked 
second at the MICCAI BRATS-2013 challenge. The evalua-
tion metrics used were DSC, specificity and sensitivity and 
the obtained values were 79%, 81%  and 79% . The time taken 
for segmentation was between 25 s and 3 min.
5.1.5  Multiscale CNN
In case of brain tumor segmentation, a multiscale CNN 
architecture for extracting both local and global features at 
different scales was proposed in [80]. The model performed 
better due to different features extracted at various resolu-
tion. The computation time was reduced by exploiting a 
two-dimensional CNN instead of a three-dimensional CNN. 
Three patch sizes 48×48 , 28×28 and 12×12 were input to 
three CNNs for feature extraction. All the features extracted 
were input to the FC layer. Evaluation of the model was by 
DSC and accuracy. The model performance was almost as 
stable as the best method with an accuracy of nearly 90%.
5.1.6  Multipath and multiscale CNN
Twopath and multiscale architecture were also explored 
for brain lesion segmentation by [37]. The model exploited 
smaller kernels to get local neighbour information and 
employed parallel convolutional pathways for multiscale 
processing. It achieved highest accuracy when applied on 
patients with severe traumatic brain injuries. It could also 
segment small and diffused pathologies. Three-dimensional 
CNN produced accurate segmentation borders. FC three-
dimensional CRF imposed regularization constraints on 
CNN output and produced final hard segmentation labels. 
Also, due to its generic nature, it cold be applied to dif -
ferent lesion segmentation tasks with slight modifications. 
It was ranked first in the stroke lesions ISLES-SISS-2015 
challenge.
Advantages of multipath and multiscale CNN was 
exploited for automatic segmentation of analytical brain 
images in [49]. The bigger kernel was used for spatial 
information. A separate network branch was used for each 
patch size, and only the output layer was shared. Mini batch 
learning and RMSprop were used to train the network with 
ReLU and cross entropy as the cost function. Automatic 
segmentation was evaluated using the DSC and mean sur -
face distance between manual and automatic segmentation. 
It achieved accurate segmentation in terms of DSC for all tissue classes. The CNN approaches for brain segmentation 
discussed above are summarized in Table  11.
5.2  Breast cancer
Breast cancers can be predicted by automatically segmenting 
breast density and by characterizing mammographic textural 
patterns.
5.2.1  FCNN
Redundant computations in conv and max pool layers can 
be avoided by using ROI segmentation in a fast scanning 
deep CNN (FCNN). The above technique was applied for 
segmentation of histopathological breast cancer images and 
was proposed in [72]. The proposed work was compared 
against three texture classification methods namely raw pixel 
patch with large scale SVM, local binary pattern feature with 
large scale SVM and texton histogram with logistic booting. 
The evaluation metrics used were accuracy, efficiency and 
scalability. Ihe proposed method was robust to intra-class 
variance. It achieved an F-score of 85% , whereas the other 
methods delivered the maximum F-score of 75% . It took 
only 2.3 s to segment image of resolution of 1000×1000 .
5.2.2  Probability map CNN
Probability maps were explored for iterative region merg-
ing for shape initialization along with compact nucleus 
shape repository with selection-based dictionary learning 
algorithm in [ 77]. The model resulted in better automatic 
nucleus segmentation using CNN. The framework was 
tested on three types of histopathology images namely, brain 
tumor, pancreatic neuro endocrine tumor and breast cancer. 
The parameters for comparison were precision, recall and 
F-score. It achieved better performance when compared to 
SVM, RF and DBN, especially for breast cancer images. 
Pixel-wise segmentation accuracy measured using DSC, HD 
and MAD resulted in superior performance when compared 
to other methods.
5.2.3  Patch CNN
Advantages of patch-based CNN was exploited in [ 78]. The 
method also exploited super pixel method to over segment 
breast cancer H&E images into atomic images. The result was 
natural boundaries with errors being subtle and less egregious, 
whereas sliding window methods resulted in zigzag bounda-
ries. Both patch-based CNN and superpixel techniques were 
combined for segmenting and classifying the stromal and 
epithelial regions in histopathological images for detection 
of breast and colorectal cancer. The proposed model outper -
formed CNN with SVM. The comparison was done against 

==== Page 14 ====
14 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
methods using handcrafted features. It achieved 100%  accuracy 
and Deep CNN-Ncut-SVM had better AUC than other CNN.
5.3  Eye diseases
5.3.1  Greedy CNN
The architecture of conventional CNNs was tweaked by mak -
ing the filters of the CNN learn sequentially using a greedy 
approach of boosting instead of backpropagation. Boosting 
was applied to learn diverse filters to minimize weighted clas-
sification error. The ensembling learning was proposed for 
the automatic segmentation of optic cup and optic disc from 
retinal fundus images to detect glaucoma in [81]. The model 
performed entropy sampling to identify informative points 
on landmarks such as edges, blood vessels. etc. The weight 
updates were done considering final classification error instead 
of back propagation error. The method operated on patches of 
image taken around a point. A F-score of 97.3%  was obtained 
which was comparatively better to normal CNN whose best 
F-score was 96.7% .
5.3.2  Multi label inference CNN
Retinal blood vessel segmentation was dealt as multi-label 
inference problem and solved using CNN in [16]. The model 
extracted green channel from RGB fundus image, as blood 
vessels manifest high contrast in green channel. The model 
was upsampled at the sixth layer to increase spatial dimension 
for structured output. The output of CNN model was mod-
eled as vector instead of a scalar, due to multiple labels. It 
achieved precision of 84.98%  , sensitivity of 76.91%  , specificity 
of 98.01%  , accuracy of 95.33%  and AUC of 97.44% .
5.4  Lung
5.4.1  U net
Lung segmentation and bone shadow exclusion techniques for 
analysis of lung cancer using U-net architecture is proposed in 
[23]. The images were preprocessed to eliminate bone shadow 
and a simple U-net architecture was used to segment the lung 
ROI. The results obtained were very promising and showed a 
good speed and precise segmentation. The CNN approaches 
for medical image segmentation discussed above are summa-
rized in Table  12.Table 11  A summary of CNN applications in brain medical image segmentation surveyed in Sect. 5
References Preprocessing Architecture Performance metric
[55] N4ITK bias field correction, Nyul’s intensity normalization Seven layers with conv and ReLU at 1, 3, 5, 6 and maxpool at 2 
and 4, layer seven was FC with softmaxPrecision 98.3%  and accuracy 97%
[66] Augmented by flipping and translation Shallow network, (conv, max pool layers)  ×5 . First two layer 
outputs are subsampled, five output classesDSC, Haudsroff distance, contour mean distance
[25] Removed 1% higher and 1% lower intensity, normalization Two path CNN with cascaded architecture with maxout, fol-
lowed by maxpool, softmax. optimization using stochastic 
gradient descent, regularization using L1, L2 and dropout.DSC 79% , sensitivity 79% and specificity 81%
[37] 2 pathway, 11 layers architecture called deep medic, with three-
dimensional CNN, FC three-dimensional CRF and smaller 
kernelsDSC, precision and sensitivity
[49] Classified brain tissue pixels into classes, using different kernel 
sizesSeparate network branch was used for each patch size, and only 
output layer was shared. Mini batch learning and RMSprop 
to train the network with ReLU and cross entropy as the cost 
function.DSC and mean surface distance between manual 
and automatic segmentation

==== Page 15 ====
15 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
6  CNN applications in medical image 
detection
6.1  Breast tumors
A Camelyon grand challenge for automatic detection of met -
astatic breast cancer in digital whole slide images of sentinel 
lymph node biopsies is organised by the International Sym-
posium of Biomedical Imaging.
6.1.1  GoogLeNet CNN
The award-winning system with performance very closer 
to human accuracy was proposed in [76]. The computation 
time was reduced by first excluding the white background of 
digital images using Otsu’s algorithm. The method exploited 
advantages of patch-based classification to obtain better 
results. Also the model trained extensively on misclassified 
image patches, to decrease classification error. The results of 
the patches were embedded on heatmap image and heatmaps 
were used to compute evaluation scores. AUC of 92.5%  was 
obtained, and was the top performer in the challenge. In case 
of lesion based detection, the system achieved the sensitivity 
of 70.51%  , whereas the second ranking score was 57.61% .
6.2  Eye diseases
6.2.1  Dynamic CNN
Random assignment of weights, speeds up the training and 
improves the performance. This was proposed for hem-
orrhage detection in fundus eye images in [75]. Also the 
samples were dynamically selected at every training epoch 
from a large pool of medical images. Pre-processing was 
performed using image contrast using gaussian filters. To 
prevent overfitting, the images were augmented. For correct classification of hemorrhage, the result was convolved with 
gaussian filter to smoothen the values. It achieved sensitivity, 
specificity and ROC of 93% , 91.5%  and 98% , whereas non 
selective sampling obtains sensitivity, specificity and ROC 
of 93%, 93%  and 96.6%  for Messidor dataset. AUC was used 
to monitor overfitting during training and when AUC value 
reached a stable maximum, the CNN training was stopped.
6.2.2  Ensemble CNN
An ensemble performs better than a single CNN and can be 
used to achieve higher performance. The ensemble model 
for detection of retinal vessels in fundus images is proposed 
in [46]. The model was an ensemble of twelve CNNs. Each 
CNN’s output probability was averaged to get the final ves-
sel’s probability of each pixel. The probability was used to 
discriminate between vessel pixels from non-vessel ones for 
detection. The performance measures, accuracy and Kappa 
score were compared with existing state of the art methods. 
It stood second in terms of accuracy as well as in kappa 
score. The model obtained a FROC score of 0.928.
6.3  Cell division
6.3.1  LeNet CNN
Augmentation and shifting the centroid of the object 
enhanced the performance, and was proposed in [69]. The 
model was for automatic detection of mitosis (cell divisions) 
and quantification of mitosis occurring during scratch assay. 
The positive example training samples was augmented by 
mirroring and rotating by 45◦ and centering by shifting the 
centroid of the object to the patch center. A random addi-
tional sampling of negative samples was added in the same 
amount as positive examples. The performance param-
eters used were sensitivity, specificity, AUC and F-score Table 12  A summary of CNN applications in medical image segmentation surveyed in Sect. 5
References Organ Dataset Comparison against Performance metric
[8] MS lesion ISBI 2015 and MICCAI 2008 
datasetsFive publicly available methods DSC, TPR and FPR. Achieved better 
TPR and FPR, but less DSC values
[36] Breast Dutch breast cancer screening 
datasetState of the art methods AUC 
[72] Breast The Cancer Genome Atlas breast 
cancer datasetThree texture classification methods 
namely RPLSVM, LBPLSVM and 
THLBAccuracy, efficiency and scalability 
and F-score of 85%
[77] Nucleus Brain tumor, pancreatic NET and 
breast cancerSVM, RF and DBN Precision, recall and F-score
[83] Heart CCTA scans of 60 patients Manual segmentation Sensitivity 95% and specificity 96.6%  
DSC 85% and mean absolute sur -
face distance 85%
[81] Eye glaucoma DRISHTI-GS, Messidor Manual Precision, recall, F-score

==== Page 16 ====
16 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
and compared with SVM. The results indicated significant 
increase in F-score (for SVM 78% , for CNN 89% ). The 
model concluded that both positive and negative samples 
are needed for better performance. The CNN applications 
in medical image detection reviewed in this paper are sum-
marized in Table  13.
7  CNN applications in medical image 
localization
7.1  Breast tumors
7.1.1  Semi‑supervised deep CNN
To overcome challenges of sparsely labeled data, a model 
was proposed in [73]. The unlabeled data was first auto-
matically labeled using labeled data. Newly labeled data and 
initial labeled data were used to train the deep CNN. The 
method used semi-supervised deep CNN for breast cancer 
diagnosis. The performance of CNN was compared with 
SVM and ANN using different numbers of labeled data like 
40, 70 and 100. The model produced comparable results 
even with sparse labeled data with accuracy of 83% and 
AUC of 88%.
7.2  Heart diseases
7.2.1  Pyramid of scales localization
Pyramid of scales (PoS) localization leads to better perfor -
mance, specially in cases, where the size of the organ varies 
between the patients. The size of the heart is not consistent 
among human, and hence PoS was proposed for localiza-
tion of left ventricle (LV) in cardiac MRI images in [17]. The model also exploited patch based training. Evaluation 
metrics used were accuracy, sensitivity and specificity and 
were respectively 98.6%, 83.9%  and 99.1%  . The limitation of 
the approach was the computing time of 10 s/image.
7.3  Fetal abnormalities
7.3.1  Transfer learning CNN
Transfer learning uses the knowledge of low layers of a base 
CNN trained on a large cross domain of dataset of images. 
Transfer learning advantages include saving of training time, 
and need of less data for training. This reduces overfitting 
and enhances the classification performance. Domain trans-
ferred deep CNN for fetal abdominal standard plane (FASP) 
localization in fetal ultrasound scanning was proposed in 
[10]. The base CNN was trained on 2014 ImageNet detection 
dataset. The metrics accuracy, precision, recall and F-score 
were the highest when compared to R-CNN and RVD. The 
drawback of the system was that it took more time to locate 
FASP from one ultra sound video. The CNN methods for 
image localization previewed in this paper are summarized 
in Table  14.
The papers reviewed for medical image understanding are 
summarized in Table  15.
8  Critical review and conclusion
CNNs have been successfully applied in the areas of medi-
cal image understanding and this section provides a critical 
review of applications of CNNs in medical image under -
standing. Firstly, the literature contains a vast number of 
CNN architectures. It is difficult to select the best architec-
ture for a specific task due to high diversity in architectures. 
Table 13  A summary of CNN applications in medical image detection surveyed in Sect. 6
References  Organ Preprocessing Architecture Performance metric
[76] Breast Threshold tissue from white 
background and patch-based clas-
sificationGoogLeNet AUC for slide based classification 
92.5%  , lesion based detection 
sensitivity 70.5%
[50] Skin (melanoma) Illumination correction step, 
removal of noise using gaussian 
filters(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 , FC, 
softmaxSensitivity, specificity, true positive, 
false positive and accuracy
[75] Hemorrhage (eye) Image contrast using gaussian 
filters, augment using vertical, 
horizontal flips(Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×5 , FC, 
softmaxSensitivity, specificity and ROC
[46] Eye retina Ensemble of twelve CNN having 
(conv, ReLU) ×3 , (FC, dropout) 
×2Accuracy, FROC of 0.928
[69] Cell Extraction of grayscale patches, 
segmentation and binarizationLeNet Sensitivity, specificity, AUC and 
F-score. F-score (SVM 78% , CNN 
89%)

==== Page 17 ====
17 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
Moreover, the same architecture might result in different per -
formance due to inefficient data preprocessing techniques. 
A prior knowledge of data for applying the correct preproc-
essing technique is needed. Futhermore, hyper parameters 
optimization (dropout rate, learning rate, optimizer etc) help 
in enhancing or declining the performance of a network.
For training, CNNs require exhaustive amounts of data 
containing the most comprehensive information. Insufficient 
information or features leads to underfitting of the model. 
However, augmentation could be applied in such scenarios 
as it results in translation variance and increases the training 
dataset, thereby enhancing the CNNs efficiency. Further -
more, transfer learning and fine-tuning could also be used to 
enhance the efficiency in case of sparse availability of data. 
These enhance the performance since the low level features 
are nearly the same for most of the images.Small-sized kernels could be used to enhance the perfor -
mance by capturing low-level textual information. However, 
it is at the cost of increased computational complexity during 
training. Moreover, multiple pathway architecture could be 
used to enhance performance of CNN. The performance is 
enhanced due to simultaneous learning of global contextual 
features and local detailed features, but this in turn, increases 
the computational burden on the processor and memory.
One of the challenge involved in medical data is the 
class imbalance problem, where the positive class is gener -
ally under-represented and most of the images belong to 
the normal class. Designing CNNs to work on imbalanced 
data is a challenging task. However, researchers have tried 
to overcome this challenge by applying augmentation of the 
under-represented data. Denser CNNs could also lead to the 
vanishing gradient problem which could be overcome by 
using skip connections as in the inceptionNet architecture.
Furthermore, CNNs’ significant depth and enormous size 
require huge memory and higher computational resources 
for training. The deeper CNNs involves millions of train-
ing parameters which could lead the model to overfit and 
also inefficient at generalization, especially in the case of 
limited dataset. This calls for models which are lightweight 
and which could also extract critical features like the dense 
models. Lightweight CNNs could be explored further.
Medical image Understanding would be more efficient 
in the presence of background context or knowledge about 
the image to be understood. In this context, CNNs would 
be more efficient if the data consists of not only images, but 
also patient history. Hence, the next challenging task would 
be to build models, which take as input both images and 
patient history to make a decision and this could be the next 
research trend.
Interpreting CNNs is challenging due to many layers, 
millions of parameters, and complex, nonlinear data struc-
tures. CNN researchers have been concentrating on build-
ing accurate models without quantifying uncertainty in the 
obtained results. The need for successful utilization of the 
CNN model in medical diagnosis lies in providing confi-
dence and this confidence needs the ability of the model to 
ascertain its uncertainty or certainty or explain the results 
obtained. This field needs further exploration. Although, 
researchers have proposed heat maps, class activation maps Table 14  A summary of CNN applications in medical image localization surveyed in Sect. 7
References Organ Architecture Dataset Comparison against Performance Metric
[17] Heart (Conv, ReLU, maxpool)  ×2 , 
FCPublic dataset of York 
UniversityAccuracy 98.66%  , sensitivity 
83.91%  , specificity 99.07%
[10] Fetal abdominal (Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 
conv ×3 , maxpool, FC ×3Imagenet 2014, Shenzen 
Maternal and Child 
Healthcare Hospital, ChinaR-CNN and RVD Accuracy, precision, recall, 
F-score
[73] Breast Semi-supervised deep CNN SVM, ANN Accuracy 83% , AUC 88%
Table 15  Summary of papers reviewed for CNN applications in med-
ical image understanding
Image understanding tasks Organs targeted References
Medical image classification Lung [4, 18, 44, 68]
COVID-19 [6, 13, 22, 24, 45]
HEp-2 [7, 21]
Breast [34, 52, 73, 78]
Heart [20, 40]
Eye [57]
Digestive organs [82]
Brain [19, 63]
Colon [61, 71, 78]
Medical image segmentation Brain [25, 37, 49, 55, 66]
Breast [36, 72]
MS lesion [8]
Nucleus [77]
Heart [83]
Eye [81]
Medical image detection Breast [5, 76]
Melanoma [50]
Eye [46, 75]
Cell [69]
Medical Image localization Heart [17]
Fetal Abdomen [10]

==== Page 18 ====
18 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
(CAM), grad CAM, grad CAM++ for visualization of CNN 
outputs, the area of visualization is still a challenge.
The various challenges and methods of overcoming 
some of the challenges of medical image understanding are 
summarized in Table  16. Further, efficient architectures to 
overcome some of the challenges as per the survey are sum-
marized in Table  17.Deep learning includes methods like CNN, recurrent neu-
ral network and generative adversial networks. The review of 
these methods and applications have not been included, as 
these methods by themselves become topics of research and 
there is lot of research happening in those areas. Moreover, 
all the aspects involved in medical image understanding are Table 16  Ways of addressing 
challenges of medical image 
understandingChallenges in medical image understanding Solutions for overcoming challenges
Less training samples Augmentation
Sparsity of labeled data Semi supervised deep CNN
Noise in images Gaussian filtering
Thicker CT images of brain Geometric normalization
Extract local and global features Multipathway CNN
Avoid redundant computations ROI segmentation using fCNN
Reduce classification errors Train on misclassified image patches
Heart classification Two path CNN, for spatial and temporal features
Imbalanced label distributions Two phase training
Less resolution in brain images Slice by slice segmentation
Increase accuracy and AUC in eye images (retinal eye 
vessel)Ensemble learning (boosting instead of back 
propagation, RF instead of FC)
Table 17  Efficient CNN architectures For medical image understanding
Organ (modality) Diseases Tasks Best architecture
Brain MRI Alzheimer Segementation Lenet-5, GoogleNet
Detection Multipath CNN
Epilepsy Classification CNN with seven conv and
Schizophrenic, bipolar disorder Segementation Patch based CNN with 4 conv, 2 maxpool and softmax regression
Breast mammogram Tumour Segementation (Conv + maxpool) × 2+2 FC, Softmax
Detection Scaled VGGnet or GoogleNet
Classification Alexnet
Localization Semi Supervised Deep CNN
Heart (CT) Coronary artery calcium scoring Segmentation Two path CNN
Heart (ECG) ECG Classification Two path CNN, one along spatial and the other along temporal 
and fused together finally
Heart (MRI) left ventricle Localization (Conv, maxpool) ×2 , FC
Lung (CT) Cancer Classification Ensemble of overfeat across axial, saggital and coronal plane
Nodule Detection Lenet, Overfeat
COVID-19 Classification multi scale multi encoder ensemble CNN model
ILD Classification Any CNN architecture like Alexnet
Hep-2 cell Classification (Conv, maxpool) ×3 , 2 FC, softmax regressor
Eye Haemorrhage Detection (Conv, ReLu, maxpool) ×5 , FC, softmax classifier
Glaucoma Detection (Conv, ReLu, maxpool) ×2 , FC with adaboost
Retinopathy Segmentation (Conv, ReLu, maxpool) ×10 , 3 FC, softmax classifier
Colon Polyp Classification Any simple CNN architecture
Polyp Detection Ensemble of CNN
Skin Melanoma Detection (Conv, ReLu, maxpool) ×2 , FC
Liver (CT) Classification (Conv, maxpool)  ×2 , 3 conv, max pool, 3 FC, softmax
Abdomen (US scan) Fetus Localization (Conv, ReLU, maxpool) ×2 conv ×3 , maxpool, FC ×3

==== Page 19 ====
19 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
also not included since it is an ocean and the focus in the 
paper is only on a few important techniques involved.
9  Conclusion
The heterogeneous nature of medical anomalies in terms 
of shape, size, appearance, location and symptoms poses 
challenges for medical anomaly diagnosis and prognosis. 
Traditional methods of using human specialists involve 
fatigue, oversight and high cost and also sparse availability. 
ML-based healthcare systems need efficient feature extrac-
tion methods. But efficient features are still unknown and 
also, the methods available for feature extraction are not very 
efficient. This calls for intelligent healthcare systems that 
automatically extract efficient features for medical image 
understanding that aids diagnosis and prognosis. CNN is a 
popular technique for solving medical image understand-
ing challenges due to its highly efficient methods of feature 
extraction and learning low level, mid level and high level 
discriminant features of an input medical image.
The literature reviewed in this paper underscores that 
researchers have focused their attention on the use of CNN 
to overcome many challenges in medical image under -
standing. Many have accomplished the task successfully. 
The CNN methods discussed in this paper have been found 
to either outperform or compliment the existing traditional 
and ML approaches in terms of accuracy, sensitivity, AUC, 
DSC, time taken etc. However, their performance is often 
not the best due to a few factors. A snapshot summary of 
the quantum of research articles surveyed in this article is 
presented in the Fig.  2.
The challenges in image understanding with respect 
to medical imaging have been discussed in this paper. 
Various image understanding tasks have been introduced. 
In addition, CNN and its various components have been outlined briefly. The approaches used by the researchers 
to address the various challenges in medical image under -
standing have been surveyed.
CNN models have been described as black boxes and 
there is a lot of research happening in terms of analyzing 
and understanding output at every layer. Since medical 
images are involved, we need an accountable and efficient 
prediction system which should also be able to articulate 
about a decision taken. Researchers are also working on 
image captioning (textual representations of the image) 
[29]. This will enable physicians to understand the per -
ception of the network at both output layer and intermedi-
ate levels. Researchers have tried Bayesian deep learning 
models which calculates the uncertainty estimates [38]. 
This would help physicians assess the model. All these 
could further accelerate medical image understanding 
using CNNs among physicians.
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge with gratitude the sup-
port received from REVA University, Bengaluru, and M. S. Ramaiah 
University of Applied Sciences, Bengaluru, India.
Compliance with ethical standards  
 Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
References
 1. Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P (2016) Tensorflow: large-scale 
machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems. CoRR 
Arxiv  : 1603.04467  
 2. Akkus Z, Galimzianova A, Hoogi A, Rubin DL, Erickson BJ 
(2017) Deep learning for brain MRI segmentation: state of the 
art and future directions. J Digit Imaging 30(4):449–459
 3. Al-Rfou R, Alain G, Almahairi A, Angermueller C, Bahdanau 
D, Ballas N, Bengio Y (2016) Theano: a python framework for 
fastcomputation of mathematical expressions. arXiv  :1605.02688  Fig. 2  Bar chart summarizing 
the number of papers surveyed

==== Page 20 ====
20 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
 4. Anthimopoulos M, Christodoulidis S, Ebner L, Christe A, Mou-
giakakou SG (2016) Lung pattern classification for interstitial lung 
diseases using a deep convolutional neural network. IEEE Trans 
Med Imaging 35(5):1207–1216
 5. Apou G, Schaadt NS, Naegel B (2016) Structures in normal breast 
tissue. Comput Biol Med 74:91–102
 6. Bassi PAS, Attux R (2020) A deep convolutional neural network 
for COVID-19 detection using chest X-rays
 7. Bayramoglu N, Kannala J, Heikkilä J (2015) Human epithelial 
type 2 cell classification with convolutional neural networks. In: 
Proceedings of the 15th IEEE international conference on bioin-
formatics and bioengineering, BIBE, pp 1–6
 8. Brosch T, Tang LYW, Yoo Y, Li DKB, Traboulsee A, Tam RC 
(2016) Deep 3-D convolutional encoder networks with shortcuts 
for multiscale feature integration applied to multiple sclerosis 
lesion segmentation. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 35(5):1229–1239
 9. CS231N convolutional neural network for visual recogntion 
(2019). http://cs231 n.stanf  ord.edu/. Accessed 24 June 2019
 10. Chen H, Ni D, Qin J (2015) Standard plane localization in fetal 
ultrasound via domain transferred deep neural networks. IEEE J 
Biomed Health Inform 19(5):1627–1636
 11. Chollet F (2018) Keras: the Python deep learning library. https ://
keras .io/. Accessed 24 June 2019
 12. Chollet F (2017) Xception: deep learning with depthwise sepa -
rable convolutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition, (CVPR), pp 1800–1807
 13. Chowdhury NK, Rahman MM, Kabir MA (2020) Pdcovidnet: 
a parallel-dilated convolutional neural network architecture for 
detecting COVID-19 from chest X-ray images
 14. Ciompi F, de Hoop B, van Riel SJ (2015) Automatic classifica-
tion of pulmonary peri-fissural nodules in computed tomography 
using an ensemble of 2-D views and a convolutional neural net-
work out-of-the-box. Med Image Anal 26(1):195–202. https ://doi.
org/10.1016/j.media .2015.08.001
 15. Collobert R, Kavukcuoglu K, Farabet C (2011) Torch7: a Matlab-
like environment for machine learning. In: BigLearn, NIPS work -
shop, EPFL-CONF-192376
 16. Dasgupta A, Singh S (2017) A fully convolutional neural network 
based structured prediction approach towards the retinal vessel 
segmentation. In: Proceedings of the 14th IEEE international 
symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI), pp 248–251
 17. Emad O, Yassine IA, Fahmy AS (2015) Automatic localization 
of the left ventricle in cardiac MRI images using deep learning. 
In: Proceedings of the 37th IEEE annual international confer -
ence on engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC), 
pp 683–686
 18. Gao M, Bagci U, Lu L, Wu A, Buty M (2018) Holistic classi-
fication of CT attenuation patterns for interstitial lung diseases 
via deep convolutional neural networks. CMBBE Imaging Vis 
6(1):1–6
 19. Gao XW, Hui R (2016)A deep learning based approach to classifi-
cation of CT brain images. In: Proceedings of the SAI computing 
conference, pp 28–31
 20. Gao XW, Li W, Loomes M, Wang L (2017) A fused deep learning 
architecture for viewpoint classification of echocardiography. Inf 
Fusion 36:103–113
 21. Gao Z, Zhang J, Zhou L, Wang L (2014) HEp-2i cell image classi-
fication with deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE J Biomed 
Health Inform 21:416–428
 22. Ghoshal B, Tucker A (2020) Estimating uncertainty and interpret -
ability in deep learning for coronavirus (COVID-19) detection 
arXiv  :2003.10769  
 23. Gordienko Y, Gang P, Hui J, Zeng W, Kochura Y, Alienin O, Rok -
ovyi O, Stirenko S (2017) Deep learning with lung segmentation 
and bone shadow exclusion techniques for chest X-ray analysis of 
lung cancer. CoRR arXiv  :1712.07632   24. Hasan MK, Alam MA, Elahi MTE, Roy S, Wahid SR (2020) 
CVR-NET: a deep convolutional neural network for coronavirus 
recognition from chest radiography images
 25. Havaei M, Davy A, Warde-Farley D (2017) Brain tumor 
segmentation with deep neural networks. Med Image Anal 
35:18–31
 26. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for 
image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition, (CVPR), pp 770–778
 27. Hesamian M, Jia W, He X (2019) Deep learning techniques for 
medical image segmentation: achievements and challenges. J 
Digit Imaging 32:582–596
 28. Ho TK (1995) Random decision forests. In: Proceedings of the 
3rd IEEE international conference on document analysis and 
recognition, vol 1, pp 278–282
 29. Hossain MZ, Sohel F, Shiratuddin MF, Laga H (2018) A com-
prehensive survey of deep learning for image captioning. CoRR 
arXiv  :1810.04020  
 30. Hubel D, Wiesel T (1959) Receptive fields of single neurones 
in the cat’s striate cortex. J Physiol 148(3):574–591
 31. ICPR 2018 international conference on pattern recognition 
(2019). http://www.icpr2 018.org. Accessed 24 June 2019
 32. ISLES challenge 2018 ischemic stroke lesion segmentation 
(2018). http://www.isles  -chall  enge.org . Accessed 24 June 2019
 33. Jia, Y., Shelhamer E, Donahue J (2014) Caffe: convolutional 
architecture for fast feature embedding. In: Proceedings of the 
22th ACM international conference on multimedia, MM ’14, pp 
675–678. ACM, New York
 34. Jiao Z, Gao X, Wang Y, Li J (2016) A deep feature based 
framework for breast masses classification. Neurocomputing 
197:221–231
 35. Jusman Y, Ng SC, Abu Osman NA (2014) Intelligent screening 
systems for cervical cancer. Sci World J 2014:810368
 36. Kallenberg M, Petersen K, Nielsen M (2016) Unsupervised deep 
learning applied to breast density segmentation and mammo-
graphic risk scoring. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 35(5):1322–1331
 37. Kamnitsas K, Ferrante E, Parisot S (2016) Deepmedic for brain 
tumor segmentation. In: Proceedings of the international work -
shop on brainlesion: glioma, multiple sclerosis, stroke and trau-
matic brain injuries. Springer, pp 138–149
 38. Kendall A, Gal Y (2017) What uncertainties do we need in bayes-
ian deep learning for computer vision? CoRR arXiv  :1703.04977  
 39. Kermany DS, Goldbaum M, Cai W, Valentim CC, Liang H, Baxter 
SL, McKeown A, Yang G, Wu X, Yan F et al (2018) Identifying 
medical diagnoses and treatable diseases by image-based deep 
learning. Cell 172(5):1122–1131
 40. Kiranyaz S, Ince T, Gabbouj M (2016) Real-time patient-specific 
ECG classification by 1-D convolutional neural networks. IEEE 
Trans Biomed Eng 63(3):664–675
 41. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) Imagenet classifi-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Advances in 
neural information processing systems 25: proceedings of the 26th 
annual conference on neural information processing systems, pp 
1106–1114
 42. Larochelle H, Bengio Y (2008) Classification using discrimina-
tive restricted Boltzmann machines. In: Proceedings of the 25th 
international conference on machine learning, pp 536–543
 43. LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P (1998) Gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proc IEEE 
86(11):2278–2324
 44. Li Q, Cai W, Wang X, Zhou Y, Feng DD, Chen M (2014) Medical 
image classification with convolutional neural network. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 13th international conference on control, automa-
tion, robotics and vision (ICARCV), pp 844–848
 45. Maghdid HS, Asaad AT, Ghafoor KZ, Sadiq AS, Khan MK (2020)
Diagnosing COVID-19 pneumonia from X-ray and CT images 

==== Page 21 ====
21 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22 
1 3
using deep learning and transfer learning algorithms. CoRR arXiv  
:2004.00038  
 46. Maji D, Santara A, Mitra P (2016) Ensemble of deep convolu-
tional neural networks for learning to detect retinal vessels in 
fundus images. arXiv preprint arXiv  :1603.04833  
 47. Mavroforakis ME, Georgiou HV, Dimitropoulos N (2006) Mam-
mographic masses characterization based on localized texture and 
dataset fractal analysis using linear, neural and support vector 
machine classifiers. Artif Intell Med 37(2):145–162
 48. Menze BH, Jakab A, Bauer S (2015) The multimodal brain tumor 
image segmentation benchmark (BRATS). IEEE Trans Med Imag-
ing 34(10):1993–2024
 49. Moeskops P, Viergever MA, Mendrik AM, de Vries LS, Bend-
ers MJNL, Isgum I (2016) Automatic segmentation of MR brain 
images with a convolutional neural network. IEEE Trans Med 
Imaging 35(5):1252–1261
 50. Nasr-Esfahani E, Samavi S, Karimi N (2016) Melanoma detection 
by analysis of clinical images using convolutional neural network. 
In: Proceedings of the 38th IEEE annual international confer -
ence on engineering in medicine and biology society, EMBC, pp 
1373–1376
 51. Nervana Systems Inc (2018) neon. http://neon.nerva nasys .com/
docs/lates  t/. Accessed 24 June 2019
 52. Ovalle JEA, González FA, Ramos-Pollán R, Oliveira JL, Guevara-
López MÁ (2016) Representation learning for mammography 
mass lesion classification with convolutional neural networks. 
Comput Methods Prog Biomed 127:248–257
 53. Paszke A, Gross S, Chintala S, Chanan G (2018) Tensors and 
dynamic neural networks in Python with strong GPU acceleration. 
https ://pytor  ch.org/. Accessed 24 June 2019
 54. Pereira S, Pinto A, Alves V, Silva CA (2015) Deep convolutional 
neural networks for the segmentation of gliomas in multi-sequence 
MRI. In: Brainlesion: glioma, multiple sclerosis, stroke and trau-
matic brain injuries—first international workshop, Brainles 2015, 
held in conjunction with MICCAI 2015, Munich, Germany, Octo-
ber 5, 2015, revised selected papers, pp 131–143
 55. Pereira S, Pinto A, Alves V, Silva CA (2016) Brain tumor segmen-
tation using convolutional neural networks in MRI images. IEEE 
Trans Med Imaging 35(5):1240–1251
 56. Phillips NA, Rajpurkar P, Sabini, M, Krishnan R, Zhou, S, Pareek, 
A, Phu NM, Wang C, Ng AY, Lungren MP (2020) Chexphoto: 
10,000+ smartphone photos and synthetic photographic transfor -
mations of chest X-rays for benchmarking deep learning robust-
ness. CoRR arXiv  :2007.06199  
 57. Pratt H, Coenen F, Broadbent DM, Harding SP, Zheng Y (2016) 
Convolutional neural networks for diabetic retinopathy. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 20th conference on medical image understanding 
and analysis, MIUA, pp 200–205
 58. Rajpurkar P, Irvin J, Zhu K, Yang B, Mehta H, Duan T, Ding 
DY, Bagul A, Langlotz C, Shpanskaya KS, Lungren MP, Ng AY 
(2017) Chexnet: radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest 
X-rays with deep learning. CoRR arXiv  :1711.05225  
 59. Ranzato M, Hinton GE, LeCun Y (2015) Guest editorial: deep 
learning. Int J Comput Vis 113(1):1–2
 60. Ravi D, Wong C, Deligianni F, Berthelot M, Pérez JA, Lo B, Yang 
G (2017) Deep learning for health informatics. IEEE J Biomed 
Health Inform 21(1):4–21
 61. Ribeiro E, Uhl A, Häfner M (2016) Colonic polyp classification 
with convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 29th 
IEEE international symposium on computer-based medical sys-
tems, (CBMS), pp 253–258
 62. Sajjad M, Khan S, Muhammad K, Wu W, Ullah A, Baik SW 
(2019) Multi-grade brain tumor classification using deep CNN 
with extensive data augmentation. J Comput Sci 30:174–182. 
https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2018.12.003 63. Sarraf S, Tofighi G (2016) Classification of Alzheimer’s disease 
using fMRI data and deep learning convolutional neural networks. 
Computer Research Repository. arXiv  :1603.08631  
 64. Seide F, Agarwal A (2016) CNTK: Microsoft’s open-source deep-
learning toolkit. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international 
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, p 2135
 65. Sermanet P, Eigen D, Zhang X, Mathieu M, Fergus R, LeCun Y 
(2013) Overfeat: integrated recognition, localization and detection 
using convolutional networks. Computing Research Repository. 
arXiv  :1312.6229
 66. Shakeri M, Tsogkas S, Ferrante E, Lippe S, Kadoury S, Paragios 
N, Kokkinos I (2016) Sub-cortical brain structure segmentation 
using F-CNNs. In: Proceedigns of the IEEE 13th international 
symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI). IEEE, pp 269–272
 67. Shankar K, Zhang Y, Liu Y, Wu L, Chen CH (2020) Hyperparam-
eter tuning deep learning for diabetic retinopathy fundus image 
classification. IEEE Access 8:118164–118173
 68. Shen W, Zhou M (2017) Multi-crop convolutional neural networks 
for lung nodule malignancy suspiciousness classification. Pattern 
Recognit 61:663–673
 69. Shkolyar A, Gefen A, Benayahu D, Greenspan H (2015) Auto-
matic detection of cell divisions (mitosis) in live-imaging micros-
copy images using convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings 
of the 37th annual international conference of the IEEE engineer -
ing in medicine and biology society (EMBC), pp 743–746
 70. Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional net-
works for large-scale image recognition. Computer Research 
Repository. arXiv  :1409.1556
 71. Sirinukunwattana K, Raza SEA, Tsang Y, Snead DRJ, Cree IA, 
Rajpoot NM (2016) Locality sensitive deep learning for detec-
tion and classification of nuclei in routine colon cancer histology 
images. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 35(5):1196–1206
 72. Su H, Liu F, Xie Y (2015) Region segmentation in histopathologi-
cal breast cancer images using deep convolutional neural network. 
In: Proceedings of the 12th IEEE international symposium on 
biomedical imaging (ISBI), pp 55–58
 73. Sun W, Tseng TB, Zhang J, Qian W (2017) Enhancing deep con-
volutional neural network scheme for breast cancer diagnosis with 
unlabeled data. Comput Med Imaging Graph 57:4–9
 74. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed SE (2015) Going 
deeper with convolutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference 
on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), pp 1–9
 75. van Grinsven MJ, van Ginneken B, Hoyng CB (2016) Fast con-
volutional neural network training using selective data sampling: 
application to hemorrhage detection in color fundus images. IEEE 
Trans Med Imaging 35(5):1273–1284
 76. Wang D, Khosla A, Gargeya R, Irshad H, Beck AH (2016) Deep 
learning for identifying metastatic breast cancer. Computer 
Research Repository. arXiv  :1606.05718  
 77. Xing F, Xie Y, Yang L (2016) An automatic learning-based frame-
work for robust nucleus segmentation. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
35(2):550–566
 78. Xu J, Luo X, Wang G, Gilmore H, Madabhushi A (2016) A deep 
convolutional neural network for segmenting and classifying epi-
thelial and stromal regions in histopathological images. Neuro-
computing 191:214–223
 79. Zeiler MD, Fergus R (2013) Visualizing and understanding 
convolutional networks. Computer Research Repository. arXiv  
:1311.2901
 80. Zhao L, Jia K (2016) Multiscale CNNs for brain tumor seg-
mentation and diagnosis. Comput Math Methods Med 
2016:8356294:1–8356294:7
 81. Zilly JG, Buhmann JM, Mahapatra D (2017) Glaucoma detec-
tion using entropy sampling and ensemble learning for automatic 
optic cup and disc segmentation. Comput Med Imaging Graph 
55:28–41

==== Page 22 ====
22 Evolutionary Intelligence (2022) 15:1–22
1 3
 82. Zou Y, Li L, Wang Y (2015) Classifying digestive organs in wire-
less capsule endoscopy images based on deep convolutional neu-
ral network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference 
on digital signal processing, DSP, pp 1274–1278
 83. Zreik M, Leiner T, de Vos BD, van Hamersvelt RW, Viergever 
MA, Isgum I (2016) Automatic segmentation of the left ventricle 
in cardiac CT angiography using convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 13th IEEE international symposium on 
biomedical imaging (ISBI), pp 40–43
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

