==== Page 1 ====
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Xu, X.; Zhao, M.; Shi, P .;
Ren, R.; He, X.; Wei, X.; Yang, H.
Crack Detection and Comparison
Study Based on Faster R-CNN and
Mask R-CNN. Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s22031215
Academic Editor: Theodore
E. Matikas
Received: 7 January 2022
Accepted: 25 January 2022
Published: 5 February 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Crack Detection and Comparison Study Based on Faster R-CNN
and Mask R-CNN
Xiangyang Xu1, Mian Zhao1, Peixin Shi1, Ruiqi Ren1, Xuhui He2
, Xiaojun Wei2and Hao Yang3,*
1School of Rail Transportation, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China; X.Y.Xu@suda.edu.cn (X.X.);
20215246020@stu.suda.edu.cn (M.Z.); pxshi@suda.edu.cn (P .S.); 20204046002@stu.suda.edu.cn (R.R.)
2School of Civil Engineering & Transportation, Central South University, Changsha 410075, China;
xuhuihe@csu.edu.cn (X.H.); xiaojun.wei@csu.edu.cn (X.W.)
3School of Transportation and Civil Engineering, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, China
*Correspondence: H.Yang@ntu.edu.cn
Abstract: The intelligent crack detection method is an important guarantee for the realization of
intelligent operation and maintenance, and it is of great signiﬁcance to trafﬁc safety. In recent years,
the recognition of road pavement cracks based on computer vision has attracted increasing attention.
With the technological breakthroughs of general deep learning algorithms in recent years, detection
algorithms based on deep learning and convolutional neural networks have achieved better results
in the ﬁeld of crack recognition. In this paper, deep learning is investigated to intelligently detect
road cracks, and Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared and analyzed. The results show
that the joint training strategy is very effective, and we are able to ensure that both Faster R-CNN
and Mask R-CNN complete the crack detection task when trained with only 130+ images and can
outperform YOLOv3. However, the joint training strategy causes a degradation in the effectiveness
of the bounding box detected by Mask R-CNN.
Keywords: deep learning; Mask R-CNN; crack detection; Faster R-CNN; intelligent monitoring
1. Introduction
In the research ﬁeld of road crack recognition that is primarily based on computer
vision, the essential methods mainly include digital image processing methods, which
mainly distinguish features manually and employ many feature rules to design some
feature recognition conditions, and convolutional networks based on deep learning, which
adopt networks to automatically investigate the features of information so that the net
can continuously adjust itself according to a certain rule to achieve input data output
equal to or close to the label. In the previous ten years, many scholars have conducted in-
depth examinations of road crack recognition primarily based on digital image processing.
Hoang [ 1] proposed a smart method of automatically classifying road cracks to enhance
the effectiveness of periodic surveys of asphalt pavement conditions. The new method
depends on algorithms of computational intelligence and methods of image processing.
Lei et al. [ 2] proposed a new crack detection approach based completely on the crack
central point—particularly, the crack central point approach—to address these critical
issues. With a small quantity of images, the new approach can rapidly and precisely pick
out cracks in the gathered images. Furthermore, Ying et al. [ 3] introduced a novel way to
detect and classify cracks by digital images, which makes use of an image magniﬁcation
algorithm. However, with the rapid growth of road mileage, the information on road
pavement cracks is already massive, so traditional coding ideas based on experience to
set logic have difﬁculty meeting actual needs. At the same time, computer hardware is
also developing rapidly, leading to breakthroughs in deep learning-related algorithms. In
recent years, widely applicable deep learning algorithms have become increasingly popular,
and computer hardware and convolutional neural networks have become the core of deep
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22031215 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 2 of 17
learning [ 4]. Therefore, detection algorithms based on deep learning and convolutional
neural networks have achieved better results in the ﬁeld of crack recognition.
To quantify the defect width or length, many researchers have proposed deep learning-
based quantiﬁcation methods. Kim et al. [ 5] introduced a novel crack evaluation framework
for concrete constructions that detects cracks using masks and location-based totally convo-
lutional neural communities (Mask R-CNN) and quantiﬁes cracks using a few morphologi-
cal operations on the detected crack masks. Kalfarisi et al. [ 6] proposed a uniﬁed framework
for the usage of actuality mesh-modeling technological know-how that enables quantitative
evaluation with the integrated visualization of an inspected structure. The effectiveness
and robustness of the developed methods are evaluated, and the usage of various actual
instances, including road pavements, bridges, underground tunnels, buildings, and water
towers, is established. Wu et al. [ 7] adopted images to assemble a mesh model through a
photogrammetry approach. The model with annotated cracks allows intuitive visualization
and quantitative evaluation of thousands of detected cracks. Moreover, Peng et al. [ 8]
proposed a computer vision approach for bridge crack cognizance and width quantiﬁcation
via hybrid characteristic learning. Furthermore, Guo et al. [ 9] introduced a computer
vision approach for the identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation, and visualization of microcracks,
primarily based on deep learning. Recently, Bang et al. [ 10] proposed deep learning-based
detection and the quantiﬁcation of structural damage by adopting structured lights and a
depth camera.
Many other scholars have improved the performance of the model with better de-
tection results. Han et al. [ 11] proposed a sampling block with the implementation of
convolutional neural networks, thereby developing a novel pixel-level semantic segmenta-
tion network. Li et al. [ 12] proposed a multilayer characteristic fusion network based totally
on the faster region-based convolutional neural network (Faster R-CNN) to gain automated
tunnel surface defect detection with excessive precision. Ju Huyan et al. [ 13] proposed the
fusion of a sensitivity detection network, which is capable of monitoring unsealed and
sealed cracks with severely complicated backgrounds. Moreover, Malini et al. [ 14] used a
regularization approach to obtain greater total performance primarily based on a convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) monitoring model. Cha et al. [ 15] proposed a vision-based
approach using a deep CNN architecture for monitoring concrete cracks except for calculat-
ing the defect features. Mogalapalli et al. [ 16] proposed a quantum transfer learning-based
method for various image classiﬁcation tasks. Pang et al. [ 17] proposed a two-stage crack
defect segmentation approach based totally on the target detection community to resolve
the issue of extreme brightness imbalance and massive noise in dam surface images. Sekar
et al. [ 18] introduced a new multitasking Faster R-CNN method using the region of interest
and global average pooling align methods to monitor various road cracks.
Many researchers have added classiﬁcation functions for extraordinary defects. Trana
et al. [ 19] proposed a two-step sequential computerized method for detecting cracks and
classifying the severity of asphalt pavements. Liu et al. [ 20] introduced a new model
combining pixelwise and region-based deep learning to supply pavement inspection tech-
nological know-how for mutually acquiring misery classes, locations, and geometric infor-
mation. Moreover, Mondal et al. [ 21] analyzed visual data captured by means of sensors
established on robots, and the damages could be detected and categorized autonomously.
The current study proposes the use of deep learning-based methods to this end. Hou
et al. [ 22] introduced transfer learning with the Cascade Mask RCNN mannequin for defect
identiﬁcation and location. Dhiman et al. [ 23] proposed two methods primarily based
on stereo-vision evaluation of street environments beforehand of the vehicle, and they
additionally designed two models for deep-learning-based pothole detection. Intelligent
monitoring methods [ 24–26] will be an essential guarantee for the realization of smart
operation and maintenance.
Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN have been proven successful in the ﬁeld of general
vision, such as in [ 27]. However, the crack detection research considering the characteristics
of road images is still insufﬁcient. We experimentally validated our model using these

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 3 of 17
two methods for the speciﬁc task of road crack detection. To speed up the training, we
trained our model by a joint training strategy using pre-training and migration learning.
The results show that we were able to make Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with good
results using only 130+ images.
2. Method
The pipeline of Faster R-CNN [ 28] and Mask R-CNN [ 29] is presented in Figure 1,
where it can be divided into three main components. (1) Feature extraction: we employed
ResNet [ 30] and FPN [ 31] as feature extractors for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The
feature extractor sends ﬁve feature maps of various sizes to the following network after
feature extraction. (2) Region proposal networks (RPNs): ﬁve identical RPNs obtained
ﬁve feature maps, which were then utilized to generate region proposals. Speciﬁcally,
RPN generates anchors of different sizes to obtain the speciﬁed number of region proposal
feature maps. (3) Region CNN (R-CNN): the R-CNN component of Faster R-CNN uniﬁes
the feature maps of the region proposal into the same size and then feeds them all into the
fully connected layer for classiﬁcation and regression. For Mask R-CNN, a full convolution
branch is added to implement the instance segmentation task.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 22 
 
 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN have been proven successful in the field of general 
vision, such as in [27]. However, the crack detection research considering the characteris-
tics of road images is still insufficient. We experimentally validated our model using these 
two methods for the specific task of road cr ack detection. To speed up the training, we 
trained our model by a joint training strate gy using pre-training an d migration learning. 
The results show that we were able to ma ke Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with good 
results using only 130+ images. 
2. Method 
The pipeline of Faster R-CNN [28] and Mask  R-CNN [29] is presented in Figure 1, 
where it can be divided into three main components. (1) Feature extraction: we employed 
ResNet [30] and FPN [31] as feature extrac tors for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The 
feature extractor sends five feature maps of various sizes to the following network after 
feature extraction. (2) Region proposal networ ks (RPNs): five identical RPNs obtained five 
feature maps, which were then utilized to generate region proposals. Specifically, RPN 
generates anchors of different sizes to obtain the specified number of region proposal fea-
ture maps. (3) Region CNN (R-CNN): the R- CNN component of Faster R-CNN unifies the 
feature maps of the region proposal into the same size and then feeds them all into the 
fully connected layer for classification and regression. For Mask R-CNN, a full convolu-
tion branch is added to implement the instance segmentation task. 
 
Figure 1. Pipeline of Faster R -CNN and Mask R-CNN: RPN is trai ned separately. In addition, the 
mask branch and bbox branch use different RoI feature extractors, and the mask branch  obtains 
better results through a larger feature map. 
The two main differences between Mask R- CNN and Faster R-CNN are as follows. 
(1) The addition of the mask component (fully convolutional layer) to R-CNN enables the task of instance segmentation (Figure 1). (2) For the problem of misalignment between the 
feature map and the RoI on the original image, RoIAlign, which is an improved version 
of RoIPooling, is pr oposed (Figure 2). 
Figure 1. Pipeline of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN: RPN is trained separately. In addition, the
mask branch and bbox branch use different RoI feature extractors, and the mask branch obtains better
results through a larger feature map.
The two main differences between Mask R-CNN and Faster R-CNN are as follows.
(1) The addition of the mask component (fully convolutional layer) to R-CNN enables the
task of instance segmentation (Figure 1). (2) For the problem of misalignment between the
feature map and the RoI on the original image, RoIAlign, which is an improved version of
RoIPooling, is proposed (Figure 2).

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 4 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 22 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
Figure 2. Visualization diagram of RoI Pooling and RoI Alig n: Assume that the output size is (2, 2). 
RoIAlign uses a bilinear interpolation method to improve accuracy. ( a) RoI Pooling. ( b) RoI Align. 
The loss function of Faster R -CNN can be divided into two parts: R-CNN loss [32] 
and RPN loss [28], which is shown as Equations (1) and (2). For training, a joint training 
strategy will be used for both parts. Training Mask R-CNN only requires adding a loss of 
the mask component for training fully convol ution layer, with the same joint training 
strategy as Faster R -CNN. 
𝐿ሺ𝑝, 𝑢, 𝑡௨,𝑣ሻൌ𝐿 ௖௟௦ሺ𝑝, 𝑢ሻ ൅ 𝜆′𝐿 ௥௘௚ሺ𝑡௨,𝑣ሻ (1)
𝐿ሺሼ𝑝௜ሽ,ሼ𝑡௜ሽሻൌ1
𝑁௖௟௦෍ 
௜𝐿௖௟௦ሺ𝑝௜,𝑝௜∗ሻ൅𝜆1
𝑁௥௘௚෍ 
௜𝑝௜∗𝐿௥௘௚ሺ𝑡௜,𝑡௜∗ሻ
  (2)
The dataset contains 148 images of pavement cracks, in which 90% are training data 
and 10% are testing data. The images in the dataset are taken by smartphones, including 
single cracks, deep cracks, cracks with sunlight  interference, bending cracks, etc. We used 
the random flip method for data augmentation, including horizontal and vertical flipping, 
with the probability set to 0.5, and as such our dataset was expanded by 50%. As shown 
in Figure 3, Faster R-CNN selects rectangles to label cracks in the image, and Mask R-CNN uses polygons to depict cracks in the image. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 3. Labeling of cracks. ( a) Labeling of Faster R-CNN; ( b) Labeling of Mask R-CNN. 
We use a backbone based on ImageNet pre- training and perform finetuning strategy 
to train our network. The input image size was set to 800 × 500 to ensure the model training 
speed (also limited by GPU memory), although our approach does not require specifying 
the size of the input image. We set five differe nt learning rates for training both networks: 
0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025 and 0.0002. We employed an SGD optimizer for training. In addi-
tion, methods, such as batch normalization and warm-up, are used in the training process 
to enhance the effect. We used PyTorch 1.8 and CUDA 11.1 for training. The task was 
Figure 2. Visualization diagram of RoI Pooling and RoI Align: Assume that the output size is (2, 2).
RoIAlign uses a bilinear interpolation method to improve accuracy. ( a) RoI Pooling. ( b) RoI Align.
The loss function of Faster R-CNN can be divided into two parts: R-CNN loss [ 32]
and RPN loss [ 28], which is shown as Equations (1) and (2). For training, a joint training
strategy will be used for both parts. Training Mask R-CNN only requires adding a loss
of the mask component for training fully convolution layer, with the same joint training
strategy as Faster R-CNN.
L(p,u,tu,v)=Lcls(p,u)+l0Lreg(tu,v) (1)
L(fpig,ftig) =1
Nclså
iLcls(pi,p
i) +l1
Nregå
ip
iLreg(ti,t
i) (2)
The dataset contains 148 images of pavement cracks, in which 90% are training data
and 10% are testing data. The images in the dataset are taken by smartphones, including
single cracks, deep cracks, cracks with sunlight interference, bending cracks, etc. We used
the random ﬂip method for data augmentation, including horizontal and vertical ﬂipping,
with the probability set to 0.5, and as such our dataset was expanded by 50%. As shown in
Figure 3, Faster R-CNN selects rectangles to label cracks in the image, and Mask R-CNN
uses polygons to depict cracks in the image.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 22 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
Figure 2. Visualization diagram of RoI Pooling and RoI Alig n: Assume that the output size is (2, 2). 
RoIAlign uses a bilinear interpolation method to improve accuracy. ( a) RoI Pooling. ( b) RoI Align. 
The loss function of Faster R -CNN can be divided into two parts: R-CNN loss [32] 
and RPN loss [28], which is shown as Equations (1) and (2). For training, a joint training 
strategy will be used for both parts. Training Mask R-CNN only requires adding a loss of 
the mask component for training fully convol ution layer, with the same joint training 
strategy as Faster R -CNN. 
𝐿ሺ𝑝, 𝑢, 𝑡௨,𝑣ሻൌ𝐿 ௖௟௦ሺ𝑝, 𝑢ሻ ൅ 𝜆′𝐿 ௥௘௚ሺ𝑡௨,𝑣ሻ (1)
𝐿ሺሼ𝑝௜ሽ,ሼ𝑡௜ሽሻൌ1
𝑁௖௟௦෍ 
௜𝐿௖௟௦ሺ𝑝௜,𝑝௜∗ሻ൅𝜆1
𝑁௥௘௚෍ 
௜𝑝௜∗𝐿௥௘௚ሺ𝑡௜,𝑡௜∗ሻ
  (2)
The dataset contains 148 images of pavement cracks, in which 90% are training data 
and 10% are testing data. The images in the dataset are taken by smartphones, including 
single cracks, deep cracks, cracks with sunlight  interference, bending cracks, etc. We used 
the random flip method for data augmentation, including horizontal and vertical flipping, 
with the probability set to 0.5, and as such our dataset was expanded by 50%. As shown 
in Figure 3, Faster R-CNN selects rectangles to label cracks in the image, and Mask R-CNN uses polygons to depict cracks in the image. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 3. Labeling of cracks. ( a) Labeling of Faster R-CNN; ( b) Labeling of Mask R-CNN. 
We use a backbone based on ImageNet pre- training and perform finetuning strategy 
to train our network. The input image size was set to 800 × 500 to ensure the model training 
speed (also limited by GPU memory), although our approach does not require specifying 
the size of the input image. We set five differe nt learning rates for training both networks: 
0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025 and 0.0002. We employed an SGD optimizer for training. In addi-
tion, methods, such as batch normalization and warm-up, are used in the training process 
to enhance the effect. We used PyTorch 1.8 and CUDA 11.1 for training. The task was 
Figure 3. Labeling of cracks. ( a) Labeling of Faster R-CNN; ( b) Labeling of Mask R-CNN.
We use a backbone based on ImageNet pre-training and perform ﬁnetuning strategy
to train our network. The input image size was set to 800 500 to ensure the model
training speed (also limited by GPU memory), although our approach does not require
specifying the size of the input image. We set ﬁve different learning rates for training both
networks: 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025 and 0.0002. We employed an SGD optimizer for training.
In addition, methods, such as batch normalization and warm-up, are used in the training

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 5 of 17
process to enhance the effect. We used PyTorch 1.8 and CUDA 11.1 for training. The task
was performed on the Ubuntu 20.04.3 working platform and trained on a single NVIDIA
GTX 1080 Ti GPU.
3. Analysis
We conducted a comparison using the popular method YOLO. The P-R curves of
bounding-box of the three methods are shown in Figure 4, and it is obvious that Faster
R-CNN has an advantage in detection, while YOLO v3 is hardly competent for our task.
In addition, YOLOv3 requires a longer training time. It seems that using YOLO v3 for the
speciﬁc task of pavement crack detection and with only a small amount of data do not
yield the desired results.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 22 
 
 performed on the Ubuntu 20.04.3 working plat form and trained on a single NVIDIA GTX 
1080 Ti GPU. 
3. Analysis 
We conducted a comparison using the popular method YOLO. The P-R curves of 
bounding-box of the three methods are shown in Figure 4, and it is obvious that Faster R-
CNN has an advantage in detection, while YOLO  v3 is hardly competent for our task. In 
addition, YOLOv3 requires a longer training time. It seems that using YOLO v3 for the 
specific task of pavement crack detection an d with only a small amount of data do not 
yield the desired results. 
   
(a) ( b) ( c) 
Figure 4. Precision-recall curve of boundi ng-boxes in different models. ( a) Faster R-CNN. ( b) Mask 
R-CNN. ( c) YOLO v3.  
Joint training is a common strategy in deep learning that can speed up training and 
often obtain good results. However, for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN models with 
upstream and downstream relationships, it is not known how much the results will be 
affected by simply summing their losses and using joint training. The following experi-ment compares the detection of cracks by Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN after setting 
different learning rates. Five learning rates were set: 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002. 
The learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are investigated and com-
pared, which are presented in Figures 5 and 6.  The comparison of acc and loss plots based 
on different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are discussed in this paper. 
From the figures, it can be seen that the a cc and loss of both algorithms do not change 
much after adjusting the learning rate. The acc values of both Faster R-CNN and Mask R-
CNN are stable at approximately 98, the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.4. However, when the learn-
ing rate is 0.0002, the results are poorer, as s een by the comparison of the previous groups 
of detection results, but the acc and loss plot s have more desirable results, which shows 
that the model will be overfitted when th e learning rate is adjusted to 0.0002. 
Figure 4. Precision-recall curve of bounding-boxes in different models. ( a) Faster R-CNN. ( b) Mask
R-CNN. ( c) YOLO v3.
Joint training is a common strategy in deep learning that can speed up training and
often obtain good results. However, for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN models with
upstream and downstream relationships, it is not known how much the results will be
affected by simply summing their losses and using joint training. The following experiment
compares the detection of cracks by Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN after setting different
learning rates. Five learning rates were set: 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
The learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are investigated and compared,
which are presented in Figures 5 and 6. The comparison of acc and loss plots based on
different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are discussed in this paper.
From the ﬁgures, it can be seen that the acc and loss of both algorithms do not change
much after adjusting the learning rate. The acc values of both Faster R-CNN and Mask
R-CNN are stable at approximately 98, the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable at approximately
0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.4. However, when the
learning rate is 0.0002, the results are poorer, as seen by the comparison of the previous
groups of detection results, but the acc and loss plots have more desirable results, which
shows that the model will be overﬁtted when the learning rate is adjusted to 0.0002.
In Figure 5, different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are presented
where Figure 5a shows the acc comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Faster R-CNN; Figure 5b
shows the acc comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Mask R-CNN; Figure 5c shows the
loss comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Faster R-CNN; and Figure 5d shows the loss
comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Mask R-CNN.
The comparison of accuracy vs. loss plots for the same learning rate of Faster R-CNN
and Mask R-CNN are presented. Figure 5 shows the comparison of acc and loss plots for
the same learning rate of ﬁve groups of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. As seen from the
ﬁgure: the learning rate is 0.02, and 0.01 acc are shown as follows: the initial stage Mask
R-CNN is higher, with the increase of iter, slightly decreases, and later Faster R-CNN is
signiﬁcantly higher; the learning rate is 0.005 when the difference between the two is not

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 6 of 17
signiﬁcant; the learning rate is 0.0025 when the initial Mask R-CNN is higher, and, later,
the difference between the two is not signiﬁcant. The loss of Faster R-CNN is always lower
than that of Mask R-CNN, and the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.25,
and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.4. The loss of Faster R-CNN is
always lower than that of Mask R-CNN. Since the loss function of Mask R-CNN increases,
Lmask, the loss value of Mask R-CNN will be larger.
In Faster R-CNN, each ROI has two outputs: one output is the classiﬁcation result,
which is the label of the prediction frame, and the other output is the regression result,
which is the coordinates of the prediction frame. However, Mask R-CNN adds a third
output, the object mask, which means that a mask is output for each ROI, and the branch
is implemented through the FCN network. The loss function of Mask R-CNN is 1.2 and
consists of three parts: Lcls,Lboxand Lmask, where Lclsand Lboxare consistent with the
classiﬁcation and regression losses deﬁned in Faster R-CNN. In Mask R-CNN, for the newly
added mask branches, the output dimension of each ROI is K mm, where mm
denotes the size of the mask and K denotes K categories, so a total of K binary masks are
generated here. After obtaining the predicted mask, the sigmoid function value is found
for each pixel point value of the mask, and the obtained result is used as one of the inputs
to the Lmask (cross-entropy loss function). It should be noted that only the positive sample
ROI is used to calculate Lmask, and the deﬁnition of a positive sample is the same as the
target detection, which is deﬁned as a positive sample with an IOU greater than 0.5. In fact,
Lmask is very similar to Lcls, except that the former is calculated based on pixel points and
the latter is calculated based on images, so similar to Lcls, although K masks are obtained
here, only the mask corresponding to the ground truth is valid in the calculation of the
cross-entropy loss function.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
  
(c) ( d) 
Figure 5. Various learning rate analyses. ( a) Accuracy of various learning rates of Faster R-CNN. 
(b) Accuracy of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. ( c) Loss of various learning rates of Faster 
R-CNN. ( d) Loss of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. 
In Figure 5, different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are presented 
where Figure 5a shows the acc comparison of five learning rates for Faster R-CNN; Figure 5b shows the acc comparison of five learning rates for Mask R-CNN; Figure 5c shows the 
loss comparison of five learning rates for Faster R-CNN; and Figure 5d shows the loss 
comparison of five learning rates for Mask R-CNN. 
The comparison of accuracy vs. loss plots for the same learning rate of Faster R-CNN 
and Mask R-CNN are presented. Figure 6 shows the comparison of acc and loss plots for the same learning rate of fi ve groups of Faster R-CNN an d Mask R-CNN. As seen from 
the figure: the learning rate is 0.02, and 0.01 acc are shown as follows: the initial stage 
Mask R-CNN is higher, with the increase of iter, slightly decreases, and later Faster R-
CNN is significantly higher; the learning rate  is 0.005 when the difference between the 
two is not significant; the learning rate is 0.0025 when the initial Mask R-CNN is higher, and, later, the difference between the two is  not significant. The loss of Faster R-CNN is 
always lower than that of Mask R-CNN, and the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable, at approx-
imately 0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.4. The loss of Faster 
R-CNN is always lower than that of Mask R- CNN. Since the loss function of Mask R-CNN 
increases, 𝐿
mask , the loss value of Mask R-CNN will be larger. 
In Faster R-CNN, each ROI has two outputs:  one output is the classification result, 
which is the label of the prediction frame, and the other output is the regression result, 
which is the coordinates of the prediction frame. However, Mask R-CNN adds a third 
output, the object mask, which means that a ma sk is output for each ROI, and the branch 
Figure 5. Various learning rate analyses. ( a) Accuracy of various learning rates of Faster R-CNN.
(b) Accuracy of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. ( c) Loss of various learning rates of Faster
R-CNN. ( d) Loss of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN.

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 7 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 22 
 
 is implemented through the FCN network. The loss function of Mask R-CNN is 1.2 and 
consists of three parts: 𝐿௖௟௦, 𝐿௕௢௫ and 𝐿mask , where 𝐿௖௟௦ and 𝐿௕௢௫ are consistent with 
the classification and regression losses defin ed in Faster R-CNN. In Mask R-CNN, for the 
newly added mask branches, the output dimension of each ROI is K × m × m, where m × 
m denotes the size of the mask and K denotes K categories, so a total of K binary masks 
are generated here. After obtaining the pred icted mask, the sigmoid function value is 
found for each pixel point value of the mask, an d the obtained result is used as one of the 
inputs to the 𝐿mask  (cross-entropy loss function). It should be noted that only the positive 
sample ROI is used to calculate 𝐿mask , and the definition of a positive sample is the same 
as the target detection, which is defined as a po sitive sample with an IOU greater than 0.5. 
In fact, 𝐿mask  is very similar to 𝐿௖௟௦, except that the former is calculated based on pixel 
points and the latter is calculated based on images, so similar to 𝐿௖௟௦, although K masks 
are obtained here, only the mask corresponding to the ground truth is valid in the calcu-
lation of the cross-entropy loss function. 
In Figure 6, this set of images shows th e acc and loss comparison between Faster R-
CNN and Mask R-CNN with the same learning rate, where Figure 6a shows the acc and 
loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Ma sk R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.02; 
Figure 6b shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN 
when the learning rate is 0.01; Figure 6c sh ows the acc and loss comparison between Faster 
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.005; Figure 6d shows the acc and 
loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 
0.0025; and Figure 6e shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.0002. 
  
(a) 
  
(b) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 22 
 
   
(c) 
  
(d) 
  
(e) 
Figure 6. Accuracy and loss comparison with the same learning rate. ( a) Accuracy and loss com-
parison (lr = 0.02). ( b) Accuracy and loss co mparison (lr = 0.01). ( c) Accuracy and loss comparison 
(lr = 0.005). ( d) Accuracy and loss comparison (lr = 0.0025). ( e) Accuracy and loss comparison (lr = 
0.0002). 
4. Results and Discussion 
Four different sets of results were select ed for comparison: single crack vs. bifurcated 
crack comparison, crack with or without sunlig ht interference comparison, deep and shal-
low crack comparison, and straight and curved crack comparison. 
  
Figure 6. Accuracy and loss comparison with the same learning rate. ( a) Accuracy and loss com-
parison ( lr = 0.02 ). (b) Accuracy and loss comparison ( lr = 0.01 ). (c) Accuracy and loss comparison
(lr = 0.005 ). (d) Accuracy and loss comparison (lr = 0.0025). ( e) Accuracy and loss comparison
(lr = 0.0002).

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 8 of 17
In Figure 6, this set of images shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with the same learning rate, where Figure 6a shows the acc and
loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.02;
Figure 6b shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
when the learning rate is 0.01; Figure 6c shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.005; Figure 6d shows the acc and loss
comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.0025; and
Figure 6e shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
when the learning rate is 0.0002.
4. Results and Discussion
Four different sets of results were selected for comparison: single crack vs. bifurcated
crack comparison, crack with or without sunlight interference comparison, deep and
shallow crack comparison, and straight and curved crack comparison.
4.1. Single Crack and Bifurcation Crack
Figure 7a shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Faster R-CNN with different
learning rates; Figure 7b shows the detection of single cracks by Faster R-CNN with
different learning rates. As seen from the detection results, Faster R-CNN has little effect on
a single crack after adjusting the learning rate, and the detection results are all better with
a higher score-thr; for the bifurcated crack, Faster R-CNN is more sensitive to the change
in learning rate and can only detect part of the crack, in which the detection results of the
transverse crack are better than those of the vertical crack. The direction of the bifurcation
crack is different, and it can be seen from the detection results that transverse cracks can
be detected, while vertical cracks, branch cracks and small cracks cannot be detected
completely. The detection results in this group of comparison tests when the learning rate
is set to 0.005 are better; all cracks can be detected, and the score-thr is also higher. Figure 7c
shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning rates;
Figure 7d shows the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning
rates. As seen from the detection results, Mask R-CNN is also more sensitive to single
cracks after adjusting the learning rate. The learning rate is set to 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, and
0.0025, most of the cracks can be detected, and only a small local area is missed. When the
learning rate is set to 0.0002, cracks are completely undetectable, and the model appears to
be overﬁtted at this point. For bifurcation cracks, the detection of the ﬁve learning rates
under this experiment is not very good, in which the detection results of vertical cracks
are worse than those of transversal cracks, the detection effect becomes signiﬁcantly worse
when the learning rate is gradually reduced, the number of cracks that can be detected
decreases, only sporadic segments of cracks can be detected, and cracks cannot be detected
at all when the learning rate is reduced to 0.0002. From the results, it can be seen that, as
in the case of Faster R-CNN, the detection results of single transverse cracks are all better;
the detection effect of transverse cracks in bifurcated cracks is better than that of other
directions. Overall, both algorithms are ideal for the detection of single cracks; complex
bifurcated cracks require more data sets for training, and the training set used in this
experiment has more transverse single cracks.
In Figure 7 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 7a for the detection
of bifurcated cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 7b for the detection of single cracks by Faster
R-CNN; Figure 7c for the detection of bifurcated cracks by Mask R-CNN; and Figure 7d for
the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN, the learning rates of each group of images
from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 9 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 22 
 
 4.1. Single Crack and Bifurcation Crack 
Figure 7a shows the detection of bifurcatio n cracks by Faster R-CNN with different 
learning rates; Figure 7b shows the detection of single cracks by Faster R-CNN with dif-
ferent learning rates. As seen from the detection results, Faster R-CNN has little effect on 
a single crack after adjusting the learning rate, and the detection results are all better with 
a higher score-thr; for the bifurcated crack, Fa ster R-CNN is more sensitive to the change 
in learning rate and can only detect part of th e crack, in which the detection results of the 
transverse crack are better than those of the vertical crack. The direction of the bifurcation crack is different, and it can be seen from the detection results that transverse cracks can 
be detected, while vertical cr acks, branch cracks and small cracks cannot be detected com-
pletely. The detection results in this group of  comparison tests when the learning rate is 
set to 0.005 are better; all cracks can be detect ed, and the score-thr is also higher. Figure 7c 
shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning rates; 
Figure 7d shows the detection of single crac ks by Mask R-CNN with different learning 
rates. As seen from the detection results, Mask R-CNN is also more sensitive to single 
cracks after adjusting the learning rate. The learning rate is set to 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, and 0.0025, most of the cracks can be detected, an d only a small local area is missed. When the 
learning rate is set to 0.0002, cracks are completely undetectable, and the model appears 
to be overfitted at this point. For bifurcation cracks, the detection of the five learning rates 
under this experiment is not very good, in wh ich the detection results of vertical cracks 
are worse than those of transversal cracks, th e detection effect becomes significantly worse 
when the learning rate is gradually reduced,  the number of cracks that can be detected 
decreases, only sporadic segments of cracks can be detected, and cracks cannot be detected 
at all when the learning rate is reduced to 0.0002. From the results, it can be seen that, as 
in the case of Faster R-CNN, th e detection results of single tr ansverse cracks are all better; 
the detection effect of transverse cracks in bi furcated cracks is better than that of other 
directions. Overall, both algorithms are ideal for the detection of single cracks; complex 
bifurcated cracks require more data sets for tr aining, and the training set used in this ex-
periment has more transverse single cracks. 
 
 
(a) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 22 
 
  
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 22 
 
  
 
(d) 
Figure 7. Comparison of bifurcatio ns and single cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( b) 
Faster R-CNN for single crack. ( c) Mask R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( d) Mask R-CNN for single 
crack. 
In Figure 7 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CN N are compared, and the detection results 
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 7a for the detec-tion of bifurcated cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 7b for the detection of single cracks by 
Faster R-CNN; Figure 7c for the detection of  bifurcated cracks by Mask R-CNN; and Fig-
ure 7d for the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN, the learning rates of each group 
of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002. 
4.2. Cracks with or with out Sunlight Interference 
We selected a set of comparison pictures, one of which is a road crack with sunlight 
interference, and the other is a picture of a normal road crack. Figure 8a shows Faster R-
CNN for detecting cracks with sunlight inte rference; and Figure 8b shows Faster R-CNN 
for detecting cracks without sunlight interferen ce. From the results, it can be seen that 
Faster R-CNN has better results for different le arning rates for detecting well-lit cracks, 
and some cracks are not detected when the lear ning rate is set to 0.0002 for detecting 
poorly lit cracks. The comparison between a single crack and a bifurcated crack shows 
that the detection result of a transverse single crack is better, and a transverse single crack is chosen for this comparison, so the influence of the crack direction on the detection result 
is excluded in this experiment , and cracks with or without sunlight interference are not 
too sensitive to the learning rate. Figure 8c  shows the crack with sunlight interference 
detection by Mask R-CNN; Figure 8d shows the crack without sunlight interference de-
tection by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, when Mask R-CNN is used to detect 
well-lit cracks, the learning rate is set to 0. 02, and part of the crack on the right is not 
detected; when the learning rate is reduced to  0.01, 0.005, and 0.0025, the whole crack can 
be detected; after continuing to reduce the learning rate to 0.0002, the model shows an 
overfitting phenomenon, and the detection effect  is poor, with large segments of cracks 
not detected, and the detection score-thr is al so reduced. When used to detect cracks with-
out sunlight interference, the cracks can be det ected completely at learning rates of 0.02, 
0.01, and 0.005, and a small portion of cracks are not detected at the other two learning 
rates, where the score-thr of the model detecting cracks is very low at a learning rate of 
Figure 7. Comparison of bifurcations and single cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for bifurcation crack. (b) Faster
R-CNN for single crack. ( c) Mask R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( d) Mask R-CNN for single crack.

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 10 of 17
4.2. Cracks with or without Sunlight Interference
We selected a set of comparison pictures, one of which is a road crack with sunlight
interference, and the other is a picture of a normal road crack. Figure 8a shows Faster R-
CNN for detecting cracks with sunlight interference; and Figure 8b shows Faster R-CNN for
detecting cracks without sunlight interference. From the results, it can be seen that Faster
R-CNN has better results for different learning rates for detecting well-lit cracks, and some
cracks are not detected when the learning rate is set to 0.0002 for detecting poorly lit cracks.
The comparison between a single crack and a bifurcated crack shows that the detection result
of a transverse single crack is better, and a transverse single crack is chosen for this comparison,
so the influence of the crack direction on the detection result is excluded in this experiment,
and cracks with or without sunlight interference are not too sensitive to the learning rate.
Figure 8c shows the crack with sunlight interference detection by Mask R-CNN; Figure 8d
shows the crack without sunlight interference detection by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the
results, when Mask R-CNN is used to detect well-lit cracks, the learning rate is set to 0.02,
and part of the crack on the right is not detected; when the learning rate is reduced to 0.01,
0.005, and 0.0025, the whole crack can be detected; after continuing to reduce the learning
rate to 0.0002, the model shows an overfitting phenomenon, and the detection effect is poor,
with large segments of cracks not detected, and the detection score-thr is also reduced. When
used to detect cracks without sunlight interference, the cracks can be detected completely
at learning rates of 0.02, 0.01, and 0.005, and a small portion of cracks are not detected at
the other two learning rates, where the score-thr of the model detecting cracks is very low
at a learning rate of 0.0002. In general, both cracks with and without sunlight interference
comparisons selected for this set of experiments had relatively good detection results.
In Figure 8 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results of
four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 8a for Faster R-CNN to
detect cracks with sunlight interference; Figure 8b for Faster R-CNN to detect cracks without
sunlight interference; Figure 8c for Mask R-CNN to detect cracks with sunlight interference;
and Figure 8d for Mask R-CNN to detect cracks without sunlight interference, the learning
rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
4.3. Deep and Shallow Cracks
Figure 9a shows the detection of deep cracks by Faster R-CNN and Figure 9b shows
the detection of shallow cracks by Faster R-CNN. From the results, it can be seen that Faster
R-CNN is used to detect deep and shallow cracks, different learning rates are set to detect
the results more satisfactorily , and the cracks can be detected completely . The crack structure
selected for this group of comparison experiments is relatively simple and belongs to a single
crack in the transverse direction. Only learning rates of 0.02 and 0.0002 in the two groups of
comparisons detect a small section of crack on the left side when a shallow crack is detected.
It can also be seen from the comparison of the two previous groups that the model trained
from this experimental data set is better for simple crack detection, and thus, for detecting deep
and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN is not sensitive to the learning rate. Figure 9c shows the
detection of deep cracks by Mask R-CNN; Figure 9d shows the detection of shallow cracks
by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask R-CNN for detecting deep cracks is more
sensitive to the change in learning rate than Faster R-CNN. When the learning rate is set to 0.02,
the most complete cracks are detected, and as the learning rate is tuned down, small sections of
cracks are missed. When the learning rate is 0.0002, the detection effect is the worst, and cracks
cannot be detected. When used to detect shallow cracks, the learning rate of 0.005 has the
best effect, and the detected cracks are the most complete. The other learning rates also have
the situation of missed detection, especially when the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the model
exhibits an overfitting phenomenon, and cracks cannot be detected. In the comparison of deep
and shallow cracks in this experiment, Faster R-CNN has better detection results than Mask
R-CNN. For deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN can basically detect them, while Mask
R-CNN is more sensitive to the change in learning rate. There are many missed detections after
setting an inappropriate learning rate, and the detection results become worse.

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 11 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 22 
 
 0.0002. In general, both cracks with and wi thout sunlight interference comparisons se-
lected for this set of experiments had relatively good detection results. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 22 
 
  
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
Figure 8. Comparison of road crack detection results with and without sunlight interference. ( a) 
Faster R-CNN for cracks with sunlight interference. ( b) Faster R-CNN for cracks without sunlight 
interference. ( c) Mask R-CNN for cracks with sunlight interference. ( d) Mask R-CNN for cracks 
without sunlight interference. 
In Figure 8 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CN N are compared, and the detection results 
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 8a for Faster R-CNN to detect cracks with sunlight interferen ce; Figure 8b for Faster R-CNN to detect 
cracks without sunlight interference; Figure 8c for Mask R-CNN to detect cracks with sun-
Figure 8. Comparison of road crack detection results with and without sunlight interference.
(a) Faster R-CNN for cracks with sunlight interference. ( b) Faster R-CNN for cracks without sunlight
interference. ( c) Mask R-CNN for cracks with sunlight interference. ( d) Mask R-CNN for cracks
without sunlight interference.

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 12 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 22 
 
 light interference; and Figure 8d for Mask R- CNN to detect cracks without sunlight inter-
ference, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 
0.0025, and 0.0002. 
4.3. Deep and Shallow Cracks 
Figure 9a shows the detection of deep cracks by Faster R-CNN and Figure 9b shows 
the detection of shallow cracks by Faster R-CN N. From the results, it can be seen that 
Faster R-CNN is used to detect deep and sha llow cracks, different learning rates are set to 
detect the results more satisfactorily, and the cracks can be detected completely. The crack 
structure selected for this group of comparison experiments is relatively simple and be-
longs to a single crack in the transverse direction. Only learning rates of 0.02 and 0.0002 
in the two groups of comparisons detect a smal l section of crack on the left side when a 
shallow crack is detected. It can also be s een from the comparison of the two previous 
groups that the model trained from this experimental data set is better for simple crack 
detection, and thus, for detecting deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN is not sensitive 
to the learning rate. Figure 9c shows the dete ction of deep cracks by Mask R-CNN; Figure 
9d shows the detection of shallow cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask R-CNN for detecting deep cracks is more sensitive to the change in learning rate than 
Faster R-CNN. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, the most complete cracks are detected, 
and as the learning rate is tuned down, small sections of cracks are missed. When the 
learning rate is 0.0002, the de tection effect is the worst, and cracks cannot be detected. 
When used to detect shallow cracks, the learni ng rate of 0.005 has the best effect, and the 
detected cracks are the most complete. The othe r learning rates also have the situation of 
missed detection, especially when the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the model exhibits an 
overfitting phenomenon, and cracks cannot be detected. In the comparison of deep and 
shallow cracks in this experiment, Faster R-CNN has better detection results than Mask 
R-CNN. For deep and shallow cracks, Faster  R-CNN can basically detect them, while 
Mask R-CNN is more sensitive to the change in learning rate. There are many missed 
detections after setting an inappropriate lear ning rate, and the detection results become 
worse. 
 
 
(a) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 22 
 
  
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 22 
 
  
 
 
(d) 
Figure 9.  Comparison of deep and shallow cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for deep cracks. ( b) Faster R-
CNN for shallow cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for deep cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for shallow cracks. 
In Figure 9 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CN N are compared, and the detection results 
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 9a for Faster R-
CNN to detect deep cracks; Figure 9b for Fa ster R-CNN to detect shallow cracks; Figure 
9c for Mask R-CNN to detect deep cracks; an d Figure 9d for Mask R-CNN to detect shal-
low cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 
0.005, 0.0025 and 0.0002. 
4.4. Straight and Bending Cracks 
Figure 10a shows the detection of straight cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 10b shows 
the detection of curved cracks by Faster R-C NN. As seen from the results, Faster R-CNN 
adjusts the learning rate and has little effect on horizontal straight away cracks; the detec-
tion results are better, and the score-thr is higher. When detecting bending cracks, Faster 
R-CNN is more sensitive to the learning rate ch ange. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, 
all the cracks can be detected, and when the learning rate is reduced, each image will be 
partially missed. Figure 10c shows the detect ion of straight cracks by Mask R-CNN and 
Figure 10d shows the detection of bending cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the re-
sults, Mask R-CNN is used to detect transver se straight cracks with better results than 
bending cracks, most of the transverse crac ks—which have a simpler crack form—can be 
detected, and only a small portion of them ar e missed. When the learning rate is set to 
0.0002, the detection effect is the worst, and the score-thr of the detection result is very 
low; even cracks cannot be detected. The other four learning rates set in this experiment 
have similar detection situations, and there will be small sections of missed detection, 
where the learning rate is 0.01, the detection re sult is the best, and the detected cracks are 
the most complete. The five learning rates set in this experiment are not ideal for detecting 
bending cracks, and cracks cannot be detected completely, as shown in the figure. Faster 
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN both have better dete ction results for transverse and simple 
cracks, and more crack data may be needed to train the model for complex cracks. 
Figure 9. Comparison of deep and shallow cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for deep cracks. ( b) Faster
R-CNN for shallow cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for deep cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for shallow cracks.

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 13 of 17
In Figure 9 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results of
four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 9a for Faster R-CNN
to detect deep cracks; Figure 9b for Faster R-CNN to detect shallow cracks; Figure 9c for
Mask R-CNN to detect deep cracks; and Figure 9d for Mask R-CNN to detect shallow
cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005,
0.0025 and 0.0002.
4.4. Straight and Bending Cracks
Figure 10a shows the detection of straight cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 10b shows
the detection of curved cracks by Faster R-CNN. As seen from the results, Faster R-CNN
adjusts the learning rate and has little effect on horizontal straightaway cracks; the detection
results are better, and the score-thr is higher. When detecting bending cracks, Faster R-CNN
is more sensitive to the learning rate change. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, all the
cracks can be detected, and when the learning rate is reduced, each image will be partially
missed. Figure 10c shows the detection of straight cracks by Mask R-CNN and Figure 10d
shows the detection of bending cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask
R-CNN is used to detect transverse straight cracks with better results than bending cracks,
most of the transverse cracks—which have a simpler crack form—can be detected, and only
a small portion of them are missed. When the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the detection
effect is the worst, and the score-thr of the detection result is very low; even cracks cannot
be detected. The other four learning rates set in this experiment have similar detection
situations, and there will be small sections of missed detection, where the learning rate is
0.01, the detection result is the best, and the detected cracks are the most complete. The ﬁve
learning rates set in this experiment are not ideal for detecting bending cracks, and cracks
cannot be detected completely, as shown in the ﬁgure. Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
both have better detection results for transverse and simple cracks, and more crack data
may be needed to train the model for complex cracks.
In Figure 10, Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 10a for Faster
R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; Figure 10b for Faster R-CNN to detect curved
cracks; Figure 10c for Mask R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; and Figure 10d for
Mask R-CNN to detect curved cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top
to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
4.5. Effectiveness of Detection for Other Dataset
We tested the CRACK500 dataset using the completed training model, and some of
the results are shown in Figures 11 and 12. Faster R-CNN still performs well on different
datasets with strong generalization performance. Mask R-CNN performs slightly worse,
but is still valid. It should be noted that migration-learning based ﬁnetuning methods are
very efﬁcient. It is reasonable to believe that we will obtain even better results if we train a
small amount for the CRACK500 dataset.

==== Page 14 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 14 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 22 
 
  
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 22 
 
  
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
Figure 10. Comparison of straight and bending cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for straight cracks. ( b) 
Faster R-CNN for bending cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for straight cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for bend-
ing cracks. 
In Figure 10, Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection re-
sults of four groups with different learning  rates are presented, where Figure 10a for 
Faster R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; Figure 10b for Faster R-CNN to detect 
curved cracks; Figure 10c for Mask R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; and Figure 
10d for Mask R-CNN to detect curved cracks, the learning rates of each group of images 
from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002. 
Figure 10. Comparison of straight and bending cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for straight cracks. ( b) Faster
R-CNN for bending cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for straight cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for bending cracks.

==== Page 15 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 15 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 22 
 
 4.5. Effectiveness of Detection for Other Dataset 
We tested the CRACK500 dataset using th e completed training model, and some of 
the results are shown in Figure s 11 and 12. Faster R-CNN still performs well on different 
datasets with strong generalization performa nce. Mask R-CNN performs slightly worse, 
but is still valid. It should be noted that migration-learning base d finetuning methods are 
very efficient. It is reasonable to believe that we will obtain even better results if we train 
a small amount for the CRACK500 dataset. 
  
  
Figure 11. Test results using Faster R-CNN . 
  
  
Figure 11. Test results using Faster R-CNN.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 22 
 
 4.5. Effectiveness of Detection for Other Dataset 
We tested the CRACK500 dataset using th e completed training model, and some of 
the results are shown in Figure s 11 and 12. Faster R-CNN still performs well on different 
datasets with strong generalization performa nce. Mask R-CNN performs slightly worse, 
but is still valid. It should be noted that migration-learning base d finetuning methods are 
very efficient. It is reasonable to believe that we will obtain even better results if we train 
a small amount for the CRACK500 dataset. 
  
  
Figure 11. Test results using Faster R-CNN . 
  
  
Figure 12. Test results using Mask R-CNN.
5. Conclusions
With the rapid increase in road mileage, the traditional road crack monitoring method
has difﬁculty meeting the demand, and intelligent monitoring technology is becoming
increasingly urgent. In this study, deep learning methods are investigated to detect road

==== Page 16 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 16 of 17
cracks with the comparison of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The following points in
this study can be concluded.
(i) For the same crack image with the same set of data training, the detection bounding-
boxes of Faster R-CNN are more complete than those of Mask R-CNN, and in this study,
in which the joint training strategy leads to difﬁculties in its bounding box regression, the
score-thr of Faster R-CNN is higher. At the same time, we see that this type of training
is effective. Both models are able to detect cracks better with only 130+ images trained,
and the use of SGD optimizer makes the models insensitive to the learning rate setting.
However, the detection of more complex cracks is more sensitive to the learning rate, and
the worst detection result is obtained when the learning rate is 0.0002.
(ii) Our method works better than YOLOv3, as both models are ideal for the detection
of single cracks, and both algorithms have ideal detection results for detecting bright and
dark cracks. Additionally, both algorithms can detect straight cracks well. For the detection
of deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN performs well in this dataset.
(iii) Both Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN require more datasets to train for complex
cracks, and the dataset in this experiment has more transverse single cracks and less
complex cracks.
(iv) The acc and loss of Faster R-CNN do not differ much under the ﬁve learning rates
set in this experiment, and the case of Mask R-CNN is the same as that of Faster R-CNN.
(v) At the same learning rate, the acc of Faster R-CNN is higher than that of Mask
R-CNN when the learning rate is more than 0.005, and the learning rate of Mask R-CNN is
higher than that of Faster R-CNN when the learning rate is less than 0.005; the loss value of
Faster R-CNN is smaller than that of Mask R-CNN.
For further work, how to use a small amount of labeled data more effectively to achieve
better results will be our research goal. More suitable pre-trained models, active learning,
data augmentation, etc., may be useful for the goal. Considering that deep learning
methods are constantly evolving and the algorithms are improving, we will investigate
more perfect algorithms or improve existing algorithms to obtain more advanced detection
results in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.X. and H.Y.; methodology, X.X. and M.Z.; software, M.Z.
and R.R.; validation, X.X., M.Z. and P .S.; formal analysis, X.X. and M.Z.; investigation, X.X. and X.W.;
resources, X.X. and H.Y.; data curation, H.Y. and P .S.; writing—original draft preparation, X.X. and
M.Z.; writing—review and editing, H.Y., M.Z. and R.R.; visualization, M.Z. and X.W.; supervision,
X.X.; project administration, X.X., X.H. and P .S.; funding acquisition, X.X. and X.H. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Natural Science Foundation of China (No: U1934209).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Science
Foundation of China (No: U1934209).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Hoang, N.D. Classiﬁcation of Asphalt Pavement Cracks Using Laplacian Pyramid-Based Image Processing and a Hybrid
Computational Approach. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2018 ,2018 , 16. [CrossRef]
2. Lei, B.; Wang, N.; Xu, P .C.; Song, G.B. New Crack Detection Method for Bridge Inspection Using UAV Incorporating Image
Processing. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2018 ,31, 13. [CrossRef]
3. Ying, L.; Salari, E. Beamlet Transform-Based Technique for Pavement Crack Detection and Classiﬁcation. Comput.-Aided Civil.
Infrastruct. Eng. 2010 ,25, 572–580. [CrossRef]

==== Page 17 ====
Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 17 of 17
4. Myllyaho, L.; Raatikainen, M.; Männistö, T.; Mikkonen, T.; Nurminen, J.K. Systematic literature review of validation methods for
AI systems. J. Syst. Softw. 2021 ,181, 111050. [CrossRef]
5. Kim, B.; Cho, S. Image-based concrete crack assessment using mask and region-based convolutional neural network. Struct.
Control Health Monit. 2019 ,26, e2381. [CrossRef]
6. Kalfarisi, R.; Wu, Z.Y.; Soh, K. Crack Detection and Segmentation Using Deep Learning with 3D Reality Mesh Model for
Quantitative Assessment and Integrated Visualization. J. Comput. Civil Eng. 2020 ,34, 20. [CrossRef]
7. Wu, Z.Y.; Kalfarisi, R.; Kouyoumdjian, F.; Taelman, C. Applying deep convolutional neural network with 3D reality mesh model
for water tank crack detection and evaluation. Urban Water J. 2020 ,17, 682–695. [CrossRef]
8. Peng, X.; Zhong, X.G.; Zhao, C.; Chen, A.H.; Zhang, T.Y. A UAV-based machine vision method for bridge crack recognition and
width quantiﬁcation through hybrid feature learning. Constr. Build. Mater. 2021 ,299, 19. [CrossRef]
9. Guo, P .W.; Meng, W.N.; Bao, Y. Automatic identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of dense microcracks in high-performance ﬁber-
reinforced cementitious composites through deep learning-based computer vision. Cem. Concr. Res. 2021 ,148, 12. [CrossRef]
10. Bang, H.; Min, J.; Jeon, H. Deep Learning-Based Concrete Surface Damage Monitoring Method Using Structured Lights and
Depth Camera. Sensors 2021 ,21, 2759. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Han, C.; Ma, T.; Huyan, J.; Huang, X.; Zhang, Y. CrackW-Net: A Novel Pavement Crack Image Segmentation Convolutional
Neural Network. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021 , 1–10. [CrossRef]
12. Li, D.W.; Xie, Q.; Gong, X.X.; Yu, Z.H.; Xu, J.X.; Sun, Y.X.; Wang, J. Automatic defect detection of metro tunnel surfaces using a
vision-based inspection system. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2021 ,47, 12. [CrossRef]
13. Huyan, J.; Li, W.; Tighe, S.; Zhai, J.Z.; Xu, Z.C.; Chen, Y. Detection of sealed and unsealed cracks with complex backgrounds using
I (A) deep convolutional neural network. Autom. Constr. 2019 ,107, 14. [CrossRef]
14. Malini, A.; Priyadharshini, P .; Sabeena, S. An automatic assessment of road condition from aerial imagery using modiﬁed VGG
architecture in Faster R-CNN framework. J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 2021 ,40, 11411–11422. [CrossRef]
15. Cha, Y.-J.; Choi, W.; Büyüköztürk, O. Deep Learning-Based Crack Damage Detection Using Convolutional Neural Networks.
Comput.-Aided Civil. Infrastruct. Eng. 2017 ,32, 361–378. [CrossRef]
16. Mogalapalli, H.; Abburi, M.; Nithya, B.; Bandreddi, S.K.V . Classical–Quantum Transfer Learning for Image Classiﬁcation.
SN Comput. Sci. 2021 ,3, 1–8. [CrossRef]
17. Pang, J.; Zhang, H.; Feng, C.C.; Li, L.J. Research on Crack Segmentation Method of Hydro-Junction Project Based on Target
Detection Network. KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 2020 ,24, 2731–2741. [CrossRef]
18. Sekar, A.; Perumal, V . Automatic road crack detection and classiﬁcation using multitasking faster RCNN. J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst.
2021 ,41, 6615–6628. [CrossRef]
19. Tran, T.S.; Tran, V .P .; Lee, H.J.; Flores, J.M.; Le, V .P . A two-step sequential automated crack detection and severity classiﬁcation
process for asphalt pavements. Int. J. Pavement Eng. 2020 , 1–15. [CrossRef]
20. Liu, C.Q.; Li, J.; Gao, J.; Gao, Z.Q.; Chen, Z.J. Combination of pixelwise and region-based deep learning for pavement inspection
and segmentation. Int. J. Pavement Eng. 2021 , 13. [CrossRef]
21. Mondal, T.G.; Jahanshahi, M.R.; Wu, R.T.; Wu, Z.Y. Deep learning-based multi-class damage detection for autonomous post-
disaster reconnaissance. Struct. Control Health Monit. 2020 ,27, e2507.
22. Hou, S.T.; Dong, B.; Wang, H.C.; Wu, G. Inspection of surface defects on stay cables using a robot and transfer learning. Autom.
Constr. 2020 ,119, 14. [CrossRef]
23. Dhiman, A.; Klette, R. Pothole Detection Using Computer Vision and Learning. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2020 ,21, 3536–3550 .
[CrossRef]
24. Xu, X.; Carrera, E.; Augello, R.; Daneshkhah, E.; Yang, H. Benchmarks for higher-order modes evaluation in the free vibration
response of open thin-walled beams due to the cross-sectional deformations. Thin-Walled Struct. 2021 ,166, 107965. [CrossRef]
25. Yang, H.; He, X.; Xu, X.; Wei, X.; Wang, Y. Laser-based intelligent perception method for tunnel invasion. Mech. Adv. Mater. Struct.
2021 , 1–8. [CrossRef]
26. Xu, X.; Yang, H. Vision Measurement of Tunnel Structures with Robust Modelling and Deep Learning Algorithms. Sensors 2020 ,
20, 4945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Garg, D.; Jain, P .; Kotecha, K.; Goel, P .; Varadarajan, V . An Efﬁcient Multi-Scale Anchor Box Approach to Detect Partial Faces from
a Video Sequence. Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2022 ,6, 9. [CrossRef]
28. Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 2015 ,28, 91–99. [CrossRef]
29. He, K.; Gkioxari, G.; Doll ár, P .; Girshick, R. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 2961–2969.
30. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 770–778.
31. Lin, T.Y.; Doll ár, P .; Girshick, R.; He, K.; Hariharan, B.; Belongie, S. Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017;
pp. 2117–2125.
32. Girshick, R. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Santiago, Chile,
7–13 December 2015; pp. 1440–1448.

