==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Alqahtani, N.; Alam, S.;
Aqeel, I.; Shuaib, M.; Mohsen
Khormi, I.; Khan, S.B.; Malibari, A.A.
Deep Belief Networks (DBN) with
IoT-Based Alzheimer’s Disease
Detection and Classiﬁcation. Appl.
Sci.2023 ,13, 7833. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app13137833
Academic Editor: Jan Egger
Received: 4 May 2023
Revised: 23 June 2023
Accepted: 28 June 2023
Published: 3 July 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
Deep Belief Networks (DBN) with IoT-Based Alzheimer’s
Disease Detection and Classiﬁcation
Nayef Alqahtani1
, Shadab Alam2
, Ibrahim Aqeel2
, Mohammed Shuaib2,*
, Ibrahim Mohsen Khormi2,
Surbhi Bhatia Khan3,4,*
and Areej A. Malibari5
1Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, King Faisal University,
Al Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia
2College of Computer Science & IT, Jazan University, Jazan 45142, Saudi Arabia
3Department of Data Science, School of Science, Engineering and Environment, University of Salford,
Salford M5 4WT, UK
4Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lebanese American University, Byblos 13-5053, Lebanon
5Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, College of Engineering, Princess Nourah Bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia
*Correspondence: msashraf@jazanu.edu.sa (M.S.); surbhibhatia1988@yahoo.com (S.B.K.)
Abstract: Dementias that develop in older people test the limits of modern medicine. As far as
dementia in older people goes, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is by far the most prevalent form. For
over ﬁfty years, medical and exclusion criteria were used to diagnose AD, with an accuracy of only
85 per cent. This did not allow for a correct diagnosis, which could be validated only through
postmortem examination. Diagnosis of AD can be sped up, and the course of the disease can be
predicted by applying machine learning (ML) techniques to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
techniques. Dementia in speciﬁc seniors could be predicted using data from AD screenings and
ML classiﬁers. Classiﬁer performance for AD subjects can be enhanced by including demographic
information from the MRI and the patient’s preexisting conditions. In this article, we have used the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. In addition, we proposed a framework
for the AD/non-AD classiﬁcation of dementia patients using longitudinal brain MRI features and
Deep Belief Network (DBN) trained with the Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm (MOA). An IoT-enabled
portable MR imaging device is used to capture real-time patient MR images and identify anomalies
in MRI scans to detect and classify AD. Our experiments validate that the predictive power of all
models is greatly enhanced by including early information about comorbidities and medication
characteristics. The random forest model outclasses other models in terms of precision. This research
is the ﬁrst to examine how AD forecasting can beneﬁt from using multimodal time-series data. The
ability to distinguish between healthy and diseased patients is demonstrated by the DBN-MOA
accuracy of 97.456%, f-Score of 93.187 %, recall of 95.789 % and precision of 94.621% achieved by the
proposed technique. The experimental results of this research demonstrate the efﬁcacy, superiority,
and applicability of the DBN-MOA algorithm developed for the purpose of AD diagnosis.
Keywords: Deep Belief Network; DBN; machine learning; healthcare; disease detection; alzheimer; IoT
1. Introduction
When ranked by prevalence, AD ranks third in the US, behind cardiovascular disease
and cancer, and is the sixth leading cause of death worldwide [ 1]. The entorhinal cortex,
the hippocampus neocortex, and other brain regions are highly susceptible to neuronal
cell death, neuroﬁbrillary tangles, and senile plaques that characterize AD. The number of
people living with dementia is expected to rise from its current 75.6 million to 135.5 million
by 2050 [2].
For the past ﬁfty years, studies on AD have predicated on including and excluding
speciﬁc clinical factors. Clinical criteria are only 85% accurate in detecting AD, so a detailed
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13137833 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 2 of 22
examination is necessary for a deﬁnitive diagnosis [ 3]. The role of instrumental tests in
clinical diagnosis such as detecting cerebral atrophy on a brain scan or measuring the
concentration of speciﬁc proteins in a patient’s blood has grown over time. Quantitative
evaluation is intrinsically linked to the creation of novel neuroimaging techniques.
Dementia can be detected in its earliest stages with the help of neuroimaging tech-
niques developed by the ADNI. Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques, such as MRI,
have allowed researchers to identify and present novel molecular and structural biomarkers
for AD. Clinical trials have demonstrated that the diagnostic accuracy of neuroimaging
techniques like MRI is improved. It has been speculated that MRI can detect abnormalities
in brain morphology related to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and thus accurately
predict the progression from MCI to AD. The aim is to identify structural and molecular
hallmarks of AD. Clinical studies have demonstrated increased diagnostic accuracy of
neuroimaging modalities like MRI [ 4]. It has been hypothesized that MRI can reliably
predict whether or not a person with MCI will develop AD by detecting the abnormalities
in brain morphology that are characteristic of MCI.
There has also been a call for research into “multimodal biological markers,” which
may aid in the initial diagnosis of AD [ 5]. Electroencephalogram (EEG) data, neuropsycho-
logical data, demographic data, APOE4 genotype data, and MRI information were used to
train the ML classiﬁer by Gaubert et al. [ 6]. The model is educated to recognize the onset of
AD and its telltale signs, including amyloid plaques and neuronal degeneration. After ﬁve
years, EEG can predict neurodegenerative diseases, just as amyloid accumulation and pro-
dromal diseases can be predicted with psychographic and MRI data. This study conﬁrmed
previous ﬁndings that used ML techniques to predict AD onset successfully. Being able to
form opinions rapidly is the end result [ 7]. Several supervised Ensemble methods were
compared and analyzed for their potential use in the classiﬁcation of AD [ 8]. Some claims
of improved classiﬁcation accuracy and speciﬁcity have been made for boosting models [ 9],
like the generalized boosting model and the gradient boosting machines (GBM).
Using ML expertise and the patient’s medical records, dementia can also be predicted.
Dementia onset prediction using AD patient records over two years using a gradient
boosting model (light GBM) was also proposed [ 10]. In the end, we got an accuracy rate
of 87%. The use of recurrent neural networks (RNN) to simulate the development of AD
was also proposed [ 11]. Data assertion and regression methods were used to evaluate it
against an alternative RNN model. As a result, when training on unlabeled data, accuracy
reached 74%. The inter-data relationship between MRI demographic data and AD can also
be learned. Studies have shown that random forest (RF) models perform better than other
models, including support vector machine (SVM) models, when using this technique [ 12].
Deep learning models can forecast the advancement from MCI to AD [ 13]. Since deep
learning models beneﬁt from more information, pre-processing unlabeled data is a good
idea [ 14]. Several studies [ 15] have shown promise in using deep learning to diagnose AD
and detect symptoms. With the help of a deep learning model that is both precise and
thorough in identifying the ﬁrst signs of AD, the disease could be diagnosed and treated
much sooner.
Discretizing MRI data and handling outliers effectively can improve ML classiﬁcation
accuracy. Reportedly, people with dementia can be accurately categorized using supervised
models in conjunction with feature selection [ 16]. In another investigation [ 17], multifactor
afﬁliation analysis was used to categorize patients according to the interrelationships of
features. This method excels beyond classiﬁcation trees and generic distribution zones in
classifying patients and efﬁciency. These methods failed to show how crucial it is to use
data-centric ML techniques and embrace model-boosting knowledge to turn inefﬁcient
learners into efﬁcient ones and enhance model performance [ 18]. IoT applications are
spreading throughout the medical industry [ 19]. IoT can be used to sense real-time patient
data and other environmental detail and can be sent for further processing [ 20]. It helps
in fast data processing, relief from manual work and avoiding mistakes while digitizing

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 3 of 22
the records [ 21]. IoT-enabled portable MR imaging device captures real-time patient MR
images and identiﬁes anomalies in MRI scans for detecting and classifying AD [22].
The more recent algorithm is known as mayﬂy optimization (MOA.) This algorithm
could be used to identify male and female mayﬂies in a group. Each one of them updates in
its own special way. If a person’s current position was extremely far from the best contender
or the historically best trajectories, their progress toward the best position slowed in the
MO algorithm’s initial iteration. It is easy to see how such actions could immediately slow
the rate of convergence. To boost the efﬁciency of MOA algorithms, we suggest rewriting
the updating equations that have been applied throughout this paper.
In this paper, we make signiﬁcant advancements over previous work in both the
accuracy with which DBN can classify the status of a patient and its ability to deal with
voice features. DBN use many processing layers to model higher-level abstractions in
complex data structures. Weighted connections link the processing layers together, but the
layers themselves are isolated. It allows us to view it as a generative graphical model with
many hidden nested units, similar to the structure of a tree. These networks can only learn
as much as their trainers allow when given supervised and unsupervised training.
The current survey’s contributions are summarized as follows:
1. Evaluate how well the current model can foresee the development of AD using the
ADNI database.
2. In addition, we proposed a framework for AD/non-AD classiﬁcation of dementia
subjects using longitudinal brain MRI features and DBN with an MOA.
3. In contrast to the current literature, our DBN-MOA models are optimized by consid-
ering a wide range of low-cost time-series features, such as patients’ comorbidities,
cognitive scores, medication histories, and demographics.
The following topics make up the study’s subsections: In Section 2, we provided a
review of the recent related works. Part III, look at the fundamentals of DBN and proposed a
DBN- MOA approach for Alzheimer detection with detailed algorithms. Section 4 discusses
the proposed model and compared the output results with the similar approaches provided
in other studies. The paper’s ﬁnal Section 5 discusses the proposed model’s implications
and directions for future research.
2. Literature Survey
Cao et al. [ 23] created a new optimization strategy to enhance the mixed-norm regu-
larised formulation. When tested on the ADNI datasets, cognitive measurements using
multimodality or single MRI modality data showed enhanced classiﬁcation performance
and a condensed set of AD biomarkers was produced. The use of full 3D image data for
differential diagnosis may call for larger training sets. Artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms
that have been trained on large datasets may be more useful than CAD when applied to
medical images. Because of this, the current state of AI-based medical image analysis is
limited. When presented with novel images captured under extremely diverse conditions,
artiﬁcial intelligence techniques quickly degrade from their stellar performance in a lab
setting with uniform imaging protocols.
Nawaz et al. [ 24] compared three models to determine which one was the most
accurate. The ﬁrst model involves preparing an image for classiﬁcation using SVM, KNN,
or Random Forest by applying manually created features. The second model employs a
convolutional neural network (CNN) deep learning model with cleaned and prepped data.
AlexNet is used to extract deep features in SVM, k-nearest neighbor, and Random Forest.
SVM classiﬁers performed best for the deep features-based model. K-nearest neighbor
algorithms have an accuracy of 57.32 per cent, whereas SVM have an accuracy of 95.21 per
cent, and random forest algorithms have an accuracy of 93.9 per cent.
Feng et al. [ 25] suggested a new deep learning architecture that combines 3D-enhanced
CNN with stacked bidirectional RNN (SBi-RNN CNNs). Extraction of deep feature de-
piction from MRI and PET images is the focus of this paper, which argues for the use of a
simple 3D-CNN framework. Using SBi-RNN enhanced the functionality of locally deep

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 4 of 22
cascaded and compressed features. Several trials were conducted on the ADNI dataset
to evaluate the recommended structure’s efﬁcacy. Analyzing the proposed architecture
against the NC cohort revealed an average precision of 64.47 per cent for sMCI, 94.29% for
AD, and 84.66% for pMCI.
Jenugopalan et al. [ 26] combined data from various sources, including MRI scans,
to better comprehend AD. Every CNN was trained with every type of data. Then, an
integrated classiﬁcation was carried out using random forests, SVMs, trees, and k-nearest
neighbours. Evidence herein shows that combining data from multiple sources improves
prediction accuracy. The small size of its dataset hinders the current study. The survey is
presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Survey of existing literature on AD detection.
Author Methods Performance Advantages Year
AI-Atroshi et al. [27]Gaussian Mixture Model and Deep
Belief Network modelAccuracy of 90.28% and
86.76% on the binary and
multiple class classiﬁcationsUse Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) for detection.2022
Nawaz et al. [24] AlexNet and CNNKNN- 57.32%
SVM- 95.21%
RF- 93.9%It proposed a model that extract
deep features and solve the issues
of imbalance and overﬁtting2021
Jenugopalan et al. [26] 3D CNNSVM- 72%
RF- 70%
SVM- 72%It minimizes the effect of missing
data and allows prediction.2021
Ramzan et al. [28]ResNet-18, Transfer Learning
(ﬁne-tuning, 2D CNN,
off-the-shelf)off-the-shelf 97.92%
ﬁne-tuning 97.88%
ResNet-18- 97.37%MRI pictures with less noise and
less non-brain tissue are produced,
which improves learning accuracy.2020
Mehmood et al. [29]Siamese CNN (VGG16 model with
additional convolution layer in
the framework)Proposed Siamese CNNEnhancing dataset contrast will
enhance model performance.2020
Jain et al. [30] VGG16Accuracy of 95.74% in 3-way
classiﬁcation 99.15% (AD vs
CN) 99.30% (AD vs. MCI)
99.21% (CN vs. MCI)Avoid over-ﬁtting problem 2019
Sarraf et al. [31] CNNLeNet-5 98.79%
GoogLeNet 98.84%They utilized a high pass ﬁlter
having frequency of 0.01 H to
eliminate low-level noise
from photographs.2016
Afzal et al. [32] CNN (pre-trained AlexNet model)The model with Data Aug.
98.41% Model without Data
Aug. 85.15%overcoming the problem of
overﬁtting and raising the
importance of testing accuracy2019
Aderghal et al. [33]VGG16 model with additional
convolution layerAccuracy Achieved 99.05%Effective in understanding
maximum features2018
Spasov et al. [34] CNN with transfer learningAccuracy is achieved with
92.50 % (AD vs. NC), 85.00%
(AD vs. MCI) 80.00% (MCI
vs. NC.)increasing classiﬁcation accuracy
and learning performance2019
To reveal the dementia and mild cognitive deﬁciency, Wang et al. [ 35] suggest a set of
densely linked 3D convolutional networks (3D-DenseNets) using a probability-based fusion
technique (MCI). In 3D-DenseNets, all of the layers are interconnected, which speeds up
the gradient propagation. MRI scans are used as the training data. The results of DenseNets
are also calculated with the help of a softmax function. The classiﬁcation accuracy of
DenseNets was 97.52 per cent when tested on the ADNI dataset.
With the help of longitudinal data collected before the testing period and a random
forest regression algorithm, Huanget et al. [ 36] could predict the subjects’ cognitive scores.
Precise, constant, and medically instinctive models can be obtained by analyzing multi-
modal time series data with the right ML models. The usage of multimodal time series data
is likely to improve model performance when attempting to predict the progression of AD.

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 5 of 22
Kundaram et al. [ 37] pre-processed the images by resizing them to 255 in brightness
and contrast. To train and categorize diseases, CNN models are used [ 38,39]. The images
were divided into three groups (AD, MCI, and NC) that used 9540 images in the model-
training process. The CNN model consists of four ReLU activation layers, three max-
pooling layers, and three convolutional layers. Various optimizers were implemented,
including Adam, S.G.D., Adadelta, Nadam, Adagrad, and Rmsprop. Adagrad outperforms
competing optimizers in the proposed framework by achieving higher precision at a lower
cost. The proposed model performed at a 98.57 per cent accuracy on the ADNI dataset.
Mishra et al. [ 40] have contributed to this ﬁeld. It is suggested that deep learning
models be developed to facilitate automated feature extraction from imaging data. Scientists
are working to develop a deep-learning model for reliable disease diagnosis. Many medical
imaging modalities, from CT and MRI scans to x-rays and ultrasounds, have beneﬁted
greatly from applying deep learning models [ 41]. The most recent proposal for a cutting-
edge ML system to automatically and swiftly diagnose AD was made by Zhang et al. [ 42].
The binary classiﬁer used for this study was trained with 196 subjects’ volumetric MRI
data. The training procedure beneﬁted from this information. These data were utilized in a
number of ways during the training process.
Korolev et al. [ 43] demonstrated comparable performance. Both the residual network
and the plain 3D CNN architectures showed very long depth and complex behavior when
trained on 3D structural MRI. Their results were subpar in comparison to what was hoped
for. In order to introduce a CNN architecture, Ding et al. [ 44] ﬁrst used an Inception
v3 network trained on 90% of the ADNI data and testing 10%. Scans for pets using
ﬂuorine-18 ﬂuorodeoxyglucose are analyzed using grid processing. Images obtained from
the ADNI data set. Using the Otsu threshold, the brain’s voxels were assigned labels.
Adam’s learning ratio was 0.0001, and the batch size was 8. The models were trained using
90% of the availabel data (1921 images). This data set contains information from three
distinct demographics (AD, MCI, and no disease). Despite its high sensitivity, the proposed
structure has a low level of speciﬁcity (only 82%).
It was proposed by Beheshti et al. [ 45] that a system could be developed to detect
AD using feature position and structural MRI data. The created framework is comprised
of multiple actionable steps: (i) Differentiating the GM of AD patients from that of HCs
requires I a voxel-based morphometry procedure, (ii) the creation of raw features based
on the voxel frequency components of the volumes of interest, and (iii) the ranking of the
raw features using a seven-feature ranking technique. The most distinguishing feature
between HC and AD groups is the vector size that produces the smallest classiﬁcation error.
A classiﬁcation is made using a SVM in (iv). Extensive research has demonstrated that
incorporating a data fusion technique into feature ranking approaches enhances their ability
to classify input data correctly. The accuracy of the developed framework for diagnosing
AD was 92.48 per cent when trained on the ADNI dataset.
3. Proposed System
A block diagram depicting the proposed DBN-MOA has been given in Figure 1 below.
The ﬁgure elucidates the data collection and pre-processing steps in detail. In order to test
hypotheses and assess results, data collection entails amassing and measuring relevant
information on relevant variables in a predetermined, systematic manner. It is a decisive in
the research process because it supports the researcher in making sense of the availabel
data and determine that how it can help in progression of the project forward. The term
“data pre-processing” refers to any action taken on raw data before it undergoes further
processing. It is a crucial ﬁrst step in data mining and has been for a long time.
The pre-processed data is then fused and split; data fusion is the process of combining
information from different sources to create accurate, complete, and consistent data about
a single entity, and data splitting is the reverse of that procedure. Feature-level, Low-level,
and decision-level data fusion are the three main types. Separating a dataset into two
subsets, or “splits,” is common in cross-validation analyses. The data is split in two, with

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 6 of 22
one half used to build a predictive model and the other half for testing. The DBN-MAO
algorithm is then used to optimize the classiﬁcation of the data. Finally, the accuracy of the
predicted data is conﬁrmed through independent validation, demonstrating the method’s
superiority over its competitors.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
the voxel frequency components of the volumes of interest, and (iii) the ranking of the raw 
features using a seven-feature ranking techni que. The most distinguishing feature be-
tween HC and AD groups is the vector size that produces the smallest classi ﬁcation error. 
A classi ﬁcation is made using a SVM in (iv). Ex tensive research has demonstrated that 
incorporating a data fusion technique into fe ature ranking approaches enhances their abil-
ity to classify input data correctly. The accu racy of the developed framework for diagnos-
ing AD was 92.48 per cent when trained on the ADNI dataset. 
3. Proposed System 
A block diagram depicting the proposed DB N-MOA has been given in Figure 1 be-
low. The ﬁgure elucidates the data collection and pr e-processing steps in detail. In order 
to test hypotheses and assess results, data collection entails amassing and measuring rel-
evant information on relevant variables in a predetermined, systematic manner. It is a de-
cisive in the research process because it supports the researcher in making sense of the 
available data and determine that how it can help in progression of the project forward. 
The term “data pre-processing” refers to any action taken on raw data before it undergoes 
further processing. It is a crucial ﬁrst step in data mining and has been for a long time. 
The pre-processed data is then fused and split; data fusion is the process of combin-
ing information from di ﬀerent sources to create accurate, complete, and consistent data 
about a single entity, and data spli tting is the reverse of that procedure. Feature-level, 
Low-level, and decision-level data fusion are the three main types. Separating a dataset 
into two subsets, or “splits,” is common in cross-validation analyses. The data is split in two, with one half used to build a predictive model and the other half for testing. The 
DBN-MAO algorithm is then used to optimize the classi ﬁcation of the data. Finally, the 
accuracy of the predicted data is con ﬁrmed through independent validation, demonstrat-
ing the method’s superiority over its competitors. 
 
Figure 1. Proposed diagram of DBN-MOA. 
3.1. Dataset Collection 
We sourced all of our information from the ADNI dataset [46]. ADNI is an invaluable 
resource for researchers [47]. A total of 416 people were included in this cross-sectional 
Figure 1. Proposed diagram of DBN-MOA.
3.1. Dataset Collection
We sourced all of our information from the ADNI dataset [ 46]. ADNI is an invaluable
resource for researchers [ 47]. A total of 416 people were included in this cross-sectional
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independent
T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample images
from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24 
 
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independ-
ent T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample 
images from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD pa tient from the ADNI dataset. 
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very 
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects  aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability 
data set, with images from the follow-up appo intment within 90 days, is also included for 
20 people without dementia. 
3.2. Data Pre-Processing 
The relationship between cognitive tests, me dication, and mental health is depicted 
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in 
making prognoses about the course of AD. 
 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising. 
Each patient is represented by four rows in  each of the four time-series representa-
tions, with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles at-
tendance statistics once every six months. Re searchers on the ADNI project gathered mas-
sive amounts of information over th e course of more than a decade. 
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-ma tched healthy controls. The MR I images having a resolu-
tion of 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm and dimensions of 256 × 256 × 160. The intensity values of 
each pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255. 
Before training the May ﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-pro-
cessed by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization us-
ing the SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey ma tter, white ma tter, and cere-
brospinal ﬂuid using the FSL software. 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD patient from the ADNI dataset.
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability
data set, with images from the follow-up appointment within 90 days, is also included for
20 people without dementia.

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 7 of 22
3.2. Data Pre-Processing
The relationship between cognitive tests, medication, and mental health is depicted
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in
making prognoses about the course of AD.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24 
 
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independ-
ent T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample 
images from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD pa tient from the ADNI dataset. 
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very 
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects  aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability 
data set, with images from the follow-up appo intment within 90 days, is also included for 
20 people without dementia. 
3.2. Data Pre-Processing 
The relationship between cognitive tests, me dication, and mental health is depicted 
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in 
making prognoses about the course of AD. 
 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising. 
Each patient is represented by four rows in  each of the four time-series representa-
tions, with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles at-
tendance statistics once every six months. Re searchers on the ADNI project gathered mas-
sive amounts of information over th e course of more than a decade. 
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-ma tched healthy controls. The MR I images having a resolu-
tion of 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm and dimensions of 256 × 256 × 160. The intensity values of 
each pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255. 
Before training the May ﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-pro-
cessed by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization us-
ing the SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey ma tter, white ma tter, and cere-
brospinal ﬂuid using the FSL software. 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising.
Each patient is represented by four rows in each of the four time-series representations,
with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles attendance
statistics once every six months. Researchers on the ADNI project gathered massive
amounts of information over the course of more than a decade.
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-matched healthy controls. The MRI images having a resolution
of 1 mm1 mm1 mm and dimensions of 256 256160. The intensity values of each
pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255.
Before training the Mayﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-processed
by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization using the
SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid using the FSL software.
To train the algorithm, leave-one-out cross-validation approach has been used where
one patient was left out for testing, and the remaining 199 patients for training. The input
to the algorithm consisted of the segmented grey matter images, which were resized to
12812880 to reduce the computational burden.
By providing this level of detail about the input data, the authors can help readers
better understand the characteristics of the MRI images used in the study and how they may
have inﬂuenced the results. This information can also be useful for other researchers who
want to reproduce the study or compare it with other studies that use similar input data.
Data Labelling
Our sample size was also set after we ﬁnished pre-processing and labelled our data
for binary classiﬁcation. Since we are engaging in binary classiﬁcation, each record in
the dataset has been either given a zero or a one for the Clinical Dementia Ratio (CDR).
Keep in mind that a CDR of 0 denotes perfect health (i.e., no signs of dementia), and a
CDR of 1 indicates severe Alzheimer’s (i.e., demented). To date, 28 patients have been
diagnosed with CDR 1. We used a total of 28 patients with AD and 28 controls to make our
classiﬁcations. We have two pictures of each patient. We then randomly split the dataset

==== Page 8 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 8 of 22
into halves, creating an 8:2 split. It means that eighty per cent of the data is used for training
and twenty per cent for testing. The proposed DBN-MOA method diagram is depicted in
Figure 1.
3.3. Data Fusion and Splitting
The combined dataset from the ﬁve modalities is then used for either training (repre-
senting 90% of the data) or testing (representing 10% of the data). After being ﬁne-tuned
and trained on the training set, all ML models are then evaluated on the test set, which they
have never seen before.
3.4. Deep Belief Network
A Deep Belief Network (DBN) is a type of generative model that utilizes multiple
processing layers to capture complex structures and abstractions in data. It consists of a
series of individually trained Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) stacked on top of
each other. The RBMs in a DBN are trained in an unsupervised manner, where the training
process begins with an unsupervised stage.
In a DBN, there are typically two processing layers in each of the RBMs, referred to
as the “visible” layer and the “hidden” layer. The visible layer represents the observable
entities or features of the data, while the hidden layer captures latent or hidden repre-
sentations. The units within the same layer of an RBM do not have direct connections to
each other. Instead, the interconnectedness between layers allows for the construction and
reconstruction processes.
The training of a DBN involves iteratively training each RBM in a layer-wise manner.
The ﬁrst RBM is trained using the visible layer as input, and its hidden layer activations
become the visible layer for the next RBM. This process continues until all RBMs are trained.
This layer-wise pretraining helps to ﬁx problems that can occur when the network is
initially set up with untrained, arbitrary connection weights. Using unsupervised learning
techniques, generative stochastic neural networks can be learned from probability models.
The RBM’s network has two distinct processing levels, labelled “visible” and “hidden”
in Figure 4. The units within the same layer have no connection to one another, but the
construction and reconstruction processes are made possible by the interconnectedness of
these layers. A large quantity of observable entities (v1,v2, . . .vi)make up the network’s
visible layer ( v), which is trained on the unlabeled pattern structures fed into it, and a large
number of unseen entities 
h1,h2, . . .hj
Unseen nodes in the network have binary values,
receive information from the seen nodes, and are able to reconstruct the patterns ( h).
All the obvious nodes talk to all the obvious nodes as a symmetric two-way matrix of
weight (Sij), in addition to the biases (bi)and (aj)that are already there.
R(v,h) =åi2vis(vi bi)2
2l2
i åj2hidajhj åijvi
lihjSij (1)
where lrepresents the dispersion of the Gaussian noise in the ith visible dimension.
The learning process may become more challenging if both the exposed and concealed
units are Gaussians. The standard deviations of the assumed noise levels are used to
calculate the coefﬁcients of the quadratic “containment” terms that keep the activities
within reasonable bounds. The energy function then takes the form (2).
R(v,h) =åi2vis(vi bi)2
2l2
i+åj2hid(hj aj)2
2l2
i åijvihj
liljSij (2)
Data in the training set was used for guesses about the probabilities of the hidden
units and to represent those predictions graphically (3).
M(hj=1) =l(aj+åviwij) (3)

==== Page 9 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 9 of 22
With just a sample of h, we can reconstruct the invisible variable v’ at the visible level. Next,
we collect a fresh set of h’ hidden activations (as shown in Step 4 of the Gibbs algorithm).
M(vi=1) =l 
bi+åhjsij
(4)
The result of multiplying v’ by h’ from the outside was the key to this solution (negative
phase). Proposed Amendments to the Law of the Weight Matrix (5)
DSij=h (vihj)data  
v0
ih0j
model
(5)
where learner speed his assumed. Make the changes to biand hiin Equations (6) and (7),
where () is a logistic activation function, respectively.
b=b+l(v v0) (6)
a=a+l(h h0) (7)
?(x)=1
1+e x(8)
At last, a logistic activation function is described and illustrated that has been used in
every node of processing (8). This function takes an input value ( x) and applies the logistic
transformation to squash the output between 0 and 1.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 24 
 
binary values, receive information from the seen nodes, and are able to reconstruct the 
patterns ( h). 
All the obvious nodes talk to all the obvi ous nodes as a symmetric two-way matrix 
of weight ()ijS, in addition to the biases ()ib and ()jathat are already there. 
2
2()(, )2ii i
jjj i j i vis j hid ij
iivb vRvh ah hSλλ∈∈−=− −   (1)
where λ represents the dispersion of the Gaussian noise in the ith visible dimension. 
 
Figure 4. Deep Belief Network (DBN) Architecture. 
The learning process may become more challenging if both the exposed and con-
cealed units are Gaussians. The standard devi ations of the assumed noise levels are used 
to calculate the coe ﬃcients of the quadratic “containment” terms that keep the activities 
within reasonable bounds. The energy function then takes the form (2). 
2 2
22() ()(, )22jj i j ii
ij i vis j hid ij
ii i jha v h vbRvh Sλλ λ λ∈∈− −=+ −   (2)
Data in the training set was used for gue sses about the probabilities of the hidden 
units and to represent those predictions graphically (3). 
Figure 4. Deep Belief Network (DBN) Architecture.

==== Page 10 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 10 of 22
3.5. Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm
These features of PSO, GA, and the ﬁreﬂy algorithm are all combined in this one
algorithm (FA). The MA is a highly effective hybrid optimization algorithm that is based on
the behavior of mayﬂies during mating and which adopts and improves upon the global
search of PSO. This optimization procedure disregards the mayﬂy’s lifespan and instead
assumes that it is an adult immediately after hatching and that only the strongest survive.
Each mayﬂy’s location in the solution space indicates the probability that a good solution
can be found at that location [48].
Randomly generated are sets of male and female mayﬂies. To rephrase,
P=
p1,p2, . . . , pdMaxTthe position vector represents the search space into which the
mayﬂies, the agent performing the search, will initially be seeded. The objective function
(OF) evaluates the position vector’s effectiveness with the help of f. (x). Using the velocity
vector, the mayﬂy’s position is revised in light of its revised movement path, which is
informed by both its social and individual movement experiences K=
k1,k2, . . . , KdMaxT.
A mayﬂy will move up or down the search graph based on its current best position. (repre-
sented by pbest) and the best positions obtained by other mayﬂies in the swarm (represented
bygbest). This section will outline the crucial points of the MA.
3.5.1. Male Mayﬂy Flight
The aggregation of male mayﬂies into swarms is evidence that their status is revised
in light of new information and circumstances. An updated version of the male mayﬂy’s
position is as follows:
Pm(t+1) =km(t+1) +pm(t) (9)
For the ith mayﬂy, pm(t)is its current location and pm(0)falls between xMinand xMax. The
next time step’s mayﬂy positions and velocities, pm(t+1)and km(t+1), respectively.
The algorithm’s constant speed is calculated as follows because the male mayﬂy’s
nuptial dance continues at the height of some meters.
kmd(t+1) = vmd(t) +q1exp( VD2
p)(pbest md pmd(t))+
q2exp( VD2
g)(gbest d pmd(t))(10)
q1and q2are the attractive constants that determine the relative importance of the mental
and social components. Mayﬂies cannot see each other very well when they are in an V
environment. Using Equations (12) and (13), we can determine the distances Dp, and Dp
that pi has with pbest mand gbest , respectively. The ith agent’s velocity in the dth dimension
is denoted by kmd, while its position is indicated by pmd.dis the dimension index, and
it can range from 1 to dMax, where d is the maximum number of dimensions. This best
position (abbreviated pbest md) is held by the ith agent in the dth dimension and is calculated
as follows.
pbest m=(
xm(t+1),f(xm(t+1))<f(pbest m)
pbest m,f(xm(t+1)f(pbest m)(11)
A quality-deﬁning OF for this solution is denoted by f (.). Here is how we determine D2
p
and D2
g:
D2
p= dMax
å
n=1(pmd pbest m)!0.5
(12)
D2
g= dMax
å
d=1(pmd gbest )!0.5
(13)
The strongest and healthiest mayﬂies will keep on dancing vertically in the nuptial dance,
protecting the algorithm’s optimal outcome. Therefore, the healthiest mayﬂies must main-

==== Page 11 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 11 of 22
tain the following velocity shift, which introduces an element of chance into the algorithm.
kmd(t+1) =kmd(t) +NDv (14)
where NDis the nuptial dance coefﬁcient and vis a random number between  1 and 1.
3.5.2. Female Mayﬂy Flight
Female mayﬂies do not swarm like males do when they take to the air; instead, they
head straight for the men to mate. Using rm(t), we can see where the ith female mayﬂy is
located in the search space, and then use the following equation to adjust our position:
rm(t+1) =km(t+1) +rm(t) (15)
To model this phenomenon, we assume that the most attractive female will be drawn to
the most attractive male, the next most attractive female will be drawn to the next most
attractive male, and so on. Using the following equation, we can determine the speed:
kmd(t+1) =8
>><
>>:kmd(t) +q2exp( VD2
i f)(pmd(t) rmd(t)),
f(rm)>f(pm)
umd(t) +qwv,f(rm)f(pm)(16)
rmd(t)and umd(t)represent the location and velocity of the ith female mayﬂy in the dth
dimension at time t, respectively. Male–female mayﬂy separation distances are denoted
byD2
i f, where Dis 2 times the original distance. The coefﬁcient of the walk, qw, is chosen
at random.
3.5.3. Mating Procedure
The crossover operator is used to model the mayﬂy mating behavior described below.
One male and one female are picked from each set to be the parents, just as males are
attracted to speciﬁc females. Winner selection can be based either on chance or on the
objective function. For each group, the ﬁttest females mate with the ﬁttest males, the second-
ﬁttest females with the second-ﬁttest males, and so on. With the help of the following
equation, we can foresee the offspring of the crossover.
a1=bmale +(1 b)f emale (17)
a2=bf emale +(1 b)male (18)
The ﬁrst and second generations of this family are denoted here as a1anda2. The third
element, “ b” is a random number within a speciﬁed interval. In addition, males and
females represent biological parents. Note that a child is assumed to have no initial velocity
(Algorithm 1).

==== Page 12 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 12 of 22
Algorithm 1 Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm
Inputs:
- Population size (N)
- Maximum number of iterations (max_iter)
- Objective function (obj_func)
Outputs:
- Best solution found (best_solution)
1. Initialization:
 Initialize a population of N female mayﬂies with random positions and velocities
 Initialize a population of male mayﬂies with random velocities
2. Evaluate initial solutions:
 Evaluate the ﬁtness of each female mayﬂy using the objective function
 Set the global best solution (gbest) to be the female mayﬂy with the highest ﬁtness
3. While stopping criteria are not met do:
A. Update velocities and solutions:
 Update the velocities of male and female mayﬂies using Equation (1) and (2), respectively
 Update the positions of male and female mayﬂies using Equation (3) and (4), respectively
B. Evaluate solutions
 Evaluate the ﬁtness of each female mayﬂy using the objective function
C. Rank the mayﬂies:
 Rank the female mayﬂies in order of ﬁtness from best to worst
D. Mate the mayﬂies:
 Select pairs of female mayﬂies for mating using a tournament selection approach
 Generate offspring using Equation (5) and (6)
E. Evaluate offspring:
 Evaluate the ﬁtness of each offspring using the objective function
F. Separate offspring to male and female randomly:
 For each offspring, randomly assign it to be a male or female mayﬂy
G. Replace worst solutions with the best new ones:
 Replace the worst female mayﬂies with the best offspring, maintaining the population size
of N
 Update the global best solution (gbest) if a better solution is found
H. Update personal and global best solutions:
 Update the personal best solution (pbest) for each female mayﬂy if it is better than its
current pbest
 Update the gbest if a better solution is found
I. Increment the iteration counter
4. End While
5. Return the best solution found (best_solution), which is the position of the female mayﬂy with the
highest ﬁtness (gbest).
Equations:
â Equation (1): male_velocity = rand() * male_velocity + rand() * (gbest  position)
â Equation (2): female_velocity = rand() * female_velocity + rand() * (pbest  position)
â Equation (3): male_position = male_position + male_velocity
â Equation (4): female_position = female_position + female_velocity
â Equation (5): offspring_position = rand() * (female1_position  female2_position) +
female2_position
â Equation (6): offspring_velocity = rand() * (female1_velocity  female2_velocity) +
female2_velocity
The Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm is a metaheuristic optimization algorithm that is
inspired by the mating behavior of mayﬂies. The algorithm begins with an initialization
step where a population of female and male mayﬂies are randomly generated with initial
positions and velocities. The ﬁtness of each female mayﬂy is evaluated using an objective
function, and the global best solution is set as the female mayﬂy with the highest ﬁtness.

==== Page 13 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 13 of 22
The algorithm then iterates through a series of steps where the positions and velocities
of male and female mayﬂies are updated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each female
mayﬂy is evaluated again, and the female mayﬂies are ranked based on their ﬁtness. Pairs
of female mayﬂies are selected for mating using a tournament selection approach, and
offspring are generated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each offspring is evaluated,
and they are randomly assigned to be either male or female mayﬂies. The worst female
mayﬂies are replaced with the best offspring, and the personal and global best solutions
are updated accordingly.
The algorithm continues to iterate until a stopping criterion is met, and the best solu-
tion found is returned as the position of the female mayﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. The
Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm has been shown to be effective in solving optimization
problems in various domains, including image processing, feature selection, and classiﬁca-
tion. Figure 5 presents a Flowchart of MOA algorithm. We rewrote the updating equations
for mayﬂy swarms to enhance the MOA algorithm. The upgraded MOA algorithm out-
performed the baseline algorithm in every simulation experiment. We found that good
optimization results are possible for a subset of the non-symmetric benchmark functions.
The non-symmetric benchmark functions simulated in this paper showed that even with
the MOA algorithm’s enhancements, they were not signiﬁcantly better than the originals.
The MOA algorithm was modified and tailored for AD detection and classification by
carefully defining the objective function, establishing the initial population of mayflies, updat-
ing and evaluating the algorithm, and comparing the results to other state-of-the-art methods.
Algorithm 2 presents the modified MOA algorithm for AD Detection and Classification.
To deﬁne the objective function, we considered a set of features that are relevant for
AD detection and classiﬁcation, such as cortical thickness, hippocampal volume, and white
matter hyper intensities. Based on these features, we then designed a ﬁtness function that
maximized the separation between healthy and diseased individuals. To establish the
initial population of mayﬂies, we randomly generated a set of solutions for each feature
in the objective function. We then assigned these solutions to a set of male and female
mayﬂies with baseline velocities and evaluated their ﬁtness using the objective function.
To update and evaluate the algorithm, we updated the velocities and solutions of the
male and female mayﬂies, ranked the mayﬂies based on their ﬁtness, mated the mayﬂies to
generate offspring, evaluated the offspring’s ﬁtness, separated the offspring randomly into
male and female mayﬂies, and replaced the worst solutions with the best new ones. We
also compared the results of our algorithm to other approaches, such as random forests
and SVM, using metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity.
By providing a more detailed explanation of how the Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm
was adapted for AD detection and classiﬁcation, we can demonstrate the modiﬁcations
and tailoring that were necessary to make the algorithm effective for this speciﬁc task. It
can help readers understand the strengths and limitations of the algorithm and how it
compares to other methods in the ﬁeld.
The proposed Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm for AD Detection and Classiﬁcation is
designed to identify the best set of features from brain MRI images that can be used to accu-
rately classify patients with Alzheimer’s disease. The algorithm begins by pre-processing
the MRI images and randomly selecting a subset of features to use for classiﬁcation. It then
initializes a population of female mayﬂies with random positions and velocities for the
selected subset of features, as well as a population of male mayﬂies with random velocities
for the same subset of features.
The algorithm then evaluates the classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy
using a classiﬁer and cross-validation on the selected subset of features, and sets the global
best solution (gbest) to be the female mayﬂy with the highest classiﬁcation performance. In
the following iterations, the algorithm updates the subset of features used for classiﬁcation
by selecting features based on the positions of the male mayﬂies. It then evaluates the
classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy using the updated subset of features and

==== Page 14 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 14 of 22
the classiﬁer and updates the positions and velocities of male and female mayﬂies based
on the updated subset of features.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 24 
 
 Equation (6): offspring_velocity = rand() * (female1_velocity − female2_velocity) + 
female2_velocity 
The May ﬂy Optimization Algorithm is a metaheuristic optimization algorithm that 
is inspired by the mating behavior of may ﬂies. The algorithm begins with an initialization 
step where a population of female and male may ﬂies are randomly generated with initial 
positions and velocities. The ﬁtness of each female may ﬂy is evaluated using an objective 
function, and the global best solution is set as the female may ﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. 
The algorithm then iterates through a series of steps where the positions and veloci-
ties of male and female may ﬂies are updated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each 
female may ﬂy is evaluated again, and the female may ﬂies are ranked based on their ﬁt-
ness. Pairs of female may ﬂies are selected for mating using a tournament selection ap-
proach, and o ﬀspring are generated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each o ﬀspring 
is evaluated, and they are randomly assigned to be either male or female may ﬂies. The 
worst female may ﬂies are replaced with the best o ﬀspring, and the personal and global 
best solutions are updated accordingly. 
The algorithm continues to iterate until a stopping criterion is met, and the best so-
lution found is returned as the position of the female may ﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. The 
Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm has been shown to be e ﬀective in solving optimization 
problems in various domains, including image processing, feature selection, and classi ﬁ-
cation. Figure 5 presents a Flowchart of MO A algorithm. We rewrote the updating equa-
tions for may ﬂy swarms to enhance the MOA algorithm. The upgraded MOA algorithm 
outperformed the baseline algorithm in every simulation experiment. We found that good 
optimization results are possible for a subset  of the non-symmetric benchmark functions. 
The non-symmetric benchmark functions simulate d in this paper showed that even with 
the MOA algorithm’s enhancements, they were not signi ﬁcantly be tter than the originals. 
 
Figure 5. Flowchart of MOA algorithm.
Finally, the mayﬂies are ranked based on their classiﬁcation performance, and the best
new solutions are used to replace the worst solutions. The algorithm stops when the maxi-
mum number of iterations is reached or when a predetermined accuracy threshold is met.
The proposed algorithm also includes visualizations of feature importance and/or saliency
maps to help understand which parts of the brain are most important for classiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation performance metrics such as accuracy and F1-score.

==== Page 15 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 15 of 22
Algorithm 2 Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm for AD detection and classiﬁcation
Inputs:
- Dataset containing brain images (X) and corresponding labels (y)
- Population size (N)
- Maximum number of iterations (max_iter)
Outputs:
- Best set of features found (best_features)
1. Initialization:
 Randomly select a subset of features to use for classiﬁcation from the brain images
 Initialize a population of N female mayﬂies with random positions and velocities for the selected
subset of features
 Initialize a population of male mayﬂies with random velocities for the selected subset of features
2. Feature selection and evaluation:
 Evaluate the classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy using a classiﬁer (e.g., SVM) and
cross-validation on the selected subset of features
 Set the global best solution (gbest) to be the female mayﬂy with the highest classiﬁcation
performance
3. While stopping criteria are not met do: Feature selection and evaluation:
 Update the subset of features used for classiﬁcation by selecting features based on the positions of
the male mayﬂies using Equation (7)
 Evaluate the classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy using the updated subset of
features and the classiﬁer
 Update the positions and velocities of male and female mayﬂies using Equations (1)-(6) with the
updated subset of features
A. Rank the mayﬂies:
 Rank the female mayﬂies in order of classiﬁcation performance from best to worst
B. Mate the mayﬂies:
 Select pairs of female mayﬂies for mating using a tournament selection approach
 Generate offspring using Equations (5) and (6)
C. Evaluate offspring:
 Evaluate the classiﬁcation performance of each offspring using the updated subset of features and
the classiﬁer
D. Separate offspring to male and female randomly:
 For each offspring, randomly assign it to be a male or female mayﬂy
E. Replace worst solutions with the best new ones:
 Replace the worst female mayﬂies with the best offspring, maintaining the population size of N
 Update the global best solution (gbest) if a better solution is found
F. Update personal and global best solutions:
 Update the personal best solution (pbest) for each female mayﬂy if it has a higher classiﬁcation
performance than its current pbest
 Update the gbest if a better solution is found
G. Increment the iteration counter
4. End While
5. Return the best set of features found (best_features), which is the subset of features used by the female
mayﬂy with the highest classiﬁcation performance (gbest).
Equations:
â Equation (1): male_velocity = rand() * male_velocity + rand() * (gbest  position)
â Equation (2): female_velocity = rand() * female_velocity + rand() * (pbest  position)
â Equation (3): male_position = male_position + male_velocity
â Equation (4): female_position = female_position + female_velocity
â Equation (5): offspring_position = rand() * (female1_position  female2_position) +
female2_position
â Equation (6): offspring_velocity = rand() * (female1_velocity  female2_velocity) +
female2_velocity
â Equation (7): new_feature_set = select_features(male_position)

==== Page 16 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 16 of 22
4. Result and Discussion
We have evaluated an existing model’s potential to foretell the development of AD over
a period of 2.5 years. The ADNI database was combed through in order to get information
on people who had participated in the ADNI. Practitioners can use the confusion matrix
to help them gauge the results’ performance [ 12]. Patients who were correctly diagnosed
as suffering from Alzheimer (TPs) and those who were not (TNs) were divided into three
groups: those with AD (FNs), those without AD (FPs), and those who were misdiagnosed
as TNs (FPs). False negative predictions are particularly dangerous in the medical ﬁeld.
The various metrics of performance were calculated using a confusion matrix. Accuracy
was calculated based on the number of correctly identiﬁed events (Acc).
The square root of the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) reﬂects the average discrep-
ancy between observed data and forecasted values. The equation used to calculate its
worth is (19).
RMSE =s
ån
i=1(predicted i actual i)2
n(19)
4.1. Precision
Tabulated results of a precision comparison of the DBN-MOA method to those of other
existing methods are shown in Figure 6. The graph demonstrates how the ML approach
led to improved precision and performance. By way of comparison, the SVM model, the
RF model, the KNN model, the LR model, and the DT model all achieved precisions of
65.821%, 69.832%, 72.465%, 77.682%, and 83.312% with data set 100, respectively. However,
DBN-MOA has demonstrated its best performance with varying sizes of data. Furthermore,
under 600 data points, the precision values for the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models
are 68.132%, 71.132%, 76.685%, 82.705%, and 88.932%, respectively, while the DBN-MOA
model has a precision value of 94.621%.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 24 
 
 
Figure 6. Precision Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system. 
4.2. Recall 
Figure 7 illustrates a comparative recall examination of the DBN-MOA approach 
with other existing methods. With data set to 100, the recall value is 90.162% for DBN-
MOA, whereas the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models have obtained recalls of 70.632%, 74.659%, 77.465%, 81.112%, and 85.652%, respectively. 
 
Figure 7. Recall Analysis of the DBN-MOA me thod with the existing system. 
However, the DBN-MOA model has sh own maximum performance with di ﬀerent 
data sizes. Similarly, under 600 data points , the recall value of DBN-MOA is 95.789%, 
while it is 73.998%, 76.132%, 81.656%, 85.132%, and 90.162% for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and 
DT models, respectively. 
  6065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600PRECISION ANALYSIS (%)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETAnalysis of Precisison
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
6065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600RECALL ANALYSIS (%)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETAnalysis of Recall
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
Figure 6. Precision Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.
4.2. Recall
Figure 7 illustrates a comparative recall examination of the DBN-MOA approach with
other existing methods. With data set to 100, the recall value is 90.162% for DBN-MOA,
whereas the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models have obtained recalls of 70.632%, 74.659%,
77.465%, 81.112%, and 85.652%, respectively.

==== Page 17 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 17 of 22
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 24 
 
 
Figure 6. Precision Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system. 
4.2. Recall 
Figure 7 illustrates a comparative recall examination of the DBN-MOA approach 
with other existing methods. With data set to 100, the recall value is 90.162% for DBN-
MOA, whereas the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models have obtained recalls of 70.632%, 74.659%, 77.465%, 81.112%, and 85.652%, respectively. 
 
Figure 7. Recall Analysis of the DBN-MOA me thod with the existing system. 
However, the DBN-MOA model has sh own maximum performance with di ﬀerent 
data sizes. Similarly, under 600 data points , the recall value of DBN-MOA is 95.789%, 
while it is 73.998%, 76.132%, 81.656%, 85.132%, and 90.162% for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and 
DT models, respectively. 
  6065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600PRECISION ANALYSIS (%)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETAnalysis of Precisison
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
6065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600RECALL ANALYSIS (%)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETAnalysis of Recall
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
Figure 7. Recall Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.
However, the DBN-MOA model has shown maximum performance with different
data sizes. Similarly, under 600 data points, the recall value of DBN-MOA is 95.789%, while
it is 73.998%, 76.132%, 81.656%, 85.132%, and 90.162% for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT
models, respectively.
4.3. RMSE
Figure 8 shows the results of an RMSE comparison of the DBN-MOA method to
those of other existing methods. The lower RMSE value achieved by the ML method is
graphically displayed in the ﬁgure. On data set 100, for instance, the RMSE is 20.685%,
while the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models achieve marginally improved RMSE of
45.839%, 36.811%, 32.851%, 28.652, and 24.685%, respectively. In contrast, the DBN-MOA
model has demonstrated its best performance across various data sizes while maintaining
a small RMSE. Similarly, under 600 data points, the RMSE values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR,
and DT models are 52.965%, 44.832%, 36.789%, 31.789, and 27.981%, respectively, while
DBN-RMSE MOA’s value is 23.785%.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 24 
 
4.3. RMSE 
Figure 8 shows the results of an RMSE co mparison of the DBN-MOA method to those 
of other existing methods. The lower RMSE value achieved by the ML method is graph-ically displayed in the ﬁgure. On data set 100, for instance, the RMSE is 20.685%, while the 
SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models achieve marginally improved RMSE of 45.839%, 
36.811%, 32.851%, 28.652, and 24.685%, respectively. In contrast, the DBN-MOA model 
has demonstrated its best performance across various data sizes while maintaining a small 
RMSE. Similarly, under 600 data points, the RMSE values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models are 52.965%, 44.832%, 36.789%, 31.789, and 27.981%, respectively, while DBN-
RMSE MOA’s value is 23.785%. 
 
Figure 8. RMSE Analysis of the DBN-MOA me thod with the existing system.  
4.4. F-Score 
Figure 9 shows the results of an f-score analysis comparing the DBN-MOA approach 
to those of other existing methods. The impr oved performance measured by an f-score is 
evidenced graphically to have resulted from the ML method. For instance, on data set 100, the f-score for DBN-MOA is 88.132%, while those for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT are 
60.832%, 64.981%, 69.382%, 75.659%, and 82.132%. However, DBN-MOA has demon-
strated its best performance with varying size s of data. Similarly, under 600 data points, 
the f-score values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models are 63.805%, 68.465%, 74.168%, 
80.435%, and 87.652%, respectively, while the f-score value for DBN-MOA is 93.187%. 1015202530354045505560
100 200 300 400 500 600RMSE Analysis (%)
No of Data from DatasetAnalysis of RMSE
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
Figure 8. RMSE Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.
4.4. F-Score
Figure 9 shows the results of an f-score analysis comparing the DBN-MOA approach
to those of other existing methods. The improved performance measured by an f-score

==== Page 18 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 18 of 22
is evidenced graphically to have resulted from the ML method. For instance, on data set
100, the f-score for DBN-MOA is 88.132%, while those for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT are
60.832%, 64.981%, 69.382%, 75.659%, and 82.132%. However, DBN-MOA has demonstrated
its best performance with varying sizes of data. Similarly, under 600 data points, the f-score
values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models are 63.805%, 68.465%, 74.168%, 80.435%, and
87.652%, respectively, while the f-score value for DBN-MOA is 93.187%.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 24 
 
 
Figure 9. F-Score Analysis of the DBN-MOA me thod with the existing system.  
4.5. Execution Time 
Figure 10 describes the execution time analysis of the DBN-MOA technique with ex-
isting methods. The data clearly shows that the DBN-MOA method has outperformed the 
other techniques in all aspects. For exampl e, with 100 pieces of data, the DBN-MOA 
method has taken only 1.384 s to execute, wh ile the other existing techniques like SVM, 
RF, KNN, LR, and DT have an execution time of 7.762 s, 6.465 s, 5.484 s, 3.732 s, and 2.981 
s, respectively. Similarly, for 600 data points, the DBN-MOA method has an execution 
time of 2.4 s while the other existing techni ques like SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT have 
8.990 s, 6.965 s, 5.693 s, 4.382 s, and 2.999 s of execution time, respectively. 
 
Figure 10. Execution Time Analysis of the DBN-MO A method with the existing system. 
  
50556065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600F-Score  Analysis (%)
No of Data from DatasetF-Score Analysis 
SVM
 RF
 KNN
 LR
 DT
 DBN-MOA
012345678910
100 200 300 400 500 600EXECUTION TIME (SEC)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETANALYSIS OF EXECUTION TIME
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
Figure 9. F-Score Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.
4.5. Execution Time
Figure 10 describes the execution time analysis of the DBN-MOA technique with
existing methods. The data clearly shows that the DBN-MOA method has outperformed
the other techniques in all aspects. For example, with 100 pieces of data, the DBN-MOA
method has taken only 1.384 s to execute, while the other existing techniques like SVM, RF,
KNN, LR, and DT have an execution time of 7.762 s, 6.465 s, 5.484 s, 3.732 s, and 2.981 s,
respectively. Similarly, for 600 data points, the DBN-MOA method has an execution time
of 2.4 s while the other existing techniques like SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT have 8.990 s,
6.965 s, 5.693 s, 4.382 s, and 2.999 s of execution time, respectively.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 24 
 
 
Figure 9. F-Score Analysis of the DBN-MOA me thod with the existing system.  
4.5. Execution Time 
Figure 10 describes the execution time analysis of the DBN-MOA technique with ex-
isting methods. The data clearly shows that the DBN-MOA method has outperformed the 
other techniques in all aspects. For exampl e, with 100 pieces of data, the DBN-MOA 
method has taken only 1.384 s to execute, wh ile the other existing techniques like SVM, 
RF, KNN, LR, and DT have an execution time of 7.762 s, 6.465 s, 5.484 s, 3.732 s, and 2.981 
s, respectively. Similarly, for 600 data points, the DBN-MOA method has an execution 
time of 2.4 s while the other existing techni ques like SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT have 
8.990 s, 6.965 s, 5.693 s, 4.382 s, and 2.999 s of execution time, respectively. 
 
Figure 10. Execution Time Analysis of the DBN-MO A method with the existing system. 
  
50556065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600F-Score  Analysis (%)
No of Data from DatasetF-Score Analysis 
SVM
 RF
 KNN
 LR
 DT
 DBN-MOA
012345678910
100 200 300 400 500 600EXECUTION TIME (SEC)
NO OF DATA FROM DATASETANALYSIS OF EXECUTION TIME
SVM RF KNN LR DT DBN-MOA
Figure 10. Execution Time Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.

==== Page 19 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 19 of 22
4.6. Accuracy
Accuracy comparisons of the DBN-MOA method to those of other existing methods
are shown in Figure 11. Improved performance and accuracy can be seen in the graph,
demonstrating the success of the ML method.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 24 
 
4.6. Accuracy 
Accuracy comparisons of the DBN-MOA meth od to those of other existing methods 
are shown in Figure 11. Improved performance and accuracy can be seen in the graph, demonstrating the success of the ML method. 
 
Figure 11. Accuracy Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system. 
To illustrate, the accuracy of DBN-MOA is 91.435% on data set 100, while the corre-
sponding values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, an d DT models are 74.982%, 77.182%, 78.732%, 
81.565%, and 84.78%, respectively. Howeve r, DBN-MOA has demonstrated its best per-
formance with varying sizes of data. Comparatively, under 600 data points, the accuracy 
values for the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT model s are 76.112%, 78.685%, 80.166%, 83.966%, 
and 89.465%, respectively, while the DBN-MOA model has a value of 97.456%. 
5. Conclusions 
This research examines the strengths and weaknesses of various MRI-based AD de-
tection strategies. Several reliable approaches to AD classi ﬁcation have been proposed and 
implemented. Research that combines ML and neuroscience can lead to a more accurate 
diagnosis of AD. In this article, we tested a model for predicting the onset of AD using the 
ADNI dataset. The ADNI database currently contains information on 1029 people who 
met the inclusion criteria. It was prop osed to use supervised learning classi ﬁers in the 
form of a DBN to identify AD in dementia pa tients by analyzing features from a longitu-
dinal brain MRI scan of patients using IoT based portable MRI scan machine to obtain real-time imaging. Incorporating a richer set of cost-e ﬀective time-series features, such as 
patients’ comorbidities, cognitive scores, medication histories, and demographics, led to 
the superior performance of our DBN-MOA mo dels compared to state-of-the-art methods. 
Our results demonstrate the universal bene ﬁt of early feature fusion, and they particularly 
highlight the value of fusing diagnostic and therapeutic features. When comparing accu-
racy, the random forest model is superior. SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT were tested, and 
their results were compared.  The proposed DBN-MOA method can distinguish between 
healthy and ill patients with an accuracy of 97.456%, r-Score of 93.187%, recall of 95.789% and precision of 94.621% achieved by the pr oposed technique. The results demonstrate 
that the proposed DBN-MOA model clearly outc lasses the existing models and performs 
better on all the parameters of accuracy, f-Score, recall and precision. The results validate 
6065707580859095100
100 200 300 400 500 600Accuracy Analysis (%)
No of Data from DatasetAnalysis of Accuracy
SVM
 RF
 KNN
 LR
 DT
 DBN-MOA
Figure 11. Accuracy Analysis of the DBN-MOA method with the existing system.
To illustrate, the accuracy of DBN-MOA is 91.435% on data set 100, while the corre-
sponding values for SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models are 74.982%, 77.182%, 78.732%,
81.565%, and 84.78%, respectively. However, DBN-MOA has demonstrated its best per-
formance with varying sizes of data. Comparatively, under 600 data points, the accuracy
values for the SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT models are 76.112%, 78.685%, 80.166%, 83.966%,
and 89.465%, respectively, while the DBN-MOA model has a value of 97.456%.
5. Conclusions
This research examines the strengths and weaknesses of various MRI-based AD
detection strategies. Several reliable approaches to AD classiﬁcation have been proposed
and implemented. Research that combines ML and neuroscience can lead to a more accurate
diagnosis of AD. In this article, we tested a model for predicting the onset of AD using the
ADNI dataset. The ADNI database currently contains information on 1029 people who met
the inclusion criteria. It was proposed to use supervised learning classiﬁers in the form
of a DBN to identify AD in dementia patients by analyzing features from a longitudinal
brain MRI scan of patients using IoT based portable MRI scan machine to obtain real-time
imaging. Incorporating a richer set of cost-effective time-series features, such as patients’
comorbidities, cognitive scores, medication histories, and demographics, led to the superior
performance of our DBN-MOA models compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our results
demonstrate the universal beneﬁt of early feature fusion, and they particularly highlight
the value of fusing diagnostic and therapeutic features. When comparing accuracy, the
random forest model is superior. SVM, RF, KNN, LR, and DT were tested, and their
results were compared. The proposed DBN-MOA method can distinguish between healthy
and ill patients with an accuracy of 97.456%, r-Score of 93.187%, recall of 95.789% and
precision of 94.621% achieved by the proposed technique. The results demonstrate that the
proposed DBN-MOA model clearly outclasses the existing models and performs better on
all the parameters of accuracy, f-Score, recall and precision. The results validate that the

==== Page 20 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 20 of 22
proposed model is efﬁcient and better than the existing models. The future of assessing the
efﬁcacy of multiclass AD stage classiﬁcations will involve using Efﬁcient Net B0-B7 and
other pre-trained models. The dataset is also enlarged through the use of elementary data
augmentation techniques. Further, Alzheimer’s characteristics will be highlighted via MRI
segmentation before AD stage classiﬁcations are made.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.A., S.A., S.B.K. and I.A.; formal analysis, M.S., I.M.K.
and A.A.M.; investigation, S.B.K., I.A., N.A., S.A. and M.S.; project administration, N.A., S.B.K. and
A.A.M.; resources, A.A.M.; supervision, S.B.K. and A.A.M.; visualization, M.S. and I.M.K.; writing—
original draft, M.S., N.A., S.A. and S.B.K.; writing—review and editing, I.A., I.M.K. and A.A.M. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research is supported by Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Researchers
Supporting Project Number (PNURSP2023R151), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. This data
can be found here: https://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/adni-data-inventory/ (accessed on
11 January 2023).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Ahmad, F.B.; Anderson, R.N. The Leading Causes of Death in the US for 2020. JAMA 2021 ,325, 1829–1830. [CrossRef]
2. Das, R.; Rauf, A.; Akhter, S.; Islam, M.N.; Emran, T.B.; Mitra, S.; Khan, I.N.; Mubarak, M.S. Role of Withaferin A and Its Derivatives
in the Management of Alzheimer’s Disease: Recent Trends and Future Perspectives. Molecules 2021 ,26, 3696. [CrossRef]
3. Turner, R.S.; Stubbs, T.; Davies, D.A.; Albensi, B.C. Potential New Approaches for Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Dementias. Front. Neurol. 2020 ,11, 496. [CrossRef]
4. Wu, C.-L.; Lin, T.-J.; Chiou, G.-L.; Lee, C.-Y.; Luan, H.; Tsai, M.-J.; Potvin, P .; Tsai, C.-C. A Systematic Review of MRI Neuroimaging
for Education Research. Front. Psychol. 2021 ,12, 617599. [CrossRef]
5. Alam, S.; Shuaib, M.; Ahmad, S.; Jayakody, D.N.K.; Muthanna, A.; Bharany, S.; Elgendy, I.A. Blockchain-Based Solutions
Supporting Reliable Healthcare for Fog Computing and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) Integration. Sustainability 2022 ,
14, 15312. [CrossRef]
6. Gaubert, S.; Houot, M.; Raimondo, F.; Ansart, M.; Corsi, M.-C.; Naccache, L.; Sitt, J.D.; Habert, M.-O.; Dubois, B.; Fallani, F.D.V . A
Machine Learning Approach to Screen for Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurobiol. Aging 2021 ,105, 205–216. [CrossRef]
7. Gao, Z.; Pan, X.; Shao, J.; Jiang, X.; Su, Z.; Jin, K.; Ye, J. Automatic interpretation and clinical evaluation for fundus ﬂuorescein
angiography images of diabetic retinopathy patients by deep learning. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2022 , 321472. [CrossRef]
8. Battineni, G.; Sagaro, G.G.; Chinatalapudi, N.; Amenta, F. Applications of Machine Learning Predictive Models in the Chronic
Disease Diagnosis. J. Pers. Med. 2020 ,10, 21. [CrossRef]
9. Spooner, A.; Chen, E.; Sowmya, A.; Sachdev, P .; Kochan, N.A.; Trollor, J.; Brodaty, H. A Comparison of Machine Learning Methods
for Survival Analysis of High-Dimensional Clinical Data for Dementia Prediction. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 20410. [CrossRef]
10. Nori, V .S.; Hane, C.A.; Crown, W.H.; Au, R.; Burke, W.J.; Sanghavi, D.M.; Bleicher, P . Machine Learning Models to Predict Onset
of Dementia: A Label Learning Approach. Alzheimer’s Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv. 2019 ,5, 918–925. [CrossRef]
11. Saab, S., Jr.; Saab, K.; Phoha, S.; Zhu, M.; Ray, A. A multivariate adaptive gradient algorithm with reduced tuning efforts. Neural
Netw. 2022 ,152, 499–509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Saab, S., Jr.; Fu, Y.; Ray, A.; Hauser, M. A dynamically stabilized recurrent neural network. Neural Process. Lett. 2022 ,54, 1195–1209.
[CrossRef]
13. Jo, T.; Nho, K.; Saykin, A.J. Deep Learning in Alzheimer’s Disease: Diagnostic Classiﬁcation and Prognostic Prediction Using
Neuroimaging Data. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2019 ,11, 220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Bashir, M.F.; Javed, A.R.; Arshad, M.U.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Shahzad, W.; Beg, M.O. Context aware emotion detection from low
resource urdu language using deep neural network. Trans. Asian Low-Resour. Lang. Inf. Process. 2023 ,22, 1–30. [CrossRef]
15. Lundervold, A.S.; Lundervold, A. An Overview of Deep Learning in Medical Imaging Focusing on MRI. Z. Med. Phys. 2019 ,29,
102–127. [CrossRef]
16. Battineni, G.; Chintalapudi, N.; Amenta, F. Comparative Machine Learning Approach in Dementia Patient Classiﬁcation Using
Principal Component Analysis. Group 2020 ,500, 146.
17. Aditya, C.R.; Pande, M.B.S. Devising an Interpretable Calibrated Scale to Quantitatively Assess the Dementia Stage of Subjects
with Alzheimer’s Disease: A Machine Learning Approach. Inform. Med. Unlocked 2017 ,6, 28–35. [CrossRef]

==== Page 21 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 21 of 22
18. Lian, Z.; Zeng, Q.; Wang, W.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Su, C. Blockchain-Based Two-Stage Federated Learning with Non-IID Data in IoMT
System. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 2022 . [CrossRef]
19. Judith, A.M.; Priya, S.B.; Mahendran, R.K.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Ambati, L.S. Two-phase classiﬁcation: ANN and A-SVM classiﬁers on
motor imagery BCI. Asian J. Control 2022 . [CrossRef]
20. Alam, S.; Bhatia, S.; Shuaib, M.; Khubrani, M.M.; Alfayez, F.; Malibari, A.A.; Ahmad, S. An Overview of Blockchain and IoT
Integration for Secure and Reliable Health Records Monitoring. Sustainability 2023 ,15, 5660. [CrossRef]
21. Siyu Lu, J.Y.B.Y. Analysis and Design of Surgical Instrument Localization Algorithm. Comput. Model. Eng. Sci. 2023 ,137, 669–685.
22. Singh, A.; Joshi, K.; Alam, S.; Bharany, S.; Shuaib, M.; Ahmad, S. Internet of Things-Based Integrated Remote Electronic Health
Surveillance and Alert System: A Review. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Current Development in
Engineering and Technology (CCET), Bhopal, India, 23–24 December 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1–6.
23. Cao, P .; Liu, X.; Yang, J.; Zhao, D.; Huang, M.; Zaiane, O. `2,1 `1Regularized Nonlinear Multi-Task Representation Learning
Based Cognitive Performance Prediction of Alzheimer’s Disease. Pattern Recognit. 2018 ,79, 195–215. [CrossRef]
24. Nawaz, H.; Maqsood, M.; Afzal, S.; Aadil, F.; Mehmood, I.; Rho, S. A Deep Feature-Based Real-Time System for Alzheimer
Disease Stage Detection. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2021 ,80, 35789–35807. [CrossRef]
25. Feng, C.; Elazab, A.; Yang, P .; Wang, T.; Lei, B.; Xiao, X. 3D Convolutional Neural Network and Stacked Bidirectional Recurrent
Neural Network for Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnosis. In Proceedings of the PRedictive Intelligence in MEdicine: First International
Workshop, PRIME 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, 16 September 2018; Proceedings 1; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2018; pp. 138–146.
26. Venugopalan, J.; Tong, L.; Hassanzadeh, H.R.; Wang, M.D. Multimodal Deep Learning Models for Early Detection of Alzheimer’s
Disease Stage. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11, 3254. [CrossRef]
27. AI-Atroshi, C.; Rene Beulah, J.; Singamaneni, K.K.; Pretty Diana Cyril, C.; Neelakandan, S.; Velmurugan, S. Automated Speech
Based Evaluation of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease Detection Using with Deep Belief Network Model. Int.
J. Healthc. Manag. 2022 , 1–11. [CrossRef]
28. Ramzan, F.; Khan, M.U.G.; Rehmat, A.; Iqbal, S.; Saba, T.; Rehman, A.; Mehmood, Z. A Deep Learning Approach for Automated
Diagnosis and Multi-Class Classiﬁcation of Alzheimer’s Disease Stages Using Resting-State FMRI and Residual Neural Networks.
J. Med. Syst. 2020 ,44, 37. [CrossRef]
29. Mehmood, A.; Maqsood, M.; Bashir, M.; Shuyuan, Y. A Deep Siamese Convolution Neural Network for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation
of Alzheimer Disease. Brain Sci. 2020 ,10, 84. [CrossRef]
30. Jain, R.; Jain, N.; Aggarwal, A.; Hemanth, D.J. Convolutional Neural Network Based Alzheimer’s Disease Classiﬁcation from
Magnetic Resonance Brain Images. Cogn. Syst. Res. 2019 ,57, 147–159. [CrossRef]
31. Sarraf, S.; Toﬁghi, G. Classiﬁcation of Alzheimer’s Disease Using Fmri Data and Deep Learning Convolutional Neural Networks.
arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1603.08631.
32. Afzal, S.; Maqsood, M.; Nazir, F.; Khan, U.; Aadil, F.; Awan, K.M.; Mehmood, I.; Song, O.-Y. A Data Augmentation-Based
Framework to Handle Class Imbalance Problem for Alzheimer’s Stage Detection. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 115528–115539. [CrossRef]
33. Aderghal, K.; Khvostikov, A.; Krylov, A.; Benois-Pineau, J.; Afdel, K.; Catheline, G. Classiﬁcation of Alzheimer Disease on
Imaging Modalities with Deep CNNs Using Cross-Modal Transfer Learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 31st international
symposium on computer-based medical systems (CBMS), Karlstad, Sweden, 18–21 June 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018;
pp. 345–350.
34. Spasov, S.; Passamonti, L.; Duggento, A.; Lio, P .; Toschi, N.; Initiative, A.D.N. A Parameter-Efﬁcient Deep Learning Approach to
Predict Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuroimage 2019 ,189, 276–287. [CrossRef]
35. Wang, H.; Shen, Y.; Wang, S.; Xiao, T.; Deng, L.; Wang, X.; Zhao, X. Ensemble of 3D Densely Connected Convolutional Network
for Diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurocomputing 2019 ,333, 145–156. [CrossRef]
36. Huang, L.; Jin, Y.; Gao, Y.; Thung, K.-H.; Shen, D.; Initiative, A.D.N. Longitudinal Clinical Score Prediction in Alzheimer’s Disease
with Soft-Split Sparse Regression Based Random Forest. Neurobiol. Aging 2016 ,46, 180–191. [CrossRef]
37. Kundaram, S.S.; Pathak, K.C. Deep Learning-Based Alzheimer Disease Detection. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Microelectronics, Computing and Communication Systems: MCCS 2019, Ranchi, India, 11–12 May 2019; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 587–597.
38. Vyas, A.H.; Mehta, M.A.; Kotecha, K.; Pandya, S.; Alazab, M.; Gadekallu, T.R. Tear Film Breakup Time-Based Dry Eye Disease
Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network. Neural Comput. Appl. 2022 , 1–19. [CrossRef]
39. Bhatia, S.; Alam, S.; Shuaib, M.; Alhameed, M.H.; Jeribi, F.; Alsuwailem, R.I. Retinal Vessel Extraction via Assisted Multi-Channel
Feature Map and U-Net. Front. Public Health 2022 ,10, 858327. [CrossRef]
40. Mishra, R.K.; Urolagin, S.; Jothi, J.A.A.; Neogi, A.S.; Nawaz, N. Deep Learning-Based Sentiment Analysis and Topic Modeling on
Tourism during Covid-19 Pandemic. Front. Comput. Sci. 2021 ,3, 775368. [CrossRef]
41. Tripathy, B.K.; Parimala, M.; Reddy, G.T. Innovative Classiﬁcation, Regression Model for Predicting Various Diseases. In Data
Analytics in Biomedical Engineering and Healthcare ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2021; pp. 179–203.
42. Zhang, Y.; Wang, S.; Sui, Y.; Yang, M.; Liu, B.; Cheng, H.; Sun, J.; Jia, W.; Phillips, P .; Gorriz, J.M. Multivariate Approach for
Alzheimer’s Disease Detection Using Stationary Wavelet Entropy and Predator-Prey Particle Swarm Optimization. J. Alzheimer’s
Dis. 2018 ,65, 855–869. [CrossRef]

==== Page 22 ====
Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 22 of 22
43. Korolev, S.; Saﬁullin, A.; Belyaev, M.; Dodonova, Y. Residual and Plain Convolutional Neural Networks for 3D Brain MRI
Classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE 14th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2017), Melbourne,
Australia, 18–21 April 2017; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 835–838.
44. Ding, Y.; Sohn, J.H.; Kawczynski, M.G.; Trivedi, H.; Harnish, R.; Jenkins, N.W.; Lituiev, D.; Copeland, T.P .; Aboian, M.S.; Mari
Aparici, C. A Deep Learning Model to Predict a Diagnosis of Alzheimer Disease by Using 18F-FDG PET of the Brain. Radiology
2019 ,290, 456–464. [CrossRef]
45. Beheshti, I.; Demirel, H.; Farokhian, F.; Yang, C.; Matsuda, H.; Initiative, A.D.N. Structural MRI-Based Detection of Alzheimer’s
Disease Using Feature Ranking and Classiﬁcation Error. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 2016 ,137, 177–193. [CrossRef]
46. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Availabel online: https://adni.loni.usc.edu/ (accessed on 11 January 2023 ).
47. Naz, S.; Ashraf, A.; Zaib, A. Transfer Learning Using Freeze Features for Alzheimer Neurological Disorder Detection Using ADNI
Dataset. Multimed. Syst. 2022 ,28, 85–94. [CrossRef]
48. Zervoudakis, K.; Tsafarakis, S. A Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020 ,145, 106559. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

