==== Page 1 ====
1726 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
Frontiers of Information T echnology & Electronic Engineering
www.jzus.zju.edu.cn; engineering.cae.cn; www.springerlink.com
ISSN 2095-9184 (print); ISSN 2095-9230 (online)E-mail: jzus@zju.edu.cn
Review:
Deep reinforcement learning: a survey∗
Hao-nan WANG‡, Ning LIU, Yi-yun ZHANG, Da-wei FENG, Feng HUANG,
Dong-sheng LI, Yi-ming ZHANG
Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410000, China
E-mail: wanghaonan14@nudt.edu.cn; liuning17a@nudt.edu.cn; zhangyiyun213@163.com; fengdawei@nudt.edu.cn;
huangfeng@nudt.edu.cn; dsli@nudt.edu.cn; zhangyiming@nudt.edu.cn
Received Sept. 29, 2019; Revision accepted Mar. 30, 2020; Crosschecked June 4, 2020; Published online Oct. 15, 2020
Abstract: Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has become one of the most popular topics in artiﬁcial intelligence
research. It has been widely used in various ﬁelds, such as end-to-end control, robotic control, recommendationsystems, and natural language dialogue systems. In this survey, we systematically categorize the deep RL algorithms
and applications, and provide a detailed review over existing deep RL algorithms by dividing them into model-
based methods, model-free methods, and advanced RL methods. We thoroughly analyze the advances including
exploration, inverse RL, and transfer RL. Finally, we outline the current representative applications, and analyze
four open problems for future research.
Key words: Reinforcement learning; Deep reinforcement learning; Reinforcement learning applications
https://doi.org/10.1631/FITEE.1900533 CLC number: TP18
1 Introduction
With the combination of deep learning and big
data, revolutionary advances have occurred in arti-
ﬁcial intelligence research. There is growing interest
to explore new technologies in the ﬁeld of post-deep
learning. Deep reinforcem ent learning (RL), which
uses neural network modeling in traditional RL algo-
rithms, is particularly att ractive. Speciﬁcally, deep
RL is used to solve decision optimization problems,
and decides which action to perform to maximize
the beneﬁt in the face of a speciﬁc state. As a result,
both the academic community and industry are pay-
ing much attention to analyzing and applying deepRL.
Deep RL is a general paradigm which combines
‡Corresponding author
*Project supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Nos. 61772541, 61872376, and 61932001)
ORCID: Hao-nan W ANG, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0792-
3858
c/circlecopyrtZhejiang University and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part
of Springer Nature 2020RL and deep learning and has achieved success in a
variety of scenarios, such as chess, investment, driv-
ing, and action imitation. Deep RL is thought as one
of the closest things that look anything like artiﬁcial
general intelligence (AGI).
The processing and analysis diﬀerences between
deep RL and traditional machine learning are huge.
The current mainstream machine learning paradigm
mostly collects or construct s dataset tags in advance,
and performs machine learning based on existingstatic data. By contrast, RL is a typical represen-
tation of the closed-loop learning paradigm, which
uses dynamic data and tags to bring feedback sig-
nals into the learning process. In this survey, we try
to provide an overview of the stat-of-the-art deep RLalgorithms.
Several comprehensive reviews have been pub-
lished on deep RL. For example, Mousavi et al.
(2018) summarized some early RL algorithms and
categorized them into six core elements, six impor-tant mechanisms, and 12 a pplications. They listed

==== Page 2 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1727
a collection of RL resources. Vanschoren (2018)
reviewed meta-learning a lgorithms and categorized
them based on the type of meta-data. Vanschoren(2018) gave experimental evaluation and analysis of
the performance characteristics for several popular
techniques, including learning from task properties,
learning from model evaluations, and learning from
prior models. Botvinick et al. (2019) summarizedthe implementation of deep meta-RL and proposed
the future directions like combining episodic deep RL
with meta-RL.
Compared to these surveys, we systematically
and comprehensively revi ew diﬀerent deep RL algo-
rithms rather than focusing on one speciﬁc branch, to
show the relationship and development trend. Fur-ther, we systematically ca tegorize the advanced RL
methods and their applications, and propose promis-
ing directions to address the challenges of RL.
To summarize, this paper presents an extensive
survey of RL with the following contributions:
1. We provide a detailed review over state-
of-the-art RL methods and divide them into threecategories: model-free, model-based, and advanced
methods.
2. We systematically su mmarize the develop-
ment of advanced RL and divide the algorithms into
three categories including exploration, inverse RL,
and transfer RL.
3. We detailedly analyze and discuss the ap-
plication of RL, such as robotics, natural language
processing, and computer systems.
4. We propose several open problems (e.g., data
hunger issue and AGI issue) for future research as
well as the analysis of each problem and the direc-
tions for further study.
2 Model-free reinforcement learning
The development of deep RL is still in its in-
fancy. Academic research focuses on the determin-
istic and static environment where the states aremainly discrete and fully observed. Therefore, most
RL jobs are based on model-free approaches. Model-
free RL can estimate the state, value function, and
reward function of the agent through a large num-
ber of samples to optimize the action policy π
θ(a|s)
that aims to obtain more rewards by doing action
ain states. Because of its simple implementation
and rich open resources, model-free RL has attractedmore and more scholars to conduct further research.
In this section, we simply divide model-free RL
into two scenarios: (1) RL based on the value func-
tion; (2) RL based on policy gradient.
2.1 RL based on the value function
2.1.1 Deep Q-network
Deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013,
2015) is a typical representative of deep RL,
which uses the convolutional neural network (CNN)
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) as a model and is trained
with a variant of Q-learning (Kröse, 1995). DQN
uses the maximum Q value as the low-dimensional
action outputs to solve the confusing representation
of high-dimensional state inputs such as raw pixelslike the picture of the game.
Moreover, DQN reduces the bonus value and
error term to a limited interval, which mitigates the
instability of the value functions represented by anonlinear network. Diﬀerent from the Q-learning
algorithm, DQN synchroni zes the learning process
and the training process, and the main improve-
ments are summarized as follows: (1) experience re-
play buﬀer (Lin, 1992) is used to reduce the associa-tion between samples; (2) deep neural networks—
target network—is used for action-value function
approximation.
Experimental results show that DQN surpasses
previous algorithms on most of the Atari 2600 games
(Bellemare et al., 2013) and perform comparably toa human professional tester. When solving various
types of visual perception based deep RL tasks, DQN
uses the same set of network models, parameter set-
tings, and training algorithms, which demonstrates
that the method is highly adaptable and versatile(Gu SX et al., 2016).
2.1.2 Developments of DQN
A large number of improved algorithms have
been proposed since the success of DQN. In this sub-
section, we focus mainly on representative methodsrelated to the overall structure of the system, the
construction of training samples, and the structure
of neural networks.
Double deep Q-network (DDQN) (van Hasselt
et al., 2016) reduces the risk of overestimation bias
of Q-learning by decoupling selection and evaluationof the bootstrap action. Since experience transitions

==== Page 3 ====
1728 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
are uniformly sampled from replay memory, DQN
obviously fails to fully consider the importance of
each sample. An improvement on the experience re-play mechanism, DDQN (Schaul et al., 2016), tackles
the problem by calculating the priority of each sam-
ple in the experience pool and increasing the proba-
bility of valuable training samples.
Limited by conventional architectures (e.g.,
convolutional networks, long short time memories
(LSTMs), or auto-encoders), the DQN algorithm ex-
hibits some other shortcomings, such as the lack
of long-term memory capabilities. Hausknechtand Stone (2017) investigated the eﬀects of adding
recurrency to DQN by replacing the ﬁrst post-
convolutional fully conn ected layer with a recurrent
LSTM. Wang ZY et al. (2016) expanded DQN based
on a dueling architecture, which helps generalize
across actions by separately representing state val-
ues and action advantages.
The multi-step bootstrap targets (Sutton, 1988;
Sutton and Barto, 2018) used in asynchronous ad-
vantage actor-critic (A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) shift
the bias-variance tradeoﬀ and help propagate newlyobserved rewards faster to earlier visited states.
Noisy DQN (Fortunato et al., 2019) uses stochas-
tic network layers for exploration. Distributional Q-
learning (Bellemare et al., 2017) learns a categorical
distribution of discounted returns instead of estimat-ing the mean.
Since the aforementioned independent improve-
ments of DQN are based on a shared framework,
Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018) could combine themplausibly. Experimental results show that the combi-
nation provides state-of-the-art performance on the
Atari 2600 benchmark in terms of data eﬃciency and
ﬁnal performance.
From research on Rainbow, identifying priorities
is the most important for the agent’s performance.
However, Schaul et al. (2016) used only a single actor
to collect data, which is in eﬃcient. Ape-X (Horgan
et al., 2018) leverages a distributed architecture fordeep RL at scale, and uses hundreds of actors to col-
lect data and obtain a large number of replay buﬀers
with diﬀerent priority levels through various actors.
The experiment shows that the performance of Ape-
X is almost doubled in a shorter training time than
Rainbow. Besides, it reveals that distributed com-
puting is becoming one of the most important partsin deep RL.2.2 RL based on policy gradient
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) is the prototype
of policy gradient (PG) algorithms. Compared with
value-based RL, policy-based RL not only avoids
the policy degradation caused by the value func-
tion error, but also is easier to apply in the con-tinuous action space problem. Speciﬁcally, value-
based methods, such as Q-learning and SARSA, re-
quire a one-step operation to calculate the maxi-
mum value, which can hardly be found in the con-
tinuous space or high-dimensional space. In ad-dition, value-based methods learn implicit policies
but policy-based RL methods can learn stochastic
policies. That is, in the value-based method, the
policies obtained through policy improvement are
all deterministic policies, and will encounter someproblems that cannot be resolved in some tasks
like Rock-Paper-Scissors. Policy-based methods also
have some common shortcomings: (1) data eﬃciency
or sample utilization is low; (2) the variance is large,
which makes it diﬃcult to converge.
We introduce the typical improvements from
two aspects: (1) improved framework based on actor-
critic; (2) improved method based on the trust
region.
2.2.1 Improved frameworks based on actor-critic
A classical and eﬀective method to overcome
the common drawbacks of policy-based methods is
the actor-critic algorithm (Sutton and Barto, 2018),which learns a policy and a state-value function.
The state-value function is used for bootstrapping,
i.e., updating a state from subsequent estimates to
reduce variance and accelerate learning. However,
it has been a long-standing hurdle of RL to sta-bly apply the simple but eﬃcient design of actor
critic methods to both continuous and discrete ac-
tion spaces. By extending DQN and DPG (Silver
et al., 2014), a deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) algorithm (Lillicrap et al., 2016) can learncompetitive policies for tasks using low-dimensional
observations (e.g., Cartesian coordinates and joint
angles) that are based on the same hyper param-
eters and network structure. Moreover, the twin
delayed DDPG algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018) is
proposed as a deterministic algorithm which can con-
currently work and has substantial improvement overDDPG.

==== Page 4 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1729
However, DDPG, whose policy is deterministic,
is particularly unsuitable in complex environments
with noise interference because the policy is requiredgenerally to perform with a certain randomness. An-
other problem is that many commonly used model-
free RL algorithms such as trust region policy opti-
mization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), proximal
policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017),or A3C, demand a number of new samples for each
gradient step. Suﬀering from this strict requirement,
it is extravagantly expensive to learn an eﬀective pol-
icy and will be much worse with the increase of com-
plexity of tasks. Soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) is an eﬀective approach for addressing
these problems. SAC combines oﬀ-policy updateswith a stable stochastic AC formulation and uses a
maximum entropy framework to augment the stan-
dard maximum reward RL objective. A substan-
tial improvement can be attained in performance
and sample eﬃciency over oﬀ-policy and on-policyprior methods, because there are several special ad-
vantages of the RL algorithm based on maximum
entropy:
1. An initialization for more complex speciﬁc
tasks. The policy learned by maximum entropy can
be used as an initialization for more complex speciﬁctasks and to learn a way to solve tasks.
2. Stronger exploration capabilities. It is obvi-
ous that maximum entropy makes it easier to ﬁnd
better patterns under a multimodal reward.
3. High robustness and stronger generaliza-
tion. Maximum entropy requires exploring vari-
ous optimal possibilities from diﬀerent ways and
makes it easier to do adjustments in the face of
interference.
2.2.2 Improved methods based on the trust region
The policy gradient method has the problem
that the policy is diﬃcult to update stably in the case
of unstable data because of using a neural network
as the nonlinear function approximator. In recent
years, the academic community has introduced thetrust region method into RL and enabled substantial
performance improvements in various experimental
scenarios.
Based on the conclusion of conservative pol-
icy iteration (Kakade and Langford, 2002), TRPO
computes the maximum value of total varia-tion divergence as the lea rning rate and consid-ers the relationship between total variation di-
vergence and Kullback-Leibler divergence, so as
to extend the mix policy into a general stochas-tic strategy. The genera lized advantage estimator
(Schulman et al., 2016) uses two factors as tun-
able parameters in the discounted Markov deci-
sion process (MDP) further to implement the trade-
oﬀ between bias and variance in the actor-criticalgorithm.
One trouble for TRPO is the large amount of
interaction with the environment. Wang ZY et al.
(2017) ﬁrst addressed the problem from sample inef-
ﬁciency at scale by introducing an actor-critic withexperience replay (ACER). Unlike TRPO, which re-
stricts policy updates by constraints, ACER main-
tains a sliding average that represents the past policy
and keeps policy updates from deviation from this
mean. Similarly, actor-critic using the Kronecker-factored trust region (Wu et al., 2017) optimizes both
the actor and the critic using Kronecker-factored ap-
proximate curvature with the trust region, while con-
strained policy optimization (Achiam et al., 2017)
uses a constrained MDP.
TRPO fails on complex calculations or com-
patibility with some architectures (e.g., noise or
parameter sharing). It is much simpler to imple-
ment PPO, since it uses an objective function with
a clipped probability ratio to form a pessimisticestimate based on ﬁrst-order optimization, which,
however, may result in sample ineﬃciency. Dis-
tributed PPO (Heess et al., 2017) is presented fur-
ther to explore how a rich environment can help
promote the learning of complex behaviors. Asin A3C, data collection and gradient calculation
are deployed to multiple distributed workers. This
not only improves performance and scalability but
also enables stable behaviors in a rich and varied
environment.
Combining the advantages of on-policy and oﬀ-
policy, path consistency learning (PCL) (Nachum
et al., 2017a) enhan ces exploration capabilities based
on a relationship between softmax temporal value
consistency and policy optimality under entropy reg-
ularization. Improved on PCL, Trust-PCL (Nachum
et al., 2017b) adds the discounted relative-entropy
trust region into constrained optimization. This not
only ensures the stability of optimization but also
makes full use of oﬀ-policy data to improve sampleeﬃciency.

==== Page 5 ====
1730 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
3 Model-based reinforcement learning
It is a fact that knowing the transition dynam-
icsp(st+1|st,at)makes things easier. The dynamics
are called models. Model-based methods are thealgorithms that learn the transition dynamics that
decide which next state s
t+1would be after doing
actionatin the current state st. Then methods
will ﬁgure out how to choose actions. In brief, this
kind of algorithm learns models of system dynamicsand uses optimal control to choose actions. Model-
based RL develops from the ﬁeld of optimal control.
Usually, speciﬁc problems are built by models such
as the Gaussian process and Bayesian network, and
then are solved through machine learning methods oroptimal control methods, e.g., model predictive con-
trol (MPC), linear quadratic regulator (LQR), and
linear-quadratic- Gaussian control.
Compared with model-free RL, model-based RL
learns a value function or policy in a data-eﬃcient
way and does not need continuous interaction with
the environment. However, it may suﬀer from theissue of model identiﬁcation and lead to an inac-
curate description of the real environment. In this
section, we divide the context of model-based RL
into three scenarios and systematically analyze their
advantages and disadvantages.
Table 1 shows diﬀerent algorithms that require
diﬀerent numbers of samples and diﬀerent computa-
tion time. It is a complicated question. This table
is a rough guide but we think it can be a starting
point. We list the data of these algorithms based
on the standard benchmark task “half-cheetah” in-
cluding the numbers of steps and episodes and totaltime for learning. Fig. 1 reveals the diﬀerent us-
age scenarios of model-bas ed and model-free meth-
ods. If we have a simulator and the simulation
cost is negligible compared to the training cost (it
is much cheaper to take one simulation step thanone gradient step on the model), it is a really good
choice to go with online-policy or policy-gradientNo
YesImpatient
Patient
No
YesLearn in a 
simulator?Model-free off-policy algorithms (e.g., DDPG, SAC, NAF, SQL, and TD3)Model-based algorithms (e.g., GPS and PETS)
How long 
would like 
to wait?
Is simulation 
cost negligible 
compared to 
training cost?Model-free online-policy orpolicy-gradient algorithms(e.g., TRPO, PPO, and A3C)
Fig. 1 Diﬀerent usage scenarios of model-based and
model-free methods
algorithms, such as TRPO, PPO, and A3C, be-
cause these algorithms are easier to tune and have
fewer hyper parameters and then converge more re-
liably. If we have a simulator but the simulation
is expensive, then we might opt for model-free oﬀ-policy algorithms like DDPG, NAF (Gu SX et al.,
2016), and SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017). There
are many diﬀerent choices for all policy-model-free
algorithms that can be Q-learning-based or extra-
critic-based. Finally, if we do not have a simulator,the main question is how long an acceptable wait-
ing period is. If the answer is not long (impatience),
the model-based algorithms like guided policy search
(GPS) (Levine and Koltun, 2013) and probabilistic
ensembles with trajectory sampling (PETS) (Chua
et al., 2018) are good choices. Otherwise, you can
choose the model-free oﬀ-policy algorithms that re-quire somewhat fewer assumptions and may be a
little bit less domain-speciﬁc.
3.1 Global and local models
For model-based algorithms, the ﬁrst question
is which one should be ﬁtted if the dynamics is un-known: global dynamics models or local dynamics
models? In this subsection, we introduce the related
algorithms and the comparison between these two
models.
In spite of some advantages such as cheap
computation at runtime, global model methods
often fail on numerical stability, especially in
Table 1 Comparison of diﬀerent reinforcement learning algorithms
Method ReferenceNumber of Number ofTimesteps episodes
Model-free Fully online (e.g., A3C) Wang ZY et al. (2016) 100 000 000 100 000 ∼15 d
Policy gradient (e.g., TROPO) Schulman et al. (2017) 10 000 000 10 000 ∼1.5 d
Value estimation (e.g., DDPG and SAG) Gu SX et al. (2016) 1 000 000 1000 ∼3h
Model-based E.g., PETS and GPS Chua et al. (2018) 30 000 30 ∼5m i n


==== Page 6 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1731
stochastic domains, because they iteratively collect
data using MPC and directly backpropagate them
into policy. There has been some eﬀort to overcomethis shortcoming. GPS (Levine and Koltun, 2013)
uses trajectory optimization to direct policy learn-
ing and avoid poor local optima. Levine et al. (2016)
developed GPS and a CNN architecture to reduce
real-world interaction a nd to decrease the number
of training samples. Nagabandi et al. (2018) initial-
ized a model-free learner with the help of special deep
neural network dynamics models, which can combine
sample eﬃciency of model-based approaches with the
high task-speciﬁc performance of model-free meth-
ods. The results on MuJoCo locomotion tasks show
that the algorithm has excellent sample eﬃciency,and can accelerate model-f ree learning on high-speed
benchmark tasks.
In most of the state space, the planner in global
models may seek out the region where the model
is erroneously optimistic, thus requiring a very accu-
rate model to converge on a good solution. Moreover,
it is often much more diﬃcult to obtain a proper
model than learning a policy especially when theenvironment is hard to des cribe. Therefore, more
and more attention is paid to local models with con-
straints. Local models need to ﬁgure out which con-
troller is executed to obtain the right data and how
to ensure the whole models not to diverge horribly.Here we list some typical algorithms.
A model-based iterative linear quadratic regula-
tor (iLQR) (Levine et al., 2015) is extended on GPS
and can learn a range of dynamic manipulation be-
haviors with highly general policy representations,without using known models or example demonstra-
tions. Combining the advantages of model-free RL,
Dyna-Q (Sutton and Barto, 2018) is a classical in-
tegrated architecture where a model is leveraged to
update Q-values. Probabilistic inference for particle-based policy search further allows for almost arbi-
trary models and policies by simultaneously match-
ing the performance of previous data-eﬃcient learn-
ing algorithms.
To adopt good points from both model-free
and model-based RL algorithms, Chebotar et al.
(2017) focused on time-varying linear-Gaussian poli-
cies, and integrated a model-based LQR algorithm
with a model-free path integral policy improvement
algorithm. Imagination-augmented agents (I2As)(Racanière et al., 2017) learns to interpret environ-ment models to augment model-free decisions. Com-
pared to Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Silver
et al., 2016), I2As shows improvements in data eﬃ-ciency and robustness by m itigating the problem of
model misspeciﬁcation.
3.2 Uncertainty-aware model
There is a performance gap between pure-
model-based and model-free methods. Comparedwith model-free methods that require 10 days,
model-based methods enable a complete training
process using only 10 min in real time. However,
model-free methods can achieve much better perfor-
mance, diﬀering by at most three orders of magni-
tude (Nagabandi et al., 2018). The main reason is
overﬁtting. The uncertainty-aware model is an eﬀec-tive approach for solving this problem. Based on the
representation of uncertainty, we divide it into two
distinct classes, aleatoric uncertainty (inherent sys-
tem stochasticity) and epistemic uncertainty (sub-
jective uncertainty due to limited data). There are
two main directions, estimating mode uncertainty
and using output entropy to build uncertainty-aware
models. We introduce the former in this section and
the latter in Section 4.1.1.
By learning a probabilistic dynamic model and
explicitly incorporating model uncertainty into long-
term planning, probabilistic inference for learning
control (PILCO) can cope with very little data and
facilitate learning from scratch in only a few tri-
als. Blundell et al. (2015) used variational Bayesian-learning to estimate the uncertainty in a nerual
network (Fig. 2). Compared to feedforward neu-
ral networks, this method not only mitigates the
issue of overﬁtting but also correctly assesses the
uncertainty in the training data. Similarly, relying
on developments in Bayesian deep learning, the ap-
proach in Gal et al. (2017) allows the agent to adapt
0.11.2
0.20.1
1.41.3 0.5
0.1 0.7S0(a) (b)
H1 H2 H3 I
XI??
??
?? ?
??S0
H1 H2 H3 I
XI
Fig. 2 Process to estimate the uncertainty in a neural
network: (a) each weight has a ﬁxed value provided by
classical backpropagation; (b) each weight is assigned
a distribution provided by Bayesian methods

==== Page 7 ====
1732 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
its uncertainty dynamically and observes more data
using a continuous relaxation of a dropout’s dis-
crete masks. PETS (Chua et al., 2018) combinesuncertainty-aware deep network dynamics models
with sampling-based uncertainty propagation and ﬁ-
nally brings these components together in a deep RL
framework that reaches th e asymptotic performance
of the model-free RL methods on benchmark controltasks.
There is a growing interest in combining model-
free and model-based approaches in RL to achieve
algorithms with high performance but low sample
complexity. Model-based va lue expansion (Feinberg
et al., 2018) allows imagination to ﬁxed depth to
control the uncertainty of the model. Stochastic
ensemble value expansion (Buckman et al., 2018) en-
sures that the model is used only when doing so doesnot introduce signiﬁcant errors by dynamical inter-
polation between model rollouts of various horizon
lengths.
3.3 Model for complex observations
Model-based RL has proven to be a data-
eﬃcient approach for learning control tasks, but it
is diﬃcult to use in partially observable MDPs with
complex observations such as images. This is be-
cause agents have to make a decision based on theobservation rather than the accurate state of the
environment.
Spatial autoencoder architectures (Lange et al.,
2012; Finn et al., 2016b) are presented to learn
in the latent space and autonomously learn low-
dimensional embedding of the image. However, there
is an inevitable issue that the autoencoder might notrecover the right representation and is not suitable
for model-based RL. To tackle this diﬃcult prob-
lem, embed to control (E2C) (Watter et al., 2015)
applies variational autoencoders with iLQR in a la-
tent space and turns the problem of locally optimal
control in high-dimensional nonlinear systems into a
low-dimensional latent state space.
The method that combines deep action-
conditioned video prediction models with model-
predictive control (Finn and Levine, 2017) is the ﬁrst
instance of robotic manipulation to learn directly
in the observation space. It trains the agent with
entirely unlabeled data and plans for actions that
move user-speciﬁed objects in the environment touser-deﬁned locations, both of which could help gen-eralize to new, previously unseen objects. A video
prediction model (Ebert et al., 2017) can also keep
track of objects by incorporating temporal skip con-nections and achieve signiﬁcant advance in the range
and complexity of skills entirely with self-supervised
robot learning. Since accurate forward prediction
could be very expensive (Chua et al., 2018; Naga-
bandi et al., 2018), SOLAP (Zhang et al., 2019)uses simple models, typically linear models, to pro-
vide gradient directions for local policy improvement
rather than forward prediction and planning.
4 Advanced reinforcement learning
4.1 Exploration
In many complex RL tasks, agents face the chal-
lenge of balancing exploration and exploitation wheninteracting with unknown dynamics. With the rapid
development of RL, various eﬀective and scalable ap-
proaches have been proposed to overcome the draw-
back of lacking exploration. We will introduce the
typical algorithms of each category and analyze theiradvantages and disadvantages.
4.1.1 Optimistic exploration
Since unexplored actions could bring a better
reward, it would be valuable to optimize them to
eﬀectively increase exploration. Therefore, how to
quantify the state novelty of these never-accessed
states is key to solving such complex problems.
Frequency-based distribution reward mecha-
nisms have been widely applied. These count the
frequency of occurrences of an action (state-action)
as a bonus:
r
+(s,a)=r(s,a)+B(N(s)), (1)
whereN(s)represents the frequency of occurrences
of states.B(N(s))represents a bonus that decreases
withN(s). Optimistic exploration uses r+(s,a)in-
stead of r(s,a)as reward with any model-free al-
gorithm. Diﬀerent bonuses have the same essential
feature of tending to choose the optimal or the latest
action. Apart from the upper conﬁdence bound, used
by AlphaGo as a bonus in MCTS, there are some
other bonuses such as the model-based interval esti-
mation with exploration bonus (Strehl and Littman,
2008) and Bayesian exploration bonus (Kolter andNg, 2009).

==== Page 8 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1733
The optimistic initial value method (Sutton and
Barto, 2018) achieves exploration by increasing the
initial value of the value function instead of count-ing the frequency of the state. The gradient bandit
algorithm (Sutton and Barto, 2018) uses the entropy
value rather than the value function to represent un-
certainty. The algorithm adjusts the entropy of each
action through the rewards obtained, and tends toselect an action with a larger entropy value.
In some complex high-dimensional continuous
environments (e.g., StarCraft II), it is almost im-
possible for the exact same state to appear twice.
This will cause the above approaches to be mean-
ingless because almost every state counts one. De-
rived from a density model, the notion of pseudo-
count was introduced to generalize count-based ex-
ploration bonuses for non-tabular RL agents (Belle-mare et al., 2016). Since then, a large amount of
eﬀort has been put into improving the pseudo-count
algorithm. Ostrovski et al. (2017) improved the work
by the count-based exploration with neural density
models. Hash-based count (Tang et al., 2017) mapsstates to hash codes and count states’ occurrences
with a hash table. By exemplar model exploration
(Fu et al., 2017a), classiﬁers are trained to discrimi-
nate each visited state against all others and the new
state is implicitly compared to the old state.
4.1.2 Posterior sampling exploration
Exploring with random actions (e.g., epsilon-
greedy) suﬀers from oscillating back and forth. It
might not go to a coherent or interesting place,while exploring with random Q-functions can com-
mit to a randomized but internally consistent strat-
egy for an entire episode. Inspired by this, posterior
sampling algorithms are proposed for more targeted
exploration.
The Thompson sampling approach (Chapelle
and Li, 2011) samples the Q-value of each action from
the prior distribution. Then, the reward probability
of each action is consider ed as a Beta distribution,
which helps provide guidance on tweaking the pos-
terior and achieve a smaller regret. Bootstrapped
DQN (Osband et al., 2016) combines deep explo-
ration with deep neural networks to overcome the
shortcoming of incompatibility with nonlinearly pa-rameterized value functions. Fig. 3 shows the archi-
tecture of bootstrapped DQN.
Bootstrapped DQN trains bootstrap data onHead 1 Head 2 ... Head k
Shared network
Frame
Fig. 3 Architecture of bootstrapped DQN
Head represents Q-function. The shared network learns a
joint feature representation from all data. Frame is a replay
buﬀer storing samples
multiple shunt networks to randomize diﬀerent value
functions. This way of training contributes to a bal-ance between learning from noise and exploring com-
plex state/action spaces. Through this distributed
deep exploration, bootstrapped DQN can fully guar-
antee the exploration of various strategies, produce
diverse samples, and better generalize to the un-known state space.
4.1.3 Information gain exploration
In some complex environments, sampling one
action can help the agent assess other actions. Based
on this, for information gain exploration, the ad-
vantage of information structures is fully considered,
which helps the agent learn more eﬃciently in diﬃ-
cult tasks.
Information-directed sampling (Russo and Roy,
2014) measures the mutual information between
the true optimal action and the next observation,
and then selects an action to quantify the amount
learned. Each selected action is sampled in a manner
that the ratio between expected single-period regret
and the measure of information gain is minimized,
which will also balance exploration and exploitationto some extent.
However, it is impossible to construct a shaped
reward function for the reason that the rewards of
the environment are extremely sparse or missing al-
together in many real-world scenarios. Comparedto the aforementioned exploration approaches, vari-
ational information maximizing exploration (VIME)
(Houthooft et al., 2017) approximates the probabil-
ity of the dynamic model and greatly reduces the
reliance on rewards using variational inference in
Bayesian neural networks. The inner exploration
mechanism where the reward function is modiﬁed bythe information gain motivates the agent to explore

==== Page 9 ====
1734 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
the unknown domain and enables integration with
other methods such as TRPO.
Similar to the idea of VIME, curiosity-driven
learning (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019)
generates an intrinsic reward signal based on how
hard it is for the agent to predict the consequencesof its own actions (i.e., predict the next state given
the current state and the executed action). The pre-
diction error of the forward dynamics model is used
as an intrinsic reward to encourage the agent’s cu-
riosity. The experiments reveal that curiosity-drivenlearning could achieve signiﬁcant performance across
a variety of continuous co ntrol tasks even in the en-
vironment with very sparse rewards.
4.2 Inverse RL
Usually we learn a transition model assuming
that the reward model is already known. However,
there will be a huge impact on performance once the
reward function is not designed properly. InverseRL (IRL) (Ng and Russell, 2000) is introduced to
learn a proper reward function from the observed
expert examples. However, there are some chal-
lenges in IRL: (1) The problem is under-deﬁned and
lacks prior knowledge; (2) It is diﬃcult to evaluatea learned reward; (3) Demonstrations may not be
precisely optimal. In the following, we discuss the
solutions based on maximum margin and maximum
entropy.
4.2.1 IRL based on maximum margin
Apprenticeship learning (Abbeel and Ng, 2004)
uses the maximum marginal method to ﬁnd the cur-
rent reward function from an expert example. There
is a guarantee that the optimal policy obtained un-
der the reward function is near the expert example
policy.
Maximum margin planning (MMP) (Ratliﬀ
et al., 2006) attempts to automate the mapping from
perception features to cost s by structured maximum-
margin classiﬁcation. In spite of some improvements
with tricks (e.g., support vector machines), MMP
still has troubles in calculation when iteratively solv-
ing MDP. To handle this issue, IRL through struc-
tured classiﬁcation (Klein et al., 2012) constrains
each action at each state instead of constraining the
solution of an MDP and uses the so-called featureexpectation of the expert as the parameterization ofthe score function of a multiclass classiﬁer.
Further, neural inverse RL (NIRL) (Xia and
El Kamel, 2016) focuses on IRL with large-scale
high-dimensional state spaces. With the help of a
neural network, NIRL can not only generalize the
expert’s behaviors into unvisited regions of the state
space but also express an explicit policy representa-
tion easily even for the stochastic expert policy.
In all, methods based on maximum margins
tend to be ambiguous. For instance, many diﬀer-
ent reward functions lead to the same expert policy.
In this case, the reward function learned often has
a random preference. The challenges are summa-rized as follows: (1) Maximizing the margin is a bit
arbitrary; (2) There is no clear model of expert sub-
optimality; (3) Deep planning is not applicable for
the messy constrained optimization problem.
4.2.2 IRL based on maximum entropy
The method of maximum entropy can avoid
ambiguity problems because its probability is dis-tributed without any assumption about the distri-
bution of any other location information except con-
straints. It may cause ambiguity when choosing
a distribution over decisions under the constraint
of matching the reward value of the demonstratedbehavior. Maximum entropy IRL (MaxEnt IRL)
(Ziebart et al., 2008) is proposed to solve the problem
by employing the principle of maximum entropy.
Although MaxEnt IRL solves the ambiguity
problem, it does not adapt to large and continu-
ous states and action spaces or meet the require-ments for eﬀective learning under unknown dynam-
ics. Methods based on maximum entropy are also
diﬃcult to apply in practical applications because:
(1) The learning of the reward function requires arti-
ﬁcially selected features (th e choice of features is very
diﬃcult for many practical problems); (2) Many sub-
cycles of IRL contain forward RL, which is a diﬃcult
problem. To address the former challenge, Ziebart
et al. (2008) exploited the representational capac-
ity of neural networks to approximate complex andnonlinear reward functions. To address the latter
challenge, guided cost learning (Finn et al., 2016a)
further formulates an eﬃcient sample-based approx-
imation instead of forward RL.
Generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL) (Ho and Ermon, 2016) maps the rewardfunction target in IRL in the context of the

==== Page 10 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1735
generative adversarial network (GAN). The strategy
model of GAIL acts as a production model in
GAN, generating actions with state as the input.The reward function model of GAIL can serve
as a discriminant model for discriminating the
extent to which actions appr oximate expert actions.
The experimental results show that GAIL could
achieve signiﬁcant performance in imitating complexbehaviors in large, high-dimensional environments.
Adversarial inverse reinfo rcement learning (AIRL)
(Fu et al., 2017b) provides simultaneous learning of
the value function and reward function. In contrast
to GAIL, AIRL makes adequate use of the eﬃcient
adversarial formulation and can also recover a
generalizable and portable reward function.
4.3 Transfer RL
A fundamental problem in artiﬁcial intelligence
is that it cannot learn as eﬃciently as a human.
Many RL algorithms demonstrate superhuman per-
formance but require millions of training samples.
Many transfer RL algorithms are presented moti-vated by an intuition that useful knowledge might
be acquired based on prior tasks to solve a new task.
This kind of algorithm aims to rapidly learn an opti-
mal policy in a new environment using only a small
amount of available data.
We divide transfer RL into three categories ac-
cording to the choice of the source domain: (1) for-
ward transfer that trains on one task and transfersto a new task; (2) multi-task transfer that trains on
many tasks and transfers to a new task; (3) meta-RL
that learns to learn from many tasks.
4.3.1 Forward transfer
The simplest method of forward transfer is just
to try with the best hope (Levine et al., 2016). Poli-cies trained for one set of circumstances might just
work and could deal with new tasks successfully with
good luck because sometim es there is enough vari-
ability during training to generalize.
Finetuning remains one of the most popular
choices for transfer learning with neural networks.
First, a model is pretrained on a source domain where
data is often abundant. Second, the output layers of
the model are adapted to the target domain. Finally,
the network is ﬁnetuned via backpropagation. Forexample, in an approach of pre-training for diversity(Haarnoja et al., 2017), it learns all the possible ways
of a given task to achieve a particular policy. This
policy can serve as a good initialization for ﬁnetuningto a more speciﬁc behavior (i.e., ﬁrst learn all the
ways that a robot could move forward, and then use
this as an initialization to learn separate running and
bounding skills).
Unfortunately, the ﬁnetuning approach often re-
sults in overﬁtting when ﬁnetuning with a little bit
of experience in large deep networks. Progressive
neural networks (Rusu et al., 2016b) mitigate overﬁt-
ting and solve expressivity problems by construction.
This framework retains a pool of pre-trained models
throughout the training process and learns lateral
connections from these to ext ract useful features for
the new task. Fig. 4 shows t he architecture of pro-
gressive neural networks. The gray box labeled “a”
indicates the adapters, which keep the hidden layer
activation values of the front row consistent with the
original input dimensions.
Output2
h2'
h1'Output3
h2''
h1''Output1
h2
h1
Inputaa
aa
Fig. 4 A simple progressive neural network
It is a fact that agents will transfer better if they
see more diversity during the training. To achieve
better performance, the methods make the networkunable to distinguish observations from the source
domain and target domain by modifying the source
domain and using a modest amount of target domain
data for transfer. The ensemble policy optimization
algorithm (Rajeswaran et al., 2017) can adapt theprobability over source domains in the ensemble us-
ing the data from the target domain and randomizing
physical parameters of simulated source domains.
The approach can help learn more robust policies
and generalize to a broad range of possible target
domains. For perception-b ased tasks, the methods
that prepare for the unknown (Yu WH et al., 2017;Peng et al., 2018b) use recurrent neural networks

==== Page 11 ====
1736 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
(RNN) to output unknown parameters in the true
environment (such as dict ionary/mass) to precom-
pute many possible situations that the robot mightencounter when acting in the real world to reduce
the interaction with the real world.
4.3.2 Multi-task transfer
Typical applications of RL focus more on mas-
tery than on one-shot learning and require a sub-
stantial number of training episodes. Multi-task
transfer provides a way to address these challenges
and is closer to what people do—build a lifetime of
experience.
One of the simplest solutions is to learn a model
that can simultaneously perform many tasks. Onlinedynamics adaptation (Fu et al., 2016) combines prior
knowledge from previous tasks with online adapta-
tion of the dynamics model. This model-based ap-
proach not only decreases the demand for training
data using the model, but also performs one-shot
learning of new tasks using the robot’s experience
on other tasks, without requiring explicit domainknowledge or demonstrations be provided by the
designer.
However, sometimes learning a model can be
very diﬃcult. Model-free approaches have been pro-
posed to combine the policies after training each
MDP separately (Parisotto et al., 2016; Rusu et al.,
2016a). This kind of algorithm exploits DQN andmodel compression techniques to train a single pol-
icy network and learns how to act in a set of distinct
tasks using the guidance of several expert teachers.
Architectures with reus able components can
be designed to make full use of the characteris-
tics of tasks if they have shared parts and distinct
parts. Since the above kinds of methods build a sin-gle network for all tasks, modular policies (Devin
et al., 2017) can achieve better performance by de-
composing neural network policies into task- and
robot-speciﬁc modules. The algorithm trains the
same task-speciﬁc compon ent across all robots and
the same robot-speciﬁc component across all tasks.
Then the robot- and task-speciﬁc modules will be
mixed and matched to execute new tasks. Fig. 5
shows the process of modular policies. This special
architecture allows the agent to share task informa-
tion (such as perception) between robots and share
robot information (such as dynamics and kinemat-ics) between tasks.
Robot1 Robot2
Task1
Task2
Fig. 5 Process of modular policies
After training robot1 with task1 and task2 and training
robot2 with task1, robot2 can execute new task2 when testing
by mixing the robot- and task-speciﬁc components
4.3.3 Meta-RL
Meta-RL oﬀers a feasible framework to address
few-shot learning in a very complicated environment
that demands strategic and tactical thinking. Let
Mi=(S,A,T i,Ri)represent an MDP with state
spaceS, action space A, transition probability dis-
tribution Ti, and reward function Ri.I n m e t a - R L ,
we consider a family of MDPs M={Mi}N
i=1,w h i c h
comprise a task distribution τi∼p(T)such that
each MDP shares the stat istical regularity of p(T).
Meta-RL aims to improve the learning eﬃciency for
novel subsequent tasks by learning a meta-item from
the family of MDPs such as policy πθ,m o d e l Tθ,
and the reward function. We introduce two kinds
of most representative meta-RL algorithms and then
list some main advanced improvements.
Almost at the same time, Duan et al. (2017) and
Wang JX et al. (2017) deﬁned a new concept, deep
meta-RL, and put forward recurrent models called
RL2, which are encoded in the weights of the RNN
and learned slowly through a general-purpose RLalgorithm. The main idea of RL
2is training neu-
ral networks with all historical trajectories (state,
action, and reward) and automatically determining
the information at the task level (meta level). This
design can signiﬁcantly speed up the training pro-cess of the new task and is thought as one of the
most basic changes from RL to meta-RL. Fig. 6 il-
lustrates the process of interaction between an agent
and the environment. Further, a simple neural at-
tentive learner (SNAIL) (Mishra et al., 2018) is pro-
posed to solve the problem of information loss in
the above original models. To aggregate informa-tion from experience and pinpoint speciﬁc pieces of

==== Page 12 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1737
h0 h1 h2 h3 h4
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1a0
r0, d0a1
r1, d1a0
Episode2 Episode1
MDP1Agent
r0, d0
Fig. 6 Process of interaction between an agent and
the environment
For each episode in each MDP, a fresh S0 is drawn from the
initial state distribution speciﬁc to the corresponding MDP.Agent is trained with historical trajectories. At the end of
an episode, the hidden state of the policy is preserved to the
next episode, but not preserved between trials
information, SNAIL adjusts the architecture of RNN
with LSTM and uses a novel combination of inter-
leaved one-dimensional convolutions and soft atten-
tion. E-RL2(Stadie et al., 2018) adds an indicator
to the standard sum of discounted returns, returning
one if the episode helps account for the impact of thisinitial sampling distribution and 0 otherwise. Ex-
periments show that this encourages the RNN to ac-
count for the impact of casting a wider sampling dis-
tribution on the ﬁnal meta-reward. ReBAL (Naga-
bandi et al., 2019) uses a recurrent model to learn
the transition model instead of the action policy to
perform well on the simulated continuous controltasks.
Recurrent models have a variety of choices of
design in the architecture and are usually generaland expressive. However, they often fail in deal-
ing with complex tasks and demand complex mod-
els and impractical data. Another typical meta-RL
approach is model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML)
(Finn et al., 2017a). To overcome the drawbacks of
recurrent models, MAML uses a ﬁxed optimizer and
learns a set of base parameters that can be adaptedto minimize any task loss by a few steps of gradient
descent.
MAML can be directly applied to any learn-
ing problem and model that is trained with a gradi-
ent descent procedure because of the ﬁxed optimizer.
Since MAML is simple but powerful, it attracts great
interest among researchers. Improving exploration is
an attractive perspective. E-MAML (Stadie et al.,
2018) highlights the importance of correctly diﬀer-
entiating through sampling distributions in meta-RL. Model agnostic exploration with structurednoise (MAESN) (Gupta et al., 2018) injects struc-
tured stochasticity into MAML to acquire a latent
exploration space. Diﬀerent from MAESN that addsextra parameters as the em bedding space, fast con-
text adaptation via meta-learning (CAVIA) (Zint-
graf et al., 2019) uses the same network to learn the
embedding during a backward pass and make predic-
tions during a forward pass. Combined with inverseRL, SMILe (Ghasemipour et al., 2019) is the ﬁrst ef-
ﬁcient method for meta-IRL that scales to the func-
tion approximator setting. To tackle the problem
of eﬃcient oﬀ-policy meta-RL, there are also some
novel algorithms. GrBAl (Nagabandi et al., 2019)
combines MAML with model-based algorithms (e.g.,
MPC) to learn the transition model. Probabilisticembeddings for actor-critic RL (PEARL) (Rakelly
et al., 2019) integrates online inference of proba-
bilistic context variables with existing oﬀ-policy RL
algorithms.
Apart from the improvement based on the
framework of MAML, there are some other novel ap-
proaches. The meta-MDP approach to exploration
(Garcia and Thomas, 2019) models the problem of
searching for an optimal exploration policy as an
MDP, and separates the policies into an explorationpolicy and an exploitation policy to achieve lifelong
learning.
In all, deep meta-RL is a promising research di-
rection and is being researched using a variety of
meta-angles and numerous exploration methods toachieve better performan ce of both meta-training
and adaptation eﬃciency. Fig. 7 provides a rep-
resentation of relationships between improved deep
meta-RL algorithms.
Policy
gradientRecurrent
model
MAML
OthersRL22018: E-RL2 (NIPS),
          SNAIL (ICLR)2019: ReBAL (ICLR)
2018: Evolutionary
          strategies (NIPS),          Cognitive science          ( Nat Neurosci )
2019: meta-MDP (AAMAS)2018: E-MAML (NIPS),
          MAESN (NIPS)2019: GrBAL (ICLR),          SMILe (NIPS),          PEARL (ICLR)2020: CAVUA (ICML)
Meta-RL
Fig. 7 Relationship between deep meta-RL
algorithms

==== Page 13 ====
1738 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
5 Applications
In the early stages of RL development, DQN was
used mainly in various two-dimensional video games
such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2016; Schaul et al.,2016; Hessel et al., 2018; Horgan et al., 2018). With
AlphaGo successfully defeating the world champion
of chess using deep neural networks and MCTS, there
has been increasing interest in RL to improve the per-
formance in dealing with complex tasks in diﬀerent
ﬁelds in recent years.
In the ﬁeld of games, StarCraft II (Vinyals et al.,
2017) oﬀers a challenging multi-agent environment
with multiple players interacting to explore RL al-
gorithms and architectures. Deep meta-RL can also
be leveraged in games to do few-shot learning, such
as by imitating human Atari game play from a sin-
gle recorded action sequence (Pohlen et al., 2018) or
online videos (Aytar et al., 2018).
Deep RL has achieved signiﬁcant success in
various ﬁelds. We outline current representative
RL applications including robotics, natural language
processing (NLP), and computer systems in the
following.
5.1 Robotics
Robotics is a classic area for RL. RL can im-
plement behavioral control of complex robots in the
simulation environment, thus enabling realistic re-sponses to perturbations and environmental varia-
tion. Apart from Atari and simple agents in Mu-
joco (e.g., half-cheetah, ant, and spider), DeepMimic
(Peng et al., 2018a) further develops challenging mul-
tiskilled agents including multiple characters (e.g.,
human, Atlas robot, bipedal dinosaur, and dragon)
and a large variety of skills (e.g., locomotion, acro-batics, and martial arts).
In addition, RL has obtained numerous research
results in robot control tasks in real situations. A
range of real-world tasks are contact-rich and require
close coordination between vision and control, suchas stacking tight-ﬁtting Lego blocks and screwing
bottle caps onto a bottle. The improvements (Levine
et al., 2015) control manipulation to complete these
tasks by reducing the sample count and automating
parameter selection in GPS. An RNN with LSTM
(Rahmatizadeh et al., 2016) helps the controller learn
from virtual demonstrations and successfully per-forms the manipulation tasks on a physical robot.By closed-loop vision-based control (Kalashnikov
et al., 2018), re-grasping strategies are automatically
learned, probing an object and repositioning objectsto ﬁnd the most eﬀective grasps and perform other
non-prehensile pre-grasp manipulations.
However, training data of real robots is scarce
for real scenarios. The method which combines
knowledge from previous tasks with online adapta-
tion of the dynamics model (Fu et al., 2016) helpssolve a variety of complex robotic manipulation tasks
in a single attempt. Multiple robots (Gu SX et al.,
2017a; Yahya et al., 2017) learn collaboratively to
sample and train in parallel. Manipulating the
source domain (Peng et al., 2018b) narrows the gapbetween simulation and real physical systems. Al-
Nima et al. (2019) produced suitable road tracking
actions based on RL by collecting input states from
forward car facing views.
Based on transfer learning (Devin et al., 2017),
robots can share task-speciﬁc modules across robotsand robot-speciﬁc modules across all tasks. The im-
proved methods of meta-RL (Finn et al., 2017b; Yu
TH et al., 2018) enable the agents to learn rapidly
from little data in new environments. Learning to
adapt to dynamic real-world environments (Naga-bandi et al., 2019) further alleviates the problem of
missing training data and has better generalization
ability in dealing with robotic manipulation tasks.
5.2 Natural language processing
RL methods have broad application prospects
in the domain of NLP and have been successfully
applied in the ﬁelds of neural machine translation
(NMT), dialog systems, and speech generation.
NMT systems generally rely on aligned parallel
training corpora, but such parallel data is costly to
collect in practice. This co ntradiction may result
in heavy limitation in scale and constrain related
research and applications. Dual learning for machine
translation (He et al., 2016) tackles the data hunger
issue in NMT by training translation models from
unlabeled data through RL (e.g., PG). Using thismechanism, the monolingual data can play a similar
role to the parallel bilingual data, and signiﬁcantly
reduces the requirement on parallel bilingual data
during the training process.
Beneﬁtting from the development of transfer
learning and deep meta-RL, universal NMT (GuJT et al., 2018a) uses a transfer-learning approach

==== Page 14 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1739
to share lexical and sentence representations across
multiple source languages into one target language.
This enables the low-resource language to use thelexical and sentence representations of the higher re-
source languages. Further, Gu JT et al. (2018b) ﬁrst
extended a deep meta-RL algorithm (e.g., MAML)
into low-resource NMT. The model can learn to
adapt to low-resource languages based on multilin-gual high-resource language tasks. The results show
that the method signiﬁcantly outperforms the prior
multilingual approaches and enables the training of
a competitive NMT system with only a fraction of
training examples.
The task of chatbots in dialogue systems is
to mimic human-human interactions with extended
conversations (Shum et al., 2018). A modiﬁed ver-sion of the episodic REINFORCE algorithm (Dhin-
gra et al., 2017) explores and learns the policy and
the posterior probability over the knowledge base
entries for correct retrievals to select dialogue acts.
Moreover, although many t ext-to-speech (TTS) sys-
tems (Ping et al., 2018; Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018)
have produced high-quality samples for speakerspresent in the training set, generalizing to new speak-
ers given only a few seconds of audio remains a chal-
lenge. An adaptive TTS approach (Chen YT et al.,
2019) is presented based on MAML to highly re-
store the speaker’s voice in new scenes using veryfew speech samples. Similarly, the DeepVoice model
(Ping et al., 2018) is improved by predicting the em-
bedding with an encoding network and ﬁtting the
embedding based on a small amount of adaptation
data (Arik et al., 2018).
5.3 Computer systems
Computer systems present many challenging
problems for RL, including time-varying state or ac-
tion spaces (e.g., dynamically varying number of jobs
and machines in a computer cluster), structured data
sources (e.g., graphs to represent data ﬂow of jobsor a network’s topology), and highly stochastic en-
vironments (e.g., random time-varying workloads).
Here, we summarize some typical RL methods used
in computer systems and show that RL could provide
signiﬁcant real-world beneﬁts in this domain.
Tackling multi-resource cluster scheduling with
a PG algorithm (Mao et al., 2016) optimizes various
objectives like average job slowdown or completiontime in an online manner with dynamic job arrivals,and validates the approach via simulation. Chen L
et al. (2018) proposed a two-level system called “au-
tomatic traﬃc optimization (AuTO)” to solve thescalability problem in data center traﬃc. One level
is the peripheral system and the other is the cen-
tral system. They leverage the long-tail distribution,
which is a feature of data center traﬃc. The central
system uses a DDPG algorithm to help the periph-eral system choose the optimal parameters. This
allows AuTO to solve the scalability problem of traf-
ﬁc optimization in data centers and achieve superior
performance.
Motivated by prior applications, a scalable RL
model with the graph embedding technique (Maoet al., 2019a) is trained by the PG algorithm to
deal with the issue of continuous stochastic job ar-
rivals. The model could help learn workload-speciﬁc
scheduling algorithms without any human instruc-
tion beyond a high-level objective (e.g., minimiz-
ing average job completion time). Further, inspired
by much potential for RL to improve the perfor-mance, an open extensible platform Park (Mao et al.,
2019b) deﬁnes the MDP formulation (e.g., state, ac-
tion space, and reward function). Park connects to a
suite of real-world computer systems and lowers the
barrier of entry for machine learning researchers toinnovate based on deep RL in computer systems.
6 Challenges and the future
RL is one of the closest things that look anything
like AGI. However, there are still numerous problems
and many of them are fundamentally diﬃcult:
1. Ineﬃcient sampleAs listed in Table 1, an extremely large number
of training samples are required to allow the modelto reach a certain level. A lot of time is taken for
an Atari game that most humans pick up within a
few minutes. Rainbow DQN (Section 2.1.2) takes
long time to train the model and needs about 83 h of
play experience to exceed the human level. Model-based RL is computationally expensive and has its
own planning fallacy: learning a good policy usually
needs more samples and the practical level of sample
eﬃciency is usually much lower than the expected
result. Even though deep meta-RL algorithms (Sec-
tion 4.3.3) achieve few-shot learning on a new task,
they need to train with a lot of data to ﬁnd a goodgeneralization model.

==== Page 15 ====
1740 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
2. A demanding reward function
RL assumes the existence of a reward function,
which must be deﬁned exactly to ensure that the
agent can do the right thing all the time. However,
reward function design is often diﬃcult: (1) A suit-
able prior is needed; (2) Perfect knowledge of all
object states is required; (3) A good deﬁnition of
the problem is necessary. Moreover, sometimes too
much eﬀort on the reward function may introducenew biases. Even given a good reward, it is hard
to escape from local optima. The several mentioned
intuitively pleasing ways of exploration (Section 4.1)
mitigate the problem to some extent. However, as
far as we know, none of them could work consistentlyacross all environments. In addition, IRL and imita-
tion learning do not need a reward function, but their
performances are usually limited and unsatisfactory.
3. Overﬁtting and instabilityRarely can an RL agent ﬁt in multiple environ-
ments. Even for deep meta-RL, there is no guarantee
that the agent can perform well on new tasks. RL is
unstable and very sensitive to the initialization and
dynamics of the training process. Each category of
algorithms has its own chllenges in this regard. For
example, ﬁtted Q (or value) methods with deep net-
work function estimators are typically not contrac-tive, hence no guarantee of convergence. In addition,
there are many parameters for stability such as tar-
get network delay, replay buﬀer size, and clipping.
Policy gradient methods have a very high variance
gradient estimator. Although there have been manymethods that try to reduce the variance, most also
introduce hyper parameters, so they require many
samples and complex baseline. Model-based RL al-
gorithms have to choose their model class and a ﬁt-
ting method. The optimization policy is nontrivialdue to backpropagation through time. In contrast,
the diﬀerent hyper parameters in supervised learn-
ing will show more or fewer changes in training. Bad
luck in RL may mean that the curve of the model will
not change for a long time or that the RL methodsdo not work at all. What is worse, even if all the
hyper parameters and the random seeds are known,
the performance will be very diﬀerent as long as the
implementation is slightly diﬀerent.
We believe that there are great prospects for RL
and list some plausible directions for the future:
1. Algorithms with favorable improvement and
convergence are needed. Although TRPO gives akind of guaranteed improvement under assumptions,
it probably does not hold in the real world. Al-
though adjusting parameters adaptively (Gu SXet al., 2017b) requires a large number of samples
to provide statistical guarantees, it may be a good
starting point.
2. Artiﬁcially add some supervision signals. In
the case of sparse rewards, we can introduce an in-
trinsic reward or add some auxiliary tasks to increase
the exploration ability.
3. IRL can automatically learn the reward func-
tion, and imitation learning does not have high re-
quirements for reward functions. Besides, unsuper-
vised or weakly supervised learning of diverse be-haviors will avoid rigid supervision like the reward
function. These two directions could make up for
the disadvantages of RL.
4. Generalize from multi-task learning. Deep
meta-RL is increasingly recognized as one of the
most likely ways to implement AGI. Recent stud-
ies have shown that the performance of agents can
be improved by increasing the exploration ability of
meta-RL. Combining meta-RL with IRL is also anattractive direction.
7 Summary
Over the past few years, deep RL has become in-
creasingly powerful and important in handling com-
plex problems. In this survey, we conduct a com-prehensive review of deep RL algorithms. First, we
introduce the model-free and model-based deep RL
algorithms to determine th e characteristics of RL.
Then we summarize several recent advances and di-
vide them into three categories: exploration meth-
ods, inverse RL, and transfer RL. We give a detailed
review for each category. In terms of applications,we discuss deep RL in robotics, NLP, and computer
systems. Finally, we suggest some open challenges
that indicate future research directions for deep RL.
Contributors
Hao-nan WANG designed the research. Ning LIU and
Yi-yun ZHANG collected the literature. Hao-nan WANG
drafted the manuscript. Ning LIU, Da-wei FENG, and Feng
HUANG helped organize the manuscript. Hao-nan WANG
and Ning LIU revised the manuscript. Hao-nan WANG
ﬁnalized the paper under the guidance of Dong-sheng LI andYi-ming ZHANG.

==== Page 16 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1741
Compliance with ethics guidelines
Hao-nan WANG, Ning LIU, Yi-yun ZHANG, Da-wei
FENG, Feng HUANG, Dong-sheng LI, and Yi-ming ZHANGdeclare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
References
Abbeel P, Ng AY, 2004. Apprenticeship learning via inverse
reinforcement learning. Proc 21stInt Conf on Machine
Learning, p.1-8.https://doi.org/10.1145/1015330.1015430
Achiam J, Held D, Tamar A, et al., 2017. Constrained policy
optimization. Proc 34
thInt Conf on Machine Learning,
p.22-31.
Al-Nima RRO, Han TT, Chen TL, 2019. Road tracking
using deep reinforcement learning for self-driving car
applications. Int Conf on Computer Recognition Sys-
tems, p.106-116.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19738-4_12
Arik SO, Chen JT, Peng KN, et al., 2018. Neural voice
cloning with a few samples. Proc 32
ndNeural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, p.10019-10029.
Aytar Y, Pfaﬀ T, Budden D, et al., 2018. Playing hard
exploration games by watching YouTube. Proc 32nd
Neural Information Processing Systems, p.2930-2941.
Bellemare MG, Naddaf Y, Veness J, et al., 2013. The
Arcade learning environment: an evaluation platformfor general agents. JA r t i fI n t e l lR e s , 47:253-279.
https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.3912
Bellemare MG, Srinivasan S, Ostrovski G, et al., 2016.
Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motiva-tion. Proc 30
thNeural Information Processing Systems,
p.1471-1479.
Bellemare MG, Dabney W, Munos R, 2017. A distributional
perspective on reinforcement learning. Proc 34thInt
Conf on Machine Learning, p.449-458.
Blundell C, Cornebise J, Kavukcuoglu K, et al., 2015. Weight
uncertainty in neural networks. Proc 32ndInt Conf on
Machine Learning, p.1613-1622.
Botvinick M, Ritter S, Wang JX, et al., 2019. Reinforcement
learning, fast and slow. Trends Cogn Sci , 23(5):408-422.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.006
Buckman J, Hafner D, Tucker G, et al., 2018. Sample-eﬃcient
reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble valueexpansion. Proc 32
ndNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.8224-8234.
Burda Y, Edwards H, Pathak D, et al., 2019. Large-scale
study of curiosity-driven learning.https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04355
Chapelle O, Li LH, 2011. An empirical evaluation of Thomp-
son sampling. Proc 24
thNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.2249-2257.
Chebotar Y, Hausman K, Zhang M, et al., 2017. Combin-
ing model-based and model-free updates for trajectory-
centric reinforcement learning. Proc 34thInt Conf on
Machine Learning, p.703-711.
Chen L, Lingys J, Chen K, et al., 2018. AuTO: scaling deep
reinforcement learning for datacenter-scale automatic
traﬃc optimization. Proc Conf of the ACM Special
Interest Group on Data Communication, p.191-205.https://doi.org/10.1145/3230543.3230551Chen YT, Assael Y, Shillingford B, et al., 2 019. Sample
eﬃcient adaptive text-to-speech.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10460
Chua K, Calandra R, McAllister R, et al., 2018. Deep re-
inforcement learning in a handful of trials using proba-bilistic dynamics models. Proc 32
ndNeural Information
Processing Systems, p.4754-4765.
Devin C, Gupta A, Darrell T, et al., 2017. Learning modular
neural network policies for multi-task and multi-robottransfer. Proc IEEE Int Conf on Robotics and Au-
tomation, p.2169-2176.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989250
Dhingra B, Li LH, Li XJ, et al., 2017. Towards end-to-end re-
inforcement learning of dialogue agents for information
access. Proc 55
thAnnual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, p.484-495.https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1045
Duan Y, Schulman J, Chen X, et al., 2017. RL
2:f a s t
reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.02779
Ebert F, Finn C, Lee AX, et al., 2017. Self-supervised
visual planning with temporal skip connections. Proc1
stAnnual Conf on Robot Learning, p.344-356.
Feinberg V, Wan A, Stoica I, et al., 2018. Model-based
value estimation for eﬃcient model-free reinforcementlearning.https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00101
Finn C, Levine S, 2017. Deep visual foresight for planning
robot motion. Proc IEEE Int Conf on Robotics andAutomation, p.2786-2793.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989324
Finn C, Levine S, Abbeel P, 2016a. Guided cost learning:
deep inverse optimal control via policy optimization.Proc 33
rdInt Conf on Machine Learning, p.49-58.
Finn C, Tan XY, Duan Y, et al., 2016b. Deep spatial
autoencoders for visuomotor learning. Proc IEEE Int
Conf on Robotics and Automation, p.512-519.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487173
Finn C, Abbeel P, Levine S, 2017a. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. Proc
34
thInt Conf on Machine Learning, p.1126-1135.
Finn C, Yu T, Zhang T, et al., 2017b. One-shot visual
imitation learning via meta-learning. Proc 1stConf on
Robot Learning, p.357-368.
Fortunato M, Azar MG, Piot B, et al., 2019. Noisy networks
for exploration.https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.10295
Fu J, Levine S, Abbeel P, 2016. One-shot learning of ma-
nipulation skills with online dynamics adaptation andneural network priors. Proc IEEE/RSJ Int Conf onIntelligent Robots and Systems, p.4 019-4026.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2016.7759592
Fu J, Co-Reyes JD, Levine S, 2017a. EX
2: exploration with
exemplar models for deep reinforcement learning. Proc30
thNeural Information Processing Systems, p.2577-
2587.
Fu J, Luo K, Levine S, 2017b. Learning robust rewards with
adversarial inverse reinforcement learning.https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.11248
Fujimoto S, Hoof H, Meger D, 2018. Addressing function
approximation error in actor-critic methods. Proc 35
th
Int Conf on Machine Learning, p.1587-1596.

==== Page 17 ====
1742 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
Gal Y, Hron J, Kendall A, 2017. Concrete dropout. Proc
30thNeural Information Processing Systems, p.3581-
3590.
Garcia FM, Thomas PS, 2019. A meta-MDP approach to
exploration for lifelong reinforcement learning. Proc32
ndNeural Information Processing Systems, p.5691-
5700.
Ghasemipour SKS, Gu SX, Zemel R, 2019. SMILe: scalable
meta inverse reinforcement learning through context-conditional policies. Proc 32
ndNeural Information
Processing Systems, p.7879-7889.
Gu JT, Hassan H, Devlin J, et al., 2018a. Universal neu-
ral machine translation for extremely low resource lan-guages. Proc 16
thConf of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, p.344-354.https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1032
Gu JT, Wang Y, Chen Y, et al., 2018b. Meta-learning for
low-resource neural machine translation. Proc Conf
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,p.3622-3631.https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D18-1398
Gu SX, Lillicrap T, Sutskever I, et al., 2016. Continuous
deep Q-learning with model-based acceleration. Proc
33
rdInt Conf on Machine Learning, p.2829-2838.
Gu SX, Holly E, Lillicrap T, et al., 2017a. Deep reinforcement
learning for robotic manipulation with asynchronous oﬀ-
policy updates. Proc IEEE Int Conf on Robotics and
Automation, p.3389-3396.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989385
Gu SX, Lillicrap T, Ghahramani Z, et al., 2017b. Q-Prop:
sample-eﬃcient policy gradient with an oﬀ-policy critic.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.02247
Gupta A, Mendonca R, Liu YX, et al., 2018. Meta-
reinforcement learning of structured exploration strate-
gies. Proc 32
ndNeural Information Processing Systems,
p.5302-5311.
Haarnoja T, Tang HR, Abbeel P, et al., 2017. Reinforcement
learning with deep energy-based policies. Proc 34thInt
Conf on Machine Learning, p.1352-1361.
Haarnoja T, Zhou A, Abbeel P, et al., 2018. Soft actor-
critic: oﬀ-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcementlearning with a stochastic actor. Proc 35
thInt Conf on
Machine Learning, p.1861-1870.
Hausknecht M, Stone P, 2017. Deep recurrent Q-learning for
partially observable MDPs.https://arxiv.org/abs/1507.06527
He D, Xia YC, Qin T, et al., 2016. Dual learning for machine
translation. Proc 30
thNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.820-828.
Heess N, Sriram S, Lemmon J, et al., 2017. Emergence of
locomotion behaviours in rich environments.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02286
Hessel M, Modayil J, van Hasselt H, et al., 2018. Rain-
bow: combining improvements in deep reinforcementlearning. https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02298
Ho J, Ermon S, 2016. Generative adversarial imitation
learning. Proc 30
thNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.4565-4573.
Horgan D, Quan J, Budden D, et al., 2018. Distributed
prioritized experience replay.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00933Houthooft R, Chen X, Duan Y, et al., 2017. Variational
information maximizing exploration. Proc 30thNeural
Information Processing Systems, p.1109-1117.
Kakade S, Langford J, 2002. Approximately optimal approx-
imate reinforcement learning. Proc 19thInt Conf on
Machine Learning, p.267-274.
Kalashnikov D, Irpan A, Pastor P, et al., 2018. QT-Opt:
scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-basedrobotic manipulation. Proc 2
ndConf on Robot Learn-
ing, p.651-673.
Klein E, Geist M, Piot B, et al., 2012. Inverse reinforcement
learning through structured classiﬁcation. Proc 25th
Neural Information Processing Systems, p.1007-1015.
Kolter JZ, Ng AY, 2009. Near-Bayesian exploration in poly-
nomial time. Proc 26thInt Conf on Machine Learning,
p.513-520. https://doi.org/10.1145/1553374.1553441
Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE, 2012. ImageNet clas-
siﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. Proc
25thNeural Information Processing Systems, p.1097-
1105.
Kröse BJA, 1995. Learning from delayed rewards. Robot
Auton Syst , 15(4):233-235.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-8890(95)00026-C
Lange S, Riedmiller M, Voigtländer A, 2012. Autonomous
reinforcement learning on raw visual input data in areal world application. Proc Int Joint Conf on NeuralNetworks, p.1-8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2012.6252823
Levine S, Koltun V, 2013. Guided policy search. Proc 30
th
Int Conf on Machine Learning, p.1-9.
Levine S, Wagener N, Abbeel P, 2015. Learning contact-rich
manipulation skills with guided policy search. Proc
IEEE Int Conf on Robotics and Automation, p.156-163. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2015.7138994
Levine S, Finn C, Darrell T, et al., 2016. End-to-end training
of deep visuomotor policies. JM a c hL e a r nR e s , 17(1):
1334-1373.
Lillicrap TP, Hunt JJ, Pritzel A, et al., 2 016. Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning. Proc 4
thInt
Conf on Learning Representations, p.2829-2838.
Lin LJ, 1992. Self-improving reactive agents based on re-
inforcement learning, planning and teaching. Mach
Learn, 8(3-4):293-321.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992699
Mao HZ, Alizadeh M, Menache I, et al., 2016. Resource
management with deep reinforcement learning. Proc15
thACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, p.50-
56. https://doi.org/10.1145/3005745.3005750
Mao HZ, Schwarzkopf M, Venkatakrishnan SB, et al., 2019a.
Learning scheduling algorithms for data processing clus-ters. Proc ACM Special Interest Group on Data Com-munication, p.270-288.
Mao HZ, Negi P, Narayan A, et al., 2019b. Park: an
open platform for learning-augmented computer sys-tems. Proc 36
thInt Conf on Machine Learning, p.2490-
2502.
Mishra N, Rohaninejad M, Chen X, et al., 2018. A simple
neural attentive meta-learner.https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03141
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, et al., 2013. Playing Atari
with deep reinforcement learning.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602

==== Page 18 ====
Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744 1743
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, et al., 2015. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature ,
518(7540):529-533.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236
Mnih V, Badia AP, Mirza M, et al., 2016. Asynchronous
methods for deep reinforcement learning. Proc 33rdInt
Conf on Machine Learning, p.1928-1937.
Mousavi SS, Schukat M, Howley E, 2018. Deep reinforcement
learning: an overview. Proc SAI Intelligent SystemsConf, p.426-440.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56991-8_32
Nachum O, Norouzi M, Xu K, et al., 2017a. Bridging
the gap between value and policy based reinforcement
learning. Proc 31
stNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.2775-2785.
Nachum O, Norouzi M, Xu K, et al., 2017b. Trust-PCL: an
oﬀ-policy trust region method for continuous control.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.01891
Nagabandi A, Kahn G, Fearing RS, et al., 2018. Neural
network dynamics for model-based deep reinforcementlearning with model-free ﬁne-tuning. IEEE Int Conf onRobotics and Automation, p.7559-7566.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8463189
Nagabandi A, Clavera I, Liu SM, et al., 2019. Learning
to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments throughmeta-reinforcement learning.https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11347v6
Ng AY, Russell SJ, 2000. Algorithms for inverse reinforce-
ment learning. Proc 17
thInt Conf on Machine Learning,
p.663-670.
Osband I, Blundell C, Pritzel A, et al., 2016. Deep ex-
ploration via bootstrapped DQN. Proc 29thNeural
Information Processing Systems, p.4026-4034.
Ostrovski G, Bellemare MG, van den Oord A, et al., 2017.
Count-based exploration with neural density models.Proc 34
thInt Conf on Machine Learning, p.2721-2730.
Parisotto E, Ba JL, Salakhutdinov R, 2016. Actor-Mimic:
deep multitask and transfer reinforcement learning.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06342
Pathak D, Agrawal P, Efros AA, et al., 2017. Curiosity-
driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. ProcIEEE Conf on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion Workshops, p.488-489.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2017.70
Peng XB, Abbeel P, Levine S, et al., 2018a. DeepMimic:
example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills. ACM Trans Graph , 37(4):143.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3197517.3201311
Peng XB, Andrychowicz M, Zaremba W, et al., 2018b. Sim-
to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics ran-domization. Proc IEEE Int Conf on Robotics andAutomation, p.3803-3810.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460528
Ping W, Peng KN, Gibiansky A, et al., 2018. Deep voice 3:
2000-speaker neural text-to-speech. Proc Int Conf onLearning Representations, p.214-217.
Pohlen T, Piot B, Hester T, et al., 2018. Observe and look
further: achieving consistent performance on Atari.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11593
Racanière S, Weber T, Reichert DP, et al., 2017.
Imagination-augmented agents for deep reinforcementlearning. Proc 31
stNeural Information Processing Sys-
tems, p.5694-5705.Rahmatizadeh R, Abolghasemi P, Behal A, et al., 2016.
Learning real manipulation tasks from virtual demon-
strations using LSTM.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03833v2
Rajeswaran A, Ghotra S, Ravindran B, et al., 2017. EPOpt:
learning robust neural network policies using model en-
sembles.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.01283
Rakelly K, Zhou A, Quillen D, et al., 2019. Eﬃcient oﬀ-policy
meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context
variables. Proc 36thInt Conf on Machine Learning,
p.5331-5340.
Ratliﬀ ND, Bagnell JA, Zinkevich MA, 2006. Maximum
margin planning. Proc 23rdInt Conf on Machine
Learning, p.729-736.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143936
Russo D, Roy BV, 2014. Learning to optimize via
information-directed sampling. Proc 27thNeural In-
formation Processing Systems, p.1583-1591.
Rusu AA, Colmenarejo SG, Gulcehre C, et al., 2016a. Policy
distillation. https: //arxiv.org/abs/1511.06295
Rusu AA, Rabinowitz NC, Desjardins G, et al., 2016b. Pro-
gressive neural networks.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04671
Schaul T, Quan J, Antonoglou I, et al., 2016. Prioritized
experience replay. https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05952
Schulman J, Levine S, Moritz P, et al., 2015. Trust re-
gion policy optimization. Proc Int Conf on Machine
Learning, p.1889-1897.
Schulman J, Moritz P, Levine S, et al., 2016. High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized ad-
vantage estimation.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02438
Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, et al., 2017. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347
Shum HY, He XD, Li D, 2018. From Eliza to XiaoIce:
challenges and opportunities with social chatbots. Front
Inform Technol Electron Eng , 19(1):10-26.
https://doi.org/10.1631/FITEE.1700826
Silver D, Lever G, Heess N, et al., 2014. Deterministic policy
gradient algorithms. Proc 31stInt Conf on Machine
Learning, p.387-395.
Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, et al., 2016. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.Nature , 529(7587):484-489.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961
Skerry-Ryan RJ, Battenberg E, Xiao Y, et al., 2018. Towards
end-to-end prosody transfer for expressive speech syn-thesis with Tacotron. Int Conf on Machine Learning,p.4693-4702.
Stadie BC, Yang G, Houthooft R, et al., 2018. Some consid-
erations on learning to explore via meta-reinforcement
learning. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.01118
Strehl AL, Littman ML, 2008. An analysis of model-based
interval estimation for Markov decision processes. J
Comput Syst Sci , 74(8):1309-1331.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcss.2007.08.009
Sutton RS, 1988. Learning to predict by the methods of
temporal diﬀerences. Mach Learn , 3(1):9-44.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022633531479

==== Page 19 ====
1744 Wang et al. / Front Inform T echnol Electron Eng 2020 21(12):1726-1744
Sutton RS, Barto AG, 2018. Reinforcement Learning: an
Introduction (2ndEd.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
Tang HR, Houthooft R, Foote D, et al., 2017. #Exploration:
a study of count-based exploration for deep reinforce-ment learning. Proc 31
stNeural Information Processing
Systems, p.2753-2762.
van Hasselt H, Guez A, Silver D, 2016. Deep reinforcement
learning with double Q-learning. Proc 30thAAAI Conf
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, p. 2096-2100.
Vanschoren J, 2018. Meta-learning: a survey.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03548
Vinyals O, Ewalds T, Bartunov S, et al., 2017. StarCraft II:
a new challenge for reinforcement learning.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04782
Wang JX, Kurth-Nelson Z, Tirumala D, et al., 2017. Learn-
ing to reinforcement learn.https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05763
Wang ZY, Schaul T, Hessel M, et al., 2016. Dueling network
architectures for deep reinforcement learning. Proc 33
rd
Int Conf on Machine Learning, p.1995-2003.
Wang ZY, Bapst V, Heess N, et al., 2017. Sample eﬃcient
actor-critic with experience replay.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01224
Watter M, Springenberg JT, Boedecker J, et al., 2015. Em-
bed to control: a locally linear latent dynamics modelfor control from raw images. Proc 28
thNeural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, p.2746-2754.
Williams RJ, 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algo-
rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. MachLearn, 8(3-4):229-256.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022672621406
Wu YH, Mansimov E, Grosse RB, et al., 2017. Scalable trust-
region method for deep reinforcement learning usingKronecker-factored approximation. Proc 30
thNeural
Information Processing Systems, p.5279-5288.
Xia C, El Kamel A, 2016. Neural inverse reinforcement
learning in autonomous navigation. Robot Auton Syst ,
84:1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2016.06.003
Yahya A, Li A, Kalakrishnan M, et al., 2017. Collective robot
reinforcement learning with distributed asynchronous
guided policy search. IEEE/RSJ Int Conf on IntelligentRobots and Systems, p.79-86.https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8202141
Yu TH, Finn C, Xie AN, et al., 2018. One-shot imitation from
observing humans via domain-adaptive meta-learning.https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01557v1
Yu WH, Tan J, Liu CK, et al., 2017. Preparing for the
unknown: learning a universal policy with online system
identiﬁcation. https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.02453
Zhang M, Vikram S, Smith L, et al., 2019. SOLAR:
deep structured representations for model-based rein-forcement learning. Proc 36
thInt Conf on Machine
Learning, p.7444-7453.
Ziebart BD, Maas A, Bagnell JA, et al., 2008. Maximum
entropy inverse reinforcement learning. Proc 23rdAAAI
Conf on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, p. 1433-1438.
Zintgraf L, Shiarli K, Kurin V, et al., 2019. Fast context
adaptation via meta-learning. Proc 36thInt Conf on
Machine Learning, p.7693-7702.

