==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1810.10161v1  [cs.NE]  24 Oct 20181
Deep Learning with Long Short-Term Memory for
Time Series Prediction
Yuxiu Hua, Zhifeng Zhao, Rongpeng Li, Xianfu Chen, Zhiming L iu,
and Honggang Zhang
Abstract —Time series prediction can be generalized as
a process that extracts useful information from historical
records and then determines future values. Learning long-
range dependencies that are embedded in time series
is often an obstacle for most algorithms, whereas Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) solutions, as a speciﬁc
kind of scheme in deep learning, promise to effectively
overcome the problem. In this article, we ﬁrst give a
brief introduction to the structure and forward propa-
gation mechanism of the LSTM model. Then, aiming at
reducing the considerable computing cost of LSTM, we
put forward the Random Connectivity LSTM (RCLSTM)
model and test it by predicting trafﬁc and user mobility
in telecommunication networks. Compared to LSTM,
RCLSTM is formed via stochastic connectivity between
neurons, which achieves a signiﬁcant breakthrough in the
architecture formation of neural networks. In this way,
the RCLSTM model exhibits a certain level of sparsity,
which leads to an appealing decrease in the computational
complexity and makes the RCLSTM model become more
applicable in latency-stringent application scenarios. I n
the ﬁeld of telecommunication networks, the prediction
of trafﬁc series and mobility traces could directly beneﬁt
from this improvement as we further demonstrate that
the prediction accuracy of RCLSTM is comparable to
that of the conventional LSTM no matter how we change
the number of training samples or the length of input
sequences.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The analysis and prediction of time series has
always been the key technique in an array of
practical problems, including weather forecasting,
transportation planning, trafﬁc management, and so
on. In the domain of telecommunications, intelli-
gent mechanisms have already been designed to
Y . Hua, Z. Zhao, R. Li and H. Zhang are with Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310027, China, (email: {21631087, zhaozf,
lirongpeng, honggangzhang }@zju.edu.cn).
X. Chen is with VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
Oulu FI-90571, Finland (email: xianfu.chen@vtt.ﬁ).
Z. Liu is with China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing
100053, China (email: liuzhiming@chinamobile.com).track and analyze a large number of time-dependent
events, such as data trafﬁc, user location, channel
load, and service requests, to mention a few [ 1]. On
the other hand, with the explosive proliferation of
mobile terminals as well as the expansion of mobile
Internet, the Internet of Things (IoT) and cloud
computing, the mobile communication network has
become an indispensable social infrastructure that
is bound up with people’s lives and various areas of
society [ 1]. However, it remains a challenging issue
that how to guarantee the quality of service (QoS)
and the quality of experience regardless of the
dynamics of network trafﬁc and user movements.
One promising solution is to predict the varying
pattern of data trafﬁc and the location at which
a mobile user will likely demand network service
[1]. Accordingly, network operators can reserve
some network resources, and react effectively to
network changes in near real time [ 2]. However,
since misplaced reservation of network resources
and outdated predicted information will not only
fail to support the desired QoS but also likely
degrade the performance of the overall network,
the prediction accuracy and complexity is of vital
importance [ 3].
Basically, the prediction goal of a time series
{y1,y2,...}is to estimate the value at time ibased
on its previous data yi−1,yi−2,.... If we denote
x={yi−k,yi−k+1,...,yi−1},i={k,...,n}, the goal
aims at ﬁnding a function f(x)so thatˆyi=f(x)
is as close to the ground truth yias possible.
Time series analysis and prediction have been
intensively studied for 40 years [ 4]. In statistical
signal processing, the Autoregressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) model has been used
to study time-varying processes. However, one
limitation of ARIMA is its natural tendency to
concentrate on the mean values of the past series
data. Therefore, it remains challenging to capture

==== Page 2 ====
2
a rapidly changing process [ 5]. Support Vector
Regression (SVR) has been successfully applied
for time series prediction, but it also has dis-
advantages like the lack of structured means to
determine some key parameters of the model [ 5].
In recent years, owing to the ﬂexible structure,
deep learning models are increasingly used in time
series prediction [ 6]. Speciﬁcally, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), one of deep learning models,
establish the reputation to cope with time series
by recurrent neural connections. However, for any
standard RNN architecture, the inﬂuence of a given
input on the hidden layers and eventually on the
neural network output would either decay or blow
up exponentially when cycling around recurrent
connections. To tackle this problem, Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) has been revolutionarily
designed by changing the structure of the hidden
neurons in traditional RNN [ 7]. Today, research
and applications of LSTM for time series predic-
tion are proliferating. For example, Wang et al.
[2] used LSTM-based model to predict the next-
moment trafﬁc load in a speciﬁc geometric area
and Alahi et al. [3] predicted the motion dynamics
in crowded scenes based on LSTM.
Generally, without customized hardware and
software acceleration, the LSTM’s computing time
is proportional to the number of parameters. Given
this disappointing characteristic, in this article, we
present an approach to decrease the number of
involved parameters, and thus put forward a new
model that reduces the computational cost. Inspired
by the interesting ﬁnding that Feed Forward Neural
Networks (FFNNs) with sparse neural connections
have a similar or even superior performance in
many experiments compared to the conventional
FFNNs [ 8], we introduce random connectivity to
the conventional LSTM model, thus forming a
new architecture with sparse neural connections,
called the Random Connectivity Long Short-Term
Memory (RCLSTM) model.
Our simulation model is a three-layer stack
RCLSTM neural network with a memory cell size
of 300 per layer. The simulation data comprise traf-
ﬁc data from G ´EANT networks—a pan-European
research network [ 9], and realistic user-trajectory
data [ 10]. The reasons to use the two different
datasets are twofold. First, ANN-based models
like LSTM are sensitive to the dataset and mayyield signiﬁcant performance changes on different
subsets taken from the same database. Therefore, it
would be hard to draw conclusions from one single
dataset for comparing different algorithms. Second,
the prediction of both network trafﬁc and user
mobility is of signiﬁcant importance in the design
and optimization of telecommunication networks.
For these reasons, we take advantage of the two
different datasets. Our simulation results show that
when compared to LSTM, the RCLSTM model
is highly capable of trafﬁc prediction and user-
location forecasting with less than half the neural
connections. Particularly, in the trafﬁc prediction
task, RCLSTM with even 1% neural connections
performs better than ARIMA, SVR, and FFNN,
while reducing the computing time by around 30%
compared with the conventional LSTM. More inter-
estingly, when the length of input trafﬁc sequences
increases from 50 to 500, the prediction error of
RCLSTM remains basically unchanged, whereas
that of LSTM increases by about 10%.
II. A NOVERVIEW OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL
NETWORKS AND LSTM
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) are con-
structed as a class of machine learning models
that can eliminate the drawbacks of the tradi-
tional learning algorithms with rule-based program-
ming [ 11]. ANNs can be classiﬁed into two main
categories—FFNNs and RNNs. FFNNs usually
consist of an input layer, an output layer and hidden
layers (if necessary). Each layer is composed of
a number of neurons and an activation function.
A simple diagram of FFNNs is illustrated in Fig.
1(a). In FFNNs, there is no connection between
the neurons within the same layer, and all neurons
cannot be connected across layers, which means
the information ﬂows in one direction, from the
input layer, through the hidden layers (if any), to
the output layer. FFNNs are widely used in various
ﬁelds like data classiﬁcation, object recognition,
and image processing. However, constrained by
their internal structure, FFNNs are unsuitable for
handling historical dependencies.
RNNs, as another type of ANNs, are similar to
FFNNs in the structure of neural layers, but allow
the connections between the neurons within the
same hidden layer. An illustration of RNNs can be
observed in the left-hand side of Fig. 1(b). In addi-

==== Page 3 ====
3
Output 
layer 
Hidden 
layer 
Input 
layer Output 
layer 
Hidden 
layer 
Input 
layer Unfold /g86 /g86 /g86 /g77/g77
forget 
gate input 
gate output 
gate 
input input 
update cell state 
hidden state (a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 1: An illustration of FFNN, RNN and LSTM memory block: (a ) FFNN; (b) RNN; (c) LSTM memory block.
tion, the right-hand side of Fig. 1(b) is the expanded
form of the RNN model, indicating that RNNs
calculate the output of the current moment from the
input of the current moment xtand the hidden state
of the previous moment ht−1. Therefore, RNNs
allow historical input information to be stored in
the network’s internal state, and are thereby capable
of mapping all of the historical input data to the
ﬁnal output. Theoretically, RNNs are competent
to handle such long-range dependencies. However,
in practice, RNNs seem unable to accomplish the
task. This phenomenon has been explored in depth
by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [ 7], who explained
some pretty fundamental reasons why such learning
might be difﬁcult.
Long Short-Term Memory networks, usually just
called “LSTMs”, are a special RNNs that are
suitable for learning long-term dependencies [ 7].
The key part that enhances LSTMs’ capability
to model long-term dependencies is a component
called memory block [ 7]. As illustrated in Fig. 1(c),
the memory block is a recurrently connected subnet
that contains functional modules called the memory
cell and gates. The memory cell is in charge
of remembering the temporal state of the neural
network and the gates formed by multiplicative
units are responsible for controlling the pattern of
information ﬂow. According to the corresponding
practical functionalities, these gates are classiﬁed
as input gates, output gates and forget gates. Input
gates control how much new information ﬂows
into the memory cell, while forget gates control
how much information of the memory cell still
remains in the current memory cell through re-
current connection, and output gates control how
much information is used to compute the output
activation of the memory block and further ﬂows
into the rest of the neural network. Before going
through the details of LSTM, some simple yetuseful activation functions need to be reviewed.
The sigmoid function σ(x) =1
1+e−xand the tanh
function ϕ(x) = 2σ(2x)−1are commonly used
as the activation function in ANNs. The domain
of both functions is the real number ﬁeld, but
the return value for the sigmoid function ranges
from 0 to 1, while the tanh function ranges from
-1 to 1. Fig. 1(c) explains in detail how LSTM
works. The ﬁrst step is to decide what kind of
information will be removed from the memory cell
state, which is implemented by a sigmoid layer
(i.e., the forget gate). The next step is to decide
what new information will be stored in the memory
cell state. This operation can be divided into two
steps. First, a sigmoid layer (i.e., the input gate)
determines what will be updated, and a tanh layer
creates a vector of new candidate values ztthat
can be added to the memory cell state, where the
subscript tdenotes the current moment. Next, these
two parts are combined to trigger an update to the
memory cell state. To update the old memory cell
state ct−1into the new memory cell state ct, we
can ﬁrst multiply the corresponding elements of
ct−1and the output of forget gate layer (i.e. ft),
which is just like the oblivion mechanism in the
human brain, and then add it∗zt, where itdenotes
the output of input gate and ∗denotes element-
wise multiplication. The last step is to decide
what to output, which is realized by element-wise
multiplication between the value obtained from a
tanh function of ctand the output of a sigmoid layer
(i.e., the output gate), ot. Through the cooperation
between the memory cell and the gates, LSTM is
endowed with a powerful ability to predict time
series with long-term dependences.
Since the invention of LSTM, a number of
scholars have proposed several improvements with
respect to its original architecture. Greff et al. [12]
evaluated the aforementioned conventional LSTM

==== Page 4 ====
4
input 
update /g77 /g86forget 
gate /g86input 
gate /g86output 
gate /g77
input 
update /g77 /g86 forget 
gate /g86 input 
gate /g86 output 
gate /g77
input 
update /g77 /g86 forget 
gate /g86 input 
gate /g86 output 
gate /g77
LSTM block RCLSTM block Inputs 
Hidden state 
Memory cell 
Data flow 
Operations 
Parameters 
Fig. 2: The comparison between LSTM and RCLSTM in the view of g enerating process of neural connections.
and eight different variants thereof (e.g., Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) [ 13]) on three benchmark
problems—TIMIT, IAM Online and JSB Chorales.
Each variant differs from the conventional LSTM
by a single and simple change. They found that
the conventional LSTM architecture performs well
on the three datasets, and none of the eight in-
vestigated modiﬁcations signiﬁcantly improve the
performance.
III. R ANDOM CONNECTIVITY FOR LSTM
The conventional LSTM (including its variants)
follows the classical pattern that the neurons in
each memory block are fully connected and this
connectivity cannot be changed manually. How-
ever, it has been found that for certain functional
connectivity in neural microcircuits, random topol-
ogy formation of synapses plays a key role and
can provide a sufﬁcient foundation for speciﬁc
functional connectivity to emerge in local neural
microcircuits [ 14]. This discovery is different from
the conventional cases where neural connectivity
is considered to be more heuristic so that neurons
need to be connected in a more fully organized
manner. It raises a fundamental question as towhether a strategy of forming more random neu-
ral connectivity, like in the human brain, might
yield potential beneﬁts to LSTM’s performance and
efﬁciency. With this conjecture, we built up the
RCLSTM model.
In RCLSTM, neurons are randomly connected
rather than being fully connected as in LSTM.
Actually, the trainable parameters in LSTM only
exist between the input part—the combination of
the input of the current moment (i.e. xt) and the
output of the previous moment (i.e. ht−1), and
the functional part—the combination of the gate
layers and the input update layer. Therefore, the
LSTM architecture can be further depicted in Fig.
2. In our approach, whether the LSTM neurons
are connected or not can be determined by certain
randomness. Therefore, we use dashed lines to
denote that the neural connections can be added
or omitted, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. 2.
If the neurons are fully connected, then it becomes
a standard LSTM model. On the other hand, if the
neurons are randomly connected according to some
rules (which are covered in detail below), then an
RCLSTM model is created. The lower right part
of Fig. 2shows an example RCLSTM structure in
which the neural connections are randomly sparse,

==== Page 5 ====
5
unlike the LSTM model. The fundamental differ-
ence between RCLSTM and LSTM is illustrated
in Fig. 2, so let us move to the implementation
strategy of randomly connecting neurons.
First, we attach a probability value to each pair
of neurons that are connected by a dashed line
in the upper part of Fig. 2. The probability val-
ues can obey arbitrary statistical distributions, and
we choose uniform distribution in our simulations
given its computational efﬁciency. The probability
value indicates the tendency that the corresponding
pair of neurons will be connected. Then we assume
all neurons are connected with the same probability
and carefully set a threshold to determine the
percentage of connected neurons. If the probability
values are greater than the threshold, the corre-
sponding pairs of neurons are connected. Other-
wise, they are prohibited from being connected.
This process can be visualized as turning dashed
lines into solid lines, as shown in the right-hand
transformation of Fig. 2. Therefore, the RCLSTM
structure can create some sparsity, considerably
decreasing the total number of involved parameters
to be trained and reducing the computational loads
of the whole RCLSTM network.
IV. N UMERICAL SIMULATIONS FOR TRAFFIC
AND MOBILITY PREDICTION
In this section, we focus on verifying the perfor-
mance of the proposed RCLSTM model on trafﬁc
prediction and user-location forecasting. In partic-
ular, we construct a three-layer RNN whose recur-
rent neurons are all the newly designed RCLSTM
memory blocks (for the sake of simplicity, this
model is called the RCLSTM network in the
following statement). The corresponding expanded
form is described in Fig. 3. Because the purpose of
our simulations is to predict the value at the next
moment given some historical data, the input data
are fromy1toyTwhereTdenotes the length of the
input sequences, and the output of the RCLSTM
network is a prediction of the actual value at the
next moment denoted as ˆyT+1. First of all, we
take advantage of the RCLSTM network to predict
trafﬁc and user mobility, particularly compare the
prediction accuracy of the RCLSTM network with
that of other algorithms or models. Then, we adjust
the number of training data samples and the length
of input sequences to investigate the inﬂuence ofRCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block RCLSTM 
block 
Unfold 
Fig. 3: The designed RCLSTM network for simulations.
these factors on the prediction accuracy of the
RCLSTM network.
A. Data Description and Processing
We evaluate the model’s performance on trafﬁc
prediction depending upon real trafﬁc data from
a link in the G ´EANT backbone networks [ 9].
G´EANT is a pan-European data source for the
research and education communities. These traf-
ﬁc data are sampled every 15 minute during a
4-month period and the unit for data points is
Kbps. In this study, we selected 10772 trafﬁc
data points from 2005-01-01 00:00AM to 2005-
04-30 00:00AM. The raw data are so uneven in
numerical size that there are about three orders of
magnitude difference between the maximum and
minimum. To reduce the numerical unevenness, we
ﬁrst take the logarithm to base 10 of the raw data,
then carry out a normalization process according
tox−min(x)
max(x)−min(x), where xis the vector after
taking the logarithm of the raw data, min(x)and
max(x)denote the minimum and maximum value
ofx, respectively. Through this process, the raw
data are limited to a range between 0 and 1, which
makes the training phase of ANN-based models
converge faster and effectively avoid the bad local
optimal solution [ 11]. Real-time prediction of data
trafﬁc requires continuous data input and learning.
Hence, we introduce a notion of sliding window,
which indicates a ﬁxed number of previous times-
lots to learn and then predict the current data trafﬁc.
Finally, we split the processed data into two sets
(i.e., a training set and a test set). The training set
is used to train the RCLSTM network, and the test
set is used to evaluate its prediction accuracy.

==== Page 6 ====
6
The other dataset to evaluate the capability of the
RCLSTM model comes from reference [ 10], which
contains the location history of several mobile users
together with manually deﬁned important places for
every person, and is thus used for user-mobility
prediction. The data for every person are taken
from the Android location history service, and
mobile users are asked to mark the important places
that are further constructed as polygons on the
map. The dataset contains four attributes, i.e., date-
time, latitude, longitude, and assigned location ID,
within which the last item is used to map the user’s
location to one of the geographical polygons. These
data are collected in 1-hour intervals from 2015-08-
06 to 2015-11-04. In this article, we use location
data of ﬁve users. First, we encode the location
ID to one–hot code. For example, suppose that in
User A’s trajectory, the number of different location
IDs marked by User A is m. Then we map these
different location IDs to the Numbers 1 to m, and
use them as new location IDs. If the newly current
location ID is i, we construct an m-dimensional
vector where only the element with index iis one
and the others are all zero. After transforming all
the raw data to one-hot vectors, we use the sliding
window to slice the processed data and ﬁnally split
them into training set and test set, which follows
the same procedure as mentioned earlier in the
trafﬁc data processing.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our proposed
RCLSTM model on trafﬁc prediction, Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) is applied to estimate the
prediction accuracy. RMSE measures the squared
root of the mean of the deviation squares, which
quantiﬁes the difference between the predicted
values and the actual ones. The RMSE can be
expressed as RMSE=/radicalBig
1
N/summationtextN
i=1(yi−ˆyi)2, whereyi
is the actual value, ˆyiis the predicted value and N
represents the total number of predicted trafﬁc data.
On the other hand, the evaluation metric for
human mobility prediction is the accuracy level,
which indicates the percentage of the correct loca-
tion predictions. In our study, the accuracy level is
deﬁned as Acc=/summationtextN
i=11(yi=ˆyi)
N, whereyiis the actual
value,ˆyiis the predicted value, Nrepresents the
total number of predicted locations and 1(yi= ˆyi)is the indicator function that equals to 1 if yi= ˆyi
or 0 ifyi/ne}ationslash= ˆyi.
C. Testing Results and Analyses
1) Trafﬁc Prediction
Fig. 4(a) reveals the RMSE and the computing
time under different percentages of neural connec-
tivity in the RCLSTM model (note that 100% con-
nectivity means the fully-connected LSTM model).
Notably, the probability of neural connections
obeys a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. In
addition, the size of the RCLSTM’s memory cell
is set at 300, the ratio between the number of
training samples and the number of test samples is
set at 9:1, and the length of input trafﬁc sequences
is 100. Fig. 4(a) shows that the RMSE of the
RCLSTM model is slightly larger than that of the
LSTM model, but the RCLSTM with very sparse
neural connections (i.e. 1%) reduces the computing
time by around 30% compared with the baseline
LSTM. In addition, the computing time almost
stops increasing when the percentage of neural
connections is larger than 20%, which is because
the method we use for accelerating calculation only
works efﬁciently on extremely sparse matrices. Fig.
4(b) intuitively illustrates the actual and predicted
trafﬁc values. It can be observed from the subﬁgure
that the predicted values can match the variation
trend and features of the actual values very well.
Therefore, the simulation results indicate that the
RCLSTM model can yield acceptable prediction
capability, and effectively decrease the computa-
tional loads and complexity.
Then we investigate how the predictive capa-
bility of the RCLSTM model is inﬂuenced by
the number of training samples and the length of
input trafﬁc sequences. First we train the models
with 90%, 80%, 70% and 60% of the processed
data, respectively, while ﬁxing both the size of the
memory cell (set at 300) and the length of the input
sequences (set at 100), and test the trained models
with the remaining data. Then we vary the length of
the input sequences from 50 to 500 while keeping
the values of the other hyperparameters ﬁxed. The
simulation results are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d).
It can be observed from Fig. 4(c) that RCLSTM
models are more sensitive to the number of training
samples than LSTM, because when the number
of training samples increases, the RMSEs of the

==== Page 7 ====
7
Fig. 4: Results of trafﬁc prediction using RCLSTM network: ( a) RMSE and computing time of RCLSTMs ; (b) predicted trafﬁc d ata and actual trafﬁc data;
(c) RMSE of RCLSTMs over different number of training sample s; (d) RMSE of RCLSTMs over different length of input sequenc es; (e) comparing RCLSTM
with SVR, ARIMA, FFNN and LSTM.
RCLSTM models vary more signiﬁcantly than that
of the LSTM model. Fig. 4(d) gives the related
results and shows that RCLSTM models are less
susceptive to the length of the input sequences than
LSTM model.
Finally, we compare the RCLSTM with three
well-known prediction techniques—SVR, ARIMA,
and FFNN. The hyper-parameters of these algo-
rithms are as follows:
•SVR: The number of input features is 100,
the kernel is a Radial Basis Function (RBF)
and the tolerance for the stopping criterion is
0.001.
•ARIMA(p,d,q): The number of autoregres-
sive terms (i.e. p) is 5, the number of nonsea-
sonal differences needed for stationarity (i.e.
d) is 1, and the number of lagged forecast
errors in the prediction equation (i.e. q) is 0.
•FFNN: The number of input features is 100
and the numbers of neurons in both the ﬁrst
hidden layer and the second hidden layer are
50.
In addition, since the LSTM with a memory cell
size of 30 has almost as many trainable parameters
as the RCLSTM with a memory cell size of 300
and 1% neural connections, we put it into the
comparison list as well. The simulation results areshown in Fig. 4(e), which reveals that LSTM with
a memory cell size of 300 performs much better
than the others, followed by the RCLSTM with the
memory cell size of 300 and 1% neural connec-
tions. Interestingly, the RCLSTM model performs
better than the LSTM with the memory cell size of
30, which is probably due to a degree of overﬁtting
that exists in the latter [ 11].
2) Human Mobility Prediction
The results of user-mobility prediction with the
RCLSTM model are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5(a)
shows the respective prediction accuracy for the
ﬁve users with the RCLSTM model, where the
probability of neural connections obeys a uniform
distribution between 0 and 1. In addition, the size
of the memory cell is 150, the length of input
sequences is 12, and the training samples account
for 90% of the processed data. There is a slight
difference in the prediction results for different
users. For example, Users A and D are both
university students with a part-time job, and thus
they almost follow the same behavioral pattern in
school or work, which results in highly expected
predictability. On the other hand, User E is running
his own business and is more likely to travel a
lot with unﬁxed schedule, consequently having low
expected predictability [ 10]. Although the predic-

==== Page 8 ====
8
Fig. 5: Results of human mobility prediction using RCLSTM: a ) prediction accuracy of RCLSTMs for different users; b) pre diction accuracy of RCLSTMs
over different length of input sequences for User A; c) perfo rmance of RCLSTMs over different length of input sequences f or User E.
tion accuracy of the RCLSTM model is not as
good as that of the LSTM model, the RCLSTM
model with high sparsity of neural connections can
compute faster than the LSTM, similar to the trafﬁc
prediction scenario.
In order to further investigate the capability
of the RCLSTM model to characterize long-term
dependencies of user mobility, we carry out simu-
lations with the different length of input sequence
data for Users A and E, consistent with the scenario
of trafﬁc prediction. The results are shown in Fig.
5(b) and (c), respectively. It can be observed from
the subﬁgures that the RCLSTM models can catch
up with LSTM in terms of prediction accuracy,
regardless of the length of the input sequences.
Remarkably, for User A, increasing the length of
input sequences scarcely affects the prediction ac-
curacy, whereas for User E, the prediction accuracy
improves when the length of the input sequences
increases. From the perspective of data analysis,
the mobility data of User E is more irregular than
that of User A, so both the RCLSTM model and
the baseline LSTM model need more input data to
ﬁnd the regular movement patterns of User E.
Remark. The RCLSTM model shows promise for
manifesting strong trafﬁc and user-mobility pre-
diction capabilities while reduces the number of
parameters to be trained, which in effect decreases
the computational load and complexity.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we have addressed the importance
of leveraging deep learning for time series predic-
tion. In particular, we have reinvestigated the issuesof trafﬁc prediction and user-mobility forecasting
with deep learning and proposed a new model
named RCLSTM by revolutionarily redesigning the
conventional LSTM model. The basic idea behind
the RCLSTM model is to construct neural networks
by forming and realizing a random sparse graph.
We have checked the effectiveness of the RCLSTM
model by predicting the dynamics of trafﬁc and
user locations through various temporal scales. In
trafﬁc prediction, we have demonstrated that the
RCLSTM model with 1% neural connections re-
duces the computing complexity by 30% compared
with the standard LSTM model. Although the char-
acteristic of sparse neural connections may cause
a degradation of approximately 25% in prediction
accuracy, the RCLSTM model still outperforms
SVR, ARIMA, FFNN, even the LSTM model
with the same number of parameters. In addition,
along with the adjustment of the length of input
sequences and the number of training samples, the
RCLSTM models ﬂuctuate in line with the LSTM
model in terms of prediction accuracy. In summary,
it can be expected the RCLSTM model with lower
computing costs and satisfactory performance will
play an essential role in time series prediction in
the future intelligent telecommunication networks.
REFERENCE
[1] R. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Zhou, G. Ding, Y . Chen, Z. Wang,
and H. Zhang, “Intelligent 5G: When Cellular Networks
Meet Artiﬁcial Intelligence,” IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations , vol. 24, no. 5, Oct 2017, pp. 175–183.
[2] J. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Xu, Y . Wang, G. Xue, X. Zhang,
and D. Yang, “Spatiotemporal Modeling and Prediction
in Cellular Networks: A Big Data Enabled Deep Learn-
ing Approach,” Proc. 36th International Conference on

==== Page 9 ====
9
Computer Communications (INFOCOM) , Atlanta, GA,
USA, May 2017, pp. 1–9.
[3] A. Alahi, K. Goel, V . Ramanathan, A. Robicquet,
L. Fei-Fei, and S. Savarese, “Social LSTM: Human
Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Spaces,” Proc. 29th
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , Las Vegas, NV , USA, June 2016,
pp. 961–971.
[4] N. I. Sapankevych and R. Sankar, “Time Series Predic-
tion Using Support Vector Machines: A Survey,” IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine , vol. 4, no. 2,
May 2009, pp. 24–38.
[5] W.-C. Hong, “Application of Seasonal SVR with
Chaotic Immune Algorithm in Trafﬁc Flow Forecast-
ing,” Neural Computing and Applications , vol. 21, no. 3,
Apr 2012, pp. 583–593.
[6] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C. J.
Pal, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques , Morgan Kaufmann,
Burlington, MA, USA, 4 edition, 2016,
https://www.amaxon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0128042915/ departmofcompute ,
accessed 10/11/2018.
[7] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term
Memory,” Neural Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, 1997, pp.
1735–1780.
[8] M. J. Shaﬁee, P. Siva, and A. Wong, “Stochasticnet:
Forming Deep Neural Networks via Stochastic Connec-
tivity,” IEEE Access , vol. 4, 2016, pp. 1915–1924.
[9] S. Uhlig, B. Quoitin, J. Lepropre, and S. Balon,
“Providing Public Intradomain Trafﬁc Matrices to the
Research Community,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
Rev., vol. 36, no. 1, Jan 2006, pp. 83–86.
[10] J. Tkaˇ c´ ık and P. Kord´ ık, “Neural Turing Machine for
Sequential Learning of Human Mobility Patterns,” Proc.
2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
works (IJCNN) , Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 2016, pp.
2790–2797.
[11] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep Learning,”
Nature , vol. 521, no. 7553, 2015, p. 436.
[12] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutnk, B. R. Steunebrink ,
and J. Schmidhuber, “LSTM: A Search Space Odyssey,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems , vol. 28, no. 10, Oct 2017, pp. 2222–2232.
[13] J. Chung, C ¸ . G¨ ulc ¸ehre, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Empir-
ical Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on
Sequence Modeling,” CoRR , vol. abs/1412.3555, 2014.
[14] S. L. Hill, Y . Wang, I. Riachi, F. Sch¨ urmann, and
H. Markram, “Statistical Connectivity Provides a Suf-
ﬁcient Foundation for Speciﬁc Functional Connectivity
in Neocortical Neural Microcircuits,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences , vol. 109, no. 42, 2012,
pp. E2885–E2894.

