==== Page 1 ====
Springer Artificial Intelligence Review
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images:
A Review
Saeid Asgari Taghanaki†·Kumar Abhishek†·
Joseph Paul Cohen ·Julien Cohen-Adad ·Ghassan
Hamarneh
Received: 20 December 2019 / Accepted: 25 May 2020
Abstract The semantic image segmentation task consists of classifying each pixel of an
image into an instance, where each instance corresponds to a class. This task is a part of the
concept of scene understanding or better explaining the global context of an image. In the
medical image analysis domain, image segmentation can be used for image-guided inter-
ventions, radiotherapy, or improved radiological diagnostics. In this review, we categorize
the leading deep learning-based medical and non-medical image segmentation solutions into
six main groups of deep architectural, data synthesis-based, loss function-based, sequenced
models, weakly supervised, and multi-task methods and provide a comprehensive review of
the contributions in each of these groups. Further, for each group, we analyze each variant
of these groups and discuss the limitations of the current approaches and present potential
future research directions for semantic image segmentation.
Keywords Semantic Image Segmentation ·Deep Learning
1 Introduction
Deep learning has had a tremendous impact on various fields in science. The focus of the
current study is on one of the most critical areas of computer vision: medical image anal-
ysis (or medical computer vision), particularly deep learning-based approaches for medical
image segmentation. Segmentation is an important processing step in natural images for
scene understanding and medical image analysis, for image-guided interventions, radiother-
apy, or improved radiological diagnostics, etc. Image segmentation is formally defined as
†: Joint first authors
Saeid Asgari Taghanaki, Kumar Abhishek, and Ghassan Hamarneh
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
E-mail: {sasgarit,kabhishe,hamarneh }@sfu.ca
Joseph Paul Cohen
Mila, Universit ´e de Montr ´eal, Canada
E-mail: joseph@josephpcohen.com
Julien Cohen-Adad
NeuroPoly Lab, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Polytechnique Montr ´eal, Canada
E-mail: jcohen@polymtl.caarXiv:1910.07655v4  [cs.CV]  31 Mar 2024

==== Page 2 ====
2 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
“the partition of an image into a set of nonoverlapping regions whose union is the entire
image” (Haralick and Shapiro, 1992). A plethora of deep learning approaches for medical
image segmentation have been introduced in the literature for different medical imaging
modalities, including X-ray, visible-light imaging (e.g. colour dermoscopic images), mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), computerized tomog-
raphy (CT), and ultrasound (e.g. echocardiographic scans). Deep architectural improvement
has been a focus of many researchers for different purposes, e.g., tackling gradient vanishing
and exploding of deep models, model compression for efficient small yet accurate models,
while other works have tried to improve the performance of deep networks by introducing
new optimization functions.
Guo et al. (2018) provided a review of deep learning based semantic segmentation of
images, and divided the literature into three categories: region-based, fully convolutional
network (FCN)-based, and weakly supervised segmentation methods. Hu et al. (2018b)
summarized the most commonly used RGB-D datasets for semantic segmentation as well
as traditional machine learning based methods and deep learning-based network architec-
tures for RGB-D segmentation. Lateef and Ruichek (2019) presented an extensive survey of
deep learning architectures, datasets, and evaluation methods for the semantic segmentation
of natural images using deep neural networks. Similarly, for medical imaging, Goceri and
Goceri (2017) presented an high-level overview of deep learning-based medical image anal-
ysis techniques and application areas. Hesamian et al. (2019) presented an overview of the
state-of-the-art methods in medical image segmentation using deep learning by covering the
literature related to network structures and model training techniques. Karimi et al. (2019)
reviewed the literature on techniques to handle label noise in deep learning based medi-
cal image analysis and evaluated existing approaches on three medical imaging datasets for
segmentation and classification tasks. Zhou et al. (2019b) presented a review of techniques
proposed for fusion of medical images from multiple modalities for medical image segmen-
tation. Goceri (2019a) discussed the fully supervised, weakly supervised and transfer learn-
ing techniques for training deep neural networks for segmentation of medical images, and
also discussed the existing methods for addressing the problems of lack of data and class im-
balance. Zhang et al. (2019) presented a review of the approaches to address the problem of
small sample sizes in medical image analysis, and divided the literature into five categories
including explanation, weakly supervised, transfer learning, and active learning techniques.
Tajbakhsh et al. (2020) presented a review of the literature for addressing the challenges of
scarce annotations as well as weak annotations (e.g., noisy annotations, image-level labels,
sparse annotations, etc.) in medical image segmentation. Similarly, there are several surveys
covering the literature on the task of object detection (Wang et al., 2019c; Zou et al., 2019;
Borji et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b; Zhao et al., 2019), which can also be used to obtain what
can be termed as rough localizations of the object(s) of interest. In contrast to the existing
surveys, we make the following contributions in this review:
–We provide comprehensive coverage of research contributions in the field of semantic
segmentation of natural and medical images. In terms of medical imaging modalities,
we cover the literature pertaining to both 2D (RGB and grayscale) as well as volumetric
medical images.
–We group the semantic image segmentation literature into six different categories based
on the nature of their contributions: architectural improvements, optimization function
based improvements, data synthesis based improvements, weakly supervised models,
sequenced models, and multi-task models. Figure 1 indicates the categories we cover
in this review, along with a timeline of the most influential papers in the respective

==== Page 3 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 3
categories. Moreover, Figure 2 shows a high-level overview of the deep semantic seg-
mentation pipeline, and where each of the categories mentioned in Figure 1 belong in
the pipeline.
–We study the behaviour of many popular loss functions used to train segmentation mod-
els on handling scenarios with varying levels of false positive and negative predictions.
–Followed by the comprehensive review, we recognize and suggest the important research
directions for each of the categories.
Computational 
Complexity 
Reduction 
Attention 
Models Fully 
Convolutional 
Networks Encoder- 
Decoder 
Models Adversarial 
Training 
Model 
Architecture 
Sections 2, 3 LSTM Sequenced 
Models 
Multi-Task Models 
Section 8 Cross Entropy 
based 
Energy 
Minimization Overlap based 
Distance 
based Optimization 
Functions 
Sections 4, 5 
GAN 
Synthesis 
Paired 
Image-to-Image 
Translation Unpaired 
Image-to-Image 
Translation Synthesis based Methods 
Section 6 Bounding Box 
Annotations 
Image-level 
Labels Unsupervised 
Learning 
Regularization   
Priors Weakly 
Supervised 
Methods 
Section 7 LSTM Sequenced 
Models 
RNN 
Detection 
Tracking Classification Multi-Task Models 
Section 8 LSTM 
RNN Sequenced Models 
(a) Topics surveyed in this review.
Couprie et al., 2013 2013 
Long et al., 2015 
Noh et al., 2015 
Ronneberger et al., 2015 
Badrinarayanan et al., 2015 
2015 
Milletari et al., 2016 
Luc et al., 2016 
Kim and Hwang, 2016 2016 
Chen et al., 2017a 
Jégou et al., 2017 
Yang et al., 2017b 
Chartsias et al., 2017 
Salehi et al., 2017 
Lin et al., 2017b 
He et al., 2017 
Chaichulee et al., 2017 
2017 
Chen et al., 2018a,b 
Yu et al., 2018b 
Drozdal et al., 2018 
Bai et al., 2018 
Berman et al., 2018b 
Zhang et al., 2018b,c 
Huo et al., 2018 
Jaeger et al., 2018 2018 
Liu et al., 2019a 
Alom et al., 2019 
Bischke et al., 2019 
Lee et al., 2019 
Kervadec et al., 2019b 
Perone et al., 2019 
2019 Reddick et al., 1997 
Kuntimad and Ranganath, 1999 
Shallow 
Models 
(b) A timeline of the various contributions in deep learning based semantic segmentation of natural and
medical images. The contributions are colored according to their topics in (a) above.
Fig. 1: An overview of the deep learning based segmentation methods covered in this review.

==== Page 4 ====
4 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
(x, y) Input Space 
ŷModel Architecture 
Sections 2, 3 
Optimization Functions 
Sections 4, 5 (x, y) (x’, y’) Synthesis-based Methods 
Section 6 
(x, y) 
Pixel level 
annotations 
Supervised 
Learning Image level 
annotations 
Bounding box 
annotations 
Semi-supervised 
Learning No annotations 
Unsupervised 
Learning 
Weakly Supervised Methods 
Section 7 Multi-Task Models 
Section 8 
Fig. 2: A typical deep neural network based semantic segmentation pipeline. Each compo-
nent in the pipeline indicates the section of this paper that covers the corresponding contri-
butions.
In the following sections, we discuss deep semantic image segmentation improvements
under different categories visualized in Figure 1. For each category, we first review the im-
provements on non-medical datasets, and in a subsequent section, we survey the improve-
ments for medical images.
2 Network Architectural Improvements
This section discusses the advancements in semantic image segmentation using convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs), which have been applied to interpretation tasks on both nat-
ural and medical images (Garcia-Garcia et al., 2018; Litjens et al., 2017). Although artificial
neural network-based image segmentation approaches have been explored in the past using
shallow networks (Reddick et al., 1997; Kuntimad and Ranganath, 1999) as well as works
which relied on superpixel segmentation maps to generate pixelwise predictions (Couprie
et al., 2013), in this work, we focus on deep neural network based image segmentation
models which are end-to-end trainable. The improvements are mostly attributed to explor-
ing new neural architectures (with varying depths, widths, and connectivity or topology) or
designing new types of components or layers.
2.1 Fully Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
As one of the first high impact CNN-based segmentation models, Long et al. (2015) pro-
posed fully convolutional networks for pixel-wise labeling. They proposed up-sampling (de-
convolving) the output activation maps from which the pixel-wise output can be calculated.
The overall architecture of the network is visualized in Figure 3.
In order to preserve the contextual spatial information within an image as the filtered
input data progresses deeper into the network, Long et al. (2015) proposed to fuse the output
with shallower layers’ output. The fusion step is visualized in Figure 4.

==== Page 5 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 5
Fig. 3: Fully convolutional networks can efficiently learn to make dense predictions for per-
pixel tasks like semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015).
Pool3Pool4Pool532x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)16x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)8x up-sampled prediction (FCN-32s)2x up-sampled prediction2x up-sampled prediction
Fig. 4: Upsampling and fusion step of the fully convolution networks (Long et al., 2015).
2.2 Encoder-decoder Semantic Image Segmentation Networks
Next, encoder-decoder segmentation networks (Noh et al., 2015) such as SegNet, were in-
troduced (Badrinarayanan et al., 2015). The role of the decoder network is to map the low-
resolution encoder feature to full input resolution feature maps for pixel-wise classification.
The novelty of SegNet lies in the manner in which the decoder upsamples the lower resolu-
tion input feature maps. Specifically, the decoder uses pooling indices (Figure 5) computed
in the max-pooling step of the corresponding encoder to perform non-linear upsampling.
The architecture (Figure 5) consists of a sequence of non-linear processing layers (encoder)
and a corresponding set of decoder layers followed by a pixel-wise classifier. Typically, each
encoder consists of one or more convolutional layers with batch normalization and a ReLU
non-linearity, followed by non-overlapping max-pooling and sub-sampling. The sparse en-
coding due to the pooling process is upsampled in the decoder using the max-pooling indices
in the encoding sequence.
Ronneberger et al. (2015) proposed an architecture (U-Net; Figure 6) consisting of a
contracting path to capture context and a symmetric expanding path that enables precise lo-
calization. Similar to the image recognition (He et al., 2016) and keypoint detection (Honari
et al., 2016), Ronneberger et al. (2015) added skip connections to the encoder-decoder image
segmentation networks, e.g., SegNet, which improved the model’s accuracy and addressed
the problem of vanishing gradients.
Milletari et al. (2016) proposed a similar architecture (V-Net; Figure 7) which added
residual connections and replaced 2D operations with their 3D counterparts in order to pro-
cess volumetric images. Milletari et al. also proposed optimizing for a widely used segmen-
tation metric, i.e., Dice, which will be discussed in more detail in the section 4.
J´egou et al. (2017) developed a segmentation version of the densely connected networks
architecture (DenseNet (Huang et al. (2017)) by adapting the U-Net like encoder-decoder
skeleton. In Figure 8, the detailed architecture of the network is visualized.

==== Page 6 ====
6 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Pooling indices
Conv + BN + ReluDown samplingUp samplingInputOutput
Fig. 5: Top: An illustration of the SegNet architecture. There are no fully connected lay-
ers, and hence it is only convolutional. Bottom : An illustration of SegNet and FCN (Long
et al., 2015) decoders. a, b, c, d correspond to values in a feature map. SegNet uses the
max-pooling indices to upsample (without learning) the feature map(s) and convolves with
a trainable decoder filter bank. FCN upsamples by learning to deconvolve the input feature
map and adds the corresponding encoder feature map to produce the decoder output. This
feature map is the output of the max-pooling layer (includes sub-sampling) in the corre-
sponding encoder. Note that there are no trainable decoder filters in FCN (Badrinarayanan
et al. (2015)).
Fig. 6: An illustration of the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) architecture.
In Figure 9, we visualize the simplified architectural modifications applied to the first
image segmentation network i.e. FCN.
Several modified versions (e.g. deeper/shallower, adding extra attention blocks) of encoder-
decoder networks have been applied to semantic segmentation (Amirul Islam et al., 2017;

==== Page 7 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 7
Fig. 7: An illustration of the V-Net (Milletari et al., 2016) architecture.
ConvInput
Down
DownDense
UpUpConvOutputDense
Dense
DenseDense
Fig. 8: Diagram of the one-hundred layers Tiramisu network architecture (J ´egou et al.,
2017). The architecture is built from dense blocks. The architecture is composed of a down-
sampling path with two transitions down and an upsampling path with two transitions up.
A circle represents concatenation, and the arrows represent connectivity patterns in the net-
work. Gray horizontal arrows represent skip connections, where the feature maps from the
downsampling path are concatenated with the corresponding feature maps in the upsampling
path. Note that the connectivity pattern in the upsampling and the downsampling paths are
different. In the downsampling path, the input to a dense block is concatenated with its out-
put, leading to linear growth of the number of feature maps, whereas in the upsampling path,
it is not the case.
Fu et al., 2019b; Lin et al., 2017a; Peng et al., 2017; Pohlen et al., 2017; Wojna et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018d). Recently in 2018, DeepLabV3+ (Chen et al., 2018b) has outperformed

==== Page 8 ====
8 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Seg-NetU-NetV-NetTiramisuCross EntropyCross EntropyDiceCross Entropy
FCNCross Entropy
Fig. 9: Gradual architectural improvements applied to FCN (Long et al., 2015) over time.
many state-of-the-art segmentation networks on PASCAL VOC 2012 (Everingham et al.,
2015) and Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) datasets. Zhao et al. (2017b) modified the feature
fusing operation proposed by Long et al. (2015) using a spatial pyramid pooling module
or encode-decoder structure (Figure 10) are used in deep neural networks for semantic seg-
mentation tasks. The spatial pyramid networks are able to encode multi-scale contextual
information by probing the incoming features with filters or pooling operations at multi-
ple rates and multiple effective fields-of-view, while the latter networks can capture sharper
object boundaries by gradually recovering the spatial information.
ConvPoolConvConvConvConvUPConcatenationConvInputOutputPyramid Pooling
Fig. 10: Overview of the pyramid scene parsing networks. Given an input image (a), feature
maps from last convolution layer are pulled (b), then a pyramid parsing module is applied
to harvest different sub-region representations, followed by upsampling and concatenation
layers to form the final feature representation, which carries both local and global context
information in (c). Finally, the representation is fed into a convolution layer to get the final
per-pixel prediction (d) Zhao et al. (2017b).
Chen et al. (2018b) proposed to combine the advantages from both dilated convolutions
and feature pyramid pooling. Specifically, DeepLabv3+, extends DeepLabv3 (Chen et al.
(2017b)) by adding a simple yet effective decoder module (Figure 11) to refine the segmen-
tation results, especially along object boundaries using dilated convolutions and pyramid
features.

==== Page 9 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 9
Dilated ConvConv 1x1Conv 3x3Rate 6Conv 3x3Rate 12Conv 3x3Rate 18ImagepoolingUp-sampleConv 1x1
Up-sampleConv 3x3Conv 1x1DecoderEncoderInput
Output
Fig. 11: An illustration of the DeepLabV3+; The encoder module encodes multi-scale con-
textual information by applying atrous (dilated) convolution at multiple scales, while the
simple yet effective decoder module refines the segmentation results along object bound-
aries (Chen et al., 2018b).
2.3 Computational Complexity Reduction for Image Segmentation Networks
Several works have been done on reducing the time and the computational complexity of
deep classification networks (Howard et al., 2017; Leroux et al., 2018). A few other works
have attempted to simplify the structure of deep networks, e.g., by tensor factorization (Kim
et al., 2015), channel/network pruning (Wen et al., 2016), or applying sparsity to connec-
tions (Han et al., 2016). Similarly, Yu et al. (2018b) addressed the high computational cost
associated with high resolution feature maps in U-shaped architectures by proposing spatial
and context paths to preserve the rich spatial information and obtain a large receptive field.
A few methods have focused on the complexity optimization of deep image segmentation
networks. Similar to the work of Saxena and Verbeek (2016), Liu et al. (2019a) proposed
a hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic image segmentation by performing
both cell and network-level search and achieved comparable results to the state-of-the-art
results on the PASCAL VOC 2012 (Everingham et al., 2015) and Cityscapes (Cordts et al.,
2016) datasets. In contrast, Chen et al. (2018a) focused on searching the much smaller
atrous spatial pyramid pooling module using random search. Depth-wise separable con-
volutions (Sifre, 2014; Chollet, 2017) offer computational complexity reductions since they
have fewer parameters and have therefore also been used in deep segmentation models (Chen
et al., 2018b; Sandler et al., 2018).
Besides network architecture search, Srivastava et al. (2015) modified ResNet in a way
to control the flow of information through a connection. Lin et al. (2017a) adopted one step
fusion without filtering the channels.
2.4 Attention-based Semantic Image Segmentation
Attention can be viewed as using information transferred from several subsequent layer-
s/feature maps to select and localize the most discriminative (or salient) part of the input sig-

==== Page 10 ====
10 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
nal. Wang et al. (2017a) added an attention module to the deep residual network (ResNet) for
image classification. Their proposed attention module consists of several encoding-decoding
layers. Hu et al. (2018a) proposed a selection mechanism where feature maps are first ag-
gregated using global average pooling and reduced to a single channel descriptor. Then an
activation gate is used to highlight the most discriminative features. Wang et al. (2018b)
proposed non-local operation blocks for encoding long range spatio-temporal dependencies
with deep neural networks that can be plugged into existing architectures. Fu et al. (2019a)
proposed dual attention networks that apply both spatial and channel-based attention opera-
tions.
Li et al. (2018) proposed a pyramid attention based network, for semantic segmentation.
They combined an attention mechanism and a spatial pyramid to extract precise dense fea-
tures for pixel labeling instead of complicated dilated convolution and artificially designed
decoder networks. Chen et al. (2016) applied attention to DeepLab (Chen et al., 2017a)
which takes multi-scale inputs.
2.5 Adversarial Semantic Image Segmentation
Goodfellow et al. (2014) proposed an adversarial approach to learn deep generative models.
Their generative adversarial networks (GANs) take samples zfrom a fixed (e.g., standard
Gaussian) distribution pz(z), and transform them using a deterministic differentiable deep
network p(.)to approximate the distribution of training samples x. Inspired by adversarial
learning, Luc et al. (2016) trained a convolutional semantic segmentation network along
with an adversarial network that discriminates segmentation maps coming either from the
ground truth or from the segmentation network. Their loss function is defined as
ℓ(θs,θa) =NX
n=1ℓmce(s(xn),yn)
−λ[ℓbce(a(xn,yn),1) +ℓbce(a(xn, s(xn)),0)],(1)
where θsandθadenote the parameters of the segmentation and adversarial model, respec-
tively. lbceandlmce are binary and multi-class cross-entropy losses, respectively. In this
setup, the segmentor tries to produce segmentation maps that are close to the ground truth,
i.e., which look more realistic.
The main models being used for image segmentation mostly follow encoder-decoder
architectures as U-Net. Recent approaches have shown that dilated convolutions and feature
pyramid pooling can improve the U-Net style networks. In Section 3, we summarize how
these methods and their modified counterparts have been applied to medical images.
3 Architectural Improvements Applied to Medical Images
In this section, we review the different architectural based improvements for deep learning-
based 2D and volumetric medical image segmentation.

==== Page 11 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 11
3.1 Model Compression based Image Segmentation
To perform image segmentation in real-time and be able to process larger images or (sub)
volumes in case of processing volumetric and high-resolution 2D images such as CT, MRI,
and histopathology images, several methods have attempted to compress deep models. Weng
et al. (2019a) applied a neural architecture search method to U-Net to obtain a smaller net-
work with a better organ/tumor segmentation performance on CT, MR, and ultrasound im-
ages. Br ¨ugger et al. (2019) by leveraging group normalization (Wu and He, 2018) and leaky
ReLU function, redesigned the U-Net architecture in order to make the network more mem-
ory efficient for 3D medical image segmentation. Perone et al. (2018) and Bonta and Kiran
(2019) designed a dilated convolution neural network with fewer parameters as compared to
the original convolution-based one. Some other works (Xu et al., 2018; Paschali et al., 2019)
have focused on weight quantization of deep networks for making segmentation networks
smaller.
3.2 Encoder Decoder based Image Segmentation
Drozdzal et al. (2018) proposed to normalize input images before segmentation by applying
a simple CNN prior to pushing the images to the main segmentation network. They showed
improved results on electron microscopy segmentation, liver segmentation from CT, and
prostate segmentation from MRI scans. Gu et al. (2019) proposed using a dilated convolution
block close to the network’s bottleneck to preserve contextual information.
V orontsov et al. (2019), using a dataset defined in Cohen et al. (2018), proposed an
image-to-image based framework to transform an input image with object of interest (pres-
ence domain) like a tumor to an image without the tumor (absence domain) i.e. translate dis-
eased image to healthy; next, their model learns to add the removed tumor to the new healthy
image. This results in capturing detailed structure from the object, which improves the seg-
mentation of the object. Zhou et al. (2018) proposed a rewiring method for the long skip
connections used in U-Net and tested their method on nodule segmentation in the low-dose
CT scans of the chest, nuclei segmentation in the microscopy images, liver segmentation in
abdominal CT scans, and polyp segmentation in colonoscopy videos.
3.3 Attention based Image Segmentation
Nie et al. (2018) designed an attention model to segment prostate from MRI images with
higher accuracy compared to baseline models, e.g., V-Net (Milletari et al., 2016) and FCN (Long
et al., 2015). Sinha and Dolz (2019) proposed a multi-level attention based architecture for
abdominal organ segmentation from MRI images. Qin et al. (2018) proposed a dilated con-
volution base block to preserve more detailed attention in 3D medical image segmentation.
Similarly, other papers (Lian et al., 2018; Isensee et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019b; Ni et al.,
2019; Oktay et al., 2018; Schlemper et al., 2019) have leveraged the attention concept into
medical image segmentation as well.
3.4 Adversarial Training based Image Segmentation
Khosravan et al. (2019) proposed an adversarial training framework for pancreas segmen-
tation from CT scans. Son et al. (2017) applied GANs for retinal image segmentation. Xue

==== Page 12 ====
12 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
et al. (2018) used a fully convolutional network as a segmenter in the generative adversarial
framework to segment brain tumors from MRI images. Other papers (Costa et al., 2017; Dai
et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; Moeskops et al., 2017; Neff et al., 2017; Rezaei et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2017a; Zhang et al., 2017) have also successfully applied adversarial learning to
medical image segmentation.
3.5 Sequenced Models
The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) was designed for handling sequences. The long short-
term memory (LSTM) network is a type of RNN that introduces self-loops to enable the
gradient flow for long duration (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). In the medical image
analysis domain, RNNs have been used to model the temporal dependency in image se-
quences. Bai et al. (2018) proposed an image sequence segmentation algorithm by combin-
ing a fully convolutional network with a recurrent neural network, which incorporates both
spatial and temporal information into the segmentation task. Similarly, Gao et al. (2018)
applied LSTM and CNN to model temporal relationship in brian MRI slices to improve
segmentation performance in 4D volumes. Li et al. (2019a) applied U-Net to obtain initial
segmentation probability maps and further improve them using LSTM for pancreas segmen-
tation from 3D CT scans. Similarly, other works have also applied RNNs (LSTMs) (Alom
et al., 2019; Chakravarty and Sivaswamy, 2018; Yang et al., 2017b; Zhao and Hamarneh,
2019a,b) to medical image segmentation.
4 Optimization Function based Improvements
In addition to improved segmentation speed and accuracy using architectural modifications
as mentioned in Section 2, designing new loss functions has also resulted in improvements
in subsequent inference-time segmentation accuracy.
4.1 Cross Entropy
The most commonly used loss function for the task of image segmentation is a pixel-wise
cross entropy loss (Eqn. 2). This loss examines each pixel individually, comparing the class
predictions vector to the one-hot encoded target (or ground truth) vector. For the case of
binary segmentation, let P(Y= 0) = pandP(Y= 1) = 1 −p. The predictions are given
by the logistic/sigmoid function P(ˆY= 0) =1
1+e−x= ˆpandP(ˆY= 1) = 1 −1
1+e−x=
1−ˆp, where xis output of network. Then cross entropy (CE) can be defined as:
CE(p,ˆp) =−(plog(ˆp) + (1 −p) log(1 −ˆp)). (2)
The general form of the equation for multi-region (or multi-class) segmentation can be writ-
ten as:
CE = −X
classesplog ˆp (3)

==== Page 13 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 13
4.2 Weighted Cross Entropy
The cross-entropy loss evaluates the class predictions for each pixel vector individually and
then averages over all pixels, which implies equal learning to each pixel in the image. This
can be problematic if the various classes have unbalanced representation in the image, as
the most prevalent class can dominate training. Long et al. (2015) discussed weighting the
cross-entropy loss (WCE) for each class in order to counteract a class imbalance present in
the dataset. WCE was defined as:
WCE( p,ˆp) =−(βplog(ˆp) + (1 −p) log(1 −ˆp)). (4)
To decrease the number of false negatives, βis set to a value larger than 1, and to
decrease the number of false positives βis set to a value smaller than 1. To weight the
negative pixels as well, the following balanced cross-entropy (BCE) can be used (Xie and
Tu, 2015).
BCE( p,ˆp) =−(βplog(ˆp) + (1 −β)(1−p) log(1 −ˆp)). (5)
Ronneberger et al. (2015) added a distance function to the cross-entropy function to
enforce learning distance between the components to enforce better segmentation in case of
having very close objects to each other as follows:
BCE( p,ˆp) +w0·exp
−(d1(x) +d2(x))2
2σ2
(6)
where d1(x)andd2(x)are two functions that calculate the distance to the border of nearest
and second cells in their cell segmentation problem.
4.3 Focal Loss
To reduce the contribution of easy examples so that the CNN focuses more on the difficult
examples, Lin et al. (2017b) added the term (1−ˆp)γto the cross entropy loss as:
FL(p,ˆp) =−(α(1−ˆp)γplog(ˆp) +(1 −α)ˆpγ(1−p) log(1 −ˆp)). (7)
Setting γ= 0in this equation yields the BCE loss.
4.4 Overlap Measure based Loss Functions
4.4.1 Dice Loss / F1 Score
Another popular loss function for image segmentation tasks is based on the Dice coefficient,
which is essentially a measure of overlap between two samples and is equivalent to the F1
score. This measure ranges from 0 to 1, where a Dice coefficient of 1 denotes perfect and
complete overlap. The Dice coefficient (DC) is calculated as:
DC =2TP
2TP+FP+FN=2|X∩Y|
|X|+|Y|. (8)

==== Page 14 ====
14 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Similarly, the Jaccard metric (intersection over union: IoU) is computed as:
IoU =TP
TP+FP+FN=|X∩Y|
|X|+|Y|−|X∩Y|(9)
where XandYare the predicted and ground truth segmentation, respectively. TP is the true
positives, FP false positives and FN false negatives. We can see that DC≥IoU.
To use this as a loss function the DC can be defined as a Dice loss (DL) function (Mil-
letari et al., 2016):
DL(p,ˆp) =2⟨p,ˆp⟩
∥p∥1+∥ˆp∥1(10)
where p∈ {0,1}nand0≤ˆp≤1.pandˆpare the ground truth and predicted segmentation
and⟨·,·⟩denotes dot product.
4.4.2 Tversky Loss
Tversky loss (TL) (Salehi et al., 2017) is a generalization of the DL. To control the level of
FP and FN, TL weights them as the following:
TL(p,ˆp) =⟨p,ˆp⟩
⟨p,ˆp⟩+β(1−p,ˆp⟩+ (1−β)(p,1−ˆp)(11)
setting β= 0.5simplifies the equation to Eqn. 10.
4.4.3 Exponential Logarithmic Loss
Wong et al. (2018) proposed using a weighted sum of the exponential logarithmic Dice
loss (Leld) and the weighted exponential cross-entropy loss ( Lwece) in order to improve the
segmentation accuracy on small structures for tasks where there is a large variability among
the sizes of the objects to be segmented.
L=weldLeld+wweceLwece, (12)
where
Leld=E[(−ln (Di))γD],and (13)
Lwece=E[(−ln (pl(x)))γCE]. (14)
x,i, and ldenote the pixel position, the predicted label, and the ground truth label. Di
denotes the smoothed Dice loss (obtained by adding an ϵ= 1 term to the numerator and
denominator in Eqn. 10 in order to handle missing labels while training, and γDandγCE
are used to control the non-linearities of the respective loss functions.

==== Page 15 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 15
4.4.4 Lov ´asz-Softmax loss
Since it has been shown that the Jaccard loss (IoU loss) is submodular (Berman et al.,
2018a), Berman et al. (2018b) proposed using the Lov ´asz hinge with the Jaccard loss for bi-
nary segmentation, and proposed a surrogate of the Jaccard loss, called the Lov ´asz-Softmax
loss, which can be applied for the multi-class segmentation task. The Lov ´asz-Softmax loss
is, therefore, a smooth extension of the discrete Jaccard loss, and is defined as
LLovaszSoftmax =1
|C|X
c∈C∆Jc(m(c)), (15)
where ∆Jc(·)denotes the convex closure of the submodular Jaccard loss, ·denotes that
it is a tight convex closure and polynomial time computable, Cdenotes all the classes, and
Jcandm(c)denote the Jaccard index and the vector of errors for class crespectively.
4.4.5 Boundary Loss
Kervadec et al. (2019a) proposed to calculate boundary loss LBalong with the generalized
Dice loss LGDfunction as
αLGD(θ) + (1 −α)LB(θ), (16)
where the two terms in the loss function are defined as
LGD(θ) = 1 −2wGP
p∈Ωg(p)sθ(p) +wBP
p∈Ω(1−g(p)) (1−sθ(p))
wGP
p∈Ω[sθ(p) +g(p)] +wBP
p∈Ω[2−sθ(p)−g(p)],and (17)
LB(θ) =p∈ΩϕG(p)sθ(p), (18)
where ϕG(p) =−∥p−z∂G(p)∥ifp∈GandϕG(p) =∥p−z∂G(p)∥, otherwise. The
general form integralP
Ωg(p)f(sθ(p))is for foreground andP
Ω(1−g(p))f(1−sθ(p))
for background. wG= 1/P
p∈Ωg(p)2
and
wB= 1/ P
Ω(1−g(p))2.Ωshows the spatial domain.
4.4.6 Conservative Loss
Zhu et al. (2018) proposed the Conservative Loss for in order to achieve a good generaliza-
tion ability in domain adaptation tasks by penalizing the extreme cases and encouraging the
moderate cases. The Conservative Loss is defined as
CL(pt) =λ(1 + loga(pt))2∗loga(−loga(pt)), (19)
where ptis the probability of the prediction towards the ground truth and ais the base of
the logarithm. aandλare empirically chosen to be e(Euler’s number) and 5 respectively.
Other works also include approaches to optimize the segmentation metrics (Nowozin,
2014), weighting the loss function (Roy et al., 2017), and adding regularizers to loss func-
tions to encode geometrical and topological shape priors (BenTaieb and Hamarneh, 2016;
Mirikharaji and Hamarneh, 2018).

==== Page 16 ====
16 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Foreground Background False Negative False Positive
Fig. 12: A comparison of seven loss functions for different extends of overlaps for a large
(left) and a small (right) object.
A significant problem in image segmentation (particularly in medical images) is to over-
come class imbalance for which overlap measure based methods have shown reasonably
good performance in overcoming the imbalance. In Section 5, we summarize the approaches
which use new loss functions, particularly for medical image segmentation or use the (mod-
ified) loss functions mentioned above.
In Figure 12, we visualize the behavior of different loss functions for segmenting large
and small objects. For the parameters of the loss functions, we use the same parameters as
reported by the authors in their respective papers. Therefore, we use β= 0.3in Eqn. 11,
α= 0.25andγ= 2 in Eqn. 7, and γD=γCE= 1,weld= 0.8, and wwece= 0.2in
Eqn. 12. Moving from the left to the right for each plot, the overlap of the predictions and
ground truth mask becomes progressively smaller, i.e., producing more false positives and
false negatives. Ideally, the loss value should monotonically increase as more false positives,
and negatives are predicted. For large objects, almost all the functions follow this assump-
tion; however, for the small objects (right plot), only combo loss and focal loss penalize
monotonically more for larger errors. In other words, the overlap-based functions highly
fluctuate while segmenting small and large objects (also see Figure 13), which results in un-
stable optimization. The loss functions which use cross-entropy as the base and the overlap
measure functions as a weighted regularizer show more stability during training.
5 Optimization Function based Improvements Applied to Medical Images
The standard CE loss function and its weighted versions, as discussed in Section 4, have been
applied to numerous medical image segmentation problems (Isensee et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019b; Lian et al., 2018; Ni et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2018; Oktay et al., 2018; Schlemper et al.,
2019). However, Milletari et al. (2016) found that optimizing CNNs for DL (Eqn. 10) in
some cases, e.g., in the case of having very small foreground objects in a large background,
works better than the original cross-entropy.
Li et al. (2019c) proposed adding the following regularization term to the cross entropy
loss function to encourage smooth segmentation outputs.

==== Page 17 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 17
Fig. 13: Comparison of cross entropy and Dice losses for segmenting small and large ob-
jects. The red pixels show the ground truth and the predicted foregrounds in the left and right
columns respectively. The striped and the pink pixels indicate false negative and false posi-
tive, respectively. For the top row (i.e., large foreground), the Dice loss returns 0.96for one
false negative and for the bottom row (i.e., small object) returns 0.66for one false negative,
whereas the cross entropy loss function outputs 0.83for both the cases. By considering a
false negative and false positive, the output value drops even more in case of using Dice but
the cross entropy stays smooth (i.e., Dice value of 0.93and0.50for large and small object
versus cross entropy loss value of 1.66for both.)
R=NX
i=1Eξ′,ξf 
xi;θ, ξ′
−f(xi;θ, ξ)2(20)
where ξ′andξare different perturbation (e.g., Gaussian noise, network dropout, and ran-
domized data transformation) applied to the input image xi.
Chen et al. (2019) proposed leveraging traditional active contour energy minimization
into CNNs via the following loss function.
Loss = Length + λ·Region (21)
Length =i=1,j=1X
Ωr 
∇uxi,j2+ 
∇uyi,j2+ϵ (22)
where xandyfromuxi,janduyi,jare horizontal and vertical directions, respectively.
Region =i=1,j=1X
Ωui,j(c1−vi,j)2+i=1,j=1X
Ω(1−ui,j) (c2−vi,j)2(23)
where uandvare represented as prediction and a given image, respectively. c1 is set to 1
and c2 to 0. Similar to, Li et al. (2019c), Zhou et al. (2019a) proposed adding a contour
regression term to the weighted cross entropy loss function.
Karimi and Salcudean (2019) optimized Hausdorff distance based function between a
predicted and ground truth segmentation as follows.
fHD(p, q) = Loss( p, q) +λ
1−2P
Ω(p◦q)P
Ω(p2+q2)
(24)
where the second term is the Dice loss function and the first term can be replaced with
three different versions of the Hausdorff distance for pandqi.e. ground truth and predicted
segmentations respectively, as follows;

==== Page 18 ====
18 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Loss( q, p) =1
|Ω|X
Ω
(p−q)2◦ 
dα
p+dα
q
(25)
The parameter αdetermines the level of penalty for larger errors. dpis the distance map
of the ground-truth segmentation as the unsigned distance to the boundary δp. Similarly, dq
is defined as the distance to δq. The◦is Hadamard operation.
Loss( q, p) =1
|Ω|KX
k=1X
Ω
(p−q)2⊖kB
kα(26)
where⊖kdenotes ksuccessive erosions. where
B=
0 1/5 0
1/5 1/5 1/5
0 1/5 0
 (27)
Loss( q, p) =1
|Ω|X
r∈RrαX
Ωh
fs
Br∗pC
◦fq\p+fs(Br∗p)◦fp\q
+fs
Br∗qC
◦fp\q+fs(Br∗q)◦fq\p](28)
where fq\p= (p−q)2q.fsindicates soft thresholding. Brdenotes a circular-shaped
convolutional kernel of radius r. Elements of Brare normalized such that they sum to one.
pC= 1−p. Ground-truth and predicted segmentations, denoted with pandq,
Caliva et al. (2019) proposed to measure distance of each voxel to the boundaries of the
objects and use the weight matrices to penalize a model for error on the boundaries. Kim and
Ye (2019) proposed using level-set energy minimization as a regularizer summed with stan-
dard multi-class cross entropy loss function for semi-supervised brain MRI segmentation
as:
Llevel(Θ;x) =NX
n=1Z
Ωx(r)−cΘ
n2
yΘ
n(r)dr+λNX
n=1Z
Ω∇yΘ
n(r)dr (29)
with
cΘ
n=R
Ωx(r)yΘ
n(r)drR
ΩyΘn(r)dr(30)
where x(r)is the input, yΘ
n(r)is the output of softmax layer, Θrefers to learnable
parameters.
Taghanaki et al. (2019e) discussed the risks of using solo overlap based loss functions
and proposed to use them as regularizes along with a weighted cross entropy to explicitly
handle input and output imbalance as follows;
Combo Loss =α
−1
NNX
i=1β(ti−lnpi) + (1 −β) [(1−ti) ln (1 −pi)]
+ (1−α)KX
i=1 
−2PN
i=1piti+SPN
i=1pi+PN
i=1ti+S!
(31)

==== Page 19 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 19
where αcontrols the amount of Dice term contribution in the loss function L, andβ∈[0,1]
controls the level of model penalization for false positives/negatives: when βis set to a
value smaller than 0.5, FPare penalized more than FN as the term (1−ti) ln (1 −pi)is
weighted more heavily, and vice versa. In their implementation, to prevent division by zero,
the authors perform add-one smoothing (a specific instance of the additive/Laplace/Lidstone
smoothing; Russell and Norvig (2016)), i.e., they add unity constant Sto both the denomi-
nator and numerator of the Dice term.
The majority of the methods discussed in Section 5 have attempted to handle the class
imbalance issue in the input images i.e., small foreground versus large background with
providing weights/penalty terms in the loss function. Other approaches consist of first iden-
tifying the object of interest, cropping around this object, and then performing the task (e.g.,
segmentation) with better-balanced classes. This type of cascade approach has been applied
for the segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions in the spinal cord (Gros et al., 2019).
6 Image Synthesis based Methods
Deep CNNs are heavily reliant on big data to avoid overfitting and class imbalance issues,
and therefore this section focuses on data augmentation, a data-space solution to the problem
of limited data. Apart from standard online image augmentation methods such as geomet-
ric transformations (LeCun et al., 1998; Simard et al., 2003; Cires ¸an et al., 2011, 2012;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012), color space augmentations (Galdran et al., 2017; Yuan, 2017; Ab-
hishek et al., 2020), etc., in this section, we discuss image synthesis methods, the output
of which are novel images rather than modifications to existing images. GANs based aug-
mentation techniques for segmentation tasks have been used for a wide variety of problems
- from remote sensing imagery (Mohajerani et al., 2019) to filamentary anatomical struc-
tures (Zhao et al., 2017a). For a more detailed review of image augmentation strategies in
deep learning, we direct the interested readers to Shorten and Khoshgoftaar (2019).
6.1 Image Synthesis based Methods Applied to Natural Image Segmentation
Neff et al. (2018) trained a Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
to generate labeled image data in the form of image-segmenation mask pairs. They eval-
uated their approach on a dataset of chest X-ray images and the Cityscapes dataset, and
found that the WGAN-GP was able to generate images with sufficient variety and that a
segmentation model trained using GAN-based augmentation only was able to perform bet-
ter than a model trained with geometric transformation based augmentation. Cherian and
Sullivan (2019) proposed to incorporate semantic consistency in image-to-image transla-
tion task by introducing segmentation functions in the GAN architecture and showed that
the semantic segmentation models trained with synthetic images led to considerable per-
formance improvements. Other works include GAN-based data augmentation for domain
adaptation (Huang et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2019) and panoptic data augmentation (Liu
et al., 2019c). However, the majority of GAN based data augmentation has been applied to
medical images (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Next, we discuss the GAN based image
synthesis for augmentation in the field of medical image analysis.

==== Page 20 ====
20 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
6.2 Image Synthesis based Methods Applied to Medical Image Segmentation
Chartsias et al. (2017) used a conditional GAN to generate cardiac MR images from CT
images. They showed that utilizing the synthetic data increased the segmentation accuracy
and that using only the synthetic data led to only a marginal decrease in the segmentation
accuracy. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2018c) proposed a GAN based volume-to-volume trans-
lation for generating MR volumes from corresponding CT volumes and vice versa. They
showed that synthetic data improve segmentation performance on cardiovascular MRI vol-
umes. Huo et al. (2018) proposed an end-to-end synthesis and segmentation network called
EssNet to simultaneously synthesize CT images from unpaired MR images and to segment
CT splenomegaly on unlabeled CT images and showed that their approach yielded better
segmentation performance than even segmentation obtained using models trained using the
manual CT labels. Abhishek and Hamarneh (2019) trained a conditional GAN to generate
skin lesion images from and confined to binary masks, and showed that using the synthe-
sized images led to a higher skin lesion segmentation accuracy. Zhang et al. (2018b) trained
a GAN for translating between digitally reconstructed radiographs and X-ray images and
achieved similar accuracy as supervised training in multi-organ segmentation. Shin et al.
(2018) proposed a method to generate synthetic abnormal MRI images with brain tumors
by training a GAN using two publicly available data sets of brain MRI. Similarly, other
works (Han et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018a) have leveraged GANs to syn-
thesize brain MR images.
7 Weakly Supervised Methods
Collecting large-scale accurate pixel-level annotation is time-consuming and financially ex-
pensive. However, unlabeled and weakly-labeled images can be collected in large amounts
in a relatively fast and cheap manner. As shown in Figure 2, varying levels of supervision
are possible when training deep segmentation models, from pixel-wise annotations (super-
vised learning) and image-level and bounding box annotations (semi-supervised learning)
to no annotations at all (unsupervised learning), the last two of which comprise weak su-
pervision. Therefore, a promising direction for semantic image segmentation is to develop
weakly supervised segmentation models.
7.1 Weakly Supervised Methods Applied to Natural Images
Kim and Hwang (2016) proposed a weakly supervised semantic segmentation network using
unpooling and deconvolution operations, and used feature maps from the deconvolutions
layers to learn scale-invariant features, and evaluated their model on the PASCAL VOC
and chest X-ray image datasets. Lee et al. (2019) used dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
to choose features at random during training and inference and combine the many different
localization maps to generate a single localization map, effectively discovering relationships
between locations in an image, and evaluated their proposed approach on the PASCAL VOC
dataset.

==== Page 21 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 21
7.2 Weakly Supervised Methods Applied to Medical Images
The scarcity of richly annotated medical images is limiting supervised deep learning-based
solutions to medical image analysis tasks (Perone and Cohen-Adad, 2019), such as local-
izing discriminatory radiomic disease signatures. Therefore, it is desirable to leverage un-
supervised and weakly supervised models. Kervadec et al. (2019b) introduced a differen-
tiable term in the loss function for datasets with weakly supervised labels, which reduced
the computational demand for training while also achieving almost similar performance to
full supervision for segmentation of cardiac images. Afshari et al. (2019) used a fully con-
volutional architecture along with a Mumford-Shah functional Mumford and Shah (1989)
inspired loss function to segment lesions from PET scans using only bounding box anno-
tations as supervision. Mirikharaji et al. (2019) proposed to learn spatially adaptive weight
maps to account for spatial variations in pixel-level annotations and used noisy annotations
to train a segmentation model for skin lesions. Taghanaki et al. (2019d) proposed to learn
spatial masks using only image-level labels with minimizing mutual information between
the input and masks, and at the same time maximizing the mutual information between
the masks and image labels. Peng et al. (2019) proposed an approach to train a CNN with
discrete constraints and regularization priors based on the alternating direction method of
multipliers (ADMM). Perone and Cohen-Adad (2018) expanded the semi-supervised mean
teacher (Tarvainen and Valpola, 2017) approach to segmentation tasks on MRI data, and
show that it can bring important improvements in a realistic small data regime. In another
work, Perone et al. (2019) extended the method of unsupervised domain adaptation using
self-ensembling for the semantic segmentation task. They showed how this approach could
improve the generalization of the models even when using a small amount of unlabeled data.
8 Multi-Task Models
Multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997) refers to a machine learning approach where multiple
tasks are learned simultaneously, and the learning efficiency and the model performance
on each of the tasks are improved because of the existing commonalities across the tasks.
For visual recognition tasks, it has been shown that there exist relations between various
tasks in the task space (Zamir et al., 2018), and multi-task models can help exploit these
relationships to improve performance on the related tasks.
8.1 Multi-Task Models Applied to Natural Images
Bischke et al. (2019) proposed a cascaded multi-task loss to preserve boundary information
from segmentation masks for segmenting building footprints and achieved state-of-the-art
performance on an aerial image labeling task. He et al. (2017) extended Faster R-CNN (Ren
et al., 2015) by adding a new branch to predict the object mask along with a class label
and a bounding box, and the proposed model was called Mask R-CNN. Mask R-CNN has
been used extensively for multi-task segmentation models for a wide range of application
areas (Abdulla, 2017), such as adding sports fields to OpenStreetMap (Remillard, 2018), de-
tection and segmentation for surgery robots (SUYEgit, 2018), understanding climate change
patterns from aerial imagery of the Arctic (Zhang et al., 2018a), converting satellite imagery
to maps (Mohanty, 2018), detecting image forgeries (Wang et al., 2019d), and segmenting
tree canopy (Zhao et al., 2018).

==== Page 22 ====
22 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
8.2 Multi-Task Models Applied to Medical Images
Chaichulee et al. (2017) extended the VGG16 architecture (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014)
to include a global average pooling layer for patient detection and a fully convolutional net-
work for skin segmentation. The proposed model was evaluated on images from a clinical
study conducted at a neonatal intensive care unit, and was robust to changes in lighting, skin
tone, and pose. He et al. (2019) trained a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015)-like encoder-
decoder architecture to simultaneously segment thoracic organs from CT scans and perform
global slice classification. Ke et al. (2019) trained a multi-task U-Net architecture to solve
three tasks - separating wrongly connected objects, detecting class instances, and pixel-
wise labeling for each object, and evaluated it on a food microscopy image dataset. Other
multi-task models have also been proposed for segmentation and classification for detecting
manipulated faces in images and video (Nguyen et al., 2019) and diagnosis of breast biopsy
images (Mehta et al., 2018) and mammograms (Le et al., 2019).
Mask R-CNN has also been used for segmentation tasks in medical image analysis such
as automatically segmenting and tracking cell migration in phase-contrast microscopy (Tsai
et al., 2019), detecting and segmenting nuclei from histological and microscopic images (John-
son, 2018; Vuola et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a,b), detecting and segmenting oral dis-
eases (Anantharaman et al., 2018), segmenting neuropathic ulcers (Gamage et al., 2019),
and labeling and segmenting ribs in chest X-rays (Wessel et al., 2019). Mask R-CNN has
also been extended to work with 3D volumes and has been evaluated on lung nodule de-
tection and segmentation from CT scans and breast lesion detection and categorization on
diffusion MR images (Jaeger et al., 2018; Kopelowitz and Engelhard, 2019).
9 Segmentation Evaluation Metrics and Datasets
9.1 Evaluation Metrics
The quantitative evaluation of segmentation models can be performed using pixel-wise and
overlap based measures. For binary segmentation, pixel-wise measures involve the construc-
tion of a confusion matrix to calculate the number of true positive (TP), true negative (TN),
false positive (FP), and false negative (FN) pixels, and then calculate various metrics such
as precision, recall (also known as sensitivity), specificity, and overall pixel-wise accuracy.
They are defined as follows:
Precision =TP
TP+FP, (32)
Recall or Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN, (33)
Specificity =TN
TN+FP,and, (34)
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN. (35)
Two popular overlap-based measures used to evaluate segmentation performance are the
Sørensen–Dice coefficient (also known as the Dice coefficient) and the Jaccard index (also
known as the intersection over union or IoU). Given two sets AandB, these metrics are
defined as:

==== Page 23 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 23
Dice coefficient ,Dice(A,B) = 2|A ∩ B|
|A|+|B|,and, (36)
Jaccard index ,Jaccard (A,B) =|A ∩ B|
|A ∪ B|. (37)
For binary segmentation masks, these overlap-based measures can also be calculated
from the confusion matrix as shown in Equations 8 and 9 respectively. The two measures
are related by:
Jaccard =Dice
2−Dice. (38)
(a) Ground truth binary mask
 (b) Predicted binary mask
 (c) Overlap between the masks.
Fig. 14: A 5×5overlap scenario with (a) the ground truth, (b) the predicted binary masks,
and (c) the overlap. In (a) and (b), black and white pixels denote the foreground and the
background respectively. In (c), green, grey, blue, and red pixels denote TP, TN, FP, and FN
pixels respectively.
Figure 14 contains a simple overlap scenario, with the ground truth and the predicted
binary masks with a spatial resolution 5×5. Let black pixels denote the object to be seg-
mented. The confusion matrix for this can be constructed as shown in Table 1. Using the ex-
pressions above, we can calculate the metrics as precision =7
8= 0.875, recall =7
10= 0.7,
specificity =14
15= 0.9333 , pixel-wise accuracy =21
25= 0.84, Dice coefficient =7
9=
0.7778 , and Jaccard index =7
11= 0.6364 .
Table 1: Confusion matrix for the overlap scenario shown in Figure 14.
Ground Truth
Background Object
PredictionBackground 14 3
Object 1 7
9.2 Semantic Segmentation Datasets for Natural Images
Next, we briefly discuss the most popular and widely used datasets for the semantic segmen-
tation of natural images. These datasets cover various categories of scenes, such as indoor
and outdoor environments, common objects, urban street view as well as generic scenes. For
a comprehensive review of the natural image datasets that segmentation models are usually
benchmarked upon, we direct the interested readers to Lateef and Ruichek (2019).

==== Page 24 ====
24 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Table 2: A summary of papers for semantic segmentation of natural images applied to PAS-
CAL VOC 2012 dataset.
PaperType of
ImprovementDataset(s) evaluated onPASCAL VOC
2012 mean IoU
SegNet (Noh et al. (2015)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, CamVid, SUN RGB-D 59.1%
FCN (Long et al. (2015)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, NYUDv2, SIFT Flow 62.2%
Luc et al. (2016)Adversarial
SegmentationPASCAL VOC, Stanford Background 73.3%
Lov´asz-Softmax Loss Berman et al. (2018b) Loss PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes 76.44%
Large Kernel Matters (Peng et al. (2017)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes 82.2%
Deep Layer Cascade (Li et al. (2017)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes 82.7%
TuSimple (Wang et al. (2018a)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, KITTI Road Estimation 83.1%
RefineNet (Lin et al. (2017a)) ArchitecturePASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context, Person-Part,
NYUDv2, SUN RGB-D, Cityscapes, ADE20K84.2%
ResNet-38 (Wu et al. (2019)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context, Cityscapes 84.9%
PSPNet (Zhao et al. (2017b)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes 85.4%
Auto-DeepLab (Liu et al. (2019a))Architecture
SearchPASCAL VOC, ADE20K, Cityscapes 85.6%
IDW-CNN (Wang et al. (2017b)) Architecture PASCAL VOC 86.3%
SDN+ (Fu et al. (2019b)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, CamVid, Gatech 86.6%
DIS (Luo et al. (2017)) Architecture PASCAL VOC 86.8%
DeepLabV3 (Chen et al. (2017b)) Architecture PASCAL VOC 86.9%
MSCI (Lin et al. (2018)) ArchitecturePASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context, NYUDv2,
SUN RGB-D88.0%
DeepLabV3+ (Chen et al. (2018b)) Architecture PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes 89.0%
– Pascal VOC datasets : The PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge (Ever-
ingham et al., 2010) was an annual challenge that ran from 2005 through 2012 and had
annotations for several tasks such as classification, detection, and segmentation. The seg-
mentation task was first introduced in the 2007 challenge and featured objects belonging
to 20 classes. The last offering of the challenge, the PASCAL VOC 2012 challenge, con-
tained segmentation annotations for 2,913 images across 20 object classes (Everingham
et al., 2015).
– PASCAL Context : The PASCAL Context dataset (Mottaghi et al., 2014) extended the
PASCAL VOC 2010 Challenge dataset by providing pixel-wise annotations for the im-
ages, resulting in a much larger dataset with 19,740 annotated images and labels belong-
ing to 540 categories.
– Cityscapes : The Cityscapes dataset (Cordts et al., 2016) contains annotated images of
urban street scenes. The data was collected during daytime from 50 cities and exhibits
variance in the season of the year and traffic conditions. Semantic, instance wise, and
dense pixel-wise annotations are provided, with ‘fine’ annotations for 5,000 images and
‘coarse’ annotations for 20,000 images.
– ADE20K : The ADE20K dataset (Zhou et al., 2017) contains 25,210 images from other
existing datasets, e.g, the LabelMe (Russell et al., 2008), the SUN (Xiao et al., 2010),
and the Places (Zhou et al., 2014) datasets. The images are annotated with labels belong-
ing to 150 classes for “scenes, objects, parts of objects, and in some cases even parts of
parts”.

==== Page 25 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 25
Table 3: A summary of medical image segmentation papers along with their type of proposed
improvement. *indicates the count at the highest level. For example, if a paper reports
counts of patients, volumes, slices, etc., we report the count of patients.
Paper Type of ImprovementTraining Data
[Modality (Site, Count*)]
Ronneberger et al. (2015)Architecture
OptimizationEM (Drosophilia, 30)
Microscopy (Cells, 35)
Microscopy (HeLa cells, 20)
Milletari et al. (2016)Architecture
OptimizationMRI (Prostate, 50)
BenTaieb and Hamarneh (2016) Optimization Histology (Colon, 70)
Yang et al. (2017b) Sequenced Models US (Prostate, 17)
Salehi et al. (2017) Optimization MRI (Multiple sclerosis lesions. 15)
Chartsias et al. (2017) Synthesis-based CT (Heart, 20); MRI (Heart, 20)
Chaichulee et al. (2017) Multi-Task Models RGB (Skin, 4603)
Drozdzal et al. (2018) ArchitectureEM (Drosophilia, 30)
CT (Liver, 77); MRI (Prostate, 50)
Zhou et al. (2018) ArchitectureMicroscopy (Cell nuclei, 670)
RGB (Colon polyp, 7379)
CT (Liver, 331)
CT (Lung nodule, 1012)
Oktay et al. (2018) ArchitectureCT (Abdominal, 150)
CT (Pancreas, 82)
Xue et al. (2018) Architecture MRI (Brain, 246)
Zhang et al. (2018c) Synthesis-based CT (Heart, 4354); MRI (Heart, 142)
Shin et al. (2018) Synthesis-based MRI (Brain, 211)
Johnson (2018) Multi-Task Models Microscopy (Cell nuclei, 664)
Jaeger et al. (2018) Multi-Task ModelsCT (Lung nodule, 1035)
MRI (Breast, 331)
Mehta et al. (2018) Multi-Task Models Histology (Breast, 428)
Huo et al. (2018) Synthesis-based MRI (Spleen, 60); CT (Spleen, 19)
Alom et al. (2019) Sequenced ModelsFundus (Retinal vessel, 20)
Fundus (Retinal vessel, 20)
Fundus (Retinal vessel, 28)
RGB (Skin, 1250); X-ray (Lung, 373)
Kervadec et al. (2019b)Weakly Supervised
OptimizationMRI (Heart, 75)
MRI (Vertebral body, 15)
MRI (Prostate, 40)
Perone et al. (2019) Weakly Supervised MRI (Spinal cord, 40)
– CamVid : The Cambridge-driving Labeled Video Database (CamVid) (Brostow et al.,
2008, 2009) contains 10 minutes of video captured at 30 frames per second from a driv-

==== Page 26 ====
26 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
ing automobile’s perspective, along with pixel-wise semantic segmentation annotations
for 701 frames and 32 object classes.
Table 2 lists a summary of selected papers from this review, the nature of their proposed
contributions, and the datasets that they were evaluated on. For the papers that evaluated
their models on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset (Everingham et al., 2012), one of the most
popular image semantic segmentation dataset for natural images, we also list their reported
mean IoU scores. As can be seen in Table 2, the focus has been mostly on architectural im-
provements. Comparing the first deep learning-based model (i.e., FCN (Long et al., 2015))
to the state-of-the-art model (i.e., DeepLabV3+ (Chen et al., 2018b)) there is a large im-
provement (i.e. ∼27% , i.e., 62.2% to 89.0% ) in terms of mean IoU. The latter model
leverages a more sophisticated decoder, dilated convolutions, and feature pyramid pooling.
9.3 Semantic Segmentation Datasets for Medical Images
In contrast to natural images, it is difficult to tabulate and summarize the performance of
medical image segmentation methods because of the vast number of (a) medical imaging
modalities and (b) medical image segmentation datasets. Figure 15 presents a breakdown
of the various attributes of the medical image segmentation papers surveyed in this review,
color coded similar to Figure 1. As shown in Figure 15 (b), the papers covered in this review
use 13 medical imaging modalities. Figure 15 (c) shows the distribution of the number of
samples across datasets from multiple modalities. We observe that modalities which are
expensive to acquire and annotate (such as electron microscopy (EM), PET, and MRI) have
smaller dataset sizes than relative cheaper to acquire modalities such as RGB images (e.g.,
skin lesion images), ultrasound (US) and X-ray images. We also present a summary of the
popular medical image segmentation papers in Table 3 and include the entire table in the
Supplementary Material.
A similar observation can be made by looking at the medical image segmentation com-
petitions. Grand Challenges in Biomedical Image Analysis (Challenge, 2020) provides a
comprehensive but not exhaustive list of publicly available medical image segmentation
challenges, and since 2007, there have been 94 segmentation challenges for medical images
and volumes from as many as 12 imaging modalities. Figure 16 shows the number of these
challenges for every year since 2007, and it can be seen that this number has been on the
rise in the past few years.
10 Discussion and Future Directions
In the following sections, we discuss in detail the potential future research directions for
semantic segmentation of natural and medical images.
10.1 Architectures
Encoder-decoder networks with long and short skip connections are the winning architec-
tures according to the state-of-the-art methods. Skip connections in deep networks have
improved both segmentation and classification performance by facilitating the training of
deeper network architectures and reducing the risks for vanishing gradients. They equip

==== Page 27 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 27
(a) The various categories of contributions.
 (b) The various medical imaging modalities.
(c) The distribution of dataset sizes across multiple imaging
modalities.
Fig. 15: Analyzing the attributes of the medical image segmentation papers discussed in this
review. The large number of medical imaging modalities (b) as well as the smaller average
dataset sizes for medical image segmentation datasets (c) as compared to natural images
(as discussed in Section 9.2) make it difficult to benchmark the performance of various
approaches. In (b), PET (1.1%), OCT (0.6%), and topogram (0.6%) make up the ‘Other’
label.
encoder-decoder-like networks with richer feature representations, but at the cost of higher
memory usage, computation, and possibly resulting in transferring non-discriminative fea-
ture maps. Similar to Taghanaki et al. (2019c), one future work direction is to optimize the
amount of data is being transferred through skip connections. As for the cell level architec-
tural design, our study shows that atrous convolutions with feature pyramid pooling modules
are highly being used in the recent models. These approaches are somehow modifications
of the classical convolution blocks. Similar to the radial basis function layers in Meyer et al.
(2018) and Taghanaki et al. (2019a), a future work focus can be designing new layers that
capture a new aspect of data as opposed to convolutions or transform the convolution fea-
tures into a new manifold. Another useful research direction is using neural architecture
search (Zoph and Le, 2016) to search for optimal deep neural network architectures for
segmentation (Liu et al., 2019a; Zhu et al., 2019; Shaw et al., 2019; Weng et al., 2019b).

==== Page 28 ====
28 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Fig. 16: The number of medical image segmentation challenges every year since 2007 listed
on Grand Challenges (Challenge, 2020), along with a imaging modality-wise breakdown.
Note that for many challenges, the data is multi-modal, and therefore the breakdown takes
that into account.
10.2 Sequenced Models
For image segmentation, sequenced models can be used to segment temporal data such as
videos. These models have also been applied to 3D medical datasets, however the advantage
of processing volumetric data using 3D convolutions versus the processing the volume slice
by slice using 2D sequenced models. Ideally, seeing the whole object of interest in a 3D
volume might help to capture the geometrical information of the object, which might be
missed in processing a 3D volume slice by slice. Therefore a future direction in this area can
be through analysis of sequenced models versus volumetric convolution-based approaches.
10.3 Optimization Functions
In medical image segmentation works, researchers have converged toward using classical
cross-entropy loss functions along with a second distance or overlap based functions. Incor-
porating domain/prior knowledge (such as coding the location of different organs explicitly
in a deep model) is more sensible in the medical datasets. As shown in Taghanaki et al.
(2019e), when only a distance-based or overlap-based loss function is used in a network, and
the final layer applies sigmoid function, the risk of gradient vanishing increases. Although
overlap based loss function are used in case of a class imbalance (small foregrounds), in
Figure 13, we show how using ( only) overlap based loss functions as the main term can
be problematic for smooth optimization where they highly penalize a model under/over-
segmenting a small foreground. However, the cross-entropy loss returns a reasonable score
for the same cases. Besides using integrated cross-entropy based loss functions, future work
can be exploring a single loss function that follows the behavior of the cross-entropy and at
the same time, offers more features such capturing contour distance. This can be achieved by
revisiting the current distance and overlap based loss functions. Another future path can be
exploring auto loss function (or regularization term) search similar to the neural architecture

==== Page 29 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 29
search mentioned above. Similarly, gradient based optimizations based on Sobolev (Adams
and Fournier, 2003) gradients (Czarnecki et al., 2017), such as the works of Goceri (2019b,
2020) are an interesting research direction.
10.4 Other Potential Directions
–Going beyond pixel intensity-based scene understanding by incorporating prior knowl-
edge, which have been an active area of research for the past several decades (Nosrati
and Hamarneh, 2016; Xie et al., 2020). Encoding prior knowledge in medical image
analysis models is generally more possible as compared to natural images. Currently,
deep models receive matrices of intensity values, and usually, they are not forced to
learn prior information. Without explicit reinforcement, the models might still learn ob-
ject relations to some extent. However, it is difficult to interpret a learned strategy.
–Because of the large number of imaging modalities, the significant signal noise present
in imaging modalities such as PET and ultrasound, and the limited amount of medical
imaging data mainly because of high acquisition cost compounded by legal, ethical,
and privacy issues, it is difficult to develop universal solutions that yield acceptable
performances across various imaging modalities. Therefore, a proper research direction
would be along the work of Raghu et al. (2019) on image classification models, studying
the risks of using non-medical pre-trained models for medical image segmentation.
–Creating large 2D and 3D publicly available medical benchmark datasets for seman-
tic image segmentation such as the Medical Segmentation Decathlon (Simpson et al.,
2019). Medical imaging datasets are typically much smaller in size than natural image
datasets (Jin et al., 2020), and the curation of larger public datasets for medical imaging
modalities will allow researchers to accurately compare proposed approaches and make
incremental improvements for specific datasets and problems.
–A possible solution to address the paucity of sufficient annotated medical data is the
development and use of physics based imaging simulators, the outputs of which can
be used to train segmentation models and augment existing segmentation datasets. Sev-
eral platforms (Marion et al., 2011; Glatard et al., 2013) as well as simulators already
exist for various imaging modalities such as SIMRI (Benoit-Cattin et al., 2005) and
POSSUM (Drobnjak et al., 2006, 2010) for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), PET-
SORTEO (Reilhac et al., 2005) and SimSET (Harrison and Lewellen, 2012) for emis-
sion tomography, SINDBAD (Tabary et al., 2007) for computed tomography (CT), and
FIELD-II (Jensen and Svendsen, 1992; Jensen, 1996) and SIMUS (Shahriari and Gar-
cia, 2018) for ultrasound imaging as well as anatomical regions of interest such as Vas-
cuSynth (Hamarneh and Jassi, 2010) for vascular trees.
–Medical images, both 2D and volumetric, have in general, larger file sizes than natural
images, which inhibits the ability to load them entirely onto the memory for processing.
As such, they need to be processed either as patches or sub-volumes, making it difficult
for the segmentation models to capture spatial relationships in order to perform accurate
segmentation. Therefore, an interesting and potentially very useful research direction
would be coming up with architectures and training methods that can incorporate spatial
relationships from large medical images and volumes in the models.
–Exploring reinforcement learning approaches similar to Song et al. (2018) and Wang
et al. (2018c) for semantic (medical) image segmentation to mimic the way humans
delineate objects of interest. Deep CNNs are successful in extracting features of different
classes of objects, but they lose the local spatial information of where the borders of an

==== Page 30 ====
30 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
object should be. Some researchers resort to traditional computer vision methods such as
conditional random fields (CRFs) to overcome this problem, which however, add more
computation time to the models.
–Studying the causes for some models and datasets being prone to false positive and
false negative predictions in the image segmentation context as found by Berman et al.
(2018b) and Taghanaki et al. (2019e).
–Exploring segmentation-free approaches (Zhen and Li, 2015; Hussain et al., 2017; Taghanaki
et al., 2018; Mukherjee et al., 2019; Proenca and Neves, 2019), i.e., bypassing the seg-
mentation step according to the target problem.
–Weakly supervised segmentation using image-level labels versus a few images with seg-
mentation annotations. Most new weakly supervised localization methods apply atten-
tion maps or region proposals in a multiple instance learning formulations. While atten-
tion maps can be noisy, leading to erroneously highlighted regions, it is not simple to
decide on an optimal window or bag size for multiple instance learning approaches.
–While most deep segmentation models for medical image analysis rely on only clinical
images for their predictions, there is often multi-modal patient data in the form of other
imaging modalities as well as patient metadata that can provide valuable information,
which most deep segmentation models do not use. Therefore, a valuable research direc-
tion for improving segmentation performance of medical images would be to develop
models which are able to leverage multi-modal patient data.
–Modifying input instead of the model, loss function, and adding more train data. Drozdzal
et al. (2018) showed that attaching a pre-processing module at the beginning of a seg-
mentation network improves the network performance. Taghanaki et al. (2019b) lever-
aged the gradients of a trained segmentation network with respect to the input to transfer
it to a new space where the segmentation accuracy improves.
–Deep neural networks are trained using error backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986)
and gradient descent for optimizing the network weights. However, there have been
many neural network optimization techniques which do not rely on backpropagation,
such as credit assignment (Bengio and Frasconi, 1994), neuroevolution (Stanley and
Miikkulainen, 2002), difference target propagation (Lee et al., 2015), training with local
error signals (Nøkland and Eidnes, 2019) and several other techniques (Amit, 2019;
Bellec et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019). Exploring these and similar other techniques to
optimize deep neural networks for semantic segmentation would be another valuable
research direction.
References
Abdulla W (2017) Mask R-CNN for object detection and instance segmentation on Keras
and TensorFlow. https://github.com/matterport/Mask_RCNN
Abhishek K, Hamarneh G (2019) Mask2Lesion: Mask-constrained adversarial skin lesion
image synthesis. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention Work-
shop on Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging pp 71–80
Abhishek K, Hamarneh G, Drew MS (2020) Illumination-based transformations improve
skin lesion segmentation in dermoscopic images. arXiv preprint arXiv:200310111
Adams RA, Fournier JJ (2003) Sobolev spaces. Elsevier
Afshari S, BenTaieb A, Mirikharaji Z, Hamarneh G (2019) Weakly supervised fully convo-
lutional network for PET lesion segmentation. In: Medical Imaging 2019: Image Process-
ing, International Society for Optics and Photonics, vol 10949, p 109491K

==== Page 31 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 31
Alom MZ, Yakopcic C, Hasan M, Taha TM, Asari VK (2019) Recurrent residual U-Net for
medical image segmentation. Journal of Medical Imaging 6(1):14006
Amirul Islam M, Rochan M, Bruce ND, Wang Y (2017) Gated feedback refinement network
for dense image labeling. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp 3751–3759
Amit Y (2019) Deep learning with asymmetric connections and hebbian updates. Frontiers
in Computational Neuroscience 13, DOI 10.3389/fncom.2019.00018, URL https://
doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2019.00018
Anantharaman R, Velazquez M, Lee Y (2018) Utilizing Mask R-CNN for detection and
segmentation of oral diseases. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine pp 2197–2204
Badrinarayanan V , Handa A, Cipolla R (2015) Segnet: A deep convolutional encoder-
decoder architecture for image segmentation. arXiv:151100561
Bai W, Suzuki H, Qin C, Tarroni G, Oktay O, Matthews PM, Rueckert D (2018) Recur-
rent neural networks for aortic image sequence segmentation with sparse annotations. In:
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interven-
tion, Springer, pp 586–594
Bellec G, Scherr F, Hajek E, Salaj D, Legenstein R, Maass W (2019) Biologically inspired
alternatives to backpropagation through time for learning in recurrent neural nets. arXiv
preprint arXiv:190109049
Bengio Y , Frasconi P (1994) Credit assignment through time: Alternatives to backpropaga-
tion. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 75–82
Benoit-Cattin H, Collewet G, Belaroussi B, Saint-Jalmes H, Odet C (2005) The
SIMRI project: a versatile and interactive MRI simulator. Journal of Magnetic Res-
onance 173(1):97–115, DOI 10.1016/j.jmr.2004.09.027, URL https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmr.2004.09.027
BenTaieb A, Hamarneh G (2016) Topology aware fully convolutional networks for histol-
ogy gland segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 460–468
Berman M, Blaschko MB, Triki AR, Yu J (2018a) Yes, IoU loss is submodular-as a function
of the mispredictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:180901845
Berman M, Rannen Triki A, Blaschko MB (2018b) The Lov ´asz-Softmax loss: A tractable
surrogate for the optimization of the intersection-over-union measure in neural networks.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp
4413–4421
Bischke B, Helber P, Folz J, Borth D, Dengel A (2019) Multi-task learning for segmentation
of building footprints with deep neural networks. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Image Processing, IEEE, pp 1480–1484
Bonta LR, Kiran NU (2019) Efficient segmentation of medical images using dilated resid-
ual networks. In: Computer Aided Intervention and Diagnostics in Clinical and Medical
Images, Springer, pp 39–47
Borji A, Cheng MM, Hou Q, Jiang H, Li J (2019) Salient object detection: A survey. Com-
putational Visual Media 5(2):117–150, DOI 10.1007/s41095-019-0149-9, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s41095-019-0149-9
Brostow GJ, Shotton J, Fauqueur J, Cipolla R (2008) Segmentation and recognition using
structure from motion point clouds. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp 44–57, DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-88682-2 5, URL https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88682-2_5

==== Page 32 ====
32 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Brostow GJ, Fauqueur J, Cipolla R (2009) Semantic object classes in video: A high-
definition ground truth database. Pattern Recognition Letters 30(2):88–97, DOI 10.1016/
j.patrec.2008.04.005, URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2008.04.
005
Br¨ugger R, Baumgartner CF, Konukoglu E (2019) A partially reversible U-Net for memory-
efficient volumetric image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:190606148
Caliva F, Iriondo C, Martinez AM, Majumdar S, Pedoia V (2019) Distance map loss penalty
term for semantic segmentation. International Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep
Learning
Caruana R (1997) Multitask learning. Machine Learning 28(1):41–75
Chaichulee S, Villarroel M, Jorge J, Arteta C, Green G, McCormick K, Zisserman A,
Tarassenko L (2017) Multi-task convolutional neural network for patient detection and
skin segmentation in continuous non-contact vital sign monitoring. In: 2017 12th IEEE
International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, IEEE, pp 266–272
Chakravarty A, Sivaswamy J (2018) RACE-Net: a recurrent neural network for biomedical
image segmentation. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 23(3):1151–
1162
Challenge G (2020) Grand challenges in biomedical image analysis. URL https://
grand-challenge.org/challenges/
Chartsias A, Joyce T, Dharmakumar R, Tsaftaris SA (2017) Adversarial image synthesis
for unpaired multi-modal cardiac data. In: International Workshop on Simulation and
Synthesis in Medical Imaging, Springer, pp 3–13
Chen LC, Yang Y , Wang J, Xu W, Yuille AL (2016) Attention to scale: Scale-aware semantic
image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp 3640–3649
Chen LC, Papandreou G, Kokkinos I, Murphy K, Yuille AL (2017a) Deeplab: Semantic
image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected
crfs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 40(4):834–848
Chen LC, Papandreou G, Schroff F, Adam H (2017b) Rethinking atrous convolution for
semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:170605587
Chen LC, Collins M, Zhu Y , Papandreou G, Zoph B, Schroff F, Adam H, Shlens J (2018a)
Searching for efficient multi-scale architectures for dense image prediction. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 8699–8710
Chen LC, Zhu Y , Papandreou G, Schroff F, Adam H (2018b) Encoder-decoder with atrous
separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision, pp 801–818
Chen X, Williams BM, Vallabhaneni SR, Czanner G, Williams R, Zheng Y (2019) Learn-
ing active contour models for medical image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 11632–11640
Cherian A, Sullivan A (2019) Sem-GAN: Semantically-consistent image-to-image transla-
tion. In: 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
IEEE, DOI 10.1109/wacv.2019.00196, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/wacv.
2019.00196
Choi J, Kim T, Kim C (2019) Self-ensembling with gan-based data augmentation for domain
adaptation in semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pp 6830–6840
Chollet F (2017) Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 1251–
1258

==== Page 33 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 33
Cires ¸an D, Meier U, Schmidhuber J (2012) Multi-column deep neural networks for image
classification. In: 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
IEEE, pp 3642–3649
Cires ¸an DC, Meier U, Masci J, Gambardella LM, Schmidhuber J (2011) High-performance
neural networks for visual object classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:11020183
Cohen JP, Luck M, Honari S (2018) Distribution Matching Losses Can Hallucinate Features
in Medical Image Translation. Medical Image Computing & Computer Assisted Inter-
vention
Cordts M, Omran M, Ramos S, Rehfeld T, Enzweiler M, Benenson R, Franke U, Roth
S, Schiele B (2016) The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp
3213–3223
Costa P, Galdran A, Meyer MI, Abr `amoff MD, Niemeijer M, Mendonc ¸a AM, Campilho A
(2017) Towards adversarial retinal image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:170108974
Couprie C, Farabet C, Najman L, LeCun Y (2013) Indoor semantic segmentation using
depth information. arXiv preprint arXiv:13013572
Czarnecki WM, Osindero S, Jaderberg M, Swirszcz G, Pascanu R (2017) Sobolev training
for neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 4278–
4287
Dai W, Dong N, Wang Z, Liang X, Zhang H, Xing EP (2018) SCAN: Structure correcting
adversarial network for organ segmentation in chest X-rays. In: Deep Learning in Medical
Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support, Springer, pp
263–273
Drobnjak I, Gavaghan D, S ¨uli E, Pitt-Francis J, Jenkinson M (2006) Development of a func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging simulator for modeling realistic rigid-body motion ar-
tifacts. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 56(2):364–380, DOI 10.1002/mrm.20939, URL
https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.20939
Drobnjak I, Pell GS, Jenkinson M (2010) Simulating the effects of time-varying
magnetic fields with a realistic simulated scanner. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
28(7):1014–1021, DOI 10.1016/j.mri.2010.03.029, URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mri.2010.03.029
Drozdzal M, Chartrand G, V orontsov E, Shakeri M, Di Jorio L, Tang A, Romero A, Bengio
Y , Pal C, Kadoury S (2018) Learning normalized inputs for iterative estimation in medical
image segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 44:1–13
Everingham M, Gool LV , Williams CKI, Winn J, Zisserman A (2010) The pascal
visual object classes (VOC) challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
88(2):303–338, DOI 10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4, URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11263-009-0275-4
Everingham M, Van Gool L, Williams CKI, Winn J, Zisserman A (2012) The PAS-
CAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012) Results. http://www.pascal-
network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html
Everingham M, Eslami SA, Van Gool L, Williams CK, Winn J, Zisserman A (2015) The
PASCAL visual object classes challenge: A retrospective. International Journal of Com-
puter Vision 111(1):98–136
Fu J, Liu J, Tian H, Li Y , Bao Y , Fang Z, Lu H (2019a) Dual attention network for scene
segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp 3146–3154
Fu J, Liu J, Wang Y , Zhou J, Wang C, Lu H (2019b) Stacked deconvolutional network for
semantic segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing

==== Page 34 ====
34 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Galdran A, Alvarez-Gila A, Meyer MI, Saratxaga CL, Ara ´ujo T, Garrote E, Aresta G, Costa
P, Mendonc ¸a AM, Campilho A (2017) Data-driven color augmentation techniques for
deep skin image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:170303702
Gamage H, Wijesinghe W, Perera I (2019) Instance-based segmentation for boundary de-
tection of neuropathic ulcers through Mask-RCNN. In: International Conference on Arti-
ficial Neural Networks, Springer, pp 511–522
Gao Y , Phillips JM, Zheng Y , Min R, Fletcher PT, Gerig G (2018) Fully convolutional struc-
tured LSTM networks for joint 4D medical image segmentation. In: 2018 IEEE 15th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, IEEE, pp 1104–1108
Garcia-Garcia A, Orts-Escolano S, Oprea S, Villena-Martinez V , Martinez-Gonzalez P,
Garcia-Rodriguez J (2018) A survey on deep learning techniques for image and video
semantic segmentation. Applied Soft Computing 70:41–65
Glatard T, Lartizien C, Gibaud B, da Silva RF, Forestier G, Cervenansky F, Alessandrini
M, Benoit-Cattin H, Bernard O, Camarasu-Pop S, Cerezo N, Clarysse P, Gaignard A,
Hugonnard P, Liebgott H, Marache S, Marion A, Montagnat J, Tabary J, Friboulet D
(2013) A virtual imaging platform for multi-modality medical image simulation. IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 32(1):110–118, DOI 10.1109/tmi.2012.2220154, URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/tmi.2012.2220154
Goceri E (2019a) Challenges and recent solutions for image segmentation in the era of
deep learning. In: 2019 Ninth International Conference on Image Processing Theory,
Tools and Applications (IPTA), IEEE, DOI 10.1109/ipta.2019.8936087, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ipta.2019.8936087
Goceri E (2019b) Diagnosis of alzheimer ´s disease with sobolev gradient-based optimiza-
tion and 3d convolutional neural network. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Biomedical Engineering 35(7), DOI 10.1002/cnm.3225, URL https://doi.org/
10.1002/cnm.3225
Goceri E (2020) CapsNet topology to classify tumours from brain images and comparative
evaluation. IET Image Processing 14(5):882–889, DOI 10.1049/iet-ipr.2019.0312, URL
https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2019.0312
Goceri E, Goceri N (2017) Deep learning in medical image analysis: Recent advances and
future trends. In: Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference Computer Graphics,
Visualization, Computer Vision and Image Processing (CGVCVIP) 2017, pp 305–310
Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley D, Ozair S, Courville A, Ben-
gio Y (2014) Generative adversarial nets. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp 2672–2680
Gros C, De Leener B, Badji A, Maranzano J, Eden D, Dupont SM, Talbott J, Zhuoquiong
R, Liu Y , Granberg T, et al. (2019) Automatic segmentation of the spinal cord and in-
tramedullary multiple sclerosis lesions with convolutional neural networks. Neuroimage
184:901–915
Gu Z, Cheng J, Fu H, Zhou K, Hao H, Zhao Y , Zhang T, Gao S, Liu J (2019) CE-Net: Context
encoder network for 2D medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging
Gulrajani I, Ahmed F, Arjovsky M, Dumoulin V , Courville AC (2017) Improved training of
wasserstein gans. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 5767–5777
Guo Y , Liu Y , Georgiou T, Lew MS (2018) A review of semantic segmentation using deep
neural networks. International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval 7(2):87–93
Hamarneh G, Jassi P (2010) VascuSynth: Simulating vascular trees for generating volumet-
ric image data with ground-truth segmentation and tree analysis. Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics 34(8):605–616, DOI 10.1016/j.compmedimag.2010.06.002, URL

==== Page 35 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 35
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compmedimag.2010.06.002
Han C, Murao K, Satoh S, Nakayama H (2019) Learning more with less: GAN-based med-
ical image augmentation. Medical Imaging Technology 37(3):137–142
Han S, Liu X, Mao H, Pu J, Pedram A, Horowitz MA, Dally WJ (2016) EIE: efficient
inference engine on compressed deep neural network. In: 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, IEEE, pp 243–254
Haralick RM, Shapiro LG (1992) Computer and Robot Vision. Addison-Wesley
Harrison R, Lewellen T (2012) The SimSET program. In: Monte Carlo Calculations in Nu-
clear Medicine, Second Edition, Taylor & Francis, pp 87–110, DOI 10.1201/b13073-7,
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1201/b13073-7
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for image recognition. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp
770–778
He K, Gkioxari G, Doll ´ar P, Girshick R (2017) Mask R-CNN. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 2961–2969
He T, Guo J, Wang J, Xu X, Yi Z (2019) Multi-task learning for the segmentation of thoracic
organs at risk in CT images. In: SegTHOR@ISBI
Hesamian MH, Jia W, He X, Kennedy P (2019) Deep learning techniques for medical image
segmentation: Achievements and challenges. Journal of Digital Imaging pp 1–15
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8):1735–1780
Honari S, Yosinski J, Vincent P, Pal C (2016) Recombinator networks: Learning coarse-to-
fine feature aggregation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp 5743–5752
Howard AG, Zhu M, Chen B, Kalenichenko D, Wang W, Weyand T, Andreetto M, Adam
H (2017) Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applica-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:170404861
Hu J, Shen L, Sun G (2018a) Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 7132–7141
Hu Y , Chen Z, Lin W (2018b) RGB-D semantic segmentation: A review. In: 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia & Expo Workshops, IEEE, pp 1–6
Huang G, Liu Z, Van Der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ (2017) Densely connected convolu-
tional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp 4700–4708
Huang SW, Lin CT, Chen SP, Wu YY , Hsu PH, Lai SH (2018) AugGAN: Cross do-
main adaptation with GAN-based data augmentation. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Springer International Publishing, pp 731–
744, DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-01240-3 44, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-01240-3_44
Huo Y , Xu Z, Bao S, Assad A, Abramson RG, Landman BA (2018) Adversarial synthesis
learning enables segmentation without target modality ground truth. In: 2018 IEEE 15th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, IEEE, pp 1217–1220
Hussain MA, Amir-Khalili A, Hamarneh G, Abugharbieh R (2017) Segmentation-free kid-
ney localization and volume estimation using aggregated orthogonal decision CNNs. In:
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interven-
tion, Springer, pp 612–620
Isensee F, Petersen J, Klein A, Zimmerer D, Jaeger PF, Kohl S, Wasserthal J, Koehler G,
Norajitra T, Wirkert S, et al. (2019) nnU-Net: Self-adapting framework for U-Net-based
medical image segmentation. In: Bildverarbeitung f ¨ur die Medizin 2019, Springer, pp

==== Page 36 ====
36 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
22–22
Jaeger PF, Kohl SA, Bickelhaupt S, Isensee F, Kuder TA, Schlemmer HP, Maier-Hein KH
(2018) Retina U-Net: Embarrassingly simple exploitation of segmentation supervision
for medical object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:181108661
J´egou S, Drozdzal M, Vazquez D, Romero A, Bengio Y (2017) The one hundred layers
tiramisu: Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp 11–19
Jensen J, Svendsen N (1992) Calculation of pressure fields from arbitrarily shaped,
apodized, and excited ultrasound transducers. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferro-
electrics and Frequency Control 39(2):262–267, DOI 10.1109/58.139123, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1109/58.139123
Jensen JA (1996) Field: A program for simulating ultrasound systems. In: 10th Nordic-Baltic
Conference on Biomedical Imaging, V olume 34, Supplement 1, Part 1, pp 351–353
Jin D, Xu Z, Tang Y , Harrison AP, Mollura DJ (2018) CT-realistic lung nodule simula-
tion from 3D conditional generative adversarial networks for robust lung segmentation.
In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-
vention, Springer, pp 732–740
Jin W, Fatehi M, Abhishek K, Mallya M, Toyota B, Hamarneh G (2020) Artificial in-
telligence in glioma imaging: challenges and advances. Journal of Neural Engineer-
ing 17(2):021002, DOI 10.1088/1741-2552/ab8131, URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/1741-2552/ab8131
Johnson JW (2018) Adapting Mask R-CNN for automatic nucleus segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:180500500
Karimi D, Salcudean SE (2019) Reducing the Hausdorff distance in medical image segmen-
tation with convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:190410030
Karimi D, Dou H, Warfield SK, Gholipour A (2019) Deep learning with noisy labels: explor-
ing techniques and remedies in medical image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:191202911
Ke R, Bugeau A, Papadakis N, Sch ¨utz P, Sch ¨onlieb CB (2019) A multi-task U-Net for
segmentation with lazy labels. ArXiv abs/1906.12177
Kervadec H, Bouchtiba J, Desrosiers C, Granger E, Dolz J, Ben Ayed I (2019a) Bound-
ary loss for highly unbalanced segmentation. In: Proceedings of The 2nd International
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, PMLR, London, United King-
dom, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 102, pp 285–296, URL http:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v102/kervadec19a.html
Kervadec H, Dolz J, Tang M, Granger E, Boykov Y , Ayed IB (2019b) Constrained-CNN
losses for weakly supervised segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 54:88–99, DOI https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.02.009, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1361841518306145
Khosravan N, Mortazi A, Wallace M, Bagci U (2019) PAN: Projective adversarial network
for medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:190604378
Kim B, Ye JC (2019) Multiphase level-set loss for semi-supervised and unsupervised seg-
mentation with deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:190402872
Kim HE, Hwang S (2016) Deconvolutional feature stacking for weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:160204984
Kim YD, Park E, Yoo S, Choi T, Yang L, Shin D (2015) Compression of deep con-
volutional neural networks for fast and low power mobile applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:151106530
Kopelowitz E, Engelhard G (2019) Lung nodules detection and segmentation using 3D Mask
R-CNN. arXiv:1907.07676

==== Page 37 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 37
Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) ImageNet classification with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp
1097–1105
Kuntimad G, Ranganath H (1999) Perfect image segmentation using pulse coupled neu-
ral networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 10(3):591–598, DOI 10.1109/72.
761716, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/72.761716
Lateef F, Ruichek Y (2019) Survey on semantic segmentation using deep learning tech-
niques. Neurocomputing 338:321–348
Le TLT, Thome N, Bernard S, Bismuth V , Patoureaux F (2019) Multitask classification and
segmentation for cancer diagnosis in mammography. arXiv preprint arXiv:190905397
LeCun Y , Bottou L, Bengio Y , Haffner P (1998) Gradient-based learning applied to docu-
ment recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 86(11):2278–2324, DOI 10.1109/5.726791,
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/5.726791
Lee DH, Zhang S, Fischer A, Bengio Y (2015) Difference target propagation. In: Ma-
chine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer International Publish-
ing, pp 498–515, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-23528-8 31, URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-23528-8_31
Lee J, Kim E, Lee S, Lee J, Yoon S (2019) Ficklenet: Weakly and semi-supervised semantic
image segmentation using stochastic inference. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 5267–5276
Leroux S, Molchanov P, Simoens P, Dhoedt B, Breuel T, Kautz J (2018) IamNN: Itera-
tive and adaptive mobile neural network for efficient image classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:180410123
Li H, Xiong P, An J, Wang L (2018) Pyramid attention network for semantic segmentation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:180510180
Li H, Li J, Lin X, Qian X (2019a) Pancreas segmentation via spatial context based U-Net
and bidirectional LSTM. arXiv preprint arXiv:190300832
Li S, Dong M, Du G, Mu X (2019b) Attention dense-U-Net for automatic breast mass seg-
mentation in digital mammogram. IEEE Access 7:59037–59047
Li X, Liu Z, Luo P, Change Loy C, Tang X (2017) Not all pixels are equal: Difficulty-aware
semantic segmentation via deep layer cascade. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3193–3202
Li X, Yu L, Chen H, Fu CW, Heng PA (2019c) Transformation consistent self-ensembling
model for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:190300348
Lian S, Luo Z, Zhong Z, Lin X, Su S, Li S (2018) Attention guided U-Net for accurate iris
segmentation. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 56:296–304
Lin D, Ji Y , Lischinski D, Cohen-Or D, Huang H (2018) Multi-scale context intertwining
for semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision, pp 603–619
Lin G, Milan A, Shen C, Reid I (2017a) RefineNet: Multi-path refinement networks for high-
resolution semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 1925–1934
Lin TY , Goyal P, Girshick R, He K, Doll ´ar P (2017b) Focal loss for dense object detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:170802002
Litjens G, Kooi T, Bejnordi BE, Setio AAA, Ciompi F, Ghafoorian M, Van Der Laak JA,
Van Ginneken B, S ´anchez CI (2017) A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis.
Medical Image Analysis 42:60–88
Liu C, Chen LC, Schroff F, Adam H, Hua W, Yuille AL, Fei-Fei L (2019a) Auto-deeplab:
Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic image segmentation. In: Proceedings

==== Page 38 ====
38 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 82–92
Liu L, Ouyang W, Wang X, Fieguth P, Chen J, Liu X, Pietik ¨ainen M (2019b) Deep learn-
ing for generic object detection: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision
128(2):261–318, DOI 10.1007/s11263-019-01247-4, URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11263-019-01247-4
Liu Y , Perona P, Meister M (2019c) Panda: Panoptic data augmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:191112317
Long J, Shelhamer E, Darrell T (2015) Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmen-
tation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pp 3431–3440
Luc P, Couprie C, Chintala S, Verbeek J (2016) Semantic segmentation using adversarial
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:161108408
Luo P, Wang G, Lin L, Wang X (2017) Deep dual learning for semantic image segmentation.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 2718–2726
Ma WDK, Lewis J, Kleijn WB (2019) The hsic bottleneck: Deep learning without back-
propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:190801580
Marion A, Forestier G, Benoit-Cattin H, Camarasu-Pop S, Clarysse P, da Silva RF, Gibaud
B, Glatard T, Hugonnard P, Lartizien C, Liebgott H, Specovius S, Tabary J, Valette
S, Friboulet D (2011) Multi-modality medical image simulation of biological models
with the virtual imaging platform (VIP). In: 2011 24th International Symposium on
Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), IEEE, DOI 10.1109/cbms.2011.5999141,
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/cbms.2011.5999141
Mehta S, Mercan E, Bartlett J, Weaver D, Elmore JG, Shapiro L (2018) Y-Net: Joint seg-
mentation and classification for diagnosis of breast biopsy images. In: International Con-
ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp
893–901
Meyer BJ, Harwood B, Drummond T (2018) Deep metric learning and image classification
with nearest neighbour Gaussian kernels. In: 2018 25th IEEE International Conference
on Image Processing, IEEE, pp 151–155
Milletari F, Navab N, Ahmadi SA (2016) V-Net: Fully convolutional neural networks for
volumetric medical image segmentation. In: 2016 Fourth International Conference on 3D
Vision, IEEE, pp 565–571
Mirikharaji Z, Hamarneh G (2018) Star shape prior in fully convolutional networks for
skin lesion segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 737–745
Mirikharaji Z, Yan Y , Hamarneh G (2019) Learning to segment skin lesions from noisy
annotations. International Workshop on Medical Image Learning with Less Labels and
Imperfect Data
Moeskops P, Veta M, Lafarge MW, Eppenhof KA, Pluim JP (2017) Adversarial training
and dilated convolutions for brain MRI segmentation. In: Deep learning in medical image
analysis and multimodal learning for clinical decision support, Springer, pp 56–64
Mohajerani S, Asad R, Abhishek K, Sharma N, van Duynhoven A, Saeedi P (2019) Cloud-
maskgan: A content-aware unpaired image-to-image translation algorithm for remote
sensing imagery. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, IEEE,
pp 1965–1969
Mohanty SP (2018) Crowdai mapping challenge 2018 : Base-
line with Mask RCNN. https://github.com/crowdai/
crowdai-mapping-challenge-mask-rcnn

==== Page 39 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 39
Mottaghi R, Chen X, Liu X, Cho NG, Lee SW, Fidler S, Urtasun R, Yuille A (2014) The role
of context for object detection and semantic segmentation in the wild. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 891–898
Mukherjee S, Cheng I, Miller S, Guo T, Chau V , Basu A (2019) A fast segmentation-free
fully automated approach to white matter injury detection in preterm infants. Medical &
Biological Engineering & Computing 57(1):71–87
Mumford D, Shah J (1989) Optimal approximations by piecewise smooth functions and
associated variational problems. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
42(5):577–685
Neff T, Payer C, Stern D, Urschler M (2017) Generative adversarial network based synthesis
for supervised medical image segmentation. In: Proceedings of OAGM and ARW Joint
Workshop
Neff T, Payer C, ˇStern D, Urschler M (2018) Generative adversarial networks to syntheti-
cally augment data for deep learning based image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the
OAGM Workshop 2018: Medical Image Analysis, Verlag der Technischen Universit ¨at
Graz, pp 22–29
Nguyen HH, Fang F, Yamagishi J, Echizen I (2019) Multi-task learning for detecting and
segmenting manipulated facial images and videos. ArXiv abs/1906.06876
Ni ZL, Bian GB, Xie XL, Hou ZG, Zhou XH, Zhou YJ (2019) RASNet: Segmentation
for tracking surgical instruments in surgical videos using refined attention segmentation
network. arXiv preprint arXiv:190508663
Nie D, Gao Y , Wang L, Shen D (2018) ASDNet: Attention based semi-supervised deep net-
works for medical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 370–378
Noh H, Hong S, Han B (2015) Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 1520–1528
Nøkland A, Eidnes LH (2019) Training neural networks with local error signals. In: Chaud-
huri K, Salakhutdinov R (eds) Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, PMLR, Long Beach, California, USA, Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol 97, pp 4839–4850, URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
nokland19a.html
Nosrati MS, Hamarneh G (2016) Incorporating prior knowledge in medical image segmen-
tation: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:160701092
Nowozin S (2014) Optimal decisions from probabilistic models: the intersection-over-union
case. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pp 548–555
Oktay O, Schlemper J, Folgoc LL, Lee M, Heinrich M, Misawa K, Mori K, McDonagh S,
Hammerla NY , Kainz B, et al. (2018) Attention U-Net: Learning where to look for the
pancreas. arXiv preprint arXiv:180403999
Paschali M, Gasperini S, Roy AG, Fang MYS, Navab N (2019) 3DQ: Compact
quantized neural networks for volumetric whole brain segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:190403110
Peng C, Zhang X, Yu G, Luo G, Sun J (2017) Large kernel matters–improve semantic seg-
mentation by global convolutional network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 4353–4361
Peng J, Kervadec H, Dolz J, Ayed IB, Pedersoli M, Desrosiers C (2019) Discretely-
constrained deep network for weakly supervised segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:190805770

==== Page 40 ====
40 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Perone CS, Cohen-Adad J (2018) Deep semi-supervised segmentation with weight-averaged
consistency targets. Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning
for Clinical Decision Support pp 12–19
Perone CS, Cohen-Adad J (2019) Promises and limitations of deep learning for medical
image segmentation. Journal of Medical Artificial Intelligence 2
Perone CS, Calabrese E, Cohen-Adad J (2018) Spinal cord gray matter segmentation using
deep dilated convolutions. Scientific reports 8(1):5966
Perone CS, Ballester P, Barros RC, Cohen-Adad J (2019) Unsupervised domain adaptation
for medical imaging segmentation with self-ensembling. Neuroimage 194:1–11
Pohlen T, Hermans A, Mathias M, Leibe B (2017) Full-resolution residual networks for
semantic segmentation in street scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 4151–4160
Proenca H, Neves JC (2019) Segmentation-less and non-holistic deep-learning frameworks
for iris recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp 0–0
Qin Y , Kamnitsas K, Ancha S, Nanavati J, Cottrell G, Criminisi A, Nori A (2018) Auto-
focus layer for semantic segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 603–611
Raghu M, Zhang C, Kleinberg J, Bengio S (2019) Transfusion: Understanding transfer
learning with applications to medical imaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:190207208
Reddick W, Glass J, Cook E, Elkin T, Deaton R (1997) Automated segmentation and clas-
sification of multispectral magnetic resonance images of brain using artificial neural net-
works. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 16(6):911–918, DOI 10.1109/42.650887,
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/42.650887
Reilhac A, Batan G, Michel C, Grova C, Tohka J, Collins D, Costes N, Evans A (2005)
PET-SORTEO: validation and development of database of simulated PET volumes. IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 52(5):1321–1328, DOI 10.1109/tns.2005.858242, URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/tns.2005.858242
Remillard J (2018) Images to OSM. https://github.com/jremillard/
images-to-osm
Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J (2015) Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection
with region proposal networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp 91–99
Rezaei M, Harmuth K, Gierke W, Kellermeier T, Fischer M, Yang H, Meinel C (2017) A
conditional adversarial network for semantic segmentation of brain tumor. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention,
Brainlesion Workshop, Springer, pp 241–252
Ronneberger O, Fischer P, Brox T (2015) U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical im-
age segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Com-
puter Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 234–241
Roy AG, Conjeti S, Sheet D, Katouzian A, Navab N, Wachinger C (2017) Error corrective
boosting for learning fully convolutional networks with limited data. In: International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer,
pp 231–239
Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE, Williams RJ (1986) Learning representations by back-
propagating errors. Nature 323(6088):533–536, DOI 10.1038/323533a0, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/323533a0
Russell BC, Torralba A, Murphy KP, Freeman WT (2008) LabelMe: A database
and web-based tool for image annotation. International Journal of Computer Vision

==== Page 41 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 41
77(1-3):157–173, DOI 10.1007/s11263-007-0090-8, URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11263-007-0090-8
Russell SJ, Norvig P (2016) Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Malaysia; Pearson
Education Limited,
Salehi SSM, Erdogmus D, Gholipour A (2017) Tversky loss function for image segmenta-
tion using 3D fully convolutional deep networks. In: International Workshop on Machine
Learning in Medical Imaging, Springer, pp 379–387
Sandler M, Howard A, Zhu M, Zhmoginov A, Chen LC (2018) MobileNetV2: Inverted
residuals and linear bottlenecks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 4510–4520
Saxena S, Verbeek J (2016) Convolutional neural fabrics. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp 4053–4061
Schlemper J, Oktay O, Schaap M, Heinrich M, Kainz B, Glocker B, Rueckert D (2019) At-
tention gated networks: Learning to leverage salient regions in medical images. Medical
Image Analysis 53:197–207
Shahriari S, Garcia D (2018) Meshfree simulations of ultrasound vector flow imag-
ing using smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Physics in Medicine & Biology
63(20):205011, DOI 10.1088/1361-6560/aae3c3, URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/1361-6560/aae3c3
Shaw A, Hunter D, Landola F, Sidhu S (2019) SqueezeNAS: Fast neural architecture search
for faster semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision Workshops
Shin HC, Tenenholtz NA, Rogers JK, Schwarz CG, Senjem ML, Gunter JL, Andriole KP,
Michalski M (2018) Medical image synthesis for data augmentation and anonymiza-
tion using generative adversarial networks. In: International Workshop on Simulation and
Synthesis in Medical Imaging, Springer, pp 1–11
Shorten C, Khoshgoftaar TM (2019) A survey on image data augmentation for deep
learning. Journal of Big Data 6(1), DOI 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0
Sifre L (2014) Rigid-motion scattering for image classification. PhD thesis, CMAP, Ecole
Polytechnique
Simard PY , Steinkraus D, Platt JC (2003) Best practices for convolutional neural networks
applied to visual document analysis. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence on Document Analysis and Recognition - V olume 2, IEEE Computer Society, USA,
ICDAR ’03, p 958
Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:14091556
Simpson AL, Antonelli M, Bakas S, Bilello M, Farahani K, van Ginneken B, Kopp-
Schneider A, Landman BA, Litjens G, Menze B, et al. (2019) A large annotated med-
ical image dataset for the development and evaluation of segmentation algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:190209063
Sinha A, Dolz J (2019) Multi-scale guided attention for medical image segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:190602849
Son J, Park SJ, Jung KH (2017) Retinal vessel segmentation in fundoscopic images with
generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:170609318
Song G, Myeong H, Mu Lee K (2018) Seednet: Automatic seed generation with deep re-
inforcement learning for robust interactive segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 1760–1768

==== Page 42 ====
42 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Srivastava N, Hinton G, Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Salakhutdinov R (2014) Dropout: a
simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research 15(1):1929–1958
Srivastava RK, Greff K, Schmidhuber J (2015) Highway networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:150500387
Stanley KO, Miikkulainen R (2002) Evolving neural networks through augmenting topolo-
gies. Evolutionary computation 10(2):99–127
SUYEgit (2018) Mask R-CNN for Surgery Robot. https://github.com/SUYEgit/
Surgery-Robot-Detection-Segmentation/
Tabary J, Hugonnard P, Mathy F (2007) SINDBAD: a realistic multi-purpose and scalable
X-ray simulation tool for NDT applications. In: DIR 2007: International Symposium on
Digital Industrial Radiology and Computed Tomography
Taghanaki SA, Duggan N, Ma H, Hou X, Celler A, Benard F, Hamarneh G (2018)
Segmentation-free direct tumor volume and metabolic activity estimation from pet scans.
Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 63:52–66
Taghanaki SA, Abhishek K, Azizi S, Hamarneh G (2019a) A kernelized manifold mapping
to diminish the effect of adversarial perturbations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 11340–11349
Taghanaki SA, Abhishek K, Hamarneh G (2019b) Improved inference via deep input trans-
fer. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention, Springer, pp 819–827
Taghanaki SA, Bentaieb A, Sharma A, Zhou SK, Zheng Y , Georgescu B, Sharma P, Grbic
S, Xu Z, Comaniciu D, et al. (2019c) Select, attend, and transfer: Light, learnable skip
connections. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention Workshop
on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging
Taghanaki SA, Havaei M, Berthier T, Dutil F, Di Jorio L, Hamarneh G, Bengio Y (2019d)
InfoMask: Masked variational latent representation to localize chest disease. International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
Taghanaki SA, Zheng Y , Zhou SK, Georgescu B, Sharma P, Xu D, Comaniciu D, Hamarneh
G (2019e) Combo loss: Handling input and output imbalance in multi-organ segmenta-
tion. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 75:24–33
Tajbakhsh N, Jeyaseelan L, Li Q, Chiang JN, Wu Z, Ding X (2020) Embracing imperfect
datasets: A review of deep learning solutions for medical image segmentation. Medical
Image Analysis p 101693
Tarvainen A, Valpola H (2017) Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged con-
sistency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp 1195–1204
Tsai HF, Gajda J, Sloan TF, Rares A, Shen AQ (2019) Usiigaci: Instance-aware cell tracking
in stain-free phase contrast microscopy enabled by machine learning. SoftwareX 9:230–
237
V orontsov E, Molchanov P, Byeon W, De Mello S, Jampani V , Liu MY , Kadoury S, Kautz
J (2019) Towards semi-supervised segmentation via image-to-image translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:190401636
Vuola AO, Akram SU, Kannala J (2019) Mask R-CNN and U-net ensembled for nuclei
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:190110170
Wang EK, Zhang X, Pan L, Cheng C, Dimitrakopoulou-Strauss A, Li Y , Zhe N (2019a)
Multi-path dilated residual network for nuclei segmentation and detection. Cells 8(5):499
Wang F, Jiang M, Qian C, Yang S, Li C, Zhang H, Wang X, Tang X (2017a) Residual
attention network for image classification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on

==== Page 43 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 43
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 3156–3164
Wang G, Luo P, Lin L, Wang X (2017b) Learning object interactions and descriptions for se-
mantic image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp 5859–5867
Wang P, Chen P, Yuan Y , Liu D, Huang Z, Hou X, Cottrell G (2018a) Understanding convo-
lution for semantic segmentation. In: 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision, IEEE, pp 1451–1460
Wang S, Rong R, Yang DM, Cai L, Yang L, Luo D, Yao B, Xu L, Wang T, Zhan X, et al.
(2019b) Computational staining of pathology images to study tumor microenvironment
in lung cancer. Available at SSRN 3391381
Wang W, Lai Q, Fu H, Shen J, Ling H (2019c) Salient object detection in the deep learning
era: An in-depth survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:190409146
Wang X, Girshick R, Gupta A, He K (2018b) Non-local neural networks. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 7794–7803
Wang X, Wang H, Niu S, Zhang J (2019d) Detection and localization of image forgeries
using improved mask regional convolutional neural network. Mathematical Bioscience
and Engineering
Wang Z, Sarcar S, Liu J, Zheng Y , Ren X (2018c) Outline objects using deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:180404603
Wen W, Wu C, Wang Y , Chen Y , Li H (2016) Learning structured sparsity in deep neural
networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 2074–2082
Weng Y , Zhou T, Li Y , Qiu X (2019a) NAS-Unet: Neural architecture search for medical
image segmentation. IEEE Access 7:44247–44257
Weng Y , Zhou T, Li Y , Qiu X (2019b) NAS-unet: Neural architecture search for medical
image segmentation. IEEE Access 7:44247–44257, DOI 10.1109/access.2019.2908991,
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2908991
Wessel J, Heinrich MP, von Berg J, Franz A, Saalbach A (2019) Sequential rib labeling and
segmentation in chest X-ray using Mask R-CNN. In: International Conference on Medical
Imaging with Deep Learning – Extended Abstract Track, London, United Kingdom, URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJxuHzLjFV
Wojna Z, Ferrari V , Guadarrama S, Silberman N, Chen LC, Fathi A, Uijlings J (2017) The
devil is in the decoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:170705847
Wong KC, Moradi M, Tang H, Syeda-Mahmood T (2018) 3D segmentation with exponen-
tial logarithmic loss for highly unbalanced object sizes. In: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Springer, pp 612–619
Wu Y , He K (2018) Group normalization. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision, pp 3–19
Wu Z, Shen C, Van Den Hengel A (2019) Wider or deeper: Revisiting the resnet model for
visual recognition. Pattern Recognition 90:119–133
Xiao J, Hays J, Ehinger KA, Oliva A, Torralba A (2010) SUN database: Large-scale scene
recognition from abbey to zoo. In: 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, IEEE, pp 3485–3492
Xie S, Tu Z (2015) Holistically-nested edge detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp 1395–1403
Xie X, Niu J, Liu X, Chen Z, Tang S (2020) A survey on domain knowledge powered deep
learning for medical image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:200412150
Xu X, Lu Q, Yang L, Hu S, Chen D, Hu Y , Shi Y (2018) Quantization of fully convolutional
networks for accurate biomedical image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 8300–8308

==== Page 44 ====
44 S. A. Taghanaki et al.
Xue Y , Xu T, Zhang H, Long LR, Huang X (2018) SegAN: Adversarial network with multi-
scale L1 loss for medical image segmentation. Neuroinformatics 16(3-4):383–392
Yang D, Xu D, Zhou SK, Georgescu B, Chen M, Grbic S, Metaxas D, Comaniciu D (2017a)
Automatic liver segmentation using an adversarial image-to-image network. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention,
Springer, pp 507–515
Yang Q, Li N, Zhao Z, Fan X, Chang EI, Xu Y , et al. (2018) MRI cross-modality
neuroimage-to-neuroimage translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:180106940
Yang X, Yu L, Wu L, Wang Y , Ni D, Qin J, Heng PA (2017b) Fine-grained recurrent neu-
ral networks for automatic prostate segmentation in ultrasound images. In: Thirty-First
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Yu B, Zhou L, Wang L, Fripp J, Bourgeat P (2018a) 3D cGAN based cross-modality MR im-
age synthesis for brain tumor segmentation. In: 2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium
on Biomedical Imaging, IEEE, pp 626–630
Yu C, Wang J, Peng C, Gao C, Yu G, Sang N (2018b) BiSeNet: Bilateral segmenta-
tion network for real-time semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Springer International Publishing, pp 334–
349, DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-01261-8 20, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-01261-8_20
Yuan Y (2017) Automatic skin lesion segmentation with fully convolutional-
deconvolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:170305165
Zamir AR, Sax A, Shen W, Guibas LJ, Malik J, Savarese S (2018) Taskonomy: Disentan-
gling task transfer learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp 3712–3722
Zhang P, Zhong Y , Deng Y , Tang X, Li X (2019) A survey on deep learning of small sample
in biomedical image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:190800473
Zhang W, Witharana C, Liljedahl A, Kanevskiy M (2018a) Deep convolutional neural net-
works for automated characterization of arctic ice-wedge polygons in very high spatial
resolution aerial imagery. Remote Sensing 10(9):1487
Zhang Y , Yang L, Chen J, Fredericksen M, Hughes DP, Chen DZ (2017) Deep adversarial
networks for biomedical image segmentation utilizing unannotated images. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention,
Springer, pp 408–416
Zhang Y , Miao S, Mansi T, Liao R (2018b) Task driven generative modeling for unsu-
pervised domain adaptation: Application to X-ray image segmentation. In: International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer,
pp 599–607
Zhang Z, Yang L, Zheng Y (2018c) Translating and segmenting multimodal medical vol-
umes with cycle-and shape-consistency generative adversarial network. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 9242–9251
Zhang Z, Zhang X, Peng C, Xue X, Sun J (2018d) Exfuse: Enhancing feature fusion for
semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision,
pp 269–284
Zhao H, Li H, Cheng L (2017a) Synthesizing filamentary structured images with GANs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:170602185
Zhao H, Shi J, Qi X, Wang X, Jia J (2017b) Pyramid scene parsing network. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 2881–2890
Zhao M, Hamarneh G (2019a) Retinal image classification via vasculature-guided sequential
attention. International Conference on Computer Vision workshop on Visual Recognition

==== Page 45 ====
Deep Semantic Segmentation of Natural and Medical Images: A Review 45
for Medical Images
Zhao M, Hamarneh G (2019b) Tree-LSTM: Using LSTM to Encode Memory in Anatomi-
cal Tree Prediction from 3D Images. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging
Zhao T, Yang Y , Niu H, Wang D, Chen Y (2018) Comparing U-Net convolutional network
with Mask R-CNN in the performances of pomegranate tree canopy segmentation. In:
Asia-Pacific Remote Sensing
Zhao ZQ, Zheng P, Xu ST, Wu X (2019) Object detection with deep learning: A review.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 30(11):3212–3232, DOI
10.1109/tnnls.2018.2876865, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2018.
2876865
Zhen X, Li S (2015) Towards direct medical image analysis without segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:151006375
Zhou B, Lapedriza A, Xiao J, Torralba A, Oliva A (2014) Learning deep features for scene
recognition using Places database. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pp 487–495
Zhou B, Zhao H, Puig X, Fidler S, Barriuso A, Torralba A (2017) Scene parsing through
ADE20K dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pp 633–641
Zhou S, Nie D, Adeli E, Yin J, Lian J, Shen D (2019a) High-resolution encoder-decoder
networks for low-contrast medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Image Pro-
cessing
Zhou T, Ruan S, Canu S (2019b) A review: Deep learning for medical image segmentation
using multi-modality fusion. Array p 100004
Zhou Z, Siddiquee MMR, Tajbakhsh N, Liang J (2018) UNet++: A nested U-Net architec-
ture for medical image segmentation. In: Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and
Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support, Springer, pp 3–11
Zhu X, Zhou H, Yang C, Shi J, Lin D (2018) Penalizing top performers: Conservative loss
for semantic segmentation adaptation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision, pp 568–583
Zhu Z, Liu C, Yang D, Yuille A, Xu D (2019) V-NAS: Neural architecture search for vol-
umetric medical image segmentation. In: 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV), IEEE, DOI 10.1109/3dv.2019.00035, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
3dv.2019.00035
Zoph B, Le QV (2016) Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:161101578
Zou Z, Shi Z, Guo Y , Ye J (2019) Object detection in 20 years: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:190505055

