==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Fu, X.; Kim, J.G.
Deep-Q-Network-Based Packet
Scheduling in an IoT Environment.
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339. https://
doi.org/10.3390/s23031339
Academic Editors: Jung Hoon Lee,
Jun-Pyo Hong, Jaeyoung Song
and Jinho Kang
Received: 30 December 2022
Revised: 18 January 2023
Accepted: 20 January 2023
Published: 25 January 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Deep-Q-Network-Based Packet Scheduling in an
IoT Environment
Xing Fu
 and Jeong Geun Kim *
Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Electronics and Information, Kyung Hee University,
Yongin 17104, Republic of Korea
*Correspondence: jg_kim@khu.ac.kr
Abstract: With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT) era, a wide array of wireless sensors
supporting the IoT have proliferated. As key elements for enabling the IoT, wireless sensor nodes
require minimal energy consumption and low device complexity. In particular, energy-efﬁcient
resource scheduling is critical in maintaining a network of wireless sensor nodes, since the energy-
intensive processing of wireless sensor nodes and their interactions is too complicated to control. In
this study, we present a practical deep Q-network (DQN)-based packet scheduling algorithm that
coordinates the transmissions of multiple IoT devices. The scheduling algorithm dynamically adjusts
the connection interval (CI) and the number of packets transmitted by each node within the interval.
Through various experiments, we verify how effectively the proposed scheduler improves energy
efﬁciency and handles the time-varying nature of the network environment. Moreover, we attempt to
gain insight into the optimized packet scheduler by analyzing the policy of the DQN scheduler. The
experimental results show that the proposed scheduling algorithm can further prolong a network’s
lifetime in a dynamic network environment in comparison with that in other alternative schemes
while ensuring the quality of service (QoS).
Keywords: energy efﬁciency; deep Q-network; reinforcement learning; IoT; wireless sensor network;
BLE
1. Introduction
The IoT has brought unprecedented convenience in everyday life and triggered various
technological innovations throughout industries [ 1–3]. The core technological elements
enabling the IoT include wireless sensor networks (WSNs), cloud computing, data analytics,
smart devices, etc. [ 1,2]. A WSN is responsible for transferring the information obtained
from sensor nodes to remote sites [ 4,5]. The sensor nodes constituting a WSN often rely
on batteries or energy harvesting as an energy source [ 6]. Regardless of the type of energy
source that is in use, improving energy efﬁciency remains a critical issue, since it determines
the quality of network connectivity [7,8].
There have been numerous attempts to enhance the energy efﬁciency of WSNs by
employing various technical methods [ 3–6]. In particular, energy efﬁciency can be fur-
ther improved by utilizing emerging approaches, such as artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-based
algorithms [ 9–12]. In [ 9], Bhandari et al. introduced a support vector machine (SVM)-
based packet scheduling method for wireless networks. The scheduler considered the
channel capacity and average throughput to determine the user–channel mapping. A
deep neural network (DNN) was utilized by Zhang et al. in [ 10] for a channel allocation
algorithm in interference-limited wireless networks. The DNN therein approximated a
complex function of a traditional sequential convex approximation (SCA)-based algorithm,
thereby signiﬁcantly reducing the complexity of the allocation algorithm. In [ 11], Xu et
al. proposed DQN-based optimal link scheduling in a dense cellular environment. The
DQN therein gave an estimated schedule of link and user selection, and then power is
allocated by the DNN for the corresponding schedule. In [ 12], Wu et al. presented a deep
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23031339 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 2 of 13
reinforcement learning (DRL)-based scheduling strategy for allocating channels and time
slots in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). The proposed deep scheduling algorithm,
which was named DISA, was intended to operate in an edge-computing-based network for
communication scheduling.
This paper proposes an energy-efﬁcient packet scheduling algorithm based on a
DQN. We considered an application scenario of a WSN in which multiple slave nodes
centered around the master node were connected in a star topology, similarly to [ 13]. The
master collected the sensed data transmitted from the slaves while completely controlling
the slaves’ transmissions through scheduling. In time-division multiple access (TDMA)-
based transmissions with variable CIs [ 14], the master node controls the length of the CIs
and the number of packets to be transmitted per CI for each slave. Furthermore, QoS
requirements were imposed on packets, so each packet needed to be transmitted within a
predetermined time. In this situation, it was not obvious to design an optimal scheduling
algorithm that maximized the network’s lifetime while satisfying the QoS requirements.
In particular, a traditional scheduling algorithm would hardly capture the complicated
interplay between operating transmission parameters, the imposed constraints (e.g., QoS
requirements, limited battery capacity, etc.), and the network lifetime.
To address the complexity of the problem, we relied on an AI technique called rein-
forcement learning (RL) [ 15]. In the framework of RL, the master incorporating the packet
scheduler acts as an agent, and the rest of the parts of the WSN other than the master
correspond to the environment. The master performs a sequence of scheduling actions over
time and receives feedback in the form of state updates and rewards from the environment.
Properly designed reward functions drive the DQN-based packet scheduler to converge to
the desired form through learning over multiple episodes. Experiments were conducted
in various network environments to measure the performance of the optimized DQN
scheduler. In WSN environments, factors that affect the scheduler’s policy include the
node population, mobility, data arrival process, packet lifetime, etc. Through extensive
experiments, we examined how the DQN scheduler adapted to the time-varying network
environment, and we compared the performance of the DQN scheduler with that of other
existing methods in terms of the network lifetime and degree of QoS guarantee. Addition-
ally, by analyzing the policy of the optimized DQN scheduler, we aimed to gain insight
into scheduling methods based on RL. These efforts are expected to not only increase the
understanding of the underlying processes of AI-based solutions, but also provide many
insights into designing solutions for non-AI techniques through reverse engineering.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the system model
and the problem formulation. In Section 3, an energy-efﬁcient packet scheduling algorithm
based on a DQN is proposed. Section 4 presents the experimental methods and numerical
results. In Section 5, a review of related work is presented. Finally, this paper concludes in
Section 6.
2. System Model
2.1. Network Model
In this study, we consider a WSN model that consists of one master and multiple
slaves connected to the master in a star topology, as shown in Figure 1a. All communication
occurs between the master and one slave at a time, and the master switches between slaves
via TDMA. A slave can transmit packets only when granted permission by the master.
These characteristics of our model are similar to those of the BLE-connected mode in [ 13,14].
In fact, our network model can be viewed as an extension of the BLE-connected mode to
accommodate additional functionalities required for AI-based scheduling.
After establishing the connection, the master and slaves communicate with each other
during a predeﬁned connection interval (CI), which consists of a control period (CP) and
data period (DP), as shown in Figure 1b. In the CP , the master collects information on the
transmission status from each slave. This information, including the number of packets in
the queue and the packet delay, is used for scheduling decisions. In the DP , the scheduler

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 3 of 13
determines the number of packets to be transmitted for each slave and grants permission
to transmit packets by polling each slave. Since the CP is ﬁxed and very small compared to
the DP , the DP accounts for most of the CI. After the transmission is completed in the DP ,
the slaves return to the sleep mode until the CI ends, and they become active again when
the next CI starts.
In this study, we assume that the master, which incorporates a packet scheduler,
dynamically sets the CI length, as well as the number of packets that need to be sent during
the CI for each slave. Such scheduling information is broadcast by the master, and the slaves
then react accordingly upon receiving the information. The notion of QoS is incorporated
into our system model, which assumes that the packets have a latency limit. For instance,
if a packet in the queue waits longer than this latency limit, e.g., 10 s, the packet will be
discarded by the slave and considered lost. Upon making a connection, the packet loss rate
is speciﬁed as a QoS parameter between the master and slaves.
Regarding the energy model, we assume that the slave nodes are powered by a
ﬁnite-capacity battery, although the master is supplied with sufﬁcient energy via either
a high-capacity battery or wired power sources [ 13,14]. As such, the network lifetime is
mostly determined by the slave nodes, which become inoperable if the battery runs out. It
is also assumed that energy is consumed by communication only, i.e., packet transmission
or reception. One unit of energy is set to be consumed for the transmission/reception of
a data packet that is 37bytes long. For packets of other sizes, the energy consumption is
proportional to the packet size.
S3 S2S1S5
S4
MConnection Interval. . .
Control
PeriodData
Period
. . .
time
M
S1
n1
S2
n2
1
(a)
S3 S2S1S5
S4
MConnection Interval. . .
Control
PeriodData
Period
. . .
time
M
S1
n1
S2
n2
1 (b)
Figure 1. (a) Master Mand multiple slaves Siconnected in a star topology. ( b) Packet exchanges
between the master and slaves over time. The nidenotes the number of packets trasnsmitted by the
ith slave.
2.2. Problem Formulation
To formulate the problem, we consider a WSN model that contains a master node and
Nslave nodes, as shown in Figure 1a. Since communication continues until the battery is
exhausted, the lifetime of the ith slave, V(i), is deﬁned as
V(i)=M
å
k=1Lk, for e(i)
M<E(i)
s<e(i)
M+1
where Lkdenotes the length of the kth CI, Mrepresents the index of the last CI, e(i)
kdenotes
the cumulative power consumption of the ith slave until the kth CI, and E(i)
srepresents
the initial battery level of the ith slave. In this study, the network lifetime is deﬁned as the
time until one of the nodes runs out of battery for the ﬁrst time. Assuming that the slaves
use a limited amount of energy compared to the master, the network lifetime is completely

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 4 of 13
determined by the slaves. Therefore, the slave node with the shortest lifetime determines
the entire network lifetime.
We maximize the network lifetime by scheduling (Lk,fn(i)
kgN
i=1)fork=1, 2,. . ., while
ensuring the QoS requirements q(i)of each slave, i.e.,
maximize
Lk,fn(i)
kgN
i=1minfV(i)gN
i=1
subject to q(i)>h(i)(1)
where q(i)is the QoS metric of the packet transmission for the ith slave and h(i)is its target
QoS requirement.
3. DQN-Based Scheduling Algorithm
We present a brief overview of reinforcement learning (RL) and discuss how the
scheduling problems of the WSN can be formulated with the DQN.
3.1. Reinforcement Learning
RL is a class of machine learning (ML) approaches in which a decision-making agent
learns the optimal policy in an environment by exploring various actions and observing the
associated rewards [ 15,16]. Figure 2 shows the framework of RL [ 15], which is composed
of an agent and the environment. At each time step, the agent observes the state of the
environment and takes an action on the environment. The environment then transitions to
a new state and responds to the agent by returning a reward. By repeating this process, the
agent is able to learn a sequence of actions that maximize the cumulative reward without
any a priori knowledge of the environment [15].
Agent
Environmentaction reward state
at rt st
rt+1
st+1
1
Figure 2. The interaction between an agent and the environment in the framework of reinforcement
learning [ 15]. At a time step t, the agent observes the state stof the environment and takes an action
at. The environment then transitions to a new state st+1and responds to the agent by returning a
reward rt.
Q-learning, which considered one of the most popular RL algorithms [ 15], ﬁnds an
optimal action policy by using a Q-function that represents the value of an action for a
given state. The Q-function Q(s,a)at state sand action ais updated as follows:
Q(s,a) Q(s,a) +a[r+gmax
aQ(s0,a) Q(s,a)] (2)
where rdenotes the reward given for taking an action a,ais the step size, gis the discount
factor, and s0is the next state [ 15]. In practice, the tabular update method in (2) suffers
from explosive growth in the state–action (s,a)space and slow convergence for common

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 5 of 13
real-world problems. To address these issues, the deep Q-network (DQN) proposed in [ 17]
uses a neural network to approximate the Q-function. Moreover, two key components are
incorporated into the DQN to stabilize the learning: experience replay and a duplicated
Q-network [ 15,17]. Experience replay employs mini-batching to update the Q-network
for better stability. The target network, which is duplicated from the main Q-network, is
devised to improve the stability of the learning, and Q-values are used to train the main
Q-network.
3.2. DQN-Based Scheduling Algorithm
The scheduling of transmission parameters in our WSN model is formulated as a
sequential decision-making problem under the RL framework. In this formulation, the
agent corresponds to the master node, and everything beyond the master node is considered
the environment. The environment presents the system state and the reward to the agent,
as shown in Figure 2. We assume that this state information is provided through the
return packets from the slaves during the CP , as shown in Figure 1. The master node takes
scheduling actions in response to the system state information by selecting appropriate
transmission parameters.
Figure 3 shows the architecture of a DQN-based scheduling algorithm in the WSN
environment that was described earlier. The master node observes a state stat time t
and takes an action atby selecting the CI and the number of packets to transmit per
CI. According to the master’s scheduling action, the communication between the master
and the slaves takes place during the CI. At the end of the CI, a quadruple experience
sequence (st,at,rt,st+1), which represents the current observation state, current action,
current reward at time t, and next state at t+1, is fed back to the master. These quadruple
data are stored in a replay buffer, and a mini-batch is randomly sampled from the buffer
to train the DNN. The main Q-network’s parameters are updated at each training step.
Detailed speciﬁcations on the states, actions, and rewards are described below.
Figure 3. Architecture of the DQN-based scheduling algorithm. At the beginning of the CI, the
DQN-based scheduler receives state information (i.e., the remaining lifetime of packets in the queue
(D1,D2,. . .,DN)) from the slaves. Then it performs scheduling actions, i.e., choosing the CI length
and the number of packets transmitted by each slave (L,n1,n2,. . .,nN). The reward ris given to the
scheduler as feedback along with the updated state s2. Such a sequence of relevant information (i.e.,
current state s1, action a, reward r, and next state s2) is stored in the replay buffer for the training of
the DQN-based scheduler.

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 6 of 13
3.2.1. States
The state of the environment stat time tis represented by a vector of the remaining
lifetime of the packets for the Nslaves:
st= (D1,D2, . . . , DN) (3)
where Di= (d1,d2,. . .,dk)indicates the remaining lifetime of the ﬁrst kpackets in the
queue of the ith slave. The remaining lifetime of the packet is deﬁned as the time left until
the maximum latency since its arrival in the queue. A larger value of kwill better represent
the state, but will also cause an exponential growth in the state space S. Thus, we set
kto 5 in our experiments without loss of generality. The remaining lifetime d, which is
continuous in nature, was discretized into 20levels for modeling purposes. Each level is
0.2sec long, and this value was selected to accommodate the range of CIs (7.5 msec to 4 sec )
speciﬁed in the BLE speciﬁcations [14].
3.2.2. Actions
An action at2A at time tconsists of two components: the CI length and the number
of packets sent by each slave during the CI. Thus, the action atis expressed as
at= (L,n1,n2, . . . , nN) (4)
where Ldenotes the length of the CI and n1,n2,. . .,nNdenote the numbers of packets that
each Nslave transmits during the CI. We set the value of nito range from 0to5, considering
that a maximum of ﬁve packets were observable for each slave node. According to the BLE
speciﬁcations [14], the length of a CI in seconds, L, is given as
L=0.0075 +0.00125i,i=0, 1, . . . , 3194, (5)
where the index i, which is also called the CI index, usually refers to a speciﬁc CI. In our
experiments, we used a CI index ranging from 0to31instead of 0to3194 to avoid having a
huge action space. These CI indexes covered from 7.5msec up to 4s with a step size that
was 125 msec long.
3.2.3. Rewards
The goal of our DQN-based packet scheduler is to maximize the network lifetime
while satisfying the latency constraints. In the RL framework, this can be achieved by
designing an appropriate reward function that is intended to guide the learning process.
The reward function in our packet scheduler consists of two components: the CI length
and QoS metric. The reward rtis formulated as
rt= (1+Cid)N
Õ
i=1qi (6)
where Cidis the CI index in (5) at time tand qiis the QoS value of the ith slave at time t.qi
is given by
qi=8
><
>:0, if nd6=0
1/2, if ni=0,nd=0
1, otherwise
where nddenotes the number of dropped packets in the state stfor the ith slave. The
reward function in (6) is designed to increase with a longer CI and fewer packet losses. The
learning part of the DQN scheduling algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 7 of 13
Algorithm 1 DQN scheduling algorithm
1:Initialize the replay buffer B;
2:Initialize the network Qwith random weights q;
3:Initialize the target network ˆQwith random weights q0=q;
4:foreach episode do
5: foreach step of the episode do
6: With the parameter e, select a random action a; otherwise, a=argmax aQ(s,a);
7: Take action a, observe r,s0, and store the transition tuple (s,a,r,s0)in the replay
buffer B;
8: Sample a random mini-batch of transitions (s,a,r,s0)from the replay buffer B;
9: Set
y=(
r, if episode ends
r+gmax aˆQ(s0,a), otherwise
10: Perform a gradient descent step on loss function Lloss= (Q(s,a) y)2with respect
to the network parameters q;
11: Every Ksteps, synchronize the network parameters q0=q;
12: end for
13:end for
4. Numerical Results and Discussion
In this section, we analyze the performance of our DQN-based packet scheduling
algorithm for a WSN model. The considered WSN model was composed of a master and
multiple slaves connected to it in a star topology. The master scheduled the key operating
parameters, including the CI and the number of packets to be transmitted for each CI. The
DQN was used to optimize the scheduling algorithm that maximized the network lifetime
while satisfying the QoS requirement. Hundreds of simulated episodes were used for
training. An episode in our model refers to a communication session between the master
and multiple slaves. The communication session was simulated by using a discrete-event
simulation library named SimPy [ 18]. An episode started the communication session
after initializing all of the relevant network parameters (e.g., arrival processes, packet
queues, battery level, etc.) and ended when one of the slaves ran out of battery for the
ﬁrst time. Packet arrival processes for the slaves were assumed to follow a Poisson process
with an arrival rate l. Upon arrival, each packet was assigned a packet lifetime as a QoS
parameter. The packet was to be dropped and treated as lost if the transmission was
not completed within the packet lifetime. We assumed that energy was consumed only
during communication, ignoring other energy uses. For the convenience of the experiments,
1.0 units of energy were consumed for transmission or reception of a data packet that was
37 bytes long. Packets of different sizes were assumed to consume energy proportional
to this value. The battery level of the slaves was initially set to 1000.0 units, whereas the
master’s was set to inﬁnity. Due to this energy imbalance among the nodes, the network
lifetime was entirely determined by the lifetimes of the slaves. The number of slave nodes
was set to two unless otherwise noted. Our model was trained in the environment of
OpenAI Gym [ 19], an open-source toolkit for developing RL applications. We developed
our own WSN model and integrated it into OpenAI Gym. Some of the key parameters
used in the experiments are listed in Table 1.
We evaluated the performance of our DQN-based scheduling algorithm in terms of
convergence, cumulative rewards, network lifetime, and transmission ratio. Here, the
transmission ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of packets that were successfully transmitted from
each slave node. For example, a transmission ratio of 0.95 means that 95% of the packets
were successfully transmitted, but the rest were lost because they were not transmitted
within the packet lifetime. Note that our DQN-based scheduling algorithm is hereafter
abbreviated as DQN for convenience. The DQN was compared with a non-AI scheduling

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 8 of 13
scheme, which is abbreviated as DET, in which the value of the CI was always chosen at its
maximum, and as many packets as were in the queue were sent.
Table 1. Parameters used in the numerical experiments.
Parameters Values
Connection interval length ( L) 0.0075 3.8825 s
Discretized delay levels 20
Packet arrival rate ( l) 0.5/s
Transmission speed of link 1 Mbps
Interframe space (IFS) 0.15 ms
Master packet size 12 bytes
Slave packet size 37 bytes
Packet lifetime ( t) 2–4 s
Initial battery capacity 1000.0
Energy consumed by transmitting/receiving a
data packet1.0
Energy consumed by transmitting/receiving
an empty/control packet0.3243
In Figure 4, we evaluate the performance of the DQN-based scheduler in terms of the
cumulative reward, network lifetime, and transmission ratio by increasing the number of
episodes to be learned. As shown in the ﬁgure, all three metrics converged while learning
350 episodes. In particular, the convergence became clear and steady after 100 or more
episodes. According to the experimental results, the cumulative reward, network lifetime,
and transmission ratio converged to 15, 800 ,1450 , and 0.99, respectively. It was peculiar
that a sharp increase in the network lifetime was observed around the 15th episode. This
was caused by the action of ‘never transmitting’ becoming dominant during the early stage
of learning. Note that our reward function in (6) was designed to favor a longer CI and no
packet loss. Thus, a simple policy of ‘transmitting no packets, but taking the maximum CI’
can result in a relatively longer network lifetime. Obviously, this simple policy cannot be
optimal, since the DQN-based scheduler maximizes the cumulative reward rather than the
network lifetime. Consider that the value of the transmission ratio around the 15th episode
is very low, whereas the corresponding network lifetime is large. Since the rewards are
roughly a product of the network lifetime and transmission ratio, the value of cumulative
rewards around the 15th episode remains almost unaffected. This suboptimal policy was
overwhelmed by better policies and was eventually ﬁltered out through learning.
Figure 5 shows the average cumulative reward, network lifetime, and transmission
ratio for the DQN and DET. Here, the DET was divided into two cases, namely, DET2
and DET4, which denote the DET cases with packet lifetimes of 2 and 4 s, respectively.
In the ﬁgure, we can see that performance of the DQN was similar to DET4’s, but was
superior to DET2’s. DET4 could outperform DET2, since the larger packet lifetime of DET4
would reduce the packet loss rate for the DET schedulers, in which a ﬁxed CI was used.
Speciﬁcally, consider a packet that arrives during the CI. This packet will not be dropped
due to its longer lifetime for the DET4 scheduler. However, the chance that this packet
will be dropped becomes higher for the DET2 scheduler. Selecting a ﬁxed CI length that is
larger than the packet lifetime leads to higher packet losses and, consequently, aggravates
the stability of the scheduling. DET4 accidentally operated with parameters that yielded
optimal performance, but there was no guarantee of tuning to optimal parameters when
operating in a time-varying communication environment. The results show that dynamic
adjustment of transmission parameters through learning can show better performance than
deterministic scheduling.

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 9 of 13
Figure 4. (Top) Cumulative rewards versus the number of episodes for the DQN. ( Middle ) Network
lifetime versus the number of episodes for the DQN. ( Bottom ) Transmission ratios versus the number
of episodes for the DQN.
Figure 5. Average cumulative reward, network lifetime, and transmission ratio for the DQN and
DET. DET2 and DET4 denote the DET cases with packet lifetimes of 2 and 4 s, respectively.
Table 2 lists the most frequent state–action pairs of the DQN scheduler under the
default settings. After running the fully trained DQN scheduler for several episodes,
these state–action pairs were collected. The table consists of state–action pairs and their
frequencies. Since the state–action pairs governed the behavior of the DQN scheduler,
they could show how the DQN scheduler acted at a particular state. As shown in the
table, the all-zero state, which corresponded to the case of no packets in the queue, and
the one-packet states accounted for most of the frequent (state, action) pairs. In general,
how the group of frequent states was formed was greatly inﬂuenced by system parameters,
especially trafﬁc arrival rate. Two characteristic behaviors of the DQN scheduler can be
observed in the table. First, the scheduler tended to select the almost-maximum CI, i.e., CI
indexes of 29, 30, or 31. Note that 31 was the index of the maximum CI in our experiments.
Second, packets were transmitted immediately, regardless of their remaining lifetimes. That
is, the optimal DQN scheduler did not take actions such as intentionally deferring packet
transmission or sending all packets in a batch. These ﬁndings are expected to be useful for
reverse engineering AI schedulers or understanding the behavior of AI-based solutions.

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 10 of 13
Table 2. The most frequent (state, action) pairs for the DQN scheduler.
States Action Frequency
((0,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (29,0,0) 3.275
((0,0,0,0,0), (16,0,0,0,0)) (30,0,1) 0.425
((19,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.35
((16,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.35
((10,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.35
((0,0,0,0,0), (11,0,0,0,0)) (30,0,1) 0.325
((17,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.325
((15,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.325
((0,0,0,0,0), (4,0,0,0,0)) (30,0,1) 0.325
((20,0,0,0,0), (0,0,0,0,0)) (31,1,0) 0.3
5. Related Work
As one of the core technologies supporting the IoT, the WSN has attracted much
attention among researchers. Most of the early relevant studies focused on designing
different routing schemes and communication protocols to improve the energy efﬁciency
of WSNs [ 20,21]. In [ 22], Qiu et al. proposed an urgency-based packet scheduling scheme
named EARS. The master node determined the packet scheduling sequence while taking the
packets’ priority and deadline into account. Packets with a higher priority were processed
before the low-priority ones. If the priority was the same, the packet that expired sooner
would be transmitted ﬁrst. On the other hand, sleep scheduling mechanisms are widely
used to prolong the network lifetime. In [ 23], Feng et al. proposed a scheduling strategy
named EBMS for tracking targets in a cluster structure. It was intended to balance the
energy in terms of multisensor distributed scheduling. The cluster header adaptively
changed the sleeping time of cluster members based on the distance. To avoid missing the
targets, cluster members closer to the cluster center would have a longer sleep time, while
members closer to the cluster border would have a shorter one.
Inspired by the innovations brought by AI, several studies related to wireless net-
works have adopted AI-based techniques. In [ 9], Bhandari et al. proposed an SVM-based
algorithm for proportional fair scheduling (PFS) of users on a channel. Compared to con-
ventional metric-based PFS, which evaluates with a user-by-user metric, the SVM-based
PFS algorithm used channel capacity and average throughput as the metrics for schedul-
ing. In [ 10], Zhang et al. utilized a DNN to approximate the traditional SCA in channel
assignment algorithms. The samples could be used to train a user’s channel assignment
policy quickly in a real-time environment. The simulation results showed that the proposed
algorithm signiﬁcantly reduced the computation time and algorithm complexity. In [ 11], Xu
et al. proposed DQN-based link scheduling for multiple small base stations. The scheduler
selected a link based on channel gains and transmission weights. The simulation results
showed that DQN-based scheduling required less computation while achieving similar
performance to that of an exhaustive search. In [ 12], Wu et al. presented a DRL-based
scheduling strategy for allocating channels and time slots in an IIOT. The scheduling al-
gorithm considered various network information, including the source node, target node,
number of transmission time slots, and time slot occupancy. Their scheduling algorithm
was reported to have a higher success rate and schedulability compared with those of other
alternative methods.
BLE, which provides low-power and short-range wireless connectivity, has been
considered as a communication technology that is suitable for IoT. Thus, many studies have
investigated the enhancement of the performance of BLE-based communications in the
IoT [ 24–28]. In [ 25], Shan et al. introduced a method for reducing the detection time of the
surrounding advertisers by tuning the advertisement interval. By doing so, their method
could reduce unnecessary energy consumption. In [ 26], Ghamari et al. proposed a packet
collision model to estimate an advertisement collision when multiple nodes transmitted
advertisement packets simultaneously. The experimental results showed that decreasing

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 11 of 13
the advertisement interval signiﬁcantly increased the possibility of packet collisions, thus
increasing the energy consumption of the nodes. In [ 27], Giovanelli et al. evaluated
three BLE modules in terms of throughput, latency, and power consumption. The results
showed that optimizing the connection parameters, such as the CI, could improve the
system efﬁciency while maintaining the required throughput. In [ 28], Fu et al. proposed
Q-learning-based resource scheduling in a WSN to enhance the energy efﬁciency while
providing a QoS guarantee speciﬁed by a packet loss rate.
To the best of our knowledge, most existing IoT-related studies considered energy
efﬁciency and throughput as performance metrics; however, only a little work considering
the QoS has been reported. Nonetheless, the studies by Rioual et al. in [ 29] and Collotta et al.
in [30] are relatively close to our research. In [ 29], Rioual et al. used Q-learning to manage
the energy of sensor nodes by adjusting the sleep duration. This scheme tuned the processor
frequency of the nodes by considering the energy harvested from the environment. In
particular, they found that Q-learning is sufﬁcient to handle a moderate size of this problem,
though it is less appropriate for a large or nearly inﬁnite state space. In [ 30], Collotta et
al. proposed a fuzzy-based scheme that scheduled the sleeping time of IoT nodes by
considering the battery levels and the throughput-to-workload ratio. Compared to the
schemes that used a ﬁxed sleeping time, the proposed method increased the node lifetime
by 30%. However, this simulation was based on a simple network environment (i.e., only
one peripheral device), and the sleeping duration was ambiguous due to the inclusion of
unknown environmental parameters.
6. Conclusions
In this study, we proposed a practical DQN-based packet scheduling algorithm that
coordinates the transmission of multiple slaves in a WSN. The scheduler embedded in
the master dynamically adjusts the CI and the number of packets transmitted by each
slave within the interval. The experimental results conﬁrmed that the DQN scheduler can
adapt to dynamic network environments via continuous learning and can prolong network
lifetime while providing QoS guarantees. Moreover, an in-depth analysis of the optimized
scheduler’s policy revealed that immediate transmission of packets using the maximum CI
is optimal, rather than using batch transmission by deferring the transmissions. As future
research suggestions, there may be a need for ways to reuse previously learned policies
in highly mobile network environments in which the node population in the WSN varies
signiﬁcantly over time. It is also interesting to analyze how the optimal policy changes as
the amount and pattern of scheduling overhead vary.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.G.K.; methodology, J.G.K.; software, X.F. and J.G.K.;
validation, X.F. and J.G.K..; formal analysis, X.F.; investigation, X.F.; resources, X.F.; data curation,
X.F.; writing—original draft preparation, X.F.; writing—review and editing, J.G.K.; visualization, X.F.;
supervision, J.G.K.; project administration, J.G.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All data derived from this study are presented in the article.
Acknowledgments: This research was conducted as part of the Research Year Program, Kyung Hee
University, 2021.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 12 of 13
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
BLE Bluetooth Low Energy
CI Connection Interval
DNN Deep Neural Network
DQN Deep Q-Network
IoT Internet of Things
IIoT Industrial Internet of Things
QoS Quality of Service
RL Reinforcement Learning
WSN Wireless Sensor Network
References
1. Atzori, L.; Iera, A.; Morabito, G. The Internet of Things: A survey. Comput. Netw. 2010 ,54, 2787–2805. [CrossRef]
2. Sethi, P .; Sarangi, S.R. Internet of Things: Architectures, protocols, and applications. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. 2017 ,2017 . [CrossRef]
3. Balaji, S.; Nathani, K.; Santhakumar, R. IoT technology, applications and challenges: A contemporary survey. Wirel. Pers. Commun.
2019 ,108, 363–388. [CrossRef]
4. Yick, J.; Mukherjee, B.; Ghosal, D. Wireless sensor network survey. Comput. Netw. 2008 ,52, 2292–2330. [CrossRef]
5. Kandris, D.; Nakas, C.; Vomvas, D.; Koulouras, G. Applications of wireless sensor networks: An up-to-date survey. Appl. Syst.
Innov. 2020 ,3, 14. [CrossRef]
6. Sudevalayam, S.; Kulkarni, P . Energy harvesting sensor nodes: Survey and implications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2010 ,
13, 443–461. [CrossRef]
7. Sachan, S.; Sharma, R.; Sehgal, A. Energy efﬁcient scheme for better connectivity in sustainable mobile wireless sensor networks.
Sustain. Comput. Inform. Syst. 2021 ,30, 100504. [CrossRef]
8. Jones, C.E.; Sivalingam, K.M.; Agrawal, P .; Chen, J.C. A survey of energy efﬁcient network protocols for wireless networks. Wirel.
Netw. 2001 ,7, 343–358. [CrossRef]
9. Bhandari, S.; Zhao, H.P .; Kim, H.; Khan, P .; Ullah, S. Packet scheduling using SVM models in wireless communication networks.
J. Internet Technol. 2019 ,20, 1505–1512. [CrossRef]
10. Zhang, Z.; Zhai, D.; Zhang, R.; Wang, Y. Deep neural network based channel allocation for interference-limited wireless networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR), Xi’an, China,
26–29 May 2019; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
11. Xu, S.; Liu, P .; Wang, R.; Panwar, S.S. Realtime scheduling and power allocation using deep neural networks. In Proceedings of
the 2019 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Marrakesh, Morocco, 15–18 April 2019; pp. 1–5.
[CrossRef]
12. Wu, J.; Zhang, G.; Nie, J.; Peng, Y.; Zhang, Y. Deep reinforcement learning for scheduling in an edge computing-based industrial
internet of things. Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. 2021 ,2021 . [CrossRef]
13. Chen, J.H.; Chen, Y.S.; Jiang, Y.L. Energy-efﬁcient scheduling for multiple latency-sensitive Bluetooth Low Energy nodes. IEEE
Sens. J. 2017 ,18, 849–859. [CrossRef]
14. Bluetooth, S. Speciﬁcation of the Bluetooth System v4. 2 ; Bluetooth SIG: Kirkland, WA, USA, 2014; Volume 27.
15. Sutton, R.S.; Barto, A.G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction ; MIT press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.
16. Arulkumaran, K.; Deisenroth, M.P .; Brundage, M.; Bharath, A.A. Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 2017 ,34, 26–38. [CrossRef]
17. Mnih, V .; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A.A.; Veness, J.; Bellemare, M.G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fidjeland, A.K.;
Ostrovski, G.; et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 2015 ,518, 529–533. [CrossRef]
18. Matloff, N. Introduction to Discrete-Event Simulation and the Simpy Language ; Department of Computer Science, University of
California at Davis: Davis, CA, USA, 2008; Volume 2, pp. 1–33.
19. Brockman, G.; Cheung, V .; Pettersson, L.; Schneider, J.; Schulman, J.; Tang, J.; Zaremba, W. OpenAI Gym. arXiv e-prints. arXiv
2016 , arXiv:1606.01540.
20. Jones, A. Survey: Energy efﬁcient protocols using radio scheduling in wireless sensor network. Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng.
2020 ,10. [CrossRef]
21. Malekpourshahraki, M.; Desiniotis, C.; Radi, M.; Dezfouli, B. A survey on design challenges of scheduling algorithms for wireless
networks. Int. J. Commun. Netw. Distrib. Syst. 2022 ,28, 219–265. [CrossRef]
22. Qiu, T.; Zheng, K.; Han, M.; Chen, C.P .; Xu, M. A data-emergency-aware scheduling scheme for Internet of Things in smart cities.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 2017 ,14, 2042–2051. [CrossRef]
23. Feng, J.; Zhao, H. Energy-balanced multisensory scheduling for target tracking in wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2018 ,18, 3585.
[CrossRef]

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 13 of 13
24. Dementyev, A.; Hodges, S.; Taylor, S.; Smith, J. Power consumption analysis of Bluetooth Low Energy, ZigBee and ANT sensor
nodes in a cyclic sleep scenario. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Wireless Symposium (IWS), Beijing, China, 14–18
April 2013; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
25. Shan, G.; Roh, B.H. Advertisement interval to minimize discovery time of whole BLE advertisers. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 17817–17825.
[CrossRef]
26. Ghamari, M.; Villeneuve, E.; Soltanpur, C.; Khangosstar, J.; Janko, B.; Sherratt, R.S.; Harwin, W. Detailed examination of a packet
collision model for Bluetooth Low Energy advertising mode. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 46066–46073. [CrossRef]
27. Giovanelli, D.; Milosevic, B.; Farella, E. Bluetooth Low Energy for data streaming: Application-level analysis and recommendation.
In Proceedings of the 2015 6th International Workshop on Advances in Sensors and Interfaces (IWASI), Gallipoli, Italy, 18–19 June
2015; pp. 216–221. [CrossRef]
28. Fu, X.; Lopez-Estrada, L.; Kim, J.G. A Q-learning-based approach for enhancing energy efﬁciency of Bluetooth Low Energy. IEEE
Access 2021 ,9, 21286–21295. [CrossRef]
29. Rioual, Y.; Le Moullec, Y.; Laurent, J.; Khan, M.I.; Diguet, J.P . Reward function evaluation in a reinforcement learning approach
for energy management. In Proceedings of the 2018 16th Biennial Baltic Electronics Conference (BEC), Tallinn, Estonia, 8–10
October 2018; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
30. Collotta, M.; Pau, G. Bluetooth for Internet of Things: A fuzzy approach to improve power management in smart homes. Comput.
Electr. Eng. 2015 ,44, 137–152. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

