==== Page 1 ====
Deep Metric Learning for Few-Shot Image Classiﬁcation:
A Review of Recent Developments
Xiaoxu Li∗1,2, Xiaochen Yang3, Zhanyu Ma†2, and Jing-Hao Xue4
1School of Computer and Communication, Lanzhou University of Technology, China.
2Pattern Recognition and Intelligent System Laboratory, School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China.
3School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, UK.
4Department of Statistical Science, University College London, UK.
Abstract
Few-shot image classiﬁcation is a challenging problem that aims to achieve the human
level of recognition based only on a small number of training images. One main solution to
few-shot image classiﬁcation is deep metric learning. These methods, by classifying unseen
samples according to their distances to few seen samples in an embedding space learned by
powerful deep neural networks, can avoid overﬁtting to few training images in few-shot image
classiﬁcation and have achieved the state-of-the-art performance. In this paper, we provide
an up-to-date review of deep metric learning methods for few-shot image classiﬁcation from
2018 to 2022 and categorize them into three groups according to three stages of metric
learning, namely learning feature embeddings, learning class representations, and learning
distance measures. With this taxonomy, we identify the novelties of diﬀerent methods and
problems they face. We conclude this review with a discussion on current challenges and
future trends in few-shot image classiﬁcation.
Image classiﬁcation is an important task in machine learning and computer vision. With
the rapid development of deep learning, recent years have witnessed breakthroughs in this
area [1,2,3,4]. Such progress, however, hinges on collecting and labeling a vast amount of data
(in the order of millions), which can be diﬃcult and costly. More severely, this learning mechanism
is in stark contrast with that of humans, where one or few examples suﬃce for learning a new
concept [ 5]. Therefore, to reduce the data requirement and imitate human intelligence, many
researchers started to focus on few-shot classiﬁcation [ 6,7,8], i.e., learning a classiﬁcation rule
from few (typically 1-5) labeled examples.
The biggest challenge in few-shot classiﬁcation is a high risk of model overﬁtting to the
few labeled training samples. To alleviate this problem, researchers have proposed various
approaches, such as meta-learning methods, transfer learning methods, and metric learning
methods. Meta-learning methods train a meta-learner on many diﬀerent classiﬁcation tasks to
extract generalizable knowledge, which enables rapid learning on a new related task with few
examples [ 7,9]. Transfer learning methods presume shared knowledge between the source and
target domains, and ﬁne-tune the model trained on abundant source data to ﬁt few labeled target
samples [ 10,11]. Metric learning methods learn feature embeddings [ 6] and/or distance measures
(or inversely, similarity measures) [ 12] and classify an unseen sample based on its distance to
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding author: Zhanyu Ma (email: mazhanyu@bupt.edu.cn)
1arXiv:2105.08149v2  [cs.CV]  27 Jun 2022

==== Page 2 ====
labeled samples or class representations; samples of the same class are expected to locate close
together in the embedding space and samples of diﬀerent classes should be far apart. Note that
the above methods can be applied simultaneously, for example learning feature embeddings of
metric learning methods by using a meta-learning strategy [7].
In this paper, we present a review of recent deep metric learning methods for few-shot image
classiﬁcation. Metric learning methods deserve special attention as they do not require learning
additional parameters for new classes once the metric is learned, and thus able to avoid overﬁtting
to the few labeled samples of new classes in few-shot learning. They have also demonstrated
impressive classiﬁcation performance on benchmark datasets. Moreover, in this review we
decouple metric learning into three learning stages, namely learning feature embeddings, learning
class representations, and learning distance measures. Such decomposition facilitates exchange
of ideas between researchers from two underpinning communities: few-shot image classiﬁcation
and deep metric learning. For example, latest developments in learning generalizable feature
embeddings can be adopted for few-shot image classiﬁcation, and the idea of learning prototypes,
one type of class representations, can be extended for long-tailed visual recognition [13].
A number of surveys on few-shot learning (FSL) have been published or preprinted. [ 14] is the
ﬁrst survey on small sample learning, summarizing methods for diﬀerent small sample learning
scenarios, including zero-shot learning and FSL, and for various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation,
object detection, visual question answering, and neural machine translation. Since the survey was
conducted early in 2018, it includes relatively limited work on few-shot classiﬁcation, particularly
metric learning methods. [ 15] provides the ﬁrst comprehensive review on FSL. In addition
to deﬁning FSL and distinguishing it from related machine learning problems, the authors
discuss FSL from the fundamental perspective of error decomposition in supervised learning
and classify all methods in terms of augmenting the training data for reducing the estimation
error, learning models from prior knowledge for constraining the hypothesis space and reducing
the approximation error, and learning initializations or optimizers which improve the search
for the optimal hypothesis within the hypothesis space. The survey has limited coverage on
metric learning methods and categorize them all under learning embedding models, which does
not fully describe the merits of these methods. [ 16] is another comprehensive survey, reviewing
literature over a long period from the 2000s to 2020 as well as summarizing applications of FSL
in various ﬁelds. It includes early, non-deep approaches of metric learning methods and, since the
survey emphasizes on meta-learning methods, categorizes most recent, deep approaches under
meta-learning as learning-to-measure. Compared with [ 16] which links diﬀerent meta-learning
metric learning methods to three classical methods, our review provides a deeper insight into
how metric learning methods evolve in order to generalize better and be more applicable in the
settings that mimic the reality more closely. Moreover, the rapid development of FSL leads to
a considerable amount of methods proposed since the publications of [ 15] and [16]. These new
approaches have been discussed in this review. [ 17] is the latest review on FSL published in
2021, but it is entirely devoted to meta-learning approaches and has very little overlap with our
work. In short, this paper provides an up-to-date review of deep metric learning methods for
few-shot image classiﬁcation and a careful examination of diﬀerent components of these methods
to understand their strengths and limitations.
The rest of this review is organized as follows. Firstly for completeness, in Section 1 we give
the deﬁnition of few-shot classiﬁcation and introduce the evaluation procedure and commonly
used datasets. Secondly, in Section 2 we review classical few-shot metric learning algorithms
and recent inﬂuential works published from 2018 to 2022. In the light of the procedure of
metric learning, these methods are classiﬁed into learning feature embeddings, learning class
representations, and learning distance or similarity measures. Finally, we discuss some remaining
challenges in existing methods and directions for further developments in Section 3 and conclude
2

==== Page 3 ====
this review in Section 4.
1 The Framework of Few-Shot Image Classiﬁcation
1.1 Notation and deﬁnitions
Weﬁrstestablishthenotationandgiveauniﬁeddeﬁnitionofvarioustypesoffew-shotclassiﬁcation
by generalizing the deﬁnition of few-shot learning [12].
Few-shot classiﬁcation involves two datasets, base dataset andnovel dataset . The novel
dataset is the dataset on which the classiﬁcation task is performed. The base dataset is an
auxiliary dataset used to facilitate the learning of the classiﬁer by transferring knowledge. We
useDbase=f(Xi; Yi);Xi2Xbase; Yi2YbasegNbase
i=1to denote the base dataset, where Yiis the
class label of instance Xi; in the case of image classiﬁcation, Xidenotes the feature vector of
theith image. The novel dataset is denoted similarly by Dnovel =f(~Xj;~Yj);~Xj2Xnovel;~Yj2
YnovelgNnovel
j=1.DbaseandDnovelhave no overlap in the label space , i.e.,Ybase\Ynovel =;.
To train and test the classiﬁer, we split Dnovelinto the support set DSand the query set DQ.
Deﬁnition 1. Suppose the support set DSis available, and the sample size of each class in
DSis very small (e.g., from 1 to 5). The few-shot classiﬁcation task aims to learn from DS
a classiﬁer f:Xnovel!Y novelthat can correctly classify instances in the query set DQ. In
particular, if DScontains Cclasses and Klabeled examples per class, the task is called C-way
K-shot classiﬁcation ; if the sample size of each class in DSis one, then the task is called
one-shot classiﬁcation .
Before presenting the next deﬁnition, we introduce the concept of domain. A domainconsists
of two components, namely a feature space Xand a marginal distribution P(X)overX[18].
Deﬁnition 2. A few-shot classiﬁcation task is called cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation
if the base dataset and the novel dataset come from two diﬀerent domains, i.e., Xbase6=Xnovelor
P(X)6=P(~X), where X2Xbaseand ~X2Xnovel.
Deﬁnition 3. Thegeneralized few-shot classiﬁcation task aims to learn a classiﬁer f:
Xnovel[Xbase!Y novel[Ybasethat can correctly classify instances in the query set DQ, where
DQincludes instance-label pairs from Dbasein addition to existing pairs from Dnovel.
1.2 Evaluation procedure of few-shot classiﬁcation
We provide a general procedure to evaluate the performance of a classiﬁer for C-way K-shot
classiﬁcation in Algorithm 1. The evaluation procedure includes many episodes (i.e., tasks). In
each episode, we ﬁrst randomly select Cclasses from the novel label set, and then randomly select
Ksamples from each of the Cclasses to form a support set and Msamples from the remaining
samples of those Cclasses to form a query set. Let X(e)andY(e)denote the set of instances and
the set of labels in the query set at the eth episode, respectively. A learning algorithm returns a
classiﬁer f(jDbase;D(e)
S)upon receiving the base dataset and the eth support set, which predicts
labels of query instances as ^Y(e)=f(X(e)jDbase;D(e)
S). Let a(e)denote the classiﬁcation accuracy
on the eth episode. The performance of a learning algorithm is measured by the classiﬁcation
accuracy averaged over all episodes.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Algorithm 1 Evaluation procedure of C-wayK-shot classiﬁcation
Input:
Dbase =f(Xi; Yi);Xi2 X base; Yi2 Y basegNbase
i=1;Dnovel =f(~Xj;~Yj);~Xj2 X novel;~Yj2
YnovelgNnovel
j=1; number of episodes E.
Steps:
1:e 0
2:repeat
3:e e+ 1
4:Randomly select Cclasses fromYnovel.
5:Randomly select Ksamples from each class as the support set D(e)
S.
6:Randomly select Msamples from the remaining samples of Cclasses as the query set
D(e)
S=f(X(e);Y(e))g.
7:Record predicted labels ^Y(e)=f(X(e)jDbase;D(e)
S).
8:Compute accuracy a(e)=1
MPM
j=11[^Y(e)=Y(e)]1.
9:untile=E
10:return mean accuracy1
EPE
e=1a(e).
1.3 Datasets for few-shot image classiﬁcation
Inthissection, webrieﬂyintroducebenchmarkdatasetsforfew-shotimageclassiﬁcation. Statistics
of the datasets and commonly used experimental settings are listed below, and sample images
are shown in Figure 1.
•Omniglot [ 19]: one of the most widely used datasets for evaluating few-shot classiﬁcation
algorithms. It contains 1,623 characters from 50 languages. The dataset is often augmented
by rotations of 90, 180, 270 degrees, resulting in 6,492 classes, which are split into 4,112
base, 688 validation, and 1,692 novel classes. The validation classes are used for model
selection. The dataset is used less often in the latest studies as many methods can attain
over 99% accuracy on the 5-way 1-shot classiﬁcation task.
•Mini-ImageNet and Tiered-ImageNet: another two widely used datasets derived from the
ImageNet dataset [ 20]. Mini-ImageNet consists of 100 selected classes with 600 images for
each class. This dataset was ﬁrst proposed by Vinyals et al. [ 7], but recent studies follow
the experimental setting provided by Ravi and Larochelle [ 21], which splits 100 classes into
64 base, 16 validation, and 20 novel classes. Tiered-ImageNet is a larger dataset with a
hierarchical structure [ 22]. It is constructed from 34 super-classes with 608 classes in total
and include 779,165 images. These super-classes are split into 20 base, 6 validation, and
8 novel super-classes, which correspond to 351 base, 97 validation, and 160 novel classes,
respectively.
•CIFAR-FS and FC100: two datasets derived from CIFAR-100 [ 23]. CIFAR-FS [ 24] contains
100 classes with 600 images per class, and it is split into 64 base, 16 validation, and 20
novel classes. FC100 [ 25] divides 100 classes into 20 super-classes, with ﬁve classes in each
super-class. The dataset is split into 12 base, 4 validation, and 4 novel super-classes.
•Stanford Dogs [ 26]: one of the benchmark datasets for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation task, which
contains 120 breeds (classes) of dogs with a total number of 20,580 images. These classes
are divided into 70 base, 20 validation, and 30 novel classes.
11denotes the element-wise indicator function.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Fewshot-CIFAR100
CUB-200-2011Mini-ImageNet
Stanford DogsOmniglotFigure 1: Sample images of benchmark datasets for few-shot image classiﬁcation. Datasets
include Onimiglot, Mini-ImageNet, Fewshot-CIFAR100, Stanford Dogs, and CUB-200-2011.
•CUB-200-2011: a ﬁne-grained bird classiﬁcation dataset, which contains 200 classes and
11,788 images in total. Following [ 27], the dataset is commonly split into 100 base, 50
validation, and 50 novel classes.
•Mini-ImageNet!CUB: a dataset used for cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation. Mini-
ImageNet serves as the base dataset, 50 classes of CUB-200-2011 serve as the validation
classes, and the remaining 50 classes serve as novel classes.
•Meta-Dataset: a new, large-scale dataset for evaluating few-shot classiﬁcation methods,
particularly cross-domain methods. It initially consists of 10 diverse image datasets [ 28],
e.g., ImageNet, CUB, and MS COCO [ 29], and later expanded with three additional
datasets [ 30]. There are two training procedures and two evaluation protocols. In the more
commonly used setting of training on all datasets (multi-domain learning) [ 30,31,32],
the methods are trained on the oﬃcial training splits of the ﬁrst eight datasets, and they
are evaluated on the test splits of the same datasets for in-domain performance and the
remaining ﬁve datasets for out-of-domain performance. The other setting is training only
on the Meta-Dataset version of ImageNet (single-domain learning), and evaluating on the
test split of ImageNet for in-domain performance and the rest 12 datasets for out-of-domain
performance.
2 Few-Shot Deep Metric Learning Methods
The goal of supervised metric learning is to learn a distance measure between instance pairs that
assigns a small (large, resp.) distance to semantically similar (dissimilar, resp.) instances. In
the case of few-shot classiﬁcation, the metric is learned on the base dataset; query images of
the novel class are classiﬁed by computing their distances to novel support images with respect
to the learned measure, followed by applying a distance-based classiﬁer such as the k-nearest
5

==== Page 6 ====
Temperature Network [87, 2021]
Variational scaling [88, 2020]
Simple CNAPS [31, 2020]
TEAM [89, 2020]
SEN [90, 2020]
DeepEMD [92, 2020]
BDC [93, 2022]FSL with embedded class models
[74, 2019]
LMPNet [75, 2021]
Two-stage FSL [76, 2020]
TapNet [77, 2019]
FSLwith global classes[78, 2019]
KGTN [79, 2020]
KGGR [80, 2020]
SOC [81, 2021]
PHR [82, 2022]
ABPML [83, 2021]Learning task -agnostic features
Siamese Network [6, 2015 ]
Matching Network [7, 2016]
TPN [37, 2019]
PTN [38, 2021]
Cross -domain FSL [40, 2020]
URL [41, 2021]
PARN [43, 2019]
ConstellationNet [44, 2021]
Attentive Prototype [45, 2020]Learning with data augmentation
Hallucinator [62, 2018]
Saliency Network [63, 2019]
SFSP [64, 2020]Learn ingtask-specific features
TADAM [25, 2018]
LGM -Net[35, 2019]
TPMN [52, 2021]
CTM [53, 2019]
FEAT [36, 2020]
XtarNet [54, 2020]
Unified FSL [55, 2018]Learning via multi -task learning
TADAM [25, 2018]
Self-supervis edFSL [65, 2019]
AGFL [66, 2020]
Auto-ACNet [67, 2021]
Meta -learning for semi -supervised few -
shot classificationLearning point -based prototypes Learning distribution or subspace -
based representationsLearning or selecting an analytical 
distance/similarity measures
Relation Network [12, 2018]
BSNet [94, 2020]
ArL [95, 2021]
SAML [96, 2018]
GNN -FSL [98, 2018]
EGNN [97, 2019]
TRPN [99, 2020]
HGNN [100, 2021]
DPGN [101, 2020]Learning Distance/Similarity
Measures
Variational FSL [84, 2019]
DSN [85, 2020]Learning similarity via 
neural networksLearning C lass Representations
Prototypical Network [ 68, 2017 ]
CovaMNet [69, 2019]
Semi -supervised Prototypical 
Network [22, 2018]
IMP [70, 2019]
Attentive Prototype [45, 2020]
CTX [71, 2020]
RapNets [72, 2020]
CCVD [73, 2022]Mean feature embeddingsLearning Feature Embeddings
Learning fine -grained features
DN4 [42, 2019]
ATL-Net [47, 2020]
COMET [48, 2021]
MSML [49, 2020]
LRPABN [46, 2020]
TOAN [51, 2021]Figure 2: Taxonomy of few-shot deep metric learning methods reviewed in this paper. Some
methods contribute to two aspects of metric learning and thus appear twice.
neighbor ( kNN) algorithm. Traditional metric learning methods learn a Mahalanobis distance,
which is equivalent to learning a linear transformation of original features [ 33]. However, in deep
metric learning, the distance measure and feature embeddings are often learned separately so as
to capture the nonlinear data structure and generate more discriminative feature representations.
Moreover, instead of comparing with individual samples, many few-shot metric learning methods
compare query samples with class representations such as prototypes and subspaces. In the
remainder of this section, we provide a review of representative approaches, which are categorized
into three groups according to the aspect they are improving on, namely 1) learning feature
embeddings, 2) learning class representations, and 3) learning distance or similarity measures. A
summary of these methods is provided in Figure 2.
2.1 Learning feature embeddings
Methods of learning feature embeddings implicitly assume that the network is powerful to extract
discriminative features and can generalize well to novel classes. Early approaches aim at a
task-agnostic embedding model that is eﬀective for any task. More recently, endeavors are
made to learn a task-speciﬁc embedding model for better distinguishing the classes at hand.
Furthermore, techniques for data augmentation and multi-task learning are leveraged to address
the issues of data scarcity and overﬁtting.
2.1.1 Learning task-agnostic features
The Siamese Convolutional Neural Network [ 6] is the ﬁrst deep metric learning method for
one-shot image classiﬁcation. The Siamese Network, ﬁrst introduced in [ 34], consists of two
sub-networks with identical architectures and shared weights. [ 6] adopted the VGG-styled
6

==== Page 7 ====
convolutional layers as the sub-network to extract high-level features from two images and
employed the weighted L1distance as the distance between the two feature vectors. Weights
of the network, as well as those of component-wise distance, are trained using the conventional
technique of mini-batch gradient descent.
The Matching Network [ 7] encoded support and query images using diﬀerent networks in the
context of the entire support set, and it ﬁrst introduced episodic training to few-shot classiﬁcation.
A support image is embedded via a bidirectional LSTM network, which takes account of not only
the image itself but also other images in the set; a query image is embedded via an LSTM with
an attention mechanism to enable dependency on the support set. However, the sequential nature
of bidirectional LSTM results in feature embeddings that will change with diﬀerent ordering
of samples in the support set. This issue can be sidestepped, such as by applying a pooling
operation [ 35] or using self-attention [ 36]. The classiﬁcation mechanism of Matching Network is
suitable for few-shot learning. The network outputs a label distribution by computing a convex
combination of one-hot label vectors of all support samples, with coeﬃcients deﬁned by using a
softmax over cosine similarities; the class with the highest probability is selected as the predicted
class. Another valuable contribution of [ 7] is the episode-based training strategy, which has been
adopted by many subsequent works. Following the idea of meta-learning, the training phase on
the base dataset should mimic the prediction phase where only few support samples are available.
That is, gradient updates should be performed on episodes with Cclasses randomly sampled
from the base label set and Kexamples for each class.
The episodic training strategy closes the gap between training and test distributions and thus
alleviates the issue of overﬁtting to few labeled training images. This can also be addressed from
a diﬀerent perspective by utilizing query instances (i.e., excluding query labels) via transductive
inference. Transductive Propagation Network (TPN) [ 37] is the ﬁrst work adopting transductive
inference for few-shot learning and introduced the idea of label propagation. Concretely, the
network contains a feature embedding module and a graph construction module. The graph
construction module, taking feature embeddings as inputs, learns a label propagation graph
to exploit the manifold structure of support and query samples. In particular, a kNN graph
is constructed according to the Gaussian kernel whose length-scale parameters are learned in
an example-wise manner. Based on the graph, labels are propagated from the support set to
the query set; a closed-form solution of label propagation is used to speed up the prediction
procedure. The Poisson Transfer Network (PTN) [ 38] improved the label propagation scheme by
applying the Poisson learning algorithm [ 39], which has been theoretically proved to be more
stable and informative, especially in the case of very few labels. PTN is primarily designed for
semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation with additional unlabeled data than query samples, and it
further enhances the feature embeddings through contrastive self-supervised learning and reﬁnes
the inference procedure by using a graph-cut method.
The aforementioned methods, designed for classifying novel data from the same domain,
degrade when novel data comes from diﬀerent domains [ 27]. Tseng et al. [ 40] noticed that this
is caused by the large discrepancy between the feature distributions in diﬀerent domains and
proposed to simulate various feature distributions in the training stage as a general solution to
enhancethedomaingeneralizationabilityofmetriclearningmethods. Thisisachievedbyinserting
multiple feature-wise transformation layers into the feature extractor; each transformation
simulates one distribution, and the hyperparameters of aﬃne transformations can be tuned
via a meta-learning approach so that they are optimal to a particular metric learning method
and capture the complex variation in feature distributions. Li et al. [ 41] proposed to learn a
universal feature representation that works well for multiple domains. The technique of knowledge
distillation is applied, where a multi-domain network is learned to generate universal features
which align with features from multiple single-domain networks up to a linear transformation.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Motivated by the observation that the interested object may locate only in a region of an image
and at diﬀerent positions across images, a series of improvements on feature embedding have
been proposed, such as by learning local features [ 42] and encoding the position information [ 43].
The former type of methods, while can be applied to generic few-shot image classiﬁcation, are
particularly eﬀective for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. Thus, we will discuss them separately
in the next subsection and only focus on position encoding methods here. Wu et al. [ 43] proposed
the Position-Aware Relation Network (PARN) to reduce the sensitivity of Relation Network
(which will be introduced in Section 2.3.2) to the spatial position of semantic objects. PARN
adopts deformable convolutional layers to extract more eﬀective features which ﬁlter out unrelated
information like the background, and a dual correlation attention module to incorporate each
spatial position of an image with the global information about the compared image and the
image itself, so that the subsequent convolution operations, even subject to local connectivity,
can perceive and compare semantic features in diﬀerent positions. Compared with standard
ways of overcoming position sensitivity, such as by using larger kernels or more layers, PARN is
more parameter eﬃcient. Xu et al. [ 44] proposed the ConstellationNet which extracts part-based
features and encodes the spatial relationship between these representations by using self-attention
with an explicit, learnable positional encoding. The spatial relationship between diﬀerent parts
of the image has also been encoded in [45] by using a capsule network.
2.1.2 Learning task-agnostic features for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation
Fine-grained image classiﬁcation aims to distinguish diﬀerent sub-categories under the same
basic-level category. It is particularly challenging due to the subtle diﬀerences between diﬀerent
sub-categories and large variance in the same sub-category which may result from variations in
the object’s pose, scale, rotation, etc. Therefore, for eﬀective classiﬁcation, several methods have
been proposed to extract local features, multi-scale features, and second-order features.
In deep nearest neighbor neural network (DN4) [ 42], the feature embedding module extracts
multiple local descriptors from an image, which are essentially the feature maps learned via
CNNs prior to adding the ﬁnal image-level pooling layer. The classiﬁcation is performed at an
image-to-class level, meaning that the local descriptors from support images of the same class are
put into one pool, kNNs in each class pool are searched for each query local descriptor, and the
total distance over all local descriptors and kNNs is the distance between the query image and the
corresponding class. The method is shown to be particularly eﬀective on ﬁne-grained datasets,
and the idea of learning local descriptors has been adopted in other ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
methods [ 46]. The Adaptive Task-aware Local representations Network (ATL-Net) [ 47] improved
DN4 by selecting local descriptors with learned thresholds and assigning them diﬀerent weights
based on episodic attention, which brings more ﬂexibility than using kNNs and adjusts for the
discriminability between classes, respectively. In contrast to learning one feature embedding over
spatially local patches, COMET [ 48] learns multiple embedding functions over various parts of
input features. A set of ﬁxed binary masks, termed concepts, are applied to input features to
separate an image into human-interpretable segments. For each concept, a feature embedding is
learned to map masked features into a new discriminative feature space. The query image is
classiﬁed according to the distances aggregated from all concept-speciﬁc spaces.
The Multi-Scale Metric Learning (MSML) network [ 49] also constructs multiple feature
embeddings, but diﬀerent from COMET, each embedding corresponds to a diﬀerent scale of the
image. The similarity between support and query features at each scale is computed using the
Relation Network.
Huang et al. [ 46] proposed the Low-Rank Pairwise Alignment Bilinear Network (LRPABN)
which aligns features spatially and extracts discriminative, second-order features. After learning
8

==== Page 9 ====
ﬁrst-order features from base images, the method trains a two-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
network with two designed feature alignment losses to transform the positions of image features
of a query image to match those of a support image, and designs a low-rank pairwise bilinear
pooling layer which adapts the self-bilinear pooling [ 50] to extract second-order features from a
pair of support and query images. The classiﬁcation is performed as in the Relation Network. In
the follow-up work, [ 51] improves the spatial alignment part by using the cross-channel attention
to generate spatially matched support and query features and groups features in the convolutional
channel dimension before the pooling layer as each group corresponds to a semantic concept.
2.1.3 Learning task-speciﬁc features
Methods reviewed in the preceding sections generate the same feature embedding for an image,
regardless of the subsequent classiﬁcation task. While this avoids the risk of overﬁtting, these
generic features may not be suﬃciently discriminative to distinguish novel classes. To this end,
task-speciﬁc embedding models have been proposed to adapt features to the particular task; it
should be noted that the adaptation is learned on the base dataset and does not involve any
re-training on the novel dataset.
TADAM [ 25] is the ﬁrst metric learning method which explicitly performs task adaptation.
Exploiting the technique of conditional batch normalization, it applies a task-speciﬁc aﬃne
transformation to each convolutional layer of a task-agnostic feature extractor. The task is
represented by the mean of class prototypes, and the scale and shift parameters of the aﬃne
transformation are generated from a separate network, called the Task Embedding Network
(TEN). As TEN introduces more parameters and causes diﬃculty in optimization, the training
scheme is revised to add the standard training, i.e., to distinguish all classes in the base dataset,
as an auxiliary task to the episodic training.
Li et al. [ 35] proposed a meta-learning approach that can adapt weights of Matching Network
to novel data. The proposed LGM-Net consists of a meta-learner termed MetaNet and a task-
speciﬁc learner termed TargetNet. The MetaNet module learns to produce a representation of
each task from the support set and construct a mapping from the representation to weights of
TargetNet. The TargetNet module, set as the Matching Network, embeds support and query
images and performs classiﬁcation. The proposed meta-learning strategy can be potentially
implemented to adapt network parameters of other metric learning methods. Wu et al. [ 52] also
proposed to learn task-speciﬁc parameters, but they combined the idea with local features. The
proposed Task-aware Part Mining Network (TPMN) learns to generate parameters of ﬁlters used
for extracting part-based features.
Diﬀerent from the above two works which generate parameters for task-speciﬁc embedding
layers, Li et al. [ 53] proposed to modify the generic features output from the task-agnostic
embedding layers. A task-speciﬁc feature mask is generated from the Category Traversal Module
(CTM), which includes a concentrator unit and a projector unit to extract features for intra-
class commonality and inter-class uniqueness, respectively. It is noted that CTM can be easily
embedded into most few-shot metric learning methods, such as Matching Network, Prototypical
Network, and Relation Network; the latter two methods will be introduced in the following
sections. Ye et al. [ 36] also proposed to adjust features directly, but instead of applying a
mask, set-to-set functions are used to transform a set of task-agnostic features into a set of
task-speciﬁc ones. These functions can model interactions between images in a set and hence
enable co-adaptation of each image. Four set-to-set function approximators are presented in [ 36],
and the one with Transformer, termed FEAT, is shown to be most eﬀective.
Yoon et al. [ 54] proposed XtarNet to learn task-speciﬁc features for a new setting of generalized
few-shot learning, where the model is trained on the base dataset, adapted given the support set
9

==== Page 10 ====
of the novel dataset, and used to classify instances from both base and novel classes. XtarNet
contains three meta-learners. The MetaCNN module adapts feature embeddings for each task.
The MergeNet module produces weights for mixing pre-trained features and meta-learned features.
As the classiﬁcation is performed by comparing the mixed features with class prototypes, the
TconNet module adapts prototypes of base and novel classes to improve discriminability. Rahman
et al. [55] proposed a uniﬁed approach for zero-shot learning, generalized zero-shot learning and
few-shot learning, which classiﬁes a query image based on the similarity between its semantic
representation and the textual features of each class. The semantic representation is a combination
of two parts – one is a linear combination of base samples’ semantic features, and the other one
is based on the linear mapping learned from support images.
2.1.4 Feature learning with data augmentation
Data augmentation is a strategy that expands the support set in an artiﬁcial or model-based
way with label preserving transformations, and thus is well-suited when the support samples are
limited. One commonly used method is deformation [ 56,57,58], such as cropping, padding, and
horizontal ﬂipping. Besides this, generating more training samples [ 59,60] and pseudo labels [ 61]
are also popular techniques to augment data.
In few-shot learning, there is one class of works which places the data augmentation process
into a model, that is, they embed a generator that can generate the augmented data to learn
or imagine the diversity of data. Wang et al. [ 62] constructed an end-to-end few-shot learning
method, in which the training data goes through two streams to output – one is from the original
data to the classiﬁer directly, and the other one is from the original data to a ‘hallucination’
network to augment data and then from the augmented data to classiﬁer. Zhang et al. [ 63]
developed a saliency-based data generation strategy. The Saliency Network obtains foregrounds
and backgrounds of an image, which are used to achieve the hallucination for the image.
In [64], a much simpler feature synthesis strategy is proposed, which synthesizes novel features
by perturbing the semantic representations (i.e., word vectors of class labels) and projecting them
into the visual feature space. In addition, when learning the projection function, a competitive
learning formulation is adopted to push the synthesized sample towards the center of the most
likely unseen class and away from that of the second best class.
2.1.5 Multi-task feature learning
Besides generating more training data, some works tried to exploit auxiliary information of
samples to perform multi-task learning, which creates a regularization eﬀect and helps learn
discriminative features.
As brieﬂy discussed above, TADAM [ 25] used an auxiliary task of training a normal global
classiﬁer on the base dataset to co-train the few-shot classiﬁer; the task is sampled with a
probability during the training process. Gidaris et al. [ 65] proposed a few-shot learning method
combining self-supervised learning. In speciﬁc, support samples are artiﬁcially rotated to diﬀerent
number of degrees. A shared feature embedding is learned through two branches of networks,
one for the original classiﬁcation task and the other for identifying the rotation degree. Zhu
et al. [66] suggested that base and novel classes, despite being disjoint, can be connected by
some visual attributes. Based on this insight, they used attribute learning as an auxiliary task.
Visual attributes are provided as additional information during training, and the embedding
network is learned to correctly predict both attribute labels and class labels. [ 67] also utilized
attribute information, but in a richer way which requires an additional prediction of common
and diﬀerent attributes between an image pair. Moreover, the neural architecture search was
ﬁrst introduced to few-shot learning for automatically identifying the optimal operation from
10

==== Page 11 ====
max pooling, convolution, identity mapping, etc for layers in the feature embedding network and
attribute learning network.
2.2 Learning class representations
Early few-shot metric learning methods such as Siamese Network and Matching Network classify
a query sample by measuring and comparing its distance to support samples. However, since
support samples are scarce, they have limited capacity in representing the novel class. To alleviate
this issue, some researchers propose to use class prototypes, which serve as reference vectors
for each class. Prototypes can be constructed by taking simple or weighted average of feature
embeddings, or learned in an end-to-end manner so as to further improve their representation
ability. Besides point-based prototypes, some works consider the distribution of each class or use
subspaces as class representations.
2.2.1 Feature embeddings-based prototypes
Prototypical Network [ 68] is a classical method that performs classiﬁcation by calculating the
Euclidean distance to class prototypes in the learned embedding space. It builds on the hypothesis
that there exists an embedding space in which each class can be represented by a single prototype
and all instances cluster around the prototype of their corresponding classes. In [ 68], the
prototype of each class is set as the mean of feature embeddings of support samples in the class.
Feature embeddings, and thus class prototypes, are learned using episodic training with the
objective of minimizing the cross entropy loss. In [ 69], the class prototype is represented using
the covariance matrix of feature embeddings. A covariance-based metric is also proposed to
measure the similarity between the query and the class.
To make use of both labeled support samples and unlabeled samples, Ren et al. [ 22] proposed
semi-supervised Prototypical Network, which is the ﬁrst work of semi-supervised few-shot learning.
The method adopts soft k-means to compute assignment score of unlabeled samples and computes
the prototype as the mean of weighted samples based on assignment scores.
Considering that the dataset may exhibit multi-modality and multiple prototypes would be
more suitable in this scenario, Inﬁnite Mixture Prototypes (IMP) [ 70] modeled multiple clusters
in each class, and each cluster is modeled as a Gaussian distribution. Concretely, the probability
that a sample follows the Gaussian distribution of each cluster determines which cluster the
sample is assigned into. Moreover, the cluster variance of the Gaussian distributions, which needs
to be learned, can aﬀect the number of class prototype and performance of IMP.
Wu et al. [ 45] proposed to compute query-dependent prototypes. An attentive prototype is
computed for each query as the weighted average of support samples and the weights are given by
the Gaussian kernel with the Euclidean distance between the query and the support samples. As
support samples that are more relevant to the query have greater inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation,
the method is more robust to outliers in support samples. Query-dependent prototypes have
also been studied in CrossTransformers (CTX) [ 71], but they are computed separately for each
spatial location. In other words, a local region of a query image is compared with an attentive
prototype speciﬁc to this query and region, and the overall distance between the query and the
prototype is the averaged distances over all local regions. Moreover, self-supervised episodes are
constructed to train CTX.
Lu et al. [ 72] focused on enhancing the robustness of prototypes against outliers and label
noises and proposed the Robust attentive proﬁle Networks (RapNets). The network transforms
raw feature embeddings into correlation features in a nonparametric way, and then inputs these
features into a parametric bidirectional LSTM and fully-connected network to generate attention
scores which serve as weights to combine support images. Moreover, training episodes are revised
11

==== Page 12 ====
to include noisy data, and a new evaluation metric is proposed to evaluate the robustness of
few-shot classiﬁcation methods.
Ma et al. [ 73] provided a geometric interpretation of Prototypical Network, regarding it as a
Voronoi diagram. Moreover, the authors extended this perspective and proposed the Cluster-
to-Cluster Voronoi Diagram (CCVD), which can ensemble models learned with diﬀerent data
augmentation, built on single or multiple feature transformations, and using linear or nearest
neighbor classiﬁer.
2.2.2 Point-based learnable prototypes
Ravichaandran et al. [ 74] adopted an implicit way to learn class representation instead of
determining class prototypes as in the aforementioned methods. The prototype is modeled as a
learnable and parameterized function of feature embedding of labeled samples in the class and is
obtained by minimizing a loss which measures the distance between the feature embedding of a
sample and the class prototype. Meanwhile, the function is shot free, that is, it allows sample
sizes of classes in novel data to be unbalanced. In [ 75], prototypes are represented as weighted
averages of feature embeddings, but diﬀerent from [ 22,45] discussed in the previous section,
weights are learned end-to-end via episodic training. Moreover, instead of using image-level
features, [ 75] combines local descriptors of one class following the idea of DN4 and learn multiple
weight vectors to generate multiple prototypes per class. Das and Lee proposed a two-stage
approach for generating class prototypes [ 76]. In the ﬁrst stage, feature embeddings are learned,
from which coarse prototypes of base and novel classes can be obtained from mean embeddings.
In the second stage, the novel class prototype is reﬁned through a meta-learnable function of its
own prototype and related base prototypes.
Besides the above methods, TapNet [ 77] explicitly modeled class prototypes as learnable
parameters. Prototypes and feature embeddings are learned simultaneously on the base dataset
following the training procedure of Prototypical Network. In addition, to make prototypes and
feature embeddings more speciﬁc to the current task, both of them are projected into a new
classiﬁcation space via a linear projection matrix. The projection matrix is obtained by using a
linear nulling operation and does not include any learnable parameter. Luo et al. [ 78] proposed
to learn prototypes of base and novel classes simultaneously by including the support set of novel
classes in the training process. In each episode, local prototypes are generated from the sample
synthesis module, which aims to increase the diversity of novel classes. They are then used in
the registration module to update the global prototypes towards better separability. The query
image is classiﬁed by searching for the nearest neighbor among global prototypes. As both base
and novel prototypes are learned, the method can be readily applied to the generalized few-shot
learning setting. Chen et al. [ 79] shared the same aim of learning base and novel prototypes,
but additionally took advantage of the semantic correlations among these classes. A Knowledge
Graph Transfer Network (KGTN) is proposed, which employs a gated graph neural network to
represent class prototypes and correlations as nodes and edges, respectively. By propagating
through the graph, information from correlated base classes is used to guide the learning of novel
prototypes. This work is extended in [ 80] to the multi-label classiﬁcation setting, which employs
the attention mechanism and an additional graph for learning class-speciﬁc feature vectors. In [ 81],
the Shared Object Concentrator (SOC) algorithm was proposed to learn a series of prototypes
for each novel class from local features of support images. The ﬁrst prototype is learned to
have the largest cosine similarity with one of the local features, the second prototype has the
second largest value, and so forth. The query image is classiﬁed according to the weighted sum
of similarities between its local features and all prototypes, with weights decaying exponentially
to account for the decreasing inﬂuence of prototypes. Zhou et al. [ 82] proposed the Progressive
12

==== Page 13 ====
Hierarchical Reﬁnement (PHR) method to update prototypes iteratively using all novel data. In
each iteration, support images and a random subset of query images are embedded into features
at local, global and semantic levels, and a loss function deﬁned over these hierarchical features is
used to reﬁne prototypes for better inter-class separability. As each update is based on a random
subset of queries, the method is less likely to overﬁt to noisy query samples, though it implicitly
assumes the availability of a large number of queries.
Sun et al. [ 83] proposed to treat prototypes as random variables. The posterior distributions
of latent class prototypes are learned by using amortized variational inference, a technique
which enables prototype learning to be formulated as a probabilistic generative model without
encountering severe computational and inferential diﬃculties.
2.2.3 Distribution or subspace-based representations
Considering that single point-based metric learning is sensitive to noise, Zhang et al. [ 84] proposed
a variational Bayesian framework for few-shot learning and used the Kullback-Leibler divergence
to measure the distance of samples. The framework can compute the conﬁdence that a query
image is assigned into each class by estimating the distribution of each class based on a neural
network.
Simon et al. [ 85] proposed Deep Subspace Network (DSN) to represent each class using a
low-dimensional subspace, constructed from support samples via singular value decomposition.
Query samples are classiﬁed according to the nearest subspace classiﬁer, that is to assign the
query to the class which has the shortest Euclidean distance between the query and its projection
onto the class-speciﬁc subspace. The method is shown to be more robust to noises and outliers
than Prototoypical Network.
2.3 Learning distance or similarity measures
Methods reviewed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 focus on learning a discriminative feature embedding
or obtaining an accurate class representation. For classiﬁcation, they mostly adopt a ﬁxed
distance or similarity measure, such as the Euclidean distance [ 68] and the cosine similarity [ 7].
More recently, researchers propose to learn parameters in these ﬁxed measures or deﬁne novel
measures so as to further improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, considerable eﬀort has
been made to learn similarity scores by using fully-connected neural networks or Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs).
2.3.1 Learning or selecting an analytical distance or similarity measure
In TADAM [ 25], Oreshkin et al. mathematically analyzed the eﬀect of metric scaling on the loss
function. Since then, many works tune the scaling parameter via cross-validation [ 47,86]. Zhu
et al. [87] proposed to use two diﬀerent scaling parameters for the ground-truth class and other
classes to enforce the same-class distance is much smaller than the diﬀerent-classes distance.
Moreover, the scaling parameters are gradually tuned every few episodes, which implements the
idea of self-paced learning to learn from easy to hard. Chen et al. [ 88] proposed to learn the
scaling parameter in a Bayesian framework. By assuming a univariate or multivariate Gaussian
prior and applying the stochastic variational inference technique for approximating the posterior
distribution, a scaling parameter or a scaling vector can be learned respectively, which scales
the distance equally over all dimensions or diﬀerently for each dimension. Task-speciﬁc scaling
vectors can also be learned by learning a neural network from the task to variational parameters.
The traditional Mahalanobis distance decorrelates and scales features using the inverse of
the covariance matrix. In Simple CNAPS [ 31], after extracting features using the architecture
13

==== Page 14 ====
of Conditional Neural Adaptive Processes (CNAPS) [ 30], the classiﬁcation is performed based
on the Mahalanobis distance between query instances and class prototypes. Task-speciﬁc class-
speciﬁc covariance matrices are estimated as convex combinations of sample covariance matrices
estimated from instances of the task and instances of the class, regularized toward an identity
matrix. Transductive Episodic-wise Adaptive Metric (TEAM) [ 89] learned task-speciﬁc metric
from support and query samples. TEAM contains three modules, namely a feature extractor,
a task-speciﬁc metric module, and a similarity computation module. The task-speciﬁc metric
module learns a Mahalanobis distance to shrink the distance between similar pairs and enlarge
the distance between dissimilar pairs, following the objective function of the pioneering metric
learning method [33].
Nguyen et al. [ 90] proposed a dissimilarity measure termed SEN, which combines the Euclidean
distance and the diﬀerence in the L2-norm. Minimizing this measure will encourage feature
normalization and consequently beneﬁt the classiﬁcation performance [ 91]. DeepEMD [ 92]
combined a structural distance over dense image representations, Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)
and convolutional feature embedding to conduct few-shot learning. The optimal matching ﬂow
parameters in EMD and the parameters in the feature embedding are trained in an end-to-end
fashion. Xie et al. [ 93] introduced the Brownian Distance Covariance (BDC) metric, a new
distance measure founded on the characteristic function of random vectors. The metric has a
closed-form expression for discrete feature vectors and can be computed easily by ﬁrst computing
the BDC matrix for every image and then calculating the inner product between two BDC
matrices. The computation of BDC matrices also only involves standard matrix operations
and can be formulated as a pooling layer, thus endowing the method with high computational
eﬃciency and ease of integrating with other few-shot classiﬁcation methods.
2.3.2 Learning similarity scores via neural networks
The Relation Network [ 12] is the ﬁrst work of introducing a neural network to model the similarity
of feature embeddings in few-shot learning. It consists of an embedding module and a relation
module. The embedding module builds on convolutional blocks for mapping original images
into an embedding space, and the relation module consists of two convolutional blocks and two
fully-connected layers for computing the similarity between each pair of support and query images.
The learnable similarity measure enhances the model ﬂexibility. Li et al. [ 94] pointed out that a
single similarity measure may not be suﬃcient to learn discriminative features for ﬁne-grained
image classiﬁcation and thus proposed the Bi-Similarity Network (BSNet) which complements
the relation module by a cosine module, forcing features to adapt to two similarity measures
of diverse characteristics and consequently generating a more compact feature space. Relation
Network and subsequent methods all use class labels to form binary supervision, indicating
whether the image pair comes from the same class. Zhang et al. [ 95] argued that such binary
relations are not suﬃcient to capture the similarity nuance in the real-world setting and therefore
proposed a new method termed Absolute-relative Learning (ArL) which, in addition to binary
relations, constructs continuous-valued relations from attributes of images, such as colors and
textures.
Diﬀerent from Relation Network, Semantic Alignment Metric Learning (SAML) [ 96] adopted
the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network for computing the similarity score. Speciﬁcally,
SAML contains a feature embedding module and a semantic alignment module. In the semantic
alignment module, a relation matrix at the level of local features is ﬁrst computed by using
ﬁxed similarity measures and an attention mechanism, and then fed into a MLP network which
outputs the similarity score between the query and the support class.
Recently, some researchers adopt Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to implement few-shot
14

==== Page 15 ====
classiﬁcation. Like the above reviewed works, GNN-based methods also use a neural network to
model the similarity measure, while its advantage lies in the rich relational structure on samples
[97]. Garcia et al. [ 98] proposed the ﬁrst GNN-based neural network for few-shot learning, short
for GNN-FSL here. It contains two modules, a feature embedding module and a GNN module.
In the GNN module, a node represents a sample, and more speciﬁcally, equals the concatenation
of features of the sample and its label. For a query sample, its initial label in the ﬁrst GNN layer
uses uniform distribution over K-simplex ( Kis number of classes in few-shot learning), and its
predicted label in the last GNN layer is used for computing the loss function.
Like GNN-FSL, Edge-labeling Graph Neural Network (EGNN) [ 97] also contains a feature
embedding module and a GNN module with three layers. However, rather than labeling nodes,
EGNN learns to label edges in GNN layers so that it can cluster samples explicitly by employing
the intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. In EGNN, each GNN layer has its
own loss function that is computed based on edge values in the layer, and the total loss is the
weighted sum of loss functions of all GNN layers. The Transductive Relation-Propagation graph
neural Network (TRPN) [ 99] explicitly modeled the relation of support-query pairs by treating
them as graph nodes. After relation propagation, a similarity function is learned to map the
updated node to a similarity score, which represents the probability that the support and query
samples are of the same class. The class with the highest sum of scores is the predicted class. The
Hierarchical Graph Neural Network (HGNN) [ 100], aimed at modeling the hierarchical structure
within classes, ﬁrst down-samples support nodes to build a hierarchy of graphs and then performs
up-sampling to reconstruct all support nodes for prediction.
The previous GNN-based methods focus simply on the relation between a pair of samples. In
Distribution Propagation Graph Network (DPGN) [ 101], the global relation between a sample and
all support samples is considered by generating a distribution feature from the similarity vector. A
dual complete graph is built to proceed sample-level and distribution-level features independently,
and a cyclic update policy is used to propagate between the two graphs. Information from the
distribution graph reﬁnes sample-level node features and hence improves the classiﬁcation based
on their edge similarities.
3 Challenges and Future Directions
Even though few-shot metric learning methods have achieved the promising performance, there
remains several important challenges that need to be dealt with in the future.
1. Improving generalized feature learning on few samples Regarding feature learning,
in the existing few-shot metric learning methods, or even in the entire few-shot learning methods,
researchers mostly try to learn discriminative feature based on the attention mechanism, data
augmentation, multi-task learning and so on. To learn feature with good generalization ability
from few labeled examples, new ways of evaluation and feature learning need to be developed.
2. Rethinking the use of episodic training strategy While episodic training is a common
practice to train metric learning methods in the few-shot learning setting, it is rigid to require
each training episode to have the same number of classes and images as the evaluation episode;
in fact, [ 68] observed the beneﬁt of training with a larger number of classes. Moreover, the
model gets updated after receiving an episode without regard to its quality and thus is prone
to poorly sampled images like outliers. [ 102] is the ﬁrst attempt to alleviate this problem by
exploiting the relationship between episodes; more solutions are needed to identify episodes that
are high-quality and useful to the novel task. Furthermore, we notice that episodic training can
result in models that underﬁt the base dataset. One possible reason is that, by using episodic
15

==== Page 16 ====
training, methods adopt continual learning on plenty of tasks sampled from the base dataset
and suﬀer from catastrophic forgetting [ 103,104], i.e., the model learned from previous tasks
is supplanted after learning on a new task. Therefore, how to avoid this problem and enhance
the model ﬁtting ability of metric learning methods on both base and novel datasets remains a
challenge.
3. Enhancing stability to support samples and robustness to adversarial perturba-
tions and distribution shifts Despite the continuous improvement in classiﬁcation accuracy,
few-shot classiﬁcation methods are vulnerable in various scenarios, hindering their usage in
safety-critical applications such as medical image analysis. Prior works show that existing
methods are non-robust to input or label outliers [ 72], adversarial perturbations (i.e., small,
visually imperceptible changes of data that fool the classiﬁer to make incorrect predictions)
added to support [ 105] or query images [ 106], and distribution shift between support and query
datasets [ 107]. In [108], it is demonstrated that even non-perturbed and in-distribution support
images can signiﬁcantly deteriorate the classiﬁcation accuracy of several popular methods. Fur-
ther exploration of vulnerability in existing approaches and design of robust and stable models
will be very valuable.
4. Developing metric learning methods for cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation
While base and novel datasets may come from diﬀerent domains in practice, currently only few
works focus on cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation. More recently and severely, [ 109] reported
that all meta-trained methods, including the reviewed work [ 40], are outperformed by the simple
transductive ﬁne-tuning in the presence of a large domain shift, speciﬁcally, when training on
natural images and evaluating beyond them, such as on agriculture and satellite images. The
diﬃculty is that the base data and the novel data usually have diﬀerent metric spaces. Therefore,
how to alleviate domain shift between the training and evaluation phases needs to be explored in
the future.
4 Conclusions
This paper presents a review of recent few-shot deep metric learning methods. We provide the
deﬁnitions and a general evaluation framework for few-shot learning, then categorize and review
representative approaches, and ﬁnally summarize the main challenges. Based on these challenges,
several new directions can be further explored in the future.
References
[1]A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolu-
tional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1097–
1105, 2012.
[2]K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[3]C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke,
and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1–9, 2015.
[4]J. Gu, Z. Wang, J. Kuen, L. Ma, A. Shahroudy, B. Shuai, T. Liu, X. Wang, and G. Wang,
“Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07108 , 2015.
16

==== Page 17 ====
[5]F.-F. Li, R. Fergus, and P. Perona, “One-shot learning of object categories,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 594–611, 2006.
[6]G. Koch, R. Zemel, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Siamese neural networks for one-shot image
recognition,” in International Conference on Machine Learning deep learning workshop ,
vol. 2, 2015.
[7]O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, D. Wierstra, et al., “Matching networks for one shot
learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3630–3638, 2016.
[8]A. Santoro, S. Bartunov, M. Botvinick, D. Wierstra, and T. Lillicrap, “One-shot learning
with memory-augmented neural networks. arxiv preprint,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.06065 ,
2016.
[9]C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
deep networks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1126–1135, JMLR.
org, 2017.
[10]M. Rohrbach, S. Ebert, and B. Schiele, “Transfer learning in a transductive setting,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 46–54, 2013.
[11]Q. Sun, Y. Liu, T.-S. Chua, and B. Schiele, “Meta-transfer learning for few-shot learning,”
inIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 403–412, 2019.
[12]F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. Torr, and T. M. Hospedales, “Learning to
compare: Relation network for few-shot learning,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1199–1208, 2018.
[13]Z. Liu, Z. Miao, X. Zhan, J. Wang, B. Gong, and S. X. Yu, “Large-scale long-tailed
recognition in an open world,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pp. 2537–2546, 2019.
[14]J. Shu, Z. Xu, and D. Meng, “Small sample learning in big data era,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.04572 , 2018.
[15]Y. Wang, Q. Yao, J. T. Kwok, and L. M. Ni, “Generalizing from a few examples: A survey
on few-shot learning,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2020.
[16]J. Lu, P. Gong, J. Ye, and C. Zhang, “Learning from very few samples: A survey,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.02653 , 2020.
[17]X. Li, Z. Sun, J.-H. Xue, and Z. Ma, “A concise review of recent few-shot meta-learning
methods,” Neurocomputing , vol. 456, pp. 463–468, 2021.
[18]S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2009.
[19]B. Lake, R. Salakhutdinov, J. Gross, and J. Tenenbaum, “One shot learning of simple visual
concepts,” in Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society , vol. 33,
2011.
[20]O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpa-
thy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,”
International Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.
17

==== Page 18 ====
[21]S. Ravi and H. Larochelle, “Optimization as a model for few-shot learning,” International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
[22]M. Ren, E. Triantaﬁllou, S. Ravi, J. Snell, K. Swersky, J. B. Tenenbaum, H. Larochelle,
and R. S. Zemel, “Meta-learning for semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation,” International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[23]A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” University of
Toronto, 2009.
[24]L. Bertinetto, J. F. Henriques, P. H. Torr, and A. Vedaldi, “Meta-learning with diﬀerentiable
closed-form solvers,” International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
[25]B. Oreshkin, P. R. López, and A. Lacoste, “TADAM: Task dependent adaptive metric
for improved few-shot learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 721–731, 2018.
[26]A. Khosla, N. Jayadevaprakash, B. Yao, and F.-F. Li, “Novel dataset for ﬁne-grained image
categorization: Stanford dogs,” in CVPR Workshop on Fine-Grained Visual Categorization ,
vol. 2, 2011.
[27]W.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, Z. Kira, Y.-C. F. Wang, and J.-B. Huang, “A closer look at few-shot
classiﬁcation,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
[28]E. Triantaﬁllou, T. Zhu, V. Dumoulin, P. Lamblin, U. Evci, K. Xu, R. Goroshin, C. Gelada,
K. Swersky, P. Manzagol, and H. Larochelle, “Meta-dataset: A dataset of datasets for learn-
ing to learn from few examples,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2020.
[29]T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, and C. L.
Zitnick, “MicrosoftCOCO:commonobjectsincontext,” in European conference on computer
vision, pp. 740–755, Springer, 2014.
[30]J. Requeima, J. Gordon, J. Bronskill, S. Nowozin, and R. E. Turner, “Fast and ﬂexible
multi-task classiﬁcation using conditional neural adaptive processes,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2019.
[31]P. Bateni, R. Goyal, V. Masrani, F. Wood, and L. Sigal, “Improved few-shot visual
classiﬁcation,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pp. 14493–14502, 2020.
[32]W. Li, X. Liu, and H. Bilen, “Cross-domain few-shot learning with task-speciﬁc adapters,”
inIEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022.
[33]E. Xing, M. Jordan, S. J. Russell, and A. Ng, “Distance metric learning with application
to clustering with side-information,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
vol. 15, pp. 521–528, 2002.
[34]J. Bromley, J. W. Bentz, L. Bottou, I. Guyon, Y. LeCun, C. Moore, E. Säckinger, and
R. Shah, “Signature veriﬁcation using a “siamese” time delay neural network,” International
Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 7, no. 04, pp. 669–688, 1993.
[35]H. Li, W. Dong, X. Mei, C. Ma, F. Huang, and B.-G. Hu, “LGM-Net: Learning to generate
matching networks for few-shot learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pp. 3825–3834, 2019.
18

==== Page 19 ====
[36]H.-J. Ye, H. Hu, D.-C. Zhan, and F. Sha, “Few-shot learning via embedding adaptation
with set-to-set functions,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pp. 8808–8817, 2020.
[37]Y. Liu, J. Lee, M. Park, S. Kim, E. Yang, S. J. Hwang, and Y. Yang, “Learning to
propagate labels: Transductive propagation network for few-shot learning,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
[38]H. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Wu, and C. Xu, “PTN: A Poisson transfer network for
semi-supervised few-shot learning,” in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2021.
[39]J. Calder, B. Cook, M. Thorpe, and D. Slepcev, “Poisson learning: Graph based semi-
supervised learning at very low label rates,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning , pp. 1306–1316, 2020.
[40]H.-Y. Tseng, H.-Y. Lee, J.-B. Huang, and M.-H. Yang, “Cross-domain few-shot classiﬁ-
cation via learned feature-wise transformation,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2020.
[41]W.-H. Li, X. Liu, and H. Bilen, “Universal representation learning from multiple domains
for few-shot classiﬁcation,” in IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,
pp. 9526–9535, 2021.
[42]W. Li, L. Wang, J. Xu, J. Huo, Y. Gao, and J. Luo, “Revisiting local descriptor based
image-to-class measure for few-shot learning,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2019.
[43]Z. Wu, Y. Li, L. Guo, and K. Jia, “PARN: Position-aware relation networks for few-shot
learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019.
[44]W. Xu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, and Z. Tu, “Attentional constellation nets for few-shot learning,”
inInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
[45]F. Wu, J. S. Smith, W. Lu, C. Pang, and B. Zhang, “Attentive prototype few-shot learning
with capsule network-based embedding,” in European Conference on Computer Vision ,
pp. 237–253, Springer, 2020.
[46]H. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Xu, and Q. Wu, “Low-rank pairwise alignment bilinear
network for few-shot ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,
2020.
[47]C. Dong, W. Li, J. Huo, Z. Gu, and Y. Gao, “Learning task-aware local representations for
few-shot learning,” in International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2020.
[48]K. Cao, M. Brbic, and J. Leskovec, “Concept learners for few-shot learning,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
[49]W. Jiang, K. Huang, J. Geng, and X. Deng, “Multi-scale metric learning for few-shot
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 2020.
[50]X.-S. Wei, P. Wang, L. Liu, C. Shen, and J. Wu, “Piecewise classiﬁer mappings: Learning
ﬁne-grained learners for novel categories with few examples,” IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing , vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 6116–6125, 2019.
19

==== Page 20 ====
[51]H. Huang, J. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Zhang, Q. Wu, and C. Xu, “TOAN: Target-oriented alignment
network for ﬁne-grained image categorization with few labeled samples,” IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 2021.
[52]J. Wu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Task-aware part mining network for few-shot
learning,” in IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 8433–8442,
2021.
[53]H. Li, D. Eigen, S. Dodge, M. Zeiler, and X. Wang, “Finding task-relevant features for
few-shot learning by category traversal,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 1–10, 2019.
[54]S. W. Yoon, D.-Y. Kim, J. Seo, and J. Moon, “XtarNet: Learning to extract task-adaptive
representation for incremental few-shot learning,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning , pp. 10852–10860, 2020.
[55]S. Rahman, S. Khan, and F. Porikli, “A uniﬁed approach for conventional zero-shot,
generalized zero-shot, and few-shot learning,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,
vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 5652–5667, 2018.
[56]T. D. Kulkarni, W. F. Whitney, P. Kohli, and J. Tenenbaum, “Deep convolutional inverse
graphics network,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 2539–2547,
2015.
[57]A. J. Ratner, H. Ehrenberg, Z. Hussain, J. Dunnmon, and C. Ré, “Learning to compose
domain-speciﬁc transformations for data augmentation,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 3236–3246, 2017.
[58]L. Perez and J. Wang, “The eﬀectiveness of data augmentation in image classiﬁcation using
deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.04621 , 2017.
[59]A. Shrivastava, T. Pﬁster, O. Tuzel, J. Susskind, W. Wang, and R. Webb, “Learning from
simulated and unsupervised images through adversarial training,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 2242–2251, 2017.
[60]A. Antoniou, A. Storkey, and H. Edwards, “Data augmentation generative adversarial
networks,” International Conference on Learning Representations Workshop , 2018.
[61]A. J. Ratner, C.M. De Sa, S. Wu, D. Selsam, and C. Ré, “Data programming: Creating large
training sets, quickly,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3567–
3575, 2016.
[62]Y.-X. Wang, R. Girshick, M. Hebert, and B. Hariharan, “Low-shot learning from imaginary
data,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 7278–7286,
2018.
[63]H. Zhang, J. Zhang, and P. Koniusz, “Few-shot learning via saliency-guided hallucination of
samples,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 2770–2779,
2019.
[64]J. Guan, Z. Lu, T. Xiang, A. Li, A. Zhao, and J.-R. Wen, “Zero and few shot learning
with semantic feature synthesis and competitive learning,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 2510–2523, 2020.
20

==== Page 21 ====
[65]S. Gidaris, A. Bursuc, N. Komodakis, P. Perez, and M. Cord, “Boosting few-shot visual
learning with self-supervision,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision ,
2019.
[66]Y. Zhu, W. Min, and S. Jiang, “Attribute-guided feature learning for few-shot image
recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 1200–1209, 2020.
[67]L. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Chang, J. Liu, Z. Ge, and Q. Zheng, “Auto-FSL: Searching the
attribute consistent network for few-shot learning,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems for Video Technology , 2021.
[68]J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 4077–4087, 2017.
[69]W. Li, J. Xu, J. Huo, L. Wang, Y. Gao, and J. Luo, “Distribution consistency based
covariance metric networks for few-shot learning,” in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , vol. 33, pp. 8642–8649, 2019.
[70]K. Allen, E. Shelhamer, H. Shin, and J. Tenenbaum, “Inﬁnite mixture prototypes for
few-shot learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 232–241, 2019.
[71]C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. Zisserman, “CrossTransformers: spatially-aware few-shot
transfer,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020.
[72]J. Lu, S. Jin, J. Liang, and C. Zhang, “Robust few-shot learning for user-provided data,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1433–1447,
2020.
[73]C. Ma, Z. Huang, M. Gao, and J. Xu, “Few-shot learning via dirichlet tessellation ensemble,”
inInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2022.
[74]A. Ravichandran, R. Bhotika, and S. Soatto, “Few-shot learning with embedded class
models and shot-free meta training,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2019.
[75]H. Huang, Z. Wu, W. Li, J. Huo, and Y. Gao, “Local descriptor-based multi-prototype
network for few-shot learning,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 116, p. 107935, 2021.
[76]D. Das and C. G. Lee, “A two-stage approach to few-shot learning for image recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 29, pp. 3336–3350, 2020.
[77]S. W. Yoon, J. Seo, and J. Moon, “TapNet: Neural network augmented with task-
adaptiveprojectionforfew-shotlearning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pp. 7115–7123, 2019.
[78]A. Li, T. Luo, T. Xiang, W. Huang, and L. Wang, “Few-shot learning with global class
representations,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019.
[79] R. Chen, T. Chen, X. Hui, H. Wu, G. Li, and L. Lin, “Knowledge graph transfer network
for few-shot recognition,” in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 34, pp. 10575–
10582, 2020.
[80]T. Chen, L. Lin, X. Hui, R. Chen, and H. Wu, “Knowledge-guided multi-label few-shot
learning for general image recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence , 2020.
21

==== Page 22 ====
[81]X. Luo, L. Wei, L. Wen, J. Yang, L. Xie, Z. Xu, and Q. Tian, “Rectifying the shortcut
learning of background for few-shot learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 13073–13085, 2021.
[82]Y. Zhou, Y. Guo, S. Hao, and R. Hong, “Hierarchical prototype reﬁnement with progressive
inter-categorical discrimination maximization for few-shot learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing , 2022.
[83]Z. Sun, J. Wu, X. Li, W. Yang, and J.-H. Xue, “Amortized bayesian prototype meta-
learning: A new probabilistic meta-learning approach to few-shot image classiﬁcation,” in
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 1414–1422, 2021.
[84]J. Zhang, C. Zhao, B. Ni, M. Xu, and X. Yang, “Variational few-shot learning,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019.
[85]C. Simon, P. Koniusz, R. Nock, and M. Harandi, “Adaptive subspaces for few-shot learning,”
inIEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4136–4145,
2020.
[86]B. Liu, Y. Cao, Y. Lin, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Long, and H. Hu, “Negative margin matters:
Understanding margin in few-shot classiﬁcation,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 438–455, Springer, 2020.
[87]W. Zhu, W. Li, H. Liao, and J. Luo, “Temperature network for few-shot learning with
distribution-aware large-margin metric,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 112, p. 107797, 2021.
[88]J. Chen, L.-M. Zhan, X.-M. Wu, and F.-l. Chung, “Variational metric scaling for metric-
based meta-learning,” in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 34, pp. 3478–3485,
2020.
[89]L. Qiao, Y. Shi, J. Li, Y. Wang, T. Huang, and Y. Tian, “Transductive episodic-wise
adaptive metric for few-shot learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2019.
[90]V. N. Nguyen, S. Løkse, K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampﬀmeyer, D. Roverso, and R. Jenssen,
“SEN: A novel feature normalization dissimilarity measure for prototypical few-shot learning
networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision , vol. 12368, pp. 118–134, Springer,
2020.
[91]Y. Zheng, D. K. Pal, and M. Savvides, “Ring loss: Convex feature normalization for face
recognition,” in IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5089–5097,
2018.
[92]C. Zhang, Y. Cai, G. Lin, and C. Shen, “DeepEMD: Few-shot image classiﬁcation with
diﬀerentiable earth mover’s distance and structured classiﬁers,” in IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 12203–12213, 2020.
[93]J. Xie, F. Long, J. Lv, Q. Wang, and P. Li, “Joint distribution matters: Deep brownian
distance covariance for few-shot classiﬁcation,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022.
[94]X. Li, J. Wu, Z. Sun, Z. Ma, J. Cao, and J.-H. Xue, “BSNet: Bi-similarity network for
few-shot ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 30,
pp. 1318–1331, 2020.
22

==== Page 23 ====
[95]H. Zhang, P. Koniusz, S. Jian, H. Li, and P. H. Torr, “Rethinking class relations: Absolute-
relative supervised and unsupervised few-shot learning,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9432–9441, 2021.
[96]F. Hao, F. He, J. Cheng, L. Wang, J. Cao, and D. Tao, “Collect and select: Semantic
alignment metric learning for few-shot learning,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision , 2019.
[97]J. Kim, T. Kim, S. Kim, and C. D. Yoo, “Edge-labeling graph neural network for few-shot
learning,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 11–20,
2019.
[98]V. Garcia and J. Bruna, “Few-shot learning with graph neural networks,” International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[99]Y. Ma, S. Bai, S. An, W. Liu, A. Liu, X. Zhen, and X. Liu, “Transductive relation-
propagation network for few-shot learning,” in International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , pp. 804–810, 2020.
[100]C. Chen, K. Li, W. Wei, J. T. Zhou, and Z. Zeng, “Hierarchical graph neural networks
for few-shot learning,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology ,
2021.
[101]L. Yang, L. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Zhou, E. Zhou, and Y. Liu, “DPGN: Distribution propagation
graph network for few-shot learning,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 13390–13399, 2020.
[102]N. Fei, Z. Lu, T. Xiang, and S. Huang, “MELR: Meta-learning via modeling episode-level re-
lationships for few-shot learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2021.
[103]M. McCloskey and N. J. Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks:
The sequential learning problem,” in Psychology of Learning and Motivation , vol. 24,
pp. 109–165, Elsevier, 1989.
[104]S. Gidaris and N. Komodakis, “Dynamic few-shot visual learning without forgetting,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4367–4375, 2018.
[105]E. T. Oldewage, J. F. Bronskill, and R. E. Turner, “Attacking few-shot classiﬁers with
adversarial support poisoning,” in ICML Workshop on Adversarial Machine Learning , 2021.
[106]M. Goldblum, L. Fowl, and T. Goldstein, “Adversarially robust few-shot learning: A
meta-learning approach,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33,
pp. 17886–17895, 2020.
[107]E. Bennequin, V. Bouvier, M. Tami, A. Toubhans, and C. Hudelot, “Bridging few-shot
learning and adaptation: new challenges of support-query shift,” in Joint European Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pp. 554–569, Springer,
2021.
[108]M. Agarwal, M. Yurochkin, and Y. Sun, “On sensitivity of meta-learning to support data,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 20447–20460, 2021.
23

==== Page 24 ====
[109]Y. Guo, N. C. Codella, L. Karlinsky, J. V. Codella, J. R. Smith, K. Saenko, T. Rosing,
and R. Feris, “A broader study of cross-domain few-shot learning,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision , pp. 124–141, Springer, 2020.
24

