==== Page 1 ====
Defense Strategies for Adversarial Machine Learning: A Survey
Panagiotis Bountakasa, Apostolis Zarrasa, Alexios Lekidisa, Christos Xenakisa
aDepartment of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli &Dimitriou Piraeus, 18534, Attica, Greece
Abstract
Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) is a recently introduced technique, aiming to deceive Machine Learning (ML) models
by providing falsified inputs to render those models ine ffective. Consequently, most researchers focus on detecting new AML
attacks that can undermine existing ML infrastructures, overlooking at the same time the significance of defense strategies. This
article constitutes a survey of the existing literature on AML attacks and defenses with a special focus on a taxonomy of recent
works on AML defense techniques for di fferent application domains, such as audio, cyber-security, NLP, and computer vision. The
proposed survey also explores the methodology of the defense solutions and compares them using several criteria, such as whether
they are attack- and /or domain-agnostic, deploy appropriate AML evaluation metrics, and whether they share their source code
and/or their evaluation datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this article constitutes the first survey that seeks to systematize the
existing knowledge focusing solely on the defense solutions against AML and providing innovative directions for future research
on tackling the increasing threat of AML.
Keywords: Literature Survey, Adversarial Machine Learning, Defense Methods, Adversarial Training
1. Introduction
The adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) principles and
mechanisms led to the revolution of various technological do-
mains by introducing automation and self-managed operation
for the society, including novel advances as smart cities, self-
driving cars, autonomous ships, 5G /6G networks as well as In-
dustry 4.0 systems. However, the utilization of AI almost in ev-
ery aspect of society’s daily activities has introduced a new and
enormous attack surface that targets Machine Learning (ML)
and Deep Learning (DL) algorithms compromising their func-
tionality and a ffecting their performance, which are termed in
literature as Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) [1]. Con-
sidering the heavy applicability of ML and DL also in critical
tasks (e.g., cancer diagnosis) [2], AML can lead to severe con-
sequences, varying from data privacy leakage to even loss of
life.
Even though AI is heavily applied to critical tasks, the se-
curity of AI systems takes a back seat when developing and
evaluating ML /DL models. These models are usually devel-
oped based on the assumption that both the datasets using for
training are trustworthy and the evaluating environment is se-
cure. Hence, most AI systems are vulnerable to various attacks
that aim to impact the algorithms’ decisions by modifying the
training data (known as poisoning attacks [3]) or altering the
output of the model (known as evasion attacks [4]). Current
research delves into attacking ML /DL models rather than de-
fending them. More specifically, existing works mainly focus
∗Corresponding author: P. Bountakas
Email addresses: bountakas@unipi.gr (Panagiotis Bountakas),
zarras@unipi.gr (Apostolis Zarras), alexios.lekidis@ssl-unipi.gr
(Alexios Lekidis), xenakis@unipi.gr (Christos Xenakis)on the computer vision domain by introducing various methods
for the generation of adversarial samples, which, when injected
in the testing phase, can reduce the algorithms’ performance
significantly [5]. Nevertheless, novel AML attacks have been
recently expanded also in other domains, including health, au-
dio, Natural Language Processing (NLP), and cybersecurity, as
well as in various algorithms (e.g., Convolutional Neural Net-
works, Random Forest, and Support Vector Machines), indicat-
ing the severity of AML [6, 7].
The major part of current surveys in the field of AML focus
only on a specific domain (e.g., computer vision or cybersecu-
rity) and elaborate on the attacks against AI systems without
delving into the possible defenses. In addition, several articles
in the literature highlight that the research on the defense so-
lutions against AML attacks is still in its infancy and further
research should be conducted to tackle the growth of AML at-
tacks [8, 9, 10]. Additionally, to the best of our knowledge,
the existing AML survey articles do not focus on the existing
defense methods to counter AML attacks, leaving a knowledge
gap for researchers aiming at the development of new detection
and mitigation methods.
To this end, this article introduces a domain-agnostic and
large-scale survey of the defense methods designed to tackle
AML attacks. Specifically, it aims to organize the existing knowl-
edge and provide directions for future research to facilitate the
scientific community towards proposing more e fficient and ro-
bust defense solutions to address the ongoing threat of AML.
Thus, the methodological steps depicted in Figure 1 have been
followed. More specifically, in Step 1 , the existing literature
was collected utilizing a systematic methodology discussed in
Section 2.1. In Step 2 , the current surveys in AML field were
studied, highlighting their strengths and weaknesses as well as
Preprint submitted to Computer Science Review August 15, 2023

==== Page 2 ====
1. Literature
Collection2. Survey
Collected Papers3. Taxonomy
Creation4. Identification of
Evaluation
Datasets & Metrics5. Discussion &
Open ProblemsFigure 1: Methodological steps
their directions for future research, where almost all the surveys
identified that further research is needed to minimize the threat
of AML. Later, the existing defenses aiming to tackle AML
were examined to identify common methods and traits based
on which they will be categorized. In Step 3 , a taxonomy of
the existing defenses that aim to counter AML attacks was cre-
ated. To the best of our knowledge, this article constitutes the
first attempt to introduce a domain-agnostic taxonomy of AML
defenses. This allows to systematize the existing knowledge
and extract insights about the current AML defense state using
a comparison against several criteria, such as whether the de-
fenses are attack and /or domain-agnostic, their application do-
main, and their defense category (see Section 6). The taxonomy
is domain-agnostic since, instead of focusing on the defense
methods of a particular domain, four di fferent domains (cyber-
security, computer vision, NLP, and audio) have been consid-
ered. The selection of these domains was performed based on
the prominence of AML attacks against them [11]. In Step 4 ,
the evaluation datasets and metrics were identified based on the
existing literature in order to present the datasets and metrics
that already exist and can be deployed for validating AML de-
fense solutions. Finally, in Step 5 , relying on the knowledge
obtained from the taxonomy, numerous directions for future re-
search were proposed.
The novelty of this work mainly focuses on studying the
available defense solutions of the literature that aim to tackle
AML attacks and put them under a common taxonomy based on
their primary traits, regardless their application domain. Please
note that some of the presented categories of the taxonomy
(e.g., adversarial training, feature reduction) have been presented
in previous works that emphasize more on AML attacks than on
the defenses against AML attacks [5, 8]; however, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the first attempt for creating a domain-
agnostic taxonomy of AML defenses contributing on enhancing
the efforts on tackling AML attacks. Moreover, another novelty
of this work is that based on the analysis of the existing de-
fenses and the taxonomy, several gaps have been identified in
the literature which translated into directions for future research
(see Section 6).
Concretely, the article builds upon the following contributions:
•A domain-agnostic survey on the defense strategies against
AML attacks is conducted, including both mitigation and
defense methods.
•The defense methods against AML attacks that are present
in literature are presented in terms of a taxonomy, focus-
ing on di fferent domains, such as cybersecurity, computer
vision, NLP, and audio.
•The currently faced issues and challenges for the protec-
tion of ML /DL systems against AML attacks are thor-
oughly discussed, including mitigation methods as ad-
versarial training, defense distillation, ensemble methods
and defense methods as distance-based, feature squeez-ing, statistical.
•Innovative research directions for building a research frame-
work on AML defense strategies based on existing AML
datasets and evaluation metrics on the e ffectiveness of de-
tection methods against AML attacks are illustrated.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the methodology followed to collect the sur-
veyed papers and presents the existing surveys in the AML
field. Section 3 delves into the AML attacks. Section 4 in-
troduces a taxonomy of the existing defenses against AML at-
tacks. Section 5 gathers the existing AML evaluation metrics
and datasets, while Section 6 elaborates on the findings of the
proposed work and provides directions for future research. Fi-
nally, Section 7 outlines the critical points of the proposed sur-
vey.
2. Literature Collection and Related Work
This section elaborates on the systematic methodology that
was followed to collect the existing works that were discussed
in this survey as well as it presents the existing surveys in the
AML domain along with the limitations of the literature that
this work aims to address.
2.1. Literature Collection
Threat to validity: A systematic methodology was followed
in order for this survey to detect and collect related research pa-
pers and surveys that tackle AML attacks as well as defenses [12,
13]. In particular, the following academic platforms: Google
Scholar1, ACM Digital Library2, IEEE Xplore3, ScienceDirect4,
SpringerLink5, arXiv6, and Nicholas Carlini website7were scru-
tinized. In more detail, to collect the research papers for this
study, the following queries were deployed: ( i) adversarial ma-
chine learning defense, ( ii) adversarial machine learning miti-
gation, ( iii) adversarial training, ( iv) adversarial machine learn-
ing survey, ( v) defense against black-box attacks, ( vi) defense
against gray-box attacks, ( vii) defense against white-box at-
tacks, ( viii) defense against poisoning attacks, and ( ix) defense
against evasion attacks as well as three selection criteria: (1) the
subject of the paper aligns with the topic of the proposed sur-
vey; (2) the article was published after 2014; (3) the article is
applied to one of the following domains: computer vision, cy-
bersecurity, NLP, and audio. Please note that even using nine
different queries some relevant papers might have been missed
since authors often deploy a di fferent terminology that is not
commonly used [14].
1https: //scholar.google.com
2https: //dl.acm.org /
3https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org /
4https: //www.sciencedirect.com /
5https: //link.springer.com /
6https: //arxiv.org /
7https: //nicholas.carlini.com /writing /2019/all-adversarial-example-
papers.html
2

==== Page 3 ====
Table 1: Allocation of the surveyed papers per year
Year # Papers Year # Papers Year # Papers
2014 1 2017 6 2020 14
2015 2 2018 6 2021 15
2016 1 2019 8 2022 8
Based on the selected criteria, 68 articles were selected from
which seven are existing surveys in AML field that mainly fo-
cus on the attacks and not the defenses (see Section 2.2), and 61
are proposing a defense method against one or more AML at-
tacks in the fields of computer vision, cybersecurity, NLP, and
audio classification. The selected papers were published be-
tween 2014 and 2022. More specifically, the allocation of the
number of surveyed papers per year and domain is depicted in
Tables 1 and 2, respectively. To enhance the comprehension of
the tables, it shall be noted that some defenses have been eval-
uated on several domains (e.g., image and audio classification),
hence in Table 2, some papers are categorized in more than one
domain.
2.2. Related Work
Currently, only a handful of surveys have been published
that mostly concentrate on examining the features of AML at-
tacks and their applicability to di fferent domains. This section
elaborates on previous surveys in the AML domain. More pre-
cisely, the strengths and weaknesses of each work were dis-
cussed, and the identified gaps in the literature were highlighted.
Wang et al. [8] presented a survey regarding the security
of ML /DL models under adversarial settings. The authors pro-
vided background information about the field of ML, the treated
model, and the attack surface. Nevertheless, this research’s
backbone was the analysis of AML attacks and their possible
defense strategies. The survey concluded that future work on
ML security should pay more attention to the defense strate-
gies of DL techniques, data privacy, and the security evaluation
of ML /DL methods. One major limitation of this work is that
the authors mainly focused on AML attacks in the computer
vision domain. Notably, they elaborated on common AML at-
tacks (e.g., L-BFGS, FGSM, and C&W) that applied to image
classification or visual recognition.
Qiu et al. [9] reviewed the literature on the AML attack
field, performing a thorough analysis of its characteristics. The
authors also discussed the application of the various AML at-
tacks on di fferent domains, such as Computer Vision, NLP, and
Cyberspace Security, as well as in the physical world. Further,
the paper shortly presented some research focusing on the mit-
igation of common AML attacks and stressed that defenses are
mainly focused on a particular adversarial attack type as well
as that none of the current defense methods aiming at tackling
multiple AML attacks.
Pitropakis et al. [10] performed a thorough taxonomy of
the AML attacks features. The authors broke down the key
features of the attacks and categorized them based on the ap-
plication of ML that compromises such as intrusion detection,Table 2: Allocation of the surveyed papers per domain
Domain # Papers
Computer Vision 22
Cybersecurity 22
NLP 7
Audio 13
spam filtering, visual recognition, other applications, and mul-
tipurpose. This survey discusses various attack types on the do-
mains mentioned above and it considers the ML algorithms that
each attack targets. Also, the authors provided useful statistics
about the distribution of the investigated papers regarding the
attackers’ knowledge (e.g., 64% focused on white-box attacks,
56% focused on black-box attacks), the AML attack type (e.g.,
52% related with evasion attacks and 56% with poisoning at-
tacks), the targeted domain (e.g., 88% dealt with classification
tasks and 17% dealt with clustering). Finally, the paper high-
lighted that future research should focus on creating immunity
to perturbations, multiple adversaries, randomized adversarial
approaches, and digital forensics for AML.
Martins et al. [15] explored the application of AML attacks
on intrusion and malware detection fields. The authors sur-
veyed works that employed AML methods, such as FGSM,
JSMA, C&W, and GAN, to attack ML-based IDS and mal-
ware detectors. The paper also presented some general defense
strategies for AML attacks but it did not elaborate on them. To-
wards the same direction, Rosenberg et al. [16] discussed the
risk posed by AML attacks in the cybersecurity domain and
presented state-of-the-art AML research papers focused on cy-
bersecurity. The authors highlighted the di fferences between
the AML attacks in the computer vision and cybersecurity do-
mains, concluding that it is more di fficult to perform an AML
attack on malware or intrusion detection ML models. More-
over, the paper covered several AML attacks in the cyberse-
curity domain, analyzing multiple fields such as malware de-
tection, malicious URL detection, network intrusion detection,
spam filtering, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Industrial Con-
trol Systems (ICS), as well as biometric systems. The authors
emphasized that only a limited number of defense methods have
been proposed to tackle AML attacks or develop more robust
solutions in the cybersecurity domain.
Qayyum et al. [17] discussed the challenges aroused by
AML in the Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CA V) do-
main. The authors elaborated on the ML pipeline deployed in
CA V, the existing AML attacks on CA V, and methods to in-
crease the robustness of the ML models. Moreover, the au-
thors also mentioned open research issues and provided future
directions to raise awareness among the readers toward the de-
velopment and application of robust and e ffective ML models
in CA V. Even though this work gives readers a comprehensive
view of AML attacks and defenses, it is limited to their appli-
cation in CA V.
Bai et al. [18] presented a taxonomy of adversarial training
methods in the computer vision domain. The taxonomy classi-
fies previous works on Adversarial Regularization, Curriculum-
3

==== Page 4 ====
based Adversarial Training, Ensemble Adversarial Training, Ad-
versarial Training with Adaptive ϵ,Αdversarial Training with
Semi-supervised /Unsupervised Learning, e fficient Adversarial
Training, and other variants. This survey provides a compre-
hensive view of works on the adversarial training domain; how-
ever, it only focuses on the computer vision domain without
elaborating on the pros and cons of each work.
A recent survey with the same grounds as the proposed pa-
per was presented by Machado et al. [19]. The authors reviewed
the latest studies on AML attacks that target image classifica-
tion tasks from the defender’s perspective. This work, except
for studying AML attacks on the Computer Vision domain,
elaborates on a taxonomy of defenses against adversarial im-
ages. The AML attacks on the Computer Vision domain mainly
target DL models (e.g., CNN, DNN); hence the authors did not
elaborate on attacks against ML models. Furthermore, the au-
thors discussed possible reasons for the existence of adversarial
examples and presented directions for future works. Finally,
this work highlights the importance of extensive and up-to-date
review papers in AML to direct researchers toward tackling
this ongoing threat and protecting ML /DL models. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the only article that thoroughly an-
alyzes and categorizes the defense solutions against AML at-
tacks; nevertheless, it is limited to the Computer Vision domain
and DL models.
Table 3 summarizes the existing surveys in terms of general
features, such as the application domain as well as whether they
present also the defenses, discuss adversarial example genera-
tion methods, provide insights about the evaluation (e.g., met-
rics to evaluate the attack performance or robustness), and focus
on the attack surface.
To sum up, almost all the surveys [10, 15, 16, 17, 19] em-
phasize the fact that future works in the AML domain should
focus on developing defense methods to tackle the expansion
of AML attacks. However, there is a clear gap in the literature
regarding the surveys that elaborate exclusively on the exist-
ing defense solutions, since all the surveys in the AML domain
delve into various types of AML attacks dealing with the prob-
lem of AML attacks from the attackers’ perspective [10, 17].
Only a limited number of works briefly present some defense
solutions, but their e fforts were focusing on a particular domain
(e.g., Martins et al. [15] presented a limited number of defense
methods to tackle AML attacks in the fields of intrusion and
malware detection). Overall, existing surveys in the area of-
ten neglect to investigate the defense solutions in a domain-
agnostic manner (e.g., studying the defenses against AML at-
tacks regardless of their application domain). Based on this
observation, this article focuses exclusively on the available de-
fenses against AML attacks. To this end, it studies the avail-
able defenses of the literature in various domains (as explained
in Section 2.1) to provide a thorough taxonomy and system-
atize the existing knowledge in order to facilitate researchers in
developing new defense methods and building robust ML /DL
models. Towards this direction, this paper also presents insights
into the evaluation of AML defense methods. More specifi-
cally, the publicly available AML datasets are discussed along
with evaluation metrics appropriate for testing the robustness ofTable 3: Summarizing existing surveys
Paper /Year Domain Defense Adversarial Examples Evaluation Attack Surface
Wang et al. (2019) [8] Computer Vision ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Qiu et al. (2019) [9] Multi-domain ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Pitropakis et al. (2019) [10] Multi-domain ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Martins et al. (2020) [15] Intrusion & malware ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Qayyum et al. (2020) [17] CA V ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Bai et al. (2021) [18] Computer Vision ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
Machado et al. (2021) [19] Image Classification ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Rosenberg et al. (2021) [16] Cybersecurity ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
ML and DL models as well as the e fficacy of defense methods
against AML attacks.
3. Adversarial Machine Learning Attacks
The AML attacks have been thoroughly discussed in previ-
ous literature works [8, 10, 16]. Thus, this article does not focus
on introducing the numerous attacks that are available in liter-
ature. Instead, in this section fundamental information about
AML attacks are analyzed, which are essential for the reader to
grasp the proposed concept. Figure 2 presents an overview of
AML attacks against ML /DL models. The rest of the section
presents the adversary’s knowledge, capability, and possible at-
tack types for AML attacks.
Adversary
Training
DatasetModel TestingWrong
OutputPoisoning EvasionBlack-boxWhite-box
Gray-box
Figure 2: Adversary attacking AI models
3.1. Adversary’s Knowledge
An essential factor of an AML attack is the knowledge that
the adversary has about the target model. Based on the amount
of the adversary’s knowledge and, as an extension, the access
she has to the model, AML attacks can be classified into three
categories: white-box ,black-box , and gray-box .
White-box. In white-box attacks, the adversary has complete
knowledge of the system, the algorithm’s architecture, hyper-
parameters, and training data. While the amount of knowledge
that white-box attacks require is rarely available in real-life sce-
narios, it is not unrealistic to occur. This knowledge can be ac-
quired either by reverse engineering the model or by an insider.
For example, via reverse engineering, adversaries might recover
the model’s components (e.g., architecture, hyperparameters)
4

==== Page 5 ====
and gain white-box access. As one can understand, white-box
attacks are the most potent type of AML attacks; thus, they are
usually deployed to evaluate the robustness of ML /DL models
and defenses. Namely, if a model is robust against white-box
attacks, it will also be robust against gray-box and black-box
attacks.
Black-box. In a black-box attack, the adversary has no knowl-
edge of the system or the deployed defenses. The only infor-
mation the adversary has is that, given the input, she can mon-
itor the outcome of the system. Nevertheless, in some cases,
the number of queries she can perform is limited (e.g., it might
arouse suspicion), which hardens her work. Szegedy et al. [20]
was the first that observed the adversarial example transfer-
ability , namely adversarial examples created to be misclassi-
fied by a model are possible to be also misclassified by a dif-
ferent model, even when the models are trained on di fferent
datasets. Papernot et al. [21] carried out black-box attacks on
a Deep Neural Network (DNN), based on the adversarial ex-
ample transferability e ffect. The authors conducted the attacks
by only observing the outputs of the DNN given particular in-
puts. Their attack strategy included a substitute model, which
was trained using synthetic inputs labeled by the DNN model
to craft adversarial examples that were used to attack the DNN
model.
Gray-box. The gray-box attack refers to the attack paradigm,
where the adversary has some degree of knowledge about the
system or the deployed defenses. In real-life scenarios, com-
monly, the adversary cannot obtain white-box access; however,
it may receive partial pieces of information, such as some of the
classifier’s features, the class label, or in the case of DNN, the
results of the hidden layers.
3.2. Adversary’s Capability
An adversary’s capabilities can be grouped into two cate-
gories: attack influence anddata manipulation . The attack in-
fluence can be further divided into causative attacks that hap-
pen when the adversary modifies the training data (e.g., in case
a system is retrained) or exploratory attacks that occur when
the adversary skews the data during the testing phase. On the
other hand, data manipulation is the process that defines how
the samples or features can be modified. For instance, it deter-
mines which features can be altered without compromising the
scope of the original sample.
3.3. Attack Types
According to previous works [9, 10], there are two major
types of attacks that an adversary can perform on ML /DL mod-
els:poisoning attacks andevasion attacks . Both attacks aim to
maximize the generalization error of the decision-making pro-
cess to a ffect the system’s decision.
3.3.1. Poisoning Attacks
The poisoning attack is the attack type that targets the sys-
tem’s learning process during the training phase. The poisoning
attacks can be further classified into three categories.Training Data Modification was the first type of poisoning at-
tack proposed in the literature. The modification of training
data includes modifying or deleting training data or injecting
adversarial examples on the training dataset [3].
Label Manipulation or Label Flipping occurs when the ad-
versary alters the labels of the training samples. Hence, this
method is only applicable to supervised learning tasks. Biggio
et al. [22] presented that randomly flipping 40% of the training
labels can significantly reduce the performance of SVM classi-
fiers.
Input Feature Manipulation is similar to label manipulation at-
tacks; however, instead of altering the labels, the adversary can
manipulate the training samples’ features parsed by the ML /DL
algorithm [23].
3.3.2. Evasion Attacks
An evasion attack targets the testing phase of already trained
ML/DL classifiers by manipulating the samples without hav-
ing access to the training data aiming at violating the system’s
integrity [4]. Since these attacks are performed in the testing
phase, they are the most practical attack types and are widely
used. For instance, the injection of adversarial examples dur-
ing the testing phase to a ffect the prediction performance of a
classifier is considered an evasion attack. A typical evasion at-
tack is an input /output black-box attack, where the adversary
inserts arbitrary inputs on an ML /DL model to observe its out-
put [24]. The attacker’s objective hence violates the integrity
of the system, either by conducting a targeted or an indiscrim-
inate attack, depending on whether she is targeting a particular
system or not.
3.4. Adversarial Example Generation Methods
This section presents the most known adversarial example
generation methods in the literature. These methods were ini-
tially developed to be applied in the computer vision domain
(e.g., to attack image classifiers); however, in the last couple of
years they have been also implemented in other domains, such
as intrusion detection [25], environmental sound classification
[26], and question answering [27].
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM). Goodfellow et al. [28]
introduced the FGSM method that computes the gradient of the
cost function based on the model’s input. More specifically,
FGSM generates adversarial examples that are the original sam-
ples with a small perturbation (i.e., modification) to a ffect the
prediction of the model (i.e., classifier). The adversarial exam-
ples are generated by Equation 1:
X∗=X+ϵsign(∇xJ(θ,X,y)), (1)
where X∗is the adversarial example, ϵindicates the value that
controls the magnitude of the perturbation (i.e., the noise that
will be applied), Jrepresents the cost function of the model, ∇x
is the gradient of the model based on the sample Xand its label
y, andθis the model’s hyper-parameters.
5

==== Page 6 ====
FGSM, except for its application in the image classification
field, has also been employed in other fields, for instance, cy-
bersecurity [29, 30]. However, as mentioned by Rosenberg et
al. [16], the application of FGSM in the cybersecurity domain
is more challenging than in computer vision due to the nature
of the samples.
Jacobian based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA). Papernot et al. [31]
presented the JSMA method that produces adversarial exam-
ples using saliency maps and employs the Jacobian matrix of
the model to calculate the sensitivity direction. The Jacobian
matrix of a model Fwith respect to the input samples Xis cal-
culated via the equation 2:
JF=δF(X)
δX(2)
Later, JFis deployed to generate adversarial saliency maps
used to identify the features of the input data most relevant to
the model’s decision. Namely, the features that should be per-
turbed to a ffect the model’s classification. Finally, the JSMA
method checks whether the alterations have a ffected the model
to misclassify the input. If they have not a ffected it, another
set of features is selected, and the process repeats until an ad-
versarial saliency map arises that can be utilized to generate an
adversarial example.
Limited-memory Broyden Fletcher Goldfarb Shanno (L-BFGS).
Szegedy et al. [20] was one of the first who observed that adding
perturbations to images can deceive DL models and lead to mis-
classifications. Notably, the authors generate adversarial exam-
ples by adding perturbations to an image having as a scope to
reduce the added perturbation runder L2distance:
min||r||2,f(x+r)=y, (3)
where ris the perturbation, fis the loss function of the model,
xis the original image, and yis the incorrect prediction label.
Because Equation 3 is non-trivial, the authors deployed a box-
constrained L-BFGS to solve it. A drawback of the L-BFGS
method is that even though it is e fficient at generating adversar-
ial examples, it is computationally ine ffective.
DeepFool. Moosavi et al. [32] proposed a repetitive procedure
for creating adversarial examples. This method minimizes the
Euclidean distance between the adversarial and original sam-
ples. DeepFool is comprised of the calculation of a linear de-
cision limit, which divides the samples that belong to di fferent
classes. In DNN, it is challenging to find linear decision limits;
hence the perturbations are added repetitively by applying this
method multiple times. The robustness of a classifier is calcu-
lated by Equation 4.
∆(x,F)=min r||r||2,F(x+r),F(x), (4)
where ∆(x,F) is the robustness of classifier Fgiven a sample
xandris the minimal perturbation that it can alter the esti-
mated label F(x). DeepFool is a powerful method for generat-
ing adversarial examples with fewer perturbations than FGSM
and JSMA; however, it is computationally expensive.Carlini &Wagner (C &W).Carlini & Wagner introduced an ef-
fective adversarial example generation method that identifies
the less possible perturbations based on a distance metric ( L0,
L2,L∞). The L0andL2concluded to have much fewer pertur-
bations than SOTA (FGSM and JSMA). The aim of C&W is to
minimize D(x,x+δ) such that C(x+δ)=t,x+δ∈[0,1]n,
where (x) is the sample, δis the perturbation, and ∆is the dis-
tance metric. Namely, the goal is to find a small alteration δto
make on the sample that will change its classification without
ruining its type (e.g., if the sample is an image and a perturba-
tionδis added, then the result should be still a valid image).
Basic Interaction Method (BIM). Kurakin et al. [33] proposed
an adversarial example generation method based on FGSM.
More specifically, BIM is an extension of FGSM, meaning that
it adopts an iteration process to perturbate the pixels of an im-
age, ensuring that the values are pruned within a certain mar-
gin of the source image. Even though BIM has been originally
tested in the image classification domain, it has also been ap-
plied in the IoT domain [34] and intrusion detection [35].
At this point, it should be noted that there are also other
methods for adversarial example generation in the literature,
such as Projected Gradient Descent (PGD), Bit Coordinate As-
cent (BCA), and Bit Gradient Ascent (BGA). However, this pa-
per does not elaborate on them mainly for two reasons. First,
they are not widely used, i.e., they have been deployed by a few
previous works. Second, they are based on other adversarial
example generation methods (e.g., PGD is based on FGSM).
4. Adversarial Machine Learning Defenses
The rise of AML attacks has inspired the scientific commu-
nity to drive more research on designing and developing novel
defense methods against such attacks. This section elaborates
on a taxonomy of AML defense methods, which to the best of
our knowledge, is the first large-scale taxonomy of the available
defenses against AML attacks. As it is shown in Figure 3, the
taxonomy includes two main axes based on the defense objec-
tive: ( i) Mitigation and ( ii) Detection, also included in the fol-
lowing part of this section in 4.1 and 4.2 respectively. Finally,
the taxonomy analyzes various types of defenses against AML
attacks on four pioneer domains that gather the most works of
the literature (i.e., cybersecurity, computer vision, NLP, and au-
dio). Figure 3 provides an overview of the AML defense meth-
ods that are present in literature.
4.1. Mitigation
The mitigation category refers to proactive defenses that
strive to enhance the robustness of ML /DL models against AML
attacks. The available mitigation methods are presented below.
4.1.1. Adversarial Training
The adversarial training defense method aims to enhance
the model’s robustness by utilizing a training dataset that con-
tains both benign and adversarial examples. The di fference be-
tween traditional and adversarial training is shown in Figure 4,
6

==== Page 7 ====
DefensesMitigation
DetectionAdversarial T raining
Defense Distillation
Ensemble Learning
Pre-processing
Distance-basedSupervised/Semi-supervised
Learning
StatisticalFeature Reduction
Sequence
SqueezingCybersecurity
Computer V ision
NLP
Feature Obfuscation
Feature SqueezingFigure 3: Taxonomy of AML defense methods
Figure 4: Traditional VS adversarial training
where in adversarial training both original and perturbated data
are deployed in the learning phase.
Specifically, given a training dataset Dthat contains the tu-
pleX=(x,y) (where xis the sample and yis the label), an ad-
versarial sample x∗is crafted by an algorithm Abased on xand
forms a new tuple X∗that has the same label ( y) asX, namely
X∗=(x∗,y). Later, the training dataset Dwill be expanded with
X∗resulting in T={X,X∗}. The ML /DL algorithm is then re-
trained using the expanded dataset, which will result in a more
robust model in theory.
Adversarial training is the literature’s most well-known de-
fense method against AML attacks. To this end, most of the
existing defenses are based on di fferent variations of adversar-
ial training. It should be noted that because the majority of de-
fenses are based on adversarial training, this section categorizes
the defenses of this category based on their application domain.
Computer Vision
Adversarial training was first introduced in the computer vi-
sion domain [28]; hence it has received considerable attention
from the research community during these years. Goodfellow et
al. [28] were among the first that raised the adversarial training
defense in the computer vision field. The authors deploy the
FGSM method to generate adversarial examples and, via ad-
versarial training, managed to decrease the error rate of a DNNimage classifier from 89.4% to 17.9%. The experiments were
performed on the MNIST dataset8.
Huang et al. [36] studied the role of adversarial training on
classifiers’ robustness and proposed a new approach to gener-
ate adversarial examples. The authors employed a min-max
adversarial training approach, i.e., Learning With an Adver-
sary (LWA), to train a DNN image classifier. The experimental
results indicate that LWA accomplishes better robustness and
high accuracy on original samples compared to existing meth-
ods (e.g., [28]) on both MNIST and CIFAR-109datasets.
Madry et al. [37] deployed PGD and FGSM methods to
generate adversarial examples, which were used to retrain a
DNN. The authors deployed black-box and white-box adver-
sary’s knowledge and proved that the proposed adversarial train-
ing approach could achieve robustness against di fferent attacks.
Notably, the DNN trained with the MNIST dataset accomplished
89% accuracy on the strongest AML attack (white-box & PGD),
while on the same attack, the DNN trained with CIFAR-10
dataset achieved 46%. The drawback of the proposed defense
is that it is computationally complex; thus, it is di fficult to test
it on large datasets.
Sankaranarayanan et al. [38] proposed a new regularization
approach for DNN image classifiers that improves the adversar-
ial robustness in comparison with traditional adversarial train-
ing methods. More specifically, the authors compared the pro-
posed layer-wise adversarial training with FGSM and FGSM-
inter (i.e., a variation of FGSM where intermediate layer acti-
vations are perturbed). They concluded that when perturbating
intermediate layers and not only the input layer of a DNN, the
classification performance is improved. However, when per-
turbating only the input layer the adversarial robustness is im-
proved. Thus, there is a trade-o ffbetween the adversarial ro-
bustness and the regularization e ffect on original data.
The authors of [39] proposed an adversarial training algo-
rithm that eliminates the additional time that emerges from the
generation of adversarial examples. The algorithm eliminates
this overhead by recycling the gradient information computed
when updating the model’s parameters. The proposed algo-
rithm needs almost the same training time as in original train-
ing to produce robust DNN models, and it is 3 – 30 times
faster than previous works (e.g., [37]). The experimental results
concluded that the produced models accomplish slightly better
accuracy on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets than conven-
tional adversarial training methods. Furthermore, the proposed
algorithm can also be applied on large-scale datasets, like Ima-
geNet10attaining 40% accuracy against PGD attacks.
Xie et al. [40] combined feature denoising with adversarial
training to enhance CNNs’ adversarial robustness. The pro-
posed method improves the adversarial robustness in white-box
and black-box adversarials’ knowledge against PGD AML at-
tacks. More specifically, the authors deployed the large Ima-
geNet dataset, and in a 10-iteration PGD white-box attack, the
8http://yann.lecun.com /exdb/mnist /
9https: //www.cs.toronto.edu /kriz/cifar.html
10https: //www.image-net.org /
7

==== Page 8 ====
proposed method achieved 55.7% accuracy (the prior state-of-
the-art has 27.9% accuracy). Moreover, in the extreme case of
2000-iterations PGD white-box attacks, the proposed method
attained 42.6% accuracy, while in a black-box setting against
48 unknown attackers, the proposed method achieved 50.6%
accuracy, and it was ranked first in Competition on Adversarial
Attacks and Defenses 2018.
The authors of [41] introduced the concept of combining
ensemble learning with adversarial training. Their approach
merges the training data with adversarial perturbations gener-
ated from three di fferent AML attacks instead of one. Specif-
ically, the authors deployed the FGSM, the Single-step Least-
Likely Class Method (Step-LL), and the iterative I-FGSM. The
experiments were performed using several variations of Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) and Fully Connected Net-
work (FCN) models on the ImageNet dataset with white-box
and black-box adversary’s knowledge. The results indicate that
ensemble adversarial training is not robust against white-box I-
FGSM and Step-LL, while it enhances the models’ robustness
against black-box attacks.
Lal et al. [42] proposed a robust image classification frame-
work for detecting Diabetic Retinopathy. The authors employed
a CNN model (Darknet53) to perform the classification and de-
ployed an adversarial training approach to enhance the model’s
robustness against AML attacks. The FGSM, DeepFool, and
Speckle Noise AML attacks have been used to evaluate their
framework. Four di fferent adversarial training methods were
employed, and the best robustness was accomplished by mixed
adversarial training (MAT) in which the training dataset in-
cluded adversarial examples from all the AML attacks. To be
more precise, MAT achieved 92% correct label prediction.
Ding et al. [43] developed a method for restoring images
from degradation focusing on visual context prediction in the
case of autonomous vehicles. The proposed method is based
on a multi-stage conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(cGAN) for image restoration that employs adversarial training
to detect images from various types of degradation. The au-
thors performed the adversarial training using both original and
degraded images using various degradation methods, such as
motion blurring, Gaussian filtering, average filtering, Gaussian
noising, oversharpening, and JPEG compression. The evalua-
tion results concluded that the proposed method is more e ffi-
cient for image restoration than the existing works and other
methods (CycleGAN, DeblurGAN).
Xu et al. [44] proposed a Fair-Robust-Learning (FRL) frame-
work to mitigate the disparity of accuracy and robustness be-
tween di fferent classes introduced by adversarial training. The
authors increased the perturbation margin ϵduring training in
the generation of adversarial examples process for a specific
class. This way, the class’s robustness is improved, and the
boundary error is reduced. The FRL framework employed a
DNN model and was evaluated using the CIFAR-10 and SVHN11
datasets. Moreover, FRL improved the lower robust error of
[37] and [45] by 10% – 15%.
11http://ufldl.stanford.edu /housenumbers /Cybersecurity
Khamis et al. [29] proposed one of the first adversarial train-
ing approaches in the cybersecurity domain. Their approach
was based on the min-max formulation aiming to enhance the
robustness of ML /DL-based IDSs. The authors developed sev-
eral ML and DL classifiers, such as DNN, RF, AdaBoost (AB),
Naive Bayes (NB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM), which
were trained on the UNSW-NB1512dataset. Four AML attacks
were investigated (dFGSM, rFGSM, BCA, and BGA) in white-
box adversary’s knowledge that was performed in the DNN. In
the baseline model, the dFGSM attack reached the higher eva-
sion rate (100%), rFGSM and BGA yielded 99%, while BCA
attained 64.4%. Using min-max adversarial training, the exper-
imental results show that the evasion rate was significantly re-
duced. Moreover, the authors also concluded that the PCA fea-
ture selection method enhances the model’s robustness against
AML attacks.
An extension of the previous work was proposed in [46],
where the authors deployed three di fferent DNN DL-based IDS
on Artificial Neural Network (ANN), CNN, and Recurrent Neu-
ral Network (RNN). The IDSes were trained to detect malicious
network tra ffic on two well-known datasets (UNSW-NB15 and
NSL-KDD13). Using white-box adversary’s knowledge, the au-
thors performed five AML attacks (FGSM, BIM, PGD, C&W,
and DeepFool). The AML attacks were highly e ffective since
the accuracy of the IDSes decreased from approximately 20%
to 90% (C&W AML attack against RNN on the NSL-KDD
dataset). However, in many cases, the adversarial training-based
min-max formulation managed to reach the baseline results of
the DL-based IDSes showing that it could be considered a re-
liable defense method. Furthermore, the authors highlight that
C&W and DeepFool AML attacks on RNN are the most di ffi-
cult to tackle.
Fu et al. [47] studied the robustness of three DL-based IDS
against AML attacks. Particularly, the authors utilized the FGSM
method to generate adversarial examples to evaluate the robust-
ness of the CNN, LSTM, and GRU models. The models were
trained with three di fferent methods (normal training, adver-
sarial training, and adversarial re-training). The experiments
were performed on the CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 dataset14. After
the FGSM attack, the models’ accuracy decreased by 20-40%,
while the least a ffected model was the CNN. After the adversar-
ial training and adversarial re-training, the models’ robustness
increased significantly. However, a drawback of this work is
that the performance against the original samples was decreased
compared to the results when trained only with the original
samples. Another work along the same line is proposed in [48],
where the authors also deployed min-max adversarial training.
In this work, only a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) classifier was
evaluated using three AML attacks, named FGSM, PGD-K L2,
and PGD-K L∞, without discussing the adversary’s knowledge.
The authors concluded that PGD with a larger Kvalue (e.g.,
PGD-40 min-max training) o ffers increased robustness.
12https: //research.unsw.edu.au /projects /unsw-nb15-dataset
13http://www.di.uniba.it /andresini /datasets.html
14https: //www.unb.ca /cic/datasets /ids-2018.html
8

==== Page 9 ====
Apruzzee et al. [49] presented a Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing to automatically generate adversarial examples in the form
of network flows against botnet detectors. The adversarial ex-
amples were generated by altering a few essential tra ffic flow
features (e.g., duration, sent bytes, received bytes, and trans-
mitted packets). The generated adversarial examples were de-
ployed to create an augmented dataset that, via adversarial train-
ing, can enhance the resilience of botnet detectors. The au-
thors utilized two datasets in their experiments, CTU and Bot-
net, and two ML botnet detectors based on RF and Wide and
Deep Learning (WnD)15. The evaluation results concluded that
the hardened botnet detectors increased the detection rate from
0.58 to 0.88 against the adversarial examples without a ffecting
the performance when tested with non-adversarial examples.
Towards the same direction, Anthi et al. [25] utilized adver-
sarial training to improve the robustness of two classifiers (J48
decision tree and RF) designed to detect attacks on ICS. The
authors performed a data poisoning attack based on the gray-
box adversary’s knowledge; they only had access to the dataset
and the features, while they had not any other knowledge about
the model. The adversarial examples that were utilized to per-
form the AML attack were generated using the JSMA method,
and the detection performance of RF and J48 models decreased
by 6% and 11%, respectively. As a countermeasure to this data
poisoning attack, the authors employed the adversarial training
method using 10% of the adversarial examples to retrain the
classifiers. Afterward, the RF and J48 models were applied to
the unknown adversarial examples, where they accomplished
11% and 17% higher F1-scores respectively.
Vitorino et al. [50] introduced the Adaptive Perturbation
Pattern Method (A2PM) to generate realistic adversarial exam-
ples. The authors showcased their method on two scenarios
(i.e., Enterprise and IoT in a gray-box attack setting) using the
MLP and RF models, where they only had knowledge about
the features. The adversarial examples significantly lowered
the performance of MLP and RF in both scenarios. Further-
more, the authors evaluated the models also using adversarial
training and concluded that when the models are adversarially
trained their robustness against adversarial examples is signifi-
cantly improved.
Debicha et al. [35] studied the e ffect of adversarial training
in a DL-based IDS. More specifically, the authors performed
white-box AML attacks using the FGSM, BIM, and PGD meth-
ods. The experiments were performed on the NSL-KDD dataset,
where the baseline model reached 99.61% detection accuracy.
The FGSM attack decreased the accuracy to 14.13%, while
BIM and PGD reduced it even more to 8.85%. After the adver-
sarial training using the PGD adversarial examples, the model’s
robustness increased significantly (it is not mentioned exactly
how much); nevertheless, the authors highlighted that there is a
trade-o ffof slightly decreasing the detection accuracy on clean
data, namely when there are no adversarial examples. In ad-
dition, the authors concluded that increasing the percentage of
adversarial examples in the training phase does not necessarily
enhance the model’s robustness.
15A deep learning approach proposed by GoogleRashid et al. [34] investigated the e ffects of AML attacks
on ML /DL-based IDSs designed to detect attacks against IoT
smart city applications and proposed a defense method based
on adversarial training to enhance the models’ robustness. The
authors utilized three classifiers (MLP, DT, and RF) and trained
them using the DS2OS dataset16. Moreover, they evaluated the
five most known AML attacks (JSMA, FGSM, BIM, DeepFool,
and C&W); however, it is not mentioned what the adversary’s
knowledge is (e.g., white-box, black-box, etc.). All the AML
attacks significantly decreased the performance of the models
varying from 36% to 78%; however, the JSMA and C&W at-
tacks were the most successful. The authors concluded that the
MLP shows relatively higher robustness than the other shal-
low ML classifiers. For the adversarial training, the authors
deployed the adversarial examples that were generated by the
C&W method, where 60% of the samples were added to the
training set, and the remaining 40% was included in the testing
set. The authors concluded that the adversarial training is su ffi-
cient to maintain the classifier’s performance against adversar-
ial AML attacks. The baseline classifiers MLP, DT, and RF ac-
complished 99.43%, 99.35%, and 99.41% accuracy, while the
re-trained classifiers achieved 99.20%, 99.19%, and 99.19%,
respectively.
Natural Language Processing
In the NLP domain, there are several works in the liter-
ature, such as [51, 52, 53, 54] that deploy adversarial train-
ing as a mean to improve the prediction performance of NLP
models rather than enhancing their robustness against AML at-
tacks. Furthermore, other works that aim to enhance the NLP
model’s robustness are usually focused on BERT NLP mod-
els [55]. Subsequently, the following part will focus on the ad-
versarial training methods that aim to mitigate AML attacks in
the NLP domain.
Liu et al. [56] presented a comprehensive study on adversar-
ial pre-training aiming to enhance both the generalization and
robustness of NLP models even though prior works treat them
as inversely related terms. The authors proposed an algorithm,
which combines the training process with applying perturba-
tions in the embedding space. The algorithms were applied to
BERT and RoBERTa NLP models and tested against various
NLP tasks using three adversarial NLP benchmarks and con-
cluded that they could improve both the generalization and ro-
bustness of BERT and RoBERTa models.
Yoo et al. [57] argued that in NLP the generation of adver-
sarial examples is a combinatorial optimization problem, which
is solved by deploying a heuristic algorithm. To this end, the
authors proposed two methods to generate adversarial exam-
ples and improve the adversarial training process: ( i) a cheaper
gradient-based word importance ranking to sequentially replace
each word with a synonym (A2T) and ( ii) a masked language
model-based word replacement (A2T-MLM). The proposed meth-
ods tested both BERT and RoBERTa NLP models on text clas-
sification tasks using well-known datasets (e.g., IMDB, Rotten
16https: //www.kaggle.com /francoisxa /ds2ostra ffictraces
9

==== Page 10 ====
Tomatoes, and SNLI). The experimental results showed that the
A2T method could improve the NLP model’s robustness against
several attacks of the literature (e.g., [58, 59, 60, 61]) that target
NLP models.
Pan et al. [62] proposed an adversarial training method for
text classification models. The authors based their method on
white-box adversary’s knowledge. The adversarial sample gen-
eration process was based on FGSM and [51], but instead of
applying the perturbations to the word embeddings, they ap-
plied them to the word embedding matrix of Transformer en-
coders. The experiments were performed using the BERT and
RoBERTa NLP models on three datasets and compared on sev-
eral tasks with other adversarial learning methods (e.g., PGD,
FreeAT, FreeLB) [54]. The results showed that the proposed
method outperforms PGD and FreeAT, while accomplishing the
same performance as FreeLB.
Kitada et al. [52] introduced an adversarial training method
that can be applied to various NLP tasks. The proposed ad-
versarial training method is focused on the attention mecha-
nism. More specifically, the generated adversarial perturbations
are added to the attention mechanism to increase the model’s
prediction performance and robustness. To test their method,
the authors deployed a Bidirectional RNN (BiRNN) model and
three di fferent NLP tasks, text classification, question answer-
ing (QA), and natural language inference (NLi). The evaluation
experiments concluded that the proposed adversarial training
on the attention mechanism managed to improve the model’s
performance on the three NLP tasks and outperformed other
training techniques.
Finally, Morandi and Samwald [63] performed a large-scale
investigation of the robustness of the biomedical NLP models
against AML attacks. The authors performed white-box and
black-box attack scenarios on both character-level and word-
level AML attacks. More specifically, five biomedical /clinical
textual datasets were used and four di fferent NLP models were
deployed based on BERT. Moreover, four AML attacks were
performed and the results indicated that the NLP models are
not robust to AML attacks. The authors employed adversarial
training using adversarial examples generated by all the tested
attacks and evaluated the performance of the models against ad-
versarial and clean test samples to measure the robustness and
generalization, respectively. The proposed approach tested sev-
eral NLP tasks, such as question answering, semantic similarity
estimation, natural language inference, text classification, and
relation classification. The experimental results demonstrated
that adversarial training improves the robustness and the gener-
alization ability of biomedical NLP models.
Audio
In the audio domain, adversarial training has not received
much attention, since it has been employed only in a few exist-
ing works.
Pal et al. [64] proposed a hybrid adversarial training method
to improve the robustness of speaker recognition systems. For
this purpose, the authors provide diverse and robust adversar-
ial perturbations for adversarial training as a defense for deepspeaker recognition systems against various types of attacks.
Experiments were conducted on various white-box and black-
box attacks, such as the FGSM, the C&W, the PGD, and the
Feature Scattering attack (FS) [65]. The proposed hybrid adver-
sarial training approach outperformed other adversarial training
methods (e.g., using only FGSM, PGD, or FS adversarial exam-
ples) on all the testing AML attacks as well as on the detection
of original examples.
Other defense methods against audio AML attacks relied
on adversarial training in audio signals using a denoiser model
[66]. The proposed defense is based on the adversarial training
proposed in [37]. However, instead of adversarially training a
model from scratch that leads to convergence issues in Auto-
matic Speech Recognition (ASR), the authors present a method
to fine-tune a pre-trained ASR model using PGD adversarial ex-
amples. Then, the denoiser, which is pre-trained using deep re-
gression, maps adversarial signals to benign ones. Experiments
have been conducted using the FGSM and the PGD methods
and demonstrated promising results. Nevertheless, more exten-
sive tests still have to be conducted.
4.1.2. Defensive Distillation
The term distillation originally refers to the training proce-
dure where a DNN model (student) is trained using knowledge
transferred from a di fferent DNN (teacher) [67]. The motiva-
tion for the use of distillation stems from the deployment of DL
models in smaller devices (e.g., smartphones) that do not have
the resources to perform complex computations, hence via dis-
tillation during the training phase, the knowledge is transferred
from more complex DNN models.
Papernot et al. [68] employed an alternative to the distilla-
tion method to protect DNN against adversarial examples in the
computer vision domain. They proposed the defensive distilla-
tionwhere instead of transferring knowledge between di fferent
DNN models, they extracted knowledge from a DNN to en-
hance its robustness against adversarial examples. The authors
deployed the JSMA method to craft adversarial examples and
two datasets (MNIST and CIFAR-10) to evaluate the defensive
distillation. The defensive distillation method reduced the suc-
cess rate of the adversarial examples from 95.89% to 0.45% on
the MNIST dataset and from 87.89% to 5.11% on the CIFAR-
10 dataset. Another work that studies the distillation method in
AML domain is proposed in [69]. The authors presented the
Adversarially Robust Distillation (ARD) method that combines
distillation with adversarial training to transfer knowledge from
robust teacher against AML attacks DNN models to student
models. The experiments were performed using the adversar-
ial training method proposed in [37] to train DNN models both
with and without the ARD method on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets. The evaluation concluded that the ARD-trained
models outperform the adversarially trained models.
Soll et al. [70] applied the defensive distillation method of
the image classification domain to text classification. Particu-
larly, the authors generated the text adversarial examples based
on [71] and deployed two datasets (AG’s corpus of news articles
and Amazon movie reviews) to test the defensive distillation on
10

==== Page 11 ====
a CNN model. The experimental results indicated that the de-
fensive distillation method did not have the same e ffect in the
text classification domain as in image classification since the ro-
bustness of the CNN against the adversarial examples slightly
increased.
Apruzzese et al. [72] proposed a defensive distillation ap-
proach for enhancing the robustness of RF in the cybersecu-
rity domain (botnet network tra ffic detection). More specifi-
cally, the authors employed two RF models, one model to gen-
erate probability labels, namely they used the result of each
Decision Tree (DT) of the RF ensemble algorithm to gener-
ate the probability for each sample to be malicious or benign,
and then a second model was trained based on these proba-
bilities. The proposed method evaluated adversarial examples
only in the testing phase (i.e., the authors performed an evasion
attack) generated by altering specific features of the dataset.
The results concluded that it outperformed an undistilled model
on both adversarial and non-adversarial examples. Moreover,
the authors compared their method with other defense methods
against AML attacks (e.g., adversarial training and feature re-
duction) and concluded that the proposed defensive distillation
provides more resilience to RF against AML attacks.
Sidi et al. [73] presented MaskDGA, an evasion technique
that is based on adversarial learning to alter Algorithmically
Generated Domain (AGD) names to evade Domain Generation
Algorithm (DGA) DL classifiers having knowledge only about
the dataset that deployed to train the classier (i.e., gray-box).
The authors also employed the defensive distillation and ad-
versarial training defenses to enhance the classifiers and test
their performance against MaskDGA. The results regarding the
deployed defenses concluded that distillation is an unreliable
defense since it either improved or degrade the detection of ad-
versarial samples, while adversarial training improved the accu-
racy of the classifiers against the specific attack in which they
were trained; however, it did not generalize on other evasion
attacks.
4.1.3. Ensemble Methods
TheEnsemble Methods category is based on the concept of
Ensemble Learning, namely multiple ML algorithms are com-
bined to solve a learning problem (e.g., classification) [74]. Ex-
isting works in this category employ Ensemble Learning to en-
hance the resilience of ML and DL models against AML at-
tacks.
Appruzzese et al. [75] proposed an approach named Ap-
pCon to enhance the resilience of ML (DT, RF, and AB) and
DL (MLP and WnD) network IDS. AppCon is based on the
paradigm of Ensemble Learning, namely, it employs an ensem-
ble of detectors, where each detector is devoted to a particular
web application (e.g., Skype, WhatsApp. etc.), and the results
of the detectors are used to train and test a hardened detector.
The authors performed a gray-box adversarial attack adding
small perturbations on specific features of the original botnet
detection dataset (CTU-13). The experimental results indicated
that AppCon could prevent the 75% of adversarial examples
without a ffecting the performance in non-adversarial settings.Jiang et al. [76] proposed a framework, named FGMD, which
can e ffectively detect malicious IoT network tra ffic while it is
also robust against AML evasion attacks. The authors proposed
an adversarial sample generation approach that considers the
constraints that arise due to the inherent properties of the net-
work tra ffic (e.g., it cannot modify all the features of the net-
work tra ffic, the attack function of the original malicious sam-
ples must be preserved, etc.). To this end, the authors altered
only four features (from 23) to generate the adversarial exam-
ples and perform an evasion attack with black-box adversary
knowledge. The FGMD framework is based on feature group-
ing and ensemble learning (referred to as model fusion). More
specifically, the authors grouped the features into three cate-
gories and parsed them by three di fferent LSTM models to per-
form the detection. The final prediction of the FGMD is cal-
culated based on the average of the classification of the three
models. The evaluation experiments were performed on two
IoT datasets (MedBloT and IoTID) and FGMD compared with
baseline models (LSTM, RNN, DT), both original and adver-
sarially trained. The results indicate that FGMD can achieve
higher scores (accuracy, F1-score, precision, recall, FPR) than
other models in the presence of AML evasion attack.
Ensemble methods are also used for the detection of adver-
sarial audio samples. In [77], the authors investigate the impact
of Gaussian smoothing on the DeepSpeech and Lingvo ASRs.
Specifically, the authors present four defense systems, namely
randomized smoothing, Defense GAN (uses the same technique
as with images [78]), Variational autoencoder (V AE), and Par-
allel WaveGAN vocoder (PWG). The systems were compared
with the standard defense systems for adversarial training. As
an outcome, the authors propose a hybrid system where PWG is
combined with randomized smoothing to provide 93% accuracy
and 90% detection improvement for C&W and BIM attacks,
which impose the greatest highest risk against audio systems.
4.1.4. Pre-processing
ThePre-processing category is comprised of existing works
that utilize a pre-processing technique (e.g., feature reduction)
to improve the model’s robustness against AML attacks.
Rosenberg et al. [79] proposed an attack-agnostic defense
method for RNN classifiers against AML attacks that are named
Sequence Squeezing based on an existing work proposed in
[80]. However, it does not detect adversarial examples. In-
stead, this method merges semantically similar features (i.e.,
API call sequences) into a single representative feature. The
evaluation experiments were performed on a dataset that in-
cludes API calls of benign and malware activity. The Sequence
Squeezing method was also compared with other defense meth-
ods (e.g., adversarial training, adversarial signatures, RNN en-
semble, Nearest Neighbor, defense sequence GAN) in four AML
attacks (black-box gradient-based, white-box gradient-based,
adaptive white-box attacker, and random perturbation). The
experimental results concluded that sequence squeezing is the
only method that balances low overhead and high robustness.
Demontis et al. [81] delved into the evasion of AML attacks
by investigating the concept of bounding classifier sensitivity to
feature changes to improve the classifier’s security. The idea is
11

==== Page 12 ====
to employ evenly-distributed feature weights to make the ad-
versary alter more features to evade detection. The experiments
were performed on an SVM classifier trained to detect Android
malware. The authors concluded that the proposed approach
enhances the classifier’s security by about ten times when con-
sidering the number of modifications required to create a mal-
ware sample that evades detection.
Esmaeilpour et al. [82] proposed an environmentally sound
classification approach that is robust against AML attacks with-
out incorporating any defense method (reactive or proactive).
The SVM classifier was deployed since the authors argued that
due to the fact that learns for low-dimensional feature vectors
is less sensitive to adversarial perturbations compared to DNN.
Before extracting the robust features, the authors employed a
pre-processing approach named spectrogram pre-processing that
aimed to enhance the resilience of the SVM model against AML
attacks. Moreover, the authors focused on the feature extraction
process by evaluating several handcrafted features to conclude
on the Speed Up Robust Features (SURF). Several experiments
were carried out to assess the performance of the proposed clas-
sification approach in both original and adversarial examples
(in black-box adversary knowledge). The authors concluded
that CNN models could accomplish comparable performance in
audio classification tasks, but they can be easily fooled by ad-
versarial examples achieving more than 94% fooling rate, while
the proposed approach reduced the fooling rate to 50%.
Han et al. [83] proposed a defense method based on feature
reduction to protect an ML-based malicious network tra ffic de-
tector against the gray and black-box AML attacks. The authors
calculated the adversarial robustness scores of the features and
reduced the feature set by deleting the features with the lowest
adversarial robustness scores. A thorough evaluation was per-
formed, where six ML /DL algorithms (two of them were un-
supervised) were deployed, namely Logistic Regression (LR),
MLP, DT, SVM, Deep Autoencoders (DAE), and Isolation For-
est (IF). Furthermore, the proposed defense method was com-
pared with adversarial training and feature selection defenses,
and the results indicate that feature reduction is more e ffective
in accomplishing better results in reducing the malicious Tra ffic
Evasion Rate (MER), Probability Decline Rate (PDR), Mali-
cious features Mimicry Rate (MMR). However, the authors did
not evaluate whether the proposed defense a ffects the perfor-
mance of the original samples.
Weerasinghe et al. [84] introduced a defense method for
SVM classifiers to tackle poisoning and label flipping attacks
based on Local Intrinsic Dimensionality (LID) (i.e., a measure-
ment to characterize the outlierness of data samples). The au-
thors proposed the K-LID estimation to distinguish the adver-
sarial and original samples based on their traits, which was de-
ployed to enhance the resistance of an SVM classifier against
training data manipulations. Several experiments were performed
on various real-world datasets (e.g., image, audio classifica-
tion) to assess the performance of the K-LID SVM (i.e., testing
against five di fferent label-flipping attacks and one poisoning
attack). The experiments concluded that the proposed defense
could reduce the classification error rates by 10% on average.
Chen et al. [85] introduced a detection system for Androidmalware, named KuafuDet that contains an adversarial detec-
tion mechanism (camouflage) to protect the system against poi-
soning attacks. The camouflage detection deploys similarity-
based filtering analysis to detect malicious data distortions. Kua-
fuDet were tested against three threat models (weak attacker,
strong attacker, and sophisticated attacker) that di ffer in the way
they generate the adversarial examples. The experimental re-
sults concluded that KuafuDet enhances the detection accuracy
by at least 15%, reducing the false negatives.
Liao et al. [86] introduced the concept of denoising adver-
sarial examples as a defense against adversarial attacks that tar-
get ANN models in image classification tasks. The key inno-
vation of the proposed method, name High-level representation
Guided Denoiser (HGD) is that instead of using a pixel-level
reconstruction loss function, they employed a loss function that
considers the variations between top-level outputs of the target
model activated by original and adversarial examples. The au-
thors compared HGD with state-of-the-art ensemble adversarial
training in both white-box and black-box attacks. Finally, they
concluded that the proposed method accomplished higher accu-
racy while it requires less training data and training time.
Jia et al. [87] presented a defense method against black-box
membership inference attacks, named MemGuard that lever-
ages adversarial examples. In membership inference attacks the
attacker deploys a binary classifier that takes input from the data
sample’s confidence score vector predicted by the target classi-
fier and predicts whether the data sample is a member of the
training dataset of the target classifier. MemGuard adds noise
to the confidence score vector, which is predicted by the tar-
get classifier converting it to an adversarial example that mis-
leads the attacker’s classifier. The authors evaluated their ap-
proach in various experiments in the image classification field
and showed that MemGaurd and in consequence, adversarial
examples can be an e ffective defense against membership in-
ference attacks.
Zhang et al. [88] investigated the e fficacy of feature selec-
tion as a defense against adversarial evasion attacks. To this
end, the authors proposed a wrapper-based adversarial feature
selection approach based on forward selection and backward
elimination methods that not only improves the generalization
capabilities of the classifier but also it optimizes its performance
against black-box evasion attacks. The experiments were per-
formed on two di fferent use cases (e.g., spam and pdf malware
detection) using a linear SVM classifier and concluded that can
enhance the classifier’s security without significantly a ffecting
its performance on normal settings (i.e., without the evasion at-
tack).
Apruzzese et al. [89] proposed a set of gray-box attacks
on phishing detectors and presented the concept of Protective
Operation Chain (POC) as an e ffective mitigation technique
against such attacks. The authors proposed four di fferent gray-
box attacks that were divided into simple and complex attacks
based on the features that an attacker alters. The POC method
is basically an obfuscation method that is based on the gen-
eration of a new feature space by randomly mixing a portion
of the features that the phishing detector employs in order to
make it harder for the attacker to comprehend which features
12

==== Page 13 ====
are deployed by the detector and how these features indicate
the phishing or benign websites. A comprehensive evaluation
of the proposed defense solution was performed using four dif-
ferent phishing datasets and 13 ML classifiers. The authors
concluded that POC is robust to all 13 classifiers. Moreover,
to demonstrate the significance of POC against existing base-
lines, the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was employed along with
the Bonferroni correction and showed that POC improves the
robustness of the existing baselines at the p<0.001 level.
4.2. Detection
In contrast to the Mitigation category, the Detection cate-
gory focuses on reactive defenses whose purpose is to detect
AML attacks (e.g., detection of adversarial examples) before
they reach the ML /DL models.
4.2.1. Supervised /Semi-supervised Learning
The category Supervised /Semi-supervised Learning includes
methods that detect AML deploying an auxiliary ML /DL model
that has been trained using supervised or semi-supervised learn-
ing.
Pawlick et al. [90] developed a detection method for AML
attacks against ANN-NIDS. The authors specifically utilized
four well-known adversarial attacks (C&W, FGSM, BIM, and
PGD) to generate adversarial examples. The original samples
(both malicious and benign) are labeled as “non-adversarial”
based on the activation of each neuron of the ANN-IDS. The
generated adversarial examples, along with the “non-adversarial”,
deployed to form a new adversarial dataset that contains the la-
bels adversarial andnon-adversarial . Moreover, the authors
deployed five ML algorithms (ANN, RF, KNN, SVM, AB) to
detect whether a sample is related to an AML attack and evalu-
ated them on the CIC-IDS dataset. The best results were accom-
plished with RF and k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithms
that attained 99% recall for AML attacks.
Taheri et al. [91] presented a label-flipping attack (Silhouette-
based Label Flipping) along with two defense methods (label-
based semi-supervised and clustering-based semi-supervised de-
fense) that applied on a CNN classifier. The authors deployed
their approach on the Android malware detection field using
three di fferent datasets (i.e., Drebin, Contagio, and Genome).
The experimental results concluded that using clustering-based
semi-supervised along with RF feature selection, the accuracy
improved by 19% in comparison with state-of-the-art defenses.
The authors of [92] proposed a detection method, named
PDGAN, to defend poisoning attacks against Federated Learn-
ing models. The attacker’s goal is to compromise the global
model by uploading malicious updates from the poisoned lo-
cal model. This is achieved by performing a label-flipping at-
tack on the training dataset of the local model and computing
the poisoned local updates. The PDGAN detection method im-
plements a GAN on the server to reconstruct the training data.
Then, the training data are fed to each participant model to get
the labels of each sample and calculate the accuracy of the par-
ticipants’ models. First, the participant’s models were classified
as benign and attackers (based on a threshold value), and laterthe PDGAN considers only the updates that the benign partic-
ipants have performed. The authors evaluate the PDGAN on
the image classification field using two datasets (MNIST and
Fashion-MNIST). The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method can immediately reduce the poisoning accu-
racy from almost 90% to 3.1% and accomplish an overall accu-
racy of almost 90%.
Recent defenses in the audio domain are based on random-
ization schemes to mitigate the e ffects of AML attacks on the
audio samples. The authors in [93] use a randomization tech-
nique based on recursive filters. The technique first transforms
the audio waveform into the frequency domain, resulting in a
signal spectrogram. In parallel, recursive filters that are incor-
porating randomness are applied in the original audio to pro-
duce a new spectrogram that is di fferent from the original. Ran-
domness is considered in the form of probabilistic distributions.
Both spectrograms are fed into an ASR system which com-
pares them and derives their transcribed sentences using the
word error rate. In the same manner, the ASR system can de-
tect changes if the original audio is malformed due to an AML
attack. This ASR system technique provides protection against
both high-frequency and low-frequency audio signals and is re-
silient to adaptive attacks. The evaluation is performed in the
C&W and PsyImp [94] AML attacks using DeepSpeech as well
as Lingvo ASR systems and demonstrates a good detection per-
formance for di fferent probabilistic distributions (e.g., Gamma,
Uniform, Normal).
Lin et al. [95] treat the defense as a functional high-order
function that parses each adversarial sample and returns a new
defender function for each particular sample. The proposed
defense approach deploys an iterative self-supervised learning
model based on Denoising Autoencoder to identify the origi-
nal (unattacked) data for each adversarial sample to recover the
prediction. This defense works in white-box and gray-box ad-
versarial settings and was tested on image classification tasks
using a strong white-box attack (i.e., BPDA), accomplishing
98%, 76%, and 43% accuracy on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and Ima-
geNet datasets respectively.
In [96], the authors investigated the performance of self-
supervised learning models against black-box AML attacks in
ASR tasks. During the training phase, these models are also
learning a mapping function that maps the input to high-level
representations. This work showed that self-supervised learn-
ing models can be used as filters that extract pivotal information
from the contaminated input spectrograms to tackle AML at-
tacks. The experiments contacted using DL anti-spoofing mod-
els and well-known AML attacks (e.g., FGSM and PGD) con-
cluded that the proposed defense is very e ffective regardless of
the amount of attack signal.
Tuinen et al. [97] proposed two methods for the detection of
adversarial examples that target image classifiers using white-
box adversary’s knowledge. The first method employs a CNN
model that is trained to detect adversarial examples that have
been generated by a distribution, while the second method down-
samples the images to a lower dimension using the Discrete
Cosine Transform method and performs the detection using an
SVM classifier. The experiments performed on PGD white-box
13

==== Page 14 ====
attacks and concluded that both methods can attain high predic-
tion accuracy with some trade-o ffin efficiency.
4.2.2. Distance-based
In the Distance-based category, the detection of AML at-
tacks is performed by measuring the distance between adver-
sarial and original samples.
Paudice et al. [98] proposed an outlier detection method for
poisoning attacks. Particularly, the authors deployed a distance-
based anomaly detection for the detection of adversarial train-
ing samples using a part of original (i.e., trusted) data sam-
ples. The evaluation was performed on two benchmark datasets
in spam filtering and computer vision domains as well as on
KNN and SVM ML algorithms. The results concluded that the
proposed method is capable of mitigating poisoning attacks.
Furthermore, the authors evaluated their detection method for
label-flipping attacks; however, the results were not encourag-
ing because the generated adversarial examples were closer to
the original, and the proposed detection method failed to detect
them e ffectively.
Meng et al. [99] presented a framework, named MagNet, for
defending ANNs image classifiers against AML attacks that are
independent of the target classifier and the deployed adversarial
examples generation process (i.e., it is attack-agnostic). Mag-
Net consists of two components, the detector and the reformer .
The detector rejects a sample that exceeds the boundary, while
the reformer finds an alternative example closer to the boundary
and sends that to the ANN classifier. More specifically, MagNet
models only the original samples and estimates the distance of
the test samples and the boundary of the manifold of the orig-
inal samples. The authors used various AML attacks to gen-
erate the adversarial examples (e.g., C&W, FGSM, DeepFool,
etc.) as well as the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. The re-
sults showed that MagNet significantly increased the accuracy
against all the attacks, while the accuracy only on original sam-
ples was reduced by 3.8%.
Esmaeilpour et al. [100] proposed a detection method that
explores subspaces of adversarial examples in the unitary vector
domain and developed a detector based on LR to defend mod-
els on environmental sound classification field. Specifically, the
authors calculated chordal distance eigenvalues of legitimate
and adversarial examples, which were deployed to train the LR
classifier. The experiments were performed on three datasets
(ESC-10, ESC-50, and UrbanSound8k) using eight di fferent
types of AML attacks (e.g., FGSM, BIM, JSMA, label flipping,
etc.). The results concluded that the proposed detector achieved
high performance in detecting all the attacks as well as it out-
performed other detectors (e.g., kernel density, Bayesian un-
certainty, and local intrinsic dimensionality) in six out of eight
adversarial attacks.
The authors in [101] introduced a distance-based method
for the detection of adversarial inputs in audio samples. The
method is based on a recognition model, which performs clas-
sification to first characterize the original audio, and then it re-
ceives the modified audio as input. The modified audio is gener-
ated using low-pass filtering mechanisms, where the spectrum,
waveform, and accuracy rate of the audio signal are analyzed.If the di fference between the modified and the original audio
is sufficiently large, then the original audio sample is regarded
as an adversarial example. Similarly, if the di fference is small,
the original audio sample is regarded as a normal sample. The
method is evaluated on the Mozilla Common V oice dataset17,
where the C&W attack is performed to generate the adversar-
ial audio samples and the results concluded that it outperforms
other detection methods, such as white noise, denoise down-
sampling, and temporal dependency. Another defense approach
for adversarial audio detection is illustrated in [102], where
distance-based techniques were followed to perform the detec-
tion. The authors introduced a novel ASR framework that per-
forms similarity calculation through binary classification. The
similarity is measured using the Jaro-Winkler distance method
[103]. The method uses multiple ASRs to achieve a higher ac-
curacy reaching even up to 99.88%.
Yang et al. [104] proposed a detection method against AML
attacks for ASR models. The proposed method relied on the
temporal dependency in speech signals. The audio sample is
split into portions, and the defense framework evaluates the
transcription of the portion against the original sample. The
portion transcription is based on di fferent transformation func-
tions, such as quantization, down-sampling, local smoothing,
and auto-encoder reformation of audio signals. The authors ver-
ified the portions that are not similar using the Word Error Rate
(WER) and the Character Error Rate (CER). The results showed
that the proposed temporal dependency detection method could
effectively detect adversarial audio examples.
A similar approach that detects audio AML attacks in ASR
models is the WaveGuard framework [105]. WaveGuard uses
transformation functions and analyses the ASR transcriptions
of the original and transformed audio. These functions are lever-
aging Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for the
detection of AML attacks. WaveGuard is able to detect AML
attacks with a variety of audio transformation functions.
Chen et. al [106] introduced a stateful method for detect-
ing black-box AML attacks in image classification tasks. The
authors based their work on the argument that the generation
process of adversarial examples requires a sequence of simi-
lar queries to the classifier and developed a detection method
deploying a neural network similarity-detector and proved that
this approach can detect existing state-of-the-art black-box at-
tack algorithms. Towards the same direction, Li et al. [107]
introduced a detection-based defense method for query-based
black-box AML attacks using a content-similarity approach,
named Blacklight. Blacklight was driven by the fact that query-
based black-box attacks result in highly similar queries and is
comprised of two components: the probabilistic content fin-
gerprinting that aims at fast and scalable attack detection, and
thesalted pixel quantization that aims at providing resistance
against adaptive attacks. Blacklight was evaluated against var-
ious black-box attacks on several datasets and image classifi-
cation models and showed that it can detect all the attacks after
2-9 queries (except boundary attack that takes 50 queries on av-
erage) and that it consistently reduces the attack success rate to
17https: //commonvoice.mozilla.org /
14

==== Page 15 ====
0% for all the tested attack. Finally, the authors showed that
Blacklight can generalize also to other domains and employed
a text-classification task as an example.
Song et al. [108] proposed three mutation-based evasion
attacks that were evaluated under white-box, black-box, and
gray-box attack settings on ML-based phishing website clas-
sifiers and are highly e ffective in accomplishing 100% success
rate on Google’s phishing page filter (GPPF). The authors ex-
pand their research by introducing also two similarity-based
detection mechanisms (i.e., DOM tree and personalized simi-
larity) to tackle these attacks. The experimental results on large
phishing and legitimate URL corpus concluded that both DOM
tree and personalized similarity achieved over 90% similarity
on most of the adversarial samples in white-box and black-box
settings, while in gray-box settings personalized similarity sig-
nificantly outperformed DOM tree.
4.2.3. Feature Squeezing
Xu et al. [80] introduced Feature Squeezing , a method to de-
tect adversarial examples in the computer vision domain. The
method is based on two-dimensionality reduction techniques:
i) Color bit depth reduction (from 24-bit to 8-bit) and ii) spa-
tial smoothing (i.e., blur). The first technique is based on the
fact that the image’s colors are unrelated to the classification;
hence they will not a ffect the model’s classification accuracy
when reduced. Spatial smoothing, on the other hand, employs
local smoothing and non-local smoothing to reduce the image’s
noise. During the Feature Squeezing process, two versions of
the input image are produced based on the two aforementioned
techniques. A DNN classifies the original image and the two
generated images, and their outputs are compared using the L1
metric. If L1exceeds a threshold, the image is classified as ad-
versarial and discarded.
4.2.4. Statistical
Grosse et al. [109] proposed a detection method based on
Statistical tests for adversarial examples. Two statistical dis-
tance metrics (Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and En-
ergy Distance (ED)) were employed to measure the distance of
adversarial and original samples, namely to identify their dif-
ferences. The authors evaluated their method on four classifiers
(ANN, DT, LR, SVM), three di fferent domains, such as im-
age classification (MNIST), malware detection (Drebin), and
cancer detection (MicroRNA), as well as four AML attacks
(FGSM, JSMA, SVM attack, and Decision Tree attack) and
concluded that it could e ffectively detect the adversarial exam-
ples.
Table 4 summarizes all the above-mentioned defense meth-
ods based on key traits, such as year, deployed attack type (i.e.,
poisoning or evasion), attacker’s knowledge (i.e., black /white /gray-
box), application domain, evaluated ML /DL algorithms, as well
as the employed defense method (e.g., adversarial training, en-
semble methods, pre-processing, etc.).5. Evaluation of Defense Methods
This section aims to provide insights regarding the e fficient
evaluation of defenses (both mitigation and detection methods)
against AML attacks. However, in order to accurately evaluate
the defense methods and avoid misleading results, it should be
assured that the attack has been implemented correctly. Several
works in the literature highlight that existing defenses fail to
perform successful attacks resulting in misleading results and
suggest guidelines that aim to lead to unbiased results. Car-
lini et al. [110] performed a large-scale analysis of commonly
accepted best practices discussing their limitations and intro-
duced new methods for accurately evaluating defenses against
adversarial examples. Moreover, Pintor et al. [111] proposed
a framework to automatically detect erroneous evaluations of
adversarial robustness that researchers could employ to build
robust defenses. In the rest of this section, datasets from the lit-
erature that contain both original and adversarial samples (here-
after AML datasets ) have been gathered and presented. In ad-
dition, evaluation metrics that have been specifically created to
assess the robustness of AI systems or defense methods against
AML attacks have been collected and discussed. Finally, the
importance of evaluating the economic viability when propos-
ing a new defense has been highlighted. It should be noted that
common evaluation metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall ,
andF1-score are not considered in this section since they are
not appropriate for measuring the robustness of AI systems in
adversarial settings [112].
5.1. Dataset Gathering
In this section, we gathered the AML datasets that have
been introduced by existing works and are publicly available
to evaluate ML /DL models’ robustness. To the best of our
knowledge, only seven AML datasets are publicly available, six
of them belong to the computer vision domain and one to the
sound classification. These datasets are presented below:
1. DAmageNet [113] is an AML dataset that provides black-
box AML attack images. It contains 96,020 adversarial
samples generated from the original samples of the Ima-
geNet dataset. DAmageNet is appropriate for testing and
improving the robustness of DNN in image classification
tasks18.
2. In [114] four variations of the CIFAR dataset have been
proposed in order for the authors to demonstrate that ad-
versarial samples are a result of non-robust features (i.e.,
features that can be easily predicted but are incomprehen-
sible to humans). The datasets are publicly available19
and contain both robust and non-robust features (i.e., both
original and adversarial samples) appropriate for image
classification tasks.
3. The authors of [39] generated two AML datasets based
on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 using PGD AML at-
tack to produce the adversarial examples20. These datasets
18http://www.pami.sjtu.edu.cn /Show /56/122
19https: //github.com /MadryLab /constructed-datasets
20https: //github.com /ashafahi /free advtrain/tree/master /datasets
15

==== Page 16 ====
Table 4: Summary of AML Defense Methods
Paper Year Attack Type Attacker’s Knowledge Domain Algorithm Defense Method
Anthi et al. [25] 2021 Poisoning Gray-box Cybersecurity-ICS RF /J48 Adversarial Training
Vitorino et al. [50] 2022 Poisoning Gray-box Cybersecurity-IoT MLP /RF Adversarial Training
Khamis et al. [29] 2020 Poisoning White-box Cybersecurity-Network DNN /RF/AB/NB/SVM Adversarial Training
Khamis et al. [46] 2020 Poisoning White-box Cybersecurity-Network CNN /RNN Adversarial Training
Apruzzese et al. [49] 2020 Poisoning Gray-box Cybersecurity-Botnet RF /WnD Adversarial Training
Fu et al. [47] 2021 Poisoning White-box Cybersecurity-Network CNN /LSTM /GRU Adversarial Training
Rashid et al. [34] 2022 Poisoning N /A Cybersecurity-IoT MLP /DT/RF Adversarial Training
Goodfellow et al. [28] 2014 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Huang et al. [36] 2015 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Madry et al. [37] 2017 Poisoning Black /White-box Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Sankaranarayanan et al. [38] 2018 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Shafahi et al. [39] 2019 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Xie et al. [40] 2019 Poisoning Black /White-box Image Classification CNN Adversarial Training
Tram `er et al. [41] 2017 Poisoning Black /White-box Image Classification CNN /FCN Adversarial Training
Lal et al. [42] 2021 Poisoning Black /White-box Image Classification CNN Adversarial Training & Feature Reduction
Ding et al. [43] 2021 Poisoning N /A Visual Context Prediction cGAN Adversarial Training
Xu et al. [44] 2021 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Adversarial Training
Liu et al. [56] 2020 Poisoning N /A NLP BERT /RoBERTa Adversarial Training
Yoo et al. [57] 2021 Poisoning N /A Text Classification BERT /RoBERTa Adversarial Training
Pan et al. [62] 2021 Poisoning White-box Text Classification BERT /RoBERTa Adversarial Training
Kitada et al. [52] 2021 Poisoning N /A NLP RNN Adversarial Training
Morandi et al. [63] 2022 Poisoning Black /White-box NLP BERT Adversarial Training
Pal et al. [64] 2021 Poisoning Black /White-box Speech Recognition DNN Adversarial Training
Sonal et al. [66] 2022 Poisoning White-box Speech Recognition CNN Adversarial Training
Papernot et al. [68] 2016 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Defensive Distillation
Goldblum [69] 2020 Poisoning N /A Image Classification DNN Defensive Distillation
Soll et al. [70] 2019 Poisoning N /A Text Classification CNN Defensive Distillation
Apruzzese et al. [72] 2020 Evasion N /A Cybersecurity-Botnet RF Defensive Distillation
Sidi et al. [73] 2020 Evasion Gray-box Cybersecurity-Botnet CNN /LSTM Defensive Distillation
Apruzzese et al. [75] 2020 Evasion Gray-box Cybersecurity-Botnet DT /RF/MLP/AB/WnD Ensemble Methods
Jiang et al. [76] 2022 Evasion Black-box Cybersecurity-IoT LSTM Ensemble Methods
Sonal et al. [77] 2021 Evasion White-box Speech Recognition DNN Ensemble Methods
Rosenberg et al. [79] 2019 Evasion Black /White-box Cybersecurity-Network RNN Pre-processing
Xu et al. [80] 2017 Poisoning White-box Audio Classification DNN Feature Squeezing
Demontis et al. [81] 2017 Evasion N /A Cybersecurity-Android SVM Pre-processing
Esmaeilpour et al. [82] 2019 Evasion Black-box Audio Classification SVM Pre-processing
Han et al. [83] 2021 Evasion Gray /Black-box Cybersecurity-Network LR /MLP/DT/SVM /DAE/IF Pre-processing
Weerasinghe et al. [84] 2021 Poisoning Gray-box Image & Audio Classification SVM Pre-processing
Chen et al. [85] 2018 Poisoning Gray-box Cybersecurity SVM Pre-processing
Liao et al. [86] 2018 Poisoning Black /White-box Image Classification CNN Pre-processing
Jia et al. [87] 2018 Poisoning Black-box Image Classification FCNN Pre-processing
Zhang et al. [88] 2015 Evasion Black-box Cybersecurity-Malware /Spam SVM Pre-processing
Apruzzese et al. [89] 2022 Evasion Gray-box Cybersecurity-Phishing RF /MLP/NB/KNN /DT/SVM Pre-processing
Pawlick et al. [90] 2020 Poisoning White-box Cybersecurity-Network ANN /RF/KNN /SVM /AB Supervised Learning
Tao et al. [93] 2021 Poisoning N /A Speech Recognition DNN Supervised Learning
Taheri et al. [91] 2020 Poisoning Black-box Cybersecurity-Android CNN Semi-supervised Learning
Zhao et al. [92] 2019 Poisoning White-box Image Classification Federated Learning GAN
Lin et al. [95] 2019 Poisoning White /Gray-box Image Classification CNN Self-supervised learning
Wu et al. [96] 2020 Poisoning White /Gray-box Speech Recognition CNN Self-supervised learning
Tuinen et al. [97] 2022 Poisoning White-box Image Classification CNN Semi-supervised learning
Paudice et al. [98] 2018 Poisoning N /A Spam Filtering & Computer Vision KNN /SVM Distance-based Detection
Meng et al. [99] 2017 Poisoning Black-box Image Classification ANN Distance-based Detection
Esmaeilpour et al. [100] 2020 Poisoning & Evasion N /A Audio Classification CNN /SVM Distance-based Detection
Kwon et al. [101] 2020 Evasion Gray-box Audio Classification DNN Distance-based Detection
Zeng et al. [102] 2019 Evasion White /Black-box Speech Recognition DNN Distance-based Detection
Yang et al. [104] 2018 Evasion N /A Speech Recognition DNN Distance-based Detection
Husssain et al. [105] 2021 Evasion White-box Speech Recognition DNN Distance-based Detection
Chen et. al [106] 2020 Evasion Black-box Image Classification DNN Distance-based Detection
Li et al. [107] 2022 Evasion Black-box Image & Text Classification CNN /DNN Distance-based Detection
Song et al. [108] 2021 Evasion Black /Gray/White-box Cybersecurity-Phishing GPPF Distance-based Detection
Grosse et al. [109] 2017 Poisoning & Evasion Black /White-box Image & Malware & Cancer Classification ANN /DT/LR/SVM Statistical
can be deployed to develop robust image classification
models or evaluate the models’ robustness against PGD
attacks.
4. The APRICOT dataset [115] was developed to deceive
object detectors. It is comprised of 1000 images of printed
adversarial patches photographed in real-world scenes (i.e.,
public locations)21. The samples are generated to rep-
resent various viewing angles, positions, light, and dis-
tance conditions. Furthermore, this dataset can be used
to assess the robustness of object detectors as well as to
facilitate researchers in developing methods for flagging
adversarial patches.
5. The authors of [116] introduced two adversarial datasets
based on ImageNet, named ImageNet-A and ImageNet-
21https: //apricot.mitre.org /download /O22. ImageNet-A is comprised of real-world adversari-
ally filtered images that can be employed to assess image
classifiers’ robustness, while ImageNet-O contains ad-
versarially filtered images to evaluate out-of-distribution
detection models.
6. In [117], the authors proposed a simulation tool for gen-
erating synthetic datasets with realistic adversarial sam-
ples using the CARLA simulator23. This dataset can be
deployed to test the adversarial robustness of frameworks
in object detection tasks and similar research fields such
as autonomous driving.
7. Adv-ESC (Adversarial Environmental Sound Classifica-
tion) dataset [26] is the first environmental sound dataset
22https: //github.com /hendrycks /natural-adv-examples
23https: //carla.org /
16

==== Page 17 ====
equipped with adversarial examples, which can serve as a
benchmark evaluation dataset to train robust sound clas-
sification models. Adv-ESC is based on two environmen-
tal sound classification datasets (ESC-10 and DCASE task
1A) and is comprised of adversarial examples generated
by FGSM, PGD, and BIM methods.
It has been observed that only a few AML datasets are pub-
licly available, where the vast majority can only be applied to
the computer vision domain and, more specifically, to image
classification and object detection tasks. There is a clear need
for more AML datasets that can also be applied to other do-
mains, such as cybersecurity, where AML attacks are on the
rise. Hence, future research on AML should also consider the
introduction of benchmark AML datasets in various domains
to facilitate researchers evaluating their defense methods and
comparing them with existing works on common ground.
5.2. Evaluation Metrics
This section elaborates on metrics that existing works uti-
lized to measure the e fficacy of their defense solutions against
AML attacks. Most works employ common metrics to evaluate
the robustness against AML attacks (e.g., accuracy, F1-score,
AUC); however, a few introduce new metrics. Accordingly
these metrics are discussed.
Malicious tra ffic Evasion Rate (MER) [83]. It measures how
much original malicious network tra ffic can be evasive. MER is
the percentage of undetected mutated malicious tra ffic to origi-
nally detectable tra ffic.
MER =1−PUMT mal
PDT(5)
Detection Evasion Rate (DER) [83]. This metric is similar to
MER but measures how much of the mutated tra ffic can be eva-
sive. DER also measures whether the adversarially generated
traffic is detected as malicious. DER is the percentage of unde-
tected mutated tra ffic to originally detectable tra ffic.
DER =1−PUMT
PDT(6)
Malicious Probability Decline Rate (PDR) [83]. PDR mea-
sures the decline rate of the malicious probabilities produced
by the classifier.
PDR =1−E(f,ˆf)∈(Fmal,ˆFmal,)C(ˆf)
C(f)(7)
Malicious features Mimicry Rate (MMR) [83]. This metric
measures the extent to which adversarial crafted features are
close to malicious features extracted from mutated tra ffic.
MMR =1−E(f,ˆf,fa)∈(Fmal,ˆFmal,Fadv)L(ˆf,fa)
L(f,fa)(8)
Fooling Rate(FR) [82]. This metric is based on the error rate
and computes the ratio of successful fooling adversarial sam-
ples (SAS) over the total number of adversarial samples (TAS).FR=S AS im
T AST
i(9)
Attack Success Rate (ASR) [118]. The ratio of misclassified
adversarial samples (MAS) to the total number of adversarial
samples (TAS).
AS R =MAS im
T AST
i(10)
Attack Severity (AS) [75]. AS measures the e fficacy of an eva-
sion AML attack considering the detection rate (DR) before and
after the attack.
AS=1−DR a f ter
DR be f ore(11)
6. Discussion
Even though AML has received significant attention in the
last five years and new AML attacks are constantly introduced
or existing attacks are applied to di fferent fields, the defense
methods against AML attacks are still in their infancy. Based
on the surveyed articles limited research is available regard-
ing mitigating or detecting AML attacks. Table 5 provides a
comparison of the existing defenses in the AML field based
on numerous criteria, such as whether the defense method is
attack-agnostic (i.e., can mitigate /detect multiple AML attacks)
or domain-agnostic (i.e., it has been tested on several domains),
whether it was evaluated using AML evaluation metrics (dis-
cussed in section 5.2), the application domain, the defense method
category (i.e., mitigation or detection), and the evaluated mod-
els (i.e., ML or DL). Moreover, Table 5 (Code and Dataset
columns) presents which of the surveyed existing works pub-
licly release the source code and the dataset. It should be clearly
mentioned that the dataset criterion refers to the deployed AML
dataset. For instance, the authors of [50] utilized a publicly
available dataset to generate an AML dataset; however, they
did not share the generated dataset.
As can be observed by Table 5, most existing defense meth-
ods focus on improving the resiliency of ML /DL models (i.e.,
on the mitigation category) against AML attacks rather than
detecting them. More specifically, approximately 78% of the
surveyed defenses deal with the mitigation of AML attacks.
This can be attributed to the fact that adversarial training is
one of the first defense methods that are still extremely pop-
ular because researchers strive to introduce adversarial train-
ing methods which do not a ffect the model’s performance in
non-adversarial settings. Furthermore, only 6.55% of the sur-
veyed defenses are attack-agnostic, and almost 5% are domain-
agnostic, indicating that most of the existing defenses cannot
cope with multiple AML attacks neither can be applied to more
than one domain. Most previous works were not validated us-
ing appropriate evaluation metrics since the works that have
been evaluated using AML evaluation metrics are only 14.75%
17

==== Page 18 ====
Table 5: Comparison of AML Defense Methods
Domain Defense Model Publicly Available
Paper Attack-agnostic Domain-agnostic AML Evaluation Metrics Cybersecurity Computer Vision NLP Audio Mitigation Detection ML DL Code Dataset
Anthi Eirini et al. [25] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Vitorino Jo ˜ao et al. [50] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Abou Khamis et al. [29] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Abou Khamis et al. [46] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Apruzzese Giovanni et al. [49] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Fu Xingbing et al. [47] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Rashid Md Mamunur et al. [34] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Goodfellow Ian J. et al. [28] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Huang Ruitong et al. [36] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Madry Aleksander et al. [37] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Sankaranarayanan Swami et al. [38] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Shafahi Ali et al. [39] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
Xie Cihang et al. [40] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Tram `er, Florian et al. [41] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Lal Sheeba et al. [42] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Ding Feng et al. [43] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Xu Han et al. [44] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Liu Xiaodong et al. [56] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Yoo Jin Yong et al. [57] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Pan Lin et al. [62] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Kitada Shunsuke et al. [52] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Moradi Milad et al. [63] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Papernot Nicolas et al. [68] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Goldblum Micah et al. [69] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Soll Marcus et al. [70] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Apruzzese Giovanni et al. [72] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Sidi Lior et al. [73] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Apruzzese Giovanni et al. [75] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Jiang Hongling et al. [76] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Rosenberg Ishai et al. [79] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Demontis Ambra et al. [81] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Esmaeilpour Mohammad et al. [82] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Han Dongqi et al. [83] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Weerasinghe Sandamal et al. [84] ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗
Chen Sen et al. [85] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗
Liao Fangzhoet al. [86] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
Jia Jinyuan et al. [87] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Zhang Fei et al. [88] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Apruzzese Giovanni et al. [89] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Pawlicki Marek et al. [90] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Lin Zudi et al. [95] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Wu Haibin [96] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Tuinen Jason Van et al. [97] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Paudice Andrea et al. [98] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Meng Dongyu et al. [99] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Esmaeilpour Mohammad et al. [100] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Taheri Rahim et al. [91] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Zhao Ying et al. [92] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Pal Monisankha et al. [64] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Joshi Sonal et al. [66] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Joshi Sonal et al. [77] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Xu Weilin et al. [80] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Grosse Kathrin et al. [109] ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Tao Guanhon et al. [93] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Kwon Hyun et al. [101] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Zeng Qiang et al. [102] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Yang Zhuolin et al. [104] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Hussain Shehzeen et al. [105] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Chen Steven et. al [106] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Li Huiying et al. [107] ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Song et al. [108] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
(the majority employs the ASR metric). Last but not least, lim-
ited information is publicly shared by the authors of existing
works to facilitate the scientific community to reproduce their
results and compare them with future works considering that
only a few works share the code (36%) and only one its de-
ployed dataset (3.27%).
Analyzing the results of the taxonomy per domain, it has
been observed that in NLP and audio domains, the existing
research is in its infancy since only a few defenses exist in
these domains. However, a interesting observation is that in the
speech recognition and audio classification fields most works
focus on evasion AML attacks deploying distance-based detec-
tion methods [104]. Regarding the Computer Vision domain,
the vast majority of existing defenses focused on the image clas-
sification field implementing mostly mitigation methods (i.e.,
adversarial training) to enhance the robustness of CNN [40] and
DNN [37] models. The number of works in the detection cat-
egory is significantly lower and these work employ self- andsemi-supervised learning [95, 97] as well as distance-based de-
tection [98, 99, 106]. Furthermore, regarding the cybersecu-
rity domain, most of the existing research works focus on the
mitigation category of the taxonomy and particularly show that
the implementation of adversarial training can overall improve
the models’ robustness in the evaluated areas (e.g., IoT attacks,
botnet, and malicious network tra ffic detection) [25, 29, 34, 50,
119]. However, there are also a few works that studied the ap-
plication of Ensemble Learning and proved that the combina-
tion of multiple ML /DL algorithms is more robust than using
a single ML /DL algorithm in the botnet [89] and IoT attack
detection fields [76]. Defensive distillation and feature pre-
processing have been also investigated in [72] and [81] respec-
tively to enhance the models’ robustness against AML attacks
in botnet and Android malware ML-based detectors. Moreover,
limited attention has been given to the detection part of the
taxonomy, where existing works employ supervised and semi-
supervised learning methods to detect AML attacks [90, 91].
18

==== Page 19 ====
The taxonomy introduced in this work revealed several gaps
and open problems in the existing literature that paved the way
for identifying some directions for future research in the AML
defense domain. ML /DL models are utilized almost in every
technological domain. Consequently, the surface of AML at-
tacks is massive; hence, it is crucial to develop domain-agnostic
defenses (i.e., a defense that can be applied to several domains).
From the surveyed defenses, only two works ([98] and [109])
evaluated their defenses on more than one domain. Thus, one
direction for future research could focus on developing domain-
agnostic defenses. Towards the same direction, AML attacks
are evolving as new attacks are continuously emerging. There-
fore, it is crucial to develop defense methods that are attack-
agnostic. However, currently, only a few existing defense meth-
ods are attack-agnostic (e.g., [79], [99], [100], [109]). Hence,
a second direction for future research is designing new attack-
agnostic defenses. Moreover, since existing defenses mostly
deal with mitigating AML attacks, there is a gap in defense
methods that concentrate on detecting AML attacks. To this
end, a possible third future research direction could focus on
proposing innovative detection methods for AML attacks or hy-
brid solutions that will combine both mitigation and detection.
Finally, several works in the literature (e.g., [120, 121]) high-
light the fact that time performance is a significant parameter
that should be examined during the evaluation of ML and DL
models. However, existing literature in the field of AML de-
fense usually omits to include this information. In addition,
evaluating the robustness of ML /DL models is a critical is-
sue, and proper evaluation metrics and datasets for AML at-
tacks should be considered. Hence, a fourth research direction
could emphasize considering time complexity in the evaluation
of AML attacks and defense solutions as well as proposing new
AML evaluation metrics and datasets.
Along with the AML attack and defense taxonomy intro-
duced in this article, the attackers’ motivations should be also
studied in terms of economic viability aspects [14, 122]. This
is performed in the form of a cost-benefit analysis to determine
the potential gains of launching an AML cyber-attack against
a specific target. Specifically, if a target has higher potential
economic or reputation rewards or even is prone to multiple
vulnerabilities that can be exploited, this target will be selected
over an attack that requires significant e ffort and time with a
lower potential reward. To cope with economic viability as-
pects, research e fforts should focus on building a cost-based
AML threat model [123]. This model will allow the compu-
tation of likelihood (based on AML threats as well as system
vulnerabilities) and impact of AML cyber-attacks in the finan-
cial, reputational, legal, and regulatory domains. Then, it is
able to prioritize the AML defense methods (both mitigation
and detection categories), which should be enabled to avoid the
potential damages of AML threats in terms of organization re-
sources, and assets. A well-known approach for conducting
a prioritization is the use of risk assessment procedures based
on the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Special Publication (SP) 800-30 standard [124]. This standard
identifies risks in the form of a risk heatmap, where the highest
priority risks are to be immediately procured for implement-ing AML defense methods. An example of such a heatmap
is illustrated in Figure 5. The heatmap defines four individual
categories: 1) normal , which indicates no risk, 2) low, which
indicates minimal risk, 3) medium , which indicates that the risk
is adequate, 4) high, which needs indicates a clear and severe
threat to the system and 5) critical , which is the highest risk and
needs to be treated immediately.
Figure 5: Risk Heatmap
7. Conclusion
AML attacks are constantly enhanced compromising the ef-
ficacy of AI systems. In the last couple of years, the research
is focusing on the defenses against AML, introducing innova-
tive methods that either delve into increasing the robustness of
ML/DL models or detecting AML attacks. Even though numer-
ous surveys exist in the literature that elaborates on novel AML
attack methods, no surveys focus solely on the existing defenses
against AML. To the best of our knowledge, this article intro-
duced the first large-scale and domain-agnostic survey of AML
defenses aiming to address the current knowledge gap and pro-
vide directions for future research. Particularly, a taxonomy
of the existing works was introduced, where the defenses were
grouped into two major categories mitigation and detection .
The strengths and weaknesses of each work were discussed,
providing a comprehensive view of the existing defenses and
identifying limitations and gaps in the literature. Moreover, the
article collected and presented novel metrics developed to eval-
uate the robustness of ML /DL models against AML attacks and
the efficacy of detection systems focusing on detecting AML at-
tacks as well as AML datasets ready to be deployed for the eval-
uation of defense methods. Finally, based on the gaps identified
by the proposed taxonomy, this article discussed the directions
that future research should focus on to facilitate the scientific
community proposing new defense solutions to tackle AML.
A final takeaway derived from our survey is that AML at-
tack landscape grows exponentially and becomes increasingly
sophisticated threatening AI systems regardless of their applica-
tion domain, while on the other hand, the defense methods are
inadequate to address this threat since existing methods mainly
19

==== Page 20 ====
focusing on adversarial training. A key solution could be the
investigation and application of AI methods designed to tackle
cyber-attacks in the AML field (e.g., [125, 126, 127] ). As a
future direction, the creation of a holistic benchmark evalua-
tion framework for AML defenses is envisaged. This frame-
work will facilitate researchers upon assessing their solutions
under the same settings reducing common evaluation problems,
such as inappropriate evaluation metrics and limited informa-
tion about datasets.
Acknowledgment
This research was partially funded by the European Com-
mission (Horizon 2020 Programme), under the projects SEC-
ONDO (Grant Agreement no. 823997), INCOGNITO (Grant
Agreement no. 824015), and ERATOSTHENES (Grant Agree-
ment no. 101020416).
References
[1] A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. I. Rubinstein, J. Tygar, Adversarial machine
learning, Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[2] S. Huang, J. Yang, S. Fong, Q. Zhao, Artificial intelligence in cancer
diagnosis and prognosis: Opportunities and challenges, Cancer letters
471 (2020) 61–71.
[3] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, R. Sears, A. D. Joseph, J. D. Tygar, Can machine
learning be secure?, in: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM Symposium on
Information, computer and communications security, 2006, pp. 16–25.
[4] B. Biggio, I. Corona, D. Maiorca, B. Nelson, N. ˇSrndi ´c, P. Laskov, G. Gi-
acinto, F. Roli, Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time, in:
Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discov-
ery in databases, Springer, 2013, pp. 387–402.
[5] N. Akhtar, A. Mian, Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in
computer vision: A survey, Ieee Access 6 (2018) 14410–14430.
[6] E. Anthi, L. Williams, A. Javed, P. Burnap, Hardening machine learning
denial of service (dos) defences against adversarial attacks in iot smart
home networks, computers & security 108 (2021) 102352.
[7] S. Kaviani, K. J. Han, I. Sohn, Adversarial attacks and defenses on ai in
medical imaging informatics: A survey, Expert Systems with Applica-
tions (2022) 116815.
[8] X. Wang, J. Li, X. Kuang, Y .-a. Tan, J. Li, The security of machine
learning in an adversarial setting: A survey, Journal of Parallel and Dis-
tributed Computing 130 (2019) 12–23.
[9] S. Qiu, Q. Liu, S. Zhou, C. Wu, Review of artificial intelligence adver-
sarial attack and defense technologies, Applied Sciences 9 (5) (2019)
909.
[10] N. Pitropakis, E. Panaousis, T. Giannetsos, E. Anastasiadis, G. Loukas,
A taxonomy and survey of attacks against machine learning, Computer
Science Review 34 (2019) 100199.
[11] C. J. Hern ´andez-Castro, Z. Liu, A. Serban, I. Tsingenopoulos,
W. Joosen, Adversarial machine learning, in: Security and Artificial In-
telligence, Springer, 2022, pp. 287–312.
[12] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, V . Varadharajan, I. A. Hameed, S. Chen, D. Liu,
J. Li, Performance comparison and current challenges of using machine
learning techniques in cybersecurity, Energies 13 (10) (2020) 2509.
[13] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, V . Varadharajan, I. A. Hameed, M. Xu, A survey on
machine learning techniques for cyber security in the last decade, IEEE
Access 8 (2020) 222310–222354.
[14] G. Apruzzese, H. S. Anderson, S. Dambra, D. Freeman, F. Pierazzi,
K. Roundy, “real attackers don’t compute gradients”: Bridging the gap
between adversarial ml research and practice, in: 2023 IEEE Conference
on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML), IEEE, 2023,
pp. 339–364.
[15] N. Martins, J. M. Cruz, T. Cruz, P. H. Abreu, Adversarial machine learn-
ing applied to intrusion and malware scenarios: a systematic review,
IEEE Access 8 (2020) 35403–35419.[16] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y . Elovici, L. Rokach, Adversarial machine
learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security domain,
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54 (5) (2021) 1–36.
[17] A. Qayyum, M. Usama, J. Qadir, A. Al-Fuqaha, Securing connected &
autonomous vehicles: Challenges posed by adversarial machine learning
and the way forward, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (2)
(2020) 998–1026.
[18] T. Bai, J. Luo, J. Zhao, B. Wen, Q. Wang, Recent advances in adversar-
ial training for adversarial robustness, arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01356
(2021).
[19] G. R. Machado, E. Silva, R. R. Goldschmidt, Adversarial machine learn-
ing in image classification: A survey toward the defender’s perspective,
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 55 (1) (2021) 1–38.
[20] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfel-
low, R. Fergus, Intriguing properties of neural networks, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6199 (2013).
[21] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. B. Celik, A. Swami,
Practical black-box attacks against machine learning, in: Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM on Asia conference on computer and communications
security, 2017, pp. 506–519.
[22] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, P. Laskov, Support vector machines under adver-
sarial label noise, in: Asian conference on machine learning, PMLR,
2011, pp. 97–112.
[23] M. Jagielski, A. Oprea, B. Biggio, C. Liu, C. Nita-Rotaru, B. Li, Manip-
ulating machine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures for
regression learning, in: 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP), IEEE, 2018, pp. 19–35.
[24] B. Flowers, R. M. Buehrer, W. C. Headley, Evaluating adversarial eva-
sion attacks in the context of wireless communications, IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Forensics and Security 15 (2019) 1102–1113.
[25] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Rhode, P. Burnap, A. Wedgbury, Adversarial
attacks on machine learning cybersecurity defences in industrial control
systems, Journal of Information Security and Applications 58 (2021)
102717.
[26] A. M. Tripathi, A. Mishra, Adv-esc: Adversarial attack datasets for
an environmental sound classification, Applied Acoustics 185 (2022)
108437.
[27] W. E. Zhang, Q. Z. Sheng, A. Alhazmi, C. Li, Adversarial attacks
on deep-learning models in natural language processing: A survey,
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 11 (3)
(2020) 1–41.
[28] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, C. Szegedy, Explaining and harnessing ad-
versarial examples, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 (2014).
[29] R. Abou Khamis, M. O. Shafiq, A. Matrawy, Investigating resistance of
deep learning-based ids against adversaries using min-max optimization,
in: ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[30] P. Xu, B. Kolosnjaji, C. Eckert, A. Zarras, Manis: Evading malware
detection system on graph structure, in: Proceedings of the 35th An-
nual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC ’20, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2020, p. 1688–1695.
doi:10.1145 /3341105.3373859.
[31] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, A. Swami,
The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings, in: 2016 IEEE
European symposium on security and privacy (EuroS&P), IEEE, 2016,
pp. 372–387.
[32] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, P. Frossard, Deepfool: a simple and
accurate method to fool deep neural networks, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp.
2574–2582.
[33] A. Kurakin, I. J. Goodfellow, S. Bengio, Adversarial examples in the
physical world, in: Artificial intelligence safety and security, Chapman
and Hall /CRC, 2018, pp. 99–112.
[34] M. M. Rashid, J. Kamruzzaman, M. M. Hassan, T. Imam, S. Wibowo,
S. Gordon, G. Fortino, Adversarial training for deep learning-based cy-
berattack detection in iot-based smart city applications, Computers &
Security (2022) 102783.
[35] I. Debicha, T. Debatty, J.-M. Dricot, W. Mees, Adversarial training
for deep learning-based intrusion detection systems, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.09852 (2021).
[36] R. Huang, B. Xu, D. Schuurmans, C. Szepesv ´ari, Learning with a strong
20

==== Page 21 ====
adversary, arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.03034 (2015).
[37] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, A. Vladu, Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06083 (2017).
[38] S. Sankaranarayanan, A. Jain, R. Chellappa, S. N. Lim, Regularizing
deep networks using e fficient layerwise adversarial training, in: Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, V ol. 32,
2018, pp. 4008–4015.
[39] A. Shafahi, M. Najibi, M. A. Ghiasi, Z. Xu, J. Dickerson, C. Studer, L. S.
Davis, G. Taylor, T. Goldstein, Adversarial training for free!, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[40] C. Xie, Y . Wu, L. v. d. Maaten, A. L. Yuille, K. He, Feature denoising
for improving adversarial robustness, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019,
pp. 501–509.
[41] F. Tram `er, A. Kurakin, N. Papernot, I. Goodfellow, D. Boneh, P. Mc-
Daniel, Ensemble adversarial training: Attacks and defenses, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.07204 (2017).
[42] S. Lal, S. U. Rehman, J. H. Shah, T. Meraj, H. T. Rauf, R. Dama ˇseviˇcius,
M. A. Mohammed, K. H. Abdulkareem, Adversarial attack and defence
through adversarial training and feature fusion for diabetic retinopathy
recognition, Sensors 21 (11) (2021) 3922.
[43] F. Ding, K. Yu, Z. Gu, X. Li, Y . Shi, Perceptual enhancement for au-
tonomous vehicles: restoring visually degraded images for context pre-
diction via adversarial training, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (2021).
[44] H. Xu, X. Liu, Y . Li, A. Jain, J. Tang, To be robust or to be fair: Towards
fairness in adversarial training, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 11492–11501.
[45] H. Zhang, Y . Yu, J. Jiao, E. Xing, L. El Ghaoui, M. Jordan, Theoretically
principled trade-o ffbetween robustness and accuracy, in: International
conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 7472–7482.
[46] R. Abou Khamis, A. Matrawy, Evaluation of adversarial training on dif-
ferent types of neural networks in deep learning-based idss, in: 2020
international symposium on networks, computers and communications
(ISNCC), IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[47] X. Fu, N. Zhou, L. Jiao, H. Li, J. Zhang, The robust deep learning–
based schemes for intrusion detection in internet of things environments,
Annals of Telecommunications 76 (5) (2021) 273–285.
[48] S. Grierson, C. Thomson, P. Papadopoulos, B. Buchanan, Min-max
training: Adversarially robust learning models for network intrusion de-
tection systems, in: 2021 14th International Conference on Security of
Information and Networks (SIN), V ol. 1, IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[49] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Marchetti, A. Venturi, M. Colajanni,
Deep reinforcement adversarial learning against botnet evasion attacks,
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 17 (4) (2020)
1975–1987.
[50] J. Vitorino, N. Oliveira, I. Prac ¸a, Adaptative perturbation patterns: Re-
alistic adversarial learning for robust intrusion detection, Future Internet
14 (4) (2022) 108.
[51] T. Miyato, A. M. Dai, I. Goodfellow, Adversarial training methods
for semi-supervised text classification, arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07725
(2016).
[52] S. Kitada, H. Iyatomi, Attention meets perturbations: Robust and in-
terpretable attention with adversarial training, IEEE Access 9 (2021)
92974–92985.
[53] G. Bekoulis, J. Deleu, T. Demeester, C. Develder, Adversarial train-
ing for multi-context joint entity and relation extraction, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.06876 (2018).
[54] C. Zhu, Y . Cheng, Z. Gan, S. Sun, T. Goldstein, J. Liu, Freelb: Enhanced
adversarial training for natural language understanding, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11764 (2019).
[55] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[56] X. Liu, H. Cheng, P. He, W. Chen, Y . Wang, H. Poon, J. Gao, Ad-
versarial training for large neural language models, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.08994 (2020).
[57] J. Y . Yoo, Y . Qi, Towards improving adversarial training of nlp models,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00544 (2021).
[58] D. Jin, Z. Jin, J. T. Zhou, P. Szolovits, Is bert really robust? natu-ral language attack on text classification and entailment, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11932 2 (2019).
[59] S. Garg, G. Ramakrishnan, Bae: Bert-based adversarial examples for
text classification, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01970 (2020).
[60] Y . Zang, F. Qi, C. Yang, Z. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Liu, M. Sun, Word-
level textual adversarial attacking as combinatorial optimization, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.12196 (2019).
[61] S. Ren, Y . Deng, K. He, W. Che, Generating natural language adversarial
examples through probability weighted word saliency, in: Proceedings
of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguis-
tics, 2019, pp. 1085–1097.
[62] L. Pan, C.-W. Hang, A. Sil, S. Potdar, Improved text classification via
contrastive adversarial training, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, V ol. 36, 2022, pp. 11130–11138.
[63] M. Moradi, M. Samwald, Improving the robustness and accuracy of
biomedical language models through adversarial training, Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 132 (2022) 104114.
[64] M. Pal, A. Jati, R. Peri, C.-C. Hsu, W. AbdAlmageed, S. Narayanan,
Adversarial defense for deep speaker recognition using hybrid adversar-
ial training, in: ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2021, pp.
6164–6168.
[65] H. Zhang, J. Wang, Defense against adversarial attacks using feature
scattering-based adversarial training, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[66] S. Joshi, S. Kataria, Y . Shao, P. Zelasko, J. Villalba, S. Khudan-
pur, N. Dehak, Defense against adversarial attacks on hybrid speech
recognition using joint adversarial fine-tuning with denoiser (2022).
doi:10.48550 /ARXIV .2204.03851.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03851
[67] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, J. Dean, et al., Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network, arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 2 (7) (2015).
[68] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, A. Swami, Distillation as a
defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks, in:
2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), IEEE, 2016, pp.
582–597.
[69] M. Goldblum, L. Fowl, S. Feizi, T. Goldstein, Adversarially robust dis-
tillation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, V ol. 34, 2020, pp. 3996–4003.
[70] M. Soll, T. Hinz, S. Magg, S. Wermter, Evaluating defensive distilla-
tion for defending text processing neural networks against adversarial
examples, in: International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks,
Springer, 2019, pp. 685–696.
[71] S. Samanta, S. Mehta, Towards crafting text adversarial samples, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.02812 (2017).
[72] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Colajanni, M. Marchetti, Hardening
random forest cyber detectors against adversarial attacks, IEEE Trans-
actions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 4 (4) (2020)
427–439.
[73] L. Sidi, A. Nadler, A. Shabtai, Maskdga: An evasion attack against
dga classifiers and adversarial defenses, IEEE access 8 (2020) 161580–
161592.
[74] P. Bountakas, C. Xenakis, Helphed: Hybrid ensemble learning phish-
ing email detection, Journal of Network and Computer Applications 210
(2023) 103545.
[75] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Marchetti, V . G. Colacino, G. Russo,
Appcon: Mitigating evasion attacks to ml cyber detectors, Symmetry
12 (4) (2020) 653.
[76] H. Jiang, J. Lin, H. Kang, Fgmd: A robust detector against adversarial
attacks in the iot network, Future Generation Computer Systems 132
(2022) 194–210.
[77] S. Joshi, J. Villalba, P. ˙Zelasko, L. Moro-Vel ´azquez, N. Dehak, Study
of pre-processing defenses against adversarial attacks on state-of-the-art
speaker recognition systems, IEEE Transactions on Information Foren-
sics and Security 16 (2021) 4811–4826.
[78] P. Samangouei, M. Kabkab, R. Chellappa, Defense-gan: Protecting clas-
sifiers against adversarial attacks using generative models, International
Conference on Learning Representations (2018).
[79] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y . Elovici, L. Rokach, Defense meth-
ods against adversarial examples for recurrent neural networks, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.09963 (2019).
21

==== Page 22 ====
[80] W. Xu, D. Evans, Y . Qi, Feature squeezing: Detecting adversarial exam-
ples in deep neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01155 (2017).
[81] A. Demontis, M. Melis, B. Biggio, D. Maiorca, D. Arp, K. Rieck,
I. Corona, G. Giacinto, F. Roli, Yes, machine learning can be more se-
cure! a case study on android malware detection, IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing 16 (4) (2017) 711–724.
[82] M. Esmaeilpour, P. Cardinal, A. L. Koerich, A robust approach for secur-
ing audio classification against adversarial attacks, IEEE Transactions
on information forensics and security 15 (2019) 2147–2159.
[83] D. Han, Z. Wang, Y . Zhong, W. Chen, J. Yang, S. Lu, X. Shi, X. Yin,
Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of machine learning-
based network intrusion detectors, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications 39 (8) (2021) 2632–2647.
[84] S. Weerasinghe, T. Alpcan, S. M. Erfani, C. Leckie, Defending support
vector machines against data poisoning attacks, IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security 16 (2021) 2566–2578.
[85] S. Chen, M. Xue, L. Fan, S. Hao, L. Xu, H. Zhu, B. Li, Automated
poisoning attacks and defenses in malware detection systems: An ad-
versarial machine learning approach, computers & security 73 (2018)
326–344.
[86] F. Liao, M. Liang, Y . Dong, T. Pang, X. Hu, J. Zhu, Defense against
adversarial attacks using high-level representation guided denoiser, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 1778–1787.
[87] J. Jia, A. Salem, M. Backes, Y . Zhang, N. Z. Gong, Memguard: De-
fending against black-box membership inference attacks via adversarial
examples, in: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC conference on
computer and communications security, 2019, pp. 259–274.
[88] F. Zhang, P. P. Chan, B. Biggio, D. S. Yeung, F. Roli, Adversarial fea-
ture selection against evasion attacks, IEEE transactions on cybernetics
46 (3) (2015) 766–777.
[89] G. Apruzzese, V . Subrahmanian, Mitigating adversarial gray-box attacks
against phishing detectors, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Se-
cure Computing (2022).
[90] M. Pawlicki, M. Chora ´s, R. Kozik, Defending network intrusion de-
tection systems against adversarial evasion attacks, Future Generation
Computer Systems 110 (2020) 148–154.
[91] R. Taheri, R. Javidan, M. Shojafar, Z. Pooranian, A. Miri, M. Conti, On
defending against label flipping attacks on malware detection systems,
Neural Computing and Applications 32 (18) (2020) 14781–14800.
[92] Y . Zhao, J. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Wu, J. Teng, S. Yu, Pdgan: A novel poi-
soning defense method in federated learning using generative adversarial
network, in: International Conference on Algorithms and Architectures
for Parallel Processing, Springer, 2019, pp. 595–609.
[93] G. Tao, X. Chen, Y . Jia, Z. Zhong, S. Ma, X. Zhang, Firm: Detecting ad-
versarial audios by recursive filters with randomization, in: International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[94] Y . Qin, N. Carlini, G. Cottrell, I. Goodfellow, C. Ra ffel, Imperceptible,
robust, and targeted adversarial examples for automatic speech recog-
nition, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2019,
pp. 5231–5240.
[95] Z. Lin, H. Pfister, Z. Zhang, White-box adversarial defense via self-
supervised data estimation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06271 (2019).
[96] H. Wu, A. T. Liu, H.-y. Lee, Defense for black-box attacks
on anti-spoofing models by self-supervised learning, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.03214 (2020).
[97] J. Van Tuinen, A. Ranganath, G. Konjevod, M. Singhal, R. Marcia,
Novel adversarial defense techniques for white-box attacks, in: 2022
21st IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applica-
tions (ICMLA), IEEE, 2022, pp. 617–622.
[98] A. Paudice, L. Mu ˜noz-Gonz ´alez, A. Gyorgy, E. C. Lupu, Detection of
adversarial training examples in poisoning attacks through anomaly de-
tection, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03041 (2018).
[99] D. Meng, H. Chen, Magnet: a two-pronged defense against adversarial
examples, in: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on
computer and communications security, 2017, pp. 135–147.
[100] M. Esmaeilpour, P. Cardinal, A. L. Koerich, Detection of ad-
versarial attacks and characterization of adversarial subspace, in:
ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 3097–3101.
doi:10.1109 /ICASSP40776.2020.9052913.[101] H. Kwon, H. Yoon, K.-W. Park, Acoustic-decoy: Detection of adversar-
ial examples through audio modification on speech recognition system,
Neurocomputing 417 (2020) 357–370.
[102] Q. Zeng, J. Su, C. Fu, G. Kayas, L. Luo, X. Du, C. C. Tan, J. Wu, A mul-
tiversion programming inspired approach to detecting audio adversarial
examples, in: 2019 49th annual IEEE /IFIP international conference on
dependable systems and networks (DSN), IEEE, 2019, pp. 39–51.
[103] Y . Wang, J. Qin, W. Wang, E fficient approximate entity matching using
jaro-winkler distance, in: International Conference on Web Information
Systems Engineering, Springer, 2017, pp. 231–239.
[104] Z. Yang, B. Li, P.-Y . Chen, D. Song, Characterizing audio adversarial ex-
amples using temporal dependency, International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (2019).
[105] S. Hussain, P. Neekhara, S. Dubnov, J. McAuley, F. Koushanfar,
{WaveGuard}: Understanding and mitigating audio adversarial exam-
ples, in: 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21),
2021, pp. 2273–2290.
[106] S. Chen, N. Carlini, D. Wagner, Stateful detection of black-box adver-
sarial attacks, in: Proceedings of the 1st ACM Workshop on Security
and Privacy on Artificial Intelligence, 2020, pp. 30–39.
[107] H. Li, S. Shan, E. Wenger, J. Zhang, H. Zheng, B. Y . Zhao, Blacklight:
Scalable defense for neural networks against {Query-Based}{Black-Box}
attacks, in: 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22),
2022, pp. 2117–2134.
[108] F. Song, Y . Lei, S. Chen, L. Fan, Y . Liu, Advanced evasion attacks and
mitigations on practical ml-based phishing website classifiers, Interna-
tional Journal of Intelligent Systems 36 (9) (2021) 5210–5240.
[109] K. Grosse, P. Manoharan, N. Papernot, M. Backes, P. McDaniel,
On the (statistical) detection of adversarial examples, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.06280 (2017).
[110] N. Carlini, A. Athalye, N. Papernot, W. Brendel, J. Rauber, D. Tsipras,
I. Goodfellow, A. Madry, A. Kurakin, On evaluating adversarial robust-
ness, arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06705 (2019).
[111] M. Pintor, L. Demetrio, A. Sotgiu, A. Demontis, N. Carlini, B. Biggio,
F. Roli, Indicators of attack failure: Debugging and improving optimiza-
tion of adversarial examples, Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 35 (2022) 23063–23076.
[112] P. Bountakas, C. Ntantogian, C. Xenakis, Eknad: Exploit kits’ network
activity detection, Future Generation Computer Systems 134 (2022)
219–235.
[113] S. Chen, X. Huang, Z. He, C. Sun, Damagenet: a universal adversarial
dataset, arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07160 (2019).
[114] A. Ilyas, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, L. Engstrom, B. Tran, A. Madry, Ad-
versarial examples are not bugs, they are features, Advances in neural
information processing systems 32 (2019).
[115] A. Braunegg, A. Chakraborty, M. Krumdick, N. Lape, S. Leary,
K. Manville, E. Merkhofer, L. Strickhart, M. Walmer, Apricot: A dataset
of physical adversarial attacks on object detection, in: European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, Springer, 2020, pp. 35–50.
[116] D. Hendrycks, K. Zhao, S. Basart, J. Steinhardt, D. Song, Natural ad-
versarial examples, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 15262–15271.
[117] X. Liu, S. Singh, C. Cornelius, C. Busho, M. Tan, A. Paul, J. Martin,
Synthetic dataset generation for adversarial machine learning research,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10719 (2022).
[118] H. Ali, M. S. Khan, A. AlGhadhban, M. Alazmi, A. Alzamil, K. Al-
Utaibi, J. Qadir, All your fake detector are belong to us: Evaluating
adversarial robustness of fake-news detectors under black-box settings,
IEEE Access 9 (2021) 81678–81692.
[119] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, V . Varadharajan, A novel method for improving the
robustness of deep learning-based malware detectors against adversarial
attacks, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 116 (2022)
105461.
[120] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, S. Chen, D. Liu, Cyber threat detection using ma-
chine learning techniques: A performance evaluation perspective, in:
2020 international conference on cyber warfare and security (ICCWS),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[121] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, V . Varadharajan, A novel deep learning-based ap-
proach for malware detection, Engineering Applications of Artificial In-
telligence 122 (2023) 106030.
[122] W. Jiang, Z. He, J. Zhan, W. Pan, Attack-aware detection and defense
22

==== Page 23 ====
to resist adversarial examples, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 40 (10) (2020) 2194–2198.
[123] Y . Chen, S. Wang, W. Jiang, A. Cidon, S. Jana, Cost-aware robust tree
ensembles for security applications., in: USENIX Security Symposium,
2021, pp. 2291–2308.
[124] M. Al Fikri, F. A. Putra, Y . Suryanto, K. Ramli, Risk assessment using
nist sp 800-30 revision 1 and iso 27005 combination technique in profit-
based organization: Case study of zzz information system application in
abc agency, Procedia Computer Science 161 (2019) 1206–1215.
[125] M. Glazunov, A. Zarras, Do bayesian variational autoencoders know
what they don’t know?, in: Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, PMLR,
2022, pp. 718–727.
[126] P. Xu, C. Eckert, A. Zarras, Detecting and categorizing android mal-
ware with graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 36th An-
nual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC ’21, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2021, p. 409–412.
doi:10.1145 /3412841.3442080.
[127] A. J. Diaz-Honrubia, A. B. Herranz, L. P. Santamar ´ıa, E. M. Ruiz,
A. Rodr ´ıguez-Gonz ´alez, G. Gonzalez-Granadillo, R. Diaz, E. Panaousis,
C. Xenakis, A trusted platform module-based, pre-emptive and dynamic
asset discovery tool, Journal of Information Security and Applications
71 (2022) 103350.
23

