==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)Digital War (2020) 1:173–177 
https://doi.org/10.1057/s42984-020-00028-5
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon 
systems in order to understand their ethical challenges
Jean‑François Caron1,2
Accepted: 10 November 2020 / Published online: 24 November 2020 
© Springer Nature Limited 2020
Abstract
There is a lot of misunderstandings when it comes to what has been labelled as “autonomous killing robots”. Indeed, the 
robotization of weapons is a very complex issue and requires a clear conceptualization of these various types of weapons that 
are currently being used in the military. This article offers a typology of these weapon systems by distinguishing between 
semi-autonomous, automated and autonomous weapons. This necessary distinction allows for a better understanding of the 
ethical challenges associated with these systems.
Keywords Autonomous weapon systems · Automated weapon systems · Semi-autonomous weapon system · War · Military 
technologies · Just war theory
If we are to believe some reports, the world of warfare is 
about to be profoundly changed. Not only are we to witness 
the deployment of super soldiers on the battlefields (Caron 
2018), but autonomous killing robots will also replace 
human combatants. In light of the various Hollywood sce-
narios that have been made in the last decades, this prospect 
is for many of us very problematic. Indeed, how can we 
think objectively about this possibility when our minds are 
influenced by movies in which mankind is losing control 
over the machines, such as War Games or the Terminator  
franchise? Yet, ignoring that cultural legacy is essential if 
we are to assess the appropriateness of using these weapons 
systems and face the ethical questions connected with this 
new reality. The other challenge is to have a clear under -
standing of what we are talking about when we are talking 
about autonomous machines. There are a lot of confusion in 
this regard as a lot of people tend to assimilate technologies 
such as drones or the Israeli Iron Dome defense system in the 
same category as HAL in 2001: A Space Odyssey, namely a 
computer able to make decisions on its own. This is a serious 
mistake that needs to be overcome. If the latter system that came out of Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clark’s minds 
can be labelled as an autonomous system, the formers fall 
within two different categories, namely of semi-autonomous 
and or automated weapon systems.
This therefore begs the question of how we can we dif-
ferentiate between these types of weapons? It can be argued 
that one way of distinguishing between them is through the 
relationship humans have with the machines when they are 
performing tasks; in other words, whether there is a human 
in the loop as well as how their lethal capacities operate. 
In this perspective, some weapons’ autonomy is solely pre-
programmed, and their lethal capacities remain entirely the 
prerogative of a human operator. This is the case with many 
military technologies, such as drones that are able to fly 
autonomously to a certain location. However, they cannot 
fire their weapons without the direct intervention of a human 
being. We can think in this regard to the US Predator1 and 
Reaper drones whose non-lethal autonomy remain largely 
akin to that of a standard plane with its auto-pilot function. 
However, when it comes to firing their Hellfire missiles, 
these weapons cannot act on their own. They are fired by a 
human agent according to certain rules of engagement.
Secondly, we find automated weapon systems that pos-
sess a destructive and/or lethal capacity. The best exam-
ples in this regard are the Israeli Iron Dome and the South 
Korean SGR-A1. Contrary to semi-autonomous weapons, This text is an extract from Caron (2019).
 * Jean-François Caron 
 jean-francois.caron@nu.edu.kz
1 Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, Kazakhstan
2 University of Opole, Opole, Poland1 The Predator has been retired from active service by the US mili-
tary in early 2018.

==== Page 2 ====
174 J.-F. Caron 
these systems are able to fire at specific targets without the 
direct intervention of a human operator. Indeed, both sys-
tems are programmed to either identify incoming rockets 
and other projectiles or enemy combatants and to intercept 
or fire at them.2 We can also add to the list of examples 
the Sea Hunter, a prototype unmanned submarine track -
ing vessel developed by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) that will very soon join the US 
Naval fleet and has been described as “a highly autonomous 
unmanned ship that could revolutionize US maritime opera-
tions” and “a new vision of naval surface warfare” (Turner 
2018). Even if the initial goal was to use this type of vessel 
for surveillance purposes, the US Navy tested the Sea Hunter 
in August 2017 with an offensive anti-submarine payload 
system which means that the likelihood is high that it might 
be able to locate, track, and engage enemy submarines in 
the near future. If the Navy ever decides to move forward 
with this vessel, it would become very similar to the Iron 
Dome. Similar to the Israeli defense system, the vessel could 
potentially replace whole fleets of destroyers that were previ-
ously dedicated to anti-submarine warfare thanks to a pre-
programmed system that would only engage specific targets 
which would be detected because of their unique charac-
teristics, such as Yasen or Akula class Russian submarines 
whose dimensions and features are different from US Los 
Angeles class submarines.
Even though these systems are often referred to as being 
“autonomous” (see for instance Sparrow 2007,3 63), this 
designation is misleading. Indeed, the notion of autonomy 
refers clearly to features that are not associated with the pre-
viously discussed weapons systems, since an autonomous 
agent is someone who is first and foremost able to pose a 
deliberate and independent action that results from his own 
will. This means that breathing is not sufficient in itself to 
define a living creature as an autonomous agent, since this 
action is involuntary and a natural result of the parasympa-
thetic nervous system. The same logic would apply to the 
photosynthesis process of plants and other organisms. On the 
contrary, an autonomous action refers to an act that results 
from deliberate intent, which implies free will. Similarly, an 
individual who is under hypnosis or whose mental faculties 
are impaired cannot be considered an autonomous agent. This also implies that the intended action must result from 
a deliberative process that takes into account the difference 
between what is right and wrong. This faculty is at the core 
of how criminal responsibility is understood.4
In the case of military technologies, this understand-
ing of autonomy would refer to their capacity to determine 
on their own and without any form of human interference 
when and against whom to use lethal force. This is clearly 
not the case with these aforementioned weapons systems 
since their lethal potential lies either with humans (as in the 
case of drones) or through a pre-programmed algorithm. 
In order to talk about autonomous weapons systems, these 
technologies would need to possess the capacity to exercise 
moral judgment in their killing process. However, it must 
be noted that these weapons do not exist at the current time 
and considering the inherent difficulties associated with their 
potential development, it is impossible to say if scientists 
will ever be able to create them. On the contrary, it is clear 
that there is an intention to transform this fantasy into a 
reality. This conclusion is supported by the rhetoric of many 
senior military officers and by the tremendous investments 
that states have allocated in recent years for the research and 
development of these weapons. Indeed, we cannot ignore the 
fact that Russian military commanders have openly said that 
“a fully robotized unit will be created [in the near future], 
capable of independently conducting military operations”, 
while it has been stated by the US Department of Defense 
that the option of developing autonomous weapons able to 
determine on their own who should be targeted ought to be 
on the table (Scharre 2018, 6). Moreover, the Pentagon has 
recently announced that it will invest USD 18 billion in the 
research and development of such technologies.5
One of the main goals behind these investments is the 
capacity to develop autonomous platforms that are able to 
utilize artificial intelligence (AI) in order to operate on their 
own and to behave without a human in the loop. If it is ever 
realized, this innovation will open the door to the third revo-
lution in warfare, after the invention of gunpowder and the 
nuclear bomb. Coined for the first time in 1956 by John 
McCarthy at the British Dartmouth Summer Conference, 
AI refers to “the science of making machines do things that 
would require intelligence if done by men” (Minsky 1968, 
V). In order for AI to be used to its full potential in the mili-
tary domain, this advanced technology ought to be able to 
2 The autonomous nature of the SGR-A1 defence system has been 
a hotly debated topic in the last few years. Despite the fact that the 
spokesperson for Samsung Techwin—the company that developed 
the weapon—said in 2010 that the weapon “cannot automatically 
fire at detected foreign objects or figures”, it was however revealed 
3  years earlier that the technology could engage targets on its own 
without human intervention.
3 Noel Sharkey is one of the few who adequately sees and engages 
with the problem of labelling weapons such as drones as autonomous 
(Sharkey 2010, 376).4 This is why “someone who does not know the difference between 
right and wrong is not a moral agent and not appropriately censured 
for her behaviours. This is, of course, why we do not punish people 
with severe cognitive disabilities like a psychotic condition that inter -
feres with the ability to understand the moral character of her behav -
iour” (Einar Himma 2009, 23).
5 It is estimated that global spending on military robotics will reach 
around USD 7.5 billion a year in 2018.

==== Page 3 ====
175
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon systems in order to understand…
achieve three important features, namely: (1) to be able to 
analyze all possible outcomes and to suggest the best pos-
sible strategy and, if necessary, (2) to have intelligent robots 
coordinate a common action together, as well as (3) to dis-
play an analytical ability to show the same moral discern-
ment as human beings. Currently, AI is only able to fulfill 
the first two tasks.
While it has taken more time than originally expected for 
scientists to develop computers intelligent enough to beat 
chess and Go players,6 this was finally achieved in Febru-
ary 1996 when Deep Blue, an IBM supercomputer, was 
able to beat the world chess champion Gary Kasparov. As 
mentioned by Armin Krishnan, since then, “The days are 
now definitely gone when humans could seriously compete 
with computers in the chess domain” (Krishnan 2009, 47). 
We had to wait about twenty more years before a computer 
named AlphaGo was able to beat world champion Lee Sedol 
at the ancient Chinese game of Go, a game that requires 
far more intuition than chess. While Deep Blue relied on 
its capacity to evaluate millions of possible moves at the 
same time, AlphaGo relied for its part on its capacity for 
reinforcement learning and is therefore more akin to the 
decision-making process of humans. Indeed, AlphaGo’s 
abilities were progressive and based on numerous attempts 
and errors. The machine was programmed to play countless 
games against itself, which helped it to learn from its mis-
takes and to devise alternative strategies. This is how it was 
eventually able to develop unprecedented moves that had 
never before been used by Go players.
Like in many other domains, AI has not been limited to 
games and has been integrated in different parts of military 
computer systems and robots. One of the best examples is 
certainly DARPA’s Deep Green system that helps military 
commanders to have a better view of their strategies by gen-
erating their likely possible outcomes, thereby suggesting 
what might be the best course of action. In light of the accel-
erating stream of data and information that military com-
manders are now faced with, it is fairly easy to understand 
why this system has been developed, since human beings’ 
capacity to process this information is not increasing. Of 
course, this system keeps a human in the loop and its aim 
“is not to replace the human military commander with a 
machine, but to enable [him] to master the enormous com-
plexity of modern war”’ (Krishnan 2009, 54). Alongside the 
use of computers as decision support tools (which is inher -
ently non-problematic from the perspective of the morality 
of warfare), current technologies can also allow the armed 
forces to better coordinate their actions. Indeed, swarm systems are allowing machines to enjoy far more autonomy 
and have been developed with the aim of copying the swarm 
intelligence of ants and to use this in military technologies, 
especially for drones. There is indeed something fascinating 
about these insects. While they are vulnerable and unable 
to solve simple navigational puzzles when they are isolated 
from their peers, they show a strong collective intelligence 
by coordinating themselves in an effective manner without 
communicating with each other. This is why militaries have 
developed multi-agent systems that enable multiple robots to 
independently act in concert rather than hinder one another. 
This was done by the US military in 2003, when 120 small 
robots equipped with swarm intelligence flew in a coor -
dinated manner. Since then, the Chinese military has also 
shown its ability to use this technology effectively. One can 
easily understand the effectiveness of this system through 
a hockey analogy. While it is easy for two defensemen to 
coordinate themselves when a forward from the other team is 
trying to enter their territory with the puck, this task would 
be impossible in a situation where there were five forwards 
with five different pucks against five defensemen. It would, 
however, be possible for a swarm of robot defensemen to 
very quickly devise a way of successfully defending their 
territory by collectively deciding on a course of action. The 
US Navy has shown the usefulness of this system during a 
test in 2014. A number of small swarm boats were deployed 
near a high-value ship. The human controller’s task was 
simply to order the swarm boats to intercept a suspicious 
vessel by coordinating themselves autonomously. As stated 
by Paul Scharre:
Bob Brizzolara, who directed the Navy’s demonstra-
tion, called the swarming boas a ‘game changer’. It’s 
an often-overused term, but in this case, it’s not hyper -
bole—robotic boat swarms are highly valuable to the 
Navy as a potential way to guard against threats to its 
ships. In October 2000, the USS Cole was attacked by 
al-Qaida terrorists using a small explosive-laden boat 
while in port in Aden, Yemen. The blast killed seven-
teen sailors and cut a massive gash in the ship’s hull. 
Similar attacks continue to be a threat to US ships, not 
just from terrorists but also from Iran, which regularly 
uses small high-speed craft to harass US ships near the 
Straits of Hormuz. Robot boats could intercept suspi-
cious vessels further away, putting eyes (and poten-
tially weapons) on potentially hostile boats without 
putting sailors at risks (2018, 22).
These examples show that AI military technology has 
reached a point where machines can analyze situations, pro-
vide advice, and coordinate each other: features that have 
been labelled by Jacob Turner as a weak form of AI (2019, 
6). In order to have a stronger form of AI, the technology 
would have to encompass many of the attributes of human 6 It took almost 40 years before a computer was able to beat a chess 
Grand Master, while it was originally predicted that it would take 
10 years (Krishnan 2009, 47).

==== Page 4 ====
176 J.-F. Caron 
intelligence and resemble the kind of robots portrayed in 
popular culture—namely, systems that would allow robots to 
identify targets and to decide whether to fire at them. This is 
likely the aspect of AI that scares most people and raises the 
question as to whether it is possible to have robots develop 
their own moral code and to make them behave in a way that 
is ethically responsible. Consider the following scenario: a 
fully autonomous drone is flying about a city and positively 
identifies a well-known terrorist who has been involved—
and who is still involved—in terrorist acts against civilians. 
However, he is surrounded by young children and a group of 
elderly women. Should the robot fire a Hellfire missile at this 
high-value target? Such a decision comes with many fun-
damental moral questions and can either be solved through 
consequentialist (killing this man and innocent civilians in 
his vicinity will ultimately contribute to saving more lives) 
or deontological ethics (according to which it is immoral 
under any circumstances to justify the murder of civilians). 
The now famous example of the naked soldier evoked by 
Michael Walzer is another good example in this regard. He 
is asking us to imagine that “a soldier while on patrol or on 
sniper duty catches an enemy soldier unaware, holds him in 
his gunsight, easy to kill, and then must decide whether to 
shoot him or let the opportunity pass” (2006, 138–139). If 
killing this soldier is not problematic in the eyes of Walzer, 
he nonetheless agrees that for many of us, harming a sol-
dier who is taking a bath, calmly smoking a cigarette, or 
doing his business behind a bush would be morally repulsive 
(and he gives many examples in this regard in his book). 
This hesitation is the quintessential representation of moral 
agency and the true meaning of an autonomous subject.7 At 
the moment, the capacity to make such moral decision is not 
a feature of any weapon system.
As previously mentioned, AI is not sophisticated enough 
to allow machines to make the same moral judgments as 
human beings on a regular basis.8 In fact, as argued by Ken-
neth Einar Himma, “it is clear that an artificial agent would 
have to be a remarkably sophisticated piece of technology 
to be a moral agent” (2009, 28) and that this might very 
well never be achieved. It is, however, what researchers are 
currently trying to accomplish through a pre-programmed 
mode. More precisely, they are trying to determine ethi-
cal patterns in how human beings make moral decisions in numerous circumstances. For instance, how would drivers 
react if a child on a bike were to swerve in front of them 
while the only option to avoid him was to swerve onto a side-
walk where a group of elderly women were taking a walk? 
Who would they choose to hit? When we would finally be 
able to determine how morality functions, computer engi-
neers and technicians would then try to program these pat-
terns into an AI. If this task is ever achieved by scientists, 
these intelligent robots will simply be a more advanced form 
of a pre-programmed decision-making process, which still 
does not qualify as autonomy. Since there are currently no 
robots that are able to engage targets independently of a 
human’s will, there is thus no need at this point to entertain 
a conversation on these science fiction-esque weapons.
It is, of course, easy to have our attention diverted from 
the essence of the current debate by fears that are mainly 
supported by films such as Slaughterbots,9 a movie that was 
shown as a side event hosted by the Campaign to Stop Killer 
Robots in November 2017 as a propaganda tool to con-
vince people that autonomous weapons should be banned. 
Although controversial and conducive to debates, such films 
are an unfaithful representation of what these weapons are 
currently capable of. In this sense, it is not helpful to envis-
age that terminators and other technologies may end up turn-
ing against their creators and wipe out the entire human race.
The intelligence of weapons with a pre-programmed 
lethal capacity are not automatically more morally prob-
lematic because the life and death decision is no longer the 
sole prerogative of a human being. In fact, sticking solely to 
the notion of having or not having a human in the loop as a 
way of distinguishing the morality of these weapons is irrel-
evant in allowing us to determine the ethical permissibil-
ity of these weapons. Those who are honest will admit that 
while some of these weapon systems can be problematic, 
others have not led to the indiscriminate killing of count-
less civilians. This nuanced judgment is explained by the 
fact that other factors need to be considered—namely, their 
overall intelligence, the way they are used and programmed, 
as well as the identity of those who are targeted. It is from 
these various factors that these aforementioned technologies 
may be deemed to be or not to be ethically permissible. Let 
us take the example of the landmine that can be considered 
as a lethal weapon with pre-programmed autonomy, in the 
sense that it is designed to detonate on its own when pres-
sure is exerted on it. This weapon, however, suffers from a 
major flaw: it has no freedom when it comes to determining 
if it should explode depending on the nature of those who 
are stepping on it. This incapacity to decide whether or not 7 As Leveringhaus puts it correctly, “the act of programming negates 
any autonomy in a philosophical sense” (Leveringhaus 2016, 48).
8 As noted by Vincent Conitzer, a Professor of Computer Science at 
Duke University who is working on allowing AI to make moral judg-
ments, “Recently, there have been a number of steps towards such a 
system, and I think there have been a lot of surprising advances (…) 
but I think having something like a "true AI", one that’s really as flex-
ible, able to abstract, and do all these things that humans do so easily, 
I think we’re still quite far away from that” (Creighton 2016).9 This short film depicts a future in which autonomous drones are 
going berserk and turn themselves against US Senators and university 
students.

==== Page 5 ====
177
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon systems in order to understand…
to explode makes this type of autonomous weapon a rather 
indiscriminate and unintelligent one, which is why anti-
personal landmines have been banned following the 1997 
Ottawa Treaty. The German Falcon torpedo used during 
WWII is also another good example of a not-so-wise auton-
omous weapon. Equipped with an acoustic homing seeker, 
this type of torpedo did not travel in a straight line like tra-
ditional torpedoes. Using its acoustic sensors, it was able to 
detect ships and modify its trajectory accordingly. While it 
was a revolutionary weapon at the time that allowed for the 
more precise and deadly targeting of Allied merchant ships, 
it nonetheless faced a serious problem: two of the three 
U-boats equipped with this technology were sunk after their 
torpedoes detected the sound of the submarines’ propellers 
and circled back on them. On the other hand, defense sys-
tems like the Israeli Iron Dome, the German Nächstbereich -
schutzsystem MANTIS, or the South Korean SGR-A1 can 
be considered as more clever autonomous systems because 
of their capacity to only fire on specific targets. Indeed, these 
systems are programmed to either identify incoming rockets 
and other projectiles or enemy combatants, and to intercept 
or fire at them without any human intervention. In the case 
of the Iron Dome, the Israeli military has displayed numer -
ous batteries on strategical positions throughout the country 
that are constantly moved to fool the enemy and to adjust 
to new threats. When the radar system detects an incom-
ing missile, the sophisticated algorithm determines in a few 
seconds the type of projectile that has been fired and if it is 
aimed at populated civilian areas or military infrastructure. 
If this is the case, interception missiles are launched. Since 
the deployment of this system in 2011, more than a thousand 
of Hezbollah and Hamas’ rockets have been intercepted with 
an incredible success rate,10 which has of course changed the 
lives of Israeli citizens living close to Lebanon or the Gaza 
Strip (Human Rights Council 2015, 151). In return, this sys -
tem has not led to the destruction of commercial airliners or 
the death of innocent civilians.
At the end of the day, one of the main benefits of this 
conceptual clarifications is not only to defuse the fear that 
senseless computers can now decide to harm us based on 
their own free will. As it stands now, human beings are still 
either directly (in the case of drones) or indirectly involved 
(in the case of automated weapons in the way algorithms are 
developed) in the decision to kill in warfare. It also gives us a 
better idea of the specific ethical challenges associated with 
these respective weapon systems. One of most important being our capacity to determine the criminal responsibility 
of those responsible of a system malfunction or the unfor -
tunate death of innocent civilians. If attributing this respon-
sibility can be difficult in the case of an autonomous sys-
tem, it is easier to determine in the two other systems since 
their respective reaction depends either on the decision of a 
human being (in the case of drones) or of individuals who 
have determined how the automated reaction ought to work.
References
Caron, Jean-François. 2018. A Theory of the Super Soldier: The Moral-
ity of Capacity-Increasing Technologies in the Military. Manches-
ter: Manchester University Press.
Caron, Jean-François. 2019. The War of the Machines: Contempo-
rary Technologies and the Morality of Warfare, 2019. London: 
Routledge.
Creighton, Jolene. 2016. The Evolution of AI: Can Morality be Pro-
grammed?. Futurism, 1 July. https ://futur  ism.com/the-evolu tion-
of-ai-can-moral ity-be-progr  ammed /.
Einar Himma, Kenneth. 2009. Artificial Agency, Consciousness, and 
the Criteria for Moral Agency: What Properties Must an Artificial 
Agent have to be a Moral Agent? Ethics and Information Technol-
ogy 11 (1): 19–29.
Human Rights Council. 2015. Report of the detailed findings of the 
independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to 
Human Rights Council resolution S-21/1. 29th session.
Krishnan, Armin. 2009. Killer Robots: Legality and Ethicality of 
Autonomous Weapons. London: Ashgate.
Leveringhaus, Alex. 2016. Ethics and Autonomous Weapons. Oxford: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Minsky, Marvin. 1968. Semantic Information Processing. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
Scharre, Paul. 2018. Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the 
Future of War. New York, London: W.W. Norton & Company.
Sharkey, Noel. 2010. Saying No! To Lethal Autonomous Targeting. 
Journal of Military Ethics 9 (4): 369–383.
Sparrow, Robert. 2007. Killer Robots. Journal of Applied Philosophy  
24 (1): 62–77.
Turner, Jacob. 2019. Robot Rules. Regulating Artificial Intelligence. 
London: Palgrave MacMillan.
Turner, Julian. 2018. Sea Hunter: Inside the US Navy’s Autonomous 
Submarine Tracking Vessel. Naval Technology, 3 May. https ://
www.naval -techn ology  .com/featu res/sea-hunte r-insid e-us-navys  
-auton omous -subma rine-track ing-vesse l/.
Jean‑François Caron is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Political Science and at the Institute of Political Science and Adminis-
tration at the University of Opole.
10 During Operation Pillar of Defense, the system successfully inter -
cepted 84% of rockets and mortars fired against Israel, while the suc-
cess rate reached 91% during the first part.

