==== Page 1 ====
FOCUS
DenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network
for melanoma cancer detection
Nancy Girdhar1•Aparna Sinha2•Shivang Gupta2
Accepted: 16 June 2022 / Published online: 24 August 2022
/C211The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
Research in the ﬁeld of medicine and relevant studies evince that melanoma is one of the deadliest cancers. It deﬁnesprecisely that the condition develops due to uncontrolled growth of melanocytic cells. The current trends in any disease
detection revolve around the usage of two main categories of models; these are general machine learning models and deep
learning models. Further, the experimental analysis of melanoma has an additional requirement of visual records likedermatological scans or normal camera lens images. This further accentuates the need for a more accurate model for
melanoma detection. In this work, we aim to achieve the same, primarily by the extensive usage of neural networks. Our
objective is to propose a deep learning CNN framework-based model to improve the accuracy of melanoma detection bycustomizing the number of layers in the network architecture, activation functions applied, and the dimension of the input
array. Models like Resnet, DenseNet, Inception, and VGG have proved to yield appreciable accuracy in melanoma
detection. However, in most cases, the dataset was classiﬁed into malignant or benign classes only. The dataset used in ourresearch provides seven lesions; these are melanocytic nevi, melanoma, benign keratosis, basal cell carcinoma, actinic
keratoses, vascular lesions, anddermatoﬁbroma . Thus, through the HAM10000 dataset and various deep learning models,
we diversiﬁed the precision factors as well as input qualities. The obtained results are highly propitious and establish itscredibility.
Keywords Melanoma detection /C1ResNet /C1DenseNet /C1VGG /C1Lesions /C1HAM10000 /C1Deep learning /C1Machine learning
1 Introduction
Worldwide, cancers have been a considerable issue for
medical practitioners for decades. It has taken more lives
than any other disease (Baltruschat et al. 2019 ). As per thestats, about 9.5 million people died of cancer worldwide in
2018. An estimate of 18,06,590 new cases is expected in
the USA in 2020. This is further worsened by the expectednumber of deaths this year, that estimates to about 6,06,520
(Barnett et al. 2019 ). Cancers in their various forms have
been posing a constant threat to the lives of people. Onesuch prominent type is skin cancer also known as mela-
noma. According to reports, the average skin exposure to
UV radiation has increased by 53%, leading to a subse-quent increase in the risk of acquiring skin cancer. Mela-
noma itself constitutes about six percent of the total
reported cancer cases. Thus, due to the unfavorable factorscontributing to the rise in melanoma cases, the necessity
for timely prediction and detection of the disease also
increases.
With an ever-increasing rise in the number of melanoma
cases detected worldwide, the necessity to bring down this
number with the help of present technologies has furtherincreased (Sondermann et al. 2019 ). Melanoma has been
intriguing to researchers due to its striking similarity withCommunicated by Nancy Girdhar.
Aparna Sinha and Shivang Gupta have contributed equally.
The names are arranged alphabetically.
&Nancy Girdhar
nancy.gr1991@gmail.com
Aparna Sinha
aparna.sinha710@gmail.com
Shivang Gupta
gshivay01@gmail.com
1School of Computer Science Engineering and Technology,Bennett University, Greater Noida, UP, India
2Amity School of Engineering and Technology, AmityUniversity, Noida, UP, India
123Soft Computing (2023) 27:13285–13304
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-022-07406-z (0123456789().,-volV) (0123456789().,-volV)

==== Page 2 ====
many other skin ailments in terms of appearance (Guo et al.
2020 ). It thus becomes hard for someone to tell in advance
whether it is melanoma or not. Besides, the disease not
always develops suddenly; in many cases, it slowly growswith a backdrop of long family history or other major–
minor genetic reasons. In either of the cases, one is una-
ware of the possible risks in near future.
Machine learning (ML) is a remarkable ﬁeld in health-
care, its contribution to various ﬁelds of diagnosis and
detection holds high importance. Methods like decision
trees and artiﬁcial neural networks in cancer prediction
have been widely used for years (Kurvers et al.2015 ,2016 ); however, melanoma prediction is a relatively
younger ﬁeld of study. The family history and genetic
characteristics are two major factors that if used efﬁcientlycan lead to close predictions or detection of the disease.
These factors have been utilized for predicting cancer in
many research studies (Brinker et al. 2018b ). However,
melanoma holds one unique trait, which is its appearance.
Unlike other ailments like breast cancer, wherein the vis-
ible changes may not appear for a while; melanoma in thevery beginning shows visible changes such as a newly
appeared mole or spot, generally with irregular border
lines. In other cases, the skin color of a selected area maydrastically change, many such visible changes have been
recorded in melanoma patients at early stages itself. Hence,
images of possible cancerous moles can be processed toremove unwanted elements; it will thus serve as the
potential dataset for the problem statement (Tschandl et al.
2018 ).
Early research work in this ﬁeld lacks the ability to
handle variable dataset quality, that is the images used are
mostly professional, taken at correct angles and lighting;however, the same machine learning models when
deployed do not receive the same quality of dataset from
the users (Faujdar et al. 2021 ). The photos input in the
model are often taken by the user at insufﬁciently lit places,
with an inappropriate zoom and angle of inclination. The
problem can, however, be avoided by adopting data-drivenapproaches which mainly refer to the usage of abundant
training and testing data, hence making the model immune
to any changes in terms of quality of image (Ka ¨mmer et al.
2017 ; Kurvers et al. 2016 ; Mendonc ¸a et al. 2013 ; Richter
and Khoshgoftaar 2019 ). This shall not only ensure an
improved performance but also enhance the potential of themodel to get accepted at a relatively larger scale.
To overcome the aforesaid limitations of previous lit-
erature on melanoma detection and improve the detectionprocess, we have adopted the convolutional neural net-
works (CNN’s) which are known for their asset to greatly
reduce the dimensionality of a model (Maron et al. 2019 ).
Moreover, time-taken to tune the hyper-parameters, with-
out compromising on the overall quality, hence rendersthem highly efﬁcient in image-based prediction. In addition
to this, the efﬁcacy, power, and robust nature of the CNN’s
to predict and classify data from a huge dataset has further
garnered the attention of many researchers to choose andincorporate them in their studies that deal with classiﬁca-
tion based on image datasets. Sulthana et al. ( 2020 ) have
proposed a CNN-based optimization to improve the per-formance of image-based recommendation systems. The
authors stated that the most signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld
of image processing are owed to the rigorous application of
CNNs. The authors have justiﬁed the same by comparing
their model with other popular methods utilized to reducethe dimensionality such as principal component analysis
(PCA) and locality sensitive hashing and the CNNs provide
a strikingly better performance as compared to others.
These studies have further proven the superiority of
CNN’s in terms of performance based on various metrics
(such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1_score, and the areaunder a curve) in comparison with other state-of-the-art
supervised and unsupervised machine learning models like
k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine(SVM), etc. (Esteva et al. 2017 ; Haenssle et al. 2018 ;
Hekler et al. 2019b ;K a¨mmer et al. 2017 ). All the above-
stated reasons and coherence of our work with pastresearch literature show that CNN is the best choice and
thus supports our approach to selecting the CNN model.
Melanoma as per records has caused more deaths than
any other skin ailments. It is thus important to reiterate the
fact that most of these deaths are caused due to delays in
detection and subsequent diagnosis of the disease. Keeping
all the aforementioned factors in mind, our work aims to
propose a deep learning-based model to improve the
accuracy prediction of melanoma disease (Wolf et al.2015 ).
The main motivation of this work is to develop Dense-
Net-II to make the process of diagnosis of melanomaquicker and more efﬁcient which further reduces the
application of CT scans, X-Rays, and other medical pro-
cedures involved for the procedure, optimizing theresources required to cure and treat the number of patients
diagnosed (Tschandl et al. 2019a ). The study aims to save
the additional overheads of healthcare equipment andmethodologies by ﬁltering out the false positives earlier.
The key contribution of this work is summarized as
follows:
•The investigation of melanoma in this work speciﬁcally
includes a real-world benchmarked HAM10000 dataset
which offers exhaustive and varied types of images
based on their color and resolution.
•Development of an enhanced deep learning CNN model
based on DenseNet, with an ability to classify 7
different lesions.13286 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 3 ====
•Extensive evaluation and validation of the proposed
model with deep learning-based state-of-the-art algo-rithms like ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ; Szegedy et al.
2017 ), DenseNet (Li et al. 2020 ; Sun et al. 2020 ), VGG-
16 (Dutta et al. 2016 ; Mateen et al. 2019 ).
•The comprehensive dataset chosen also allows the
proposed model to be further tested on other available
datasets to validate its efﬁcacy in prediction and henceﬁnds its application in a broader domain of medical
treatment and prevention, which constructively resolves
the hindrances in integrity in the works of Cruz andWishart ( 2006 ) and Esteva et al. ( 2017 ).
•In coherence to the contribution made by Upadhyay and
Nagpal ( 2020 ), our work streamlines and simpliﬁes the
course of treatment which ought to be provided to an
individual suffering from melanoma.
The organization of this article is as follows: Sect. 2
briefs about the related work done in the ﬁeld, and Sect. 3
outlines the proposed model. Further, Sect. 4describes the
experimental setup and analysis of results. Section 5con-
cludes the work with some future research directions.
2 Related work
A plethora of work has already been done in cancerdetection using artiﬁcial intelligence with a considerable
amount of progress being by implementing both machine
learning and deep learning methodologies (Brinker et al.
2017a ,2018a ; Rajpurkar et al. 2017 ). However, there is
lesser literature available on melanoma detection. Previousresearch in this ﬁeld has provided abundant prudent
insights into the commonly adopted strategies while pro-
cessing data and constructing machine learning architec-tures (Karunakaran 2020 ). Most of the techniques can
broadly be categorized into (1) machine learning-based
models and (2) deep learning-based models.
2.1 Machine learning based state-of-the-art
Machine learning-based techniques comprise the most
rudimentary methods to classify a particular set of classes
associated with melanoma. Having a structured mathe-matical foundation amalgamated with statistical interpre-
tation, these methodologies are easier to implement and
comprehend and yet provide robust and promising results(Brinker et al. 2017b ,2018d ; Murphy 2012 ).
Early works based on ML-based cancer prediction
include the work of Cruz and Wishart ( 2006 ) who in their
work have conducted a detailed survey and were able to
identify the trends, the training data, susceptibility of pre-
dictive analysis, and the overall performance and relevanceof the various machine learning models which were being
developed at the time. The authors have broken down their
work into three case studies which correspond to the three
fundamental foci of cancer prognosis, i.e., (1) predictedcancer susceptibility, (2) survivability, and (3) recurrence,
which are based on the likelihood of developing a type of
cancer, the likelihood of redeveloping it and predicting theaverage life expectancy, rate of survival and the quality of
life, etc., respectively.
Ontiveros-Robles et al. ( 2021 ) have used a mixture of
techniques and concepts (Type-1 member functions, sta-
tistical quartiles, nature-inspired optimizations, etc.) togenerate a supervised fuzzy classiﬁer (Borlea et al. 2021 ).
The main advantage of this classiﬁer is the ease with which
it handles data uncertainties. Methods like random sam-pling, followed by estimating the core of uncertainty and
further determining the membership functions all, have
been used to cater to the noise and outliers, which have arelevant impact on the performance of the systems.
Vijayalakshmi ( 2019 ) proposed an automated system to
classify malignant and benign skin cancer/melanoma usinglesion images aiding in early diagnosis. The author’s work
is broadly architecture using three phases which included
augmentation of the collected images, designing the model,and ﬁnal classiﬁcation. The author has also addressed the
unclear/blur images fed as the dataset to the model by
removing hairs, shades, and glare from the image usingMATLAB ﬁlters as a part of pre-processing the dataset.
Another noteworthy application of artiﬁcial intelligence
in decision-based clinical studies is established by the workof Upadhyay and Nagpal ( 2020 ), where the authors have
used algorithms like support vector machines, etc., to
classify the state of sleep (awake, slow wave sleep, rapideye movement) of an individual. The effect of various
external parameters which induce heat stress is assessed
from the variation in values of wavelet frequency andpower. Through their research, the authors have simpliﬁed
the choice of drugs, that a patient suffering from chronic
stress disorder may prescribe.
To overcome the absence of well-structured data,
Richter and Khoshgoftaar ( 2019 ) proposed a distributed,
cloud-based big-data solution that enabled a structuredcollection of data points collected over various regions
which are used in a non-distributed machine learning
algorithm to develop a melanoma risk prediction model(Szegedy et al. 2017 ).
2.2 Deep learning based state-of-the-art
Owing to a reputation for being highly accurate and efﬁ-
cient in capturing the trends and the pattern of dataamounting to terabytes, deep learning (DL)-based models
have attracted a signiﬁcant amount of attention fromDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13287
123

==== Page 4 ====
researchers and are being applied in almost every ﬁeld in
today’s research (Ahn et al. 2018 ). Generous research has
been put into melanoma detection, which ﬁnds its basis in
various DL methods (Brinker et al. 2018c ; Chakraborty and
Mali 2020 ; Kassani and Kassani 2019 ). Having complex
networks and profuse learning nodes which they are
comprised of, deep learning techniques are noted to per-form much better than standard ML methods and have
emulated them to a large extent (Brinker et al.
2019a ,b,c,d; Maron et al. 2019 ).
The above-mentioned strengths of Deep learning models
are further veriﬁed when Cruz and Wishart ( 2006 ) used
these models to predict the chance of recurrence, where
features like patient’s age, tumor, size, and other prognostic
variables were taken along with clinical data and fed to anartiﬁcial neural network-based model, keeping the sample
to feature ratio to a suggested minimum of 5. The data was
further divided into training, monitoring, and testing sec-tions, and the model was also tested against the data of
patients from other institutions to assess the model’s
generality.
Guo et al. ( 2020 ) have proposed a 3D CNN and further
enhanced it using multiple attributes arranged in a pyra-
midal structure. The authors claim that CNN not onlyreduces the prolonged, error-prone, and arduous process of
manually marking the boundaries of the tumor, and also
automatically comprehends the features, and learns pat-terns to adapt to the optimal path required to achieve the
prediction. The pyramidal representation of the attributes
allows the CNN architecture to gain contextual insights byrunning simulations on hierarchical semantics. This study
further validates the credibility of CNN architectures in
such scenarios.
Similarly, Poma et al. ( 2020 ) proposed an optimization
over the conventional CNN to amplify its application in
image recognition and pattern classiﬁcation by reducingthe number of parameters to be trained.
Neethu et al. ( 2020 ) proposed an architecture based on a
convolutional neural network to recognize hand signs andgestures. The authors have extrapolated their work by
comparing their CNN model with other baseline models
like naı ¨ve bayes, support vector machine, markov model
and KNN, etc. This was also expected as these models
suffer from drawbacks such as dependency on a large
number of training samples and their highly complex nat-ure (Chakraborty and Mali 2020 ). Segmentation of the
region of Interest (area of the frame where the hand is
captured) and the ﬁngers leads the CNN model to boast thehighest accuracy of 96.2%.
Ka¨mmer et al. ( 2017 ) leveraged the information avail-
able from the periodic clinical records, to propose astreamlined approach to pre-treatment prognostication by
claiming deep learning convolutional neural networks(DCNN) to have the ability to identify and correlate
complex patterns to immune therapy (Hekler et al. 2019a ).
The authors have developed two DCNN classiﬁers namely
(1)segmentation classiﬁer and (2) responsive classiﬁer
which are used to classify whole slide images of the
metastatic melanoma tissue. The models are ﬁnally amal-
gamated with clinical demographic reports of the patient toproduce a more robust paradigm to increase accuracy.
The primary motivation to propose an enhanced version
of DenseNet termed DenseNet-II highly corresponds with
the work of Albu et al. ( 2019 ) where the authors have
elucidated upon the various applications and hurdles, arti-ﬁcial intelligence must conquer in the ﬁeld of medicine. A
high inclination to use artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) is
based on the following insights.
1. ANNs have excellence in modeling medical processes
reaping umpteen beneﬁts to the patient.
2. The inability of humans to detect all major/minor
medical conditions, as opposed to which ANN systems
provide highly accurate alarms and suggestions prepar-
ing the surgeon and patient accordingly.
3. Reduces time and burden on medical personnel to carry
out minute medical routines.
The authors have further mentioned the extensive
application of these networks in treatment, e.g., skin dis-
ease diagnosis, hepatitis-B prediction, stroke risk predic-tion, etc. With the development of DenseNet-II, we have
established another application of artiﬁcial neural networks
in a decision-based medical situation. Various technicaladvantages of neural networks (multi-threaded computa-
tion, noise handling, associative and functional learning,
etc.) mentioned by the authors in their work further justifyour motivation to develop a medical decision-making
model powered by artiﬁcial neural networks.
Owing to their potential to categorize and recognize
highly variable inputs, deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs) ﬁnd an extensive application in the process of
predicting and classifying the type of cancer from a largenumber of images of skin lesions which show high vari-
ability in the amount of grained texture visible (Tschandl
et al. 2019b ). This is further validated by the works of
Esteva et al. ( 2017 ), which overcomes the hurdle of
insufﬁcient data by a data-driven approach and considers adataset of 1,29,450 dermatological images, organized as a
tree-like taxonomy of 2032 diseases. The tree has three
root nodes where each node classiﬁes a lesion as benign,malignant, or non-neoplastic. Leaf nodes of the data rep-
resent the individual diseases and partitioning them into
ﬁne-grained classes takes advantage of the photographicvariability to make the model more robust.
Borlea et al. ( 2021 ) have attempted to solve the chal-
lenges of processing a large dataset, by optimizing the13288 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 5 ====
uniﬁed form algorithm. The authors have used fuzzy
c-means and k-means clustering techniques to obtain high-
quality clusters and handled the drawback (slow and poor
performance on large datasets) of these algorithms bysplitting the dataset into optimal smaller sections called
partitions. Taking inspiration from the concept of parallel
processing and horizontal scalability, the authors havepartitioned, mapped, and reduced the dataset into chunks,
which are individually trained. This technique, therefore,
makes the fuzzy c-means and k-means algorithm render a
high accuracy on large datasets.
Furthermore, recently, an exponential increase in the
count of active cases of Covid-19 and a growing need to
use CT scans and chest X-Rays, for a swift diagnosis of the
presence of virus in the lungs, inspired the authors Varela-Santos and Melin ( 2021 ) developed a feed-forward neural
network and CNN to automate the diagnosis scans which
would, in turn, decrease the cases diagnosed by thehealthcare system, and therefore promote the optimal uti-
lization of the test kits available. Taking the aid of the
open-source dataset by Cohen, the authors extracted fea-tures by localizing and quantifying pixels of similar
intensity values.
3 The proposed model: DenseNet-II
The proposed DenseNet-II model ﬁnds its basis on somedeep learning models like DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ),
VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ), InceptionV3 (Albatayneh
et al. 2020 ) and ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ). It extracts the
main features from every algorithm and amalgamates them
together to form a robust classiﬁer. The entire process ofmelanoma detection using various developed models can
be further classiﬁed into some sub-phases. These are pri-
marily enlisted as statistical analysis of the dataset, datapre-processing, splitting the dataset to retrieve training and
testing sets, creating models and training the dataset on the
same, and ﬁnally evaluating the performance of our modelson the test data.
The summary of the layers used to construct the Den-
seNet-II model is as follows:
I.Conv2d Layer : Using an appropriate ﬁlter of varying
kernel sizes, this layer produces a tensor output byconvoluting the layers on which it is applied.
II.Conv Maxpool 2d Layer : The main objective of this
layer is to condense the characteristics recognizedfrom the feature map, by taking the maximum value
from the feature matrix.
III. Flatten Layer : This layer compresses the features
and projects them into a column format to aid in
further processing.IV. Dense Layer : This is the most rudimentary layer
where an activation function is applied to a multitudeof stacked interconnected neural networks to produce
a nonlinear output.
The densenet function is an amalgamation of convolu-
tion and normalization along with ReLU functions
[Eq. ( 1)]. Normalization is done in batches by transferring
inputs having zero mean value and unit variance. There-after, ReLU function converts the negative values to zero.
Densenet FðÞ ¼ D
lF;f1;f2... ;fl/C01 ½/C138ðÞ ð 1Þ
Having been equipped with a brief of the layers con-
sidered while architecting the proposed architecture, wecan now summarise the proposed model architecture as
shown in Fig. 1a.
The model can be broadly visualized as a network of 3
chunks of layers which can further be subdivided into two
2D convolutional layers convoluted with a 3*3 convolution
matrix. These layers are ﬁnally reduced using a maxpool
ﬁlter after being mapped using a rectiﬁed linear unit. The
output of these layers acts as an input to a network of 4dense layers activated by a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU).
Finally, a softmax function is applied in the ﬁnal layer to
produce a multi-label classiﬁcation. The layer conﬁgura-tion of the proposed model is presented in Fig. 1b. Using
the ReduceLROnPlateau() function, the learning rate
hyperparameter is automatically increased or decreasedand the model is judged using ‘sparse categorical cross
entropy loss’ with ‘adam’ as the optimizer. The model’s
accuracy is also visualized for 10, 15, and 20 epochs.
The TDS (total dermoscopy) score can thus be analyzed
by Eq. ( 2):
A
score/C21:3 ðÞ þ Bscore/C20:1 ðÞ þ Cscore/C20:5 ðÞ
þDscore/C20:5 ðÞ ð 2Þ
where the ABCD method stands for asymmetry, border,
color, and diameter (Faujdar et al. 2021 ). Thereafter the
obtained value can be used for the identiﬁcation of the
lesion type.
4 Training and testing
The dataset has been segmented into training and testingsets, where the images have been randomly sampled in theratio of 80% training and 20% testing data, respectively.
After dividing the data, both the chunks are augmented
using Keras.
Before elaborating the steps of the proposed model, the
pre-processing step to make the dataset well suitable for the
model is mentioned as below:DenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13289
123

==== Page 6 ====
4.1 Data pre-processing
Data pre-processing is one of the most important steps to
ensure that the data becomes suitable for any of the deep
learning convolutional neural network architectures we aimto implement to test the performance of the same. The ﬁrstchallenge faced while the implementation of the proposed
model is that the images of the moles had no direct relation
to the lesion type in the dataset but were indirectly con-
nected by mapping each lesion type to a particular imageid. Therefore, the original data frame was augmented by
adding three additional columns to reduce this redundancy,
i.e., the cell type, the cell type index (an index that is usedto classify a particular cell type), and the path of the image
corresponding to that particular cell which solves this
problem. Since the models implemented are on the com-
mon notion that each image should correspond to a unique
type of lesion, the next task is to ﬁlter out and remove allthe lesions id’s which correspond to two or more duplicate
images in the dataset. We were able to achieve the same
through simple data frame manipulation. The data is thennormalized by taking the mean and standard deviation of
all the red, green and blue matrices extracted from the
image to reduce the complexity of the matrix, i.e., to makethe pixel’s cell value from a range of 0–255 to a value of 0–
1 and make the compilation smoother (Soille 2013 ). Fig-
ure2shows the mean of red, green, blue, and grey colors,
corresponding to each lesion type. On further careful
analysis, we observed a high imbalance in the dataset. The
‘Actinic Keratosis’ labeled class was observed to havemuch more samples than other lesion types. Since multi-
label classiﬁcation works on the assumption that each class
has nearly the same number of samples, such an imbalancewould result in an abruptly high value of F
1score for the
majority class and a much lower value for the remaining
classes. To solve the above-stated challenge, the followingmentioned steps were taken into consideration:
Step 1: First, we augment the dataset initially via the
‘‘ImageDataGenerator()’’ function present in the Keraslibrary. The aim is to rebalance the classes.
ImageDataGenerator() augments the number of training
images to balance the relative sum of images of eachlesion, to obtain this we have generated multiple copies of
lesion samples.
Step 2: Next, the generated data is then disseminated to
the required classes. This is done by implementing equal-
ization sampling.
Step 3: Finally, we implemented focal loss which is an
advanced version of cross-entropy loss, and penalized the
majority class causing an imbalance with a lower weight.
On observation of the visualized dataset, we can thus
conclude that the data is suitable to be applied to any
machine learning or deep learning-based model (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 1 aDenseNet-II model architecture, bDenseNet-II model
architecture13290 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 7 ====
5 Experimental setup and results
This section gives the details of the dataset used for
experimental analysis of the proposed model, evaluation
metrics adopted to check the efﬁcacy of the DenseNet-II
compared to other comparative models, and ﬁnally theanalysis of the experimental results with discussion.
5.1 Dataset
The dataset used for our research is the HAM10000 dataset
(Tschandl et al. 2018 ). The dataset provides a vast col-
lection of varied dermatological images. The dataset con-
tains about 10,000 records. The metadata comprised of
seven columns describing the lesion id, the image id,location of the mole, age and gender of the infected person,
the diagnosis type, and how the diagnosis was made. The
research work aims to develop an accurate computer-aidedmethod for the timely detection of melanoma. Hence, there
are two main dataset requirements for achieving the key
objective: (1) a sufﬁciently large dataset and (2) varying
image quality.
Both the requirements are fulﬁlled by the HAM10000
dataset. The motive behind using general quality images is
based on the idea of providing an easily accessible solutionto the detection problem. Further, the deployed version of
the models will receive inputs from devices ranging from
professional digital single lens reﬂex cameras to low-
quality inbuilt mobile camera lenses. The designed models
will thus be able to classify varied quality images ratherthan just professional ones.
Figure 4provides an overview of the quality and variety
of images in the dataset. Unlike the two-class scope, i.e.,malignant, and benign provided by other available mela-
noma datasets, the HAM10000 dataset provides a seven-
class classiﬁcation scope, that is, the data images belong to
Fig. 1 continuedDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13291
123

==== Page 8 ====
seven different classes, like melanocytic cells, carcinoma,
melanoma, etc. These are further abbreviated for dataanalysis as mentioned in Table 1.
5.2 Data analysis
The HAM10000 dataset used was analyzed in detail before
applying any models to it. The main reason behind this is toget an overview of the data and remove any scope for
future errors. The 10,015 images in the dataset were from
seven different lesions. The seven different classes used tolabel, or dataset as mentioned in Table 1are: ‘akiec’, ‘df’,
‘bkl’, ‘mel’, ‘nv’, ‘vasc’, ‘bcc’. On plotting a simple bar
plot of the data, we observed a clear bias for the ‘akiec’class. Figure 5shows the bar plot indicating the general
bias of data towards melanocytic cells. The high data
imbalance is not appreciated for the application of anymachine learning model since it would in turn lead to
highly biased results.
On further exploration of the dataset, striking observa-
tions found indicate that men above the age of 50 are more
likely to acquire melanoma as compared to women of thesame age set or men and women of age less than 50.
Figure 6visualizes the statistical age and gender-wise
distribution of the data. The graph accentuates the fact thatat certain age points, men are almost twice more vulnerable
to acquiring melanoma. Since the key objective is to detect
melanoma through our models and subsequently comparetheir accuracy, the facts obtained by data analysis are of
great importance since it directly affects the probability of
an input image belonging to a certain class. The consis-tency and integrity of the dataset were hence proved as the
statistical ﬁndings matched with the factual ﬁndings veri-
ﬁed on the internet. The analysis phase also aids us with the
Fig. 2 Mean color value plot associated with various lesion types before pre-processing13292 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 9 ====
possibility of any future errors or the presence of negative
factors such as data bias.
The objective of classifying the dataset into benign and
malign cases can be achieved by considering the parame-ters or features of the dataset as described in Table 2.
5.3 Evaluation metrics
Taking inspiration from most of the work which has
already been done in the past, the model’s performance is
evaluated using a confusion matrix, which is most suit-
able for classiﬁcation and accuracy computations. The lossof training and validation of the data while training is also
visualized for different epoch values to get a better overall
picture of how the model has performed. A heatmap of theconfusion matrix is further plotted to justify the perfor-
mance of the model in the testing phase.
Following are the evaluation metrics we have incorpo-
rated to validate the proposed model:
•Accuracy: Accuracy is deﬁned as the total number of
predictions that are correctly classiﬁed/predicted to the
total number of the input sample. Accuracy works well
in cases when we have a balanced distribution amongthe classes/labels which have to be classiﬁed.
Accuracy ¼
TP
TPþFPþTNþFNð3Þ
•Precision: Precision refers to the ratio of those data
points which are predicted as positive to those data
points which turned out to be positive. Precision is
indirectly proportional to the false positive rate.Precision ¼TP
TPþFPð4Þ
•Recall: Also known as Sensitivity, recall is the capa-
bility of the classiﬁcation model, to give a positiveprediction for those data points which have a positive
value.
Recall ¼TP
TPþFNð5Þ
•where TP denotes true positives that refer to those
values of the predicted set, which have been classiﬁedas positive by the model trained and have a positive
value. TN denotes true negatives that refer to those
values of the predicted set, which have been classiﬁedas negative by the model trained and have a negative
value. FP denotes false positive, also known as the
Type-1 Error, that refers to those values of the predictedset which have been classiﬁed as positive by the model
trained but have a negative value. FN denotes false
negative, also known as the Type-2 Error, that refers tothose values of the predicted set which have been
classiﬁed as negative by the model trained, but have a
positive value.
•F1-score: The F1-score allows us to capture and
consider the nature of both precision and recall of our
classiﬁcation model, by taking the harmonic mean ofthe two. Since the precision and recall metrics are
combined in the F1-score, the increase or decrease in
this metric is always uncertain as to which internalmetric out of precision and recall is being maximized/
minimized. Hence, it works best in combination with
Fig. 3 Post-processing plot
indicating the substantialdecrease in data bias and
increase in the balance of dataDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13293
123

==== Page 10 ====
other metrics such as accuracy, receiver operating
characteristic (ROC), the area under the curve (AUC),
etc.F1score ¼2/C3Precision /C3Recall ðÞ
Precision þRecallð6Þ
5.4 Comparative analysis with existing models
In this section, we will investigate the comparative per-
formance of the proposed model with the existing schemes
based on the HAM10000 dataset and metrics. The perfor-
mance of our proposed models has been compared with the
following baseline techniques (Smys et al. 2020 ):
•VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ) proposed by Mateen et al.
(2019 ), the VGG-16 model boasts a network of 16–19
layers of 3*3 convolution layers which are continuouslyreduced in size using the max pool ﬁlter. The outputs of
the smaller networks are fed as input weights of the
large, deeper networks, ﬁnally applied with a softmax
Fig. 4 Sample of the HAM10000 dataset
Table 1 Lesion names and id
Term Abbreviation
Melanocytic nevi nv
Melanoma melBenign keratosis-like lesions bklBasal cell carcinoma bccActinic keratoses akiecVascular lesions vasDermatoﬁbroma df13294 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 11 ====
function to produce an overall prediction (Dutta et al.
2016 ). However, the VGG-16/19 architecture is too
slow and assigns large weight values to the nodes/pa-
rameters used.•DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ) enhances the residual
application of ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) by connecting
all the densely connected (ensuring little to no redun-
dancy) previous layers to the layer in front of them
Fig. 5 Barplot of the lesion
classes indicating the dataimbalance and general bias
towards akiec class
Fig. 6 Number of melanoma cases based on gender and age
Table 2 Parameters analyzed
for classiﬁcation into benign
and malignParameter Description
Border The abrupt or continuous ending of a pattern is differentiated
Asymmetry Presence or absence of symmetry by detecting contour, structure, or colorColour Colors vary over 6 different shades present in the datasetDiameter Structures, networked or homogenous areas are analyzed to detect diameterDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13295
123

==== Page 12 ====
rather than only the layer before it. This ensures that the
layers share common knowledge and instead of addingthe residuals, the feature maps are concatenated to
enhance learning rates. Each transition layer is boosted
with normalization, convolution, and pooling. Themodel is augmented by using a bottleneck architecture
in convolution and compression.
•ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) To tackle the problem of
vanishing gradients with architectures containing many
dense layers, ResNet architecture was proposed (Khan
et al. 2019 ), which instead of learning the features from
all the stacked layers above it, divides the entire
architecture into micro units of CNN networks where
pooling, convolution, and activation are applied, andthese micro units amalgamate to form the macro unit
which ﬁnally produces the output. The main purpose of
the ResNet architecture is to formalize the residualfunction which determines the residual weight/value
that should be added to the output of the previous
layers, fed as the input of the following layers. Toachieve this residual function, the network uses an
identity mapping method to make the value of the
residual minimum, which in turn would suggest opti-mally mapped features by the layers in the architecture.
•Inception V3 (Albatayneh et al. 2020 ) architecture
bases its performance and popularity on computing 1*1,3*3, and 5*5 convolution in the micro-network and acts
as a multi-level feature extractor, which is then fed as
input to the proceeding layers. Many symmetric andasymmetric networks powered by max pooling, convo-
lution, dropouts, concats are further strengthened by
batch normalization and the loss is calculated using thesoftmax function. The smaller size of this architecture
(96 MB) as compared to ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) and
VGG (Mateen et al. 2019 ) gives this architecture an
added advantage.
5.5 Experimental results
Our analysis of the work done so far in determining skincancer highly suggested that deep learning conventional
neural networks performed much better and provided much
more promising values of the performance metrics used.We base our research mainly on the implementation of
various types of pre-trained deep learning convolutional
neural networks which have been already trained to clas-sify images on 1000 different categories. We have trained
and tested the HAM10000 dataset on ResNet (Khan et al.
2019 ), DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ), InceptionV3 (Alba-
tayneh et al. 2020 ), VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ), and a
standard CNN model, to compare the performance of the
dataset on different robust CNN architectures. 2Dconvolutional layers have been used in one of the imple-
mented models and are the most basic implementation of
CNNs used in our work, where data has been ﬁltered by 16,
32, and 64 ﬁlters, respectively, in the layers. Differentkernels are used for pooling and convolution and the result
is wrapped with a softmax function.
All the convolutional models implemented were able to
yield better accuracy as compared to normal machine
learning algorithms implemented in research to date.
Through our implementation, we found that for the given
HAM10000 dataset, the DenseNet-II model outperformed
all other models with an accuracy of 96.272%. Figure 7
shows predicted versus actual values in the grid for a set of
nine images. Table 3shows the comparative analysis of
different models based on their accuracy. The accuracyobtained concerning the models, clearly indicates that
while the DenseNet-II model has performed the best, the
combined model of ResNet and DenseNet has also per-formed well with an accuracy of 92%. While ResNet (Khan
et al. 2019 ), DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ) and VGG-16
(Mateen et al. 2019 ) yielded an accuracy of 86.90%,
87.30% and 75.27%, respectively. It is noteworthy that our
model is trained on 20 epochs as there was no signiﬁcant
improvement in the value of accuracy.
When trained on 15 epochs, the DenseNet yielded
87.30% accuracy, while Resnet yielded an accuracy of
86.9%. It was observed that the accuracy of the proposedDenseNet-II model also varied slightly with the number of
epochs. Figure 8shows the accuracy and loss of the
training and validation phase of the model. The model gavean accuracy of 92.704% when trained with 10 epochs.
The confusion matrix obtained while analyzing the
results clearly indicates how well the proposed DenseNet-IImodel has performed on the dataset. Figure 9brieﬂy
summarizes the performance of the proposed model.
Figure 10shows the precision of various comparative
and proposed model Dense-II on 10 and 15 epochs,
respectively. The results evidently indicate that the Den-
seNet-II model outperforms all other models, giving thehighest accuracy (96%) while the VGG-16 gives the lowest
(75.09%).
Figure 11presents the recall measure exhibits a high
correlation with the precision values obtained on 15
epochs. DenseNet-II model shows the highest recall (96%)
performing better in comparison with all other models,while VGG-16 provides the least recall (73.5%). Moreover,
the results obtained by DenseNet-II on 10 epochs also,
show the highest recall value with 93.7% and the VGG-16shows the lowest value of 73.5%.
The F1-score, taken as the harmonic mean between the
precision and recall, and therefore should mathematicallyprove to express the same trend as highlighted by previous
metric results. This is justiﬁed by DenseNet-II indicating13296 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 13 ====
the highest value of F1-score (95.7%) and VGG-16 indi-
cating the lowest value of 74%. Similar results for F1-
Score are obtained on 10 epochs as well as shown in
Fig. 12.
The DensNet-II Model hence showcases accuracy of
93.8%, 95.7%, and 97.351% for 10, 15, and 20 epochs,
respectively. Thus, we may conclude that the above-statedmodel proves to be the best performing model compared
with the state-of-the-art for the given problem statement.
Fig. 7 Sample of predicted versus actual values indicated as ‘‘predicted lesion || actual lesion’’
Table 3 Comparative analysis based on accuracy when trained on 15
epochs
Model Accuracy (in %)
VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ) 75.27
DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ) 87.30
ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) 86.90
DenseNet-161 (Sun et al. 2020 ) 87.12
ResNet ?DenseNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) 92.00
DenseNet-II 96.27DenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13297
123

==== Page 14 ====
5.6 Statistical analysis and discussion of results
5.6.1 Statistical analysis of the results
To validate the results, statistical analysis of the obtained
results is performed based on Friedman testing bycomparing various state-of-the-art HAM10000 dataset. As
Friedman is a non-parametric statistical test that does not
require any assumption about the data distribution. More-
over, the ranking approach of Friedman statistics can pri-
oritize the compared algorithms by sorting and rankingthem based on their relative performance. Given Tdatasets(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8 Accuracy and loss plot of the DenseNet-II model at ( a) 10, ( b) 15 and ( c) 20 epochs, respectively13298 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 15 ====
andkmethods to be compared, the rank will be assigned on
a scale of 1 (best) to k(worst). The ﬁnal rank for each
method is decided by averaging the ranks over all the
datasets. In our case, since we have experimented on theHAM10000 dataset only, thus, averaging the ranks over the
datasets is not required. The signiﬁcance of the resultdepends upon the obtained pvalue test statistic. If the level
of signiﬁcance i.e. a= 0.05 ( pvalue lesser than 0.05), that
indicates the signiﬁcant difference in the compared meth-
ods, and the null hypothesis is rejected.
For our experimental setup, at different epochs value,
we have considered the evaluation metrics precision, recall,
Fig. 9 Confusion matrix on
proposed DenseNet-II model (at20 epochs)
(a)(b)
(c)
Fig. 10 Comparative analysis of DenseNet-II based on Precision at ( a) 10, ( b) 15 and ( c) 20 epochs, respectivelyDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13299
123

==== Page 16 ====
and F1_score for the Friedman test . Table 4shows the
ranking of algorithms using Friedman Testing for theHAM10000 dataset which clearly shows that the result is
not signiﬁcant at p\0.05 and hence, the null hypothesis
can be rejected and further concludes that there is a sig-niﬁcant difference in the performance of all the methods.
5.6.2 Discussion on resultsAmalgamating some features from Inception V3 architec-
ture, the proposed advanced model DenseNet-II improviseson the existing DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ) model by further
dividing each network of layers into two 2-dimensional
convolutional layers with 16 or 32 and 64 layers each thusadding both symmetric and asymmetric component to the
model, label smoothing and batch normalization thus
making it more robust to complex.We have compared our proposed model with state-of-
the-art deep learning convolutional neural networks such asInceptionV3 (Albatayneh et al. 2020 ), ResNet (Khan et al.
2019 ), DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ), and VGG-16 (Mateen
et al. 2019 ) which have already been trained to label 10,000
classes efﬁciently. Taking inspiration from most of the
work which has already been done in the past, the model’s
performance is evaluated using performance metrics likeaccuracy, precision, recall, and the F1 score. The loss of
training and validation of the data while training is also
visualized for varying epoch values to get a better overallpicture of how the model has performed. A heatmap of the
confusion matrix is further plotted to justify the perfor-
mance of the model in the testing phase.(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 11 Comparative analysis of DenseNet-II based on Recall at ( a) 10, ( b) 15 and ( c) 20 epochs, respectively13300 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 17 ====
6 Conclusion and future research scope
Melanoma has proven to be more deadly than what the
statistics show, the main reason being untimely detection
and subsequently delayed treatment. However, computer-
based methods pave the way to a better future. With thecurrent research trends on melanoma, perfectly precise
detection may not be possible yet, however, a detection
accurate to a considerable extent does give enough scopefor timely warning to patients. Our work certainly indicates
that for datasets like the HAM10000 dataset, convolutional
neural networks with a customized number of layers, in thiscase, 3 network layers which further consists of two layersof 2D convolutional layers which is applied with a 3*3
convolution outperform all other models. For future work,
we would like to consider merging multiple datasets and
training the algorithm to perform on a wider set of imageinputs. Moreover, we will focus on the improvement of
accuracy and efﬁciency of our models, by involving dif-
ferent datasets other than HAM10000 , thus making the
models more robust and ﬂexible. Another interesting area
could be incorporating illumination techniques that can
provide aid in the detection and classiﬁcation of unclearimages.(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 12 Comparative analysis of DenseNet-II based on F1-Score at ( a)1 0( b) and 15 ( c) 20 epochs, respectivelyDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13301
123

==== Page 18 ====
Funding The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support
were received during the preparation of this manuscript.
Data availability Enquiries about data availability should be directed
to the authors.
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human
participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
References
Ahn JM, Kim S, Ahn KS, Cho SH, Lee KB, Kim US (2018) A deep
learning model for the detection of both advanced and early
glaucoma using fundus photography. PLoS ONE
13(11):e0207982
Albatayneh O, Forslo ¨f L, Ksaibati K (2020) Image retraining using
TensorFlow implementation of the pretrained inception-v3
model for evaluating gravel road dust. J Infrastruct Syst
26(2):04020014
Albu A, Precup RE, Teban TA (2019) Results and challenges of
artiﬁcial neural networks used for decision-making and control
in medical applications. Facta Univ Ser Mech Eng
17(3):285–308Baltruschat IM, Nickisch H, Grass M, Knopp T, Saalbach A (2019)
Comparison of deep learning approaches for multi-label chestX-ray classiﬁcation. Sci Rep 9(1):1–10
Barnett ML, Boddupalli D, Nundy S, Bates DW (2019) Comparative
accuracy of diagnosis by collective intelligence of multiplephysicians vs individual physicians. JAMA Netw Open2(3):e190096–e190096
Borlea ID, Precup RE, Borlea AB, Iercan D (2021) A uniﬁed form of
fuzzy C-means and K-means algorithms and its partitionalimplementation. Knowl Based Syst 214:106731
Brinker TJ, Brieske CM, Schaefer CM, Buslaff F, Gatzka M, Petri
MP, Sondermann W, Schadendorf D, Stoffels I, Klode J (2017a)Photoaging mobile apps in school-based melanoma prevention:pilot study. J Med Int Re 19(9):e319
Brinker TJ, Schadendorf D, Klode J, Cosgarea I, Ro ¨sch A, Jansen P,
Stoffels I, Izar B (2017b) Photoaging mobile apps as a novelopportunity for melanoma prevention: pilot study. JMIRmHealth uHealth 5(7):e101
Brinker TJ, Faria BL, Gatzka M, de Faria OM, Heppt MV,
Kirchberger MC, Schadendorf D, Nakamura Y, Buslaff F,Lisboa OC, Oliveira AC, Bernardes-Souza B (2018a) A skin
cancer prevention photoageing intervention for secondary
schools in Brazil delivered by medical students: protocol for arandomised controlled trial. BMJ Open 8(3):e018299
Brinker TJ, Heckl M, Gatzka M, Heppt MV, Rodrigues HR,
Schneider S, Sondermann W, Silva CD, Kirchberger MC, Klode
J, Enk AH, Bernardes Souza B (2018b) A skin cancer preventionfacial-aging mobile app for secondary schools in Brazil:appearance-focused interventional study. JMIR mHealth uHealth
6(3):e60
Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Utikal JS, Grabe N, Schadendorf D, Klode J,
Berking C, Steeb T, Enk AH, Von Kalle C (2018c) Skin cancerTable 4 Ranking of models
using the Friedman Statistic
based on various metrics for
HAM10000 datasets# Epochs Algorithm Ranking
Precision Recall F1_score
10 VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 )3 1 2
DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 )2 1 3
ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 )3 1 2
DenseNet-161 (Sun et al. 2020 )21 3
ResNet ?DenseNet (Khan et al. 2019 )2 3 1
DenseNet-II 2 1 3pvalue 0.01353
15 VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 )3 1 2
DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 )3 1 2
ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 )3 1 2
DenseNet-161 (Sun et al. 2020 )31 2 1
ResNet ?DenseNet (Khan et al. 2019 )1 3 2
DenseNet-II 2.5 2.5 1pvalue 0.019691
20 VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 )1 3 2
DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 )1 3 2
ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 )1 3 2
DenseNet-161 (Sun et al. 2020 )31 2
ResNet ?DenseNet (Khan et al. 2019 )2 3 1
DenseNet-II 3 1 2pvalue 0.0151413302 N. Girdhar et al.
123

==== Page 19 ====
classiﬁcation using convolutional neural networks: systematic
review. J Med Int Res 20(10):e11936
Brinker TJ, Klode J, Esser S, Schadendorf D (2018d) Facial-aging
app availability in waiting rooms as a potential opportunity for
skin cancer prevention. JAMA Dermatol 154(9):1085–1086
Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Enk AH, Berking C, Haferkamp S, Hauschild
A, Weichenthal M, Klode J, Schadendorf D, Holland-Letz T,von Kalle C, Fro ¨hlinga S, Schilling B, Utikal JS (2019a) Deep
neural networks are superior to dermatologists in melanoma
image classiﬁcation. Eur J Cancer 119:11–17
Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Enk AH, Klode J, Hauschild A, Berking C,
Schilling B, Haferkamp S, Schadendorf D, Holland-Letz T,
Utikal JS, Schru ¨fer P (2019b) Deep learning outperformed 136
of 157 dermatologists in a head-to-head dermoscopic melanomaimage classiﬁcation task. Eur J Cancer 113:47–54
Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Enk AH, Klode J, Hauschild A, Berking C,
Schilling B, Haferkamp S, Schadendorf D, Fro ¨hling S, Utikal JS,
Schru ¨fer P (2019c) A convolutional neural network trained with
dermoscopic images performed on par with 145 dermatologists
in a clinical melanoma image classiﬁcation task. Eur J Cancer
111:148–154
Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Hauschild A, Berking C, Schilling B, Enk AH,
Haferkamp S, Karoglan A, von Kalle C, Weichenthal M, Sattler
E, Utikal JS (2019d) Comparing artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms
to 157 German dermatologists: the melanoma classiﬁcationbenchmark. Eur J Cancer 111:30–37
Chakraborty S, Mali K (2020) An overview of biomedical image
analysis from the deep learning perspective. In: Applications of
advanced machine intelligence in computer vision and objectrecognition: emerging research and opportunities, pp 197–218
Cruz JA, Wishart DS (2006) Applications of machine learning in
cancer prediction and prognosis. Cancer Inform 2:58–68
Dutta A, Gupta A, Zissermann A (2016) VGG image annotator (VIA)Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, Thrun S
(2017) Dermatologist-level classiﬁcation of skin cancer with
deep neural networks. Nature 542(7639):115–118
Faujdar N, Sinha A (2021) Disease detection platform using image
processing through OpenCV. In: Tyagi AK (ed) Computational
analysis and deep learning for medical care: principles, methods,
and applications. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 181–215
Guo F, Shi C, Xiaojie L, Wu X, Zhou J, Lv J (2020) Image
segmentation of nasopharyngeal carcinoma using 3D CNN with
long-range skip connection and multi-scale feature pyramid. Soft
Comput. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-04708-y
Haenssle HA, Fink C, Schneiderbauer R, Toberer F, Buhl T, Blum A,
Kalloo A, Ben Hadj Hassen A, Thomas L, Enk A, Uhlmann L,
Alt C, Arenbergerova M, Bakos R, Baltzer A, Bertlich I, BlumA, Bokor-Billmann T, Bowling J, Braghiroli N, Braun R, Buder-Bakhaya K, Buhl T, Cabo H, Cabrijan L, Cevic N, Classen A,
Deltgen D, Fink C, Georgieva I, Hakim-Meibodi LE, Hanner S,
Hartmann F, Hartmann J, Haus G, Hoxha E, Karls R, Koga H,Kreusch J, Lallas A, Majenka P, Marghoob A, Massone C,Mekokishvili L, Mestel D, Meyer V, Neuberger A, Nielsen K,
Oliviero M, Pampena R, Paoli J, Pawlik E, Rao B, Rendon A,
Russo T, Sadek A, Samhaber K, Schneiderbauer R, Schweizer A,Toberer F, Trennheuser L, Vlahova L, Wald A, Winkler J,
Wo¨lbing P, Zalaudek I (2018) Man against machine: diagnostic
performance of a deep learning convolutional neural network fordermoscopic melanoma recognition in comparison to 58 derma-tologists. Ann Oncol 29(8):1836–1842
Hekler A, Utikal JS, Enk AH, Berking C, Klode J, Schadendorf D,
Jansen P, Franklin C, Holland-Letz T, Krahl D, von Kalle C,Fro¨hling S, Brinker TJ (2019a) Pathologist-level classiﬁcation of
histopathological melanoma images with deep neural networks.
Eur J Cancer 115:79–83Hekler A, Utikal JS, Enk AH, Solass W, Schmitt M, Klode J,
Schadendorf D, Sondermann W, Franklin C, Bestvater F, Flaig
MJ (2019b) Deep learning outperformed 11 pathologists in theclassiﬁcation of histopathological melanoma images. Eur J
Cancer 118:91–96
Ka¨mmer JE, Hautz WE, Herzog SM, Kunina-Habenicht O, Kurvers
RH (2017) The potential of collective intelligence in emergencymedicine: pooling medical students’ independent decisions
improves diagnostic performance. Med Decis Mak
37(6):715–724
Karunakaran P (2020) Deep learning approach to DGA classiﬁcation
for effective cyber security. J Ubiquitous Comput Commun
Technol UCCT 2(04):203–213
Kassani SH, Kassani PH (2019) A comparative study of deep learning
architectures on melanoma detection. Tissue Cell 58:76–83
Khan RU, Zhang X, Kumar R (2019) Analysis of ResNet and
GoogleNet models for malware detection. J Comput Virol Hack
Tech 15(1):29–37
Kurvers RH, Krause J, Argenziano G, Zalaudek I, Wolf M (2015)
Detection accuracy of collective intelligence assessments for
skin cancer diagnosis. JAMA Dermatol 151(12):1346–1353
Kurvers RH, Herzog SM, Hertwig R, Krause J, Carney PA, Bogart A,
Argenziano G, Zalaudek I, Wolf M (2016) Boosting medical
diagnostics by pooling independent judgments. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 113(31):8777–8782
Li X, Shen X, Zhou Y, Wang X, Li TQ (2020) Classiﬁcation of breast
cancer histopathological images using interleaved DenseNet
with SENet (IDSNet). PLoS ONE 15(5):e0232127
Maron RC, Weichenthal M, Utikal JS, Hekler A, Berking C,
Hauschild A et al (2019) Systematic outperformance of 112
dermatologists in multiclass skin cancer image classiﬁcation by
convolutional neural networks. Eur J Cancer 119:57–65
Mateen M, Wen J, Song S, Huang Z (2019) Fundus image
classiﬁcation using VGG-19 architecture with PCA and SVD.
Symmetry 11(1):1
Mendonc
¸a T, Ferreira PM, Marques JS, Marcal AR, Rozeira J (2013)
PH 2-A dermoscopic image database for research and bench-marking. In: 2013 35th annual international conference of the
IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC).
IEEE, pp 5437–5440
Murphy KP (2012) Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective.
MIT Press, Cambridge
Neethu PS, Ramadass S, Sathish D (2020) An efﬁcient method for
human hand gesture detection and recognition using deeplearning convolutional neural networks. Soft Comput. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-04860-5
Ontiveros-Robles E, Castillo O, Melin P (2021) Towards asymmetric
uncertainty modeling in designing General Type-2 Fuzzyclassiﬁers for medical diagnosis. Expert Syst Appl 183:115370
Poma Y, Melin P, Gonza ´lez C, Martinez G (2020) Optimization of
convolutional neural networks using the fuzzy gravitationalsearch algorithm. J Autom Mob Robot Intell Syst 14:109–120.https://doi.org/10.14313/JAMRIS/1-2020/12
Rajpurkar P, Irvin J, Zhu K, Yang B, Mehta H, Duan T, Ding D,
Bagul A, Langlotz C, Shpanskaya K, Lungren MP Ng AY (2017)Chexnet: radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest X-rays
with deep learning. arXiv preprint http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.
05225
Richter AN, Khoshgoftaar TM (2019) Efﬁcient learning from big data
for cancer risk modeling: a case study with melanoma. Comput
Biol Med 110:29–39
Smys S, Chen JIZ, Shakya S (2020) Survey on neural network
architectures with deep learning. J Soft Comput Paradigm JSCP2(03):186–194
Soille P (2013) Morphological image analysis: principles and
applications. Springer, BerlinDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13303
123

==== Page 20 ====
Sondermann W, Utikal JS, Enk AH, Schadendorf D, Klode J,
Hauschild A, Weichenthal M, French LE, Berking C, Schilling
B, Haferkamp S, Fro ¨hlingj S, von Kallej C, Brinkerdj TJ (2019)
Prediction of melanoma evolution in melanocytic nevi via
artiﬁcial intelligence: a call for prospective data. Eur J Cancer
119:30–34
Sulthana A, Gupta M, Subramanian S, Mirza S (2020) Improvising
the performance of image-based recommendation system using
convolution neural networks and deep learning. Soft Comput.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-04803-0
Sun B, Ju Q, Sang Q (2020) Image dehazing algorithm based on FC-
DenseNet and WGAN. J Front Comput Sci Technol
14(8):1380–1388
Szegedy C, Ioffe S, Vanhoucke V, Alemi AA (2017) Inception-v4,
inception resnet and the impact of residual connections onlearning. In: Thirty-ﬁrst AAAI conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence
Tschandl P, Rosendahl C, Kittler H (2018) The HAM10000 dataset, a
large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of
common pigmented skin lesions. Sci Data 5(1):1–9
Tschandl P, Codella N, Akay BN, Argenziano G, Braun RP, Cabo H,
Gutman D, Halpern A, Helba B, Hofmann-Wellenhof R, LallasA, Lapins J, Longo C, Malvehy J, Marchetti MA, Marghoob A,
Menzies S, Oakley A, Paoli J, Puig S, Rinner C, Rosendahl C,
Scope A, Christoph Sinz H, Soyer P, Thomas L, Zalaudek I,Kittler H (2019a) Comparison of the accuracy of human readersversus machine-learning algorithms for pigmented skin lesion
classiﬁcation: an open, web-based, international, diagnostic
study. Lancet Oncol 20(7):938–947
Tschandl P, Rosendahl C, Akay BN, Argenziano G, Blum A, Braun
RP, Cabo H, Gourhant J-Y, Kreusch J, Lallas A, Lapins J,Marghoob A, Menzies S, Neuber NM, Paoli J, Rabinovitz HS,
Rinner C, Alon Scope H, Soyer P, Sinz C, Thomas L, Zalaudek
I, Kittler H (2019b) Expert-level diagnosis of nonpigmented skincancer by combined convolutional neural networks. JAMA
Dermatol 155(1):58
Upadhyay PK, Nagpal C (2020) Wavelet based performance analysis
of SVM and RBF kernel for classifying stress conditions of sleepEEG. Sci Technol 23(3):292–310
Varela-Santos S, Melin P (2021) A new approach for classifying
coronavirus COVID-19 based on its manifestation on chestX-rays using texture features and neural networks. Inform Sci545:403–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2020.09.041
Vijayalakshmi MM (2019) Melanoma skin cancer detection using
image processing and machine learning. Int J Trend Sci Res DevIJTSRD 3(4):780–784
Wolf M, Krause J, Carney PA, Bogart A, Kurvers RH (2015)
Collective intelligence meets medical decision-making: the
collective outperforms the best radiologist. PLoS ONE10(8):e0134269
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article
under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsh-
older(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version ofthis article is solely governed by the terms of such publishingagreement and applicable law.13304 N. Girdhar et al.
123

