==== Page 1 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
Available  online  at  www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
jo ur nal home  p  ag  e:  www.intl.elsevierhealth.com/journals/dema
Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial
intelligence in  dentistry
Jasmin Grischkea,∗, Lars  Johannsmeierb,  Lukas  Eicha,
Leif
 Grigaa,  Sami  Haddadinb
aRobokind  Robotics  for  Mankind  Foundation,  Appelstrasse  30,  30167  Hannover,  Germany
bChair  of  Robotics  Science  and  Systems  Intelligence  and  Munich  School  of  Robotics  and  Machine  Intelligence,
Heßstraße 134,  80797  München,  Germany
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article history:
Received  29  October  2019
Received  in  revised  form
18 March  2020
Accepted  19  March  2020
Available  online  xxx
Keywords:Machine learning
Artiﬁcial  intelligence
RobotRoboticsDentistryDental robots
Dentronicsa  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
Objectives.  This  paper  provides  an  overview  of  existing  applications  and  concepts  of  robotic
systems and artiﬁcial intelligence  in  dentistry.  This  review  aims  to  provide  the  commu-
nity with  novel  inputs  and  argues  for  an  increased  utilization  of  these  recent  technological
developments, referred  to  as  Dentronics,  in  order  to  advance  dentistry.
Methods. First,  background  on  developments  in  robotics,  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  and
machine learning  (ML)  are  reviewed  that  may  enable  novel  assistive  applications  in  den-
tistry (Sec  A).  Second,  a  systematic  technology  review  that  evaluates  existing  state-of-the-art
applications in  AI,  ML  and  robotics  in  the  context  of  dentistry  is  presented  (Sec  B).
Results. A systematic literature  research  in  pubmed  yielded  in  a  total  of  558  results.  41  studies
related to  ML,  53  studies  related  to  AI  and  49  original  research  papers  on  robotics  application
in dentistry  were  included.  ML  and  AI  have  been  applied  in  dental  research  to  analyze  large
amounts of  data  to  eventually  support  dental  decision  making,  diagnosis,  prognosis  and
treatment planning  with  the  help  of  data-driven  analysis  algorithms  based  on  machine
learning. So far, only  few  robotic  applications  have  made  it  to  reality,  mostly  restricted  to
pilot use cases.
Signiﬁcance. The  authors  believe  that  dentistry  can  greatly  beneﬁt  from  the  current  rise  of
digital human-centered  automation  and  be  transformed  towards  a  new  robotic,  ML  and  AI-
enabled era.  In  the  future,  Dentronics  will  enhance  reliability,  reproducibility,  accuracy  and
efﬁciency in  dentistry  through  the  democratized  use  of  modern  dental  technologies,  such
as medical  robot  systems  and  specialized  artiﬁcial  intelligence.  Dentronics  will  increase
our understanding of disease  pathogenesis,  improve  risk-assessment-strategies,  diagnosis,
disease prediction and  ﬁnally  lead  to  better  treatment  outcomes.
©
 2020  The  Academy  of  Dental  Materials.  Published  by  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.
∗Corresponding  author .
E-mail address: grischke.jasmin@robokind.de  (J.  Grischke).1.  Objectives
Various types  of  robots  are  already  part  of  our  everyday  life,
they  support  production  in  industrial  applications,  cut  our
grass  and  clean  our  ﬂoors  [1].  The  current  generation  of
human-safe robots  is  ﬁnally  able  to  work  directly  with  human
co-workers, assist  them  and  relieve  them  of  tedious  and  labo-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021
0109-5641/©  2020  The  Academy  of  Dental  Materials.  Published  by  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

==== Page 2 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
2  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
rious routine  tasks  [2,3] .  At  the  same  time,  they  show  a  high
degree  of  performance  and  are  becoming  economically  more
relevant.  In  the  near  future,  this  will  lead  to  the  introduction
of robots  to  various  new  application  areas,  in  particular  as
co-workers not  only  in  the  industrial  sector  but  also  in  the
public  domain  in  the  form  of  smart  assistants  [4,5] .  One  of
such promising areas may be  dentistry  since  it  provides  mani-
fold
 opportunities  for  assistive  work  and  automation  of  simple
routine  tasks,  supporting  dental  staff  while  improving  quality
of work  and  care.  However,  there  are  still  major  challenges  and
limitations that need  to  be  overcome  [6].
In the next  decades more and  more  manual  work  will
be
 automated  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  technologi-
cal progress.  A  study  from  Oxford  University  describes  the
susceptibility of  jobs  being  computerized  and  found  dental
assistant  and  dental  hygienist  to  be  at  elevated  risk,  however
dentists were  scored  with  a  low  susceptibility  [7].  We  agree
with  this  assessment  since  robotics  and  ML  will  likely  not
replace dentists  but  complement  their  expertise  and  support
them in  order  to  reach  a  new  level  of  accuracy,  better  patient
experience and  treatment  success.  Already  in  1967  Jenkins
described  a  robot  dental  secretary  and  today  more  and  more
robot  application  scenarios  have  made  it  to  reality  [8].  Improv-
ing healthcare  quality  and  efﬁciency  is  demanding  since
the  processes  in  place  have  not  yet  been  properly  standard-
ized. Consequently, researchers and  practitioners  increasingly
advocate
 digital  process  redesign  as  a  valuable  way  to  reduce
practice variation  and  improve  the  overall  quality  of  health
care [9–11] .
By  making  use  of  smart  robot  technology  in  dental  ofﬁces,
e.g. as  assistants  to  the  dentist,  the  current  technological
infrastructure  could  be  augmented  in  many  beneﬁcial  ways.
Among  the  most  motivating  factors  may  actually  be  human
factors, i.e.  the  potential  mental  and  physical  overload  of
human assistants  after  long  hours  of  work  that  requires  con-
stant  focus  or  the  lack  of  ergonomic  work  environments.  This
may lead  to  further  problems  such  as  decrease  of  hygiene  and
mistakes during medical exams, disease diagnosis  or  treat-
ment
 planning.  In  addition,  general  negligence  with  regard
to  daily  routine  tasks  (e.g.  rinsing  of  dental  chair  waterpipes,
cleaning of  surfaces  and  instruments  in  the  dental  ofﬁce)  is
possible.  Since  robot  assistants  do  not  tire  and  are  able  to
repeat their  workﬂows  indeﬁnitely,  human  resources  could  be
freed  for  other  tasks  that  robots  are  not  able  to  do,  such  as
direct social  interaction  with  patients  or  other  work  with  high
cognitive  requirements.
Beyond  the  use  of  robots  in  dental  assistance  more  invasive
use cases,  such  as  autonomous  implant  placement  [12]  even-
tually combined  with  complex  3D-navigation  [13,14]  or  tooth
preparation  procedures  have  been  reported  in  the  literature.
Another area  of  interest  is  the  use  of  robot  technology  in
dental  education.  Universities  train  their  students  with  the
help of  advanced  simulation  and  haptic  device  interaction  or
even  full-body  robotic  patients  [15]  to  improve  fundamentally
important  skills  for  future  dentists  prior  to  real  patient  contact
[16–19] .
As  it  is  with  many  technologies  that  are  introduced  into  a
new environment,  various  obstacles  of  very  different  nature
may occur.  One  such  hurdle  is  the  fact  that  technolog-
ical developments  for  medical  applications  are  extremelycostly and  the  necessary  technological  advances  have  only
recently  been  introduced  into  industrial  and  assistive  robotics.
Recently  however,  modern  robot  technology  has  developed
rapidly, and  even  medical  robots  have  been  applied  in  some
clinical areas  as  well  as  in  the  ﬁeld  of  dentistry  [20].  Another
important  aspect  may  be  the  unknown  patient  compliance
and acceptance  among dental professionals [21].  A  study
among
 patients  found  that  female  participants  are  less
motivated  to  undergo  robotic  medical  treatments  compared
to male  participants,  irrespective  of  gender,  willingness  to
undergo robotic  supported  medical  interventions  decreases
with the invasiveness of  the  procedure  [21].
The
 possibilities  of  future  combinations  of  robotics  and
dentistry are  manifold.  The  most  immediate  one  is  obviously
to create  a  working  implementation  that  adheres  to  all  nec-
essary  requirements  such  as  human  safety,  human-centered
interaction, human–robot  communication,  reliable  and  intu-
itive  to  use  manipulation  skills,  which  can  be  employed  on  a
large scale  with  speciﬁc  initial  use-cases  [6].  Building  on  this
thought we  outline  the  technological  advances  that  have  been
made which  enable  the  utilization  of  robotic  support  in  den-
tistry.  Furthermore,  we  motivate  this  step  by  describing  the
opportunities  that  emerge  from  a  combination  of  robotics,
artiﬁcial intelligence,  machine  learning  and  dentistry  (Fig.  1).
In  the  following,  we  refer  to  this  combination  as  Dentronics  as
described in our previous work [6,22]  and  deﬁned  below.
2.  Section  A
2.1.  Background  on  developments  in  robotics,  artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI)  and  machine  learning  (ML)
The  authors  present  their  expert  knowledge  to  point  out
recent advances  in  interactive  force  sensitive  robotics  and
related  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  methods  and  data  driven
machine learning (ML) relevant for  dentistry  in  order  to  pro-
vide
 the  dental  community  with  an  overview  of  the  current
state-of-the-art  enabler  technologies  in  Dentronics.
2.1.1. Interactive  force-sensitive  robotics
There  are  several  enabler  technologies  in  robotics,  AI  and  ML
that  may  contribute  to  the  development  of  novel  method-
ologies  in  dentistry.  In  the  following,  we  review  these
technologies with  regard  to  the  vision  of  Dentronics  shown  in
Fig.  1.  In  this  review  we  distinguish  in  the  context  of  robotics
between mechatronics,  control,  safety  and  human–robot
interaction.  Furthermore,  we  review  AI  technologies  used  in
robotic applications  essential  to  Dentronics,  speciﬁcally  also
ML  technologies  and  algorithms  currently  used  in  Dentistry.
2.1.1.1.  Mechatronics.  The  development  of  the  mechatronic
components of  robots  has  long  been  an  incremental  process
that  only  seventeen  years  ago  started  to  yield  ﬁrst  light-weight
robot  designs  that  would  many  years  later  on  convincingly
demonstrate the  feasibility  of  human–robot  collaboration  [23].
This  design  principle  has  been  extended  and  further  devel-
oped  [24,25] .  The  most  distinguishing  factor  of  these  systems
beyond their  lightweight  design  is  their  use  of  joint  torque

==== Page 3 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  3
Fig.  1  –  Vision  of  possible  robots  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  service  network  to  support  future  dentistry.
sensors  in  every  joint  and  the  resulting  inherently  or  actively
compliant  and  reﬂexive  joints  [26].
Next generation industrial  systems,  in  particular  the  medi-
cal
 domain  has  been  a  driving  factor  in  developing  novel  robot
platforms such  as  the  research  system  DLR  MIRO  [27,28]  or  the
commercially very  successful  da  Vinci  system  [29].  The  latter  is
utilized  worldwide  by  many  large  clinics  for  minimally  inva-
sive surgeries  such  as  prostatectomies,  cardiac  valve  repair
and  gynecologic  procedures.  Much  research  in  this  area  has
also been  done  on  continuum  robots  [30]  that  may  be  bet-
ter  suited  for  a  number  of  tasks  related  to  minimally-invasive
surgery. An  overview  of  research  and  system  design  in  the
medical  domain  can  be  found  in  Ref.  [31].
In  recent  years  the  development  of  collaborative  and  safe
robots has  accelerated  signiﬁcantly  with  robotic  systems
which  enable  fenceless  operation.  With  commercially  avail-
able  collaborative  robots  such  as  Universal  Robot  systems
(Universal Robot,  Odense,  Denmark),  the  Rethink  Robotics
(Rethink  Robotics  GmbH,  Rheinböllen,  Germany)  systems  Bax-
ter  and  Sawyer  [32,33]  and  the  KUKA  iiwa  and  iisy  platforms
(KUKA AG,  Augsburg,  Germany),  robots  became  sensitive.  Just
recently,  these  developments  have  come  with  the  Franka
Emika Panda  (Franka  Emika  GmbH,  Munich,  Germany)  robot
to  a  point  where  the  tactile  perception  of  the  robot  enables
new  applications  and  the  systems  started  to  become  afford-
able, yet  at  the  highest  capability,  an  important  factor  when
considering  the  overall  acceptance  of  collaborative  robots.
2.1.1.2. Control.  The  controller  of  a  robot  determines  how  its
joints  are  actuated  depending  on  sensory  input  and  is  there-
fore directly  related  to  the  way  it  is  explicitly  or  implicitlyinteracting  with  the  environment.  The  application  of  robotic
systems  in  a  dental  scenario  requires  the  capability  of  sensi-
tive physical interaction  without  causing  any  form  of  harm  to
the
 environment  or  the  system  itself.  In  robotics,  impedance
control [34]  became  an  essential  framework  that  still  serves
as the  basis  for  many  modern  control  systems  fulﬁlling  this
requirement.  It  enables  robots  to  safely  interact  with  the  envi-
ronment in  a  similar  manner  as  humans  do  by  mimicking  the
compliant  human  motor  control  behavior.  This  stands  in  vast
contrast to  classical  position-controlled  industrial  robots  used
at  assembly  lines  and  in  segregated  workspaces  from  humans.
Also of  major  importance  for  the  foundation  of  modern  robot
control  is  the  operational  space  formulation  developed  in  Ref.
[35] that  fundamentally  changed  the  way  a  robot  task  is  seen
and deﬁned.
More  recent  research  on  the  topic  of  control  for  collabora-
tive  robots,  especially  also  in  case  of  kinematic  redundancy,
can be  found  in  Refs.  [36–38] .
2.1.1.3.  Safety.  Human  safety  is  among  the  most  important
aspects in a  human–robot  co-working  scenario.  Especially
in  the  last  decade  there  has  been  extensive  research  [39]
about  this  topic  in  order  to  determine  requirements  of  safe
robots  and  studies  regarding  injuries  which  resulted  in  the
development of  novel  design  paradigms  that  aim  to  make
modern robots  inherently  safe.  In  particular,  some  works  [40]
address safety  issues  and  led  to  new  safety  standards  such
as ISO  13482-3  (safety  of  machinery  –  functional  safety  of
safety-related electrical,  electronic  and  programmable  elec-
tronic  control  systems).  Within  the  soft  robotics  paradigm
joint  torque  sensors  with  suitable  disturbance  observers  are

==== Page 4 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
4  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
used for  human–robot  contact  handling  and,  more  general,
for  uniﬁed  collision  handling  and  reﬂex  reaction  [41].  To  pre-
vent  injuries  of  human  co-workers  in  unintended  collisions,
safe motion  control  methods  were  developed  [42],  determin-
ing the  maximum  allowed  velocity  for  ensuring  human  safety
by  means  of  an  injury  database  and  the  current  robot  conﬁgu-
ration, an  essential component to let humans  and  robots  share
physical
 spaces  and  seamlessly  interact.  Other  work  devel-
oped  methods  towards  safety-aware  robot  and  task  design
[43].  Beyond  considering  the  isolated  robot  alone  also  its  work-
place in its  entirety  shall  be  considered  when  designing  a
safe work environment [44].  Within  the  European  Economic
Area
 a  robot  system  has  to  be  provided  with  a  CE  marking
which conﬁrms  the  safety,  health  and  environmental  protec-
tion standards  for  products  [45,46] .
2.1.1.4.  Human–robot  interaction.  The  understanding,  design-
ing, and  evaluation  of  robotic  systems  for  use  by  or  with
humans is referred to  as  human–robot  interaction  [47].
There
 are  various  modes  of  interaction  between  humans
and  robots.  Physical  human–robot  interaction  (pHRI)  [48]  has
become increasingly  relevant  in  modern  robotics  [25]  and  will
also  play  an  important  role  in  Dentronics  applications.  A  for-
mer review article  found  haptics  to  be  one  of  the  key  elements
for  robotics  in  dentistry  [49].  Safe  pHRI  requires  collabora-
tive  and  sensitive  robots  and  suitable  compliant  behavior  [40]
made  possible  by  appropriate  controllers  as  described  above.
An  example  for  physical  communication  between  humans
and robots  are  haptic  gestures  [50].  They  allow  the  human  to
relay context-dependent  intentions  to  the  robot  by  touching
it. The robot’s estimation  of  external  forces  can  then  process
amplitude, direction  and  duration  as  well  as  other  haptic  sig-
natures of  the  touch  and  use  it  as  a  means  of  communication.
Extensions  with  machine-learning-based  data  analysis  even
allow  autonomous  contact  classiﬁcation  [51].  In  a  broader  con-
text, button interfaces are also  related  to  physical  interaction,
especially
 if  they  are  mounted  on  the  robot  in  order  to  form  an
integrated  direct  control  as  for  example  on  the  Franka  Emika
Panda arm  [52]  or  the  Baxter  platform  [33].
Another  rather  basic  form  of  contact-based  interaction  are
graphical interfaces  such  as  [53]  where  it  is  important  to  not
overwhelm the  user  with  information  but  focus  on  the  current
context [54].  However,  these  methods  may  not  be  as  intuitive
as  direct  physical  interaction  with  the  robot.
Contact-free  interaction  modalities  like  visual  interaction
[55]  based  on  RGB-D  camera  systems  or  similar  technolo-
gies  such  as  infrared  have  been  researched  for  many  years.
Especially, in  dental  scenarios  this  would  be  a  great  beneﬁt
as the  dentist  most  of  the  time  cannot  move  around  freely
to  interact  with  a  robot  directly.  In  order  to  establish  such
type of  communication,  visually  recognizable  gestures  like
waving,  hand  opening/closing  or  pointing  are  utilized  [56–58] .
Visual communication  is  under  the  assumption  that  the  den-
tist can  move  hands  but  cannot  move  around  to  directly  touch
the robot and  after  short  auditory/visual  cues  for  commands
the  dentist  has  hands  free  while  the  robot  does  its  work
autonomously.  Furthermore,  voice  recognition  and  foot-pedal
controlled commands  are  possible.
More advanced  techniques  involve  motion  tracking  of
humans  or  face  recognition  [59].  Its  advantages  are  that  nodirect contact  with  the  robot  is  necessary  and  a  certain  degree
of  comfort  for  the  human  user  is  created  since  they  do  not
have  to  alter  their  respective  location.  Despite  major  advan-
tages over  the  last  years,  the  systems  are  still  sensitive  to
factors such  as  different  lighting,  obstacles  and  still  require
substantial  computational  resources.
Auditory interaction includes verbal communication  and
general
 sound  signals  to  relay  information  between  humans
and  robots  [60].  Simple  sound  signals  are  often  employed  to
support other  means  of  communication  e.g.  a  conﬁrmation
sound when pressing  buttons  or  performing  a  haptic  ges-
ture. Verbal communication requires  much  more  advanced
algorithms
 and  still  is  prone  to  errors  in  practice.  While  text-
to-speech (TTS)  is  comparatively  widespread  and  easy  to
implement, general  speech  recognition  is  a  difﬁcult  problem
especially  in  a  quite  unstructured  scenario  such  as  a  dental
ofﬁce. By  leveraging  large  amounts  of  data,  neural  networks
have  proven  to  be  a  promising  approach  [61].  A  recent  overview
can be found in  Ref.  [62].  Other  important  work,  early  and
recent, can  be  found  in  Ref.  [63–66] .
2.1.1.5.  Programming.  Before  the  emergence  of  collaborative
and soft  robots  in  the  last  decade  most  platforms  required
a tedious and time-consuming  process  in  order  to  be  pro-
grammed even  for  the  simplest  tasks.  Today’s  technological
level  allows  for  much  more  intuitive  and  efﬁcient  program-
ming schemes [67].  Kinesthetic  teaching  is  a  very  common  way
to  program  collaborative  robots  and  involves  a  human  user
directly  guiding  the  robot  and  teaching  it  the  intended  motions
and skills.  The  more  and  more  intuitive  and  human-centered
design of user interfaces with powerful task  setup  and  pro-
gramming
 enable  non-professionals  to  learn  interactions  with
robots  in  very  little  time  [68].
2.1.2.  Machine  learning
The term machine learning  (ML)  summarizes  different  meth-
ods for  making  use  of  possibly  large  amounts  of  data
to  learn  and  self-improve  from  own  experience.  It  distin-
guishes itself  from  classical  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  which  is
mostly  concerned  with  planning  and  search  problems,  knowl-
edge  representation  and  logical  reasoning.  A  comprehensive
overview of  ML  in  general  can  be  found  in  [69].  More  special-
ized  branches  of  machine  learning  are  e.g.  transfer  learning
[70],  reinforcement  learning  [71,72] ,  object  detection  [73,74]
and  speech  recognition  [75,76] .  Examples  of  recent  applica-
tions and  research  works  are  translators  such  as  DeepL  [77],
diagnosis  tools  [78],  speech  recognition  frameworks  [79]  or
manipulation  learning  schemes  for  robots  [80].
2.1.3.  Artiﬁcial  intelligence
In  the  context  of  robotics,  the  ﬁeld  of  autonomous  task  plan-
ning comprises methods  from  classical  artiﬁcial  intelligence
such  as  tree-search  algorithms  and  symbolic  task  planning
[81] that  are  used  to  autonomously  plan  a  sequence  of  actions
in  order  to  achieve  a  desired  goal.  Most  of  these  methods  orig-
inate  from  works  that  are  unrelated  to  robotics  yet  very  much
applicable. An  overview  of  heuristic  planners  can  be  found  in
Refs.  [82,83]  an  incremental  version  of  the  well-known  A*  algo-
rithm  (which  is  used  in  various  contexts  to  search  for  optimal
solutions, e.g.  path  planning,  action  planning  or  scheduling)  is

==== Page 5 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  5
Table  1  –  Sums  up  the  current  literature  on  robot
applications  in  dentistry  and  informs  about  the
estimated technology  readiness  level  of  the  systems.
Application  domain  Technologyreadiness level
(TRL) [13]Publication
1.  Maxillofacial  surgeryTRL 2  [87–91]
TRL  3  [90,92–94]
[95,96]
TRL  4  [97,98]
2. Robotic  educationTRL 3  [99–101]
TRL  5  [102]
TRL  7  [103]
3.  Tooth  preparationTRL 4  [104]
TRL  3  [105]
TRL  2  [106–110]
4.  Testing  of  tooth  brushes  TRL  4  [111]
5.  Root  canal  treatmentTRL 2  [12]
TRL  3  [112]
6.  Orthodontics and jaw
movementTRL
 3  [109,113–115]
[116,117]
TRL 7 [118,119][118,119]
7.  Material  testingTRL 2  [120–123]
TRL  3  [124,125]
8.  Full  denture  arrangement  TRL  2  [126]
9.  X-ray  imaging  TRL  3  [127–129]
10.  Robotic  assistant  TRL  3  [6]
developed.  Furthermore,  [84,85]  provide  a  compact  summary
of many  elements  in  task  planning.
Generally, autonomous  robots  depend  on  a  knowledge  base
in  order  to  reliably  perform  their  assigned  tasks.  Examples
for  stored  knowledge  are  taxonomies  of  skills  [86–89] ,  i.e.  the
capabilities of  the  robot,  3D-maps  of  the  surroundings  [90]  or
general information  about  the  robot  [91].  Furthermore,  they
have  to  be  able  to  reason  about  current  events  and  new  infor-
mation [92,93]  in  order  to  adapt  to  new  situations.
3.  Section  B
3.1. Materials  and  methods
3.1.1.  Systematic  review  of  the  literature
Materials  and  methods :  A  systematic  review  of  the  literature
was  performed  in  one  database  (pubmed)  to  identify  liter-
ature on  ML,  AI  and  robotic  applications  in  dentistry.  The
following  search  terms  were  used:  “dent*  AND  robot*OR  arti-
ﬁcial intelligence  OR  machine  learning”.  All  research  items
not  older  than  ﬁve  years  published  until  01.01.2020  were
included.  Furthermore,  a  hand  search  in  the  reference  lists
of the  identiﬁed  literature  and  a  second  electronic  search
was  performed  in  3  databases  (googlescholar,  pubmed,  IEEE
xplore).  Data  extraction  was  performed  from  full-text  anal-
ysis.  Extracted  data  included  the  area  of  application  within
dentistry (Tables  1  and  2)  and  for  robot  technology  the  esti-
mated readiness  level  according  to  the  information  provided
in the original  research  papers  (Fig.  2).  The  presented  technolo-
gies were  assigned  to  a  technological  readiness  level  according
to the  information  given  in  the  publications.  Systems  were
assigned  to  level  1  when  a  basic  description  of  a  system  prin-
ciple  is  observed  and  reported.  Level  2  is  achieved  when  a  fullTable  2  –  Sums  up  current  literature  on  artiﬁcial
intelligence  and  machine  learning  in  dentistry.
Application  domains  of
AI  and  ML  in  dentistryPublication
1. Dental and maxillofacial radiography[1–7]
[8–15]
2.  Conservative  dentistry  [16,17]
3.  Forensic  science  [18–21]
4.  Caries  diagnostics  [22–26]
5.  Prosthodontics  [27,28]
6.  Maxillofacial  cancer  [29,30]
7.  Dental  implants  [31–33]
8.  Periodontal  disease  [34–41]
9.  Orthodontics  and  attractiveness  [42–48]
10.  Prediction  and  health  assessment  [49–58]
concept for  a  system  was  formulated.  Levels  3  and  4  include
in  vitro  validation,  whereas  levels  5  and  6  are  ﬁeld  validations.
Technological  readiness  level  7  is  achieved  when  a  proto-
type is  demonstrated  in  the  operating  environment.  Level  8  is
reserved  to  qualiﬁed  complete  systems  and  level  9  is  reached
at the time  when  a  system  has  been  proven  in  end-use  oper-
ations.  Furthermore,  the  application  areas  were  put  together
in order to point  out  the  advances  within  the  different  ﬁelds.
Full-text
 analysis  of  the  identiﬁed  original  research  and
review papers  was  performed  to  extract  and  present  relevant
state-of-the-art knowledge on  present  activities  of  the  dental
community  in  the  ﬁeld  of  Dentronics.
3.2.  Results
3.2.1. Robotics in  dentistry
In the  following  section  we  provide  a  technology  review  on
state-of-the-art robot applications in dentistry,  which  have
been
 published  so  far.  Literature  research  in  pubmed  identi-
ﬁed a  total  of  137  research  items  on  robots  in  dentistry.  Out  of
these 14  were  included  for  data  extraction,  another  35  origi-
nal  research  papers  were  identiﬁed  through  hand  search  and
in other electronic  databases.  In  total  49  studies  on  robot  tech-
nology  in  dentistry  were  included  for  data  extraction.  Table  1
summarizes all studies and  gives  an  overview  of  the  actual
technology  readiness  level  of  the  systems  presented  in  the
reviewed  literature  and  sums  up  the  studies  in  the  same
ﬁeld. Review  of  the  current  literature  identiﬁed  10  application
domains  of  robots  in  dentistry.
Applications  involving  robot  technology  was  published  in
the following 10  application  areas  in  the  scope  of  Dentronics.
3.2.1.1.  Maxillofacial  surgery.  A  handful  of  reviews  describe
possible scenarios  and  applications  of  digitalization  in  max-
illofacial  surgery  with  a  special  emphasis  on  the  combination
of implant  dentistry  and  prosthodontics  [95–99]  or  on  the  pos-
itive  effects  of  robot-assisted  surgery  in  head  and  neck  cancer
[100] .  Several  authors  made  advances  towards  fully  automated
implantology [98,101–107] ,  however  accuracy  and  reliability
seem in general not  to  be  adequate  until  today.  There  are  a
few  exceptions  to  this,  however,  those  systems  are  not  widely
available  or  accessible  i.e.  intuitively  usable  by  dentists  [99].
The development  of  computer-assisted  implant  surgery  based
on the  concept  of  prosthetic-driven  implantology  and  CT-scan
analysis  have  been  reviewed.  Although  advances  in  technolog-

==== Page 6 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
6  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
Fig. 2 – The  technological  advance  of  a  system  may  be  described  using  the  technological  readiness  level  (TRL1-9)  introduced
by Mankins  in  1995  [94].
ical  readiness  have  been  made,  issues  such  as  high  costs  and
inherent  complexity  of  the  techniques  and  hardware  utilized
are still  to  be  overcome.  For  example,  a  six-axis  robotic  arm
was  proposed  to  assist  a  surgeon  in  an  orthognathic  surgery,
based  on  3D  data  from  a  CT,  positioning  is  to  be  planned  by
the surgeon  preoperatively.  During  the  operation  the  robot  is
proposed  to  register  patient  movements  by  real-time  tracking.
Orthognathic surgery  was  performed  in  a  preliminary  exper-
iment with  a  jawbone  skull  phantom  [108] .  However,  Woo
et al. found that before automated  orthognathic  surgery  can
be
 tested  in  human  studies  the  available  software  needs  to  be
optimized  and  safety  of  the  hardware  augmented  [108] .
A pilot  phantom  study  concluded  that  implant  placement
with  a  six-axis  robotic  arm  can  improve  accuracy  of  the
operation in  zygomatic  implant  placement.  The  authors  rec-
ommended to  implement  force  feedback  by  adding  a  haptic
device  to  the  presented  system  in  future  research  [107] .
A surgical  robotic  application  which  has  made  it  to  real-
ity  is  an  invasive  robotic  assistant  for  dental  implantology.  It
was permitted  for  operative  use  by  the  FDA  (Food  and  Drug
Administration) in  March  2017.  The  product  is  called  Yomi  and
is produced by  Neocis  (Neocis  Inc.,  Miami,  USA).  Based  on  3D-
data  from a  CT  the  dentist  plans  the  implant  position.  During
surgery  the  robotic  arm  drills  the  hole  in  the  jawbone  and
places the  implant  according  to  the  planning  while  the  dentist
can  follow  the  position  of  the  burr  in  real-time,  owing  to  the
software, which  allows  the  dentist  to  adjust  placement  posi-
tion of  the  implant  intraoperatively.  Also,  in  2017,  in  China,  a
robot  implanted  two  implants  in  a  human  fully  autonomously
observed by  a  dentist  who  did  not  intervene  in  the  process.
This  case  was  published  in  the  China  Morning  Post  and  the
robot  was  developed  by  the  Fourth  Military  Medical  Univer-
sity’s Stomatological  Hospital  and  Beihang  University.  A  study
on a  robotic  system  for  guided  implant  placement  initially
tested the  robustness,  usability  and  safety  of  a  new  methodwhich  has  been  integrated  into  a  navigation  system,  called
RoboDent,  for  dental  implant  surgery  with  45  patient  datasets
[109] .
Studies  found  real-time  tracking  to  be  one  of  the  key  ele-
ments  to  be  addressed  in  order  to  create  a  system  capable  of
performing implant  surgery  in  patients  [110] .  Robotic  implan-
tology  was  also  proposed  to  enable  drilling  of  complex  forms
of dental  implants  and  by  that  enhance  ﬂexibility  in  prosthetic
rehabilitation in  patients  with  reduced  bone  supply  [111] .
Other studies describe robot-assisted implant  placement  [12]
or  phantom  experiments  for  dental  implant  placement  with
the  help  of  industrial  robot  systems  (MELFA  RV-3S,  Mitsubishi
Electric Corporation,  Tokyo,  Japan).  Those  industrial  robots
have  six  degrees  of  freedom  (DOF),  a  position  repeatability  of
±0.02 mm  and  showed  an  error  of  1.42  ±  0.70  mm  [104] .
Human-related factors  (such  as  reduced  concentration,
trembling,  distraction  or  reduced  vision)  affect  the  accuracy
and safety  in  maxillofacial  surgery.  A  study  proposed  an
autonomous  surgical  system  aiming  to  conduct  maxillofa-
cial surgeries  under  the  assistance  and  surveillance  of  the
surgeon. A  navigation  module  and  a  robot  were  seamlessly
integrated into  this  system  and  a  drilling  experiment  was
conducted  on ﬁve  3D  printed  mandible  models  to  test  the
pose  detecting  capability  and  evaluate  the  operational  perfor-
mance. The  experiment  showed  that  this  system  was  able  to
successfully  guide  the  robot  ﬁnishing  the  operation  regardless
of the  mandible  position  [112] .
3.2.1.2. Robotic  education.  The  idea  of  a  dental  training
robot  was  ﬁrst  described  in  1969  [113] .  The  application  of
a  humanoid  in  dental  education  was  tested  in  2017.  A
humanoid, a  full-body  patient  simulation  system  (SIMROID),
was  tested  in  a  study  among  dental  students  to  ﬁnd  out
whether  a  robotic  patient  was  more  realistic  for  the  students
to familiarize  with  real  patients  [16]  than  the  usually  used

==== Page 7 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  7
dummies. “Hanako”,  the  SIMROID  is  standing  165  cm  tall.  It
comes  with  a  metal  skeleton  and  vinyl  chloride-based  gum
pattern  of  skin.  “Hanako”  is  an  interesting  contribution  to  edu-
cation in  dentistry  as  the  SIMROID  is  imitating  a  human  in
its actions  and  expressions.  It  can  verbally  express  pain,  roll
its  eyes,  blink,  shake  its  head  in  pain,  perform  movements  of
jaw, tongue, elbow and  wrist.  Furthermore,  it  can  even  simu-
late
 a  vomiting  reﬂex  with  a  uvula  sensor,  and  also  simulate
functions  to  induce  bleeding  and  saliva  ﬂow  [114] .  Tanzawa
et al.  introduced  a  medical  emergency  robot  with  the  aim  to
help dental students  to  get  familiar  with  emergency  situations
[115] . Another  robotic educational equipment  described  in  the
literature
 is  the  ROBOTUTOR.  This  tool  was  developed  as  an
alternative to  a  clinician  to  demonstrate  tooth-cleaning  tech-
niques to  patients.  It  is  a  robotic  device  to  train  and  show
brushing  techniques.  A  study  among  patients  showed  that
the ROBOTUTOR  was  the  most  attractive  method  (according  to
patient  evaluation)  for  dental  health  care  education  compared
to other methods (clinician  or  video  audio  tutorial).  However,
it was  less  effective  than  the  clinician  [116] .  A  haptic-based
tooth drilling  simulator  was  introduced  for  dental  education
with  an  implemented  collision  detection  system  to  give  force
sensation  to  the  user  and  make  the  virtual  reality  (VR)  experi-
ence more  realistic  [15].  A  study  found  best  learning  of  dental
basic  motor  skills  in  trainees  receiving  a  combination  of  VR
training with haptic feedback and human  instructor  verbal
feedback
 [117] .  Other  studies  investigated  the  use  of  VR  and
haptic devices  for  training  of  dental  implant  placement  or
oral anesthesia  [118,119] .  VR  laboratories  with  haptic  devices
become  more  and  more  part  of  the  regular  curricula  in  dental
education and have  been  found  to  improve  student’s  learn-
ing  efﬁciency  and  effect  [117,120,121] .  A  review  of  different  VR
systems  in  dental  education  can  be  found  in  [122] .
Additionally, a  study  investigated  the  learning  experience
of pre-clinical  dental  students  using  3D  printed  teeth  designed
with  realistic  pulpe  cavities  and  simulated  caries  decays  [123] .
3.2.1.3.  Tooth  preparation.  Preparation  of  a  tooth  for  crowns
and bridges  is  a  routine  task  for  the  dentist,  although  even
after  years  of  practical  experience  it  is  still  challenging.  The
challenge is  to  reduce  the  tooth  sufﬁciently  to  create  space
for the  prosthetic  rehabilitation  with  a  minimum  of  dam-
age to  sound  tooth  structure.  The  idea  of  a  robotic  arm  used
for  tooth  preparation  or  preparation  support  for  the  den-
tist  seems  tempting  and  sensible.  A  mechatronic  system  to
support the  dentist  in  drilling  has  been  tested  in  vitro  and
showed  good  results,  however,  it  has  not  yet  been  validated
in a  clinical  setting.  The  dentist‘s  position  accuracy  was  53%
better with  the  mechatronic  system  [124]  than  without  it.
Yuan  et  al.  described  a  robotic  tooth  preparation  system  [125] )
with the  following  hardware  components:  (1)  an  intraoral
3D  scanner  (TRIOS,  3Shape  A/S,  Copenhagen,  Denmark)  to
obtain the  3D  data  of  the  patient’s  target  tooth,  adjacent  teeth,
opposing teeth  and  the  teeth  ﬁxture;  (2)  a  computer-aided
design (CAD)/computer-aided manufacturing  (CAM)  software
for  designing  the  target  preparation  shape  and  generating  a
3D  motion  path  of  the  laser;  (3)  an  effective  low-heat  laser
suitable for  hard  tissue  preparation;  (4)  a  6  DoF  robot  arm;
(5) a  tooth  ﬁxture  connecting  the  robotic  device  with  the
target  tooth  and  protecting  the  adjacent  teeth  from  laser  cut-ting,  designed  using  Solidworks  software  (Dassault  Systèmes
SOLIDWORKS  Corporation,  Waltham,  MA,  USA).  Moreover,
other tooth  preparation  devices  were  tested  for  their  accu-
racy. A  system  with  micro  robots,  controlling  a  picosecond
laser  showed  a  preparation  accuracy  that  met  clinical  needs,
the error  was  about  (0.089  ±  0.026)  mm  [126,127] .  Another
tooth  preparation  system  for  veneers  with  a  rotating  dia-
mond  instrument  mounted  on  a  robotic  arm  was  compared
to (human-)  hand crown prep  [128]  and  showed  better  results
than the  tooth  preparation  carried  out  by  the  dentist.  The  aver-
age  repeatability  of  the  system  was  about  40  /H9262m  [125,129] .
3.2.1.4.  Testing  of  toothbrushes.  The  efﬁciency  of  tooth-
brushes and  their  abrasiveness  towards  enamel  may  be  tested
with  highest  repeatability  and  comparability  by  using  robotic
systems. For  example,  an  in  vitro  study  [130]  with  a  six-axis
robot  compared  the  efﬁciency  of  two  different  tooth  brushes
with clinical hand brushing and in  vitro  robotic  brushing.
Results
 showed  that  robotic  brushing  of  teeth  is  an  alterna-
tive  for  plaque  removal  studies  and  may  even  replace  clinical
studies [130] .
3.2.1.5.  Root  canal  treatment  and  plaque  removal.  Root  canal
treatment is  a  procedure  which  is  based  on  high  accuracy.
Usually,  a  dentist  specialized  in  endodontics  works  using  mag-
niﬁcation to assure adequate view of  the  root  canal.  Nelson
et
 al.  published  the  idea  of  a  robotic  system  for  assistance
during  root  canal  treatment.  The  so-called  “vending  machine”
was supposed  to  supply  the  dentist  with  the  necessary  root
canal  instruments  during  treatment  [131]  in  order  to  reduce
deﬂection from the  operating  site.  A  recent  study  proposed  the
application of  micro-robots  with  catalytic-ability  to  destroy
bioﬁlms within  the  root  canal  and  tested  the  system  In  vitro.
Furthermore, the  authors  discussed  the  use  of  these  systems
for  other  applications  such  as  prevention  of  tooth  decay  or
peri-implant infection  [131,132] .
3.2.1.6. Orthodontics  and  jaw  movement.  A  novel  system  that
generates the  dental  arch  form  has  been  developed.  The  sys-
tem can be  used  to  bend  orthodontic  wires  [133] .  Edinger
described  a  robot  for  the  dental  ofﬁce  for  the  ﬁrst  time  in
1991, later  he  described  a  robotic  system  to  reproduce  condy-
lar  movements  [134,135] .  Virtual  articulators  are  one  of  the
technological bases  necessary  to  fully  rethink  and  digital-
ize dental  workﬂows.  They  enable  simulation  of  occlusal
changes in  the  digital  world  and  may  be  strongly  empowered
by  AI  in  the  future  to  e.g.  simulate  use  of  dental  materi-
als  patient-individually  or  simulate  treatment  outcomes  of
implant placement  or  maxilla-facial  surgeries  [136] .
3.2.1.7.  Material  testing.  Robotic  dental  wear  and  mastication
simulators are  proposed  to  test  tooth  ﬁlling  materials  [137]  or
dental implant materials  [138,139] .  One  of  the  systems  was
driven  by  a  robot  with  6  DoF  [140,141] .  In  another  study  dental
impression materials  were  tested  with  the  help  of  a  robotic
arm  [142] .
3.2.1.8.  Tooth  arrangement  for  full  dentures.  Robotic  assis-
tance may  also  be  helpful  in  supporting  the  dental  technician
[143] .  A  novel  system  that  generates  the  dental  arch  has  been

==== Page 8 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
8  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
developed. Traditional  methods  of  manually  determining  the
dental  arch  may  soon  be  replaced  by  a  robot  to  assist  in  gener-
ating  a  more  individual  dental  arch.  The  system  can  be  used
to fabricate  full  dentures.  A  study  on  this  tooth-arrangement
robot showed  that  it  was  very  accurate  [133] .  Tooth  arrange-
ment  for  full  dentures  shows  an  error  of  1.64  mm  when  the
arc width  direction (x-axis) is  37.25  mm  [144] .
3.2.1.9.  X-ray  imaging  radiography.  Positioning  of  the
ﬁlm/sensor  and  the  X-ray  source  was  proposed  to  be  executed
by a  6  DoF robotic arm  and  was  found  to  have  no  adverse
effects. Results showed that the robotic system  was  superior
to
 the  mechanical  alignment  approach,  due  to  its  excellent
accuracy and  repeatability  [145,146] .  Another  application
presented in  the  literature  is  a  robot  equipped  with  a  skull  to
investigate  the  inﬂuence  of  head  movement  to  the  accuracy
of 3D  imaging  [147] .
3.2.1.10.  Robot assistant. A prototypical  robot  assistant  was
proposed in  Ref.  [6].  The  authors  investigated  the  possibil-
ity  of  active  robotic  support  during  treatments  by  handling
of  instruments  via  a  multi-modal  communication  framework
that aims  at  dentists  as  users.  It  comprises  of  bilateral  physical
human–robot interaction,  touch  display  input,  speech  input
and visual  gestures.  In  their  approach  they  used  a  state-
of-the-art  safe  collaborative  and  sensitive  7DoF  robot  and
conducted a  user-study  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  different
human–robot  interaction  modalities  in  dentistry  as  shown  in
Ref. [6,22] .
3.2.2. Machine  learning  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in
dentistry
The  systematic  literature  search  in  pubmed  revealed  142  stud-
ies not  older  than  5  years.  101  studies  were  excluded  as  they
did not  report  on  machine  learning  in  dentistry.  41  studies
were included, and full-text analysis  was  performed  to  sum-
marize
 state-of-the-art  knowledge:
In  medical  applications  ML  may  enable  computers  to  e.g.
perform clinical  diagnoses  and  suggest  treatments  [148] .  ML
has  the  potential  to  detect  relationships  and  patterns  in  big
data [149]  and  has  been  introduced  to  diagnose  and  pre-
dict diseases  or  to  give  treatment  proposals.  However,  ML
methods  must  not  be  mistaken  for  being  generally  capable
of human-level  performance.  There  has  been  some  work  on
transfer  learning  i.e.  generalizing  acquired  knowledge  to  dif-
ferent domains,  yet,  the  achieved  performance  is  far  from
what humans are  capable  of  [150–153]  when  attempting  to
generalize  knowledge  about  already  learned  problems.  Fur-
thermore, any  algorithm  can  only  be  as  good  as  the  data
provided.  All  ML  applications  identiﬁed  through  this  review
are limited  to  a  speciﬁc  research  question  and  cannot  be  fur-
ther  applied  for  new  datasets  or  new  research  questions.
The  necessary  understanding  of  underlying  processes  and
structures and  the  ability  to  transfer  this  understanding  to
novel  problems  still  seems  to  be  above  the  capabilities  of  exist-
ing  ML  technology.
ML in  dentistry  is  generally  not  intended  to  replace  the  den-
tist,  but  rather  to  be  a  method  to  create  a  second  informed
opinion  based  on  mathematical  decision  making  and  predic-
tion. Clearly,  although  existing  methods  can  be  very  powerfulfor the  speciﬁc  domain,  they  have  been  designed  for  they
are  still  far  from  being  general  purpose  tools.  The  authors
of  a  short  communication  published  in  Quintessence  Inter-
national describe  possible  application  scenarios  of  ML  in
dentistry and  advocate  results  produced  by  these  methods  as
a  second  opinion  in  disease  diagnosis  and  treatment  planning
[154] .
The  speciﬁc  methods  of  artiﬁcial  neural  networks  (ANN)
have  been  introduced  in  the  dental  ﬁeld  for  diagnosis  of  visu-
ally conﬁrmed  dental  caries,  impacted  teeth  or  for  diagnosis
in dental radiography.  Also,  they  have  been  reviewed  in  a  pub-
lication in 2018  [155] .
A recent  review  on  deep  learning  in  dental  imaging  found
that publications  in  the  ﬁeld  of  ML-dentistry  increased  since
2016 from  2  publications  to  14  in  2018.  Today,  the  ﬁeld
covers  numerous  application  scenarios  in  the  ﬁeld  such  as
neural networks  for  reading  of  dental  radiography  [156]  out-
performing  dentists  in  sensitivity  of  identifying  caries  [157] ,
prediction of oral  treatment  need  in  children  [158] ,  classiﬁ-
cation of  dental  plaque,  treatment-planning  for  orthognathic
surgery [159]  or  orthodontic  applications  [160] .  Studies  elu-
cidated  the  use  of  convolutional  neural  networks  (CNNs)
algorithms  to  detect  dental  caries  and  concluded  that  such
ML techniques  are  efﬁcient  and  effective  for  diagnosing  den-
tal  caries  [161] .  Recently,  studies  on  the  implementation  of
ML for oral cancer prediction [162]  and  prognosis  using  a
deep
 learning-based  CNN  algorithm  were  published  [163] .  Fur-
thermore, machine  learning  has  been  advocated  as  a  tool
to increase  understanding  of  pathogenesis,  diagnosis,  devel-
opment  of  new  risk-assessment  strategies  and  prediction  of
periodontal disease or  bisphosphonate-related  osteonecro-
sis  of  the  jaw  [149,164,165] .  Interestingly,  ML  has  also  been
discussed  in  terms  of  automation  of  esthetic  and  cosmetic
dentistry treatment-planning  [166] .
The pubmed  search  with  the  search  terms  dent*  AND  arti-
ﬁcial  intelligence  yielded  279  studies.  53  were  found  to  be
relevant for  AI  in  dentistry,  however  after  removal  of  dupli-
cates from the ML section and  review  papers  17  original
research
 papers  were  included.
Studies  investigated  the  use  of  AI  (Table  2)  in  digital  dental
radiography analysis  for  caries  diagnostics  [161,165,167–169] ,
radiographic  landmarks  [170] ,  sinusitis  [171] ,  root  fracture
[172,173] or differential  jaw  pain  diagnosis  [174] .  Furthermore,
genome  wide  expression  proﬁles  have  been  investigated  in
periodontitis [175] .  Reviews  discussed  the  possible  impact
of  AI  on  esthetic  dentistry  [166] ,  orthodontics  [176] ,  oral
surgery  [177]  or  future  concepts  of  oral  healthcare  in  general
[155,154,178] .
Other applications  were  reported  for  prediction  of  nega-
tive  treatment  outcomes  in  prosthodontics,  such  as  debonding
[179] ,  and  assessment  of  attractiveness  or  orthodontic  treat-
ment  need  [145–147,180–183] .  Interestingly,  the  use  of  AI  has
also been  investigated  for  age  estimation  in  forensic  science
[184–187] .
4. Discussion
Robotics is an  emerging  ﬁeld  in  dentistry.  However,  research
in this  area  is  still  sparse.  Only  few  studies  proposed  robotics

==== Page 9 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  9
technology to  be  used  in  dental  applications  and  only  a  minor-
ity  of  the  published  studies  reported  prototype  systems  in  the
operational  area  (TRL  7).  Throughout  the  literature  authors
claim that  robotic  systems  enhance  reliability,  reproducibil-
ity and  accuracy  in  their  test  applications.  Despite  this,  the
amount  of  research  done  in  this  ﬁeld  is  still  limited  due  to
lack of  available and  accessible  systems  in  recent  years.  How-
ever,
 as  shown  in  Sec  B  such  systems  are  becoming  reality  and
this  challenge  may  be  overcome  in  the  next  years.
Another reason  why  robotics  is  still  a  ﬁeld  of  low  interest  in
dentistry may  be  the  lack  of  expert  knowledge  to  program  and
control those  systems  as a non-professional.  Consequently,
research
 in  this  domain  still  relies  on  efﬁcient  collabora-
tion between  engineers  and  dentists.  This  may  change  in
the near  future  as  the  robotics  community  researches  novel
programming  paradigms  and  interaction  methodologies  in
order to  make  communication  between  robots  and  humans
as  intuitive  as  possible,  see  Sec.  A.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  AI
methods to autonomously plan  tasks  and  reason  about  the
environment may  further  reduce  the  effort  on  the  user-side
when using  a  robot.
Studies  on  ML  in  dentistry  can  be  found  back  to  2016  and
since  then  have  become  more  and  more  popular.  However,
only few  studies  on  ML  are  published  in  dental  journals  so  far.
Still,  the  potential  of  this  special  research  ﬁeld  is  undeniable
and future research may  lead  to  new  opportunities  such  as
openly
 available  data  and  easy-to-use  ML  tools.  These  may  be
used to  enhance  and  personalize  diagnosis,  prognosis,  deci-
sion making  and  treatment  planning  in  dentistry  in  the  future
[8].
The studies reviewed  in  this  paper  show  how  manifold
Dentronics  can  help  both  clinicians  and  scientists  to  improve
work  chains,  e.g.  in  forensic  science,  here  the  use  of  Dentron-
ics has  been  reviewed  in  Ref.  [188]  and  the  authors  came  to  the
conclusion that  digitalization  including  robot  technology  is  a
helpful  tool  for  human  identiﬁcation.  For  clinical  scientist  the
idea of  having  a  swarm  of  micro-robots  to  destroy  bioﬁlms  is
tempting, considering the impact of bioﬁlms in  oral  diseases
such
 as  caries,  periodontitis,  mucositis  or  peri-implantitis.
Especially,  peri-implantitis  is  a  growing  threat  owing  to  the
rising number  of  implants  placed  every  year  [189,190] .
Unfortunately,  most  interdisciplinary  research  combining
engineering and  dentistry  in  the  ﬁeld  of  Dentronics  focuses  on
implantology,  although  the  invasive  character  of  this  applica-
tion may  impair  acceptance  of  this  technology  among  patients
and  dentists.  Hence,  these  most  invasive  applications  are  lit-
tle  suitable  as  forerunners.  Therefore,  research  in  the  ﬁeld  of
assistive robotics  seems  to  be  more  promising  to  facilitate  the
introduction of  this  new  robotic  enabled  era.  Also,  research  on
educational  robotics  in  university  environments  seems  to  be  a
promising initiator  to  introduce  Dentronics  and  take  the  ﬁrst
hurdle  towards  acceptance  of  robots  among  future  dentists
[191] .
Another  important  point  is  to  mention  the  effort  that  is
required  of  dentists  and  dental  assistants  in  order  to  learn  to
work with  these  new  technologies.  Older  generations  may  be
more  used  to  familiar  tools  and  are  rather  skeptical  to  adapt.
However, new  generations  of  dentists  can  be  considered  digi-
tal natives  and  their  experience  might  lead  them  to  use  digital
tools more  naturally.  Moreover,  in  light  of  the  expected  devel-opments in  robotics,  AI  and  ML,  future  generations  may  even
be  considered  “robonatives”  as  deﬁned  here  [192] .
All  robot  applications  presented  in  this  review  from  robot
assistants to  tooth  preparation  tools  over  material  testing  or
arrangement of  teeth  in  dentures  have  an  inherent  potential
to  advance  dentistry  far  beyond  digitalization  and  into  a  new
world where digitalization reaches out  to  manipulate  our  real
world.
 However,  the  overall  technological  readiness  is  still  low,
and  more  effort  and  research  need  to  be  done  in  order  to  create
a value  to  the  ﬁeld  of  Dentronics.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are
numerous approaches  in  the  research  community  to  explore
the potentials and  challenges of  integrating  robotics,  AI  and
ML
 into  dentistry,  thus  the  speed  of  innovation  in  this  novel
ﬁeld should  increase  in  the  next  years.
5.  Conclusion
Dentistry  is  moving  forward  towards  a  new  era  of  data-driven
and robot-assisted medicine.  However,  the  latest  step  changes
in modern  robot  technology,  ML  and  AI  have  not  yet  been  fully
introduced  to  dental  research  nor  have  they  reached  tech-
nological readiness  and  cost-efﬁciency  to  enter  the  dental
market.  Educational  systems  have  already  made  it  to  real-
ity. Robot dental  assistants  and  other  applications  e.g.  oral
surgery,  tooth  arrangement,  orthodontics  or  material  testing
are  promising  though  most  critical  challenges  for  Dentronics
besides the high  costs  and  difﬁcult  operability  of  the  systems
are  the  still  rather  basic  sensory  and  manipulation  capabilities
of the  robotic  systems  and  lack  of  learning  abilities.  More-
over,  increased  intuitiveness  of  the  systems  combined  with
broad educational efforts and  introduction  of  affordable  sys-
tems are  key  challenges  that  need  to  be  overcome  to  truly
introduce  Dentronics.  ML  will  push  forward  diagnostic  mea-
sures, ease  treatment  planning,  reduce  treatment  errors  and
ultimately  increase  effectiveness  of  the  overall  health  sys-
tem. Though, today use  of  ML  is  still  restricted  to  pilot  use
cases and  narrowly  deﬁned  research  questions.  More  ﬂexible
systems with  broader  application  areas  are  needed  to  reach
valuable, human-level-performance.  Future  dentists  need  to
be  familiarized  with  Dentronics  including  digital  and  real-
world human–robot  interaction  skills.
Funding
No  funding  apart  from  the  authors  institutions  was  available
for  this  study.
r e  f  e  r  e  n  c  e  s
[1]  Rus  D.  The  robots  are  coming.  https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-06-16/robots-arecoming
[08.10.19].
[2] Haddadin  S,  Suppa  M,  Fuchs  S,  Bodenmüller  T,
Albu-Schäffer A,  Hirzinger  G.  Konzepte  für  den
Roboterassistenten der  Zukunft  –  towards  the  robotic
co-worker. at  –  Automatisierungstechnik  2010;58:695–708.
[3] Chandrasekaran  B,  Conrad  JM.  Human–robot  collaboration:
a survey.  SoutheastCon  2015;2015:1–8.

==== Page 10 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
10  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
[4]  Forlizzi  J,  DiSalvo  C.  Service  robots  in  the  domestic
environment: a  study  of  the  roomba  vacuum  in  the  home.
In: Proceedings  of  the  1st  ACM  SIGCHI/SIGART  conference
on human–robot  interaction.  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  USA:
ACM; 2006.  p.  258–65.
[5] Ivanov S,  Webster  C,  Berezina  K.  Adoption  of  robots  and
service automation  by  tourism  and  hospitality  companies;
2017.
[6]  Grischke  J,  Johannsmeier  L,  Eich  L,  Haddadin  S.  Dentronics:
ﬁrst concepts  and  pilot  study  of  a  new  application  domain
for collaborative  robots  in  dental  assistance.  In:  2019
international conference  on  robotics  and  automation
(ICRA). 2019.
[7]  Frey  CB,  Osborne  MA.  The  future  of  employment:  how
susceptible are  jobs  to  computerisation?  Technol  Forecast
Soc Change  2017;114:254–80.
[8]  Jenkins  P.  Buy  a  robot  secretary?  Dent  Manage  1967;7:72,
passim.
[9]  Cernea  S,  Raz  I.  Insulin  therapy:  future  perspectives.  Am  J
Ther 2019.
[10] Jedamzik S. Digital  health  and  nursing:  the  future  is  now.
Unfallchirurg 2019;122:670–5.
[11] Brokel  JM,  Harrison  MI.  Redesigning  care  processes  using
an electronic  health  record:  a  system’s  experience.  Comm  J
Qual Patient  Saf  2009;35:82–92.
[12]  Miller  RJ.  Navigated  surgery  in  oral  implantology:  a  case
study. Int  J  Med  Robot  2007;3:229–34.
[13]  Guo  Y,  Guo  C.  Maxillary-fronto-temporal  approach  for
removal of  recurrent  malignant  infratemporal  fossa
tumors: anatomical  and  clinical  study.  J  Craniomaxillofac
Surg 2014;42:206–12.
[14]  Bell  RB,  Markiewicz  MR.  Computer-assisted  planning,
stereolithographic modeling,  and  intraoperative  navigation
for complex  orbital  reconstruction:  a  descriptive  study  in  a
preliminary cohort.  J  Oral  Maxillofac  Surg  2009;67:
2559–70.
[15]  Razavi  M,  Talebi  HA,  Zareinejad  M,  Dehghan  MR.  A
GPU-implemented physics-based  haptic  simulator  of  tooth
drilling. Int  J  Med  Robot  2015;11:476–85.
[16]  Abe  S,  Noguchi  N,  Matsuka  Y,  Shinohara  C,  Kimura  T,  Oka
K, et al. Educational effects  using  a  robot  patient
simulation system for development  of  clinical  attitude.  Eur
J Dent  Educ  2018;22:e327–36.
[17]  Murbay  S,  Neelakantan  P,  Chang  JWW ,  Yeung  S.  Evaluation
of the  introduction  of  a  dental  virtual  simulator  on  the
performance of  undergraduate  dental  students  in  the
pre-clinical operative  dentistry  course.  Eur  J  Dent  Educ
2019.
[18]  Mirghani  I,  Mushtaq  F,  Allsop  MJ,  Al-Saud  LM,  Tickhill  N,
Potter C,  et  al.  Capturing  differences  in  dental  training
using a  virtual  reality  simulator.  Eur  J  Dent  Educ
2018;22:67–71.
[19]  de  Boer  IR,  Lagerweij  MD,  Wesselink  PR,  Vervoorn  JM.  The
effect of  variations  in  force  feedback  in  a  virtual  reality
environment on  the  performance  and  satisfaction  of  dental
students. Simul  Healthc  2019;14:169–74.
[20]  Jeelani  S,  Dany  A,  Anand  B,  Vandana  S,  Maheswaran  T,
Rajkumar E.  Robotics  and  medicine:  a  scientiﬁc  rainbow  in
hospital. J  Pharm  Bioallied  Sci  2015;7:S381–3.
[21]  Milner  MN,  Anania  EC,  Candelaria-Oquendo  K,  Rice  S,
Winter SR,  Ragbir  NK.  Patient  perceptions  of  new  robotic
technologies in  clinical  restorative  dentistry.  J  Med  Syst
2019;44:33.
[22] Grischke  J,  Johannsmeier  L,  Eich  L,  Haddadin  S.  Dentronics:
review, ﬁrst  concepts  and  pilot  study  of  a  new  application
domain for  collaborative  robots  in  dental  assistance.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M8s9bS8qkRE&t=9s
[28.01.20].[23]  Hirzinger  G,  Sporer  N,  Albu-Schaffer  A,  Hahnle  M,  Krenn  R,
Pascucci A,  et  al.  DLR’s  torque-controlled  light  weight  robot
III-are we  reaching  the  technological  limits  now?
Proceedings 2002  IEEE  international  conference  on  robotics
and automation  (Cat  No.  02CH37292),  vol.  2  2002:1710–6.
[24] Albu-Schäffer A,  Haddadin  S,  Ott  C,  Stemmer  A,  Wimböck
T, Hirzinger  G.  The  DLR  lightweight  robot  –  design  and
control concepts  for  robots  in  human  environments.  Ind
Robot 2007;34:376–85.
[25]  Bischoff  R,  Kurth  J,  Schreiber  G,  Koeppe  R,  Albu-Schaeffer  A,
Beyer A,  et  al.  The  KUKA-DLR  Lightweight  Robot  arm  –  a
new reference  platform  for  robotics  research  and
manufacturing. ISR  2010  (41st  international  symposium  on
robotics) and  ROBOTIK  2010  (6th  German  conference  on
robotics) 2010:1–8.
[26]  Albu-Schäffer  A,  Eiberger  O,  Fuchs  M,  Grebenstein  M,
Haddadin S,  Ott  C,  et  al.  Anthropomorphic  soft  robotics  –
from torque  control  to  variable  intrinsic  compliance.  In:
Pradalier C,  Siegwart  R,  Hirzinger  G,  editors.  14th
international symposium of robotic research. Lucerne,
Switzerland: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2009.  p.  185–207.
[27] Hagn  U,  Konietschke  R,  Tobergte  A,  Nickl  M,  Jörg  S,  Kübler
B, et  al.  DLR  MiroSurge:  a  versatile  system  for  research  in
endoscopic telesurgery.  Int  J  Comput  Assist  Radiol  Surg
2010;5:183–93.
[28]  Hagn  U,  Nickl  M,  Jörg  S,  Passig  G,  Bahls  T,  Nothhelfer  A,
et al.  The  DLR  MIRO:  a  versatile  lightweight  robot  for
surgical applications.  Ind  Robot  2008;35:324–36.
[29]  Bodner  J,  Wykypiel  H,  Wetscher  G,  Schmid  T.  First
experiences with  the  da  Vinci  operating  robot  in  thoracic
surgery. Eur  J  Cardiothorac  Surg  2004;25:844–51.
[30]  Burgner-Kahrs  J,  Rucker  DC,  Choset  H.  Continuum  robots
for medical  applications:  a  survey.  IEEE  Trans  Robot
2015;31:1261–80.
[31]  Beasley  R.  Medical  robots:  current  systems  and  research
directions. J  Robot  2012:2012.
[32]  Ackerman  E.  Sawyer:  rethink  robotics  unveils  new  robot.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/industrial-robots/sawyer-rethink-robotics-newrobot [28.10.19].
[33] Fitzgerald  C.  Developing  baxter.  2013  IEEE  conference  on
technologies for  practical  robot  applications  (TePRA)
2013:1–6.
[34] Hogan  N.  Impedance  control:  an  approach  to  manipulation:
Part II.  Implementation.  J  Dynam  Syst  Meas  Control
1985;107:8.
[35]  Khatib  O.  A  uniﬁed  approach  for  motion  and  force  control
of robot  manipulators:  the  operational  space  formulation.
IEEE J  Robot  Autom  1987;3:43–53.
[36]  Albu-Schaffer  A,  Ott  C,  Frese  U,  Hirzinger  G.  Cartesian
impedance control  of  redundant  robots:  recent  results  with
the DLR-light-weight-arms.  2003  IEEE  international
conference on  robotics  and  automation  (Cat  No.
03CH37422), vol.  3  2003:3704–9.
[37]  Ott  C.  Cartesian  impedance  control  of  redundant  and
ﬂexible-joint robots;  2008.
[38]  Schindlbeck  C,  Haddadin  S.  Uniﬁed  passivity-based
Cartesian force/impedance  control  for  rigid  and  ﬂexible
joint robots  via  task-energy  tanks.  2015  IEEE  international
conference on  robotics  and  automation  (ICRA)  2015:440–7.
[39] Haddadin  S,  Albu-Schäeffer  A,  Hirzinger  G.  Requirements
for safe  robots:  measurements,  analysis  and  new  insights.
Int J  Robot  Res  2009;28:11–2.
[40] Haddadin S.  Towards  safe  robots.  Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer; 2014.
[41]  Johannsmeier  L,  Haddadin  S.  A  hierarchical  human–robot
interaction-planning framework  for  task  allocation  in
collaborative industrial  assembly  processes.  IEEE  Robot
Autom Lett  2017;2:41–8.

==== Page 11 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  11
[42]  Haddadin  S,  Haddadin  S,  Khoury  A,  Rokahr  T,  Parusel  S,
Burgkart R,  et  al.  On  making  robots  understand  safety:
embedding injury  knowledge  into  control.  Int  J  Rob  Res
2012;31:1578–602.
[43]  Mansfeld  N,  Hamad  M,  Becker  M,  Marin  AG,  Haddadin  S.
Safety map: a  uniﬁed  representation  for  biomechanics
impact data  and  robot  instantaneous  dynamic  properties.
IEEE Robot  Autom  Lett  2018;3:1880–7.
[44]  Michalos  G,  Makris  S,  Tsarouchi  P,  Guasch  T,  Kontovrakis  D,
Chryssolouris G.  Design  considerations  for  safe
human–robot collaborative  workplaces.  Proc.  CIRP
2015;37:248–53.
[45]  CE  marking.  http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-
market/ce-marking en  [08.10.19].
[46] Guide  to  application  of  the  Machinery  Directive  2006/42/EC.
2.1 ed.  European  Commission;  2017.
[47]  Michael  AG,  Alan  CS.  Human-robot  interaction:  a  survey.
Now Foundations  and  Trends;  2008.
[48]  De  Santis  A,  Siciliano  B,  De  Luca  A,  Bicchi  A.  An  atlas  of
physical human–robot interaction. Mech  Mach  Theory
2008;43:253–70.
[49] Kapoor  S,  Arora  P,  Kapoor  V,  Jayachandran  M,  Tiwari  M.
Haptics –  touchfeedback  technology  widening  the  horizon
of medicine.  J  Clin  Diagn  Res  2014;8:294–9.
[50]  Argall  BD,  Billard  AG.  A  survey  of  tactile  human–robot
interactions. Robot  Auton  Syst  2010;58:1159–76.
[51]  Golz  S,  Osendorfer  C,  Haddadin  S.  Using  tactile  sensation
for learning  contact  knowledge:  discriminate  collision  from
physical interaction.  2015  IEEE  international  conference  on
robotics and  automation  (ICRA)  2015:3788–94.
[52]  Franka  Emika.  https://franka.de/  [28.10.19].
[53] Daniel  B,  Korondi  P,  Sziebig  G,  Thomessen  T.  Evaluation  of
ﬂexible graphical  user  interface  for  intuitive  human  robot
interactions. Acta  Polytech  Hung  2014;11:135–51.
[54]  Marion  P,  Fallon  MF ,  Deits  R,  Valenzuela  A,  Pérez-D’Arpino
C, Izatt  G,  et  al.  Director:  a  user  interface  designed  for  robot
operation with  shared  autonomy.  J  Field  Robot
2017;34:262–80.
[55]  Khan  RZ,  Ibraheem  NA.  Survey  on  gesture  recognition  for
hand image  postures.  Comput  Inform  Sci  2012;5:
110–21.
[56] Ende T, Haddadin  S,  Parusel  S,  Wüsthoff  T,  Hassenzahl  M,
Albu-Schäffer A.  A  human-centered  approach  to  robot
gesture based  communication  within  collaborative
working processes.  2011  IEEE/RSJ  international  conference
on intelligent  robots  and  systems  2011:3367–74.
[57]  Gleeson  B,  Maclean  K,  Haddadi  A,  Croft  E,  Alcazar  J.
Gestures for  industry  intuitive  human–robot
communication from  human  observation;  2013.
[58]  Rautaray  SS,  Agrawal  A.  Vision  based  hand  gesture
recognition for  human  computer  interaction:  a  survey.  Artif
Intell Rev  2015;43:1–54.
[59]  Li  SZ,  Jain  AK.  Handbook  of  face  recognition.  Springer
Publishing Company,  Incorporated;  2011.
[60]  Stiefelhagen  R,  Fugen  C,  Gieselmann  R,  Holzapfel  H,  Nickel
K, Waibel  A.  Natural  human–robot  interaction  using
speech, head  pose  and  gestures.  2004  IEEE/RSJ
international conference  on  intelligent  robots  and  systems
(IROS) (IEEE  Cat  No.  04CH37566),  vol.  3  2004:2422–7.
[61] Graves  A,  Mohamed  A,  Hinton  G.  Speech  recognition  with
deep recurrent  neural  networks.  2013  IEEE  international
conference on  acoustics,  speech  and  signal  processing
2013:6645–9.
[62] Mavridis  N.  A  review  of  verbal  and  non-verbal
human–robot interactive  communication.  Robot  Auton
Syst 2015;63:22–35.
[63]  Waibel  A,  Lee  K-F .  In:  Readings  in  speech  recognition:  San
Mateo, Calif.  Morgan  Kaufmann  Publishers;  1990.[64]  Waibel  A,  Hanazawa  T,  Hinton  G,  Shikano  K,  Lang  KJ.
Phoneme recognition  using  time-delay  neural  networks.
IEEE Trans  Acoust  Speech  Signal  Process  1989;37:328–39.
[65] Müller  M,  Stüker  S,  Waibel  A.  Language  adaptive
multilingual CTC  speech  recognition.  In:  Karpov  A,
Potapova R,  Mporas  I,  editors.  Speech  and  computer.  Cham:
Springer International  Publishing;  2017.  p.  473–82.
[66]  Miao  Y,  Gowayyed  M,  Na  X,  Ko  T,  Metze  F,  Waibel  A.  An
empirical exploration  of  CTC  acoustic  models.  2016  IEEE
international conference  on  acoustics,  speech  and  signal
processing (ICASSP)  2016:2623–7.
[67]  Safeea  M,  Neto  P.  KUKA  sunrise  toolbox:  interfacing
collaborative robots  with  MATLAB.  IEEE  Robot  Autom
Magazine 2019;26:91–6.
[68]  Akan  B.  Human  robot  interaction  solutions  for  intuitive
industrial robot  programming;  2012.
[69]  Schapire  RE.  The  boosting  approach  to  machine  learning:
an overview.  In:  Denison  DD,  Hansen  MH,  Holmes  CC,
Mallick B,  Yu  B,  editors.  Nonlinear  estimation  and
classiﬁcation. New York, NY: Springer; 2003.  p.  149–71.
[70] Weiss K, Khoshgoftaar TM,  Wang  D.  A  survey  of  transfer
learning. J  Big  Data  2016;3:9.
[71] Busoniu  L,  Babuska  R,  Schutter  BD.  A  comprehensive
survey of  multiagent  reinforcement  learning.  IEEE  Trans
Syst Man  Cybern  Part  C  (Appl  Rev)  2008;38:156–72.
[72]  Kober  J,  Bagnell  JA,  Peters  J.  Reinforcement  learning  in
robotics: a  survey.  Int  J  Robot  Res  2013;32:1238–74.
[73]  Voulodimos  A,  Doulamis  N,  Doulamis  A,  Protopapadakis  E.
Deep learning  for  computer  vision:  a  brief  review.  Comput
Intell Neurosci  2018:2018.
[74]  Guo  Y,  Liu  Y,  Oerlemans  A,  Lao  S-Y ,  Wu  S,  Lew  M.  Deep
learning for  visual  understanding:  a  review.
Neurocomputing 2015:187.
[75]  Padmanabhan  J,  Premkumar  M.  Machine  learning  in
automatic speech  recognition:  a  survey.  IETE  Tech  Rev
2015;32:1–12.
[76]  Nassif  A,  Shahin  I,  Attili  I,  Azzeh  M,  Shaalan  K.  Speech
recognition using  deep  neural  networks:  a  systematic
review. IEEE  Access  2019:1.
[77]  Deep  L.  https://www.deepl.com/translator  [28.01.20].
[78] Manogaran G,  Vijayakumar  V,  Varatharajan  R,  Malarvizhi
Kumar P, Sundarasekar  R,  Hsu  C-H.  Machine  learning  based
big data  processing  framework  for  cancer  diagnosis  using
hidden Markov  model  and  GM  clustering.  Wireless  Pers
Commun 2018;102:2099–116.
[79]  Dario  A,  Sundaram  A,  Rishita  A,  Jingliang  B,  Eric  B,  Carl  C,
et al.  Deep  speech  2:  end-to-end  speech  recognition  in
English and  Mandarin.  PMLR  2016:173–82.
[80]  Johannsmeier  L,  Gerchow  M,  Haddadin  S.  A  framework  for
robot manipulation:  skill  formalism,  meta  learning  and
adaptive control.  In:  2019  international  conference  on
robotics and  automation  (ICRA).  2019.  p.  5844–50.
[81]  Russell  S,  Norvig  P.  Artiﬁcial  intelligence:  a  modern
approach. Global  Edition  Pearson  Education  Limited;  2016.
[82]  Bonet  B,  Geffner  H.  Planning  as  heuristic  search.  Artif  Intell
2001;129:5–33.
[83]  Sven  K,  Maxim  L,  Yaxin  L,  David  F.  Incremental  heuristic
search in  AI.  AI  Magazine  2004:25.
[84]  Barr  A,  Feigenbaum  EA.  The  handbook  of  artiﬁcial
intelligence. Elsevier  Science;  2014.
[85]  Nilsson  NJ.  Principles  of  artiﬁcial  intelligence.  Elsevier
Science; 2014.
[86] Huckaby JOD,  Christensen  HI.  A  taxonomic  framework  for
task modeling  and  knowledge  transfer  in  manufacturing
robotics, CogRob@AAAI;  2012.
[87]  Björkelund  A,  Malec  J,  Nilsson  K,  Nugues  P.  Knowledge  and
skill representations  for  robotized  production.  IFAC  Proc
Vol 2011;44:8999–9004.

==== Page 12 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
12  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
[88]  Erdem  E,  Aker  E,  Patoglu  V.  Answer  set  programming  for
collaborative housekeeping  robotics:  representation,
reasoning, and  execution.  Intell  Serv  Robot  2012;5:
275–91.
[89]  Stenmark  M,  Malec  J.  Knowledge-based  instruction  of
manipulation tasks for  industrial  robotics.  Robot
Comput-Integr Manuf  2015;33:56–67.
[90]  Kai  MW ,  Armin  H,  Maren  B,  Cyrill  S,  Wolfram  B.  OctoMap:  a
probabilistic, ﬂexible,  and  compact  3D  map  representation
for robotic  systems.  Proc  of  the  ICRA  2010  workshop  2010.
[91]  Tenorth  M,  Beetz  M.  Representations  for  robot  knowledge
in the  KnowRob  framework.  Artif  Intell  2017;247:
151–69.
[92]  Bessiere  P,  Laugier  C,  Siegwart  R.  Probabilistic  reasoning
and decision  making  in  sensory-motor  systems;  2008.
[93]  Hertzberg  J,  Chatila  R.  AI  reasoning  methods  for  robotics;
2008. p.  207–23.
[94]  Mankins  J.  Technology  readiness  level  –  a  white  paper;  1995.
[95]  Hassfeld  S,  Brief  J,  Raczkowsky  J,  Marmulla  R,  Mende  U,
Ziegler C. Computer-based approaches for  maxillofacial
interventions.  Minim Invas Ther  Allied  Technol
2003;12:25–35.
[96] Bhambhani  R,  Bhattacharyya  J,  Sen  S.  Digitization  and  its
futuristic approach  in  prosthodontics.  J  Indian  Prosthodon
Soc 2013:13.
[97]  Hamilton  J.  Robots,  bionics,  and  bioengineered  replacement
parts in  dentistry.  J  Calif  Dent  Assoc  2006;34:31–40.
[98]  Gulati  M,  Anand  V,  Salaria  S,  Jain  DN,  Gupta  S.
Computerized implant-dentistry:  advances  toward
automation. J  Indian  Soc  Periodontol  2015;19:5–10.
[99]  Azari  A,  Nikzad  S.  Computer-assisted  implantology:
historical background  and  potential  outcomes  –  a  review.
Int J  Med  Robot  2008;4:95–104.
[100]  Du  YF ,  Chen  N,  Li  DQ.  Application  of  robot-assisted  surgery
in the  surgical  treatment  of  head  and  neck  cancer.
Zhonghua Kou  Qiang  Yi  Xue  Za  Zhi  2019;54:58–61.
[101]  Kasahara  Y,  Kawana  H,  Usuda  S,  Ohnishi  K.
Telerobotic-assisted bone-drilling  system  using  bilateral
control with  feed  operation  scaling  and  cutting  force
scaling. Int  J  Med  Robot  2012;8:221–9.
[102] Chiarelli T, Lamma  E,  Sansoni  T.  A  fully  3D  work  context  for
oral implant planning and  simulation.  Int  J  Comput  Assist
Radiol Surg  2010;5:57–67.
[103]  Fortin  T,  Guillaume  C,  Bianchi  S,  Buatois  H,  Coudert  J-L.
Precision of  transfer  of  preoperative  planning  for  oral
implants based  on  Cone-Beam-CT  scan  images  through  a
robotic drilling  machine  –  an  in  vitro  study.  Clin  Oral
Implants Res  2003;13:651–6.
[104]  Sun  X,  McKenzie  FD,  Bawab  S,  Li  J,  Yoon  Y,  Huang  JK.
Automated dental  implantation  using  image-guided
robotics: registration  results.  Int  J  Comput  Assist  Radiol
Surg 2011;6:627–34.
[105]  Schiroli  G,  Angiero  F,  Zangerl  A,  Benedicenti  S,  Ferrante  F,
Widmann G.  Accuracy  of  a  ﬂapless  protocol  for
computer-guided zygomatic  implant  placement  in  human
cadavers: expectations  and  reality.  Int  J  Med  Robot
2016;12:102–8.
[106]  Widmann  G,  Stoffner  R,  Keiler  M,  Zangerl  A,  Widmann  R,
Puelacher W,  et  al.  A  laboratory  training  and  evaluation
technique for  computer-aided  oral  implant  surgery.  Int  J
Med Robot  2009;5:276–83.
[107]  Zhenggang  C,  Qin  C,  Fan  S,  Yu  D,  Wu  Y,  Chen  X.  Pilot  study
of a surgical  robot  system  for  zygomatic  implant
placement. Med  Eng  Phys  2019.
[108]  Woo  S-Y ,  Lee  S-J,  Yoo  J-Y ,  Han  J-J,  Hwang  S-J,  Huh  K-H,  et  al.
Autonomous bone  reposition  around  anatomical  landmark
for robot-assisted  orthognathic  surgery.  J  Cranio-Maxillofac
Surg 2017;45:1980–8.[109]  Maikuma  Y,  Usui  K,  Araki  K,  Mataki  S,  Kurosaki  N,  Furuya
N. Evaluation  of  an  articulated  measuring  apparatus  for
use in  the  oral  cavity.  Dent  Mater  J  2003;22:168–79.
[110] Chen  X,  Lin  Y,  Wu  Y,  Wang  C.  Real-time  motion  tracking  in
image-guided oral  implantology.  Int  J  Med  Robot
2008;4:339–47.
[111] Sun  X,  Yoon  Y,  Li  J,  McKenzie  F.  Automated  image-guided
surgery for  common  and  complex  dental  implants.  J  Med
Eng Technol  2014;38:1–9.
[112]  Ma  Q,  Kobayashi  E,  Wang  J,  Hara  K,  Suenaga  H,  Sakuma  I,
et al.  Development  and  preliminary  evaluation  of  an
autonomous surgical  system  for  oral  and  maxillofacial
surgery. Int  J  Med  Robot  2019;15:e1997.
[113]  A  dental  training  robot.  J  Kans  State  Dent  Assoc
1969;53:161.
[114]  Takanobu  H,  Okino  A,  Takanishi  A,  Madokoro  M,  Miyazaki
Y, Maki  K.  Dental  patient  robot.  2006  IEEE/RSJ  international
conference on  intelligent  robots  and  systems  2006:1273–8.
[115]  Tanzawa  T,  Futaki  K,  Kurabayashi  H,  Goto  K,  Yoshihama  Y,
Hasegawa T, et al.  Medical  emergency  education  using  a
robot  patient in a dental  setting.  Eur  J  Dent  Educ
2013;17:e114–9.
[116] Ahire  M,  Dani  N,  Muttha  R.  Dental  health  education
through the  brushing  ROBOTUTOR:  a  new  learning
experience. J  Indian  Soc  Periodontol  2012;16:417–20.
[117]  Al-Saud  LM,  Mushtaq  F,  Allsop  MJ,  Culmer  PC,  Mirghani  I,
Yates E,  et  al.  Feedback  and  motor  skill  acquisition  using  a
haptic dental  simulator.  Eur  J  Dent  Educ  2017;21:240–7.
[118]  Chen  X,  Sun  P,  Liao  D.  A  patient-speciﬁc  haptic  drilling
simulator based  on  virtual  reality  for  dental  implant
surgery. Int  J  Comput  Assist  Radiol  Surg  2018;13:1861–70.
[119]  Corrêa  CG,  Machado  MAAM,  Ranzini  E,  Tori  R,  Nunes  FLS.
Virtual reality  simulator  for  dental  anesthesia  training  in
the inferior  alveolar  nerve  block.  J  Appl  Oral  Sci
2017;25:357–66.
[120]  Su  Yin  M,  Haddawy  P,  Suebnukarn  S,  Schultheis  H,
Rhienmora P.  Use  of  haptic  feedback  to  train  correct
application of  force  in  endodontic  surgery.  In:  Proceedings
of the  22nd  international  conference  on  intelligent  user
interfaces. 2017.  p.  451–5.
[121] Ihm J-J, Seo  D-G.  Does  reﬂective  learning  with  feedback
improve dental  students’  self-perceived  competence  in
clinical preparedness?  J  Dent  Educ  2016;80:173–82.
[122]  Rekow  ED.  Digital  dentistry:  a  comprehensive  reference
and preview  of  the  future.  Quintessence  Publishing
Company Limited;  2018.
[123]  Höhne  C,  Schmitter  M.  3D  printed  teeth  for  the  preclinical
education of  dental  students.  J  Dent  Educ  2019;83:1100–6.
[124]  Ortiz  Simon  JL,  Martinez  AM,  Espinoza  DL,  Romero
Velazquez JG.  Mechatronic  assistant  system  for  dental  drill
handling. Int  J  Med  Robot  2011;7:22–6.
[125]  Wang  D,  Wang  L,  Zhang  Y,  Lv  P,  Sun  Y,  Xiao  J.  Preliminary
study on  a  miniature  laser  manipulation  robotic  device  for
tooth crown  preparation.  Int  J  Med  Robot  2014;10:
482–94.
[126]  Yuan  FS,  Wang  Y,  Zhang  YP ,  Sun  YC,  Wang  DX,  Lyu  PJ.  Study
on the  appropriate  parameters  of  automatic  full  crown
tooth preparation  for  dental  tooth  preparation  robot.
Zhonghua Kou  Qiang  Yi  Xue  Za  Zhi  2017;52:270–3.
[127]  Yuan  F,  Wang  Y,  Zhang  Y,  Sun  Y,  Wang  D,  Lyu  P.  An
automatic tooth  preparation  technique:  a  preliminary
study. Sci  Rep  2016;6:25281.
[128] Otani T,  Raigrodski  A,  Mancl  L,  Kanuma  I,  Rosen  J.  In  vitro
evaluation of  accuracy  and  precision  of  automated  robotic
tooth preparation  system  for  porcelain  laminate  veneers.  J
Prosthetic Dent  2015:114.
[129]  Wang  L,  Wang  D,  Zhang  Y,  Ma  L,  Sun  Y,  Lu  P.  An  automatic
robotic system  for  three-dimensional  tooth  crown

==== Page 13 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
d e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx  13
preparation  using  a  picosecond  laser.  Lasers  Surg  Med
2014:46.
[130]  Lang  T,  Staufer  S,  Jennes  B,  Gaengler  P.  Clinical  validation  of
robot simulation  of  toothbrushing-comparative  plaque
removal efﬁcacy.  BMC  Oral  Health  2014;14:82.
[131] Nelson CA,  Hossain  SG,  Al-Okaily  A,  Ong  J.  A  novel  vending
machine for  supplying  root  canal  tools  during  surgery.  J
Med Eng  Technol  2012;36:102–16.
[132]  Hwang  G,  Paula  A,  Hunter  E,  Liu  Y,  Babeer  A,  Karabucak  B,
et al.  Catalytic  antimicrobial  robots  for  bioﬁlm  eradication.
Sci Robot  2019;4:eaaw2388.
[133]  Jiang  JG,  Zhang  YD.  Motion  planning  and  synchronized
control of  the  dental  arch  generator  of  the
tooth-arrangement robot.  Int  J  Med  Robot  2013;9:94–102.
[134]  Edinger  D.  Robot  system  for  the  dental  ofﬁce.  Phillip  J
1991;8:301–2, 5–6,  8.
[135]  Edinger  DH.  Accuracy  of  a  robotic  system  for  the
reproduction of  condylar  movements:  a  preliminary  report.
Quintessence Int  2004;35:519–23.
[136] Lepidi L, Chen  Z, Ravida A,  Lan  T,  Wang  HL,  Li  J.  A
full-digital  technique to mount  a  maxillary  arch  scan  on  a
virtual articulator.  J  Prosthodont  2019;28:335–8.
[137] Conserva  E,  Menini  M,  Tealdo  T,  Bevilacqua  M,  Pera  F,
Ravera G,  et  al.  Robotic  chewing  simulator  for  dental
materials testing  on  a  sensor-equipped  implant  setup.  Int  J
Prosthodont 2008;21:501–8.
[138]  Tahir  AM,  Jilich  M,  Trinh  DC,  Cannata  G,  Barberis  F,  Zoppi
M. Architecture  and  design  of  a  robotic  mastication
simulator for  interactive  load  testing  of  dental  implants
and the  mandible.  J  Prosthet  Dent  2019;122,  389.e1–389.e8.
[139]  Sen  N,  Us  YO.  Fatigue  survival  and  failure  resistance  of
titanium versus  zirconia  implant  abutments  with  various
connection designs.  J  Prosthet  Dent  2019;122,  315.e1–315e7.
[140]  Raabe  D,  Harrison  A,  Ireland  A,  Alemzadeh  K,  Sandy  J,
Dogramadzi S,  et  al.  Improved  single-  and  multi-contact
life-time testing  of  dental  restorative  materials  using  key
characteristics of  the  human  masticatory  system  and  a
force/position-controlled robotic  dental  wear  simulator.
Bioinspiration Biomimetics  2011;7:016002.
[141]  Raabe  D,  Alemzadeh  K,  Harrison  AL,  Ireland  AJ.  The
chewing robot: a  new  biologically-inspired  way  to  evaluate
dental restorative materials.  Conf  Proc  IEEE  Eng  Med  Biol
Soc 2009:6050–3.
[142]  Carvalho  A,  Brito  P,  Santos  J,  Caramelo  FJ,  Veiga  G,
Vasconcelos B,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  two  dental  impression
materials using  a  robot  arm.  Bull  Group  Int  Rech  Sci
Stomatol Odontol  2011;50:36–7.
[143]  Zhang  YD,  Jiang  JG,  Liang  T,  Hu  WP .  Kinematics  modeling
and experimentation  of  the  multi-manipulator
tooth-arrangement robot  for  full  denture  manufacturing.  J
Med Syst  2011;35:1421–9.
[144]  Zhang  YD,  Jiang  JG,  Lv  PJ,  Wang  Y.  Coordinated  control  and
experimentation of  the  dental  arch  generator  of  the
tooth-arrangement robot.  Int  J  Med  Robot  2010;6:473–82.
[145]  Burdea  GC,  Dunn  SM,  Levy  G.  Evaluation  of  robot-based
registration for  subtraction  radiography.  Med  Image  Anal
1999;3:265–74.
[146]  Burdea  GC,  Dunn  SM,  Immendorf  CH,  Mallik  M.  Real-time
sensing of  tooth  position  for  dental  digital  subtraction
radiography. IEEE  Trans  Biomed  Eng  1991;38:366–78.
[147]  Spin-Neto  R,  Mudrak  J,  Matzen  LH,  Christensen  J,
Gotfredsen E,  Wenzel  A.  Cone  beam  CT  image  artefacts
related to  head  motion  simulated  by  a  robot  skull:  visual
characteristics and  impact  on  image  quality.
Dentomaxillofac Radiol  2013;42:32310645.
[148]  Chan  Y -K,  Chen  Y- F,  Pham  T,  Chang  W,  Hsieh  M-Y .  Artiﬁcial
intelligence in  medical  applications.  J  Healthcare  Eng
2018;2018:2.[149]  Kim  DW,  Kim  H,  Nam  W,  Kim  HJ,  Cha  IH.  Machine  learning
to predict  the  occurrence  of  bisphosphonate-related
osteonecrosis of  the  jaw  associated  with  dental  extraction:
a preliminary  report.  Bone  2018;116:207–14.
[150]  Sun  S.  A  survey  of  multi-view  machine  learning.  Neural
Comput Appl 2013:23.
[151] Lisa  T,  Jude  S.  Transfer  learning.  Handbook  of  research  on
machine learning  applications  and  trends:  algorithms,
methods, and  techniques.  Hershey,  PA,  USA:  IGI  Global;
2010. p.  242–64.
[152]  Devin  C,  Gupta  A,  Darrell  T,  Abbeel  P,  Levine  S.  Learning
modular neural  network  policies  for  multi-task  and
multi-robot transfer;  2017.
[153]  Haddadin  S,  Johannsmeier  L.  The  art  of  manipulation:
learning to  manipulate  blindly;  2018.
[154]  Mupparapu  M,  Wu  CW ,  Chen  YC.  Artiﬁcial  intelligence,
machine learning,  neural  networks,  and  deep  learning:
futuristic concepts  for  new  dental  diagnosis.  Quintessence
Int 2018;49:687–8.
[155] Park WJ, Park JB. History  and  application  of  artiﬁcial  neural
networks  in dentistry. Eur  J  Dent  2018;12:594–601.
[156] Lee  JH,  Kim  DH,  Jeong  SN.  Diagnosis  of  cystic  lesions  using
panoramic and  cone  beam  computed  tomographic  images
based on  deep  learning  neural  network.  Oral  Dis
2020;26:152–8.
[157]  Mansour  RF ,  Al-Marghilnai  A,  Hagas  ZA.  Use  of  artiﬁcial
intelligence techniques  to  determine  dental  caries:  a
systematic review;  2019.
[158]  Wang  Y,  Hays  RD,  Marcus  M,  Maida  CA,  Shen  J,  Xiong  D,
et al.  Developing  children’s  oral  health  assessment  toolkits
using machine  learning  algorithm.  JDR  Clin  Trans  Res  2019,
2380084419885612.
[159]  Choi  HI,  Jung  SK,  Baek  SH,  Lim  WH,  Ahn  SJ,  Yang  IH,  et  al.
Artiﬁcial intelligent  model  with  neural  network  machine
learning for  the  diagnosis  of  orthognathic  surgery.  J
Craniofac Surg  2019;30:1986–9.
[160]  Hwang  J-J,  Jung  Y -H,  Cho  B-H,  Heo  M-S.  An  overview  of
deep learning  in  the  ﬁeld  of  dentistry.  Imaging  Sci  Dent
2019;49:1–7.
[161]  Hung  M,  Voss  MW ,  Rosales  MN,  Li  W,  Su  W,  Xu  J,  et  al.
Application of machine learning  for  diagnostic  prediction
of root caries. Gerodontology  2019;36:395–404.
[162] Wang  X,  Yang  J,  Wei  C,  Zhou  G,  Wu  L,  Gao  Q,  et  al.  A
personalized computational  model  predicts  cancer  risk
level of  oral  potentially  malignant  disorders  and  its  web
application for  promotion  of  non-invasive  screening.  J  Oral
Pathol Med  2019.
[163]  Xie  G,  Dong  C,  Kong  Y,  Zhong  JF ,  Li  M,  Wang  K.  Group  lasso
regularized deep  learning  for  cancer  prognosis  from
multi-omics and  clinical  features.  Genes  (Basel)
2019;10:240.
[164]  Ryder  MI.  Periodontics  in  the  USA:  an  introduction.
Periodontol 2020  2000;82:9–11.
[165]  Lee  JH,  Kim  DH,  Jeong  SN,  Choi  SH.  Detection  and  diagnosis
of dental  caries  using  a  deep  learning-based  convolutional
neural network  algorithm.  J  Dent  2018;77:106–11.
[166]  Blatz  MB,  Chiche  G,  Bahat  O,  Roblee  R,  Coachman  C,
Heymann HO.  Evolution  of  aesthetic  dentistry.  J  Dent  Res
2019;98:1294–304.
[167]  Schwendicke  F,  Golla  T,  Dreher  M,  Krois  J.  Convolutional
neural networks  for  dental  image  diagnostics:  a  scoping
review. J  Dentistry  2019;91:103226.
[168] Schwendicke F,  Elhennawy  K,  Paris  S,  Friebertshäuser  P,
Krois J.  Deep  learning  for  caries  lesion  detection  in
near-infrared light  transillumination  images:  a  pilot  study.  J
Dentistry 2020;92:103260.
[169]  Casalegno  F,  Newton  T,  Daher  R,  Abdelaziz  M,  Lodi-Rizzini
A, Schürmann  F,  et  al.  Caries  detection  with  near-infrared

==== Page 14 ====
Please cite this  article  in  press  as:  Grischke  J,  et  al.  Dentronics:  Towards  robotics  and  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  dentistry.  Dent  Mater  (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.03.021ARTICLE IN PRESSDENTAL-3528;  No.  of  Pages  14
14  d  e  n  t  a  l  m  a  t  e  r  i  a  l  s  x  x  x  (  2  0  2  0  )  xxx–xxx
transillumination  using  deep  learning.  J  Dent  Res
2019;98:1227–33.
[170]  Du  X,  Chen  Y,  Zhao  J,  Xi  Y.  A  convolutional  neural  network
based auto-positioning  method  for  dental  arch  in
rotational panoramic  radiography.  Conf  Proc  IEEE  Eng  Med
Biol Soc 2018:2615–8.
[171] Murata  M,  Ariji  Y,  Ohashi  Y,  Kawai  T,  Fukuda  M,  Funakoshi
T, et  al.  Deep-learning  classiﬁcation  using  convolutional
neural network  for  evaluation  of  maxillary  sinusitis  on
panoramic radiography.  Oral  Radiol  2019;35:301–7.
[172]  Mikrogeorgis  G,  Eirinaki  E,  Kapralos  V,  Koutroulis  A,
Lyroudia K,  Pitas  I.  Diagnosis  of  vertical  root  fractures  in
endodontically treated  teeth  utilising  digital  subtraction
radiography: a  case  series  report.  Aust  Endod  J
2018;44:286–91.
[173]  Johari  M,  Esmaeili  F,  Andalib  A,  Garjani  S,  Saberkari  H.
Detection of  vertical  root  fractures  in  intact  and
endodontically treated  premolar  teeth  by  designing  a
probabilistic neural  network:  an  ex  vivo  study.
Dentomaxillofac Radiol 2017;46, 20160107.
[174] Nam Y, Kim HG,  Kho  HS.  Differential  diagnosis  of  jaw  pain
using informatics  technology.  J  Oral  Rehabil  2018;45:581–8.
[175] Kebschull  M,  Papapanou  PN.  Exploring  genome-wide
expression proﬁles  using  machine  learning  techniques.
Methods Mol  Biol  2017;1537:347–64.
[176]  Allareddy  V,  Venugopalan  S,  Nalliah  R,  Caplin  J,  Lee  M,
Allareddy V.  Orthodontics  in  the  era  of  big  data  analytics.
Orthod Craniofac  Res  2019;22:8–13.
[177]  Pereira  KR,  Sinha  R.  Welcome  the  “new  kid  on  the  block”
into the  family:  artiﬁcial  intelligence  in  oral  and
maxillofacial surgery.  Br  J  Oral  Maxillofac  Surg  2020;58:83–4.
[178]  Wu  Q,  Zhao  Y -M,  Bai  S-Z,  Li  X.  Application  of  robotics  in
stomatology. Int  J  Comput  Dentistry  2019;22:251–60.
[179]  Yamaguchi  S,  Lee  C,  Karaer  O,  Ban  S,  Mine  A,  Imazato  S.
Predicting the  debonding  of  CAD/CAM  composite  resin
crowns with  AI.  J  Dent  Res  2019.
[180]  Thanathornwong  B.  Bayesian-based  decision  support
system for  assessing  the  needs  for  orthodontic  treatment.
Healthc Inform  Res  2018;24:22–8.
[181]  Takada  K,  Yagi  M,  Horiguchi  E.  Computational  formulation
of orthodontic tooth-extraction decisions.  Part  I:  To  extract
or not to extract. Angle  Orthodontist  2009;79:885–91.[182]  Patcas  R,  Timofte  R,  Volokitin  A,  Agustsson  E,  Eliades  T,
Eichenberger M,  et  al.  Facial  attractiveness  of  cleft  patients:
a direct  comparison  between  artiﬁcial-intelligence-based
scoring and  conventional  rater  groups.  Eur  J  Orthod
2019;41:428–33.
[183] Patcas R,  Bernini  DAJ,  Volokitin  A,  Agustsson  E,  Rothe  R,
Timofte R.  Applying  artiﬁcial  intelligence  to  assess  the
impact of  orthognathic  treatment  on  facial  attractiveness
and estimated  age.  Int  J  Oral  Maxillofac  Surg  2019;48:77–83.
[184]  Merdietio  Boedi  R,  Banar  N,  De  Tobel  J,  Bertels  J,
Vandermeulen D,  Thevissen  PW .  Effect  of  lower  third  molar
segmentations on  automated  tooth  development  staging
using a  convolutional  neural  network.  J  Forensic  Sci  2019.
[185]  De  Tobel  J,  Radesh  P,  Vandermeulen  D,  Thevissen  PW .  An
automated technique  to  stage  lower  third  molar
development on  panoramic  radiographs  for  age  estimation:
a pilot  study.  J  Forens  Odonto-stomatol  2017;35:42.
[186] ˇStepanovsk ´y  M,  Ibrová  A,  Buk  Z,  Velemínská  J.  Novel  age
estimation model  based  on  development  of  permanent
teeth compared with classical  approach and  other  modern
data mining methods. Forensic Sci  Int  2017;279:72–82.
[187] Raith  S,  Vogel  E,  Anees  N,  Keul  C,  Güth  J-F ,  Edelhoff  D,  et  al.
Artiﬁcial neural  networks  as  a  powerful  numerical  tool  to
classify speciﬁc  features  of  a  tooth  based  on  3D  scan  data.
Comput Biol  Med  2016:80.
[188]  Nagi  R,  Konidena  A,  Rakesh  D,  Jain  S,  Kaur  N,  Mann  A.
Digitization in  forensic  odontology:  a  paradigm  shift  in
forensic investigations.  J  Forens  Dent  Sci  2019;11:5.
[189]  Dreyer  H,  Grischke  J,  Tiede  C,  Eberhard  J,  Schweitzer  A,
Toikkanen S,  et  al.  Epidemiology  and  risk  factors  of
peri-implantitis: a  systematic  review.  J  Period  Res  2018:53.
[190]  Grischke  J,  Eberhard  J,  Stiesch  M.  Antimicrobial  dental
implant functionalization  strategies  –  a  systematic  review.
Dent Mater  J  2016;35:545–58.
[191]  Rekow  ED.  Digital  dentistry:  the  new  state  of  the  art  –  is  it
disruptive or  destructive?  Dent  Mater  2020;36:9–24.
[192]  Haddadin  S,  Johannsmeier  L,  Schmid  J,  Ende  T,  Parusel  S,
Haddadin S,  et  al.  roboterfabrik:  a  pilot  to  link  and  unify
german robotics  education  to  match  industrial  and  societal
demands. In:  Lepuschitz  W,  Merdan  M,  Koppensteiner  G,
Balogh R, Obdr ˇzálek D,  editors.  Robotics  in  education.
Cham: Springer International Publishing;  2019.  p.  3–17.

