==== Page 1 ====
Developing Privacy-preserving AI Systems: The
Lessons learned
Huili Chen
Intel Labs
huili.chen@intel.comSiam Umar Hussain
UC San Diego
siamumar@ucsd.eduFabian Boemer
Intel Corporation
fabian.boemer@intel.comEmmanuel Stapf
TU Darmstadt
emmanuel.stapf@trust.tu-darmstadt.de
Ahmad Reza Sadeghi
TU Darmstadt
ahmad.sadeghi@trust.tu-darmstadt.deFarinaz Koushanfar
UC San Diego
farinaz@ucsd.eduRosario Cammarota
Intel Labs
rosario.cammarota@intel.com
Abstract —Advances in customers’ data privacy laws create
pressures and pain points across the entire lifecycle of AI
products. Working ﬁgures such as data scientists and data engi-
neers need to account for the correct use of privacy-enhancing
technologies such as homomorphic encryption, secure multi-
party computation, and trusted execution environment when they
develop, test and deploy products embedding AI models while
providing data protection guarantees. In this work, we share the
lessons learned during the development of frameworks to aid data
scientists and data engineers to map their optimized workloads
onto privacy-enhancing technologies seamlessly and correctly.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), in particular Machine Learning
(ML) algorithms, has advanced various real-world applications
due to its unprecedented capability to perform critical tasks
such as speech/video recognition, natural language processing,
and medical diagnosis, with superior performance compared
with both human beings and expert systems.
Given such superior performance, an increasing number of
technology companies are providing Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) to their customers. In the MLaaS paradigm,
the end-customer, e.g., an institution or a private individual,
sends his private data to the ML remote service and receives
the ﬁnal output. However, this workﬂow raises crucial con-
cerns about customers’ privacy, since: (i)often times the input
data is either personal, particularly in healthcare and medical
domain, or carries business-sensitive information, particularly
in the ﬁnancial space; (ii)the customer of a MLaaS has
no control over the data handed off to the server. As such,
ML service providers are typically assumed to be a trusted
authority, constraining the applicability of MLaaS; (iii)the
input data itself and its metadata can be used to enrich the
model or for other purposes beyond customer’s intended use.
Privacy-Enhancing Machine Learning - often referred to
as Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning (PPML) - is an
emerging ﬁeld that targets to resolve tensions with data pri-
vacy in concurrent MLaaS applications by deploying privacy-
enhancing technologies embedded in such services. In a sim-
pliﬁed view of the problem, there are two parties involved
in a PPML transaction: the customer, e.g., a user, who owns
the input data, and the service provider who owns the MLaaSapplication. The customer holds conﬁdential data and wants to
obtain the result of his desired machine learning application
deployed by the service provider. The service provider has
sufﬁcient computing power to perform the machine learning
task (training/inference). The dataﬂow of a typical PPML
application can be divided into three stages: (i)Data pre-
processing at the data input owner’s side - the processed
data is then securely transmitted to the service provider; (ii)
the service provider executes the target data application - the
resulting data is sent back to the data owner; and (iii)the data
owner (i.e., end user) post-processes the result received from
the service provider.
Note that the objective of PPML is to provide data-level
protection for the customers, either users or third party institu-
tions. Other lines of research focus on protecting the ownership
of the pre-trained models for the ML service providers [1],
[2]. This paper is centered on summarizing the key points for
developing secure, effective, and efﬁcient PPML systems.
II. PPML METHODS IN AI
Various techniques have been developed and optimized to
tackle the challenge in MLaaS data sharing. We refer to
such techniques as PPML building blocks. We categorize the
existing PPML building blocks as follows.
Multi-party Computation (MPC) is a cryptographic prim-
itive that allows the evaluation of an arbitrary function on
private inputs from multiple parties. MPC protocols typically
require the designer to represent the function as a Boolean cir-
cuit. To reduce the computational time of MPC protocols, [3]
proposes MPCircuits that generate optimized Boolean circuits
for MPC realization using customized libraries and hardware
synthesis tools. Garbled Circuit (GC) is a subcategory of
MPC that ensures secure two-party computation [4]. MAX-
elerator [5] is a GC-based hardware accelerator for privacy-
preserving Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) or its repetition.
Zero Knowledge Proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic technique
where a prover convinces a veriﬁer whether a certain math-
ematical statement is true or false without revealing any
underlying data. The nature of ZKP determines that it is
suitable for the usage in PPML. Drynx [6] adopts ZKP to
978-1-7281-1085-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

==== Page 2 ====
ensure computation integrity and validate that the encrypted
data are within the given range.
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) allows computation to be
directly performed on encrypted data (ciphertext) without de-
crypting it [7]. HE schemes support two types of computation:
HE addition, and HE multiplication. CryptoNet [8] is the ﬁrst
attempt of deploying the HE primitive for PPML. It approxi-
mates the non-linear activation functions in the neural network
with square polynomial functions. The SEAL library [9] by
Microsoft is used for HE computation.
Differential Privacy (DP) is a rigorous mathematical deﬁni-
tion of privacy in the context of statistical and ML analysis.
By deﬁnition, an algorithm or a process is called deferentially
private if an observer cannot tell whether or not an individual’s
data is included in the original dataset by inspecting the output.
In the context of PPML, DP typically works by injecting noise
to the training database [10].
Federated Learning (FL) is a variant of decentralized learn-
ing where local clients have their own proprietary data. The
ML service provider creates a global model and broadcasts it
to the selected clients. The local models are then updated via
back-propagation using the local dataset. The global model is
updated by aggregating the local updates. Since the client’s
data never leaves his local platform, FL ensures the privacy
of the local participants.
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) architectures are
hardware-assisted security architectures that guarantee a level
of protection for sensitive services beyond that of commodity
operating systems (OS). In particular, TEE architectures pro-
vide strongly isolated execution contexts, also called TEEs or
enclaves , protected from higher privileged code, including the
OS and even the hypervisor. TEEs are built around hardware
security primitives which are conﬁgured by microcode or
a small trusted code base. Besides runtime isolation, TEEs
also offer security functionalities such as local or remote
attestation, secure data provisioning or secure storage to their
enclaves. Thus, TEE can be utilized to build PPML solutions
by isolation the ML algorithms and privacy-sensitive user data
inside of an enclave.
III. S UPPORTING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PPML
The effectiveness and efﬁciency of PPML techniques rely
on both software algorithm and hardware architecture. We give
an overview of each component and also discuss the co-design
of PPML infrastructures in this section.
A. Software Infrastructure
GC Optimizations. Various optimization techniques have
been proposed to improve the efﬁciency of GC, including Free-
XOR [11], Row Reduction [12], Half Gate [13], and Garbling
With a Fixed-key Block Cipher [14]. These techniques are
effective since they alleviate the main bottleneck of GC:
generating the optimal Boolean circuit. Take Free-XOR as an
example, it allows for the evaluation of XOR, XNOR, and
NOT gates without any communication or encryption.
HE Optimizations. As for HE, integer encoding schemes [15]
are initially adopted [8]. Later on, the CKKS scheme [16]and Chinese Remainder Theory (CRT) [17] are developed to
support computation on ﬁxed-point, large numbers. Ciphertext
packing is a technique that encrypts a vector of plaintext in
a single ciphertext. As such, homomorphic operations can be
applied to the vectors component-wise in a Single Instruction
Multiple Data (SIMD) manner.
DP Optimizations. In the context of differential privacy, the
Laplacian mechanism adds a random variable to the query
answer to limit the information leakage. The exponential
mechanism randomly selects the query answer from a set
of possible answers based on the parameterized distribution.
Note that traditional techniques that deal with missing data
can be used in conjunction with DP mechanisms to deal with
scenarios where a clean dataset is not available.
FL Optimizations. Aggregation of multiple local clients
can be performed via element-wise average or element-wise
median. It has been shown that the adversary can reconstruct
training samples from the model parameters [18]. Secure
aggregation is a class of secure multi-party computation which
ensures that only the target collaborative computation result
can be learned by the participants. As such, secure aggregation
can be deployed in FL to guarantee that the client’s private data
will not be leaked via his model gradients update [19].
B. Hardware Support
MPC Acceleration. Various accelerators have been proposed
to speedup MPC protocols. MAXelerator [5] is a GC comput-
ing framework speciﬁcally optimized for Multiply-Accumulate
operation, which is the basic block of ML workloads. MAX-
elerator leverages two optimization techniques to improve the
efﬁciency of GC: (i) sequential GC where the same netlist is
garbled for multiple rounds with updated encryption keys; (ii)
static function analysis to decide the most optimized netlist
to garble in every round. While MAXelerator achieves high
throughput for MAC, it has limited application scenarios.
FASE [20] is a generic GC accelerator that is proposed to
address the shortcoming of MAXelerator.
HE Acceleration. HE primitives are computation-bounded
since they typically involve complex lattice operations. Besides
the advancement and optimizations of HE schemes mentioned
in Section III-A, researchers also devote effort to design-
ing hardware architectures for accelerating HE computation.
HEAX [21] presents a novel architecture for number-theoretic
transform (NTT) which is frequently used in HE schemes.
Furthermore, they leverage ciphertext-level as well as ﬁne-
grained modular-level arithmetic optimization to introduce the
ﬁrst architecture design for the CKKS scheme.
TEE-based PPML. Besides cryptographic primitives, TEE
architectures can also be used to construct PPML systems.
Most of the research on TEE-based PPML systems was
conducted making use of Intel SGX, whereas most of the
authors target a MLaaS scenario. In Chiron [22], ML model
training is performed in a Ryoan sandbox, which is based on
SGX, that offers the MLaaS provider the possibility to freely
select, conﬁgure and train the ML models. In MlCapsule [23],
the ML computations are performed in an SGX enclave on
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

==== Page 3 ====
the ML customer site, thereby supporting an ofﬂine MLaaS
scenario. Other works [24], [25] combine SGX with privacy-
preserving ML algorithms in order to protect the privacy-
sensitive user data from controlled side-channel attacks to
which SGX enclaves were shown to be vulnerable [26].
OMG [27] focuses on an ofﬂine MLaaS scenario on mobile
devices using Sanctuary. In contrast to the aforementioned
approaches, OMG provides a mechanism to securely collect
privacy-sensitive user data, e.g., biometric data, from sensors
on the device and to transmit it to the enclave.
All aforementioned approaches protect the ML algorithms
in enclaves on the main CPU. However, ofﬂoading ML tasks to
hardware accelerators, e.g., GPUs or Neural Processing Units
(NPU) yields better performance. Graviton [28] ofﬂoads ML
tasks from SGX enclaves to the GPU at the cost of hardware
changes. Recent work from Intel [29] demonstrates how SGX
enclaves can move ML computations from the CPU to custom
FPGA accelerators when introducing novel AES-GCM crypto
engines at the accelerator side.
C. Software/Hardware Co-design
We discuss the software-level and hardware-level support
for PPML solutions in Section III-A and III-B, respectively.
It is worth noticing that the design of these two components
shall be put in the same loop instead of tackled separately to
achieve the optimal performance.
MPC. Here, we use MPCircuits [3] as an example to demon-
strate how software/algorithm-level optimizations can be taken
into account during hardware design. The key idea of MPCir-
cuits is developing customized synthesis libraries to realize
MPC protocols. The target function is ﬁrst described with
Hardware Description Language (HDL). The optimization
objective of MPCircuits is to minimize the number of non-
XOR gates nnon XOR in the circuit. As such, [3] deﬁnes the
problem of minimizing nnon XOR as a special case of logic
optimization that can be solved using existing synthesis tools.
HE. Take HE-based PPML solutions as an example, com-
piler frameworks have been developed to enable efﬁcient
HE computation. CHET [30] is a domain-speciﬁc optimizing
compiler that intends to facilitate the development of HE
implementations. To be more detailed, CHET proposes an
ISA extension for homomorphic evaluation (HISA) and tensor
description to abstract the data ﬂow of the FHE scheme used
in the PPML system. Such abstraction is further leveraged
by the compiler to optimize the HE computation. Encrypted
Vector Arithmetic (EV A) [31] is a new FHE language that
aims to hide the complexity of HE from program developers.
Compared to CHET, EV A is designed to work as an interme-
diate representation (IR) that can be used as a target when
compiling other high-level domain-speciﬁc languages such as
CHET. As a result, EV A reduces the runtime overhead of the
original CHET implementation by 5:3.
FL.In the context of FL, [32] presents a system-level design
for FL deployment on mobile device platforms. In particular,
various practical problems are considered, including device
availability that affects the local data distribution, unreliablecommunication between devices and the server, limited on-
device storage, orchestration of lock-step execution across
devices. These challenges are tackled via communication
protocol, device management, and server levels.
IV. Q UALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF PPML FRAMEWORKS
We present a quantitative comparison between existing
PPML solutions in the following sections.
GC. GC has been explored for constructing PPML systems
due to its provable security property. MiniONN [33] is a mixed
oblivious inference protocol using HE, GC, and Secret Sharing
(SS). Chameleon [34] is also a mixed-protocol framework that
deploys GMW and GC for non-linear functions, and additive
SS for linear functions. Gazelle [35] is a hybrid approach that
leverages additive HE for linear operations in a DNN and GC
for non-linear operations. Compared to the above techniques,
XONN [36] achieves the minimal inference latency while
preserving comparable task accuracy as shown in Figure 1.
The reduction of XONN’s runtime overhead is derived from
the efﬁciency of binarizing the DNN and transforming matrix
multiplication operations into XNORs that are free in GC.
Fig. 1: Comparison of existing PPML methods with GC
primitive component on CIFAR-10 benchmark.
HE. CyrptoNet [8] is the ﬁrst attempt of adopting HE
for PPML inference. Using polynomial approximation and
YASHE with SIMD packing, CryptoNet achieves a throughput
of 58982 per hour on MNIST benchmark. While demonstrat-
ing the feasibility of HE-based PPML, CryptoNets relies on
SEAL library [9] that is written in C++. As a result, adapting
CryptoNets to different DL benchmarks incurs large engineer-
ing cost. nGraph-HE [37], [38] presents a backend for Intel’s
nGraph compiler stack [39] that enables HE-aware optimiza-
tions that are compatible with TensorFlow. Building on top of
Intel’s DL compiler PlaidML [40], the work [41] PlaidML-HE
proposes to develop a customized operator library for HE-
speciﬁc computation to realize PPML. The compiler-based
approach of PlaidML-HE not only automate the generation
of kernel libraries for HE operations on the target hardware,
but also enables various optimization techniques provided by
PlaidML compiler.
V. T HE LESSONS LEARNED
We provide an overview of existing PPML solutions in
Section II and categorize them based on their underlying
privacy-preserving primitives. One can see that different tech-
niques have their own pros and cons in terms of security,
effectiveness, efﬁciency, and scalability. We believe that a
hybrid PPML scheme can enjoy the beneﬁts of each com-
ponent, thus provisioning the optimal trade-off between ML
task performance and privacy-preserving overhead.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

==== Page 4 ====
Meanwhile, we summarize the infrastructure support for
PPML techniques in Section III from both software-level and
hardware-level. As corroborated by the quantitative results
in Section IV, we emphasize that software/hardware co-
design principle plays an important role in developing a fully
optimized PPML system.
REFERENCES
[1]B. Darvish Rouhani, H. Chen, and F. Koushanfar, “Deepsigns: An
end-to-end watermarking framework for ownership protection of deep
neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems , 2019, pp. 485–497.
[2]H. Chen, C. Fu, B. D. Rouhani, J. Zhao, and F. Koushanfar, “Deepattest:
an end-to-end attestation framework for deep neural networks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture ,
2019, pp. 487–498.
[3]M. S. Riazi, M. Javaheripi, S. U. Hussain, and F. Koushanfar, “Mpcir-
cuits: Optimized circuit generation for secure multi-party computation.”
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , vol. 2019, p. 275, 2019.
[4]A. C.-C. Yao, “How to generate and exchange secrets,” in 27th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1986) . IEEE,
1986, pp. 162–167.
[5]S. U. Hussain, B. D. Rouhani, M. Ghasemzadeh, and F. Koushan-
far, “Maxelerator: Fpga accelerator for privacy preserving multiply-
accumulate (mac) on cloud servers,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Design Automation Conference , 2018, pp. 1–6.
[6]D. Froelicher, J. R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, J. S. Sousa, and J.-P.
Hubaux, “Drynx: Decentralized, secure, veriﬁable system for statistical
queries and machine learning on distributed datasets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.03785 , 2019.
[7]C. Gentry et al. , “Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices.”
inStoc, vol. 9, no. 2009, 2009, pp. 169–178.
[8]R. Gilad-Bachrach, N. Dowlin, K. Laine, K. Lauter, M. Naehrig, and
J. Wernsing, “Cryptonets: Applying neural networks to encrypted data
with high throughput and accuracy,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning , 2016, pp. 201–210.
[9]Microsoft, “Microsoft seal library.” https://github.com/microsoft/SEAL,
2019.
[10]B. Jayaraman and D. Evans, “Evaluating differentially private ma-
chine learning in practice,” in 28th fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium
(fUSENIX gSecurity 19) , 2019, pp. 1895–1912.
[11]V . Kolesnikov and T. Schneider, “Improved garbled circuit: Free xor
gates and applications,” in International Colloquium on Automata,
Languages, and Programming . Springer, 2008, pp. 486–498.
[12]M. Naor, B. Pinkas, and R. Sumner, “Privacy preserving auctions and
mechanism design,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on
Electronic commerce , 1999, pp. 129–139.
[13]S. Zahur, M. Rosulek, and D. Evans, “Two halves make a whole,” in
Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of
Cryptographic Techniques . Springer, 2015, pp. 220–250.
[14]M. Bellare, V . T. Hoang, S. Keelveedhi, and P. Rogaway, “Efﬁcient
garbling from a ﬁxed-key blockcipher,” in 2013 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy . IEEE, 2013, pp. 478–492.
[15]J. W. Bos, K. Lauter, J. Loftus, and M. Naehrig, “Improved security for a
ring-based fully homomorphic encryption scheme,” in IMA International
Conference on Cryptography and Coding . Springer, 2013, pp. 45–64.
[16]J. H. Cheon, A. Kim, M. Kim, and Y . Song, “Homomorphic encryption
for arithmetic of approximate numbers,” in International Conference on
the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security .
Springer, 2017, pp. 409–437.
[17]J. H. Cheon, K. Han, A. Kim, M. Kim, and Y . Song, “A full rns variant
of approximate homomorphic encryption,” in International Conference
on Selected Areas in Cryptography . Springer, 2018, pp. 347–368.
[18]M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion attacks
that exploit conﬁdence information and basic countermeasures,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , 2015, pp. 1322–1333.
[19]K. Bonawitz, V . Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMa-
han, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical secure
aggregation for federated learning on user-held data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.04482 , 2016.[20]S. U. Hussain and F. Koushanfar, “Fase: Fpga acceleration of secure
function evaluation,” in 2019 IEEE 27th Annual International Sympo-
sium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM) .
IEEE, 2019, pp. 280–288.
[21]M. S. Riazi, K. Laine, B. Pelton, and W. Dai, “Heax: High-performance
architecture for computation on homomorphically encrypted data in the
cloud,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09731 , 2019.
[22]E. Hesamifard, H. Takabi, M. Ghasemi, and R. N. Wright, “Privacy-
preserving machine learning as a service,” Proceedings on Privacy
Enhancing Technologies , vol. 2018, no. 3, pp. 123–142, 2018.
[23]L. Hanzlik, Y . Zhang, K. Grosse, A. Salem, M. Augustin, M. Backes, and
M. Fritz, “Mlcapsule: Guarded ofﬂine deployment of machine learning
as a service,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.00590 , 2018.
[24]N. Hynes, R. Cheng, and D. Song, “Efﬁcient deep learning on multi-
source private data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06689 , 2018.
[25]S. Tople, K. Grover, S. Shinde, R. Bhagwan, and R. Ramjee, “Privado:
Practical and secure dnn inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00602 ,
2018.
[26]Y . Xu, W. Cui, and M. Peinado, “Controlled-channel attacks: Deter-
ministic side channels for untrusted operating systems,” in 2015 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 2015, pp. 640–656.
[27]S. P. Bayerl, T. Frassetto, P. Jauernig, K. Riedhammer, A.-R. Sadeghi,
T. Schneider, E. Stapf, and C. Weinert, “Ofﬂine model guard: Secure
and private ml on mobile devices,” DATE 2020 , 2020.
[28]S. V olos, K. Vaswani, and R. Bruno, “Graviton: Trusted execution envi-
ronments on gpus,” in 13th USENIXSymposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) , 2018, pp. 681–696.
[29]S. Ghosh, L. S. Kida, S. J. Desai, and R. Lal, “A¿ 100 gbps inline aes-
gcm hardware engine and protected dma transfers between sgx enclave
and fpga accelerator device.”
[30]R. Dathathri, O. Saarikivi, H. Chen, K. Laine, K. Lauter, S. Maleki,
M. Musuvathi, and T. Mytkowicz, “Chet: an optimizing compiler for
fully-homomorphic neural-network inferencing,” in Proceedings of the
40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation . ACM, 2019, pp. 142–156.
[31]R. Dathathri, B. Kostova, O. Saarikivi, W. Dai, K. Laine, and M. Musu-
vathi, “Eva: An encrypted vector arithmetic language and compiler for
efﬁcient homomorphic computation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11951 ,
2019.
[32]K. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp, D. Huba, A. Ingerman,
V . Ivanov, C. Kiddon, J. Konecny, S. Mazzocchi, H. B. McMahan et al. ,
“Towards federated learning at scale: System design,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.01046 , 2019.
[33]J. Liu, M. Juuti, Y . Lu, and N. Asokan, “Oblivious neural network
predictions via minionn transformations,” in Proceedings of the 2017
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,
2017, pp. 619–631.
[34]M. S. Riazi, C. Weinert, O. Tkachenko, E. M. Songhori, T. Schneider,
and F. Koushanfar, “Chameleon: A hybrid secure computation frame-
work for machine learning applications,” in Proceedings of the 2018 on
Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2018, pp.
707–721.
[35]C. Juvekar, V . Vaikuntanathan, and A. Chandrakasan, “ fGAZELLE g: A
low latency framework for secure neural network inference,” in 27th
fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 18) , 2018, pp.
1651–1669.
[36]M. S. Riazi, M. Samragh, H. Chen, K. Laine, K. Lauter, and F. Koushan-
far, “ fXONN g: Xnor-based oblivious deep neural network inference,”
in28th fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 19) , 2019,
pp. 1501–1518.
[37]F. Boemer, Y . Lao, and C. Wierzynski, “ngraph-he: A graph compiler
for deep learning on homomorphically encrypted data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.10121 , 2018.
[38]F. Boemer, A. Costache, R. Cammarota, and C. Wierzynski, “ngraph-
he2: A high-throughput framework for neural network inference on
encrypted data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04172 , 2019.
[39]I. AI, “ngraph - open source c++ library, compiler and runtime for deep
learning .” https://github.com/NervanaSystems/ngraph, 2019.
[40]PlaidML, “Plaidml: A platform for making deep learning work every-
where.” https://github.com/plaidml/plaidml, 2019.
[41]H. Chen, R. Cammarota, F. Valencia, and F. Regazzoni, “Plaidml-he:
Acceleration of deep learning kernels to compute on encrypted data,” in
2019 IEEE 37th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) .
IEEE, 2019, pp. 333–336.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

