==== Page 1 ====
Direct speech-to-speech translation with a sequence-to-sequence model
Ye Jia*, Ron J. Weiss*, Fadi Biadsy, Wolfgang Macherey, Melvin Johnson, Zhifeng Chen, Yonghui Wu
Google
fjiaye,ronwg@google.com
Abstract
We present an attention-based sequence-to-sequence neural net-
work which can directly translate speech from one language into
speech in another language, without relying on an intermediate
text representation. The network is trained end-to-end, learning
to map speech spectrograms into target spectrograms in another
language, corresponding to the translated content (in a different
canonical voice). We further demonstrate the ability to synthe-
size translated speech using the voice of the source speaker. We
conduct experiments on two Spanish-to-English speech transla-
tion datasets, and ﬁnd that the proposed model slightly underper-
forms a baseline cascade of a direct speech-to-text translation
model and a text-to-speech synthesis model, demonstrating the
feasibility of the approach on this very challenging task.
Index Terms : speech-to-speech translation, voice transfer, at-
tention, sequence-to-sequence model, end-to-end model
1. Introduction
We address the task of speech-to-speech translation (S2ST):
translating speech in one language into speech in another. This
application is highly beneﬁcial for breaking down communica-
tion barriers between people who do not share a common lan-
guage. Speciﬁcally, we investigate whether it is possible to train
model to accomplish this task directly, without relying on an in-
termediate text representation. This is in contrast to conventional
S2ST systems which are often broken down into three compo-
nents: automatic speech recognition (ASR), text-to-text machine
translation (MT), and text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis [1–4].
Cascaded systems have the potential problem of errors com-
pounding between components, e.g. recognition errors leading
to larger translation errors. Direct S2ST models avoid this is-
sue by training to solve the task end-to-end. They also have
advantages over cascaded systems in terms of reduced computa-
tional requirements and lower inference latency since only one
decoding step is necessary, instead of three. In addition, direct
models are naturally capable of retaining paralinguistic and non-
linguistic information during translation, e.g. maintaining the
source speaker’s voice, emotion, and prosody, in the synthesized
translated speech. Finally, directly conditioning on the input
speech makes it easy to learn to generate ﬂuent pronunciations
of words which do not need to be translated, such as names.
However, solving the direct S2ST task is especially chal-
lenging for several reasons. Fully-supervised end-to-end training
requires collecting a large set of input/output speech pairs. Such
data are more difﬁcult to collect compared to parallel text pairs
for MT, or speech-text pairs for ASR or TTS. Decomposing
into smaller tasks can take advantage of the lower training data
requirements compared to a monolithic speech-to-speech model,
and can result in a more robust system for a given training budget.
Uncertain alignment between two spectrograms whose underly-
ing spoken content differs also poses a major training challenge.
* Equal contribution.In this paper we demonstrate Translatotron1, a direct speech-
to-speech translation model which is trained end-to-end. To
facilitate training without predeﬁned alignments, we leverage
high level representations of the source or target content in the
form of transcriptions, essentially multitask training with speech-
to-text tasks. However no intermediate text representation is
used during inference. The model does not perform as well as a
baseline cascaded system. Nevertheless, it demonstrates a proof
of concept and serves as a starting point for future research.
Extensive research has studied methods for combining dif-
ferent sub-systems within cascaded speech translation systems.
[5, 6] gave MT access to the lattice of the ASR. [7, 8] integrated
acoustic and translation models using a stochastic ﬁnite-state
transducer which can decode the translated text directly using
Viterbi search. For synthesis, [9] used unsupervised clustering
to ﬁnd F0-based prosody features and transfer intonation from
source speech and target. [10] augmented MT to jointly predict
translated words and emphasis, in order to improve expressive-
ness of the synthesized speech. [11] used a neural network to
transfer duration and power from the source speech to the tar-
get. [12] transfered source speaker’s voice to the synthesized
translated speech by mapping hidden Markov model states from
ASR to TTS. Similarly, recent work on neural TTS has focused
on adapting to new voices with limited reference data [13–16].
Initial approaches to end-to-end speech-to-text translation
(ST) [17, 18] performed worse than a cascade of an ASR model
and an MT model. [19, 20] achieved better end-to-end perfor-
mance by leveraging weakly supervised data with multitask
learning. [21] further showed that use of synthetic training data
can work better than multitask training. In this work we take ad-
vantage of both synthetic training targets and multitask training.
The proposed model resembles recent sequence-to-sequence
models for voice conversion, the task of recreating an utterance
in another person’s voice [22 –24]. For example, [23] proposes
an attention-based model to generate spectrograms in the target
voice based on input features (spectrogram concatenated with
ASR bottleneck features) from the source voice. In contrast
to S2ST, the input-output alignment for voice conversion is
simpler and approximately monotonic. [23] also trains models
that are speciﬁc to each input-output speaker pair (i.e. one-to-
one conversion), whereas we explore many-to-one and many-
to-many speaker conﬁgurations. Finally, [25] demonstrated an
attention-based direct S2ST model on a toy dataset with a 100
word vocabulary. In this work we train on real speech, including
spontaneous telephone conversations, at a much larger scale.
2. Speech-to-speech translation model
An overview of the proposed Translatotron model architecture is
shown in Figure 1. Following [15, 26], it is composed of several
separately trained components: 1) an attention-based sequence-
1Audio samples are available at https://google-research.
github.io/lingvo-lab/translatotron .arXiv:1904.06037v2  [cs.CL]  25 Jun 2019

==== Page 2 ====
log-mel spectrogram
(Spanish)8-layer
Stacked
BLSTM
EncoderconcatSpeaker
Encoderspeaker
reference
utterance
AttentionAttentionMultihead
Attention
2LSTM Decoder2LSTM DecoderSpectrogram
DecoderVocoder
phonemes
(Spanish)phonemes
(English)linear freq
spectrogram
(English)waveform
(English)
Auxiliary recognition tasks
Figure 1: Proposed model architecture, which generates English
speech (top right) from Spanish speech (bottom left), and an
optional speaker reference utterance (top left) which is only used
for voice transfer experiments in Section 3.4. The model is multi-
task trained to predict source and target phoneme transcripts as
well, however these auxiliary tasks are not used during inference.
Optional components are drawn in light colors.
to-sequence network (blue) which generates target spectrograms,
2) avocoder (red) which converts target spectrograms to time-
domain waveforms, and, 3) optionally, a pretrained speaker
encoder (green) which can be used to condition the decoder on
the identity of the source speaker, enabling cross-language voice
conversion [27] simultaneously with translation.
The sequence-to-sequence encoder stack maps 80-channel
log-mel spectrogram input features into hidden states which
are passed through an attention-based alignment mechanism to
condition an autoregressive decoder, which predicts 1025-dim
log spectrogram frames corresponding to the translated speech.
Two optional auxiliary decoders, each with their own attention
components, predict source and target phoneme sequences.
Following recent speech translation [21] and recognition
[28] models, the encoder is composed of a stack of 8 bidirectional
LSTM layers. As shown in Fig. 1, the ﬁnal layer output is passed
to the primary decoder, whereas intermediate activations are
passed to auxiliary decoders predicting phoneme sequences.We
hypothesize that early layers of the encoder are more likely to
represent the source content well, while deeper layers might
learn to encode more information about the target content.
The spectrogram decoder uses an architecture similar to
Tacotron 2 TTS model [26], including pre-net, autoregressive
LSTM stack, and post-net components. We make several
changes to it in order to adapt to the more challenging S2ST task.
We use multi-head additive attention [29] with 4 heads instead of
location-sensitive attention, which shows better performance in
our experiments. We also use a signiﬁcantly narrower 32 dimen-
sional pre-net bottleneck compared to 256-dim in [26], which we
ﬁnd to be critical in picking up attention during training. We also
use reduction factor [30] of 2, i.e. predicting two spectrogram
frames for each decoding step. Finally, consistent with results
on translation tasks [19, 31], we ﬁnd that using a deeper decoder
containing 4 or 6 LSTM layers leads to good performance.
We ﬁnd that multitask training is critical in solving the task,
which we accomplish by integrating auxiliary decoder networks
to predict phoneme sequences corresponding to the source and/or
target speech. Losses computed using these auxiliary recogni-
tion networks are used during training, which help the primary
spectrogram decoder to learn attention. They are not used dur-
ing inference. In contrast to the primary decoder, the auxiliary
decoders use 2-layer LSTMs with single-head additive atten-
tion [32]. All three decoders use attention dropout and LSTM
zoneout regularization [33], all with probability 0.1. TrainingTable 1: Dataset-speciﬁc model hyperparameters.
Conversational Fisher
Num train examples 979k 120k
Input / output sample rate (Hz) 16k / 24k 8k / 24k
Learning rate 0.002 0.006
Encoder BLSTM 8 1024 8256
Decoder LSTM 6 1024 41024
Auxiliary decoder LSTM 2 256 2256
source / target input layer 8 / 8 4 / 6
dropout prob 0.2 0.3
loss decay constant 1.0 0:3!0:001
at 160k steps
Gaussian weight noise stddev none 0.05
uses the Adafactor optimizer [34] with a batch size of 1024.
Since we are only demonstrating a proof of concept, we
primarily rely on the low-complexity Grifﬁn-Lim [35] vocoder
in our experiments. However, we use a WaveRNN [36] neural
vocoder when evaluating speech naturalness in listening tests.
Finally, in order to control the output speaker identity we
incorporate an optional speaker encoder network as in [15]. This
network is discriminatively pretrained on a speaker veriﬁcation
task and is not updated during the training of Translatotron. We
use the dvector V3 model from [37], trained on a larger set of
851K speakers across 8 languages including English and Span-
ish. The model computes a 256-dim speaker embedding from
the speaker reference utterance, which is passed into a linear
projection layer (trained with the sequence-to-sequence model)
to reduce the dimensionality to 16. This is critical to generalizing
to source language speakers which are unseen during training.
3. Experiments
We study two Spanish-to-English translation datasets: the large
scale “conversational” corpus of parallel text and read speech
pairs from [21], and the Spanish Fisher corpus of telephone con-
versations and corresponding English translations [38], which is
smaller and more challenging due to the spontaneous and infor-
mal speaking style. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we synthesize target
speech from the target transcript using a single (female) speaker
English TTS system; In Section 3.4, we use real human tar-
get speech for voice transfer experiments on the conversational
dataset. Models were implemented using the Lingvo frame-
work [39]. See Table 1 for dataset-speciﬁc hyperparameters.
To evaluate speech-to-speech translation performance we
compute BLEU scores [40] as an objective measure of speech
intelligibility and translation quality, by using a pretrained ASR
system to recognize the generated speech, and comparing the
resulting transcripts to ground truth reference translations. Due
to potential recognition errors (see Figure 2), this can be thought
of as a lower bound on the underlying translation quality. We
use the 16k Word-Piece attention-based ASR model from [41]
trained on the 960 hour LibriSpeech corpus [42], which obtained
word error rates of 4.7% and 13.4% on the test-clean and test-
other sets, respectively. In addition, we conduct listening tests
to measure subjective speech naturalness mean opinion score
(MOS), as well as speaker similarity MOS for voice transfer.
3.1. Conversational Spanish-to-English
This proprietary dataset described in [21] was obtained by crowd-
sourcing humans to read the both sides of a conversational
Spanish-English MT dataset. In this section, instead of using the
human target speech, we use a TTS model to synthesize target

==== Page 3 ====
Table 2: Conversational test set performance. Single reference
BLEU and Phoneme Error Rate (PER) of aux decoder outputs.
Auxiliary loss BLEU Source PER Target PER
None 0.4 - -
Source 42.2 5.0 -
Target 42.6 - 20.9
Source + Target 42.7 5.1 20.8
ST [21]!TTS cascade 48.7 - -
Ground truth 74.7 - -
speech in a single female English speaker’s voice in order to
simplify the learning objective. We use an English Tacotron 2
TTS model [26] but use a Grifﬁn-Lim vocoder for expediency.
In addition, we augment the input source speech by adding back-
ground noise and reverberation in the same manner as [21].
The resulting dataset contains 979k parallel utterance pairs,
containing 1.4k hours of source speech and 619 hours of syn-
thesized target speech. The total target speech duration is much
smaller because the TTS output is better endpointed, and con-
tains fewer pauses. 9.6k pairs are held out for testing.
Input feature frames are created by stacking 3 adjacent
frames of an 80-channel log-mel spectrogram as in [21]. The
speaker encoder was not used in these experiments since the
target speech always came from the same speaker.
Table 2 shows performance of the model trained using dif-
ferent combinations of auxiliary losses, compared to a base-
line ST!TTS cascade model using a speech-to-text translation
model [21] trained on the same data, and the same Tacotron 2
TTS model used to synthesize training targets. Note that the
ground truth BLEU score is below 100 due to ASR errors during
evaluation, or TTS failure when synthesizing the ground truth.
Training without auxiliary losses leads to extremely poor
performance. The model correctly synthesizes common words
and simple phrases, e.g. translating “hola” to “hello”. However,
it does not consistently translate full utterances. While it always
generates plausible speech sounds in the target voice, the output
can be independent of the input, composed of a string of non-
sense syllables. This is consistent with failure to learn to attend
to the input, and reﬂects the difﬁculty of the direct S2ST task.
Integrating auxiliary phoneme recognition tasks helped reg-
ularize the encoder and enabled the model to learn attention,
dramatically improving performance. The target phoneme PER
is much higher than on source phonemes, reﬂecting the difﬁ-
culty of the corresponding translation task. Training using both
auxiliary tasks achieved the best quality, but the performance
difference between different combinations is small. Overall,
there remains a gap of 6 BLEU points to the baseline, indicating
room for improvement. Nevertheless, the relatively narrow gap
demonstrates the potential of the end-to-end approach.
3.2. Fisher Spanish-to-English
This dataset contains about 120k parallel utterance pairs2, span-
ning 127 hours of source speech. Target speech is synthesized
using Parallel WaveNet [43] using the same voice as the previous
section. The result contains 96 hours of synthetic target speech.
Following [19], input features were constructed by stacking
80-channel log-mel spectrograms, with deltas and accelerations.
Given the small size of the dataset compared to that in Sec. 3.1,
we found that obtaining good performance required signiﬁcantly
2This is a subset of the Fisher data due to TTS errors on target text.Table 3: Performance on the Fisher Spanish-English task in
terms of 4-reference BLEU score on 3 eval sets.
Auxiliary loss dev1 dev2 test
None 0.4 0.6 0.6
Source 7.4 8.0 7.2
Target 20.2 21.4 20.8
Source + Target 24.8 26.5 25.6
Source + Target (1-head attention) 23.0 24.2 23.4
Source + Target (encoder pre-training) 30.1 31.5 31.1
ST [19]!TTS cascade 39.4 41.2 41.4
Ground truth 82.8 83.8 85.3
Table 4: Naturalness MOS with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The
ground truth for both datasets are synthetic English speech.
Model V ocoder Conversational Fisher-test
Translatotron WaveRNN 4:080:06 3 :690:07
Grifﬁn-Lim 3:200:06 3 :050:08
ST!TTS WaveRNN 4:320:05 4 :090:06
Grifﬁn-Lim 3:460:07 3 :240:07
Ground truth Grifﬁn-Lim 3:710:06 -
Parallel WaveNet - 3:960:06
more careful regularization and tuning. As shown in Table 1,
we used narrower encoder dimension of 256, a shallower 4-
layer decoder, and added Gaussian weight noise to all LSTM
weights as regularization, as in [19]. The model was especially
sensitive to the auxiliary decoder hyperparameters, with the best
performance coming when passing activations from intermediate
layers of the encoder stack as inputs to the auxiliary decoders,
using slightly more aggressive dropout of 0.3, and decaying
the auxiliary loss weight over the course of training in order to
encourage the model training to ﬁt the primary S2ST task.
Experiment results are shown in Table 3. Once again using
two auxiliary losses works best, but in contrast to Section 3.1,
there is a large performance boost relative to using either one
alone. Performance using only the source recognition loss is very
poor, indicating that learning alignment on this task is especially
difﬁcult without strong supervision on the translation task.
We found that 4-head attention works better than one head,
unlike the conversational task, where both attention mechanisms
had similar performance. Finally, as in [21], we ﬁnd that pre-
training the bottom 6 encoder layers on an ST task improves
BLEU scores by over 5 points. This is the best performing direct
S2ST model, obtaining 76% of the baseline performance.
3.3. Subjective evaluation of speech naturalness
To evaluate synthesis quality of the best performing models from
Tables 2 and 3 we use the framework from [15] to crowdsource
5-point MOS evaluations based on subjective listening tests. 1k
examples were rated for each dataset, each one by a single rater.
Although this evaluation is expected to be independent of the
correctness of the translation, translation errors can result in low
scores for examples raters describe as “not understandable”.
Results are shown in Table 4, comparing different vocoders
where results with Grifﬁn-Lim correspond to identical model
conﬁgurations as Sections 3.1 and 3.2. As expected, using Wav-
eRNN vocoders dramatically improves ratings over Grifﬁn-Lim
into the “Very Good” range (above 4.0). Note that it is most fair

==== Page 4 ====
010203040506070Mel channelSource: "Qué tal, eh, yo soy Guillermo, ¿Cómo estás?"
010203040506070Mel channelTarget: "How's it going, hey, this is Guillermo, How are you?"
010203040506070Mel channelST  TTS: "hey i'm william how are you"
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Time (sec)010203040506070Mel channelTranslatotron: "hi a i'm of the ermo how are you"3
2
1
012345
3
2
1
012345
3
2
1
012345
3
2
1
012345
Figure 2: Mel spectrograms of input (top, upsampled to 24 kHz)
and WaveRNN vocoder output (bottom) waveforms from a Fisher
corpus example, along with ASR transcripts. Note that the spec-
trogram scales are different to the model inputs and outputs.
Corresponding audio is on the companion website.
to compare the Grifﬁn-Lim results to the ground truth training
targets since they were generated using corresponding lower
quality vocoders. In such a comparison it is clear that the S2ST
models do not score as highly as the ground truth.
Finally, we note the similar performance gap between Trans-
latotron and the baseline under this evaluation. In part, this is
a consequence of the different types of errors made by the two
models. For example, Translatotron sometimes mispronounces
words, especially proper nouns, using pronunciations from the
source language, e.g. mispronouncing the /ae/ vowel in “Dan”
as /ah/, consistent with Spanish but sounding less natural to
English listeners, whereas by construction, the baseline consis-
tently projects results to English. Figure 2 demonstrates other
differences in behavior, where Translatotron reproduces the in-
put “eh” disﬂuency (transcribed as “a”, between 0:4 0:8sec
in the bottom row of the ﬁgure), but the cascade does not. It is
also interesting to note that the cascade translates “Guillermo”
to its English form “William”, whereas Translatotron speaks
the Spanish name (although the ASR model mistranscribes it
as “of the ermo”), suggesting that the direct model might have
a bias toward more directly reconstructing the input. Similarly,
in example 7 on the companion page Translatotron reconstructs
“pasejo” as “passages” instead of “tickets”, potentially reﬂecting
a bias for cognates. We leave detailed analysis to future work.
3.4. Cross language voice transfer
In our ﬁnal experiment, we synthesize translated speech using the
voice of the source speaker by training the full model depicted in
Figure 1. The speaker encoder is conditioned on the ground truth
target speaker during training. We use a subset of the data from
Sec. 3.1 for which we have paired source and target recordings.
Note that the source and target speakers for each pair are always
different – the data was not collected from bilingual speakers.
This dataset contains 606k utterance pairs, resampled to 16 kHz,
with 863 and 493 hours of source and target speech, respectively;
6.3k pairs, a subset of that from Sec. 3.1, are held out for testing.
Since target recordings contained noise, we apply the denoising
and volume normalization from [15] to improve output quality.
Table 5 compares performance using different conditioningTable 5: Voice transfer performance when conditioned on source,
ground truth target, or a random utterance in the target language.
References for MOS-similarity match the conditioning speaker.
Speaker Emb BLEU MOS-naturalness MOS-similarity
Source 33.6 3:070:08 1 :850:06
Target 36.2 3:150:08 3 :300:09
Random target 35.4 3:080:08 3 :240:08
Ground truth 59.9 4:100:06 -
strategies. The top row transfers the source speaker’s voice to the
translated speech, while row two is a “cheating” conﬁguration
since the speaker embedding can potentially leak information
about the target content to the decoder. To verify that this does
not negatively impact performance we also condition on random
target utterances in row three. In all cases performance is worse
than models trained on synthetic targets in Tables 2 and 4. This is
because the task of synthesizing arbitrary speakers is more difﬁ-
cult; the training targets are much noisier and training set is much
smaller; and the ASR model used for evaluation makes more er-
rors on the noisy, multispeaker targets. In terms of BLEU score,
the difference between conditioning on ground truth and random
targets is very small, verifying that content leak is not a concern
(in part due to the low speaker embedding dimension). However
conditioning on the source trails by 1.8 BLEU points, reﬂecting
the mismatch in conditioning language between the training and
inference conﬁgurations. Naturalness MOS scores are close in
all cases. However, conditioning on the source speaker signiﬁ-
cantly reduces similarity MOS by 1.4 points. Again this suggests
that using English speaker embeddings during training does not
generalize well to Spanish speakers.
4. Conclusions
We present a direct speech-to-speech translation model, trained
end-to-end. We ﬁnd that it is important to use speech tran-
scripts during training, but no intermediate speech transcription
is necessary for inference. Exploring alternate training strategies
which alleviate this requirement is an interesting direction for
future work. The model achieves high translation quality on
two Spanish-to-English datasets, although performance is not as
good as a baseline cascade of ST and TTS models.
In addition, we demonstrate a variant which simultaneously
transfers the source speaker’s voice to the translated speech.
The voice transfer does not work as well as in a similar TTS
context [15], reﬂecting the difﬁculty of the cross-language voice
transfer task, as well as evaluation [44]. Potential strategies
to improve voice transfer performance include improving the
speaker encoder by adding a language adversarial loss, or by
incorporating a cycle-consistency term [13] into the S2ST loss.
Other future work includes utilizing weakly supervision to
scale up training with synthetic data [21] or multitask learning
[19,20], and transferring prosody and other acoustic factors from
the source speech to the translated speech following [45–47].
5. Acknowledgements
The authors thank Quan Wang, Jason Pelecanos and the Google
Speech team for providing the multilingual speaker encoder, Tom
Walters and the Deepmind team for help with WaveNet TTS,
Quan Wang, Heiga Zen, Patrick Nguyen, Yu Zhang, Jonathan
Shen, Orhan Firat, and the Google Brain team for helpful discus-
sions, and Mengmeng Niu for data collection support.

==== Page 5 ====
6. References
[1]A. Lavie, A. Waibel, L. Levin, M. Finke, D. Gates, M. Gavalda,
T. Zeppenfeld, and P. Zhan, “JANUS-III: Speech-to-speech trans-
lation in multiple languages,” in Proc. ICASSP , 1997.
[2]W. Wahlster, Verbmobil: Foundations of speech-to-speech transla-
tion. Springer, 2000.
[3]S. Nakamura, K. Markov, H. Nakaiwa, G.-i. Kikui, H. Kawai, T. Jit-
suhiro, J.-S. Zhang, H. Yamamoto, E. Sumita, and S. Yamamoto,
“The ATR multilingual speech-to-speech translation system,” IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 2006.
[4]International Telecommunication Union, “ITU-T F.745: Func-
tional requirements for network-based speech-to-speech translation
services,” 2016.
[5]H. Ney, “Speech translation: Coupling of recognition and transla-
tion,” in Proc. ICASSP , 1999.
[6]E. Matusov, S. Kanthak, and H. Ney, “On the integration of speech
recognition and statistical machine translation,” in European Con-
ference on Speech Communication and Technology , 2005.
[7]E. Vidal, “Finite-state speech-to-speech translation,” in Proc.
ICASSP , 1997.
[8]F. Casacuberta, H. Ney, F. J. Och, E. Vidal, J. M. Vilar et al. ,
“Some approaches to statistical and ﬁnite-state speech-to-speech
translation,” Computer Speech and Language , vol. 18, no. 1, 2004.
[9]P. Aguero, J. Adell, and A. Bonafonte, “Prosody generation for
speech-to-speech translation,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2006.
[10] Q. T. Do, S. Sakti, and S. Nakamura, “Toward expressive speech
translation: a uniﬁed sequence-to-sequence LSTMs approach for
translating words and emphasis,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2017.
[11] T. Kano, S. Takamichi, S. Sakti, G. Neubig, T. Toda, and S. Naka-
mura, “An end-to-end model for cross-lingual transformation of
paralinguistic information,” Machine Translation , pp. 1–16, 2018.
[12] M. Kurimo, W. Byrne, J. Dines, P. N. Garner, M. Gibson, Y . Guan,
T. Hirsim ¨aki, R. Karhila, S. King, H. Liang et al. , “Personalising
speech-to-speech translation in the EMIME project,” in Proc. ACL
2010 System Demonstrations , 2010.
[13] E. Nachmani, A. Polyak, Y . Taigman, and L. Wolf, “Fitting new
speakers based on a short untranscribed sample,” in ICML , 2018.
[14] S. O. Arik, J. Chen, K. Peng, W. Ping, and Y . Zhou, “Neural voice
cloning with a few samples,” in Proc. NeurIPS , 2018.
[15] Y . Jia, Y . Zhang, R. J. Weiss, Q. Wang, J. Shen, F. Ren, Z. Chen
et al. , “Transfer learning from speaker veriﬁcation to multispeaker
text-to-speech synthesis,” in Proc. NeurIPS , 2018.
[16] Y . Chen, Y . Assael, B. Shillingford, D. Budden, S. Reed, H. Zen,
Q. Wang, L. C. Cobo, A. Trask, B. Laurie et al. , “Sample efﬁcient
adaptive text-to-speech,” in Proc. ICLR , 2019.
[17] A. B ´erard, O. Pietquin, C. Servan, and L. Besacier, “Listen and
translate: A proof of concept for end-to-end speech-to-text transla-
tion,” in NeurIPS Workshop on End-to-end Learning for Speech
and Audio Processing , 2016.
[18] A. B ´erard, L. Besacier, A. C. Kocabiyikoglu, and O. Pietquin,
“End-to-end automatic speech translation of audiobooks,” in Proc.
ICASSP , 2018.
[19] R. J. Weiss, J. Chorowski, N. Jaitly, Y . Wu, and Z. Chen,
“Sequence-to-sequence models can directly translate foreign
speech,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2017.
[20] A. Anastasopoulos and D. Chiang, “Tied multitask learning for
neural speech translation,” in Proc. NAACL-HLT , 2018.
[21] Y . Jia, M. Johnson, W. Macherey, R. J. Weiss, Y . Cao, C.-C. Chiu,
N. Ari et al. , “Leveraging weakly supervised data to improve end-
to-end speech-to-text translation,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2019.
[22] A. Haque, M. Guo, and P. Verma, “Conditional end-to-end audio
transforms,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2018.
[23] J. Zhang, Z. Ling, L.-J. Liu, Y . Jiang, and L.-R. Dai, “Sequence-
to-sequence acoustic modeling for voice conversion,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 2019.[24] F. Biadsy, R. J. Weiss, P. J. Moreno, D. Kanevsky, and Y . Jia,
“Parrotron: An end-to-end speech-to-speech conversion model and
its applications to hearing-impaired speech and speech separation,”
inProc. Interspeech , 2019.
[25] M. Guo, A. Haque, and P. Verma, “End-to-end spoken language
translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10760 , 2019.
[26] J. Shen, R. Pang, R. J. Weiss, M. Schuster, N. Jaitly, Z. Yang,
Z. Chen, Y . Zhang et al. , “Natural TTS synthesis by conditioning
WaveNet on mel spectrogram predictions,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2017.
[27] A. F. Machado and M. Queiroz, “V oice conversion: A critical
survey,” in Proc. Sound and Music Computing , 2010, pp. 1–8.
[28] C.-C. Chiu, T. Sainath, Y . Wu, R. Prabhavalkar, P. Nguyen, Z. Chen,
A. Kannan, R. Weiss, K. Rao et al. , “State-of-the-art speech recog-
nition with sequence-to-sequence models,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2018.
[29] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
inProc. NeurIPS , 2017.
[30] Y . Wang, R. Skerry-Ryan, D. Stanton, Y . Wu, R. J. Weiss, N. Jaitly,
Z. Yang, Y . Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Bengio, Q. Le et al. , “Tacotron:
Towards end-to-end speech synthesis,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2017.
[31] Y . Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V . Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y . Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey et al. , “Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machine translation,” arXiv:1609.08144 , 2016.
[32] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. ICLR , 2015.
[33] D. Krueger, T. Maharaj, J. Kram ´ar, M. Pezeshki, N. Ballas, N. R.
Ke, A. Goyal, Y . Bengio et al. , “Zoneout: Regularizing RNNs by
randomly preserving hidden activations,” in Proc. ICLR , 2017.
[34] N. Shazeer and M. Stern, “Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with
sublinear memory cost,” in Proc. ICML , 2018, pp. 4603–4611.
[35] D. Grifﬁn and J. Lim, “Signal estimation from modiﬁed short-time
Fourier transform,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 236–243, 1984.
[36] N. Kalchbrenner, E. Elsen, K. Simonyan, S. Noury, N. Casagrande,
E. Lockhart, F. Stimberg, A. v. d. Oord, S. Dieleman et al. , “Efﬁ-
cient neural audio synthesis,” in Proc. ICML , 2018.
[37] A. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Paisley, and C. Wang, “Fully
supervised speaker diarization,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2019.
[38] M. Post, G. Kumar, A. Lopez, D. Karakos, C. Callison-Burch et al. ,
“Improved speech-to-text translation with the Fisher and Callhome
Spanish–English speech translation corpus,” in Proc. IWSLT , 2013.
[39] J. Shen, P. Nguyen, Y . Wu, Z. Chen et al. , “Lingvo: a modular and
scalable framework for sequence-to-sequence modeling,” 2019.
[40] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “BLEU: A method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in ACL, 2002.
[41] K. Irie, R. Prabhavalkar, A. Kannan, A. Bruguier, D. Rybach,
and P. Nguyen, “Model unit exploration for sequence-to-sequence
speech recognition,” arXiv:1902.01955 , 2019.
[42] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “LibriSpeech:
an ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in Proc.
ICASSP , 2015.
[43] A. van den Oord, Y . Li, I. Babuschkin, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals,
K. Kavukcuoglu, G. van den Driessche et al. , “Parallel WaveNet:
Fast high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICML , 2018.
[44] M. Wester, J. Dines, M. Gibson, H. Liang et al. , “Speaker adap-
tation and the evaluation of speaker similarity in the EMIME
speech-to-speech translation project,” in ISCA Tutorial and Re-
search Workshop on Speech Synthesis , 2010.
[45] Y . Lee and T. Kim, “Robust and ﬁne-grained prosody control of
end-to-end speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2019.
[46] Y . Wang, D. Stanton, Y . Zhang, R. Skerry-Ryan, E. Battenberg,
J. Shor et al. , “Style tokens: Unsupervised style modeling, control
and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICML , 2018.
[47] W.-N. Hsu, Y . Zhang, R. J. Weiss, H. Zen, Y . Wu, Y . Wang, Y . Cao,
Y . Jia, Z. Chen, J. Shen et al. , “Hierarchical generative modeling
for controllable speech synthesis,” in Proc. ICLR , 2019.

