==== Page 1 ====
Distilling Knowledge from Graph Convolutional Networks
Yiding Yang1, Jiayan Qiu2, Mingli Song3, Dacheng Tao2, Xinchao Wang1†
1Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
2UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
3College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{yyang99, xwang135 }@stevens.edu, jqiu3225@uni.sydney.edu.au,
brooksong@zju.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Student Network Teacher Network Soften 
Labels ReadOut ReadOut
Local 
Structure 
Preserving
NearFar
Teacher
Student w/ LSP
Student w/o LSP
(a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) Unlike existing knowledge distillation methods that focus on only the prediction or the middle activation, our
method explicitly distills knowledge about how the teacher model embeds the topological structure and transfers it to the
student model. (b) We display the structure of the feature space, visualized by the distance between the red point and the
others on a point cloud dataset. Here, each object is represented as a set of 3D points. Top Row : structures obtained from
the teacher; Middle Row : structures obtained from the student trained with the local structure preserving (LSP) module;
Bottom Row : structures obtained from the student trained without LSP. Features in the middle and bottom row are obtained
from the last layer of the model after training for ten epochs. As we can see, model trained with LSP learns a similar structure
as that of the teacher, while the model without LSP fails to do so.
Abstract
Existing knowledge distillation methods focus on con-
volutional neural networks (CNNs), where the input sam-
ples like images lie in a grid domain, and have largely
overlooked graph convolutional networks (GCN) that han-
dle non-grid data. In this paper, we propose to our best
knowledge the ﬁrst dedicated approach to distilling knowl-
edge from a pre-trained GCN model. To enable the knowl-
edge transfer from the teacher GCN to the student, we
propose a local structure preserving module that explic-
itly accounts for the topological semantics of the teacher.
In this module, the local structure information from both
the teacher and the student are extracted as distributions,
and hence minimizing the distance between these distribu-
tions enables topology-aware knowledge transfer from the
†Corresponding author.teacher, yielding a compact yet high-performance student
model. Moreover, the proposed approach is readily extend-
able to dynamic graph models, where the input graphs for
the teacher and the student may differ. We evaluate the pro-
posed method on two different datasets using GCN models
of different architectures, and demonstrate that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art knowledge distillation perfor-
mance for GCN models.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their
unprecedented results in almost all computer vision tasks.
The state-of-the-art performances, however, come at the
cost of the very high computation and memory loads, which
in many cases preclude the deployment of DNNs on the
edge side. To this end, knowledge distillation has been pro-
7074


==== Page 2 ====
posed, which is one of the main streams of model compres-
sion [14, 2, 38, 46]. By treating a pre-trained cumbersome
network as the teacher model, knowledge distillations aims
to learn a compact student model, which is expected to mas-
ter the expertise of the teacher, via transferring knowledge
from the teacher.
The effectiveness of knowledge distillation has been
validated in many tasks, where the performance of the
student closely approaches that of the teacher. Despite
the encouraging progress, existing knowledge distillation
schemes have been focusing on convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs), for which the input samples, such as im-
ages, lie in the grid domain. However, many real-life data,
such as point clouds, take the form of non-grid structures
like graphs and thus call for the graph convolutional net-
works (GCNs) [35, 10, 17, 12]. GCNs explicitly looks into
the topological structure of the data by exploring the local
and global semantics of the graph. As a result, conventional
knowledge distillation methods, which merely account for
the output or the intermediate activation and omit the topo-
logical context of input data, are no longer capable to fully
carry out the knowledge transfer.
In this paper, we introduce to our best knowledge the
ﬁrst dedicated knowledge distillation approach tailored for
GCNs. Given a pre-trained teacher GCN, our goal is to train
a student GCN model with fewer layers, or lower-dimension
feature maps, or even a smaller graph with fewer edges. At
the heart of our GCN distillation is the capability to encode
the topological information concealed in the graph, which is
absent in prior CNN-based methods. As depicted in Fig. 1,
the proposed method considers the features of node as well
as the topological connections among them, and hence pro-
vides the student model richer and more critical information
about topological structure embedded by the teacher.
We illustrate the workﬂow of the proposed GCN knowl-
edge distillation approach in Fig. 2. We design a local
structure preserving (LSP) module to explicitly account for
the graphical semantics. Given the embedded feature of
node and the graph from teacher and student, the LSP mod-
ule measures the topological difference between them and
guides the student to obtain a similar topological embedding
as the teacher does. Speciﬁcally, LSP ﬁrst generates distri-
bution for each local structure from both the student and the
teacher, and then enforces the student to learn a similar local
structure by minimizing the distance between the distribu-
tions. Furthermore, our approach can be readily extended to
dynamic graph models, where the graphs are not static but
constructed by the teacher and student model dynamically.
To see the distillation performance, we evaluate our
method on two different tasks in different domains include
Protein-Protein Interaction dataset for node classiﬁcation
and ModelNet40 for 3D object recognition. The models
used in these two tasks are in different architectures. Ex-periments show that our method consistently achieves the
best knowledge distillation performance among all the com-
pared methods, validating the effectiveness and generaliza-
tion of the proposed approach.
Our contributions are summarized as following:
•We introduce a novel method for distilling knowledge
from graph convolutional network. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst dedicated knowledge distil-
lation method tailored for GCN models.
•We devise a local structure preserving (LSP) method
to measure the similarity of the local topological struc-
tures embedded by teacher and student, enabling our
method to be readily extendable to dynamic graph
models.
•We evaluate the proposed method on two different
tasks of different domains and on GCN models of dif-
ferent architectures, and show that our method outper-
forms all other methods consistently.
2. Related Work
Many methods have been proposed to distill the knowl-
edge from a trained model and transfer it to a student model
with smaller capacity [2, 38, 45]. Although there are many
distillation strategies that do not only utilize the output [14]
but also focus on the intermediate activation [31, 47, 16],
they are all designed for the deep convolutional network
with the grid data as input.
Our method, however, focuses on the graph convolu-
tional networks, which handles a more general input that
lies in the non-grid domain. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst attempt along this line. In what follows, we
brieﬂy review several tasks that are related to our method.
Knowledge Distillation. Knowledge Distillation (KD)
is ﬁrst proposed in [14], where the goal is distilling the
knowledge from a teacher model that is typical large into
a smaller model so that the student model can hold a simi-
lar performance as the teacher’s. In this method, the output
of teacher is smoothed by setting a high temperature in the
softmax function, which make it contains the information
of the relationship among classes. Beside the output, in-
termediate activation can also be utilized to better train a
student network. FitNet [31] forces the student to learn a
similar features as teacher’s by adding an additional fully
connected layer to transfer features of student model. [47]
proposes a method to transfer the attention instead of the
feature itself to get a better distillation performance. More-
over, NST [16] provides a method to learn a similar activa-
tion of the neurons. There are also many other methods in
this ﬁeld [23, 2, 38, 36, 24, 4, 34, 45, 5, 4], but none of them
provide a solution that is suitable for GCN.
7075


==== Page 3 ====
Local structure 
preserving
GCN_L GCN_L
…Teacher
GCN_S GCN_S
…StudentSoften 
LabelsLocal structure 
preservingReadOut ReadOut… …Distribution
Matching
Figure 2: Framework of the proposed knowledge distillation method for GCNs. The local structure preserving module is the
core of the proposed method. Given the feature maps and the graphs from the teacher and the student, we ﬁrst compute the
distribution of the local structure for each node and then match the distributions of the teacher with that of the student. The
student model will be optimized by minimizing the difference of distribution among all the local structures.
Knowledge Amalgamation. Knowledge amalgama-
tion [33, 22, 32, 44] aims to learn a student network from
multiple teachers from different domains. The student
model is trained as a multi-task model and learns from
all the teachers. For example, a method of knowledge
amalgamation is proposed in [43] to train a student model
from heterogeneous-task teachers include scene parsing
teacher, depth estimation teacher and surface-normal esti-
mation teacher. The student model will have a backbone
network trained from all the teachers’ knowledge and also
several heads for different tasks trained from the corre-
sponding teacher’s knowledge. MTZ [13] is a framework
to compress multiple but correlated models into one model.
The knowledge is distilled via a layer-wise neuron sharing
mechanism. CFL [25] distills the knowledge by learning a
common feature space, wherein the student model mimics
the transformed features of the teachers to aggregate knowl-
edge. Although many such methods are proposed, the mod-
els involved are usually limited within grid domain.
Graph Convolutional Network. In recent years, graph
convolutional network [9, 6, 21, 27, 10, 42] has been proved
to be a powerful model for non-grid data, which is typi-
cally represented as a set of nodes with features along with
a graph that represents the relationship among nodes. The
ﬁrst GCN paper [17] shows that the GCN can be built by
making the ﬁrst-order approximation of spectral graph con-
volutions. A huge amount of methods have been proposed
to make the GCN more powerful. GraphSAGE [12] gives
a solution to make the GCN model scalable for huge graph
by sampling the neighbors rather than using all of them.
GAT [35] introduces the attention mechanism to GCN to
make it possible to learn the weight for each neighbors auto-
matically. [15] improves the efﬁcient of training by adaptive
sampling. In this paper, instead of designing a new GCN,
we focus on how to transfer the knowledge effectively be-
tween different GCN models.
3D Object Recognition. One of the setups for 3D ob-
ject recognition is predicting the label of the object given aset of 3D points belong to it [28, 30]. Deep learning based
methods [39, 11, 7, 20, 29, 26] outperform the previous
methods that based on hand-crafted feature extractors [1, 3].
Moreover, GCN based methods [8, 19, 37, 18, 41], which
can directly encode the structure information from the set of
points, become one of the most popular directions along this
line. Graph in these methods are typically obtained by con-
necting the k nearest points, where the distance is measured
in the original space [18] or the learned feature space [37].
3. Method
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief description about the
GCN followed by the motivation of the proposed knowl-
edge distillation method that is based on the observation of
the fundamental mechanism of GCN. We then provide the
details about the local structure preserving (LSP) module,
which is the core of our proposed method. Moreover, we
explore the different choices of the distance functions used
in the LSP module. Finally, we give the scheme to extend
LSP to the dynamic graph models.
3.1. Graph Convolutional Network
Unlike the traditional convolutional networks that take
grid data as input and output the high-level features, the in-
put of graph convolutional networks can be non-grid, which
is more general. Such non-grid input data is typically repre-
sented as a set of features X={x1,x2,...,xn} ∈RF, and
a directed/undirected graph G={V,E}. For example, in
the task of 3D object recognition, we can set xias the 3D
coordination and Eas the set of the nearest neighbors.
Given the input XandG, the core operation of graph
convolutional network is shown as:
x′
i=Aj:(j,i)∈Ehθ(gφ(xi),gφ(xj)), (1)
wherehθis a function that considers the features in pair
wise,gφis a function to map the features into a new space,
Ais the strategy of how to aggregate features from the
neighbors and get the new feature of the center node i.
7076


==== Page 4 ====
There are many choices of function h, function gand
the aggregation strategies. Take the graph attention net-
work [35] as an example. it can be formulated as
x′
i=/summationdisplay
j:j,i∈EeMLP 1(xi||xj)
/summationtext
j:(j,i)∈E(eMLP 1(xi||xj))MLP2(xi),(2)
where the function gis designed as a multilayer perceptron,
functionhis another multilayer perceptron that takes pair of
nodes as input and predict the attention between them. The
aggregation strategy is weighted summing all the features
of neighbors according to the attention after normalization.
3.2. Motivation
The motivation of the proposed method is based on the
fundamental of graph convolutional network. As shown
in Eq. 1, the aggregation strategy ( A) plays an important
role in embedding the features of nodes [21, 35], which is
learned during the training process. We thus aim to pro-
vide the student the information about the function that the
teacher has learned. However, it is challenging to distill
knowledge that exactly represents the aggregation function
and transfer it to the student. Instead of distilling the ag-
gregation function directly, we distill the outcomes of such
function: the embedded topological structure. The student
can then be guided by matching the structure embedded by
itself and that embedded by the teacher. We will show in the
following sections how to describe the topological structure
information and distill it to the student.
3.3. Local Structure Preserving
For the intermediate feature maps of a GCN, we can
formulate it as a graph G={V,E}and a set of features
Z={z1,z2,...,zn} ∈RF, wherenis the number of
nodes,Fis the dimension of the feature maps. The lo-
cal structure can be summarized as a set of vectors LS=
{LS1,LS2,...,LS n},LSi∈Rd, wheredis the degree of
the center node iof the local structure. Each element of the
vector is computed by
LSij=eSIM(zi,zj)
/summationtext
j:(j,i)∈E(eSIM(zi,zj)), (3)
SIM(zi,zj) =||zi−zj||2
2. (4)
whereSIM is a function that measures the similarity of
the given pair of nodes, which can be deﬁned as the eu-
clidean distance between the two features. There are also
many other advanced functions can be used here, which we
will give more details in the following section. We take an
exponential operation and normalize the values across all
the nodes that point to center of the local structure. As a
result, for each node i, we can obtain its corresponding lo-
cal structure representation LSi∈Rdby applying Eq. 3.Notice that for different center node, their local structure
representation may be in different dimension, which is de-
pended on it’s local graph.
In the setting of knowledge distillation, we are given a
teacher network as well as a student one, where the teacher
network is trained and ﬁxed. We ﬁrst provide here a local
structure preserving strategy under the situation that both
these two networks take the same graph as input but with
different layers and dimension of embedded features. For
the dynamic graph models, where the graph can be changed
during the optimization process, we will give a solution in
the section 3.5.
Given the intermediate feature maps, we can compute
the local structure vectors for both the teacher and the stu-
dent networks, which are donated as LSsandLSt. For
each center node i, the similarity of the local structure be-
tween the student’s and the teacher’s can be computed as
Si=DKL(LSs
i||LSt
i) =/summationdisplay
j:(j,i)∈ELSs
ijlog(LSs
ij
LSt
ij),(5)
where the Kullback Leibler divergence is adopted.
A smaller Simeans a more similar distribution of the
local structure. Thus, we compute the similarity of the dis-
tributions over all the nodes of the given graph and obtain
the local structure preserving loss as
LLSP=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1Si. (6)
The total loss is formulated as:
L=H(ps,y)+λLLSP (7)
whereyis the label and psis the prediction of the student
model,λis the hyperparameter to balance these two losses
andHrepresents cross entropy loss function that is also
adopted by many other knowledge distillation methods [31,
16, 47].
3.4. Kernel Function
The similarity measurement function shown in Eq. 4
makes a strong assumption about the feature space that the
similarity between pair of nodes is proportional to their eu-
clidean distance, which is typically not the truth. We thus
apply the kernel trick, which is very useful to map the vec-
tors to a higher dimension and compute the similarity, to
address this problem.
Kernel tricks are widely used in the traditional statisti-
cal machine learning methods. In that situation, the original
feature vector will be mapped to a higher dimension by a
implicit function ϕ. The similarity of the feature vector will
then be computed as the inner product of the two mapped
vectors as /an}bracketle{tϕ(zi),ϕ(zj)/an}bracketri}ht. By adopting the kernel function,
7077


==== Page 5 ====
𝑠!𝑠"#𝑠"$
𝑠"%
𝑠"&
𝑠"'𝑠"(
𝑡!𝑡"#𝑡"$𝑡"%
𝑡"&
𝑡"'𝑡"(Student Graph
Teacher Graph𝑠!𝑠"#𝑠"$
𝑠"%
𝑠"&
𝑠"'𝑠"(
𝑡!𝑡"#𝑡"$𝑡"%
𝑡"&
𝑡"'𝑡"(∪
∪Distribution 
matching
Figure 3: Handling models with a dynamic graph, where
the graph may be updated during the training process. We
address this problem by ﬁrst adding virtual edges according
to the union of the two graphs from the student model and
teacher model. The local structure preserving module can
be then applied to the new graph directly.
we can compute the above two steps together without know-
ing the expression of ϕ.
There are several choices of the kernel functions. Three
of the most common used kernel functions are linear func-
tion (Linear), polynomial kernel function (Poly) and radial
basis function (RBF) kernel:
K(zi,zj) =

(zT
izj+c)dPoly
e−1
2σ2||zi−zj||2RBF
zT
izj Linear(8)
In this paper, we adopt and compare these three kernel func-
tions and also the L2Norm. For the polynomial kernel func-
tion,dandcare set to two and zero respectively. For the
RBF,σis set to one.
3.5. Dynamic Graph
While the above method can be applied to the GCN mod-
els that with a ﬁxed graph as input, it lacks ﬂexibility for dy-
namic graph models. In the setup of dynamic graph model,
both the feature of the nodes and the connection among
them can be changed. Take the DGCNN model [37] as an
example, the graph is initially constructed according to the
3D coordination of the input nodes/points and will be re-
constructed once a new feature of nodes are obtained.
The advantage of dynamic graph is that the graph can
represent the topological connection in a learned feature
space rather than always in the initial feature space. How-
ever, such dynamic graph method can cause a problem to
the local structure preserving module we mentioned above.
The left of Fig. 3 is a case of the intermediate graphs gen-
erated by the DGCNN model. For each layer, the graph isconstructed by ﬁnding the Kcloset nodes for each node,
whereKis the hyperparameter. Directly computing the lo-
cal structure vector using above method is meaningless be-
cause the distributions will come from a total different order
of nodes.
We proposed a strategy to deal with such kind of situa-
tion by adding virtual edges to the graph in both the teacher
model and student one. As shown in Fig. 3, given the two
graphs constructed by the teacher and the student, which
typically do not hold the same distribution of edges, we ob-
tain the union of edges Eu
•i={(j,i) : (j,i)∈ Et|(j,i)∈
Es}for each center node i. A similar local structure vector
can be obtained by replacing EwithEuin Eq. 3. Notice that
although we adding the virtual edges for both the graphs, we
only use them for local structure preserving module. The
models still use their original graph to aggregate and update
the feature of nodes. By considering the union structure of
these two graphs, the generated local structure vectors now
involve the nodes with the same distribution, which makes
it possible for the student network to learn the topological
relationship learned by the teacher.
Such strategy not only make it possible to compare
the embedded local structure with different distribution of
neighbors but also compare between local structure with
different size of neighbors. It means that we can distill the
knowledge from a teacher model with a large Kto the stu-
dent model with smaller K.
4. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief description about the
comparison methods. Then, we provide the experimental
setup include the datasets we used, the GCN models we
adopted and the details for each comparison methods. No-
tice that our goal is not to achieve the state-of-the-art per-
formance in each dataset or task but to transfer as mush as
information from the teacher model the student one. This
can be measured by the performance of the student model
when the same teacher pre-trained model is involved.
We adopt two datasets in different domains, One is the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) [48] dataset where the
graphs come from the human tissues. This is a com-
mon used dataset for node classiﬁcation [35, 12]. Another
dataset is ModelNet40 [40] that contains point clouds come
from the CAD models, which is a common used dataset for
3D object analysis [28, 30, 19, 37].
We also evaluate the proposed knowledge distilla-
tion method on GCN models with different architectures.
Speciﬁcally, for the PPI dataset, GAT [35] model is adopted
that takes ﬁxed graph as input. For the ModelNet40 dataset,
DGCNN [37] model with dynamic graph is adopted. We
show in the experiments that our proposed method achieve
the state-of-the-art distillation performance under various
setups.
7078


==== Page 6 ====
4.1. Comparison Methods
Since there is no knowledge distillation method designed
for GCN models, we implement three knowledge distilla-
tion methods that can be used directly in a GCN model in-
cludes KD method [14], FitNet method [31] and attention
transfer method (AT) [47]. Neuron selectivity transfer [16]
is also one of the knowledge distillation methods for tra-
ditional convolutional networks. We leave it out since it
makes an assumption that the size of the feature maps of
student’s and teacher’s should be in the same size, which is
not the case of our setup for the student and teacher mod-
els. Besides all the methods, we also set a baseline method
which is training the student model with the original loss.
The summary of the comparison methods is as follow:
•KD method [14] is the ﬁrst attempt for distilling
knowledge from a teacher network. It utilizes a soften
labels generated by the teacher network as an addi-
tional supervision. The intuition behind this method
is that the soften label contains the similarity informa-
tion among the classes learned by the teacher network.
Since this method only relies on the output, it is suit-
able for most kinds of models.
•FitNet method [31] does not only make use of the
output of the teacher model but also consider the in-
termediate feature maps. This method based on an as-
sumption that the feature of the teacher model can be
recovered from the feature of the student when the stu-
dent is well trained. It introduces an additional map-
ping function to map the feature of student’s to that of
the teacher’s and compute the L2distance between the
mapped feature and the teacher’s feature.
•Attention transfer method (AT) [47] provides an-
other way to transfer the knowledge in attention do-
main. In this method, the student model is forced to
focus on the similar spatial areas like the teacher does,
which is achieved by adding an L2loss between their
attention maps. The attention map can be obtained
from the feature maps and keep in the same size with-
out consideration of the different channels.
4.2. Node Classiﬁcation
In the node classiﬁcation task, we are given the input
nodes with associated features and also the graph. The goal
is to generate the embedded feature for each node such that
nodes with different classes can be separated. We adopt
protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset that contains 24
graphs corresponding to different human tissues. We fol-
low the same dataset splitting protocol, wherein 20 graphs
are used for training, two graphs are used for validation and
another two graphs are used for testing. The average num-
ber of nodes for each graph in this dataset is 2372 and eachnode has an average degree of 14. The dimension of input
feature of the nodes is 50 and the number of class is 121.
For this dataset and task, we adopt GAT model for both
the teacher model and student model. Since this is a multi-
label task, where each node can belong to more than one
classes, the binary cross entropy loss is adopted. The archi-
tecture of these two models are shown as follow:
Model Layers Attention heads Hidden features
Teacher 3 4,4,6 256,256,121
Student 5 2,2,2,2,2 68,68,68,68,121
Table 1: Summary of the teacher and student models used
on the PPI dataset for node classiﬁcation. The student net-
work is deeper than the teacher but with lower dimension of
hidden features.
Model Params RunTime Training F1 Score
Teacher 3.64M 48.5ms 1.7s/3.4G 97.6
Student Full 0.16M 41.3ms 1.3s/1.2G 95.7
Student KD [14] - - - -
Student AT [47] 0.16M 41.3ms 1.9s/1.4G 95.4
Student FitNet [31] 0.16M 41.3ms 2.4s/1.6G 95.6
Student LSP (Ours) 0.16M 41.3ms 2.0s/1.5G 96.1
Table 2: Node classiﬁcation results on the PPI dataset.
Teacher model used on this dataset is a GAT model with
three hidden layers. full means the student model is trained
with the ground truth labels without the teacher model.
The results are shown in Tab. 2. Params represents the
total number of parameters; RunTime is the inference time
for one sample and Training is the training time/GPU mem-
ory usage for one iteration, which is measured in a Nvidia
1080Ti GPU. The optimizer, learning rate, weight decay
and training epochs are set to Adam, 0.005, 0 and 500 re-
spectively for all the methods. All other hyperparameters
for each method are tuned to obtain the best results on the
validation set. Speciﬁcally, for AT method, the attention is
computed by as/summationtextC
i=1|Fi|; For ours, the kernel function is
set to RBF and λis set to 100. Notice that the loss function
does not involve the softmax function. Therefore, the KD
method, which is used by setting a high temperature in a
softmax function, is not suitable here.
As what can be seen, all the knowledge distillation meth-
ods expect ours fail to provide a positive inﬂuence to the
student model and lead to a drop of the performance respect
to the performance of model trained with the original loss.
Our method, thanks to the ability to transfer the local struc-
ture information to the student model, provides a positive
inﬂuence and lead to a student model with the best perfor-
mance among all the comparison methods.
4.3. 3D Object Recognition
We adopt ModelNet40 [40] dataset for the 3D object
recognition task, wherein the object is represented by a set
of points with only the 3D coordination as features. There
7079


==== Page 7 ====
Epoch 1 Epoch 5 Epoch 10 Epoch 20 Epoch 50 Epoch 100
Near FarTeacherStudentw/o LSP
Student w/ LSP
Student w/o LSP
Studentw/ LSP
Studentw/o LSP
Studentw/ LSP
Studentw/o LSP
Studentw/ LSP
Studentw/o LSP
Studentw/ LSP
Figure 4: Visualization of the structure of the learned feature space, depicted by the distance between the red point and others.
The features are extracted from the last layer of models. From left to right, we show the structure from the model trained in
epoch 1, 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100. The rightmost column are obtained from the teacher model. For each object, the lower row
is obtained from student model trained with our proposed method, and the upper row is obtained from student model trained
with cross entropy loss. Our proposed knowledge distillation method guides the student model to embed the local structure
as the teacher model does, leading to a similar structure in the very early training stage.
are 40 classes on this dataset and objects in each class come
from the CAD models.
In this experiment, the architecture of both the teacher
and student models is the same as DGCNN [37]. DCGNN
is a dynamic graph convolutional model that makes both
the advantages of the PointNet [28] and graph convolutional
network. The graph here is constructed according to the dis-
tance of the points in their feature space. Since the feature
space is different in different layers and different training
stages, the graph is also changed, making it a dynamic graphconvolutional model.
The teacher model is under the same setup as the orig-
inal paper: it has ﬁve graph convolutional layers followed
by two fully connected layers. The student model has four
graph convolutional layers with fewer feature map channels
followed by one fully connected layers. The size of graph
used in the student model, which is determined by the num-
ber of neighbors (K) when constructing the graph, is also
smaller than the teacher’s. The details of these two models
are summarized in Tab. 3.
7080


==== Page 8 ====
Model Layers Feature map’s size MLPs K
Teacher 5 64,64,128,256,1024 512,256 20
Student 4 32,32,64,128 256 10
Table 3: Summary of the teacher and student models used
on the ModelNet40 dataset. The student network is with
less layers, fewer channels, and smaller input graphs.
The results are shown in Tab. 4. For the KD method,
αis set to 0.1, the same as the original paper. The opti-
mizer, learning rate, momentum and training epoch are set
to SGD, 0.1, 0.9, 250 respectively for all the comparison
methods. The other hyperparameters for each method are
turned to obtain the best accuracy on the validation set. For
our method, the kernel function is set to RBF and λis set to
100.
We can see from the results that both KD method and
AT method can boost the performance of the student model.
Our method, thanks to the ability to learn the structure in-
formation from dynamic graph, generates the best student
model for both the accuracy and mean class accuracy. The
student model with only ﬁx percent parameters can achieve
a similar performance as the teacher model, which shows
the generalization ability of the proposed method for differ-
ent tasks and different architectures.
Model Params RunTime Training Acc mAcc
Teacher 1.81M 8.72ms 30s/4.2G 92.4 89.3
Student Full 0.1M 3.31ms 12s/1.4G 91.2 87.5
Student KD [14] 0.1M 3.31ms 15s/1.4G 91.6 88.1
Student AT [47] 0.1M 3.31ms 21s/1.7G 91.6 87.9
Student FitNet [31] 0.1M 3.31ms 28s/2.4G 91.1 87.9
Student LSP (Ours) 0.1M 3.31ms 29s/2.2G 91.9 88.6
Table 4: 3D object recognition results on ModelNet40.
Teacher network used here is a DGCNN model with four
graph convolutional layers.
4.4. Structure Visualization
In order to provide an intuitive understanding of the pro-
posed method, we visualize the structure of the learned fea-
ture space during the process of optimization, which is rep-
resented by the distance among points in the object. As
shown in Fig. 4, the student model trained with the pro-
posed method (shown in the lower row for each object) can
learn a similar structure as the teacher model very quickly
in the early training stage. It can partially explain why the
proposed method can generate a better student model.
4.5. Ablation and Performance Studies
To thoroughly evaluate our method, we provide here ab-
lation and performance studies include the inﬂuence of dif-
ferent kernel functions as well as the performance for dif-
ferent student model conﬁgurations. All the experiments for
this section are conducted on the ModelNet40 dataset.Different Kernel Functions. We test all the three differ-
ent kernel functions as Eq. 8 and also the naive L2Norm.
The results are shown in Tab. 5. All the functions can pro-
vide the positive information to get a better student model
and RBF works the best.
Model Acc mAcc
LSP w/L2Norm 91.4 88.3
LSP w/ Polynomial function 91.7 87.7
LSP w/ RBF 91.9 88.6
LSP w/ Linear function 91.5 87.8
Table 5: Performance with different kernel functions. RBF
achieves the overall best performance.
Different Model Conﬁgurations. We provide here the
experiments to evaluate the trade-off between the model
complexity and the performance when training with our
proposed method. Speciﬁcally, we change the student
model by adding more channels to each layer, adding one
more graph convolutional layers and adding one more fully
connected layers. Notice that student model with more
channels holds almost the same accuracy performance as
the teacher model but with less many parameters.
Model Params (M) RunTime (ms) Acc mAcc
W/ more Channels 0.44 3.83 92.3 88.7
W/ more Layers 0.14 4.26 92.1 89.2
W/ more MLPs 0.30 3.67 91.8 88.6
Table 6: Performance with different model conﬁgurations
to evaluate the trade-off between performance and model-
size/run-time.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a dedicated approach to dis-
tilling knowledge from GCNs, which is to our best knowl-
edge the ﬁrst attempt along this line. This is achieved by
preserving the local structure of the teacher network during
the training process. We represent the local structure of the
intermediate feature maps as distributions over the similar-
ities between the center node of the local structure and its
neighbors, so that preserving the local structures are equiv-
alent to matching the distributions. Moreover, the proposed
approach can be readily extended to dynamic graph mod-
els. Experiments on two datasets in different domains and
on two GCN models of different architectures demonstrate
that the proposed method yields state-of-the-art distillation
performance, outperforming existing knowledge distillation
methods.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by Australian Research Coun-
cil Projects FL-170100117, DP-180103424 and Xinchao
Wang’s startup funding of Stevens Institute of Technology.
7081


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Mathieu Aubry, Ulrich Schlickewei, and Daniel Cremers.
The wave kernel signature: A quantum mechanical approach
to shape analysis. In 2011 IEEE international conference on
computer vision workshops (ICCV workshops) , pages 1626–
1633. IEEE, 2011.
[2] Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to
be deep? In Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, pages 2654–2662, 2014.
[3] Michael M Bronstein and Iasonas Kokkinos. Scale-invariant
heat kernel signatures for non-rigid shape recognition. In
2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition , pages 1704–1711. IEEE,
2010.
[4] Hanting Chen, Yunhe Wang, Chang Xu, Zhaohui Yang,
Chuanjian Liu, Boxin Shi, Chunjing Xu, Chao Xu, and Qi
Tian. Data-free learning of student networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.01186 , 2019.
[5] Tianqi Chen, Ian Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. Net2net:
Accelerating learning via knowledge transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05641 , 2015.
[6] Jian Du, Shanghang Zhang, Guanhang Wu, Jos ´e MF Moura,
and Soummya Kar. Topology adaptive graph convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10370 , 2017.
[7] Yi Fang, Jin Xie, Guoxian Dai, Meng Wang, Fan Zhu,
Tiantian Xu, and Edward Wong. 3d deep shape descriptor.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 2319–2328, 2015.
[8] Yifan Feng, Haoxuan You, Zizhao Zhang, Rongrong Ji, and
Yue Gao. Hypergraph neural networks. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33,
pages 3558–3565, 2019.
[9] Matthias Fey, Jan Eric Lenssen, Frank Weichert, and Hein-
rich M ¨uller. Splinecnn: Fast geometric deep learning with
continuous b-spline kernels. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 869–877, 2018.
[10] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol
Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural message passing for
quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pages 1263–
1272. JMLR. org, 2017.
[11] Kan Guo, Dongqing Zou, and Xiaowu Chen. 3d mesh label-
ing via deep convolutional neural networks. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics (TOG) , 35(1):3, 2015.
[12] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Induc-
tive representation learning on large graphs. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1024–1034,
2017.
[13] Xiaoxi He, Zimu Zhou, and Lothar Thiele. Multi-task zip-
ping via layer-wise neuron sharing. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 6016–6026, 2018.
[14] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling
the knowledge in a neural network. In NIPS Deep Learning
and Representation Learning Workshop , 2015.
[15] Wenbing Huang, Tong Zhang, Yu Rong, and Junzhou Huang.
Adaptive sampling towards fast graph representation learn-ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 4558–4567, 2018.
[16] Zehao Huang and Naiyan Wang. Like what you like: Knowl-
edge distill via neuron selectivity transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.01219 , 2017.
[17] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classi-
ﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.02907 , 2016.
[18] Loic Landrieu and Martin Simonovsky. Large-scale point
cloud semantic segmentation with superpoint graphs. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 4558–4567, 2018.
[19] Yangyan Li, Rui Bu, Mingchao Sun, Wei Wu, Xinhan Di,
and Baoquan Chen. Pointcnn: Convolution on x-transformed
points. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 820–830, 2018.
[20] Yangyan Li, S ¨oren Pirk, Hao Su, Charles R Qi, and
Leonidas J Guibas. Fpnn: Field probing neural networks
for 3d data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 307–315, 2016.
[21] Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard
Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.05493 , 2015.
[22] Iou-Jen Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander Schwing. Knowledge
ﬂow: Improve upon your teachers. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations , 2019.
[23] Yufan Liu, Jiajiong Cao, Bing Li, Chunfeng Yuan, Weim-
ing Hu, Yangxi Li, and Yunqiang Duan. Knowledge distil-
lation via instance relationship graph. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 7096–7104, 2019.
[24] Yufan Liu, Jiajiong Cao, Bing Li, Chunfeng Yuan, Weim-
ing Hu, Yangxi Li, and Yunqiang Duan. Knowledge distil-
lation via instance relationship graph. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 7096–7104, 2019.
[25] Sihui Luo, Xinchao Wang, Gongfan Fang, Yao Hu, Dapeng
Tao, and Mingli Song. Knowledge amalgamation from het-
erogeneous networks by common feature learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.10546 , 2019.
[26] Daniel Maturana and Sebastian Scherer. V oxnet: A 3d con-
volutional neural network for real-time object recognition.
In2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 922–928. IEEE, 2015.
[27] Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci,
Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M Bronstein.
Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using
mixture model cnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
5115–5124, 2017.
[28] Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas.
Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classiﬁcation
and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 652–660,
2017.
[29] Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Matthias Nießner, Angela Dai,
Mengyuan Yan, and Leonidas J Guibas. V olumetric and
7082


==== Page 10 ====
multi-view cnns for object classiﬁcation on 3d data. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-
tern recognition , pages 5648–5656, 2016.
[30] Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J
Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on
point sets in a metric space. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems , pages 5099–5108, 2017.
[31] Adriana Romero, Nicolas Ballas, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou,
Antoine Chassang, Carlo Gatta, and Yoshua Bengio. Fitnets:
Hints for thin deep nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6550 ,
2014.
[32] Chengchao Shen, Xinchao Wang, Jie Song, Li Sun, and Min-
gli Song. Amalgamating knowledge towards comprehensive
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 3068–3075, 2019.
[33] Chengchao Shen, Mengqi Xue, Xinchao Wang, Jie Song, Li
Sun, and Mingli Song. Customizing student networks from
heterogeneous teachers via adaptive knowledge amalgama-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07121 , 2019.
[34] Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better
role models: Weight-averaged consistency targets improve
semi-supervised deep learning results. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 1195–1204, 2017.
[35] Petar Veli ˇckovi ´c, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova,
Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. Graph at-
tention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 , 2017.
[36] Haoyu Wang, Defu Lian, and Yong Ge. Binarized collabo-
rative ﬁltering with distilling graph convolutional networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01829 , 2019.
[37] Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma,
Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon. Dynamic
graph cnn for learning on point clouds. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.07829 , 2018.
[38] Zhenyang Wang, Zhidong Deng, and Shiyao Wang. Accel-
erating convolutional neural networks with dominant convo-
lutional kernel and knowledge pre-regression. In European
Conference on Computer Vision , pages 533–548. Springer,
2016.
[39] Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Lin-
guang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong Xiao. 3d
shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 1912–1920, 2015.
[40] Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Lin-
guang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong Xiao. 3d
shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 1912–1920, 2015.
[41] Yaoqing Yang, Chen Feng, Yiru Shen, and Dong Tian. Fold-
ingnet: Point cloud auto-encoder via deep grid deformation.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 206–215, 2018.
[42] Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang, Mingli Song, Junsong Yuan,
and Dacheng Tao. Spagan: Shortest path graph attention
network. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-19 , pages
4099–4105. International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence Organization, 7 2019.[43] Jingwen Ye, Yixin Ji, Xinchao Wang, Kairi Ou, Dapeng Tao,
and Mingli Song. Student becoming the master: Knowledge
amalgamation for joint scene parsing, depth estimation, and
more. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2829–2838, 2019.
[44] Jingwen Ye, Xinchao Wang, Yixin Ji, Kairi Ou, and Min-
gli Song. Amalgamating ﬁltered knowledge: Learning task-
customized student from multi-task teachers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.11569 , 2019.
[45] Junho Yim, Donggyu Joo, Jihoon Bae, and Junmo Kim. A
gift from knowledge distillation: Fast optimization, network
minimization and transfer learning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 4133–4141, 2017.
[46] Xiyu Yu, Tongliang Liu, Xinchao Wang, and Dacheng Tao.
On compressing deep models by low rank and sparse decom-
position. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , July 2017.
[47] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Paying more at-
tention to attention: Improving the performance of convolu-
tional neural networks via attention transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.03928 , 2016.
[48] Marinka Zitnik and Jure Leskovec. Predicting multicellular
function through multi-layer tissue networks. Bioinformat-
ics, 33(14):i190–i198, 2017.
7083


