==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2003.06713v1  [cs.IR]  14 Mar 2020Document Ranking with a Pretrained
Sequence-to-Sequence Model
Rodrigo Nogueira,∗Zhiying Jiang,∗and Jimmy Lin
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Abstract
This work proposes a novel adaptation of a pretrained sequen ce-to-sequence
model to the task of document ranking. Our approach is fundam entally different
from a commonly-adopted classiﬁcation-based formulation of ranking, based on
encoder-only pretrained transformer architectures such a s BERT. We show how a
sequence-to-sequence model can be trained to generate rele vance labels as “target
words”, and how the underlying logits of these target words c an be interpreted as
relevance probabilities for ranking. On the popular MS MARC O passage ranking
task, experimental results show that our approach is at leas t on par with previous
classiﬁcation-based models and can surpass them with large r, more-recent mod-
els. On the test collection from the TREC 2004 Robust Track, w e demonstrate a
zero-shot transfer-based approach that outperforms previ ous state-of-the-art mod-
els requiring in-dataset cross-validation. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms an encoder-only model in a data-p oor regime (i.e., with
few training examples). We investigate this observation fu rther by varying target
words to probe the model’s use of latent knowledge.
1 Introduction
A simple, straightforward formulation of ranking is to conv ert the task into a classiﬁcation problem,
and then sort the candidate items to be ranked based on the pro bability that each item belongs to
the desired class. Applied to the document ranking problem i n information retrieval—where given
a query, the system’s task is to return a ranked list of docume nts from a large corpus that maximizes
some ranking metric such as average precision or nDCG—the si mplest formulation is to deploy a
classiﬁer that estimates the probability each document bel ongs to the “relevant” class, and then sort
all the candidates by these estimates.
Deep transformer models pretrained with language modeling objectives, exempliﬁed by BERT [3],
have proven highly effective in a variety of classiﬁcation a nd sequence labeling tasks in NLP.
Nogueira and Cho [9] were the ﬁrst to demonstrate its effecti veness in ranking tasks. Since it is
impractical to apply inference to every document in a corpus with respect to a query, these tech-
niques are typically applied to rerank a list of candidates. In a typical end-to-end system, these
candidates are from the results of a keyword search based on a “classic” IR scoring function such
as BM25 [15]. This gives rise to the standard multi-stage pip eline architecture of keyword retrieval
followed by reranking using one or more machine learning mod els [1, 10].
The contribution of this work is to adapt a pretrained sequen ce-to-sequence model (in our case,
T5 [14]) to the task of document reranking. To our knowledge, this is a novel use of this class
of models that has not been previously described in the liter ature. In a data-rich regime, with lots
of training examples, our method can outperform a pure class iﬁcation-based encoder-only approach.
∗Equal contribution.

==== Page 2 ====
However, the sequence-to-sequence model appears to be far m ore data-efﬁcient: our approach shines
in a data-poor regime and signiﬁcantly outperforms BERT wit h limited training examples. The main
advantage of our approach, we believe, is that by “connectin g” ﬁne-tuned latent representations of
relevance to related output “target words”, we can exploit t he model’s latent knowledge (e.g., of
semantics, linguistic relations, etc.) that has been honed through pretraining. We describe probing
experiments that attempt to verify our intuitions by delibe rately altering the target words to capture
different aspects of “semantic relatedness”.
2 Method
Our reranking method is based on T5 [14], which is a sequence- to-sequence model that uses a similar
masked language modeling objective as BERT to pretrain its e ncoder–decoder architecture. In this
model, all target tasks are cast as sequence-to-sequence ta sks. For our task, the input sequence is:
Query:qDocument: dRelevant: (1)
whereqanddare the query and document texts, respectively. The model is ﬁne-tuned to produce the
words “true” or “false” depending on whether the document is relevant or not to the query. That is,
“true” and “false” are the “target words” (i.e., ground trut h predictions in the sequence-to-sequence
transformation).
At inference time, to compute probabilities for each query– document pair (in a reranking setting), we
apply a softmax only on the logits of the “true” and “false” to kens. Hence, we rerank the documents
according to the probabilities assigned to the “true” token . We arrived at this particular approach
after some trial and error. Other approaches, for example, r eranking documents according to the
logit of the “true” token or using logits of all tokens to comp ute the softmax, were not effective, i.e.,
the retrieval metrics were close to zero.
Note that T5 tokenizes sequences using the SentencePiece mo del [7], which might split a word
into subwords. We choose target words (“true” and “false”) t hat are represented as single tokens;
thus each class is represented by a single logit. In the case w here target words are split in multiple
subwords, we would need a method to aggregate their logits in to a single score; it is best to avoid
this complexity in the design of the reranking setup.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Datasets
We use the following datasets in our experiments:
MS MARCO passage [2] is a passage ranking dataset with 8.8M passages obtained from the top
10 results retrieved from the Bing search engine (from 1M que ries). Note that for terminological
consistency, we refer to each “unit” in the corpus as a docume nt, even though they are in reality
paragraph-length passages. The training set contains appr oximately 500k pairs of query and relevant
documents. Each query has one relevant passage, on average. Non-relevant documents for training
are also provided as part of the training dataset. The develo pment and test sets contain approximately
6,900 queries each, but relevance labels are only publicly a vailable for the development set. We
have not (yet) submitted our runs to the ofﬁcial MS MARCO lead erboard because our primary goal
in this work is to conduct initial comparisons between T5 and BERT-based models. As a matter
of good experimental practice, we limit ofﬁcial submission s as to not “probe” the unseen test set
unnecessarily. After sufﬁcient model reﬁnement, we will pr oceed with ofﬁcial submissions to verify
the quality of our models.
Robust04 [16] represents the test collection from the TREC 2004 Robus t Track. It comprises 250
queries, with relevance judgments on a collection of 528K do cuments (TREC Disks 4 and 5), whose
average length is 2,800 characters or 460 words. We use the to pic “titles” (short keyword phrases,
much like the input to a search engine) as queries to our bag-o f-words retrieval methods (see Sec-
tion 3.3) and the topic “descriptions” (sentence-length st atements of information needs) as input
to our sequence-to-sequence models. These topic descripti ons are more similar to MS MARCO’s
natural language questions, and others have found that usin g them improves the effectiveness of pre-
2

==== Page 3 ====
trained reranking models [12]. We do not train our models on t his dataset, and use all its queries and
relevance judgments as a held-out test set; thus, our evalua tion adopts a zero-shot transfer setting.
3.2 Training and Inference
We ﬁne-tune our T5 models (base, large, and 3B) with a constan t learning rate of 10−3for 100k
iterations with class-balanced batches of size 128. To simp lify our training procedure (and related
hyperparameters) as well as to eliminate the need for conver gence checks, we simply trained for a
ﬁxed number of iterations, selected based on the computatio nal demands of our largest model and
the (self-allotted) time for running experiments. We repor t results using the model state at the ﬁnal
checkpoint. This procedure is consistent with the advice of Kaplan et al. [6] and recommendations
by Dodge et al. [4], since we quantify effectiveness for a par ticular computational budget. We did
not experiment with T5-11B due to its computational cost.
We use a maximum of 512 input tokens and one output token. In th e MS MARCO passage dataset,
none of the inputs have to be truncated when using this length . We use Google’s TPU v3s to train
and run inference. Training T5 base, large, and 3B take appro ximately 12, 48, and 160 hours overall,
respectively, on a single TPU.
We use greedy decoding during inference. Since we only use th e logits of one decoding step, beam
search or top- krandom sampling [5] would give the same results as greedy dec oding.
Because Robust04 contains full-length documents, it is not feasible to directly apply our method
to the entire text at once due to the length restrictions of the model. To ad dress this issue, we ﬁrst
segment each document into passages by applying a sliding wi ndow of 10 sentences with a stride
of 5. We then obtain a relevance probability for each passage by classifying it independently. We
select the highest probability among these passages as the r elevance probability of the document.
3.3 Baselines
We compare our method against the following baselines:
BM25 : For baseline bag-of-words retrieval, we use the BM25 imple mentation in the Anserini open-
source IR toolkit [17],2which is based on Lucene. We adopt all the default settings. A t inference
time, we retrieve the top 1000 documents per query.
BM25+RM3 : To examine the effects of query expansion, we applied the BM 25+RM3 model as
described in Yang et al. [18], where it is shown to be a competi tive baseline for (pre-BERT) neural
ranking models. We use the implementation in Anserini, with all default settings.
BM25+BERT-large : We additionally compare our method against the BERT-large condition from
Nogueira et al. [10], which is a two-stage pipeline with bag- of-words retrieval (BM25) followed by
a BERT reranker. Architecturally, it is the same as our metho d, the only difference being BERT
vs. T5 as the reranking model. Nogueira et al. [10] can be char acterized as the baseline of the best
methods from the ofﬁcial MS MARCO passage leaderboard; all h igher-ranked submissions can be
described as improvements upon this basic approach, and thu s it represents a fair yet competitive
comparison point. Note that we did not apply reranking on top of BM25+RM3 because RM3 is
known to reduce effectiveness when evaluated using these re levance judgments [11].
4 Results and Analysis
4.1 Main Results
Main results on the development set of the MS MARCO passage re trieval task are shown in Table 1,
comparing BERT-large [9] and T5 models of different sizes. R esults in bold are signiﬁcantly better
(p <0.01) than BERT-large, based on the Student’s paired t-test. Note that the training of T5-3B did
not appear to have converged yet, even after exhausting our c omputational budget (see Section 3.2).
In other words, we suspect that T5-3B remains under-trained at the checkpoint we used for evalu-
ation, and it is likely that effectiveness would continue to rise given more computational resources.
2http://anserini.io/
3

==== Page 4 ====
MRR@10
BM25 .184
+ BERT-large [10] .372
+ T5-base .363
+ T5-large .383
+ T5-3B .382
Table 1: Results on the development set of MS MARCO passage.
AP P@20 NDCG@20
CEDR [8] - .467 .538
Birch [19] .369 .467 .532
BM25 .253 .363 .424
+ T5-base .314 .425 .510
+ T5-large .296 .416 .499
+ T5-3B .364 .506 .596
BM25 + RM3 .290 .382 .441
+ T5-base .320 .424 .503
+ T5-large .304 .415 .495
+ T5-3B .384 .510 .601
Table 2: Results on Robust04. The T5 models are trained only o n MS MARCO passage data and
thus represent zero-shot transfer.
Larger models outperforming smaller ones is an expected tre nd, and with T5-11B we might observe
even higher MRR@10; unfortunately, we were not able to run th ese experiments due to their high
computational costs.
Results on Robust04 are shown in Table 2, where we apply our T5 reranker on top of retrieval results
from BM25 and BM25+RM3 (see Section 3.2). Figures in bold for T5-3B indicate that those results
are signiﬁcantly better ( p <0.05) than T5-large, T5-base, and the corresponding baseline (B M25
or BM25+RM3), based on the Student’s paired t-test with Bonferroni correction. We compare
our model with CEDR [8] and Birch [19], two BERT-based state- of-the-art models. Note that the
CEDR results are from training on the Robust04 data (via cros s-validation) and Birch uses Robust04
for tuning weighting parameters. In contrast, we apply infe rence directly using our model trained on
the MS MARCO passage data; Robust04 relevance judgments wer e only used as a test set, which
makes our results zero-shot. To our knowledge, our T5-3B mod el produces the highest known scores
reported on Robust04.
As expected, effectiveness increases with larger models, b ut in all cases T5 is able to improve over
both a bag-of-words as well as a query expansion baseline. We explain the odd ﬁnding that T5-large
performs worse than T5-base as follows: based on our trainin g procedure, we simply ran a ﬁxed
number of iterations and then evaluated using the ﬁnal check point (see Section 3.2). This has the
advantage of not requiring validation data. In the case of T5 -large and T5-base, effectiveness does
not monotonically increase in the out-of-domain dataset (R obust04), and thus the results reported
in the table capture the somewhat arbitrary model state at th e ﬁnal checkpoint (where effectiveness
may still be ﬂuctuating within a rather large range). For T5- 3B, in contrast, effectiveness is far more
stable across model checkpoints. We leave for future work a m ore detailed examination of these
model differences. Although there are better ways of select ing model checkpoints that could lead to
even higher scores, these techniques generally require cro ss-validation, which increases the danger
of overﬁtting while abandoning the current (highly-desira ble) zero-shot learning setup.
4.2 Effect of Model Size and Training Data
Results from the MS MARCO passage ranking task (Table 1) repr esent a direct comparison between
BERT and T5 models since the retrieval pipeline is otherwise the same. For Robust04 (Table 2), we
4

==== Page 5 ====
2k samples 20k samples
BM25 + BERT-base .127±.058 .201±.012
BM25 + T5-base .238±.025 .261±.011
Table 3: Comparisons between T5 and BERT trained with differ ent numbers of training instances.
Results report means and 95% conﬁdence intervals over ﬁve tr ials.
adopt a different architecture than CEDR and Birch, but effe ctiveness clearly improves as the size
of the T5 model increases. Therefore, while our T5-based app roach achieves better results, it is
entirely possible that the improvements are due to simply ha ving a bigger model, as opposed to any
intrinsic advantages over a classiﬁcation-based approach . Since we do not have pretrained T5 and
BERT models of comparable sizes, it is difﬁcult to conduct a f air empirical comparison.
Another interesting dimension of size is, of course, the amo unt of training data available. In a
data-poor regime with only a modest amount of training data, it appears that T5 can learn far more
effectively than BERT. To demonstrate this, we ﬁne-tuned BE RT-base and T5-base with either 1k
(or 10k) positive and 1k (or 10k) negative instances sampled from the full MS MARCO passage
dataset. These two “base” models were selected due to their m ore modest computational demands
for ﬁne-tuning. We trained them using a batch size of 32 for th ree epochs. For BERT, we used a
learning rate 10−6and no warm-up step. For T5, we used a learning rate of 10−3. For each condition
(2k or 20k samples in total), we repeated the experiment ﬁve t imes, drawing different samples each
time. The results are reported in Table 3, with means and 95% c onﬁdence intervals.
As expected, effectiveness signiﬁcantly improves as we ﬁne -tune the models with more data. We
see clearly that with the same amount of limited training data, T5 is signiﬁcantly more effective than
BM25. In fact, with only 1k positive and 1k negative training instances, BERT performs worse than
the BM25 baseline. With 20k training instances in total, BER T is able to modestly improve upon
BM25, but remains six points behind T5 ﬁne-tuned on the same a mount of data. Interestingly, T5 is
able to achieve roughly 45% of the possible gain in effective ness over the BM25 baseline with only
4% of the training data.
4.3 Target Word Probing Experiments
Our experimental results immediately raise two questions:
1. Why is our approach more data-efﬁcient than BERT? That is, why does T5 signiﬁcantly outper-
form BERT when ﬁne-tuned with few training examples?
2. How is our approach fundamentally different from classiﬁ cation, given that the softmax in our
case reduces the model down to a binary decision? That is, ask ing the model to decide between
two output tokens seems no different from relevance classiﬁ cation.
We believe these two issues are closely related. Speciﬁcall y addressing the second question: At a
high level, both neural models are learning latent represen tations important to the task at hand (in
this case, relevance classiﬁcation), starting with a pretr ained model, and then mapping these latent
representations into task-speciﬁc decisions. Thus, end-t o-end task performance depends on a com-
bination of the knowledge imparted via pretraining (alread y present at the start) and the knowledge
gained via ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc data. In the classiﬁc ation-based approach using BERT, the
end-to-end model relies on a single fully-connected layer t o map the latent representation (i.e., from
the[CLS] token) into this binary decision. While the approach can exp loit pretrained knowledge
when ﬁne-tuning the latent representations, the ﬁnal mappi ng (i.e., the fully-connected layer) needs
to be, essentially, learned from scratch (since it is random ly initialized).
In contrast, T5 can exploit both pretrained knowledge and kn owledge gleaned from ﬁne-tuning in
learning the proper task-speciﬁc latent representations a s well as the mapping to relevance decisions.
Unlike the fully-connected layer in the classiﬁcation-bas ed approach, T5 can exploit the part of the
network used for producing output. Embedded in that neural m achinery is latent knowledge about
semantics, linguistic relations, and other features that a re necessary to generate ﬂuent text. In other
words, T5 has access to an additional source of knowledge tha t BERT does not.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Target Token Training Size
Type Positive Negative 2k 20k all
Baseline true false .238±.025 .261±.011 .355
Reverse false true .222±.014 .235±.021 .340
Antonyms hot cold .205±.032 .216±.013 .353
Related Words apple orange .217±.024 .234±.005 .358
Unrelated Words hot orange .202±.021 .212±.001 .351
Subwords _ab _de .163±.027 .151±.046 .348
Table 4: Results on the development set of the MS MARCO passag e dataset comparing different
target word manipulations.
This explanation, we believe, also answers the ﬁrst questio n. With plenty of training data, BERT has
no trouble learning the ﬁnal fully-connected layer (mappin g latent representations to decisions), even
from scratch (i.e., random initialization). However, face d with few training examples, BERT still
must learn the classiﬁcation layer, but without any beneﬁt f rom pretraining—and our experiments
above (see Table 3) show that it is unable to adequately do so. In contrast, in a low-data regime,
T5 can “fall back” on pretrained neural machinery used for ge nerating ﬂuent textual output. In
other words, our experiments suggest that the pretraining o bjective used in T5 can transfer well to
generating relevance labels.
To turn our intuition into a testable hypothesis, we can vary the target words used as the prediction
targets and manipulate their “linguistic relatedness”—to deliberately “disrupt” linguistic knowledge
that may be captured in the models. As Puri and Catanzaro [13] have shown, the choice of target
words impacts effectiveness. Recall that in our baseline, “ true” indicates a relevant document and
“false”, a non-relevant document. We tried the following co ntrastive variants:
•“Reverse”. We swap the target words; that is, “false” indicates a releva nt document and “true”,
a non-relevant document. If the model is indeed exploiting l atent knowledge about linguistic
relations, then forcing the model to make opposite associat ions on the same polarity scale should
lower effectiveness with respect to the baseline.
•“Antonyms”. We map a relevant document to “hot” and a non-relevant docume nt to “cold”. This
preserves the use of adjectives at opposite ends of a polarit y scale, but a scale that is completely
unrelated to relevance. If the model were exploiting latent knowledge, we would expect effective-
ness to be lower than the baseline.
•“Related Words”. We map a relevant document to “apple” and a non-relevant docu ment to
a related word “orange”. These words are semantically relat ed, but do not present a polarity
contrast as before. We would expect effectiveness to be lowe r than the baseline.
•“Unrelated Words”. We map a relevant document to “hot” and a non-relevant docume nt to a
completely unrelated word “orange”. Thus, we force the mode l to build an arbitrary semantic
mapping. We would expect effectiveness to be lower than the b aseline and also lower than using
related words.
•“Subwords”. We map a relevant document to the subword “_ab” and a non-rele vant document to
the subword “_de” (note that we carefully select single toke ns after tokenization by SentencePiece
to avoid the need to combine multiple logits). Here, we have r emoved all “semantics” from the
input-to-output mapping. We would expect effectiveness to be lower than the baseline and the
above conditions.
Using these target word conﬁgurations, we conducted experi ments on T5-base with either 1k (or
10k) positive and 1k (or 10k) negative instances sampled fro m the full MS MARCO passage dataset,
same as in Section 4.2. Once again, for each of the conditions , we repeated the experiment ﬁve times,
drawing different samples every time. For reference, we als o ﬁne-tuned with all available data. We
note that the effectiveness of T5-base is different from the one reported in Table 1 because we used
slightly different hyperparameters which were more comput ationally efﬁcient: here, we trained for
40k steps using a batch of size 256. Experimental results are shown in Table 4, with means and 95%
conﬁdence intervals.
6

==== Page 7 ====
There does not appear to be an obvious pattern when ﬁne-tunin g with all available training data,
although the largest observed difference is between “basel ine” and “reverse”. This does appear con-
sistent with our hypothesis that with sufﬁcient training da ta, T5 is able to learn arbitrary mappings
between document relevance and target words. In the data-po or regime, the results are also con-
sistent with our hypotheses. With both 2k and 20k total sampl es, the baseline mapping achieves
the highest effectiveness. In the 2k condition, the conﬁden ce intervals computed from different
samples mostly overlap (with the exception of subwords), so we do not have the beneﬁt of greater
certainty that comes with statistical signiﬁcance. On the 2 0k condition, our target word manipula-
tions all signiﬁcantly reduce effectiveness. We note that t he 95% conﬁdence intervals are smaller
with more data, which illustrates the greater instability i n effectiveness when training on smaller
datasets (which is expected).
It is clear that the T5 model is taking advantage of latent sem antic or linguistic knowledge in pre-
dicting relevance. In both the 2k and 20k settings, the subwo rds condition performs worse than the
BM25 baseline (and the 20k score is actually lower than the 2k score). In this condition, T5 exhibits
difﬁculty in achieving any predictive power at all. There ar e at least two potential factors at play:
we are removing all semantic associations, as the subwords a re meaningless token fragments, and
furthermore, we are forcing the model to produce tokens in an order (and context) that it has not
encountered during pretraining. We are unable to tease apar t the effects currently, but either expla-
nation is consistent with our intuitions. For all other targ et word manipulations, we are at least able
to beat the BM25 baseline. Finally, our experiments are inco nclusive regarding the importance of
having a polarity scale in the low-data regime. Quite clearl y, reversing “true” and “false” has a large
impact, but T5 is more effective learning targets that are se mantically related but do not present a
polarity contrast (“apple” and ”orange”) than targets that encode an unrelated polarity contrast (“hot”
and “cold”).
5 Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is to introduce a novel ge neration-based approach to the doc-
ument ranking task using pretrained sequence-to-sequence models. Our models outperform a
classiﬁcation-based approach, especially in the data-poo r regime with limited training data. We
attempt to explain these observations in terms of hypothese s about the knowledge that a model gains
from pretraining vs. ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc data. Thes e hypotheses are operationalized into
target word probing experiments, where we demonstrate that the model is indeed exploiting knowl-
edge from its ability to generate ﬂuent natural language tex t. Exactly how remains an open research
question and the focus of our ongoing work.
6 Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Canada First Resea rch Excellence Fund and the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canad a. In addition, we would like to
thank Google Cloud for credits to support this work.
References
[1] N. Asadi and J. Lin. Effectiveness/efﬁciency tradeoffs for candidate generation in multi-stage
retrieval architectures. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conf er-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR 2013) , pages 997–1000,
2013.
[2] P. Bajaj, D. Campos, N. Craswell, L. Deng, J. Gao, X. Liu, R . Majumder, A. McNamara,
B. Mitra, T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, A. Stoica, S. Tiwa ry, and T. Wang. MS MARCO:
A human generated MAchine Reading COmprehension dataset. arXiv:1611.09268 , 2016.
[3] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pr e-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Ling uistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, June 2019.
7

==== Page 8 ====
[4] J. Dodge, S. Gururangan, D. Card, R. Schwartz, and N. A. Sm ith. Show your work: Improved
reporting of experimental results. arXiv:1909.03004 , 2019.
[5] A. Fan, M. Lewis, and Y . Dauphin. Hierarchical neural sto ry generation. arXiv:1805.04833 ,
2018.
[6] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Che ss, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford,
J. Wu, and D. Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models .arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
[7] T. Kudo and J. Richardson. SentencePiece: A simple and la nguage independent subword
tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Syste m Demonstrations , pages 66–71,
2018.
[8] S. MacAvaney, A. Yates, A. Cohan, and N. Goharian. CEDR: C ontextualized embeddings
for document ranking. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1101–1104, 2019.
[9] R. Nogueira and K. Cho. Passage re-ranking with BERT. arXiv:1901.04085 , 2019.
[10] R. Nogueira, W. Yang, K. Cho, and J. Lin. Multi-stage doc ument ranking with BERT.
arXiv:1910.14424 , 2019.
[11] R. Nogueira, W. Yang, J. Lin, and K. Cho. Document expans ion by query prediction.
arXiv:1904.08375 , 2019.
[12] R. Padaki, Z. Dai, and J. Callan. Rethinking query expan sion for BERT reranking. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd European Conference on Information Retriev al (ECIR 2020) .
[13] R. Puri and B. Catanzaro. Zero-shot text classiﬁcation with generative language models.
arXiv:1912.10165 , 2019.
[14] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. M atena, Y . Zhou, W. Li, and
P. J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a un iﬁed text-to-text transformer.
arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.
[15] S. E. Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M. Hancock-Beauli eu, and M. Gatford. Okapi at TREC-3.
InProceedings of the 3rd Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-3) , pages 109–126, 1994.
[16] E. M. V oorhees. Overview of the TREC 2004 Robust Track. I nProceedings of the Thirteenth
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2004) , pages 52–69, 2004.
[17] P. Yang, H. Fang, and J. Lin. Anserini: Enabling the use o f Lucene for information retrieval
research. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1253–1256, 2017.
[18] W. Yang, K. Lu, P. Yang, and J. Lin. Critically examining the “neural hype” weak baselines and
the additivity of effectiveness gains from neural ranking m odels. In Proceedings of the 42nd
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop ment in Information Retrieval ,
pages 1129–1132, 2019.
[19] Z. A. Yilmaz, W. Yang, H. Zhang, and J. Lin. Cross-domain modeling of sentence-level evi-
dence for document retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Join t Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3481–3487, 2019.
8

