==== Page 1 ====
Dynabench: Rethinking Benchmarking in NLP
Douwe Kielay, Max Bartoloz, Yixin Nie?, Divyansh Kaushikx, Atticus Geiger{,
Zhengxuan Wu{, Bertie Vidgenk, Grusha Prasad??, Amanpreet Singhy, Pratik Ringshiay,
Zhiyi May, Tristan Thrushy, Sebastian Riedelyz, Zeerak Waseemyy, Pontus Stenetorpz,
Robin Jiay, Mohit Bansal?, Christopher Potts{and Adina Williamsy
yFacebook AI Research;zUCL;?UNC Chapel Hill;xCMU;{Stanford University
kAlan Turing Institute;??JHU;yySimon Fraser University
dynabench@fb.com
Abstract
We introduce Dynabench, an open-source plat-
form for dynamic dataset creation and model
benchmarking. Dynabench runs in a web
browser and supports human-and-model-in-
the-loop dataset creation: annotators seek to
create examples that a target model will mis-
classify, but that another person will not. In
this paper, we argue that Dynabench addresses
a critical need in our community: contempo-
rary models quickly achieve outstanding per-
formance on benchmark tasks but nonethe-
less fail on simple challenge examples and
falter in real-world scenarios. With Dyn-
abench, dataset creation, model development,
and model assessment can directly inform
each other, leading to more robust and infor-
mative benchmarks. We report on four ini-
tial NLP tasks, illustrating these concepts and
highlighting the promise of the platform, and
address potential objections to dynamic bench-
marking as a new standard for the ﬁeld.
1 Introduction
While it used to take decades for machine learning
models to surpass estimates of human performance
on benchmark tasks, that milestone is now rou-
tinely reached within just a few years for newer
datasets (see Figure 1). As with the rest of AI, NLP
has advanced rapidly thanks to improvements in
computational power, as well as algorithmic break-
throughs, ranging from attention mechanisms (Bah-
danau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015), to Trans-
formers (Vaswani et al., 2017), to pre-trained lan-
guage models (Howard and Ruder, 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b; Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). Equally important has been the
rise of benchmarks that support the development of
ambitious new data-driven models and that encour-
age apples-to-apples model comparisons. Bench-
marks provide a north star goal for researchers, and
2000 2005 2010 2015 20201.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.2
 MNIST
GLUEImageNet
SQuAD 1.1SQuAD 2.0
SwitchboardFigure 1: Benchmark saturation over time for popular
benchmarks, normalized with initial performance at mi-
nus one and human performance at zero.
are part of the reason we can conﬁdently say we
have made great strides in our ﬁeld.
In light of these developments, one might be
forgiven for thinking that NLP has created mod-
els with human-like language capabilities. Prac-
titioners know that, despite our progress, we are
actually far from this goal. Models that achieve
super-human performance on benchmark tasks (ac-
cording to the narrow criteria used to deﬁne hu-
man performance) nonetheless fail on simple chal-
lenge examples and falter in real-world scenarios.
A substantial part of the problem is that our bench-
mark tasks are not adequate proxies for the so-
phisticated and wide-ranging capabilities we are
targeting: they contain inadvertent and unwanted
statistical and social biases that make them artiﬁ-
cially easy and misaligned with our true goals.
We believe the time is ripe to radically rethink
benchmarking. In this paper, which both takes a
position and seeks to offer a partial solution, we
introduce Dynabench, an open-source, web-based
research platform for dynamic data collection and
model benchmarking. The guiding hypothesis be-arXiv:2104.14337v1  [cs.CL]  7 Apr 2021

==== Page 2 ====
hind Dynabench is that we can make even faster
progress if we evaluate models and collect data
dynamically, with humans and models in the loop,
rather than the traditional static way.
Concretely, Dynabench hosts tasks for which
we dynamically collect data against state-of-the-
art models in the loop, over multiple rounds. The
stronger the models are and the fewer weaknesses
they have, the lower their error rate will be when in-
teracting with humans, giving us a concrete metric—
i.e., how well do AI systems perform when inter-
acting with humans? This reveals the shortcomings
of state-of-the-art models, and it yields valuable
training and assessment data which the community
can use to develop even stronger models.
In this paper, we ﬁrst document the background
that led us to propose this platform. We then de-
scribe the platform in technical detail, report on
ﬁndings for four initial tasks, and address possible
objections. We ﬁnish with a discussion of future
plans and next steps.
2 Background
Progress in NLP has traditionally been measured
through a selection of task-level datasets that grad-
ually became accepted benchmarks (Marcus et al.,
1993; Pradhan et al., 2012). Recent well-known
examples include the Stanford Sentiment Tree-
bank (Socher et al., 2013), SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016, 2018), SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015),
and MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018). More
recently, multi-task benchmarks such as SentE-
val (Conneau and Kiela, 2018), DecaNLP (McCann
et al., 2018), GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), and Super-
GLUE (Wang et al., 2019) were proposed with the
aim of measuring general progress across several
tasks. When the GLUE dataset was introduced,
“solving GLUE” was deemed “beyond the capabil-
ity of current transfer learning methods” (Wang
et al., 2018). However, GLUE saturated within a
year and its successor, SuperGLUE, already has
models rather than humans at the top of its leader-
board. These are remarkable achievements, but
there is an extensive body of evidence indicating
that these models do not in fact have the human-
level natural language capabilities one might be
lead to believe.
2.1 Challenge Sets and Adversarial Settings
Whether our models have learned to solve tasks
in robust and generalizable ways has been a topicof much recent interest. Challenging test sets have
shown that many state-of-the-art NLP models strug-
gle with compositionality (Nie et al., 2019; Kim
and Linzen, 2020; Yu and Ettinger, 2020; White
et al., 2020), and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to pass the myriad
stress tests for social (Rudinger et al., 2018; May
et al., 2019; Nangia et al., 2020) and/or linguistic
competencies (Geiger et al., 2018; Naik et al., 2018;
Glockner et al., 2018; White et al., 2018; Warstadt
et al., 2019; Gauthier et al., 2020; Hossain et al.,
2020; Jeretic et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020; Saha
et al., 2020; Schuster et al., 2020; Sugawara et al.,
2020; Warstadt et al., 2020). Yet, challenge sets
may suffer from performance instability (Liu et al.,
2019a; Rozen et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020) and
often lack sufﬁcient statistical power (Card et al.,
2020), suggesting that, although they may be valu-
able assessment tools, they are not sufﬁcient for
ensuring that our models have achieved the learn-
ing targets we set for them.
Models are susceptible to adversarial attacks,
and despite impressive task-level performance,
state-of-the-art systems still struggle to learn robust
representations of linguistic knowledge (Ettinger
et al., 2017), as also shown by work analyzing
model diagnostics (Ettinger, 2020; Ribeiro et al.,
2020). For example, question answering models
can be fooled by simply adding a relevant sentence
to the passage (Jia and Liang, 2017).
Text classiﬁcation models have been shown to be
sensitive to single input character change (Ebrahimi
et al., 2018b) and ﬁrst-order logic inconsisten-
cies (Minervini and Riedel, 2018). Similarly, ma-
chine translation systems have been found suscepti-
ble to character-level perturbations (Ebrahimi et al.,
2018a) and synthetic and natural noise (Belinkov
and Bisk, 2018; Khayrallah and Koehn, 2018). Nat-
ural language inference models can be fooled by
simple syntactic heuristics or hypothesis-only bi-
ases (Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018;
Tsuchiya, 2018; Belinkov et al., 2019; McCoy et al.,
2019). Dialogue models may ignore perturbations
of dialogue history (Sankar et al., 2019). More
generally, Wallace et al. (2019) ﬁnd universal ad-
versarial perturbations forcing targeted model er-
rors across a range of tasks. Recent work has also
focused on evaluating model diagnostics through
counterfactual augmentation (Kaushik et al., 2020),
decision boundary analysis (Gardner et al., 2020;
Swayamdipta et al., 2020), and behavioural test-
ing (Ribeiro et al., 2020).

==== Page 3 ====
2.2 Adversarial Training and Testing
Research progress has traditionally been driven by
a cyclical process of resource collection and ar-
chitectural improvements. Similar to Dynabench,
recent work seeks to embrace this phenomenon, ad-
dressing many of the previously mentioned issues
through an iterative human-and-model-in-the-loop
annotation process (Yang et al., 2017; Dinan et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Bartolo et al., 2020; Nie
et al., 2020), to ﬁnd “unknown unknowns” (Atten-
berg et al., 2015) or in a never-ending or life-long
learning setting (Silver et al., 2013; Mitchell et al.,
2018). The Adversarial NLI (ANLI) dataset (Nie
et al., 2020), for example, was collected with an
adversarial setting over multiple rounds to yield
“a ‘moving post’ dynamic target for NLU systems,
rather than a static benchmark that will eventually
saturate”. In its few-shot learning mode, GPT-3
barely shows “signs of life” (Brown et al., 2020)
(i.e., it is barely above random) on ANLI, which
is evidence that we are still far away from human
performance on that task.
2.3 Other Related Work
While crowdsourcing has been a boon for large-
scale NLP dataset creation (Snow et al., 2008;
Munro et al., 2010), we ultimately want NLP sys-
tems to handle “natural” data (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019) and be “ecologically valid” (de Vries et al.,
2020). Ethayarajh and Jurafsky (2020) analyze the
distinction between what leaderboards incentivize
and “what is useful in practice” through the lens of
microeconomics. A natural setting for exploring
these ideas might be dialogue (Hancock et al., 2019;
Shuster et al., 2020). Other works have pointed
out misalignments between maximum-likelihood
training on i.i.d. train/test splits and human lan-
guage (Linzen, 2020; Stiennon et al., 2020).
We think there is widespread agreement that
something has to change about our standard eval-
uation paradigm and that we need to explore al-
ternatives. The persistent misalignment between
benchmark performance and performance on chal-
lenge and adversarial test sets reveals that standard
evaluation paradigms overstate the ability of our
models to perform the tasks we have set for them.
Dynabench offers one path forward from here, by
allowing researchers to combine model develop-
ment with the stress-testing that needs to be done
to achieve true robustness and generalization.3 Dynabench
Dynabench is a platform that encompasses different
tasks . Data for each task is collected over multiple
rounds , each starting from the current state of the
art. In every round, we have one or more target
models “in the loop.” These models interact with
humans, be they expert linguists or crowdworkers,
who are in a position to identify models’ shortcom-
ings by providing examples for an optional context .
Examples that models get wrong, or struggle with,
can be validated by other humans to ensure their
correctness. The data collected through this pro-
cess can be used to evaluate state-of-the-art models,
and to train even stronger ones, hopefully creat-
ing a virtuous cycle that helps drive progress in
the ﬁeld. Figure 2 provides a sense of what the
example creation interface looks like.
As a large-scale collaborative effort, the platform
is meant to be a platform technology for human-
and-model-in-the-loop evaluation that belongs to
the entire community. In the current iteration, the
platform is set up for dynamic adversarial data col-
lection, where humans can attempt to ﬁnd model-
fooling examples. This design choice is due to the
fact that the average case, as measured by maxi-
mum likelihood training on i.i.d. datasets, is much
less interesting than the worst (i.e., adversarial)
case, which is what we want our systems to be able
to handle if they are put in critical systems where
they interact with humans in real-world settings.
However, Dynabench is not limited to the adver-
sarial setting, and one can imagine scenarios where
humans are rewarded not for fooling a model or
ensemble of models, but for ﬁnding examples that
models, even if they are right, are very uncertain
about, perhaps in an active learning setting. Sim-
ilarly, the paradigm is perfectly compatible with
collaborative settings that utilize human feedback,
or even negotiation. The crucial aspect of this pro-
posal is the fact that models and humans interact
live “in the loop” for evaluation and data collection.
One of the aims of this platform is to put expert
linguists center stage. Creating model-fooling ex-
amples is not as easy as it used to be, and ﬁnding
interesting examples is rapidly becoming a less triv-
ial task. In ANLI, the veriﬁed model error rate for
crowd workers in the later rounds went below 1-in-
10 (Nie et al., 2020), while in “Beat the AI”, human
performance decreased while time per valid adver-
sarial example went up with stronger models in the
loop (Bartolo et al., 2020). For expert linguists, we

==== Page 4 ====
Figure 2: The Dynabench example creation interface for sentiment analysis with illustrative example.
expect the model error to be much higher, but if
the platform actually lives up to its virtuous cycle
promise, that error rate will go down quickly. Thus,
we predict that linguists with expertise in explor-
ing the decision boundaries of machine learning
models will become essential.
While we are primarily motivated by evaluating
progress, both ANLI and “Beat the AI” show that
models can overcome some of their existing blind
spots through adversarial training. They also ﬁnd
that best model performance is still quite far from
that of humans, suggesting that while the collected
data appears to lie closer to the model decision
boundaries, there still exist adversarial examples
beyond the remit of current model capabilities.
3.1 Features and Implementation Details
Dynabench offers low-latency, real-time feedback
on the behavior of state-of-the-art NLP models.
The technology stack is based on PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019), with models served via TorchServe.1
1https://pytorch.org/serveThe platform not only displays prediction probabil-
ities, but through an “inspect model” functionality,
allows the user to examine the token-level layer
integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), ob-
tained via the Captum interpretability library.2
For each example, we allow the user to explain
what the correct label is, as well as why they think
it fooled a model if the model got it wrong; or why
the model might have been fooled if it wasn’t. All
collected model-fooling (or, depending on the task,
even non-model-fooling) examples are veriﬁed by
other humans to ensure their validity.
Task owners can collect examples through the
web interface, by engaging with the community, or
through Mephisto,3which makes it easy to connect,
e.g., Mechanical Turk workers to the exact same
backend. All collected data will be open sourced,
in an anonymized fashion.
In its current mode, Dynabench could be de-
2https://captum.ai/
3https://github.com/facebookresearch/
Mephisto

==== Page 5 ====
scribed as a fairly conservative departure from the
status quo. It is being used to develop datasets
that support the same metrics that drive exist-
ing benchmarks. The crucial change is that the
datasets are now dynamically created, allowing for
more kinds of evaluation—e.g., tracking progress
through rounds and across different conditions.
3.2 Initial Tasks
We have selected four ofﬁcial tasks as a starting
point, which we believe represent an appropri-
ate cross-section of the ﬁeld at this point in time.
Natural Language Inference (NLI) and Question
Answering (QA) are canonical tasks in the ﬁeld.
Sentiment analysis is a task that some consider
“solved” (and is deﬁnitely treated as such, with
all kinds of ethically problematic repercussions),
which we show is not the case. Hate speech is
very important as it can inﬂict harm on people, yet
classifying it remains challenging for NLP.
Natural language inference. Built upon the se-
mantic foundation of natural logic (Sánchez Valen-
cia, 1991, i.a.) and hailing back much further (van
Benthem, 2008), NLI is one of the quintessential
natural language understanding tasks. NLI, also
known as ‘recognizing textual entailment’ (Dagan
et al., 2006), is often formulated as a 3-way classi-
ﬁcation problem where the input is a context sen-
tence paired with a hypothesis, and the output is a
label (entailment, contradiction, or neutral) indicat-
ing the relation between the pair.
We build on the ANLI dataset (Nie et al., 2020)
and its three rounds to seed the Dynabench NLI
task. During the ANLI data collection process, the
annotators were presented with a context (extracted
from a pre-selected corpus) and a desired target la-
bel, and asked to provide a hypothesis that fools the
target model adversary into misclassifying the ex-
ample. If the target model is fooled, the annotator
was invited to speculate about why, or motivate why
their example was right. The target model of the
ﬁrst round (R1) was a single BERT-Large model
ﬁne-tuned on SNLI and MNLI, while the target
model of the second and third rounds (R2, R3) was
an ensemble of RoBERTa-Large models ﬁne-tuned
on SNLI, MNLI, FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) re-
cast as NLI, and all of the ANLI data collected
prior to the corresponding round. The contexts for
Round 1 and Round 2 were Wikipedia passages
curated in Yang et al. (2018) and the contexts for
Round 3 were from various domains. Results indi-cate that state-of-the-art models (which can obtain
90%+ accuracy on SNLI and MNLI) cannot exceed
50% accuracy on rounds 2 and 3.
With the launch of Dynabench, we have started
collection of a fourth round, which has several in-
novations: not only do we select candidate contexts
from a more diverse set of Wikipedia featured arti-
cles but we also use an ensemble of two different
models with different architectures as target adver-
saries to increase diversity and robustness. More-
over, the ensemble of adversaries will help mitigate
issues with creating a dataset whose distribution is
too closely aligned to a particular target model or
architecture. Additionally, we are collecting two
types of natural language explanations: why an ex-
ample is correct and why a target model might be
wrong. We hope that disentangling this informa-
tion will yield an additional layer of interpretability
and yield models that are as least as explainable as
they are robust.
Question answering. The QA task takes the
same format as SQuAD1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
i.e., given a context and a question, extract an an-
swer from the context as a continuous span of
text. The ﬁrst round of adversarial QA (AQA) data
comes from “Beat the AI” (Bartolo et al., 2020).
During annotation, crowd workers were presented
with a context sourced from Wikipedia, identical to
those in SQuAD1.1, and asked to write a question
and select an answer. The annotated answer was
compared to the model prediction using a word-
overlap F 1threshold and, if sufﬁciently different,
considered to have fooled the model. The target
models in round 1 were BiDAF (Seo et al., 2017),
BERT-Large, and RoBERTa-Large.
The model in the loop for the current round is
RoBERTa trained on the examples from the ﬁrst
round combined with SQuAD1.1. Despite the
super-human performance achieved on SQuAD1.1,
machine performance is still far from humans on
the current leaderboard. In the current phase, we
seek to collect rich and diverse examples, focusing
on improving model robustness through generative
data augmentation, to provide more challenging
model adversaries in this constrained task setting.
We should emphasize that we don’t consider this
task structure representative of the broader deﬁ-
nition even of closed-domain QA, and are look-
ing to expand this to include unanswerable ques-
tions (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), longer and more com-
plex passages, Yes/No questions and multi-span

==== Page 6 ====
answers (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and numbers,
dates and spans from the question (Dua et al., 2019)
as model performance progresses.
Sentiment analysis. The sentiment analysis
project is a multi-pronged effort to create a dy-
namic benchmark for sentiment analysis and to
evaluate some of the core hypotheses behind Dyn-
abench. Potts et al. (2020) provide an initial report
and the ﬁrst two rounds of this dataset.
The task is structured as a 3-way classiﬁcation
problem: positive, negative, and neutral. The mo-
tivation for using a simple positive/negative di-
chotomy is to show that there are still very challeng-
ing phenomena in this traditional sentiment space.
The neutral category was added to avoid (and
helped trained models avoid) the false presuppo-
sition that every text conveys sentiment informa-
tion (Pang and Lee, 2008). In future iterations,
we plan to consider additional dimensions of senti-
ment and emotional expression (Alm et al., 2005;
Neviarouskaya et al., 2010; Wiebe et al., 2005; Liu
et al., 2003; Sudhof et al., 2014).
In this ﬁrst phase, we examined the question of
how best to elicit examples from workers that are
diverse, creative, and naturalistic. In the “prompt”
condition, we provide workers with an actual sen-
tence from an existing product or service review
and ask them to edit it so that it fools the model.
In the “no prompt” condition, workers try to write
original sentences that fool the model. We ﬁnd
that the “prompt” condition is superior: workers
generally make substantial edits, and the resulting
sentences are more linguistically diverse than those
in the “no prompt” condition.
In a parallel effort, we also collected and vali-
dated hard sentiment examples from existing cor-
pora, which will enable another set of comparisons
that will help us to reﬁne the Dynabench protocols
and interfaces. We plan for the dataset to con-
tinue to grow, probably mixing attested examples
with those created on Dynabench with the help of
prompts. With these diverse rounds, we can ad-
dress a wide range of question pertaining to dataset
artifacts, domain transfer, and overall robustness of
sentiment analysis systems.
Hate speech detection. The hate speech task
classiﬁes whether a statement expresses hate
against a protected characteristic or not. Detect-
ing hate is notoriously difﬁcult given the important
role played by context and speaker (Leader May-nard and Benesch, 2016) and the variety of ways
in which hate can be expressed (Waseem et al.,
2017). Few high-quality, varied and large training
datasets are available for training hate detection
systems (Vidgen and Derczynski, 2020; Poletto
et al., 2020; Vidgen et al., 2019).
We organised four rounds of data collection and
model training, with preliminary results reported in
Vidgen et al. (2020). In each round, annotators are
tasked with entering content that tricks the model
into giving an incorrect classiﬁcation. The content
is created by the annotators and as such is synthetic
in nature. At the end of each round the model is
retrained and the process is repeated. For the ﬁrst
round, we trained a RoBERTa model on 470,000
hateful and abusive statements4. For subsequent
rounds the model was trained on the original data
plus content from the prior rounds. Due to the
complexity of online hate, we hired and trained
analysts rather than paying for crowd-sourced an-
notations. Each analyst was given training, support,
and feedback throughout their work.
In all rounds annotators provided a label for
whether content is hateful or not. In rounds 2,
3 and 4, they also gave labels for the target (i.e.,
which group has been attacked) and type of state-
ment (e.g., derogatory remarks, dehumanization,
or threatening language). These granular labels
help to investigate model errors and improve per-
formance, as well as directing the identiﬁcation of
new data for future entry. For approximately half
of entries in rounds 2, 3 and 4, annotators created
“perturbations” where the text is minimally adjusted
so as to ﬂip the label (Gardner et al., 2020; Kaushik
et al., 2020). This helps to identify decision bound-
aries within the model, and minimizes the risk of
overﬁtting given the small pool of annotators.
Over the four rounds, content becomes increas-
ingly adversarial (shown by the fact that target mod-
els have lower performance on later rounds’ data)
and models improve (shown by the fact that the
model error rate declines and the later rounds’ mod-
els have the highest accuracy on each round). We
externally validate performance using the HATE-
CHECK suite of diagnostic tests from Röttger et al.
(2020). We show substantial improvement over
the four rounds, and our ﬁnal round target model
achieves 94% on HATECHECK , outperforming the
models presented by the original authors.
4Derived from https://hatespeechdata.com , in
anonymized form.

==== Page 7 ====
Task Rounds Examples vMER
NLI 4 170,294 33.24%
QA 2 36,406 33.74%
Sentiment 3 19,975 35.00%
Hate speech 4 41,255 43.90%
Table 1: Statistics for the initial four ofﬁcial tasks.
3.3 Dynabenchmarking NLP
Table 1 shows an overview of the current situation
for the four tasks. Some tasks are further along
in their data collection efforts than others. As we
can see, the validated model error rate (vMER; the
number of human-validated model errors divided
by the total number of examples—note that the
error rates are not necessarily comparable across
tasks, since the interfaces and in-the-loop models
are not identical) is still very high across all tasks,
clearly demonstrating that NLP is far from solved.
4 Caveats and Objections
There are several obvious and valid objections one
can raise. We do not have all the answers, but we
can try to address some common concerns.
Won’t this lead to unnatural distributions and
distributional shift? Yes, that is a real risk. First,
we acknowledge that crowdsourced texts are likely
to have unnatural qualities: the setting itself is ar-
tiﬁcial from the perspective of genuine communi-
cation, and crowdworkers are not representative
of the general population. Dynabench could exac-
erbate this, but it also has features that can help
alleviate it. For instance, as we discussed earlier,
the sentiment analysis project is using naturalistic
prompt sentences to try to help workers create more
diverse and naturalistic data.
Second, if we rely solely on dynamic adversarial
collection, then we increase the risks of creating un-
natural datasets. For instance, Bartolo et al. (2020)
show that training solely on adversarially-collected
data for QA was detrimental to performance on
non-adversarially collected data. However, they
also show that models are capable of simultane-
ously learning both distributions when trained on
the combined data, retaining if not slightly im-
proving performance on the original distribution
(of course, this may not hold if we have many
more examples of one particular kind). Ideally, we
would combine adversarially collected data withnon-adversarial—preferably naturally collected—
data, so as to capture both the average and worst
case scenarios in our evaluation.
Finally, we note that Dynabench could enable
the community to explore the kinds of distribu-
tional shift that are characteristic of natural lan-
guages. Words and phrases change their meanings
over time, between different domains, and even be-
tween different interlocutors. Dynabench could be
a tool for studying such shifts and ﬁnding models
that can succeed on such phenomena.
What if annotators “overﬁt” on models? A po-
tential risk is cyclical “progress,” where improved
models forget things that were relevant in earlier
rounds because annotators focus too much on a par-
ticular weakness. Continual learning is an exciting
research direction here: we should try to under-
stand distributional shift better, as well as how to
characterize how data shifts over time might im-
pact learning, and how any adverse effects might
be overcome. Because of how most of us have
been trained, it is natural to assume that the last
round is automatically the best evaluation round,
but that does not mean that it should be the only
round: in fact, most likely, the best way to eval-
uate progress is to evaluate on allrounds as well
asanyhigh-quality static test set that exists, possi-
bly with a recency-based discount factor. To make
an analogy with software testing, similar to check-
lists (Ribeiro et al., 2020), it would be a bad idea
to throw away old tests just because you’ve written
some new ones. As long as we factor in previous
rounds, Dynabench’s dynamic nature offers a way
out from forgetting and cyclical issues: any model
biases will be ﬁxed in the limit by annotators ex-
ploiting vulnerabilities.
Another risk is that the data distribution might
be too heavily dependent on the target model in
the loop. When this becomes an issue, it can be
mitigated by using ensembles of many different ar-
chitectures in the loop, for example the top current
state-of-the-art ones, with multiple seeds.5
How do we account for future, not-yet-in-the-
loop models? Obviously, we can’t—so this is a
very valid criticism. However, we can assume that
an ensemble of model architectures is a reasonable
approximation, if and only if the models are not
too bad at their task. This latter point is crucial: we
5ANLI does not show dramatically different results across
models, suggesting that this is not necessarily a big problem
yet, but it shows in R2 and R3 that ensembles are possible.

==== Page 8 ====
take the stance that models by now, especially in
aggregate, are probably good enough to be reason-
ably close enough to the decision boundaries—but
it is deﬁnitely true that we have no guarantees that
this is the case.
How do we compare results if the benchmark
keeps changing? This is probably the main hur-
dle from a community adoption standpoint. But
if we consider, e.g., the multiple iterations of Se-
mEval or WMT datasets over the years, we’ve al-
ready been handling this quite well—we accept
that a model’s BLEU score on WMT16 is not com-
parable to WMT14. That is, it is perfectly natural
for benchmark datasets to evolve as the community
makes progress. The only thing Dynabench does
differently is that it anticipates dataset saturation
and embraces the loop so that we can make faster
and more sustained progress.
What about generative tasks? For now Dyn-
abench focuses on classiﬁcation or span extraction
tasks where it is relatively straightforward to es-
tablish whether a model was wrong. If instead
the evaluation metric is something like ROUGE or
BLEU and we are interested in generation, we need
a way to discretize an answer to determine correct-
ness, since we wouldn’t have ground truth annota-
tions; which makes determining whether a model
was successfully fooled less straightforward. How-
ever, we could discretize generation by re-framing
it as multiple choice with hard negatives, or simply
by asking the annotator if the generation is good
enough. In short, going beyond classiﬁcation will
require further research, but is deﬁnitely doable.
Do we need models in the loop for good data?
The potential usefulness of adversarial examples
can be explained at least in part by the fact that hav-
ing an annotation partner (so far, a model) simply
provides better incentives for generating quality an-
notation. Having the model in the loop is obviously
useful for evaluation, but it’s less clear if the resul-
tant data is necessarily also useful in general for
training. So far, there is evidence that adversarially
collected data provides performance gains irrespec-
tive of the model in the loop (Nie et al., 2020;
Dinan et al., 2019; Bartolo et al., 2020). For ex-
ample, ANLI shows that replacing equal amounts
of “normally collected” SNLI and MNLI training
data with ANLI data improves model performance,
especially when training size is small (Nie et al.,
2020), suggesting higher data efﬁciency. How-ever, it has also been found that model-in-the-loop
counterfactually-augmented training data does not
necessarily lead to better generalization (Huang
et al., 2020). Given the distributional shift induced
by adversarial settings, it would probably be wisest
to combine adversarially collected data with non-
adversarial data during training (ANLI takes this
approach), and to also test models in both scenarios.
To get the most useful training and testing data, it
seems the focus should be on collecting adversarial
data with the best available model(s), preferably
with a wide range of expertise, as that will likely
be beneﬁcial to future models also. That said, we
expect this to be both task and model dependent.
Much more research is required, and we encourage
the community to explore these topics.
Is it expensive? Dynamic benchmarking is in-
deed expensive, but it is worth putting the numbers
in context, as all data collection efforts are expen-
sive when done at the scale of our current bench-
mark tasks. For instance, SNLI has 20K examples
that were separately validated, and each one of
these examples cost approximately $0.50 to obtain
and validate (personal communication with SNLI
authors). Similarly, the 40K validated examples in
MultiNLI cost $0.64 each (p.c., MultiNLI authors).
By comparison, the average cost of creation and
validation for ANLI examples is closer to $1.00
(p.c., ANLI authors). This is a substantial increase
at scale. However, dynamic adversarial datasets
may also last longer as benchmarks. If true, then
the increased costs could turn out to be a bargain.
We should acknowledge, though, that dynamic
benchmarks will tend to be more expensive than
regular benchmarks for comparable tasks, because
not every annotation attempt will be model-fooling
and validation is required. Such expenses are likely
to increase through successive rounds, as the mod-
els become more robust to workers’ adversarial
attacks. The research bet is that each example
obtained this way is actually worth more to the
community and thus worth the expense.
In addition, we hope that language enthusiasts
and other non-crowdworker model breakers will
appreciate the honor that comes with being high up
on the user leaderboard for breaking models. We
are working on making the tool useful for educa-
tion, as well as gamifying the interface to make it
(even) more fun to try to fool models, as a “game
with a purpose” (V on Ahn and Dabbish, 2008), for
example through the ability to earn badges.

==== Page 9 ====
5 Conclusion and Outlook
We introduced Dynabench, a research platform for
dynamic benchmarking. Dynabench opens up ex-
citing new research directions, such as investigat-
ing the effects of ensembles in the loop, distribu-
tional shift characterisation, exploring annotator
efﬁciency, investigating the effects of annotator ex-
pertise, and improving model robustness to targeted
adversarial attacks in an interactive setting. It also
facilitates further study in dynamic data collection,
and more general cross-task analyses of human-
and-machine interaction. The current iteration of
the platform is only just the beginning of a longer
journey. In the immediate future, we aim to achieve
the following goals:
Anyone can run a task. Having created a tool
that allows for human-in-the-loop model evaluation
and data collection, we aim to make it possible for
anyone to run their own task. To get started, only
three things are needed: a target model, a (set of)
context(s), and a pool of annotators.
Multilinguality and multimodality. As of now,
Dynabench is text-only and focuses on English, but
we hope to change that soon.
Live model evaluation. Model evaluation
should not be about one single number on some
test set. If models are uploaded through a standard
interface, they can be scored automatically along
many dimensions. We would be able to capture
not only accuracy, for example, but also usage of
computational resources, inference time, fairness,
and many other relevant dimensions. This will in
turn enable dynamic leaderboards, for example
based on utility (Ethayarajh and Jurafsky, 2020).
This would also allow for backward-compatible
comparisons, not having to worry about the
benchmark changing, and automatically putting
new state of the art models in the loop, addressing
some of the main objections.
One can easily imagine a future where, in order
to fulﬁll reproducibility requirements, authors do
not only link to their open source codebase but also
to their model inference point so others can “talk
with” their model. This will help drive progress, as
it will allow others to examine models’ capabilities
and identify failures to address with newer even
better models. If we cannot always democratize
thetraining of state-of-the-art AI models, at the
very least we can democratize their evaluation .Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jason Weston, Emily Di-
nan and Kyunghyun Cho for their input on this
project, and Sonia Kris for her support. ZW has
been supported in part by the Canada 150 Research
Chair program and the UK-Canada AI Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Initiative. YN and MB have been sup-
ported in part by DARPA MCS N66001-19-2-4031,
DARPA YFA17-D17AP00022, and ONR N00014-
18-1-2871. CP has been supported in part by grants
from Facebook, Google, and by Stanford’s Institute
for Human-Centered AI.
References
Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, and Richard Sproat.
2005. Emotions from text: Machine learning
for text-based emotion prediction. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 579–586, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Joshua Attenberg, Panos Ipeirotis, and Foster Provost.
2015. Beat the machine: Challenging humans to
ﬁnd a predictive model’s “unknown unknowns”. J.
Data and Information Quality , 6(1).
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 .
Max Bartolo, Alastair Roberts, Johannes Welbl, Sebas-
tian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2020. Beat the ai:
Investigating adversarial human annotation for read-
ing comprehension. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 8:662–678.
Yonatan Belinkov and Yonatan Bisk. 2018. Synthetic
and natural noise both break neural machine transla-
tion. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations .
Yonatan Belinkov, Adam Poliak, Stuart Shieber, Ben-
jamin Van Durme, and Alexander Rush. 2019.
Don’t take the premise for granted: Mitigating ar-
tifacts in natural language inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 877–891, Flo-
rence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

==== Page 10 ====
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 .
Dallas Card, Peter Henderson, Urvashi Khandelwal,
Robin Jia, Kyle Mahowald, and Dan Jurafsky. 2020.
With little power comes great responsibility. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 9263–9274, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Michael Chen, Mike D’Arcy, Alisa Liu, Jared Fer-
nandez, and Doug Downey. 2019. CODAH: An
adversarially-authored question answering dataset
for common sense. In Proceedings of the 3rd Work-
shop on Evaluating Vector Space Representations
for NLP , pages 63–69, Minneapolis, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. 2018. SentEval: An
evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018) , Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine learning challenges. evalu-
ating predictive uncertainty, visual object classiﬁca-
tion, and recognising tectual entailment , pages 177–
190. Springer.
Harm de Vries, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Christopher
Manning. 2020. Towards ecologically valid re-
search on language user interfaces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.14435 .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Samuel Humeau, Bharath Chintagunta,
and Jason Weston. 2019. Build it break it ﬁx it for
dialogue safety: Robustness from adversarial human
attack. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
4537–4546, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel
Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. 2019.
DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requir-
ing discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North AmericanChapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers) , pages 2368–2378, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Javid Ebrahimi, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing Dou. 2018a.
On adversarial examples for character-level neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 653–663, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing
Dou. 2018b. HotFlip: White-box adversarial exam-
ples for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages
31–36, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Kawin Ethayarajh and Dan Jurafsky. 2020. Utility is in
the eye of the user: A critique of NLP leaderboard
design. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 4846–4853, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Allyson Ettinger. 2020. What BERT is not: Lessons
from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
language models. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 8:34–48.
Allyson Ettinger, Sudha Rao, Hal Daumé III, and
Emily M. Bender. 2017. Towards linguistically gen-
eralizable NLP systems: A workshop and shared
task. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Building Linguistically Generalizable NLP Systems ,
pages 1–10, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan
Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep Dasigi,
Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala,
Nitish Gupta, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Gabriel Ilharco,
Daniel Khashabi, Kevin Lin, Jiangming Liu, Nel-
son F. Liu, Phoebe Mulcaire, Qiang Ning, Sameer
Singh, Noah A. Smith, Sanjay Subramanian, Reut
Tsarfaty, Eric Wallace, Ally Zhang, and Ben Zhou.
2020. Evaluating models’ local decision boundaries
via contrast sets. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Findings , pages 1307–1323, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jon Gauthier, Jennifer Hu, Ethan Wilcox, Peng Qian,
and Roger Levy. 2020. SyntaxGym: An online
platform for targeted evaluation of language models.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations , pages 70–76, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Atticus Geiger, Ignacio Cases, Lauri Karttunen,
and Christopher Potts. 2018. Stress-testing neu-
ral models of natural language inference with

==== Page 11 ====
multiply-quantiﬁed sentences. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.13033 .
Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and Noah A.
Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in natural lan-
guage inference data. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) ,
pages 107–112, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Braden Hancock, Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel
Mazare, and Jason Weston. 2019. Learning from
dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself, chatbot!
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
3667–3684, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Md Mosharaf Hossain, Venelin Kovatchev, Pranoy
Dutta, Tiffany Kao, Elizabeth Wei, and Eduardo
Blanco. 2020. An analysis of natural language in-
ference benchmarks through the lens of negation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 9106–9118, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 328–339, Melbourne, Australia.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
William Huang, Haokun Liu, and Samuel R Bowman.
2020. Counterfactually-augmented snli training
data does not yield better generalization than unaug-
mented data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04762 .
Paloma Jeretic, Alex Warstadt, Suvrat Bhooshan, and
Adina Williams. 2020. Are natural language infer-
ence models IMPPRESsive? Learning IMPlicature
and PRESupposition. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 8690–8705, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial exam-
ples for evaluating reading comprehension systems.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2021–2031, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary C Lip-
ton. 2020. Learning the difference that makes
a difference with counterfactually-augmented data.
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR) .
Huda Khayrallah and Philipp Koehn. 2018. On the
impact of various types of noise on neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Neural Machine Translation and Generation , pages
74–83, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Najoung Kim and Tal Linzen. 2020. COGS: A com-
positional generalization challenge based on seman-
tic interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9087–9105, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob De-
vlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones,
Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai,
Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019.
Natural questions: A benchmark for question an-
swering research. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 7:452–466.
Jonathan Leader Maynard and Susan Benesch. 2016.
Dangerous Speech and Dangerous Ideology: An
Integrated Model for Monitoring and Prevention.
Genocide Studies and Prevention , 9(3):70–95.
Patrick Lewis, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel.
2020. Question and answer test-train overlap in
open-domain question answering datasets. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.02637 .
Tal Linzen. 2020. How can we accelerate progress to-
wards human-like linguistic generalization? In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5210–
5217, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Hugo Liu, Henry Lieberman, and Ted Selker. 2003.
A model of textual affect sensing using real-world
knowledge. In Proceedings of Intelligent User Inter-
faces (IUI) , pages 125–132.
Nelson F. Liu, Roy Schwartz, and Noah A. Smith.
2019a. Inoculation by ﬁne-tuning: A method for
analyzing challenge datasets. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers) , pages 2171–2179, Minneapolis, Min-
nesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019b.
RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. CoRR , abs/1907.11692.

==== Page 12 ====
Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 1412–1421, Lis-
bon, Portugal. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics , 19(2):313–330.
Chandler May, Alex Wang, Shikha Bordia, Samuel R.
Bowman, and Rachel Rudinger. 2019. On measur-
ing social biases in sentence encoders. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers) , pages 622–628, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong,
and Richard Socher. 2018. The natural language de-
cathlon: Multitask learning as question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08730 .
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 3428–3448,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Pasquale Minervini and Sebastian Riedel. 2018. Adver-
sarially regularising neural NLI models to integrate
logical background knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 22nd Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning , pages 65–74, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Mitchell, William Cohen, Estevam Hruschka,
Partha Talukdar, Bishan Yang, Justin Betteridge, An-
drew Carlson, Bhavana Dalvi, Matt Gardner, Bryan
Kisiel, et al. 2018. Never-ending learning. Commu-
nications of the ACM , 61(5):103–115.
Robert Munro, Steven Bethard, Victor Kuperman,
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Robin Melnick, Christopher Potts,
Tyler Schnoebelen, and Harry Tily. 2010. Crowd-
sourcing and language studies: the new generation
of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk , pages
122–130, Los Angeles. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Aakanksha Naik, Abhilasha Ravichander, Norman
Sadeh, Carolyn Rose, and Graham Neubig. 2018.
Stress test evaluation for natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics , pages 2340–2353,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. CrowS-pairs: A chal-
lenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked
language models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1953–1967, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Alena Neviarouskaya, Helmut Prendinger, and Mitsuru
Ishizuka. 2010. Recognition of affect, judgment,
and appreciation in text. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (Coling 2010) , pages 806–814, Beijing, China.
Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.
Yixin Nie, Yicheng Wang, and Mohit Bansal. 2019.
Analyzing compositionality-sensitivity of nli mod-
els. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence , 33(01):6867–6874.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit
Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Ad-
versarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4885–4901, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in In-
formation Retrieval , 2(1):1–135.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-
jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. Pytorch:
An imperative style, high-performance deep learn-
ing library. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 32, pages 8026–8037. Cur-
ran Associates, Inc.
Fabio Poletto, Valerio Basile, Manuela Sanguinetti,
Cristina Bosco, and Viviana Patti. 2020. Resources
and benchmark corpora for hate speech detection: a
systematic review. Language Resources and Evalu-
ation .
Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar,
Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Hypothesis only baselines in natural language in-
ference. In Proceedings of the Seventh Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics ,
pages 180–191, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Christopher Potts, Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger,
and Douwe Kiela. 2020. DynaSent: A dynamic
benchmark for sentiment analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.15349 .
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-

==== Page 13 ====
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in OntoNotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL - Shared Task , pages
1–40, Jeju Island, Korea. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
blog, 1(8):9.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of the 56th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 784–
789, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin,
and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond accuracy: Be-
havioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4902–
4912, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ohad Rozen, Vered Shwartz, Roee Aharoni, and Ido
Dagan. 2019. Diversify your datasets: Analyzing
generalization via controlled variance in adversar-
ial datasets. In Proceedings of the 23rd Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL) , pages 196–205, Hong Kong, China. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Gender bias in
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) ,
pages 8–14, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Paul Röttger, Bertram Vidgen, Dong Nguyen, Zeerak
Waseem, Helen Margetts, and Janet Pierrehumbert.
2020. Hatecheck: Functional tests for hate speech
detection models.
Swarnadeep Saha, Yixin Nie, and Mohit Bansal. 2020.
ConjNLI: Natural language inference over conjunc-
tive sentences. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8240–8252, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Victor Sánchez Valencia. 1991. Studies on natural
logic and categorial grammar, University of Amster-
dam Ph. D . Ph.D. thesis, thesis.Chinnadhurai Sankar, Sandeep Subramanian, Chris Pal,
Sarath Chandar, and Yoshua Bengio. 2019. Do neu-
ral dialog systems use the conversation history ef-
fectively? an empirical study. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 32–37, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian Schuster, Yuxing Chen, and Judith Degen.
2020. Harnessing the linguistic signal to predict
scalar inferences. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 5387–5403, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017. Bidirectional attention
ﬂow for machine comprehension. In The Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) .
Kurt Shuster, Da Ju, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Y-
Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2020. The di-
alogue dodecathlon: Open-domain knowledge and
image grounded conversational agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 2453–2470,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Daniel L Silver, Qiang Yang, and Lianghao Li. 2013.
Lifelong machine learning systems: Beyond learn-
ing algorithms. In 2013 AAAI spring symposium se-
ries.
Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it good?
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural lan-
guage tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 254–263, Honolulu, Hawaii. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea V oss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-
ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33.
Moritz Sudhof, Andrés Gómez Emilsson, Andrew L.
Maas, and Christopher Potts. 2014. Sentiment ex-
pression conditioned by affective transitions and so-
cial forces. In Proceedings of 20th Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages
1136–1145, New York. ACM.

==== Page 14 ====
Saku Sugawara, Pontus Stenetorp, Kentaro Inui, and
Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Assessing the benchmark-
ing capacity of machine reading comprehension
datasets. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 8918–8927.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017.
Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Aus-
tralia, 6-11 August 2017 , volume 70 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 3319–3328.
PMLR.
Swabha Swayamdipta, Roy Schwartz, Nicholas Lourie,
Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Noah A.
Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Dataset cartography:
Mapping and diagnosing datasets with training dy-
namics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 9275–9293, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers) , pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Masatoshi Tsuchiya. 2018. Performance impact
caused by hidden bias of training data for recog-
nizing textual entailment. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki,
Japan. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Johan van Benthem. 2008. A brief history of natu-
ral logic. In Logic, Navya-Nyaya and Applications:
Homage to Bimal Matilal .
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In I. Guyon, U. V . Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30 , pages 5998–6008. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Bertie Vidgen and Leon Derczynski. 2020. Directions
in Abusive Language Training Data: Garbage In,
Garbage Out. arXiv:2004.01670 , pages 1–26.
Bertie Vidgen, Alex Harris, Dong Nguyen, Rebekah
Tromble, Scott Hale, and Helen Margetts. 2019.
Challenges and frontiers in abusive content detec-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abu-
sive Language Online , pages 80–93, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.Bertie Vidgen, Tristan Thrush, Zeerak Waseem, and
Douwe Kiela. 2020. Learning from the worst: Dy-
namically generated datasets to improve online hate
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15761 .
Luis V on Ahn and Laura Dabbish. 2008. Designing
games with a purpose. Communications of the ACM ,
51(8):58–67.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner,
and Sameer Singh. 2019. Universal adversarial trig-
gers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2153–2162, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
derstanding systems. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , volume 32, pages 3266–
3280. Curran Associates, Inc.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP , pages 353–355, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Warstadt, Yu Cao, Ioana Grosu, Wei Peng, Ha-
gen Blix, Yining Nie, Anna Alsop, Shikha Bordia,
Haokun Liu, Alicia Parrish, Sheng-Fu Wang, Jason
Phang, Anhad Mohananey, Phu Mon Htut, Paloma
Jeretic, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. Investi-
gating BERT’s knowledge of language: Five anal-
ysis methods with NPIs. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2877–2887, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-
hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: A benchmark of linguis-
tic minimal pairs for English. In Proceedings of the
Society for Computation in Linguistics 2020 , pages
409–410, New York, New York. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Zeerak Waseem, Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Understanding Abuse: A
Typology of Abusive Language Detection Subtasks.
InProceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive
Language Online , pages 78–84.
Aaron Steven White, Rachel Rudinger, Kyle Rawlins,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Lexicosyntactic

==== Page 15 ====
inference in neural models. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 4717–4724, Brus-
sels, Belgium. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Aaron Steven White, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Siddharth
Vashishtha, Venkata Subrahmanyan Govindarajan,
Dee Ann Reisinger, Tim Vieira, Keisuke Sakaguchi,
Sheng Zhang, Francis Ferraro, Rachel Rudinger,
Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2020. The
universal decompositional semantics dataset and de-
comp toolkit. In Proceedings of the 12th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 5698–
5707, Marseille, France. European Language Re-
sources Association.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 39(2–3):165–210.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset
for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answer-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Zhilin Yang, Saizheng Zhang, Jack Urbanek, Will
Feng, Alexander H Miller, Arthur Szlam, Douwe
Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2017. Mastering the dun-
geon: Grounded language learning by mechanical
turker descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07950 .
Lang Yu and Allyson Ettinger. 2020. Assessing phrasal
representation and composition in transformers. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 4896–4907, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Xiang Zhou, Yixin Nie, Hao Tan, and Mohit Bansal.
2020. The curse of performance instability in analy-
sis datasets: Consequences, source, and suggestions.
InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 8215–8228, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

