==== Page 1 ====
electronics
Article
Early Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy Using
PCA-Fireﬂy Based Deep Learning Model
Thippa Reddy Gadekallu1
, Neelu Khare1, Sweta Bhattacharya1, Saurabh Singh2,
Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta1
, In-Ho Ra2,*
and Mamoun Alazab3,*
1School of Information Technology and Engineering, VIT-Vellore, Tamil Nadu, Vellore 632014, India;
thippareddy.g@vit.ac.in (T.R.G.); neelu.khare@vit.ac.in (N.K.); sweta.b@vit.ac.in (S.B.);
praveenkumarreddy@vit.ac.in (P .K.R.M.)
2School of Computer, Information and Communication Engineering, Kunsan National University,
Gunsan 54150, Korea; singh1989@jbnu.ac.kr
3College of Engineering, IT and Environment, Charles Darwin University, Mamoun, 0815 Darwin, Australia
*Correspondence: ihra@kunsan.ac.kr (I.-H.R.); mamoun.alazab@cdu.edu.au (M.A.)
Received: 14 January 2020; Accepted: 2 February 2020; Published: 5 February 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Diabetic Retinopathy is a major cause of vision loss and blindness affecting millions of
people across the globe. Although there are established screening methods - ﬂuorescein angiography
and optical coherence tomography for detection of the disease but in majority of the cases, the patients
remain ignorant and fail to undertake such tests at an appropriate time. The early detection of the
disease plays an extremely important role in preventing vision loss which is the consequence of
diabetes mellitus remaining untreated among patients for a prolonged time period. Various machine
learning and deep learning approaches have been implemented on diabetic retinopathy dataset for
classiﬁcation and prediction of the disease but majority of them have neglected the aspect of data
pre-processing and dimensionality reduction, leading to biased results. The dataset used in the
present study is a diabetes retinopathy dataset collected from the UCI machine learning repository.
At its inceptions, the raw dataset is normalized using the Standardscalar technique and then Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) is used to extract the most signiﬁcant features in the dataset. Further,
Fireﬂy algorithm is implemented for dimensionality reduction. This reduced dataset is fed into a
Deep Neural Network Model for classiﬁcation. The results generated from the model is evaluated
against the prevalent machine learning models and the results justify the superiority of the proposed
model in terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity.
Keywords: diabetic retinopathy; deep neural networks (DNN); dimensionality reduction; principal
component analysis (PCA); machine learning (ML); Fireﬂy
1. Introduction
There is also another group of 325 million with risk of Type II diabetes in 2017 and the numbers
of these patients are also progressively increasing throughout the world [ 1]. Most of the people in this
category belonged to the age group between 40 to 59 years of age wherein 1 out of 2 people among 212
million people are completely ignorant and uninformed of their disease. Hence it is quite evident that
diabetic retinopathy has the probability to soon become a major health issue throughout the world.
Obesity, unhealthy diet and physical inactivity are the primary factors responsible for Type 2 diabetes.
But it is important to understand that diabetic retinopathy gets developed only when a patient has
diabetes for at least 10 years and remains unaware and untreated without proper eye examination.
Diabetic Retinopathy can always be prevented if it is detected early enough by conducting health
check-ups and systematic treatment of Diabetes [2,3].
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274; doi:10.3390/electronics9020274 www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics

==== Page 2 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 2 of 16
Duration of Diabetes acts as one of the primary cause for patients getting affected with retinopathy
wherein with longer duration, the probability of occurrence of the disease gets enhanced. Hence it is
evident that retinopathy initiates when the patient has diabetes for a longer timeframe being completely
unaware, ignorant and untreated on the possibilities of diabetic retinopathy as a natural progression
from diabetes [ 4]. The onset of diabetes happens when there is an abnormal ﬂuctuation in the blood
sugar level. Normally the glucose in the body gets transformed into energy helping to conduct regular
human activities. But in an adverse situation when there is abnormal shooting up of blood sugar
level, the excess blood sugar generated ﬁnds no other option but to get accumulated in blood vessels
of various organs in the body including human eye [ 3]. This phenomenon is called hyperglycemia.
Diabetic eye disease or retinopathy has two stages namely Non-proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy
(NPDR) and Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR). In NPDR the retina gets swollen, a case of
macular edema, due accumulation of glucose leading to blood vessel leakages in the eyes. The swelling
could be so worse that the vessels could get completely blocked resulting, in macular ischemia. In all
of the instances the patient loses vision partially, completely or sometimes suffers from blurred vision.
The PDR occurs at a much advanced stage of diabetes when new blood vessels start growing in the
retina, a case known as neovascularization. The new blood vessels are extremely thin and fragile being
more prone to haemorrhage. The blood from the haemorrhage leads to partial or complete vision loss.
Also the newly created blood vessels form scar tissues which lead to detachment of retina resulting
in loss of central or peripheral vision. The symptoms of NPDR and PDR include blurred vision,
haemorrhages, wool spots, double vision, corneal abnormalities, intra-retinal abrasions, microvascular
abnormalities, microaneurysms and increase in retinal permeability [5].
The popular diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy includes ﬂuorescein angiography and optical
coherence tomography. In ﬂuorescein angiography, the physician injects a dye in the patient’s arm
vein and pictures are taken as the dye ﬂows through the blood vessels in the eyes detecting cases
of blockages, leakages and haemorrhage. In optical coherence tomography, tests are conducted to
take cross sectional images of the retina which helps to identify issues pertinent to ﬂuid leakages or
damages in the retinal tissue [6].
It is thus evident from the fact that detection of the disease plays a major role in saving patients
from vision loss. The more time the disease gets lingered being ignorant or untreated, the consequences
could be severe. Machine learning algorithms have been a prevalent choice in the prediction of various
diseases. The concept of machine learning was framed by Arthur Samuel in 1959 as a technique for
computers to automatically learn without programming interventions and further make decisions
from the experiences of learning. Deep neural network is based on the concept of machine learning
and artiﬁcial neural networks [ 7–10]. DNN has successfully contributed towards analysis and decision
making in the ﬁelds of computer vision, speech recognition, drug design, medical image processing
and many others. The implementation of such advanced machine learning approaches as DNN had
signiﬁcantly contributed towards pathological screening and disease predictions thereby reducing the
burden of human interpretations. With such glorifying results of application of DNN and machine
learning approaches in various other ﬁelds of healthcare, application of the same in the detection
of diabetic retinopathy was a natural point of interest with an objective to reduce occurrence of this
disease [11,12]. Thus motivation of the present study was:
1. Early detection of the diabetic retinopathy disease giving opportunity for medical practitioners to
treat and cure the same at an early stage with higher accuracy.
2. Focus on the most signiﬁcant factors of the disease eliminating the irrelevant ones ensuring more
accurate classiﬁcation.
A Deep neural network model is used in the present study in convergence with Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) and ﬁreﬂy algorithm for the classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy set.
The dataset is collected from the publicly available UCI machine learning repository. The data being
collected from the public domain includes attributes which are irrelevant and inclusion of the same
would only increase burden on the ML model. Hence Principal component analysis (PCA) algorithm

==== Page 3 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 3 of 16
is implemented for feature extraction from DR image dataset. To further improve on the classiﬁcation
results, ﬁreﬂy algorithm is implemented for dimensionality reduction. The resultant reduced dataset is
fed into the deep neural network model generating enhanced classiﬁcation of the diabetic retinopathy
dataset. The result of the proposed model is evaluated against the traditional state of the model to
establish its superiority in terms of the accuracy, speciﬁcity, precision, recall and sensitivity.
The following sections of the paper are organized as follows: Section 2 presents an explicit
literature review, Section 3 discusses the preliminaries and experimental setting, Section 4 describes
the methodology, Section 5 highlights the results and Section 6 provides conclusion and scope of
future work.
2. Related Work
The study in [ 13] developed a deep learning system for identiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy with
enhanced accuracy than existing studies. The analysis was performed on a small percentage of images
with higher resolutions. The results highlighted the ability of deep learning models to diagnose the
disease achieving the desired performance level considering limitations in cost as well.
The study in [ 14] has implemented adjudication for the quantiﬁcation of errors in diabetic
retinopathy (DR) focusing on grading of the disease using a deep learning algorithm. The kappa score
was measured and performance of the model was compared based on sensitivity, accuracy and area
under the curve (AUC).
The research work conducted in [ 15] developed a data oriented deep learning model for DR
detection wherein the coloured fundus images [ 16] of the disease were processed and the classiﬁcation
model helped to segregate the diseased ones from the healthy images.
In [17] a deep learning model was designed to detect diabetic retinopathy and macular edema
from images of retinal fundus. A deep convolutional neural network [ 18] was used to train a retinal
image dataset consisting of 128175 images. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity scores in the study helped to
detect referable diabetic retinopathy (RDR among diabetic patients using a deep neural network model.
The study by Swapna et. al [ 19] designed a deep learning model for the classiﬁcation of diabetes
using HRV data. The dynamic features relevant to the HRV data were extracted using a combination of
long-short-term memory (LSTM) and convolutional neural network. The output of the model achieved
prominent accuracy in detection of diabetes in HRV data.
The study in [ 20] presented a hybrid technique incorporating image processing and deep learning
for detection and classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy. The model was validated using the retinal
fundus dataset consisting of 400 images of the MESSIDOR database yielding good results.
The study in [ 21] developed a computer-aided screening system that helped to analyse fundus
images having different illumination and views. The study basically helped to detect the severity level
of DR using ML models. The model used AdaBoost classiﬁer for feature extraction and analysed the
data using Gaussian Mixture Model, KNN, SVM to classify retinopathy lesion cases from nonlesions.
The study in [ 22,23] developed an FFBAT-based algorithms for classiﬁcation of diabetes.
The unique contribution of the study was its use of LPP algorithm using fuzzy rules for feature
extraction and the FFBAT-ANN model for classiﬁcation. This combination helped to achieve better
classiﬁcation results yielding improve accuracy in the results.
Various studies have also used Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), Bayesian Classiﬁcation and
Support Vector Machines (SVM) for the classiﬁcation NPDR and PDR types of diabetic retinopathy.
The images of haemorrhages [ 24] of blood vessels and analysed using image processing techniques
and the extracted features when fed into the classiﬁers help to classify the types of DR diseases [ 25–27].
It is quite evident from the related work that majority of the work in diabetic retinopathy detected
revolves around use of various machine learning models and comparison of the performance of these
models. It is also observed that less emphasis has been given on improvement of quality of the diabetic
retinopathy dataset which could lead to more accurate results. It is important to highlight the fact that
the reliability of results generated from the machine learning model depends on the features of the

==== Page 4 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 4 of 16
dataset. Extraction of the most signiﬁcant features in the dataset and use of appropriate dimensionality
reduction techniques help to enhance accuracy of the prediction results of the machine learning models.
The present focuses on this aspect and adopts a two layered dimensionality reduction approach
followed by the use of deep neural network model for classiﬁcation. The unique contributions of the
proposed work include:
1. A three layered rigorous pre-processing approach is adopted to enhance the quality of the dataset
and include relevant and signiﬁcant attributes alone for training the proposed model.
2. The implementation of PCA+Fireﬂy is used to signiﬁcantly reduce the training time of the ML
based models.
3. Preliminaries and Experimeental Setting
This section discusses the methodologies used in the proposed model namely, PCA and Fireﬂy
algorithms. The detailed architecture of the proposed model is also presented.
3.1. Principal Component Analysis
The concept of PCA is based on the objective of reduction in dimensionality of a data set consisting
of multiple variables which are correlated with each other while retaining maximum variability in
the data set [ 28,29]. The algorithm transforms the variables in the data set to a new set of orthogonal
principal components ordered in a manner such that the retention of variation in the original variables
decreases while traversing down the order. Hence the ﬁrst principal component retains maximum
variation present in the original components. The principal components are the eigenvectors in
covariation matrix which are orthogonal. The dataset to be used in PCA needs to be a scaled one
and the method summarizes the data generating results which are also sensitive to relative scaling.
The principal component is deﬁned as a “linear combination of optimally weighted observed variables”.
The output generated from PCA are such principal components whose numbers are either lesser or
equal to the original variables. The steps involved in implementing PCA on a two dimensional data
set starts with Normalization of the data. This is done by subtracting the respective means from each
of the respective columns in the data set computing a data set with mean of zero. The second step
involves calculation of the covariation matrix. Then the Eigen values and Eigen vectors are calculated
for the covariance matrix. The Eigen values are then ordered in a descending order to provide the
order of signiﬁcance for the components and the dimensionality is reduced by choosing ﬁrst set of
Eigen values and ignoring the rest. A matrix of vectors is formed to create a feature vector. In the
ﬁnal step the principal components are formed by considering the transpose of the feature vector and
computing the left multiplication with the transpose of scaled version of the data set. The concept
of dimensionality reduction in PCA pitches its use in facial recognition, computer vision and image
compression. It has also wide spectrum of applications in pattern identiﬁcation of high dimensional
data pertaining to the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, datamining, bio-informatics and psychology [30–33].
3.2. Fireﬂy Algorithm
Fireﬂy algorithm is a “nature—inspired” algorithm based on the behaviour of ﬂies. Nature
inspired algorithms are extensively used in several stages of machine learning process [ 34,35].
The ﬁreﬂies have natural lights emitting from their body that help them to attract or ﬁnd other
ﬂying mates [ 36–38]. It also helps them to catch their prey and protect themselves from predators.
The algorithm is based on three primary assumptions [39]:
1. The artiﬁcial ﬁreﬂies are unisex and their attraction are not dependent on gender.
2. The attractiveness of a ﬁreﬂy is proportional to the brightness of the lights emitted and hence
it decreases as they move away from each other due to absorption of the light by air. Since all
ﬁreﬂies emit light, the one emitting the brightest one attracts most of its neighbours. On the

==== Page 5 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 5 of 16
contrary, if there is a situation of no such bright ﬁreﬂy, all the ﬁreﬂies move around in a haphazard
fashion in any direction.
3. The brightness of the ﬂashing light being the criteria for attraction is the objective function to be
optimized in the algorithm.
The basic schema followed in this algorithm 1 is:
Algorithm 1: Pseudo Code of Fireﬂy Algorithm [36]
Objective function makespan, z= (P1,P2...Pn)
Generate machines (i=1, 2... m)
Generate job sequences (j=1, 2... n)
Evaluate makespan (P1,P2,P3. . . . Pn)for all population
while Gen.<MaxGen .do
foreach job sequence j = (1, 2, 3. . . , n)do
forFor each lot sizes X ijdo
Move ﬁreﬂy in d-dimensional space
Determine the attractiveness based on distance Rij
Evaluate makespan
Assess light intensity
Select job sequences and lot sizes for Gen.+1E
4. Experimental Setting
The experimental setting of proposed methodology is illustrated in Figure 1. The dataset used
in this work has 19 contributing attributes. The values of these attributes are of different range. This
variation in the range of the values of the attributes may lead to varied weights of some instances which
may results in biased prediction results. In order to avoid such heterogeneity, as part of pre-processing,
a StandardScaler method is used in the proposed work. Standardscaler method normalizes the data
converting it to a common range to eliminate bias in the prediction results. The Principal Component
Analysis algorithm is then applied on this normalized data. The main reason for using PCA is to
eliminate the insigniﬁcant attributes from consideration for training the DNN. To further strengthen
the feature engineering process, one of the popular nature inspired algorithms, Fireﬂy Optimization
Algorithm, is used in this work. The main strength of Fireﬂy algorithm is that it tunes the parameters
in such a way that this algorithm chooses the optimal parameters, whose convergence rate would
be very fast avoiding local minima. This property of Fireﬂy algorithm makes it an ideal choice for
feature engineering to choose optimal parameters which inﬂuence the classiﬁcation in a positive
way thereby reducing training time. The dimensionally reduced dataset is then fed to DNN for
classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy datasets. Adam optimizer and Softsign activation function was
used at each layer except the output layer. The output layer used sigmoid activation function to classify
the Diabetic Retinopathy dataset, since it is a binary classiﬁer. For backpropagation the Root mean
square propagation (RMSprop) error was used. The dataset was split into 8:2 ratio to train and test
respectively. Instead of training entire 80 percent of data and then testing the model on remaining 20
percent of data at one go, for every epoch a batch of 64 records were fed to the model, out of which 80
percent of the records were used to train the model and remaining 20 percent of those records were
used to test the model. The proposed model is summarized as follows:
Input: Diabetic Retinopathy Dataset
Output: Classiﬁcation of class label
1. Data Transformation : Normalization of the input dataset is done using StandardScaler.
2. Dimensionality Reduction : Input the transformed dataset to the PCA for dimensonality
reduction. To further reﬁne feature engineering use ﬁreﬂy optimization algorithm.

==== Page 6 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 6 of 16
3. Classiﬁcation : Feed the extracted features to the DNN for classifying the Diabetic
Retinopathy dataset.
4. Evaluation : Evaluate the performance of the model using several measures like Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity.
5. Comparison : Comparison of the experimental results of the proposed model with traditional
ML algorithms.
Figure 1. DNN-PCA Model for Diabetic Retinopathy
5. Results and Discussion
This section discusses about the dataset used, experimental framework, metrics used and the
experimental results.
The diabetic retinopathy dataset used in this study had 1151 instances and 20 attributes.
The attributes of the dataset used in this paper are discussed in Table 1. Softsign activation fnction was
used in all the layers except at the output layer.
The experimentation was carried out on Diabetic Retinopathy Debrecen dataset from UCI machine
learning repository [ 40]. The attributes in this dataset were the features extracted from the Messidor
image dataset. A personal computer with 8 GB RAM was used for performing the experimentation
using Python.
Table 1. Dataset Description
Attribute Number Description of the Attribute
1 0 – represents bad quality;
2 1 – represents severe retinal abnormality and 0 – represents lack of retinal abnormality
3 to 8 Microaneurysm (MA) detection. It causes blood leakage to the retina. Exach feature value is the no.
9 to 16 Same as 3-8 for exudates. But, in order to compensate different image sizes, these are normalized
17 This column represents the euclidean distance between the center of optical disc to that of center
18 Diameter of the Optic Disc
19 The binary value of amplitude-modulation-frequency-modulation(AM/FM)-based classiﬁcation.
20 Class label. 1 - signs of DR and 0 - no signs of DR.
5.1. Metrics for Evaluation of the Model
The following metrics are used to evaluate the proposed model.
Accuracy: It is the percentage of correct predictions that a classiﬁer has made when compared
to the actual value of the label in the testing phase. Also, it can be said as the ratio of Number of

==== Page 7 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 7 of 16
correct assessments to the Number of all assessments. Accuracy can be calculated using the following
Equation (1).
Accuracy =(TN+TP)
(TN+TP+FN+FP)(1)
Where, TP is true positives, TN is false negatives, FP is false positives, FN is false negatives.
If the class label of a record in a dataset is positive, and the classiﬁer predicts the class label for
that record as positive, then it is called as true positive. If the class label of a record in a dataset is
negative, and the classiﬁer predicts the class label for that record as negative, then it is called as true
negative. If the class label of a record in a dataset is positive, but the classiﬁer predicts the class label
for that record as negative, then it is called as false negative. If the class label of a record in a dataset
is negative, but the classiﬁer predicts the class label for that record as positive, then it is called as
false positive.
Sensitivity: It is the percentage of true positives that are correctly identiﬁed by the classiﬁer during
testing. It is calculated using the following Equation (2).
Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN(2)
Speciﬁcity: It is the percentage of true negatives that are correctly identiﬁed by the classiﬁer
during testing. It is calculated using the following Equation (3).
Speci f icity =TN
TN+FP(3)
Precision: Precision is a signiﬁcant measure for determining exactness, it states that how much
percentage of instances the classiﬁer labelled as positive, with respect to the total predictive positive
instances as shown in Equation (4).
Precision =TruePositive
TruePositive +FalsePositive(4)
Recall: Recall determines completeness i.e, the percentage of positive instances identiﬁed by the
classiﬁer as positive. The recall is a performance metric used to select the best model when there is a
high cost associated with False Negative as shown in Equation (5).
Precision =TruePositive
TruePositive +FalseNegative(5)
F1-measure: (F1 or F1-score) represents the harmonic mean of precision and recall as shown in
Equation (6).
F1 score =2Precision Recall
Precision +Recall(6)
F1 Score is required to ﬁnd a balance between Precision and Recall. Accuracy is mainly contributed
by a large number of True Negatives whereas False Negative and False Positive usually have business
costs (tangible & intangible). Thus F1 Score might be a better measure when a balance between
Precision and Recall is needed with an uneven class distribution (large number of Actual Negatives).
5.2. Performance Analysis
For evaluating the proposed model, a sequential model was used to build the DNN-PCA model.
For the purpose of cross validation, the dataset was split into two parts, 80% of the dataset was used
for training and 20% for validating/testing for every 64 records (batchsize). To identify the activation
function best suited for the dataset, experimentation was performed on several activation functions
like relu, elu, tanh, softmax, selu, softplus and softsign on the dataset with 50 epochs and batchsize

==== Page 8 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 8 of 16
of 64. The results of the experimentation are shown in Figure 2. As observed from Figure 2, Softsign
activation function gave best average training and testing accuracy. Hence Softmax activation function
is chosen on the dense layers for evaluating the model.
Figure 2. Performance Evaluation of Activation Functions
To choose the best optimizer in the layers of deep neural networks, experimentation was
conducted on the dataset using several optimizers like Adam, Nadam, SGD, rmsprop, adagrad,
adadelta, and adamax with 50 epochs and batch size of 64. The results of this experimentation are
shown in Figure 3. As per Figure 3, adam optimizer provided best accuracy. Hence, adam optimizer is
chosen for experimentation at input and also other dense layers. Sigmoid optimizer is chosen for the
output layer.
Figure 3. Performance Evaluation of Optimizers
To choose the number of layers in deep neural networks for experimentation, the DR dataset
was experimented using several layers with softsign activation function, adam optimizer at input
and dense layers, sigmoid optimizer at the output layer, 50 epochs and batch size of 64. As shown in
Figure 4, the model had best training and testing accuracy with 5 layers with accuracy level starting to
dip with 6 layers. Hence a deep neural network with 5 layers was used for the experimentation.

==== Page 9 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 9 of 16
Figure 4. Performance Evaluation Based on Number of Layers
To choose the number of epochs, the DR data set was experimented using 5 intermediate layers
with softsign activation function, adam optimizer at input and dense layers, sigmoid optimizer at the
output layer with batchsize of 64. As shown in Figure 5, the model was successful in providing best
average training and testing accuracy with 600 epochs with the testing accuracy starting to dip with
650 epochs. Hence, a deep neural network was trained with 600 epochs.
Figure 5. Performance Evaluation Based on Number of Epochs
In the experimental work, the number of components chosen for the PCA was 0.9 percent i.e., to
retain 99 percent of the information. Figures 6-11 illustrate the performance evaluation of the ML
models based on the measures accuracy, precision, recall, sensitivity and speciﬁcity. It is evident from
these ﬁgures that PCA-Fireﬂy based ML models outperform the other two cases - ML with PCA and
ML without dimensionality reduction. Considering inclusion and noninclusion of dimensionality
reduction and feature engineering concepts with ML algorithms, it is observed that the proposed
model- DNN-PCA-Fireﬂy performs better than the other hybrid ML algorithms considered.

==== Page 10 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 10 of 16
Figure 6. Performance Evaluation of DNN Based Models
Figure 7. Performance Evaluation of Decision Tree Based Models

==== Page 11 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 11 of 16
Figure 8. Performance Evaluation of K-Nearest Neighbor Based Models
Figure 9. Performance Evaluation of Naive Bayes Based Models

==== Page 12 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 12 of 16
Figure 10. Performance Evaluation of SVM Based Models
Figure 11. Performance Evaluation of XGBoost Based Models
The results obtained based on the experimentation are tabulated in Table 2.

==== Page 13 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 13 of 16
Table 2. Summary of the Experimental Results.
Method Accuracy Precision Recall Sensitivity Speciﬁcity
DNN 96 95 95 90.4 94.3
DNN-PCA 90.07 90 91 87 91
DNN-PCA-
Fireﬂy97 96 96 92 95
SVM 73.8 75 74 83.6 83.6
SVM-PCA 65.3 78 65 85 32
SVM-PCA-
Fireﬂy76 80.2 77.3 87 89
DT 88.2 89 89 85.6 90.9
DT-PCA 86 86 87 84 89
DT-PCA-
Fireﬂy90.2 91.2 92.3 89.3 92.3
KNN 58.2 58 58 59.8 56.6
KNN-PCA 64 64 65 63 62
KNN-PCA-
Fireﬂy72.3 73.1 77 70.3 66.5
NB 57 57 59 60 57
NB-PCA 63.5 65 64 62 64
NB-PCA-
Fireﬂy70.2 71.4 70.3 71.3 72.3
XGBoost 83.3 84 83 75.2 63.8
XGBoost-PCA 80 80 80 81 79
XGBoost-PCA-
Fireﬂy86.3 88.5 88.7 83.3 81.2
The highlights of the results pertinent to the proposed model are:
1. DNN-PCA-Fireﬂy model outperforms other popular ML hybrid models considered for
comparision.
2. Application of PCA alone on DNN and other ML algorithms results in slight deterioration in the
performance measures. But the training time gets reduced.
3. The implementation of PCA+Fireﬂy on the contrary enhances the performance of the ML
algorithms with further reduction in training time as illustrated in Figure 12.
4. The original dataset when used was succumbed to over ﬁtting having an negative effect on
the testing accuracy. However, when the number of records in the dataset was increased by
resampling, the performance enhanced with higher testing accuracy.

==== Page 14 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 14 of 16
Figure 12. Comparison of Training Time for DNN based models
6. Conclusions and Future Work
In the present study a hybrid principal component analysis (PCA) – ﬁreﬂy based deep neural
network model is used for the classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy dataset. The dataset is collected
from the publicly available UCI machine learning repository which at its raw state had redundant
and irrelevant attributes. Rigorous pre-processing was the prime focus of the study and hence a three
layered pre-processing framework was initiated. At the outset, standardscalar technique was employed
to normalize the dataset and then Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used for feature selection.
Further, Fireﬂy algorithm was used for the purpose of dimensionality reduction. This reduced dataset
was fed into the deep neural network (DNN) which generated classiﬁcations results with enhanced
accuracy. The results of the model were also evaluated with the predominant machine learning
approaches wherein the results defended the superiority of the model in terms of the Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity. The major beneﬁts of the model as highlighted, includes
its potential to be implemented on any high dimensional dataset in various other domains. However,
the same performance may not be observed in case of low domensional dataset with possibilities of the
model being overﬁtted acting as its limitation. As part of the future study, the proposed model could
be utilized for data sets in other domains. The performance of the proposed model therefore motivates
to conduct similar studies in various other domains having high dimensional data. This approach can
also be used for eliminating noisy data in Magnetoencephalography (MEG) data analysis contributing
towards better prediction in healthcare.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.R.G., M.A.; Data curation, S.S., P .K.R.M.; Formal analysis, N.K.;
Investigation, S.B.; Methodology, T.R.G., I.-H.R.; Project administration, M.A., I.-H.R.; Resources, N.K.; Software,
T.R.G., S.S.; Visualization, P .K.R.M.; Writing—S.B., M.A., N.K.; Writing—review and editing, T.R.G., S.B., S.S.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the Institute for Information and communications Technology Promotion
(IITP) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. 2018-0-00508), Development of blockchain-based
embedded devices and platform for MG security and operational efﬁciency.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

==== Page 15 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 15 of 16
References
1. Solomon, S.D.; Chew, E.; Duh, E.J.; Sobrin, L.; Sun, J.K.; VanderBeek, B.L.; Wykoff, C.C.; Gardner, T.W.
Diabetic retinopathy: A position statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017 ,
40, 412–418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Luo, H.; Bell, R.A.; Garg, S.; Cummings, D.M.; Patil, S.P .; Jones, K. Trends and Racial/Ethnic Disparities in
Diabetic Retinopathy Among Adults with Diagnosed Diabetes in North Carolina, 2000–2015. N. C. Med. J.
2019 ,80, 76–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Duh, E.J.; Sun, J.K.; Stitt, A.W. Diabetic retinopathy: Current understanding, mechanisms, and treatment
strategies. JCI Insight 2017 ,2, e93751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Stitt, A.W.; Curtis, T.M.; Chen, M.; Medina, R.J.; McKay, G.J.; Jenkins, A.; Gardiner, T.A.; Lyons, T.J.;
Hammes, H.P .; Simo, R.; et al. The progress in understanding and treatment of diabetic retinopathy. Prog.
Retin. Eye Res. 2016 ,51, 156–186. [CrossRef]
5. Ting, D.S.W.; Cheung, G.C.M.; Wong, T.Y. Diabetic retinopathy: Global prevalence, major risk factors,
screening practices and public health challenges: A review. J. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2016 ,44, 260–277.
[CrossRef]
6. Soares, M.; Neves, C.; Marques, I.P .; Pires, I.; Schwartz, C.; Costa, M.Â.; Santos, T.; Durbin, M.; Cunha-Vaz, J.
Comparison of diabetic retinopathy classiﬁcation using ﬂuorescein angiography and optical coherence
tomography angiography. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2017 ,101, 62–68. [CrossRef]
7. Cuzzocrea, A.; Bosco, G.L.; Pilato, G.; Schicchi, D. Multi-class Text Complexity Evaluation via Deep Neural
Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated
Learning, Manchester, UK, 14–16 November 2019; pp. 313–322.
8. Vinayakumar, R.; Alazab, M.; Soman, K.; Poornachandran, P .; Al-Nemrat, A.; Venkatraman, S. Deep learning
approach for intelligent intrusion detection system. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 41525–41550. [CrossRef]
9. Vinayakumar, R.; Alazab, M.; Soman, K.; Poornachandran, P .; Venkatraman, S. Robust intelligent malware
detection using deep learning. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 46717–46738. [CrossRef]
10. Bhattacharya, S.; Kaluri, R.; Singh, S.; Alazab, M.; Tariq, U. A Novel PCA-Fireﬂy based XGBoost classiﬁcation
model for Intrusion Detection in Networks using GPU. Electronics 2020 ,9, 219. [CrossRef]
11. Mansour, R.F. Deep-learning-based automatic computer-aided diagnosis system for diabetic retinopathy.
Biomed. Eng. Lett. 2018 ,8, 41–57. [CrossRef]
12. Venkatraman, S.; Alazab, M. Use of data visualisation for zero-day Malware detection. Secur. Commun.
Netw. 2018 ,2018 . [CrossRef]
13. Sahlsten, J.; Jaskari, J.; Kivinen, J.; Turunen, L.; Jaanio, E.; Hietala, K.; Kaski, K. Deep learning fundus image
analysis for diabetic retinopathy and macular edema grading. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Krause, J.; Gulshan, V .; Rahimy, E.; Karth, P .; Widner, K.; Corrado, G.S.; Peng, L.; Webster, D.R. Grader
variability and the importance of reference standards for evaluating machine learning models for diabetic
retinopathy. Ophthalmology 2018 ,125, 1264–1272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Li, X.; Pang, T.; Xiong, B.; Liu, W.; Liang, P .; Wang, T. Convolutional neural networks based transfer learning
for diabetic retinopathy fundus image classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2017 10th International Congress
on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), Shanghai, China,
14–16 October 2017; pp. 1–11.
16. Lahmiri, S.; Shmuel, A. Variational mode decomposition based approach for accurate classiﬁcation of color
fundus images with hemorrhages. Opt. Laser. Technol. 2017 ,96, 243–248. [CrossRef]
17. Gulshan, V .; Peng, L.; Coram, M.; Stumpe, M.C.; Wu, D.; Narayanaswamy, A.; Venugopalan, S.; Widner, K.;
Madams, T.; Cuadros, J.; et al. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection of
diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs. JAMA 2016 ,316, 2402–2410. [CrossRef]
18. Castellano, G.; Castiello, C.; Mencar, C.; Vessio, G. Crowd Detection for Drone Safe Landing Through
Fully-Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Current Trends in
Theory and Practice of Informatics, Dortmund, Germany, 17–21 February 2020; pp. 301–312.
19. Swapna, G.; Vinayakumar, R.; Soman, K. Diabetes detection using deep learning algorithms. ICT Express
2018 ,4, 243–246.
20. Hemanth, D.J.; Deperlioglu, O.; Kose, U. An enhanced diabetic retinopathy detection and classiﬁcation
approach using deep convolutional neural network. Neural Comput. Appl. 2020 ,32, 707–721. [CrossRef]

==== Page 16 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 16 of 16
21. Lunscher, N.; Chen, M.L.; Jiang, N.; Zelek, J. Automated screening for diabetic retinopathy using compact
deep networks. Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol. 2017 ,3, 1–3. [CrossRef]
22. Reddy, G.T.; Khare, N. Hybrid ﬁreﬂy-bat optimized fuzzy artiﬁcial neural network based classiﬁer for
diabetes diagnosis. IJIES 2017 ,10, 18–27. [CrossRef]
23. Reddy, G.T.; Khare, N. Heart disease classiﬁcation system using optimised fuzzy rule based algorithm.
IJBET 2018 ,27, 183–202. [CrossRef]
24. Lahmiri, S. High-frequency-based features for low and high retina haemorrhage classiﬁcation. Healthc.
Technol. 2017 ,4, 20–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Kanungo, Y.S.; Srinivasan, B.; Choudhary, S. Detecting diabetic retinopathy using deep learning.
In Proceedings of the 2017 2nd IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information
& Communication Technology (RTEICT), Bengaluru, India, 19–20 May 2017; pp. 801–804.
26. Shen, L.; Chen, H.; Yu, Z.; Kang, W.; Zhang, B.; Li, H.; Yang, B.; Liu, D. Evolving support vector machines
using fruit ﬂy optimization for medical data classiﬁcation. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2016 ,96, 61–75. [CrossRef]
27. Shanthi, T.; Sabeenian, R. Modiﬁed Alexnet architecture for classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy images.
Comput.Electr. Eng. 2019 ,76, 56–64. [CrossRef]
28. Jolliffe, I.T.; Cadima, J. Principal component analysis: A review and recent developments. Philos. Trans. A
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2016 ,374, 20150202. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Sapuppo, F.; Umana, E.; Frasca, M.; La Rosa, M.; Shannahoff-Khalsa, D.; Fortuna, L.; Bucolo, M. Complex
spatio-temporal features in meg data. Math. Biosci. Eng. 2006 ,3, 697. [PubMed]
30. Mohsen, H.; El-Dahshan, E.S.A.; El-Horbaty, E.S.M.; Salem, A.B.M. Classiﬁcation using deep learning neural
networks for brain tumors. Future Comput. Inform. J. 2018 ,3, 68–71. [CrossRef]
31. Zisselman, E.; Adler, A.; Elad, M. Compressed learning for image classiﬁcation: A deep neural network
approach. In Handbook of Numerical Analysis ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2018; Volume 19,
pp. 3–17.
32. Diaz, M.; Ferrer, M.A.; Impedovo, D.; Pirlo, G.; Vessio, G. Dynamically enhanced static handwriting
representation for Parkinson’s disease detection. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 2019 ,128, 204–210. [CrossRef]
33. Casalino, G.; Castellano, G.; Consiglio, A.; Liguori, M.; Nuzziello, N.; Primiceri, D. A Predictive
Model for MicroRNA Expressions in Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Detection. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Modeling Decisions for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Berlin, Germany, 26–30 August
2019; pp. 177–188.
34. Reddy, G.T.; Reddy, M.P .K.; Lakshmanna, K.; Rajput, D.S.; Kaluri, R.; Srivastava, G. Hybrid genetic algorithm
and a fuzzy logic classiﬁer for heart disease diagnosis. Evol. Intell. 2019 , 1–12. [CrossRef]
35. Reddy, M.P .K.; Babu, M.R. Implementing self adaptiveness in whale optimization for cluster head section in
Internet of Things. Cluster Comput. 2019 ,22, 1361–1372. [CrossRef]
36. Wang, H.; Wang, W.; Zhou, X.; Sun, H.; Zhao, J.; Yu, X.; Cui, Z. Fireﬂy algorithm with neighborhood
attraction. Inform. Sci. 2017 ,382, 374–387. [CrossRef]
37. Thippa Reddy, G.; Khare, N. FFBAT-optimized rule based fuzzy logic classiﬁer for diabetes. Int. J. Eng. Res.
Afr. Trans. Tech. Publ. 2016 ,24, 137–152. [CrossRef]
38. Reddy, G.T.; Khare, N. An efﬁcient system for heart disease prediction using hybrid OFBAT with rule-based
fuzzy logic model. J. Circuit. Syst. Comp. 2017 ,26, 1750061. [CrossRef]
39. Sánchez, D.; Melin, P .; Castillo, O. Optimization of modular granular neural networks using a ﬁreﬂy
algorithm for human recognition. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intel. 2017 ,64, 172–186. [CrossRef]
40. Antal, B.; Hajdu, A. An ensemble-based system for automatic screening of diabetic retinopathy. Knowl.-Based
Syst. 2014 ,60, 20–27. [CrossRef]
c2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

