==== Page 1 ====
1
Edge Intelligence: The Conﬂuence of
Edge Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Shuiguang Deng, Senior Member, IEEE , Hailiang Zhao, Weijia Fang, Jianwei Yin,
Schahram Dustdar, Fellow, IEEE , and Albert Y . Zomaya, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Along with the rapid developments in communica-
tion technologies and the surge in the use of mobile devices, a
brand-new computation paradigm, Edge Computing, is surging
in popularity. Meanwhile, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications
are thriving with the breakthroughs in deep learning and the
many improvements in hardware architectures. Billions of data
bytes, generated at the network edge, put massive demands
on data processing and structural optimization. Thus, there
exists a strong demand to integrate Edge Computing and AI,
which gives birth to Edge Intelligence. In this paper, we divide
Edge Intelligence into AI for edge (Intelligence-enabled Edge
Computing) and AI on edge (Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge).
The former focuses on providing more optimal solutions to key
problems in Edge Computing with the help of popular and
effective AI technologies while the latter studies how to carry
out the entire process of building AI models, i.e., model training
and inference, on the edge. This paper provides insights into
this new inter-disciplinary ﬁeld from a broader perspective. It
discusses the core concepts and the research road-map, which
should provide the necessary background for potential future
research initiatives in Edge Intelligence.
Index Terms —Edge Intelligence, Edge Computing, Wireless
Networking, Computation Ofﬂoading, Federated Learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
COMMUNICATION technologies are undergoing a new
revolution. The advent of the 5th generation cellular
wireless systems (5G) that brings enhanced Mobile Broad-
Band (eMBB), Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communica-
tions (URLLC) and massive Machine Type Communications
(mMTC). With the proliferation of the Internet of Things
(IoTs), more data is created by widespread and geographically
distributed mobile and IoT devices, and probably more than
the data generated by the mega-scale cloud datacenters [1].
Speciﬁcally, according to the prediction by Ericsson, 45%
This research was partially supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No.2017YFB1400601), National Science
Foundation of China (No.61772461 & No.61825205) and Natural Science
Foundation of Zhejiang Province (No.LR18F020003).
S. Deng is with the First Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, 310003 Hangzhou China and also the College of Computer
Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, 310058 Hangzhou, China. E-
mail: dengsg@zju.edu.cn.
H. Zhao and J. Yin are with the College of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, Zhejiang University, 310058 Hangzhou, China. E-mail: fhliangzhao,
zjuyjw g@zju.edu.cn.
W. Fang is with the First Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, 310003 Hangzhou, China. E-mail: weijiafang@zju.edu.cn,
S. Dustdar is with the Distributed Systems Group, Technische Universitt
Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria. E-mail: dustdar@dsg.tuwien.ac.at.
A. Y . Zomaya is with the School of Computer Science, University of Syd-
ney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. E-mail: albert.zomaya@sydney.edu.au.
Weijia Fang is the corresponding author.of the 40ZB global internet data will be generated by IoT
devices in 2024 [2]. Ofﬂoading such huge data from the edge
to cloud is intractable because it can lead to excessive network
congestion. Therefore, a more applicable way is to handle user
demands at the edge directly, which leads to the birth of a
brand-new computation paradigm, (Mobile !Multi-access)
Edge Computing [3]. The subject of Edge Computing spans
many concepts and technologies in diverse disciplines, in-
cluding Service-oriented Computing (SOC), Software-deﬁned
Networking (SDN), Computer Architecture, to name a few.
The principle of Edge Computing is to push the computation
and communication resources from cloud to edge of networks
to provide services and perform computations, avoiding unnec-
essary communication latency and enabling faster responses
for end users. Edge Computing is a booming ﬁeld today.
No one can deny that Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is devel-
oping rapidly nowadays. Big data processing necessitates that
more powerful methods, i.e., AI technologies, for extracting
insights that lead to better decisions and strategic business
moves. In the last decade, with the huge success of AlexNet
and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which can learn the
deep representation of data, have become the most popular
machine learning architectures. Deep learning, represented by
DNNs and their offshoots, i.e., Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), has gradually become the most
popular AI methods in the last few years. Deep learning has
made striking breakthroughs in a wide spectrum of ﬁelds, in-
cluding computer vision, speech recognition, natural language
processing, and board games. Besides, hardware architectures
and platforms keep on improving at a rapid rate, which makes
it possible to satisfy the requirements of the computation-
intensive deep learning models. Application-speciﬁc accelera-
tors are designed for further improvement in throughput and
energy efﬁciency. In conclusion, driven by the breakthroughs
in deep learning and the upgrade of hardware architectures,
AI is undergoing sustained success and development.
Considering that AI is functionally necessary for the quick
analysis of huge volumes of data and extracting insights,
there exists a strong demand to integrate Edge Computing
and AI, which gives rise to Edge Intelligence. Edge Intel-
ligence is not the simple combination of Edge Computing
and AI. The subject of Edge Intelligence is tremendous
and enormously sophisticated, covering many concepts and
technologies, which are interwoven together in a complex
manner. Some works study the concept from the perspective
of constructing Intelligent Wireless Networks on Edge . For ex-arXiv:1909.00560v2  [cs.NI]  10 Feb 2020

==== Page 2 ====
2
TABLE I
RELATED SURVEYS AND THEIR EMPHASES .
Perspectives Related Surveys Highlights
Intelligent Wireless Networking [4] [5] [6]Summarize the utilization of machine learning on the wireless edge
Including basic principles and general applications
Focus on resource management, networking, and mobility management
Optimization across different layers with machine learning technologies
Deﬁnitions and Divisions of Edge Intelligence [7] [8] [9]Motivation, deﬁnition, division of Edge Intelligence
Including architectures, enabling technologies, learning frameworks, and
software platforms
Focus on model training and inference on edge
Discuss the application scenarios and the practical implementations
ample, Sun et al. comprehensively survey the recent advances
of the applications of machine learning technologies in wire-
less communication [4]. Speciﬁcally, this paper classiﬁes the
utilization of machine learning on the wireless edge into three
parts: resource management in the MAC layer, networking and
mobility management in the network layer, and localization
in the application layer. Different conditions and unsolved
challenges are also discussed. In addition, Mao et al. study the
state-of-the-art researches on the applications of deep learning
algorithms for different network layers [5]. Currently, there
is no formal and internationally accepted deﬁnition of Edge
Intelligence. To deal with the problem, some researchers put
forward their deﬁnitions. For example, Zhou et al. believe
that the scope of Edge Intelligence should not be restricted
to running AI models solely on edge servers or devices but in
collaboration of edge and cloud [7]. They deﬁne six levels of
Edge Intelligence, from cloud-edge co-inference (level 1) to
all on-device (level 6). Zhang et al. deﬁne Edge Intelligence
as the capability to enable edges to execute AI algorithms
[8]. In Table I, we summarize related survey papers on edge
intelligence.
In this paper, we propose to establish a broader vision and
perspective. We suggest to distinguish edge Intelligence into
AI for edge andAI on edge .
1)AI for edge is a research direction focusing on providing
a better solution to constrained optimization problems in
Edge Computing with the help of effective AI technolo-
gies. Here, AI is used to endow edge with more intel-
ligence and optimality. Therefore, it can be understood
asIntelligence-enabled Edge Computing (IEC) .
2)AI on edge studies how to run AI models on edge. It
is a framework for running training and inference of
AI models with device-edge-cloud synergy, which aims
at extracting insights from massive and distributed edge
data with the satisfaction of algorithm performance, cost,
privacy, reliability, efﬁciency, etc. Therefore, it can be
interpreted as Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge (AIE) .
Edge Intelligence, currently in its early stage, and is attracting
more researchers and companies from all over the world. To
disseminate the recent advances of Edge Intelligence, Zhou
et al. have conducted a comprehensive and concrete survey
of the recent research efforts on Edge Intelligence [7]. They
survey the architectures, enabling technologies, systems, and
frameworks from the perspective of AI models’ training andinference. However, the material in Edge Intelligence spans
an immense and diverse spectrum of literature, in origin and
in nature, which is not fully covered by this survey. Many
concepts are still unclear and questions remain unsolved. The
research process actually what motivated us to write this paper
to shed some light and provide more insights with simple and
clear classiﬁcation .
We commit ourselves to elucidating Edge Intelligence to
provide a broader vision and perspective. In Section II, we
discuss the relation between Edge Computing and AI. In
Section III, we demonstrate the research road-map of Edge
Intelligence concisely with a hierarchical structure. Section
IV and Section V elaborate the state of the art and grand
challenges on AI for edge andAI on edge , respectively. Section
VI concludes the article.
II. T HERELATIONS BETWEEN EDGE COMPUTING AND AI
We believe that the conﬂuence of AI and Edge Computing
is natural and inevitable. In effect, there is an interactive
relationship between them. On one hand, AI provides Edge
Computing with technologies and methods, and Edge Com-
puting can unleash its potential and scalability with AI; on
the other hand, Edge Computing provides AI with scenarios
and platforms, and AI can expand its applicability with Edge
Computing.
AI provides Edge Computing with technologies and
methods. In general, Edge Computing is a distributed com-
puting paradigm, where software-deﬁned networks are built
to decentralize data and provide services with robustness and
elasticity. Edge Computing faces resource allocation problems
in different layers, such as CPU cycle frequency, access ju-
risdiction, radio-frequency, bandwidth, and so on. As a result,
it has great demands on various powerful optimization tools
to enhance system efﬁciency. AI technologies are capable to
handle this task. Essentially, AI models extract unconstrained
optimization problems from real scenarios and then ﬁnd the
asymptotically optimal solutions iteratively with Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) methods. Either statistical learning
methods or deep learning methods can offer help and advice
for the edge. Besides, reinforcement learning, including multi-
armed bandit theory, multi-agent learning and deep Q-network
(DQN), is playing a growing and important role in resource
allocation problems for the edge.
Edge Computing provides AI with scenarios and plat-
forms. The surge of IoT devices makes the Internet of

==== Page 3 ====
3
Everything (IoE) a reality [10]. More and more data is
created by widespread and geographically distributed mobile
and IoT devices, other than the mega-scale cloud datacen-
ters. Many more application scenarios, such as intelligent
networked vehicles, autonomous driving, smart home, smart
city and real-time data processing in public security, can
greatly facilitate the realization of AI from theory to practice.
Besides, AI applications with high communication quality
and low computational power requirements can be migrated
from cloud to edge. In a word, Edge Computing provides
AI with a heterogeneous platform full of rich capabilities.
Nowadays, it is gradually becoming possible that AI chips
with computational acceleration such as Field Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs), Graphics Processing Units (GPUs),
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) and Neural Processing Units
(NPUs) are integrated with intelligent mobile devices. More
corporations participate in the design of chip architectures to
support the edge computation paradigm and facilitate DNN
acceleration on resource-limited IoT devices. The hardware
upgrade on edge also injects vigor and vitality into AI.
III. R ESEARCH ROAD -MAP OF EDGE INTELLIGENCE
The architectural layers in the Edge Intelligence road-map,
depicted in Fig. 1, describe a logical separation for the two
directions respectively, i.e., AI for edge (left) and AI on edge
(right). In the bottom-up approach, we divide research efforts
in Edge Computing into Topology, Content, and Service. AI
technologies can be utilized in all of them. By top-down
decomposition, we divide the research efforts in AI on edge
into Model Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor
Acceleration. Before discussing AI for edge andAI on edge
separately, we ﬁrst describe the goal to be optimized for both
of them, which is collectively known as Quality of Experience
(QoE). QoE remains at the top of the road-map.
A. Quality of Experience
We believe that QoE should be application-dependent and
determined by jointly considering multi-criteria: Performance,
Cost, Privacy (Security), Efﬁciency and Reliability.
1)Performance . Ingredients of performance are different
forAI for edge andAI on edge . As for the former, performance
indicators are problem-dependent. For example, performance
could be the ratio of successfully ofﬂoading when it comes
into the computation ofﬂoading problems. It could be the
service providers’ need-to-be-maximized revenue and need-
to-be-minimized hiring costs of Base Stations (BSs) when it
comes into the service placement problems. As for the latter,
performance mainly consists of training loss and inference
accuracy, which are the most important criteria for AI models.
Although the computation scenarios have changed from cloud
clusters to the synergised system of device, edge, and cloud,
these criteria still play important roles.
2)Cost . Cost usually consists of computation cost, com-
munication cost, and energy consumption. Computation cost
reﬂects the demand for computing resources such as achieved
CPU cycle frequency, allocated CPU time while communi-
cation cost presents the request for communication resourcessuch as power, frequency band and access time. Many works
also focused on minimizing the delay (latency) caused by
allocated computation and communication resources. Energy
consumption is not unique to Edge Computing but more
crucial due to the limited battery capacity of mobile devices.
Cost reduction is crucial because Edge Computing promises
a dramatic reduction in delay and energy consumption by
tackling the key challenges for realizing 5G.
3)Privacy (Security) . With the increased awareness of the
leaks of public data, privacy preservation has become one of
the hottest topics in recent years. The status quo led to the
birth of Federated Learning, which aggregates local machine
learning models from distributed devices while preventing
data leakage [11]. The security is closely tied with privacy
preservation. It also has an association with the robustness
of middleware and software of edge systems, which are not
considered in this article.
4)Efﬁciency . Whatever AI for edge orAI on edge , high
efﬁciency promises us a system with excellent performance
and low overhead. The pursuit of efﬁciency is the key factor
for improving existing algorithms and models, especially for
AI on edge . Many approaches such as model compression,
conditional computation, and algorithm asynchronization are
proposed to improve the efﬁciency of training and inference
of deep AI models.
5)Reliability . System reliability ensures that Edge Comput-
ing will not fail throughout any prescribed operating periods.
It is an important indicator of user experience. For Edge Intel-
ligence, system reliability appears to be particularly important
forAI on edge because the model training and inference are
usually carried out in a distributed and synchronized way and
the participated local users have a signiﬁcant probability of
failing to complete the model upload and download due to
wireless network congestion.
B. A Recapitulation of IEC
The left-side of the road-map, depicted in Fig. 1, is AI for
edge . We name this kind of work IEC (i.e. Intelligence-enabled
Edge Computing) as AI provides powerful tools for solving
complex learning, planning, and decision-making problems.
By the bottom-up approach, the key concerns in Edge Comput-
ing are categorized into three layers, i.e., Topology, Content,
and Service.
ForTopology , we pay close attention to the Orchestration
of Edge Sites (OES) and Wireless Networking (WN). In this
paper, we deﬁne an edge site as a micro data center with
applications deployed, attached to a Small-cell Base Station
(SBS). OES studies the deployment and installation of wireless
telecom equipment and servers. In recent years, research
efforts on the management and automation of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) became very popular [12] [13] [14].
UA Vs with a small server and an access point can be regarded
as moving edge servers with strong maneuverability. There-
fore, many works explore scheduling and trajectory planning
problems with the minimization of energy consumption of
UA Vs. For example, Chen et al. study the power consumption
of UA Vs by caching the popular contents under predictions,

==== Page 4 ====
4
PerformanceProblem-based IndicatorsTraining loss + Test AccuracyQuality of Experience (QoE)
CostComputation Resource (delay)Communicational Resource (latency)Energy ConsumptionPrivacy (Security)EfficiencyReliabilityAI for EdgeServiceComputation OffloadingUser Profile MigrationMobility Management
ContentData ProvisioningService                                          ProvisioningPlacementCompositionCachingTopologyEdge Site OrchestrationWireless                                     Networking                                   Data AcquisitionNetwork Planningthebottom-upapproachAI on EdgeModelAdaptationModel CompressionConditional ComputationAlgorithm Asynchronization
FrameworkDesignPartitioningSplittingProcessorAccelerationInstrcution Set Designthetop-downdecompositionThoroughly Decentralization
ModelInferenceModelTrainingFederated Learning
Parallel ComputationNear-data ProcessingKnowledge Distillation
Fig. 1. The research road-map of Edge Intelligence.
where a conceptor-based echo state network (ESN) algorithm
is proposed to learn the mobility pattern of users. With the
help of this effective machine learning technique, the proposed
algorithm greatly outperforms benchmarks in terms of transmit
power and QoE satisfaction. WN studies Data Acquisition
and Network Planning. The former concentrates on the fast
acquisition from rich but highly distributed data at subscribed
edge devices while the latter concentrates on network schedul-
ing, operation and management. Fast data acquisition includes
multiple access, radio resource allocation, and signal encod-
ing/decoding. Network planning studies efﬁcient management
with protocols and middleware. In recent years, there has been
an increasing trend in intelligent networking, which involves
building an intelligent wireless communication mechanism by
popular AI technologies. For example, Zhu et al. propose
Learning-driven Communication , which exploits the coupling
between communication and learning in edge learning systems
[15]. In addition, Sun et al. study the resource management
in F-RANs (Fog radio access network) with DRL. In order
to minimize long-term system power consumption, an MDP
is formulated and the DQN technique is utilized to make
intelligent decisions on the user’s equipment communication
modes [16].
ForContent , we place an emphasis on Data Provisioning,
Service Provisioning, Service Placement, Service Composition
and Service Caching. For data and service provisioning, the
available resources can be provided by remote cloud data-centers and edge servers. In recent years, there exist research
efforts on constructing lightweight QoS-aware service-based
frameworks [17] [18]. The shared resources can also come
from mobile devices if a proper incentive mechanism is
employed. Service placement is an important complement to
service provisioning, which studies where and how to deploy
complex services on possible edge sites. In recent years,
many works studied service placement from the perspective of
Application Service Providers (ASPs). For example, Chen et
al. try deploying services under limited budget on basic com-
munication and computation infrastructures [19]. After that,
multi-armed bandit theory, an embranchment of reinforcement
learning, was adopted to optimize the service placement de-
cision. Service composition studies how to select candidate
services for composition in terms of energy consumption and
QoE of mobile end users [20] [21] [22]. It opens up research
opportunities where AI technologies can be utilized to generate
better service selection schemes. Service caching can also be
viewed as a complement to service provisioning. It studies
how to design a caching pool to store the frequently visited
data and services. Service caching can also be studied in a
cooperative way [23]. It leads to research opportunities where
multi-agent learning can be utilized to optimize QoE in large-
scale edge computing systems.
For Service , we focus on Computation Ofﬂoading, User
Proﬁle Migration, and Mobility Management. Computation
ofﬂoading studies the load balancing of various computational

==== Page 5 ====
5
and communication resources in the manner of edge server
selection and frequency spectrum allocation. More and more
research efforts focus on dynamically managing the radio and
computational resources for multi-user multi-server edge com-
puting systems, utilizing Lyapunov optimization techniques
[24] [25]. In recent years, optimizing computation ofﬂoading
decisions via DQN is popular [26] [27]. It models the compu-
tation ofﬂoading problem as a Markov decision process (MDP)
and maximize the long-term utility performance. The utility
can be composed of the above QoE indicators and evolves
according to the iterative Bellman equation. After that, the
asymptotically optimal computation ofﬂoading decisions are
achieved based on Deep Q-Network. User proﬁle migration
studies how to adjust the place of user proﬁles (conﬁguration
ﬁles, private data, logs, etc) when the mobile users are in
constant motion. User proﬁle migration is often associated
with mobility management [28]. In [29], the proposed JCORM
algorithm jointly optimizes computation ofﬂoading and migra-
tion by formulating cooperative networks. It opens research
opportunities where more advanced AI technologies can be
utilized to improve optimality. Many existing research efforts
study mobility management from the perspective of statistics
and probability theory. It has strong interests in realizing
mobility management with AI.
C. A Recapitulation of AIE
The right of the road-map is AI on edge . We name this kind
of work AIE (i.e. Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge) since it stud-
ies how to carry out the training and inference of AI models
on the network edge. By top-down decomposition, we divide
the research efforts in AI on edge into three categories: Model
Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor Acceleration.
Considering that the research efforts in Model Adaptation are
based on existing training and inference frameworks, let us
introduce Framework Design in the ﬁrst place.
1) Framework Design: Framework design aims at pro-
viding a better training and inference architecture for the
edge without modifying the existing AI models. Researchers
attempt to design new frameworks for both Model Training
and Model Inference.
For Model Training: To the best of our knowledge, for
model training, all proposed frameworks are distributed, ex-
cept those knowledge distillation-based ones. The distributed
training frameworks can be divided into data splitting and
model splitting [30]. Data splitting can be further divided
into master-device splitting, helper-device splitting and device-
device splitting. The differences lie where the training samples
come from and how the global model is assembled and
aggregated. Model splitting separates neural networks’ layers
and deploys them on different devices. It highly relies on
sophisticated pipelines. Knowledge distillation-based frame-
works may or may not be decentralized, and they rely on
transfer learning technologies [31]. Knowledge distillation can
enhance the accuracy of shallow student networks. It ﬁrst
trains a basic network on a basic dataset. After that, the learned
features can be transferred to student networks to be trained on
their datasets, respectively. The basic network can be trainedon cloud or edge server while those student networks can be
trained by numerous mobile end devices with their private
data, respectively. We believe that there exist great avenues
to be explored in knowledge distillation-based frameworks for
model training on the edge.
The most popular work in model training is Federated
Learning [11]. Federated Learning is proposed to preserve
privacy when training the DNNs in a distributed manner.
Without aggregating user private data to a central datacenter,
Federated Learning trains a series of local models on multiple
clients. After that, a global model is optimized by averaging
the trained gradients of each client. We are not going to
elaborate on Federated Learning thoroughly in this article.
For more details please refer to [11]. For the edge nodes with
limited storage and computing resource, it is unrealistic to train
a comprehensive model on their own. Thus, a more applicable
way is distributed training, where coordination between edge
nodes is necessary. For the communication between edge
nodes, the challenge is to optimize the global gradient from the
distributed local models. No matter what learning algorithms
is adopted, Stochastic Gradient Decent (SGD) is necessary
for model training. Distributed edge nodes use SGD to update
their local gradients based on their own dataset, which can be
viewed as a mini-batch. After that, they send their updated
gradients to a central node for global model upgrade. In this
process, trade-offs between model performance and commu-
nication overhead has to be considered. If all edge nodes send
their local gradients simultaneously, network congestion might
be caused. A better approach is to selectively choose local
gradients which have relatively large improvements. Under this
circumstance, the model performance of global model can be
guaranteed while the communication overheads are reduced.
For Model Inference: Although model splitting is hard
to realize for model training, it is a popular approach for
model inference. Model splitting/partitioning can be viewed
as a framework for model inference. Other approaches such
as model compression, input ﬁltering, early-exit and so on can
be viewed as adaptations from existing frameworks, which will
be introduced in the next paragraph and elaborated on carefully
in Subsection V-A. A typical example on model inference
on edge is [32], where a DNN is split into two parts and
carried out collaboratively. The computation-intensive part is
running on the edge server while the other is running on the
mobile device. The problem lies in where to split the layers
and when to exit the intricate DNN according to the constraint
on inference accuracy.
2) Model Adaptation: Model Adaptation makes appropri-
ate improvements based on existing training and inference
frameworks, usually Federated Learning, to make them more
applicable to the edge. Federated Learning has the potential
to run on the edge. However, the vanilla version of Federated
Learning has a strong demand for communication efﬁciency
since full local models are supposed to be sent back to
the central server. Therefore, many researchers exploit more
efﬁcient model updates and aggregation policies. Many works
are devoted to reducing cost and increasing robustness while
guaranteeing system performance. Methods to realize model
adaptation include but not limited to Model Compression,

==== Page 6 ====
6
Conditional Computation, Algorithm Asynchronization and
Thorough Decentralization. Model compression exploits the
inherent sparsity structure of gradients and weights. Possible
approaches include but not limited to Quantization, Dimen-
sional Reduction, Pruning, Precision Downgrading, Compo-
nents Sharing, Cutoff and so on. Those approaches can be
realized by methods such as Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (SVD), Huffman Coding, Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and several others. Conditional computation is an
alternative way to reduce the amount of calculation by se-
lectively turning off some unimportant calculations of DNNs.
Possible approaches include but not limited to Components
Shutoff, Input Filtering, Early Exit, Results Caching and so
on. Conditional Computation can be viewed as block-wise
dropout [33]. Besides, random gossip communication can be
utilized to reduce unnecessary calculations and model updates.
Algorithm Asynchronization trys aggregating local models
in an asynchronous way. It is designed for overcoming the
inefﬁcient and lengthy synchronous steps of model updates
in Federated Learning. Thoroughly decentralization removes
the central aggregator to avoid any possible leakage and
address the central server’s malfunction. The ways to achieve
totally decentralization include but not limited to blockchain
technologies and game-theoretical approaches.
3) Processor Acceleration: Processor Acceleration focuses
on structure optimization of DNNs in that the frequently-
used computation-intensive multiply-and-accumulate opera-
tions can be improved. The approaches to accelerate DNN
computation on hardware include (1) designing special in-
struction sets for DNN training and inference, (2) designing
highly paralleled computing paradigms, (3) moving compu-
tation closer to memory (near-data processing), etc. Highly
parallelized computing paradigms can be divided into temporal
and spatial architectures [34]. The former architectures such
as CPUs and GPUs can be accelerated by reducing the num-
ber of multiplications and increasing throughput. The latter
architectures can be accelerated by increasing data reuse with
data ﬂows. For example, Lee et al. propose an algorithm
to accelerate CNN inference [35]. The proposed algorithm
converts a set of pre-trained weights into values under given
precision. It also puts near-data processing into practice with
an adaptive implementation of memristor crossbar arrays. In
the research area of Edge Computing, a lot of works hammer
at the co-design of Model Adaptation and Processor Accel-
eration. Considering that Processor Acceleration is mainly
investigated by AI researchers, this paper will not delve into
it. More details on hardware acceleration for DNN processing
can be found in [34].
IV. AI FOR EDGE
In Subsection III-B, we divide the key issues in Edge Com-
puting into three categories: Topology, Content and Service. It
just presents a classiﬁcation and possible research directions
but does not provide in-depth analysis on how to apply AI
technologies to edge to generate more optimal solutions. This
Section will remedy this. Fig. 2 gives an example of how
AI technologies are utilized in the Mobile Edge Computing(MEC) environment. Firstly, we need to identify the problem
to be studied. Take performance optimization as an example,
the optimization goal, decision variables, and potential con-
straints need to be conﬁrmed. The need-to-be optimized goal
could be the combination of task execution delay, transmission
delay and task dropping cost. The studied task can be either
binary or partial. After that, the mathematical model should be
constructed. If the long-term stability of system is considered,
Lyapunov optimization technique cloud be used to formalize
the problem. At last, we should design an algorithm to solve
the problem. In fact, the model construction is not only
decided by the to-be-studied problem, but also the to-be-
applied optimization algorithms. Take DQN for example, we
have to model the problem as an MDP with ﬁnite states and
actions . Thus, the constraints cannot exist in the long-term
optimization problem. The most common way is transferring
those constraints into penalty and adding the penalty to the
optimization goal.
Problem DefinitionModel ConstructionAlgorithm DesignRefactorPerformance Optimization in MECDeep Q-Network (DQN)execution delayhandover delaytask dropping costBinaryTaskenergy allocationedge server selectionPartialTaskoffloading or notpartition pointbattery energy leveltask execution deadlineradio frequency bandwidthcomputing resourcesObserve States
Observe Actions(Discretization)energy statetask request stateresource usage...
edge server selectionoffloading decisionRemove Constraintsadd penaltytransfer to goaladd assumption...Memory Pool(Database of Samples)DNNgradientspolicyMini-batch
EnvironmentStateCostActionWeightUpdating(alternative)Need-to-be-minimized delayGoalDecision Variables
ConstraintsActionenergy allocation
Fig. 2. The utilization of AI technology for performance optimization.
Considering that current research efforts on AI for edge con-
centrate on Wireless Networking, Service Placement, Service
Caching and Computation Ofﬂoading, we only focus on these
topics in the following Subsection. For research directions that
haven’t been explored yet, we are expecting to see more works
in due course.
A. State of the Art
1) Wireless Networking: The 5G technology promises
eMBB, URLLC and mMTC in a real-time and highly dynamic
environment. Under the circumstances, researchers reach a
consensus on that AI technologies should and can be integrated
across the wireless infrastructure and mobile users [6]. We
believe that AI should be synergistically applied to achieve
intelligent network optimization in a fully online manner. One
of the typical works in this area is [15]. This paper advocates
a new set of design principles for wireless communication

==== Page 7 ====
7
on edge with machine learning technologies and models
embedded, which are collectively named as Learning-driven
Communication . It can be achieved across the whole process
of data acquisition, which are in turn multiple access, radio
resource management and signal encoding.
Learning-driven multiple access advocates that the unique
characteristics of wireless channels should be exploited for
functional computation. Over-the-air computation (AirComp)
is a typical technique used to realize it [36] [37]. In [38] the
authors put this principle into practice based on Broadband
Analog Aggregation (BAA). Concretely, Zhu et al. suggest
that the simultaneously transmitted model updates in Fed-
erated Learning should be analog aggregated by exploiting
the waveform-superposition property of multi-access channels
[38]. The proposed BAA can dramatically reduce communica-
tion latency compared with traditional Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA). The work in [39] ex-
plores the over-the-air computation for model aggregation in
Federated Learning. More speciﬁcally, Yang et al. puts the
principle into practice by modeling the device selection and
beamforming design as a sparse and low-rank optimization
problem, which is computationally intractable [39]. To solve
the problem with a fast convergence rate, this paper proposed
a difference-of-convex-functions (DC) representation via suc-
cessive convex relaxation. The numerical results show that the
proposed algorithm can achieve lower training loss and higher
inference accuracy compared with state-of-the-art approaches.
This contribution can also be categorized as Model Adaptation
inAI on edge , but it accelerates Federated Learning from the
perspective of fast data acquisition.
Learning-driven radio resource management promotes
the idea that radio resources should be allocated based
on the value of transmitted data, not just the efﬁciency
of spectrum utilization. Therefore, it can be understood as
importance-aware resource allocation and an obvious ap-
proach is importance-aware retransmission . In [40] the au-
thors put the principle into practice. This paper proposed a
retransmission protocol, named importance-aware automatic-
repeat-request (importance ARQ). Importance ARQ makes the
trade-off between signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and data uncer-
tainty under the desired learning accuracy. It can achieve fast
convergence while avoiding learning performance degradation
caused by channel noise.
Learning-driven signal encoding stipulates that signal
encoding should be designed by jointly optimizing feature
extraction, source coding, and channel encoding. A work
puts this principle into practice is [41], which proposes a
Hybrid Federated Distillation (HFD) scheme based on separate
source-channel coding and over-the-air computing. It adopts
sparse binary compression with error accumulation in source-
channel coding. For both digital and analog implementations
over Gaussian multiple-access channels, HFD can outperform
the vanilla version of Federated Learning in a poor communi-
cation environment. This principle has something in common
with Dimensional Reduction and Quantization from Model
Adaptation in AI on edge , but it reduces the feature size from
the source of data transmission. It opens up great research
opportunities for the co-design of learning frameworks anddata encoding.
Apart from Learning-driven Communication , some works
contribute to AI for Wireless Networking from the perspective
of power and energy consumption management. Shen et al.
utilizes Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to develop scalable
methods for power control in K-user interference channels
[42]. This paper ﬁrst models the K-user interference channel
as a complete graph, then it learns the optimal power control
with a graph convolutional neural network. Temesgene et al.
study an energy minimization problem where the baseband
processes of the virtual small cells powered solely by energy
harvesters and batteries can be opportunistically executed in a
grid-connected edge server [43]. Based on multi-agent learn-
ing, several distributed fuzzy Q-learning-based algorithms
are tailored. This paper can be viewed as an attempt for
coordination with broadcasting.
As we will expound later, Wireless Networking is often
combined with Computation Ofﬂoading when it is studied in
the form of optimization. State of the art of these works is
listed in Subsection IV-A3.
2) Service Placement and Caching: Many researchers
study service placement from the perspective of Application
Service Providers (ASPs). They model the data and service
(it can be compounded and complex) placement problem as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and utilize AI methods
such as reinforcement learning to achieve optimal placement
decision. A typical work implementing this idea is [44]. This
paper proposes a spatial-temporal algorithm based on Multi-
armed bandit (MAB) and achieves the optimal placement
decisions while learning the beneﬁt. Concretely, it studies
how many SBSs should be rented for edge service hosting to
maximize the expected utility up to a ﬁnite time horizon. The
expected utility is composed of delay reduction of all mobile
users. After that, a MAB-based algorithm, named SEEN, is
proposed to learn the local users service demand patterns of
SBSs. It can achieve the balance between exploitation and
exploration automatically according to the fact that whether
the set of SBSs is chosen before. Another work attempts to
integrate AI approaches with service placement is [45]. This
work jointly decides which SBS to deploy each data block and
service component and how much harvested energy should be
stored in mobile devices with a DQN-based algorithm. This
article will not elaborate on DQN. More details can be found
in [46].
Service caching can be viewed as a complement to service
placement. Edge servers can be equipped with special service
cache to satisfy user demands on popular contents. A wide
range of optimization problems on service caching are pro-
posed to endow edge servers with learning capability. Sadeghi
et al. study a sequential fetch-cache decision based on dynamic
prices and user requests [23]. This paper endows SBSs with
efﬁcient fetch-cache decision-making schemes operating in
dynamic settings. Concretely, it formulates a cost minimization
problem with service popularity considered. For the long-
term stochastic optimization problem, several computationally
efﬁcient algorithms are developed based on Q-learning.
3) Computation Ofﬂoading: Computation ofﬂoading can be
considered as the most active topic when it comes to AI for

==== Page 8 ====
8
edge . It studies the transfer of resource-intensive computa-
tional tasks from resource-limited mobile devices to edge or
cloud. This process involves the allocation of many resources,
ranging from CPU cycles to channel bandwidth. Therefore,
AI technologies with strong optimization abilities have been
extensively used in recent years. Among all these AI technolo-
gies,Q-learning and its derivatives, DQN, are in the spotlight.
For example, Qiu et al. design a Q-learning-based algorithm
for computation ofﬂoading [47]. It formulates the computation
ofﬂoading problem as a non-cooperative game in multi-user
multi-server edge computing systems and proves that Nash
Equilibrium exists. Then, this paper proposes a model-free
Q-learning-based ofﬂoading mechanism which helps mobile
devices learn their long-term ofﬂoading strategies to maximize
their long-term utilities.
More works are based on DQN because the curse of
dimensionality could be overcome with non-linear function
approximation. For example, Min et al. study the computation
ofﬂoading for IoT devices with energy harvesting in multi-
server MEC systems [26]. The need-to-be-maximized utility
formed from overall data sharing gains, task dropping penalty,
energy consumption and computation delay, which is updated
according to the Bellman equation. After that, DQN is used to
generate the optimal ofﬂoading scheme. In [27] [48], the com-
putation ofﬂoading problem is formulated as a MDP with ﬁnite
states and actions. The state set is composed of the channel
qualities, the energy queue, and the task queue while the action
set is composed of ofﬂoading decisions in different time slots.
Then, a DQN-based algorithm is proposed to minimize the
long-term cost. Based on DQN, task ofﬂoading decisions and
wireless resource allocation are jointly optimized to maximize
the data acquisition and analysis capability of the network [49]
[50]. The work in [51] studies the knowledge-driven service
ofﬂoading problem for Vehicle of Internet. The problem is also
formulated as a long-term planning optimization problem and
solved based on DQN. In summary, computation ofﬂoading
problems in various industrial scenarios have been extensively
studied from all sort of perspectives.
There also exist works who explore the task ofﬂoading
problem with other AI technologies. For example, [52] pro-
poses a long-short-term memory (LSTM) network to predict
the task popularity and then formulates a joint optimization
of the task ofﬂoading decisions, computation resource allo-
cation and caching decisions. After that, a Bayesian learning
automata-based multi-agent learning algorithm is proposed for
optimality.
B. Grand Challenges
Although it is popular to apply AI methods to edge for
the generation of better solutions, however, there have been
many challenges. In the next several Subsections, we list grand
challenges across the whole theme of AI for edge research.
These challenges are closely related but each has its own
emphasis.
1) Model Establishment: If we want to use AI methods, the
mathematical models have to be limited and the formulated
optimization problem need to be restricted. On one hand,this is because the optimization basis of AI technologies,
SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent) and MBGD (Mini-Batch
Gradient Descent) methods, may not work well if the original
search space is constrained. On the other hand, especially for
MDPs, the state set and action set can not be inﬁnite, and
discretization is necessary to avoid the curse of dimensionality
before further processing. The common solution is changing
the constraints into a penalty and incorporating them into
the global optimization goal. The status quo greatly restricts
the establishment of mathematical models which leads to
performance degradation. It can be viewed as a compromise
for the utilization of AI methods. Therefore, how to establish
an appropriate system model poses great challenges.
2) Algorithm Deployment: The state-of-the-art works often
formulate a combinatorial and NP-hard optimization problem
which have fairly high computational complexity. Very few
works can achieve an analytic approximate optimal solution
with convex optimization methods. Actually, for AI for edge ,
the solution mostly comes from iterative learning-based ap-
proaches. There are many challenges that face when these
methods are deployed on the edge in an online manner.
Besides, another ignored challenge is which edge device
should undertake the responsibility for deploying and running
the proposed complicated algorithms. The existing research
efforts usually concentrate on their speciﬁc problems and do
not provide the details on that.
3) Balance between Optimality and Efﬁciency: Although
AI technologies can indeed provide solutions that are optimal,
the trade-off between optimality and efﬁciency can not be
ignored when it comes to the resource-constrained edge.
Thus, how to improve the usability and efﬁciency of edge
computing systems for different application scenarios with AI
technologies embedded is a severe challenge. The trade-off
between optimality and efﬁciency should be realized based
on the characteristics of dynamically changing requirements
on QoE and the network resource structure. Therefore, it is
coupling with the service subscribers’ pursuing superiority and
the utilization of available resources.
V. AI ONEDGE
In Subsection III-C, we divide the research efforts for AI on
edge into Model Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor
Acceleration. The existing frameworks for model training and
inference are rare. The training frameworks include Feder-
ated Learning and Knowledge Distillation while the inference
frameworks include Model Spitting and Model Partitioning. AI
models on edge are by far limited when compared to cloud-
based predictions because of the relatively limited compute
and storage abilities. How to carry out the model training and
inference on resource-scarce devices is a serious issue. As a
result, compared with designing new frameworks, researchers
in Edge Computing are more interested in improving existing
frameworks to make them more appropriate for the edge,
usually reducing resource occupation. As a result, Model
Adaptation based on Federated Learning is prosperously de-
veloped. As we have mentioned earlier, Processor Acceleration
will not be elaborated in details. Therefore, we only focus on

==== Page 9 ====
9
Model Adaptation in the following Subsection. Tab. II lists
the methods and the correlated papers. Their contributions are
also highlighted.
MethodsApproachesTechnologiesModel Adaptation
Model Compression
Conditional Computation
AlgorithmAsynchronization
ThoroughlyDecentralizationcostefficiency
performance
privacycostefficiency
efficiency
performanceQuantizingDimensionalReductionPruningPrecisionDowngradingComponentsSharingComponentsShutoffInputFilteringEarly ExitResultsCachingEnhancementSingular ValueDecompositionHuffmanCoding
......Block-wiseDropout...
Smart Contract...ParticipatorSelection
Game TheoryExploit the inherent sparsitystructure of gradients and weights
Selectively turn off someunimportant calculations
Aggregate local models in anasynchronous way
Remove the central aggregator toavoid any possible leakage...Random GossipCommunication
Fig. 3. Methods, approaches and technologies of Model Adaptation.
A. State of the Art
1) Model Compression: As demonstrated in Fig. 3, the
approaches for Model Compression include Quantization, Di-
mensionality Reduction, Pruning, Components Sharing, Pre-
cision Downgrading and so on. They exploit the inherent
sparsity structure of gradients and weights to reduce the
memory and channel occupation as much as possible. The
technologies to compress and quantize weights include but
not limited to Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), Huffman
coding and Principal Component Analysis. This paper will
not provide a thorough introduction to these due to limited
space. Considering that many works simultaneously utilize
the approaches mentioned above, we do not further divide
the state of the art in Model Compression. One more thing
should be clearly noted is that Model Compression is suitable
for both Model Training and Model Inference. Thus, we do
not deliberately distinguish between them.
As we have mentioned earlier, communication efﬁciency is
of the utmost importance for Federated Learning. Minimizing
the number of rounds of communication is the principal
goal when we move Federated Learning to the edge because
updating the global model might not be achieved if one or
more local devices are ofﬂine or the network is congested.
Therefore, a lot of works focus at reducing the communication
overhead for Federated Learning from various perspectives.
Compressing the trained models without reducing the infer-
ence accuracy is one of the best ways to realize it. For
example, in [53], structured updates andsketched updates are
proposed for reducing the uplink communication costs. For
structured updates , the local update is learnt from a restricted
lower-dimensional space; for sketched updates , the uploadingmodel is compressed before sending to the central server.
In [54], the authors design a communication-efﬁcient secure
aggregation protocol for high-dimensional data. The protocol
can tolerate up to 33.3% of participating devices failing to
complete the protocol, i.e., the system is robust. The work
in [56] suggests that DNNs are typically over-parameterized
and their weights have signiﬁcant redundancy. Meanwhile,
pruning compensates for the loss in performance. Thus, this
paper proposes a retraining-after-pruning scheme. It retrains
the DNN on new data while the pruned weights stay con-
stant. The scheme can reduce the resource occupation while
guaranteeing learning accuracy. The work in [55] exploits
mixed low-bitwidth compression. It works on determining
the minimum bit precision of each activation and weight
under the given constraints on memory. The authors in [58]
use Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs), which have binary
weights and activations to replace regular DNNs. This is a
typical exploration of quantization. Analogously, Chakraborty
et al. propose hybrid network architectures combing binary and
full-precision sections to achieve signiﬁcant energy efﬁciency
and memory compression with performance guaranteed [59].
Thakker et al. study a compressed RNN cell implementation
called Hybrid Matrix Decomposition (HMD) for model infer-
ence [57]. It divides the matrix of network weights into two
parts: an unconstrained upper half and a lower half composed
of rank-1 blocks. The output features are composed of the rich
part (upper) and the barren part (lower). This is an imaginative
variation on compression, compared with traditional pruning
or quantization. The numerical results show that it can not only
achieve a faster run-time than pruning and but also retain more
model accuracy than matrix factorization.
Some works also explore model compression based on
partitioned DNNs. For example, Li et al. proposes an auto-
tuning neural network quantization framework for collabora-
tive inference between edge and cloud [66]. Firstly, DNN is
partitioned. The ﬁrst part is quantized and executed on the edge
devices while the second part is executed in cloud with full-
precision . The work in [67] proposes a framework to accelerate
and compress model training and inference. It partitions DNNs
into multiple sections according to their depth and constructs
classiﬁers upon the intermediate features of different sections.
Besides, the accuracy of classiﬁers is enhanced by knowledge
distillation.
Apart from Federated Learning, there exist works that probe
into the execution of statistical learning models or other
popular deep models such as ResNet and VGG architectures
on resource-limited end devices. For example, Gupta et al. pro-
pose ProtoNN, a compressed and accurate k-Nearest Neighbor
(kNN) algorithm [61]. ProtoNN learns a small number of
prototypes to represent the entire training set by Stochastic
Neighborhood Compression (SNC) [68], and then projects the
entire data in a lower dimension with a sparse projection
matrix. It jointly optimizes the projection and prototypes with
explicit model size constraint. Chakraborty et al. proposes
Hybrid-Net which has both binary and high-precision layers to
reduce the degradation of learning performance [60]. Innova-
tively, this paper leverages PCA to identify signiﬁcant layers
in a binary network, other than dimensionality reduction. The

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE II
METHODS AND THE CORRESPONDING PAPERS .
Methods Related Papers
Model CompressionSketched updates & structured updates [53]
Communication-efﬁcient secure aggregation [54]
Mixed low-bitwidth compression [55]
Retraining-after-pruning [56]
Compressed RNN (based on Hybrid Matrix Decomposition) [57]
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) [58] [59] [60]
ProNN (based on Stochastic Neighborhood Compression) [61]
Conditional Computation Runtime-throttleable block-level gating [62]
Algorithm AsynchronizationGoSGD (based on Random-gossip communication) [63]
GossipGraD (based on Random-gossip communication) [64]
Thoroughly DecentralizationBlockFL (based on Blockchain) [65]
Game-theoretical approach
signiﬁcance here is identiﬁed based on the ability of a layer
to expand into higher dimensional space.
Model Compression is currently a very active direction in AI
on edge because it is easy to implement. However, the state-
of-the-art works are usually not tied to speciﬁc application
scenarios of edge computing systems. There are opportunities
for new works that construct edge platforms and hardware.
2) Conditional Computation: As demonstrated in Fig. 3,
the approaches for Conditional Computation include Com-
ponents Sharing, Components Shutoff, Input Filtering, Early
Exit, Results Caching and so on. To put it simply, Conditional
computation is selectively turning off some unimportant cal-
culations. Thus it can be viewed as block-wise dropout [33].
A lot of works devote themselves to ranking and selecting the
most worthy part for computation or early stop if the conﬁdent
threshold is achieved. For example, Hostetler et al. instantiate
aruntime-throttleable neural network which can adaptively
balance learning accuracy and resource occupation in response
to a control signal [62]. It puts Conditional Computation into
practice via block-level gating.
This idea can also be put into use for participator selection.
It selects the most valuable participators in Federated Learning
for model updates. The valueless participators will not engage
the aggregation of the global model. To the best of our
knowledge, currently, there is no work dedicated to participator
selection. We are eagerly looking forward to exciting works
on it.
3) Algorithm Asynchronization: As demonstrated in Fig.
3, Algorithm Asynchronization attempts to aggregate local
models in an asynchronous way for Federated Learning. As
we have mentioned before, the participating local users have a
signiﬁcant probability of failing to complete the model upload
and download due to the wireless network congestion. Apart
from model compression, another way is exchanging weights
and gradients peer-to-peer to reduce the high concurrency on
wireless channels. Random-gossip Communication is a typical
example. Based on randomized gossip algorithms, Blot et al.
propose GoSGD to train DNNs asynchronously [63]. The most
challenging problem for gossip training is the degradation of
convergence rate in large-scale edge systems. To overcome
the issue, Daily et al. introduce GossipGraD, which can
reduce the communication complexity greatly to ensure thefast convergence [64].
4) Thorough Decentralization: As demonstrated in Fig.
3, Thorough Decentralization attempts to remove the central
aggregator to avoid any possible leakage. Although Federated
Learning does not require consumers private data, the model
updates still contain private information as some trust of the
server coordinating the training is still required. To avoid
privacy leaks altogether, blockchain technology and game-
theoretical approaches can assist in total decentralization.
By leveraging blockchain, especially smart contracts, the
central server for model aggregating is not needed anymore.
As a result, collapse triggered by model aggregation can be
avoided. Besides, user privacy can be protected. We believe
that the blockchain-based Federated Learning will become a
hot ﬁeld and prosperous direction in the coming years. There
exists works that put it into practice. In [65], the proposed
blockchain-based federated learning architecture, BlockFL,
takes edge nodes as miners. Miners exchange and verify all the
local model updates contributed by each device and then run
the Proof-of-Work (PoW). The miner who ﬁrstly completes the
PoW generates a new block and receives the mining reward
from the blockchain network. At last, each device updates its
local model from the freshest block. In this paper, blockchain
is effectively integrated with Federated Learning to build a
trustworthy edge learning environment.
B. Grand Challenges
The grand challenges for AI on edge are listed from the per-
spective of data availability, model selection, and coordination
mechanism, respectively.
1) Data Availability: The toughest challenge lies in the
availability and usability of raw training data because us-
able data is the beginning of everything. Firstly, a proper
incentive mechanism may be necessary for data provisioning
from mobile users. Otherwise, the raw data may not be
available for model training and inference. Besides, the raw
data from various end devices could have an obvious bias,
which can greatly affect the learning performance. Although
Federated Learning can overcome the problem caused by non-
i.i.d. samples to a certain extent, the training procedure still
faces great difﬁculties on the design of robust communication

==== Page 11 ====
11
protocol. Therefore, there are huge challenges in terms of data
availability.
2) Model Selection: At present, the selection of need-to-
be-trained AI models faces severe challenges in the following
aspects, across from the models themselves to the training
frameworks and hardware. Firstly, how to select the beﬁtting
threshold of learning accuracy and scale of AI models for
quick deployment and delivery. Secondly, how to select probe
training frameworks and accelerator architectures under the
limited resources. Model selection is coupling with resource
allocation and management, thus the problem is complicated
and challenging.
3) Coordination Mechanism: The proposed methods on
Model Adaptation may not be pervasively serviceable because
there could be a huge difference in computing power and com-
munication resources between heterogeneous edge devices. It
may lead to that the same method achieves different learning
results for different clusters of mobile devices. Therefore, the
compatibility and coordination between heterogeneous edge
devices are of great essence. A ﬂexible coordination mecha-
nism between cloud, edge, and device in both hardware and
middleware is imperative and urgently needed to be designed.
It opens up research opportunities on a uniform API interface
on edge learning for ubiquitous edge devices.
VI. C ONCLUDING REMARKS
Edge Intelligence, although still in its early stages, has
attracted more and more researchers and companies to get
involved in studying and using it. This article attempts to
provide possible research opportunities through a succinct and
effective classiﬁcation. Concretely, we ﬁrst discuss the relation
between Edge Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. We be-
lieve that they promote and reinforce each other. After that, we
divide Edge Intelligence into AI for edge andAI on edge and
sketch the research road-map. The former focuses on providing
a better solution to the key concerns in Edge Computing
with the help of popular and rich AI technologies while the
latter studies how to carry out the training and inference of
AI models, on edge. Either AI for edge orAI on edge , the
research road-map is presented in a hierarchical architecture.
By the bottom-up approach, we divide research efforts in Edge
Computing into Topology, Content, and Service and introduce
some examples on how to energize edge with intelligence.
By top-down decomposition, we divide the research efforts in
AI on edge into Model Adaptation, Framework Design, and
Processor Acceleration and introduce some existing research
results. Finally, we present the state of the art and grand
challenges in several hot topics for both AI for edge andAI on
edge . We attempted to provide some enlightening thoughts on
the emerging ﬁeld of Edge Intelligence. We hope that this
paper can stimulate fruitful discussions on potential future
research directions for Edge Intelligence.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Asif-Ur-Rahman, F. Afsana, M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, M. R.
Ahmed, O. Kaiwartya, and A. James-Taylor, “Toward a heterogeneous
mist, fog, and cloud-based framework for the internet of healthcare
things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4049–4062,
June 2019.[2] Ericsson, “Iot connections outlook: Nb-iot and cat-m technologies will
account for close to 45 percent of cellular iot connections in 2024.”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.ericsson.com/en/mobility-report/
reports/june-2019/iot-connections-outlook
[3] N. Abbas, Y . Zhang, A. Taherkordi, and T. Skeie, “Mobile edge
computing: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 450–465, Feb 2018.
[4] Y . Sun, M. Peng, Y . Zhou, Y . Huang, and S. Mao, “Application
of machine learning in wireless networks: Key techniques and
open issues,” CoRR , vol. abs/1809.08707, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.08707
[5] Q. Mao, F. Hu, and Q. Hao, “Deep learning for intelligent wireless
networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2595–2621, Fourthquarter 2018.
[6] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Machine
learning for wireless networks with artiﬁcial intelligence: A tutorial
on neural networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1710.02913, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02913
[7] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang, “Edge
intelligence: Paving the last mile of artiﬁcial intelligence with edge
computing,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1738–1762,
Aug 2019.
[8] X. Zhang, Y . Wang, S. Lu, L. Liu, L. Xu, and W. Shi, “Openei: An
open framework for edge intelligence,” CoRR , vol. abs/1906.01864,
2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.01864
[9] Y . Han, X. Wang, V . C. M. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and
X. Chen, “Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A
comprehensive survey,” CoRR , vol. abs/1907.08349, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.08349
[10] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A survey
on internet of things: Architecture, enabling technologies, security and
privacy, and applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 4, no. 5,
pp. 1125–1142, Oct 2017.
[11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in AISTATS , 2016.
[12] J. Xu, Y . Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Uav-enabled wireless power transfer:
Trajectory design and energy optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5092–5106, Aug 2018.
[13] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y . Zhang, “Uav communications for 5g and beyond:
Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal ,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241–2263, April 2019.
[14] M. Chen, M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, C. Yin, M. Debbah, and C. S. Hong,
“Caching in the sky: Proactive deployment of cache-enabled unmanned
aerial vehicles for optimized quality-of-experience,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1046–1061, May
2017.
[15] G. Zhu, D. Liu, Y . Du, C. You, J. Zhang, and K. Huang,
“Towards an intelligent edge: Wireless communication meets machine
learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1809.00343, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00343
[16] Y . Sun, M. Peng, and S. Mao, “Deep reinforcement learning-based mode
selection and resource management for green fog radio access networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1960–1971, April
2019.
[17] H. Wu, S. Deng, W. Li, J. Yin, Q. Yang, Z. Wu, and A. Y . Zomaya,
“Revenue-driven service provisioning for resource sharing in mobile
cloud computing,” in Service-Oriented Computing , M. Maximilien,
A. Vallecillo, J. Wang, and M. Oriol, Eds. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2017, pp. 625–640.
[18] S. Deng, Z. Xiang, J. Yin, J. Taheri, and A. Y . Zomaya, “Composition-
driven iot service provisioning in distributed edges,” IEEE Access , vol. 6,
pp. 54 258–54 269, 2018.
[19] L. Chen, J. Xu, S. Ren, and P. Zhou, “Spatiotemporal edge service
placement: A bandit learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications , vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 8388–8401, Dec 2018.
[20] S. Deng, H. Wu, W. Tan, Z. Xiang, and Z. Wu, “Mobile service selection
for composition: An energy consumption perspective,” IEEE Trans.
Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1478–1490,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2015.2438020
[21] S. Deng, L. Huang, J. Taheri, J. Yin, M. Zhou, and A. Y . Zomaya,
“Mobility-aware service composition in mobile communities,” IEEE
Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 47, no. 3,
pp. 555–568, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.
2016.2521736
[22] Z. Wu, J. Yin, S. Deng, J. Wu, Y . Li, and L. Chen, “Modern service
industry and crossover services: Development and trends in china,”

==== Page 12 ====
12
IEEE Trans. Services Computing , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 664–671, 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2015.2418765
[23] S. Zhang, P. He, K. Suto, P. Yang, L. Zhao, and X. Shen, “Cooperative
edge caching in user-centric clustered mobile networks,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Mobile Computing , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1791–1805, Aug 2018.
[24] H. Zhao, W. Du, W. Liu, T. Lei, and Q. Lei, “Qoe aware and cell
capacity enhanced computation ofﬂoading for multi-server mobile edge
computing systems with energy harvesting devices,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence Computing , Oct
2018, pp. 671–678.
[25] H. Zhao, S. Deng, C. Zhang, W. Du, Q. He, and J. Yin, “A mobility-
aware cross-edge computation ofﬂoading framework for partitionable
applications,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services ,
Jul 2019, pp. 193–200.
[26] M. Min, L. Xiao, Y . Chen, P. Cheng, D. Wu, and W. Zhuang, “Learning-
based computation ofﬂoading for iot devices with energy harvesting,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 1930–
1941, Feb 2019.
[27] X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Mao, Y . Ji, and M. Bennis, “Perfor-
mance optimization in mobile-edge computing via deep reinforcement
learning,” in 2018 IEEE 88th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-
Fall) , Aug 2018, pp. 1–6.
[28] S. Deng, H. Wu, D. Hu, and J. L. Zhao, “Service selection
for composition with qos correlations,” IEEE Trans. Services
Computing , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 291–303, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2014.2361138
[29] C. Zhang, H. Zhao, and S. Deng, “A density-based ofﬂoading strategy
for iot devices in edge computing systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp.
73 520–73 530, 2018.
[30] J. Park, S. Samarakoon, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “Wireless network
intelligence at the edge,” CoRR , vol. abs/1812.02858, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02858
[31] J. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Bao, X. Zhu, B. Cao, and P. S. Yu, “Not
just privacy: Improving performance of private deep learning in
mobile cloud,” CoRR , vol. abs/1809.03428, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03428
[32] E. Li, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge intelligence: On-demand
deep learning model co-inference with device-edge synergy,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Mobile Edge Communications,
MECOMM@SIGCOMM 2018, Budapest, Hungary, August 20, 2018 ,
2018, pp. 31–36.
[33] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁt-
ting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 15, pp. 1929–1958,
2014.
[34] V . Sze, Y . Chen, T. Yang, and J. S. Emer, “Efﬁcient processing of deep
neural networks: A tutorial and survey,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.
105, no. 12, pp. 2295–2329, Dec 2017.
[35] J. Lee, J. K. Eshraghian, K. Cho, and K. Eshraghian, “Adaptive precision
cnn accelerator using radix-x parallel connected memristor crossbars,”
ArXiv , vol. abs/1906.09395, 2019.
[36] O. Abari, H. Rahul, and D. Katabi, “Over-the-air function computation
in sensor networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1612.02307, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.02307
[37] G. Zhu, L. Chen, and K. Huang, “Over-the-air computation in MIMO
multi-access channels: Beamforming and channel feedback,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/1803.11129, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1803.11129
[38] G. Zhu, Y . Wang, and K. Huang, “Low-latency broadband analog
aggregation for federated edge learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1812.11494,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.11494
[39] K. Yang, T. Jiang, Y . Shi, and Z. Ding, “Federated learning via
over-the-air computation,” CoRR , vol. abs/1812.11750, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.11750
[40] D. Liu, G. Zhu, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Wireless data acquisition
for edge learning: Importance aware retransmission,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1812.02030, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.
02030
[41] J.-H. Ahn, O. Simeone, and J. Kang, “Wireless federated distillation
for distributed edge learning with heterogeneous data,” ArXiv , vol.
abs/1907.02745, 2019.
[42] Y . Shen, Y . Shi, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “A graph neural network ap-
proach for scalable wireless power control,” ArXiv , vol. abs/1907.08487,
2019.
[43] D. A. Temesgene, M. Miozzo, and P. Dini, “Dynamic control of
functional splits for energy harvesting virtual small cells: a distributed
reinforcement learning approach,” ArXiv , vol. abs/1906.05735v1, 2019.[44] L. Chen, J. Xu, S. Ren, and P. Zhou, “Spatiotemporal edge service
placement: A bandit learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications , vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 8388–8401, Dec 2018.
[45] Y . Chen, S. Deng, H. Zhao, Q. He, and H. G. Y . Li, “Data-intensive ap-
plication deployment at edge: A deep reinforcement learning approach,”
in2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services , Jul 2019, pp.
355–359.
[46] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath,
“Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 26–38, Nov 2017.
[47] X. Qiu, L. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Hong, and Z. Zheng, “Online deep rein-
forcement learning for computation ofﬂoading in blockchain-empowered
mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,
pp. 1–1, 2019.
[48] X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Mao, Y . Ji, and M. Bennis, “Optimized
computation ofﬂoading performance in virtual edge computing systems
via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal ,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4005–4018, June 2019.
[49] L. Huang, S. Bi, and Y . A. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement learning
for online ofﬂoading in wireless powered mobile-edge computing
networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1808.01977, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.01977
[50] L. Lei, H. X. andXiong Xiong, K. Zheng, W. Xiang, and X. Wang,
“Multi-user resource control with deep reinforcement learning in iot
edge computing,” ArXiv , vol. abs/1906.07860, 2019.
[51] Q. Qi and Z. Ma, “Vehicular edge computing via deep reinforcement
learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1901.04290, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.04290
[52] Z. Yang, Y . Liu, Y . Chen, and N. Al-Dhahir, “Cache-aided noma
mobile edge computing: A reinforcement learning approach,” ArXiv , vol.
abs/1906.08812, 2019.
[53] J. Konecn ´y, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richt ´arik, A. T.
Suresh, and D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving
communication efﬁciency,” CoRR , vol. abs/1610.05492, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492
[54] K. Bonawitz, V . Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan,
S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical secure aggregation
for federated learning on user-held data,” CoRR , vol. abs/1611.04482,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.04482
[55] M. Rusci, A. Capotondi, and L. Benini, “Memory-driven mixed
low precision quantization for enabling deep network inference
on microcontrollers,” CoRR , vol. abs/1905.13082, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13082
[56] P. S. Chandakkar, Y . Li, P. L. K. Ding, and B. Li, “Strategies for re-
training a pruned neural network in an edge computing paradigm,” in
2017 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing (EDGE) , June
2017, pp. 244–247.
[57] U. Thakker, J. G. Beu, D. Gope, G. Dasika, and M. Mattina, “Run-time
efﬁcient RNN compression for inference on edge devices,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1906.04886, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.
04886
[58] R. Venkatesan and B. Li, “Diving deeper into mentee networks,”
CoRR , vol. abs/1604.08220, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1604.08220
[59] I. Chakraborty, D. Roy, A. Ankit, and K. Roy, “Efﬁcient hybrid
network architectures for extremely quantized neural networks enabling
intelligence at the edge,” CoRR , vol. abs/1902.00460, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00460
[60] I. Chakraborty, D. Roy, I. Garg, A. Ankit, and K. Roy, “Pca-
driven hybrid network design for enabling intelligence at the
edge,” CoRR , vol. abs/1906.01493, 2019. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1906.01493
[61] A. Gupta, C. G. S. Suggala, A. Gupta, H. Simhadri, B. Paranjape, A. Ku-
mar, S. Goyal, R. Udupa, M. Varma, and P. Jain, “Protonn: Compressed
and accurate knn for resource-scarce devices,” in Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Machine Learning, Sydney, Australia,
PMLR 70 , February 2017.
[62] J. Hostetler, “Toward runtime-throttleable neural networks,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1905.13179, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.
13179
[63] M. Blot, D. Picard, M. Cord, and N. Thome, “Gossip training for
deep learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1611.09726, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09726
[64] J. Daily, A. Vishnu, C. Siegel, T. Warfel, and V . Amatya,
“Gossipgrad: Scalable deep learning using gossip communication based
asynchronous gradient descent,” CoRR , vol. abs/1803.05880, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05880

==== Page 13 ====
13
[65] H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S. Kim, “On-device federated learning
via blockchain and its latency analysis,” CoRR , vol. abs/1808.03949,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.03949
[66] G. Li, L. Liu, X. Wang, X. Dong, P. Zhao, and X. Feng, “Auto-tuning
neural network quantization framework for collaborative inference
between the cloud and edge,” CoRR , vol. abs/1812.06426, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06426
[67] L. Zhang, Z. Tan, J. Song, J. Chen, C. Bao, and K. Ma, “SCAN:
A scalable neural networks framework towards compact and efﬁcient
models,” CoRR , vol. abs/1906.03951, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03951
[68] M. J. Kusner, S. Tyree, K. Q. Weinberger, and K. Agrawal, “Stochastic
neighbor compression,” in ICML , 2014.
Shuiguang Deng is currently a full professor at
the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Zhejiang Univer-
sity School of Medicineat as well as the College
of Computer Science and Technology in Zhejiang
University, China. He previously worked at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2014 and
Stanford University in 2015 as a visiting scholar. His
research interests include Edge Computing, Service
Computing, Mobile Computing, and Business Pro-
cess Management. He serves as the associate editor
for the journal IEEE Access and IET Cyber-Physical
Systems: Theory & Applications. Up to now, he has published more than 100
papers in journals and refereed conferences. In 2018, he was granted the
Rising Star Award by IEEE TCSVC. He is a fellow of IET and a senior
member of IEEE.
Hailiang Zhao received the B.S. degree in 2019
from the school of computer science and technology,
Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. He has been
a recipient of the Best Student Paper Award of IEEE
ICWS 2019. His research interests include edge
computing, service computing and machine learning.
Weijia Fang received Masters degree in oncology
and Doctorate in oncology/surgery in 2005 and 2013
from Zhejiang University, China. He works in the
department of Medical Oncology, the First Afﬁliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
China. He has been author and co-author of sev-
eral original research publications in national and
international peer-reviewed scientiﬁc and medical
journals.
Jianwei Yin received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from Zhejiang University (ZJU) in 2001. He
was a Visiting Scholar with the Georgia Institute of
Technology. He is currently a Full Professor with the
College of Computer Science, ZJU. Up to now, he
has published morethan 100 papers in top interna-
tional journals and conferences. His current research
interests include service computing and business
process management. He is an Associate Editor of
the IEEE Transactions on Services Computing.
Schahram Dustdar is a Full Professor of Computer
Science (Informatics) with a focus on Internet Tech-
nologies heading the Distributed Systems Group at
the TU Wien. He is Chairman of the Informatics
Section of the Academia Europaea (since December
9, 2016). He is elevated to IEEE Fellow (since
January 2016). From 2004-2010 he was Honorary
Professor of Information Systems at the Department
of Computing Science at the University of Gronin-
gen (RuG), The Netherlands.
From December 2016 until January 2017 he was
a Visiting Professor at the University of Sevilla, Spain and from January until
June 2017 he was a Visiting Professor at UC Berkeley, USA. He is a member
of the IEEE Conference Activities Committee (CAC) (since 2016), of the
Section Committee of Informatics of the Academia Europaea (since 2015),
a member of the Academia Europaea: The Academy of Europe, Informatics
Section (since 2013). He is recipient of the ACM Distinguished Scientist
award (2009) and the IBM Faculty Award (2012). He is an Associate Editor
of IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, ACM Transactions on the Web,
and ACM Transactions on Internet Technology and on the editorial board of
IEEE Internet Computing. He is the Editor-in-Chief of Computing (an SCI-
ranked journal of Springer).
Albert Y. Zomaya is the Chair Professor of
High Performance Computing & Networking in the
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney,
and he also serves as the Director of the Centre
for Distributed and High Performance Computing.
Professor Zomaya published more than 600 scien-
tiﬁc papers and articles and is author, co-author or
editor of more than 30 books. He is the Editor
in Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Computing and ACM Computing Surveys and serves
as an associate editor for several leading journals.
Professor Zomaya served as an Editor in Chief for the IEEE Transactions on
Computers (2011-2014). He is a Chartered Engineer, a Fellow of AAAS,
IEEE, and IET. Professor Zomayas research interests are in the areas of
parallel and distributed computing and complex systems.

