==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1910.05316v1  [cs.NI]  4 Oct 2019IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 1
Edge AI: On-Demand Accelerating Deep Neural
Network Inference via Edge Computing
En Li, Liekang Zeng, Zhi Zhou, Member, IEEE and Xu Chen, Member, IEEE
Abstract —As a key technology of enabling Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AI) applications in 5G era, Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have quickly attracted widespread attention. Howev er,
it is challenging to run computation-intensive DNN-based t asks
on mobile devices due to the limited computation resources.
What’s worse, traditional cloud-assisted DNN inference is heavily
hindered by the signiﬁcant wide-area network latency, lead -
ing to poor real-time performance as well as low quality of
user experience. To address these challenges, in this paper , we
propose Edgent , a framework that leverages edge computing
for DNN collaborative inference through device-edge syner gy.
Edgent exploits two design knobs: (1) DNN partitioning that
adaptively partitions computation between device and edge for
purpose of coordinating the powerful cloud resource and the
proximal edge resource for real-time DNN inference; (2) DNN
right-sizing that further reduces computing latency via ea rly
exiting inference at an appropriate intermediate DNN layer . In
addition, considering the potential network ﬂuctuation in real-
world deployment, Edgent is properly design to specialize for
both static and dynamic network environment. Speciﬁcally, in a
static environment where the bandwidth changes slowly, Edgent
derives the best conﬁgurations with the assist of regressio n-
based prediction models, while in a dynamic environment whe re
the bandwidth varies dramatically, Edgent generates the best
execution plan through the online change point detection al go-
rithm that maps the current bandwidth state to the optimal
conﬁguration. We implement Edgent prototype based on the
Raspberry Pi and the desktop PC and the extensive experiment al
evaluations demonstrate Edgent ’s effectiveness in enabling on-
demand low-latency edge intelligence.
Index Terms —Edge intelligence, edge computing, deep learn-
ing, computation ofﬂoading.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS the backbone technology supporting modern intelligent
mobile applications, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) rep-
resent the most commonly adopted machine learning techniqu e
and have become increasingly popular. Beneﬁted by the supe-
rior performance in feature extraction, DNN have witnessed
widespread success in domains from computer vision [2],
speech recognition [3] to natural language processing [4] a nd
big data analysis [5]. Unfortunately, today’s mobile devic es
generally fail to well support these DNN-based application s
due to the tremendous amount of computation required by
DNN-based applications.
Manuscript received March 25, 2019; revised July 19, 2019; a ccepted
September 25, 2019.
Part of the results of this journal version paper was present ed at 2018 ACM
SIGCOMM MECOMM [1].
The authors are with School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: { lien5,
zenglk3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; {zhouzhi9, chenxu35}@mail .sysu.edu.cn). ( En
Li and Liekang Zeng contribute equally to this work. Corresp onding author:
Xu Chen. )In response to the excessive resource demand of DNNs,
traditional wisdom resorts to the powerful cloud datacente r
for intensive DNN computation. In this case, the input data
generated from mobile devices are sent to the remote cloud
datacenter, and the devices receive the execution result as
the computation ﬁnishes. However, with such cloud-centric
approaches, a large amount of data (e.g., images and videos)
will be transferred between the end devices and the remote
cloud datacenter backwards and forwards via a long wide-are a
network, which may potentially result in intolerable laten cy
and extravagant energy. To alleviate this problem, we explo it
the emerging edge computing paradigm. The principal idea
of edge computing [6]–[8] is to sink the cloud computing
capability from the network core to the network edges (e.g.,
base stations and WLAN) in close proximity to end devices
[9]–[14]. This novel feature enables computation-intensi ve and
latency-critical DNN-based applications to be executed in a
real-time responsive manner (i.e., edge intelligence) [15 ]. By
leveraging edge computing, we can design an on-demand low-
latency DNNs inference framework for supporting real-time
edge AI applications.
While recognizing the beneﬁts of edge intelligence, our em-
pirical study reveals that the performance of edge-based DN N
inference is still highly sensitive to the available bandwi dth
between the edge server and the mobile device. Speciﬁcally,
as the bandwidth drops from 1Mbps to 50kbps, the edge-
based DNN inference latency increases from 0.123s to 2.317s
(detailed in Sec. III-B). Considering the vulnerable and vo latile
network environment in practical deployment, a natural que s-
tion is whether we can further optimize the DNN inference
under the versatile network environment, especially for so me
mission-critical DNN-based applications such as intellig ent
security and industrial robotics [16].
On this issue, in this paper, we exploit the edge computing
paradigm and propose Edgent , a low-latency co-inference
framework via device-edge synergy. Towards low-latency ed ge
intelligence1,Edgent pursues two design knobs. The ﬁrst is
DNN partitioning, which adaptively partitions DNN compu-
tation between mobile devices and the edge server according
to the available bandwidth so as to utilize the computation
capability of the edge server. However, it is insufﬁcient to meet
the stringent responsiveness requirement of some mission-
critical applications since the execution performance is s till
restrained by the rest of the model running on mobile devices .
Therefore, Edgent further integrate the second knob, DNN
1As an initial study, in this work, we focus on the problem of ex ecution
latency optimization. Energy efﬁciency will be considered in future studies.

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 2
right-sizing, which accelerates DNN inference by early exi ting
inference at an intermediate DNN layer. Essentially, the ea rly-
exit mechanism involves a latency-accuracy tradeoff. To st rike
a balance on the tradeoff with the existing resources, Edgent
makes a joint optimization on both DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing in an on-demand manner. Speciﬁcally, for
mission-critical applications that are typically with a pr e-
deﬁned latency requirement, Edgent maximizes the accuracy
while promising the latency requirement.
Considering the versatile network condition in practical
deployment, Edgent further develops a tailored conﬁguration
mechanism so that Edgent can pursue better performance in
both static network environment and dynamic network envi-
ronment. Speciﬁcally, in a static network environment (e.g .,
local area network with ﬁber or mmWave connection), we
regard the bandwidth as stable and ﬁgure out a collaboration
strategy through execution latency estimation based on the
current bandwidth. In this case, Edgent trains regression mod-
els to predict the layer-wise inference latency and accordi ngly
derives the optimal conﬁgurations for DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing. In a dynamic network environment (e.g., 5 G
cellular network, vehicular network), to alleviate the imp act
of network ﬂuctuation, we build a look-up table by proﬁling
and recording the optimal selection of each bandwidth state
and specialize the runtime optimizer to detect the bandwidt h
state transition and map the optimal selection accordingly .
Through our specialized design for different network envi-
ronment, Edgent is able to maximize the inference accuracy
without violating the application responsiveness require ment.
The prototype implementation and extensive evaluations ba sed
on the Raspberry Pi and the desktop PC demonstrate Edgent ’s
effectiveness in enabling on-demand low-latency edge inte lli-
gence.
To summarize, we present the contribution of this paper as
follows:
•We propose Edgent , a framework for on-demand DNN
collaborative inference through device-edge synergy, in
which we jointly optimize DNN partitioning and DNN
right-sizing to maximize the inference accuracy while
promising application latency requirement.
•Considering the versatile network environments (i.e.,
static network environment and dynamic network envi-
ronment), we specialize the workﬂow design for Edgent
to achieve better performance.
•We implement and experiment Edgent prototype with
a Raspberry Pi and a desktop PC. The evaluation results
based on the real-world network trace dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed Edgent framework.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we re-
view the related literature in Sec. II and present the backgr ound
and motivation in Sec. III. Then we propose the design of
Edgent in Sec. IV. The results of the performance evaluation
are shown in Sec. V to demonstrate the effectiveness of
Edgent . Finally, we conclude in Sec. VI.
II. R ELATED WORK
Discussions on the topic of mobile DNN computation have
recently obtained growing attention. By hosting artiﬁcial intel-ligence on mobile devices, mobile DNN computation deploys
DNN models close to users in order to achieve more ﬂexible
execution as well as more secure interaction [15]. However, it
is challenging to directly execute the computation-intens ive
DNNs on mobile devices due to the limited computation
resource. On this issue, existing efforts dedicate to optim ize
the DNN computation on edge devices.
Towards low-latency and energy-efﬁcient mobile DNN com-
putation, there are mainly three ways in the literature: run time
management, model architecture optimization and hardware
acceleration. Runtime management is to ofﬂoad computation
from mobile devices to the cloud or the edge server, which
utilizes external computation resource to obtain better pe rfor-
mance. Model architecture optimization attempts to develo p
novel DNN structure so as to achieve desirable accuracy with
moderate computation [17]–[21]. For example, aiming at re-
ducing resource consumption during DNN computation, DNN
models are compressed by model pruning [22]–[24]. Recent
advance in such kind of optimization has turned to Network
Architecture Search (NAS) [25]–[27]. Hardware accelerati on
generally embraces basic DNN computation operations in
hardware level design [28]–[30] while some works aim at
optimizing the utilization of the existing hardware resour ces
[31]–[33].
As one of the runtime optimization methods, DNN parti-
tioning technology segments speciﬁc DNN model into some
successive parts and deploys each part on multiple partici-
pated devices. Speciﬁcally, some frameworks [34]–[36] tak e
advantage of DNN partitioning to optimize the computation
ofﬂoading between the mobile devices and the cloud, while
some framework target to distribute computation workload
among mobile devices [37]–[39]. Regardless of how many
devices are involved, DNN partitioning dedicates to maximi ze
the utilization of external computation resources so as to
accelerate the mobile computation. As for DNN right-sizing ,
it focuses on adjusting the model size under the limitation
of the existing environment. On this objective, DNN right-
sizing appeals to specialized training technique to genera te the
deuterogenic branchy DNN model from the original standard
DNN model. In this paper, we implement the branchy model
with the assist of the open-source BranchyNet [40] framewor k
and Chainer [41] framework.
Compared with the existing work, the novelty of our frame-
work is summarized in the following three aspects. First of a ll,
given the pre-deﬁned application latency requirement, Edgent
maximizes the inference accuracy according to the availabl e
computation resources, which is signiﬁcantly different fr om
the existing studies. This feature is essential for practic al
deployment since different DNN-based applications may re-
quire different execution deadlines under different scena r-
ios. Secondly, Edgent integrates both DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing to maximize the inference accuracy while
promising application execution deadline. It is worth noti ng
that neither the model partitioning nor the model right-siz ing
can well address the timing requirement challenge solely.
For model partitioning, it does reduce the execution latenc y,
whereas the total processing time is still restricted by the part
on the mobile device. For model right-sizing, it accelerate s

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 3
"Cat"   0.9Neuron Layer
"Dog"  0.1
Figure 1: A four-layer DNN for image classiﬁcation
the inference processing through the early-exit mechanism ,
but the total computation workload is still dominated by the
original DNN model architecture and thus it is hard to ﬁnish
the inference before the application deadline.
Therefore, we propose to integrate these two approaches to
expand the design space. The integration of model partition ing
and model right-sizing is not a one-step effort, and we need t o
carefully design the decision optimization algorithms to f ully
explore the selection of the partition point and the exiting
point and thus to strike a good balance between accuracy and
latency in an on-demanded manner. Through these efforts, we
can achieve the design target such that given the predeﬁned
latency constraint, the DNN inference accuracy is maximize d
without violating the latency requirement. Last but not lea st,
we specialize the design of Edgent for both static and dynamic
network environments while existing efforts (e.g., [38]) m ainly
focus on the scenario with stable network. Considering the
diverse application scenarios and deployment environment s
in practice, we specialize the design of the conﬁgurator and
the runtime optimizer for the static and dynamic network
environments, by which Edgent can generate proper decisions
on the exit point and partition point tailored to the network
conditions.
III. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief introduction on DNN.
Then we analyze the limitation of edge- and device-only
methods, motivated by which we explore the way to utilize
DNN partitioning and right-sizing to accelerate DNN infere nce
with device-edge synergy.
A. A Brief Introduction on DNN
With the proliferation of data and computation capability,
DNN has served as the core technology for a wide range
of intelligent applications across Computer Vision (CV) [2 ]
and Natural Language Processing (NLP) [4]. Fig. 1 shows
a toy DNN for image recognition that recognizes a cat. As
we can see, a typical DNN model can be represented as a
directed graph, which consists of a series of connected laye rs
where neurons are connected with each other. During the DNN
computation (i.e., DNN training or DNN inference), each
neuron accepts weighted inputs from its neighborhood and
generates outputs after some activation operations. A typi cal
DNN may have dozens of layers and hundreds of nodes per
layer and the total number of parameters can easily reach toFigure 2: Execution runtime of edge-only (Edge) and device- only (De-
vice) approaches of AlexNet under different bandwidths
the millions level, thus a typical DNN inference demands a
large amount of computation. In this paper, we focus on DNN
inference rather than DNN training since the training proce ss
is generally delay-tolerant and often done ofﬂine on powerf ul
cloud datacenters.
B. Insufﬁciency of Device- or Edge-Only DNN Inference
Traditional mobile DNN computation is either solely per-
formed on mobile devices or wholly ofﬂoaded to cloud/edge
servers. Unfortunately, both approaches may lead to poor
performance (i.e., high end-to-end latency), making it dif ﬁcult
to meet real-time applications latency requirements [10]. For
illustration, we employ a Raspberry Pi and a desktop PC
to emulate the mobile device and edge server respectively,
and perform image recognition task over cifar-10 dataset
with the classical AlexNet model [42]. Fig. 2 depicts the
end-to-end latency subdivision of different methods under
different bandwidths on the edge server and the mobile devic e
(simpliﬁed as Edge and Device in Fig. 2). As shown in Fig. 2,
it takes more than 2s to ﬁnish the inference task on a resource -
constrained mobile device. As a contrast, the edge server
only spends 0.123s for inference under a 1Mbps bandwidth.
However, as the bandwidth drops, the execution latency of
the edge-only method climbs rapidly (the latency climbs to
2.317s when the bandwidth drops to 50kbps). This indicates
that the performance of the edge-only method is dominated by
the data transmission latency (the computation time at serv er
side remains at∼10ms) and is therefore highly sensitive to
the available bandwidth. Considering the scarcity of netwo rk
bandwidth resources in practice (e.g., due to network resou rce
contention between users and applications) and the limitat ion
of computation resources on mobile devices, device- and edg e-
only methods are insufﬁcient to support emerging mobile
applications in stringent real-time requirements.
C. DNN Partitioning and Right-Sizing towards Edge Intelli-
gence
DNN Partitioning: To better understand the performance
bottleneck of DNN inference, in Fig. 3 we reﬁne the layer-
wise execution latency (on Raspberry Pi) and the intermedia te
output data size per layer. Seen from Fig. 3, the latency
and output data size of each layer show great heterogeneity,
implying that a layer with a higher latency may not output
larger data size. Based on this observation, an intuitive id ea
is DNN partitioning, i.e., dividing DNN into two parts and

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 4
Figure 3: AlexNet layer-wise runtime and output data size on Raspberry
Pi
ofﬂoading the computation-intensive part to the server at a low
transmission cost and thus reducing total end-to-end execu tion
latency. As an illustration, we select the second local resp onse
normalization layer (i.e., lrn_2 ) in Fig. 3 as the partition
point and the layers before the point are ofﬂoaded to the serv er
side while the rest remains on the device. Through model
partitioning between device and edge, hybrid computation
resources in proximity can be in comprehensive utilization
towards low-latency DNN inference.
DNN Right-Sizing: Although DNN partitioning can sig-
niﬁcantly reduce the latency, it should be noted that with
the optimal DNN partitioning, the inference latency is stil l
constrained by the remaining computation on the mobile
device. To further reduce the execution latency, the DNN rig ht-
sizing method is employed in conjunction with DNN partition -
ing. DNN right-sizing accelerates DNN inference through th e
early-exit mechanism. For example, by training DNN models
with multiple exit points, a standard AlexNet model can be
derived as a branchy AlexNet as Fig. 4 shows, where a shorter
branch (e.g., the branch ended with the exit point 1) implies
a smaller model size and thus a shorter runtime. Note that in
Fig. 4 only the convolutional layers (CONV) and the fully-
connected layers (FC) are drawn for the ease of illustration .
This novel branchy structure demands novel training method s.
In this paper, we implement the branchy model training with
the assist of the open-source BranchyNet [40] framework.
Problem Deﬁnition: Clearly, DNN right-sizing leads to a
latency-accuracy tradeoff, i.e., while the early-exit mec hanism
reduces the total inference latency, it hurts the inference
accuracy. Considering the fact that some latency-sensitiv e
applications have strict deadlines but can tolerate modera te
precision losses, we can strike a good balance between laten cy
and accuracy in an on-demand manner. In particular, given
the pre-deﬁned latency requirement, our framework should
maximize accuracy within the deadline. More precisely, the
problem addressed in this paper can be summarized as how
to make a joint optimization on DNN partitioning and DNN
right-sizing in order to maximize the inference accuracy wi th-
out violating the pre-deﬁned latency requirement.
IV. F RAMEWORK AND DESIGN
In this section, we present the design of Edgent , which
generates the optimal collaborative DNN inference plan tha t
maximizes the accuracy while meeting the latency requireme nt
in both the static and dynamic bandwidth environment.
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV
CONVCONV
CONVCONV
CONVCONV
FC 
FC 
FC 
FC FC FC FC 
FC 
Exit Point 1Exit Point 5
Exit Point 4 Exit Point 3 Exit Point 2
Figure 4: A branchy AlexNet model with ﬁve exit points
A. Framework Overview
Edgent aims to pursue a better DNN inference performance
across a wide range of network conditions. As shown in Fig.
5,Edgent works in three stages: ofﬂine conﬁguration stage,
online tuning stage and co-inference stage.
At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage ,Edgent inputs the em-
ployed DNN to the Static/Dynamic Conﬁgurator component
and obtains the corresponding conﬁguration for online tuni ng.
To be speciﬁc, composed of trained regression models and
branchy DNN model, the static conﬁguration will be employed
where the bandwidth keeps stable during the DNN inference
(which will be detailed in Sec. IV-B), while composed of the
trained branchy DNN and the optimal selection for different
bandwidth states, the dynamic conﬁguration will be used
adaptive to the state dynamics (which will be detailed in Sec .
IV-C).
At the online tuning stage ,Edgent measures the current
bandwidth state and makes a joint optimization on DNN
partitioning and DNN right-sizing based on the given latenc y
requirement and the conﬁguration obtained ofﬂine, aiming a t
maximizing the inference accuracy under the given latency
requirement.
At the co-inference stage , based on the co-inference plan
(i.e., the selected exit point and partition point) generat ed at
the online tuning stage, the layers before the partition poi nt
will be executed on the edge server with the rest remaining
on the device.
During DNN inference, the bandwidth between the mobile
device and the edge server may be relatively stable or fre-
quently changing. Though Edgent runs on the same workﬂow
in both static and dynamic network environments, the functi on
ofConﬁgurator component and Runtime Optimizer component
differ. Speciﬁcally, under a static bandwidth environment ,
the conﬁgurator trains regression models to predict infere nce
latency and the branchy DNN to enable early-exit mechanism.
The static conﬁguration generated ofﬂine includes the trai ned
regression models and the trained branchy DNN, based on
which the Runtime Optimizer will ﬁgure out the optimal
co-inference plan. Under a dynamic bandwidth environment,
the dynamic conﬁgurator creates a conﬁguration map that
records the optimal selection for different bandwidth stat e
via the change point detector, which will then be input to
theRuntime Optimizer to generate the optimal co-inference
plan. In the following, we will discuss the specialized desi gn
of the conﬁgurator and optimizer for the static and dynamic
environments, respectively.

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 5
Runtime
Optimizer
Latency
RequirementCo-inference
Plan
Mobile
DeviceEdge
Server
Current
Bandwidth State
Static / Dynamic
ConﬁguratorConﬁguration
Ofﬂine Conﬁguration Stage Online Tuning Stage Co-Inference StageCONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNCONVCONVCONV
FC 
Figure 5: Edgent framework overview
Static Conﬁgurator
Prediction
Model
Branchy 
DNN CONV RELU
POOL FC 
CONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNStatic
Conﬁguration
BranchyNet
Framework
Figure 6: The static conﬁgurator of Edgent
B.Edgent for Static Environment
As a starting point, we ﬁrst consider our framework design
in the case of the static network environment. The key idea of
the static conﬁgurator is to train regression models to pred ict
the layer-wise inference latency and train the branchy mode l
to enable early-exit mechanism. The conﬁgurator specializ ed
for the static bandwidth environment is shown in Fig. 6.
At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage , to generate static
conﬁguration, the static conﬁgurator initiates two tasks: (1)
proﬁle layer-wise inference latency on the mobile device an d
the edge server respectively and accordingly train regress ion
models for different kind of DNN layer (e.g., Convolution ,
Fully-Connected , etc.), (2) train the DNN model with
multiple exit points via BranchyNet framework to obtain
branchy DNN. The proﬁling process is to record the inference
latency of each type of layers rather than that of the entire
model. Base on the proﬁling results, we establish the predic -
tion model for each type of layers by performing a series of
regression models with independent variables shown in Tabl e.
I. Since there are limited types of layers in a typical DNN,
the proﬁling cost is moderate. Since the layer-wise inferen ce
latency is infrastructure-dependent and the DNN training i s
application-related, for a speciﬁc DNN inference Edgent only
needs to initialize the above two tasks for once.
At the online tuning stage , using the static conﬁguration
(i.e., the prediction model and the branchy DNN), the Runtime
Optimizer component searches the optimal exit point and
partition point to maximize the accuracy while ensuring the
execution deadline with three inputs: (1) the static conﬁgu ra-
tion, (2) the measured bandwidth between the edge server andTable I: The independent variables of prediction models
Type of DNN Layer Independent Variable(s)
Convolutional# of input feature maps,
(ﬁlter size/stride)2×(# of ﬁlters)
Relu input data size
Pooling input data size, output data size
Local Response Normalization input data size
Dropout input data size
Fully-Connected input data size, output data size
the end device and (3) the latency requirement. The search
process of joint optimization on the selection of partition
point and exit point is described in Algorithm 1 . For a DNN
model with Mexit points, we denote that the branch of
i-thexit point has Nilayers and Dpis the output of the
p-thlayer. We use the abvoe-mentioned regression models
to predict the latency EDjof the j-thlayer running on the
device and the latency ESjof the j-thlayer running on the
server. Under a certain bandwidth B, fed with the input data
Input , we can calculate the total latency Ai,pby summing up
the computation latency on each side and the communication
latency for transferring input data and intermediate execu tion
result. We denote p-thlayer as the partition point of the branch
with the i-thexit point. Therefore, p=1indicates that the total
inference process will only be executed on the device side
(i.e., ESp=0,Dp−1/B=0,Input/B=0) whereas p=Ni
means the total computation is only done on the server side
(i.e., EDp=0,Dp−1/B=0). Through the exhaustive search
on points, we can ﬁgure out the optimal partition point with
the minimum latency of the i-thexit point. Since the model
partitioning does not affect the inference accuracy, we can
successively test the DNN inference with different exit lay ers
(i.e., with different precision) and ﬁnd the model with the
maximum accuracy while satisfying the latency requirement at
the same time. As the regression models for layer-wise laten cy
prediction have been trained in advance, Algorithm 1 mainly
involves linear search operations and can be completed very
quickly (no more than 1ms in our experiment).
There are two basic assumptions for our design. One is
that we assume the existing DNN inference on mobile de-
vices cannot satisfy the application latency requirement a nd

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 6
Algorithm 1 Runtime Optimizer for Static Environment
Input:
M: the number of exit points in the DNN model
{Ni|i=1,···,M}: the number of layers in the branch of exit pint i
{Lj|j=1,···,Ni}: the layers in the branch of exit point i
{Dj|j=1,···,Ni}: layer-wise output data size in the branch of exit point i
f(Lj): the prediction model that returns the j-thlayer’s latency
B: current available bandwidth
Input : input data size
Latency : latency requirement
Output:
Selection of exit point and partition point
1:Procedure
2:fori=M,···,1do
3: Select the branch of i-thexit point
4: forj=1,···,Nido
5: ESj←fedge(Lj)
6: EDj←fdevice(Lj)
7: end for
8:Ai,p=argmin
p=1,···,Ni(/summationtext.1p−1
j=1ESj+/summationtext.1Ni
k=pEDj+Input/B+Dp−1/B)
9: ifAi,p≤Latency then
10: return Exit point iand partition point p
11: end if
12: end for
13: return NULL ⊲can not meet the latency requirement
Dynamic Conﬁguration Dynamic Conﬁgurator
CONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNConﬁguration
Map Constructors1: <exit point, partition point>
s2: <exit point, partition point>
s3: <exit point, partition point>
...      ...
...      ...Bandwidth TracesLatency
Requirement
Bandwidth States
Figure 7: The dynamic conﬁgurator of Edgent
there is an edge server in proximity that is available to be
employed to accelerate DNN inference through computation
ofﬂoading. The other assumption is that the regression mode ls
for performance prediction are trained based on the situati on
that the computation resources for the DNN model execution
on the mobile device and the edge server are ﬁxed and
allocated beforehand. Nevertheless, these assumptions ca n be
further relaxed, since we can train more advanced performan ce
prediction models (e.g., using deep learning models) by tak ing
different resource levels into account.
C.Edgent for Dynamic Environment
The key idea of Edgent for the dynamic environment is to
exploit the historical bandwidth traces and employ Conﬁgu-
ration Map Constructor to generate the optimal co-inference
plans for versatile bandwidth states in advance. Speciﬁcal ly,
under the dynamic environment Edgnet generates the dynamic
conﬁguration (i.e., a conﬁguration map that records the opt imal
selections for different bandwidth states) at the ofﬂine st age,
and at the online stage Edgent searches for the optimal parti-
tion plan according to the conﬁguration map. The conﬁgurato r
specialized for the dynamic bandwidth environment is shown
in Fig. 7.At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage , the dynamic conﬁgurator
performs following initialization: (1) sketch the bandwid th
states (noted as s1,s2,···) from the historical bandwidth traces
and (2) pass the bandwidth states, latency requirement and t he
employed DNN to the static Edgent to acquire the optimal exit
point and partition point for the current input. The represe nta-
tion of the bandwidth states is motivated by the existing stu dy
of adaptive video streaming [43], where the throughput of TC P
connection can be modeled as a piece-wise stationary proces s
where the connection consists of multiple non-overlapping
stationary segments. In the dynamic conﬁgurator, it deﬁnes a
bandwidth state sas the mean of the throughput on the client
side in a segment of the underlying TCP connection. With each
bandwidth state, we acquire the optimal co-inference plan b y
calling the Conﬁguration Map Constructor and record that in
a map as the dynamic conﬁguration.
The conﬁguration map construction algorithm run in Con-
ﬁguration Map Constructor is presented in Algorithm 2 . The
key idea of Algorithm 2 is to utilize the reward function to
evaluate the selection of the exit point and partition point .
Since our design goal is to maximize the inference accuracy
while promising the application latency requirement, it is nec-
essary to measure whether the searched co-inference strate gy
can meet the latency requirement and whether the inference
accuracy has been maximized. Therefore, we deﬁne a reward
to evaluate the performance of each search step as follow:
rewardstep=/braceleftbiggexp(acc)+throughput, tstep≤treq,
0, else,
(1)
where tstep is the average execution latency in the current
search step (i.e., the selected exit point and partition poi nt in
the current search step), which equals to1
throughput. The con-
ditions of Equation (1) prioritizes that the latency requir ement
treqshould be satisﬁed, otherwise the reward will be set as 0
directly. Whenever the latency requirement is met, the rewa rd
of the current step will be calculated as exp(acc)+throughput ,
where accis the accuracy of current inference. If the latency
requirement is satisﬁed, the search emphasizes on improvin g
the accuracy and when multiple options have the similar
accuracy, the one with the higher throughput will be selecte d.
InAlgorithm 2 ,sirepresents a bandwidth state extracted from
the bandwidth traces and Cjis a co-inference strategy (i.e.,
a combination of exit point and partition point ) indexed by
j.R(Cj)denotes the reward of the co-inference strategy Cj,
which can be obtained by calculating Equation (1) according
to the accuracy and the throughput of Cj.
At the online tuning stage , the Runtime Optimizer com-
ponent selects the optimal co-inference plan according to t he
dynamic conﬁguration and real-time bandwidth measurement s.
Algorithm 3 depicts the whole process in Runtime Optimizer .
Note that Algorithm 3 calls the change point detection function
D(B1,···,t)[44] to detect the distributional state change of the
underlying bandwidth dynamics. Particularly, when the sam -
pling distribution of the bandwidth measurement has change d
signiﬁcantly, the change point detection function records a
change point and logs a bandwidth state transition. Then
with f ind(state)function, the Runtime Optimizer captures the

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 7
Algorithm 2 Conﬁguration Map Construction
Input:
{si|i=1,···,N}: the bandwidth states
{Cj|j=1,···,M}: the co-inference strategy
R(Cj): the reward of co-inference strategy Cj
Output:
Conﬁguration Map
1:Procedure
2:fori=1,···,Ndo
3: Select the bandwidth state si
4:reward max=0,Coptimal=0
5: forj=1,···,Mdo
6: reward cj←R(Cj)
7: ifreward max≤reward cjthen
8: reward max=reward cj,Coptimal=Cj
9: end if
10: end for
11: Get the corresponding exit point andpartitionpoint ofCoptimal
12: AddSi:<exit point ,partitionpoint >to the Conﬁguration Map
13: end for
14: return Conﬁguration Map
corresponding co-inference strategy to the current bandwi dth
state (or the closest state) in the dynamic conﬁguration and
accordingly guides the collaborative inference process at the
co-inference stage.
V. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we present our implementation of Edgent
and the evaluation results.
A. Experimental Setup
We implement a prototype based on the Raspberry Pi and
the desktop PC to demonstrate the feasibility and efﬁciency of
Edgent . Equipped with a quad-core 3.40 GHz Intel processor
and 8 GB RAM, a desktop PC is served as the edge server.
Equipped with a quad-core 1.2 GHz ARM processor and 1
GB RAM, a Raspberry Pi 3 is used to act as a mobile device.
To set up a static bandwidth environment, we use the
WonderShaper tool [45] to control the available bandwidth.
As for the dynamic bandwidth environment setting, we use
the dataset of Belgium 4G/LTE bandwidth logs [46] to emulate
the online dynamic bandwidth environment. To generate the
conﬁguration map, we use the synthetic bandwidth traces
provided by Oboe [43] to generate 428 bandwidth states range
from 0Mbps to 6Mbps.
To obtain the branchy DNN, we employ BranchyNet [40]
framework and Chainer [41] framework, which can well
support multi-branchy DNN training. In our experiments we
take the standard AlexNet [42] as the toy model and train the
AlexNet model with ﬁve exit points for image classiﬁcation
over the cifar-10 dataset [47]. As shown in Fig. 4, the
trained branchy AlexNet has ﬁve exit points, with each point
corresponds to a branch of the standard AlexNet. From the
longest branch to the shortest branch, the number of layers i n
each exit point is 22, 20, 19, 16 and 12, respectively.
B. Experiments in Static Bandwidth Environment
In the static conﬁgurator, the prediction model for layer-
wise prediction is trained based on the independent variabl es
presented in Table. I. The branchy AlexNet is deployed onAlgorithm 3 Runtime Optimizer for Dynamic Environment
Input:
{B1,···,t}: the accumulated bandwidth measurements until the current momentt
{Cj|j=1,···,t}: the co-inference strategy
{si|i=1,···,t}: the bandwidth states
D(B1,···,t): the bandwidth state detection function that returns the cu rrent bandwidth
state
find(s): ﬁnd the co-inference strategy corresponds to the given sta tes
Output:
Co-inference strategy
1:Procedure
2:Ct=Ct−1
3:st=D(Bi,···,t)
4:ifst/nequalst−1then
5:Ct←find(st)
6:end if
7:st−1=st
8:Ct−1=Ct
9:returnCt
both the edge server and the mobile device for performance
evaluation. Speciﬁcally, due to the high-impact character istics
of the latency requirement and the available bandwidth duri ng
the optimization procedure, the performance of Edgent is
measured under different pre-deﬁned latency requirements and
varying available bandwidth settings.
We ﬁrst explore the impact of the bandwidth by ﬁxing
the latency requirement at 1000ms and setting the bandwidth
from 50kbps to 1.5Mbps. Fig. 8(a) shows the optimal co-
inference plan (i.e., the selection of partition point and e xit
point) generated by Edgent under various bandwidth settings.
Shown in Fig. 8(a), as bandwidth increases, the optimal
exit point becomes larger, indicating that a better network
environment leads to a longer branch of the employed DNN
and thus higher accuracy. Fig. 8(b) shows the inference late ncy
change trend where the latency ﬁrst descends sharply and the n
climbs abruptly as the bandwidth increases. This ﬂuctuatio n
makes sense since the bottleneck of the system changes as the
bandwidth becomes higher. When the bandwidth is smaller
than 250kbps, the optimization of Edgent is restricted by
the poor communication condition and prefers to trade the
high inference accuracy for low execution latency, for whic h
the exit point is set as 3 rather than 5. As the bandwidth
rises, the execution latency is no longer the bottleneck so
that the exit point climbs to 5, implying a model with larger
size and thus higher accuracy. There is another interesting
result that the curve of predicted latency and the measured
latency is nearly overlapping, which shows the effectivene ss
of our regression-based prediction. Next, we set the availa ble
bandwidth at 500kbps and vary the latency requirement from
1000ms to 100ms for further exploration. Fig. 8(c) shows
the optimal partition point and exit point under different
latency requirements. As illustrated in Fig. 8(c), both the
optimal exit point and partition point climb higher as the
latency requirement relaxes, which means that a later execu tion
deadline will provide more room for accuracy improvement.
Fig. 9 shows the model inference accuracy of different
methods under different latency requirement settings (the
bandwidth is ﬁxed as 400kbps). The accuracy is described
in negative when the method cannot satisfy the latency re-
quirement. As Fig. 9 shows, given a tightly restrict latency
requirement (e.g., 100ms), all the four methods fail to meet

==== Page 8 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 8
(a) Selection under different bandwidths (b) Model runtime under different bandwidths (c) Selection under different latency requirements
Figure 8: The results under different bandwidths and differ ent latency requirements
Figure 9: The accuracy comparison under various latency req uirement
the requirement, for which all the four squares lay below the
standard line. However, as the latency requirement relaxes ,
Edgent works earlier than the other three methods (at the
requirements of 200ms and 300ms) with the moderate loss
of accuracy. When the latency requirement is set longer
than 400ms, all the methods except for device-only inferenc e
successfully ﬁnish execution in time.
C. Experiments in Dynamic Bandwidth Environment
For the conﬁguration map generation, we use the bandwidth
traces provided in Oboe [43]. Each bandwidth trace in the
dataset consists of 49 pairs of data tuple about download
chunks, including start time, end time and the average band-
width. We calculate the mean value of all the average band-
width in the same bandwidth trace to represent the bandwidth
state ﬂuctuation, from which we obtain 428 bandwidth states
range from 0Mbps to 6Mbps. According to the Algorithm
2, through the exhaustive search, we ﬁgure out the optimal
selection of each bandwidth state. The latency requirement in
this experiment is also set to 1000ms.
For online change point detection, we use the existing
implementation [48] and integrate it with the Runtime Op-
timizer . We use the Belgium 4G/LTE bandwidth logs dataset
[46] to perform online bandwidth measurement, which record s
the bandwidth traces that are measured on several types of
transportation: on foot, bicycle, bus, train or car. Additi onally,
Since that most of the bandwidth logs are over 6Mbps and in
some cases even up to 95Mbps, to adjust the edge computing
scenario, in our experiment, we scale down the bandwidth of
the logs and limit it in a range from 0Mbps to 10Mbps.In this experiment Edgent runs in a dynamic bandwidth
environment emulated by the adjusted Belgium 4G/LTE band-
width logs. Fig. 10(a) shows an example bandwidth trace
on the dataset that is recorded on a running bus. Fig. 10(b)
shows the DNN model inference throughput results under
the bandwidth environment showed in Fig. 10(a). The cor-
responding optimal selection of the exit point and partitio n
point is presented in Fig. 10(c). Seen from Fig. 10(c), the
optimal selection of model inference strategy varies with t he
bandwidth changes but the selected exit point stays at 5,
which means that the network environment is good enough
forEdgent to satisfy the latency requirement though the
bandwidth ﬂuctuates. In addition, since the exit point rema ins
invariable, the inference accuracy also keeps stable. Domi nated
by our reward function design, the selection of partition po ints
approximately follows the traces of the throughput result. The
experimental results show the effectiveness of Edgent under
the dynamic bandwidth environment.
We further compare the static conﬁgurator and the dynamic
conﬁgurator under the dynamic bandwidth environment in Fig .
11. We set the latency requirement as 1000ms and record
the throughput and the reward for the two conﬁgurators,
base on which we calculate the Cumulative Distribution
Function (CDF). Seen from Fig. 11(a), under the same CDF
level, Edgent with the dynamic conﬁgurator achieves higher
throughput, demonstrating that under the dynamic network
environment the dynamic conﬁgurator performs co-inferenc e
with higher efﬁciency. For example, set CDF as 0.6, the
dynamic conﬁgurator makes 27 FPS throughput while the
static conﬁgurator makes 17 FPS. In addition, the CDF curve
of dynamic conﬁgurator rises with 11 FPS throughput while
the static conﬁgurator begins with 1 FPS, which indicates th at
the dynamic conﬁgurator works more efﬁciently than the stat ic
conﬁgurator at the beginning.
Fig. 11(b) presents the CDF results of reward. Similarly,
under the same CDF level, the dynamic conﬁgurator acquires
higher reward than the static conﬁgurator and the CDF curve
of the dynamic conﬁgurator rises latter again. However, in
Fig. 11(b) the two curves is closer than in Fig. 11(a), which
means that the two conﬁgurators achieve nearly the same good
performance from the perspective of reward. This is because
the two conﬁgurators make similar choices in the selection o f
exit point (i.e., in most cases both of them select exit point 5
as part of the co-inference strategy). Therefore the differ ence

==== Page 9 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 9
(a) A example bandwidth trace on Belgium 4G/LTE dataset [46]
(b) The throughput of DNN model inference
(c) The selection of exit point and partition point at each
timestamp in the bandwidth traces
Figure 10: An example showing the decision-making ability o f Edgent in
a bandwidth traces recorded on bus
(a) Throughput (b) Reward
Figure 11: The throughput and reward comparison between two conﬁg-
urations
of the reward mainly comes from the throughput result. It
demonstrates that the static conﬁgurator may perform as wel l
as the dynamic conﬁgurator in some cases but the dynamic
conﬁgurator is better in general under the dynamic network
environment.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose Edgent , an on-demand DNN
co-inference framework with device-edge collaboration. E n-
abling low-latency edge intelligence, Edgent introduces two
design knobs to optimize the DNN inference latency: DNN
partitioning that enables device-edge collaboration, and DNN
right-sizing that leverages early-exit mechanism. We intr oduce
two conﬁgurators that are specially designed to ﬁgure out
the collaboration strategy under static and dynamic bandwi dth
environments, respectively. Our prototype implementatio n and
the experimental evaluation on Raspberry Pi shows the feasi -bility and effectiveness of Edgent towards low-latency edge
intelligence. For the future work, our proposed framework
can be further combined with existing model compression
techniques to accelerate DNN inference. Besides, we can
extend our framework to support multi-device application
scenarios by designing efﬁcient resource allocation algor ithms.
We hope to stimulate more discussion and efforts in the socie ty
and fully realize the vision of edge intelligence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Sci-
ence Foundation of China under Grant No. U1711265,
61972432 and 61802449, the Program for Guangdong Intro-
ducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams under Grant No .
2017ZT07X355, the Pearl River Talent Recruitment Program
under Grant No. 2017GC010465, the Guangdong Natural
Science Funds under Grant No. 2018A030313032, and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
under Grant No. 17lgjc40.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Li, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge intelligence: On-deman d
deep learning model co-inference with device-edge synergy ,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Mobile Edge Communications ,
MECOMM@SIGCOMM 2018, Budapest, Hungary, August 20, 2018 ,
2018, pp. 31–36.
[2] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguel ov, D. Erhan,
V . Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolu tions,”
inProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pa ttern
recognition , 2015, pp. 1–9.
[3] A. v. d. Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals , A. Graves,
N. Kalchbrenner, A. Senior, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Wavenet: A gener-
ative model for raw audio,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.
[4] D. Wang and E. Nyberg, “A long short-term memory model for answer
sentence selection in question answering,” in Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lingui stics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers) , 2015, pp. 707–712.
[5] A. Almomani, M. Alauthman, F. Albalas, O. Dorgham, and A. Obeidat,
“An online intrusion detection system to cloud computing ba sed on
neucube algorithms,” International Journal of Cloud Applications and
Computing (IJCAC) , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 96–112, 2018.
[6] Y . Mao, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A sur vey
on mobile edge computing: The communication perspective,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2322–2358,
2017.
[7] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y . Li, and L. Xu, “Edge computing: Vision
and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 3, no. 5, pp.
637–646, 2016.
[8] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, “Mobile edge computing: A survey on archi-
tecture and computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1628–1656, 2017.
[9] Y . Jararweh, M. Alsmirat, M. Al-Ayyoub, E. Benkhelifa, A . Darabseh,
B. Gupta, and A. Doulat, “Software-deﬁned system support fo r enabling
ubiquitous mobile edge computing,” The Computer Journal , vol. 60,
no. 10, pp. 1443–1457, 2017.
[10] X. Chen, Q. Shi, L. Yang, and J. Xu, “Thriftyedge: Resour ce-efﬁcient
edge computing for intelligent iot applications,” IEEE network , vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 61–65, 2018.
[11] Y . Yang, K. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Luo, and M.-T. Zhou ,
“Meets: Maximal energy efﬁcient task scheduling in homogen eous fog
networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 4076–
4087, 2018.
[12] T. Ouyang, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Follow me at the edge: Mo bility-
aware dynamic service placement for mobile edge computing, ”IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 2333–
2345, 2018.
[13] X. Chen, W. Li, S. Lu, Z. Zhou, and X. Fu, “Efﬁcient resour ce allocation
for on-demand mobile-edge cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology , vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8769–8780, 2018.

==== Page 10 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 10
[14] C. Xu, J. Ren, D. Zhang, and Y . Zhang, “Distilling at the e dge: A local
differential privacy obfuscation framework for iot data an alytics,” IEEE
Communications Magazine , vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 20–25, 2018.
[15] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang, “Edg e
intelligence: Paving the last mile of artiﬁcial intelligen ce with edge
computing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10083 , 2019.
[16] Qualcomm, “Augmented and virtual reality: the ﬁrst wav e of 5g killer
apps,” 2017.
[17] Q. Cao, N. Balasubramanian, and A. Balasubramanian, “M obirnn: Efﬁ-
cient recurrent neural network execution on mobile gpu,” in Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Deep Learning for Mobil e Systems
and Applications . ACM, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[18] J. Wu, C. Leng, Y . Wang, Q. Hu, and J. Cheng, “Quantized co nvolutional
neural networks for mobile devices,” pp. 4820–4828, 2016.
[19] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Da lly,
and K. Keutzer, “Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 5 0x fewer
parameters and< 0.5 mb model size,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 ,
2016.
[20] N. D. Lane, P. Georgiev, and L. Qendro, “Deepear: Robust smart-
phone audio sensing in unconstrained acoustic environment s using deep
learning,” in UBICOMP ’15 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing - September , 2015, pp. 283–294.
[21] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang,
T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, “Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convo-
lutional neural networks for mobile vision applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861 , 2017.
[22] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compression: Compr essing
deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization an d huffman
coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149 , 2015.
[23] Y .-D. Kim, E. Park, S. Yoo, T. Choi, L. Yang, and D. Shin, “ Compression
of deep convolutional neural networks for fast and low power mobile
applications,” 2015.
[24] N. D. Lane, S. Bhattacharya, A. Mathur, C. Forlivesi, an d F. Kawsar,
“Dxtk: Enabling resource-efﬁcient deep learning on mobile and embed-
ded devices with the deepx toolkit.” in MobiCASE , 2016, pp. 98–107.
[25] H. Cai, T. Chen, W. Zhang, Y . Yu, and J. Wang, “Efﬁcient ar chitecture
search by network transformation,” in Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[26] C. Liu, B. Zoph, M. Neumann, J. Shlens, W. Hua, L.-J. Li, L . Fei-Fei,
A. Yuille, J. Huang, and K. Murphy, “Progressive neural arch itecture
search,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV) , 2018, pp. 19–34.
[27] H. Pham, M. Y . Guan, B. Zoph, Q. V . Le, and J. Dean, “Efﬁ-
cient neural architecture search via parameter sharing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03268 , 2018.
[28] Y . Kim, J. Kim, D. Chae, D. Kim, and J. Kim, “ µlayer: Low la-
tency on-device inference using cooperative single-layer acceleration
and processor-friendly quantization,” in Proceedings of the Fourteenth
EuroSys Conference 2019 . ACM, 2019, p. 45.
[29] Y . Umuroglu, N. J. Fraser, G. Gambardella, M. Blott, P. L eong, M. Jahre,
and K. Vissers, “Finn: A framework for fast, scalable binari zed neural
network inference,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA Interna-
tional Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays . ACM, 2017,
pp. 65–74.
[30] B. Reagen, P. Whatmough, R. Adolf, S. Rama, H. Lee, S. K. L ee,
J. M. Hernández-Lobato, G.-Y . Wei, and D. Brooks, “Minerva: Enabling
low-power, highly-accurate deep neural network accelerat ors,” in 2016
ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer A rchi-
tecture (ISCA) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 267–278.
[31] A. Graves, G. Wayne, M. Reynolds, T. Harley, I. Danihelk a, A. Grabska-
Barwi ´nska, S. G. Colmenarejo, E. Grefenstette, T. Ramalho, J. Aga piou
et al. , “Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic exte rnal
memory,” Nature , vol. 538, no. 7626, p. 471, 2016.
[32] S. Bateni and C. Liu, “Apnet: Approximation-aware real -time neural
network,” in 2018 IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 67–79.
[33] B. Islam, Y . Luo, and S. Nirjon, “Zygarde: Time-sensiti ve on-device
deep intelligence on intermittently-powered systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.03854 , 2019.
[34] Y . Kang, J. Hauswald, C. Gao, A. Rovinski, T. Mudge, J. Ma rs, and
L. Tang, “Neurosurgeon: Collaborative intelligence betwe en the cloud
and mobile edge,” in ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News ,
vol. 45, no. 1. ACM, 2017, pp. 615–629.
[35] A. E. Eshratifar, M. S. Abrishami, and M. Pedram, “Joint dnn: An
efﬁcient training and inference engine for intelligent mob ile cloud
computing services,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08618 , 2018.[36] H. Li, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Learning iot in edge: deep lea rning for the
internet of things with edge computing,” IEEE Network , vol. 32, no. 1,
pp. 96–101, 2018.
[37] M. Xu, F. Qian, and S. Pushp, “Enabling cooperative infe rence
of deep learning on wearables and smartphones,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.03073 , 2017.
[38] R. Hadidi, J. Cao, M. Woodward, M. Ryoo, and H. Kim, “Musi cal
chair: Efﬁcient real-time recognition using collaborativ e iot devices,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02138 , 2018.
[39] J. Zhou, Y . Wang, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Aaiot: Accelerati ng artiﬁcial
intelligence in iot systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters ,
2019.
[40] S. Teerapittayanon, B. McDanel, and H.-T. Kung, “Branc hynet: Fast
inference via early exiting from deep neural networks,” in 2016 23rd
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) . IEEE, 2016,
pp. 2464–2469.
[41] S. Tokui, K. Oono, S. Hido, and J. Clayton, “Chainer: a ne xt-generation
open source framework for deep learning,” pp. 1–6, 2015.
[42] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagene t classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[43] Z. Akhtar, Y . S. Nam, R. Govindan, S. G. Rao, J. Chen, E. Ka tz-
Bassett, B. Ribeiro, J. Zhan, and H. Zhang, “Oboe: auto-tuni ng video
ABR algorithms to network conditions,” in Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communi cation,
SIGCOMM 2018, Budapest, Hungary, August 20-25, 2018 , 2018.
[44] R. P. Adams and D. J. MacKay, “Bayesian online changepoi nt detec-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0710.3742 , 2007.
[45] V . Mulhollon, “Wondershaper,” http://manpages.ubun tu.com/manpages/trusty/man8/wondershaper.8.html,
2004.
[46] J. van der Hooft, S. Petrangeli, T. Wauters, R. Huysegem s, P. R. Alface,
T. Bostoen, and F. De Turck, “HTTP/2-Based Adaptive Streami ng of
HEVC Video Over 4G/LTE Networks,” IEEE Communications Letters ,
vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 2177–2180, 2016.
[47] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al. , “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.
[48] “Bayesian changepoint detection,” https://github.c om/hildensia/bayesian_changepoint_detection,
2013.
En Li received the B.S. degree in communica-
tion engineering from the School of Physics &
Telecommunication Engineering, South China Nor-
mal University (SCNU), Guangzhou, China in 2017,
and M.S. degree in computer techonology from the
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. His research interests
include mobile deep computing, edge intelligence,
deep learning.
Liekang Zeng received the B.S. degree in computer
science from the School of Data and Computer Sci-
ence, Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou,
China in 2018. He is currently pursuing the mas-
terâ˘A´Zs degree with the School of Data and Com-
puter Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China. His research interests include mobile edge
computing, deep learning, distributed computing.

==== Page 11 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 11
Zhi Zhou received the B.S., M.E. and Ph.D. de-
grees in 2012, 2014 and 2017, respectively, all from
the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(HUST), Wuhan, China. He is currently a research
fellow in School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. In 2016,
he has been a Visiting Scholar at University of
Gottingen. He was the sole recipient of 2018 ACM
Wuhan & Hubei Computer Society Doctoral Disser-
tation Award, a recipient of the Best Paper Award of
IEEE UIC 2018, and a general co-chair of 2018 International W orkshop on
Intelligent Cloud Computing and Networking (ICCN). His res earch interests
include edge computing, cloud computing and distributed sy stems.
Xu Chen is a Full Professor with Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China, and the vice director
of National and Local Joint Engineering Labora-
tory of Digital Home Interactive Applications. He
received the Ph.D. degree in information engineering
from the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2012,
and worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at
Arizona State University, Tempe, USA from 2012
to 2014, and a Humboldt Scholar Fellow at Institute
of Computer Science of University of Goettingen,
Germany from 2014 to 2016. He received the pres-
tigious Humboldt research fellowship awarded by Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation of Germany, 2014 Hong Kong Young Scientist Runne r-up Award,
2016 Thousand Talents Plan Award for Young Professionals of China, 2017
IEEE Communication Society Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Young Researcher
Award, 2017 IEEE ComSoc Young Professional Best Paper Award , Honorable
Mention Award of 2010 IEEE international conference on Inte lligence and
Security Informatics (ISI), Best Paper Runner-up Award of 2 014 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications (INF OCOM), and
Best Paper Award of 2017 IEEE International Conference on Co mmunications
(ICC). He is currently an Area Editor of IEEE Open Journal of t he Com-
munications Society, an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transa ctions Wireless
Communications, IEEE Internet of Things Journal and IEEE Jo urnal on
Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC) Series on Network S oftwarization
and Enablers.

