==== Page 1 ====
184Edge Computing with Artificial Intelligence: A Machine
Learning Perspective
HAOCHEN HUA ,Hohai University,P. R.China
YUTONGLI ,TsinghuaUniversity,P.R.China
TONGHE WANG ,Guangzhou Instituteof EnergyConversion,P.R.China
NANQING DONG ,Universityof Oxford, UnitedKingdom
WEILI,Universityof Sydney, Australia
JUNWEICAO ,TsinghuaUniversity,P.R. China
RecentyearshavewitnessedthewidespreadpopularityofInternetofthings(IoT).Byprovidingsufficientdata
for model training and inference, IoT has promoted the development of artificial intelligence (AI) to a great
extent.Underthisbackgroundandtrend,thetraditionalcloudcomputingmodelmayneverthelessencounter
many problems in independently tackling the massive data generated by IoT and meeting corresponding
practical needs. In response, a new computing model called edge computing (EC) has drawn extensive at-
tention from both industry and academia. With the continuous deepening of the research on EC, however,
scholars have found that traditional (non-AI) methods have their limitations in enhancing the performance
of EC. Seeing the successful application of AI in various fields, EC researchers start to set their sights on AI,
especiallyfromaperspectiveofmachinelearning,abranchofAIthathasgainedincreasedpopularityinthe
pastdecades.Inthisarticle,wefirstexplaintheformaldefinitionofECandthereasonswhyEChasbecome
afavorablecomputingmodel.Then,wediscusstheproblemsofinterestinEC.Wesummarizethetraditional
solutions and hightlight their limitations. By explaining the research results of using AI to optimize EC and
applyingAItootherfieldsundertheECarchitecture,thisarticlecanserveasaguidetoexplorenewresearch
ideas inthesetwoaspects while enjoyingthemutually beneficial relationshipbetween AI andEC.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →
Artificial intelligence ;•Computersystems organization →Distributedarchitectures;
Additional Key Words andPhrases:Edgecomputing, artificial intelligence, machine learning
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 52107089, in part
by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant No. 2021M70040, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities of China under Grant No. B200201071, and in part by the BNRist Program under Grant No.
BNR2021TD01009.
Authors’addresses:H.Hua,CollegeofEnergyandElectricalEngineering,HohaiUniversity,Nanjing,Jiangsu,P.R.China,
211100; email: huahc16@tsinghua.org.cn; Y. Li, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China,
100084; email: liyt19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; T. Wang, Micro Energy Research Group, Guangzhou Institute of Energy
Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China, 510640; email: wangth@ms.giec.ac.cn;
N. Dong, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom, OX1 3QD; email:
nanqing.dong@cs.ox.ac.uk; W. Li, Centre for Distributed and High Performance Computing,School of Computer Science,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New SouthWales, Australia; email: weiwilson.li@sydney.edu.au; J. Cao (corresponding au-
thor),BeijingNationalResearchCenterforInformationScienceandTechnology,TsinghuaUniversity,Beijing,P.R.China,
100084;email:jcao@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2023Association for ComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2023/01-ART184$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555802
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.


==== Page 2 ====
184:2 H.Huaetal.
ACM Reference format:
HaochenHua,YutongLi,TongheWang,NanqingDong,WeiLi,andJunweiCao.2023.EdgeComputingwith
ArtificialIntelligence:AMachineLearningPerspective. ACMComput.Surv. 55,9,Article184(January2023),
35pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555802
1 INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing has been widely used since its inception and has greatly changed people’s
lifestyle. Many large companies, including Google, Amazon, and Microsoft, have launched their
own cloud computing services (Google Cloud, Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, respec-
tively). Equipped with a large number of remotely located servers, cloud computing can intelli-
gentlyprovideuserswithcomputing,storage,andnetworkservicesinrealtimeaccordingtouser
needsintermsofresourcetype,quantity,andsoon[ 1].Inthiscase,userscaneasilyobtainthese
cloudserviceswitha small feeor totally forfree[ 2].
1.1 Edge Computing
Thedevelopmentof Internetofthings(IoT) hasdriventheproductionandapplicationofalarge
numberofhardwaredevices/sensorsworldwide.Thesehardwaredevices/sensorshavetheability
tosensethesurroundingphysicalenvironmentandtransformtheenvironmentalinformationinto
data. After these massive data are transmitted to the cloud for computing or storage, data con-
sumerscanaccessclouddataaccordingtotheirindividualneedsandthenextracttheinformation
theyneed[ 3].
However, with the continuous development and widespread application of IoT, cloud com-
puting has begun to expose more and more problems. For instance, if the data generated by
global terminal devices are computed and stored in a centralized cloud, then it will cause a se-
ries of problems, including low throughput, high latency, bandwidth bottlenecks, data privacy,
centralized vulnerabilities, and additional costs (such as transmission cost, energy cost, storage
cost,calculationcost).In fact,many applicationscenariosin IoT,especially Internet of vehicles
(IoV),haverequirementsofhighspeedandlowlatencyfordataprocessing,analyzing,andresult
returning[ 4].
To address these challenges of cloud computing mentioned above, a new computing paradigm,
callededgecomputing(EC) ,hasattractedwidespreadattention.Simplyput,thecoreideaofthe
ECmodelistooffloadthedataprocessing,storage,andcomputingoperationsthatwereoriginally
required by the cloud to the edge of the network near terminal devices. This helps to reduce data
transmission time and device response times, reduce the pressure on network bandwidth, reduce
thecostof data transmission,and alsoachievedecentralization[ 5].
1.2 Artificial Intelligence
Artificialintelligence(AI) isakindoftechnologythatendowsthemachinewithcertainintelli-
gencesothatthemachinehasthesameabilitytosolvetasksashumanbeings[ 6].Whileheuristic-
based algorithms and data mining (DM) [7] have both played an important role in AI solutions
toIoTinthepastdecades,wemainlyfocuson machinelearning(ML) ,arecentlypopularareain
AI.Itisworthmentioningthat,thoughDMandMLsharesimilaritiesinutilizingmassivedata,ML
focuses on mimicking the human learning process, but DM is designed to extract the rules from
data[8,9].IncontrasttoDM,MLisahigher-levelintelligenceandrepresentsthefuturedirection
ofAI.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 3 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:3
The widespread application of AI, especially ML, has clearly become an inevitable trend in the
“bigdataera”broughtbyIoT.ItisworthnotingthatthisarticlefocusesonthenewgenerationAI
algorithm, e.g., deep learning (DL) , and so on. Note that some of these applications have high
requirements for latency and network stability, but these requirements are often not guaranteed
by cloud computing. In contrast, the new EC model can meet these requirements by deploying
AI at the edge and delegating some computing and storage resources to edge devices close to
the terminal. Although EC brings benefits such as reduced latency, improved data privacy, and
enhanced security, the limited computing and storage capacity of edge devices has brought new
problems. Using AI to optimize EC and solve the problems faced by EC has become a new trend
in relatedresearch[ 10].
1.3 Combination of Edge Computing and Artificial Intelligence
ThemotivationsofcombiningAIandECinrecentworkscanberoughlydividedintotwoaspects,
whichfully illustratethemutualbenefitbetweenAI andEC:
(1) ThedevelopmentofECstillfacesmanychallenges,e.g.,taskscheduling,resourceallocation,
delayoptimization,energyconsumptionoptimization,andprivacyandsecurity.Inresponse,
many researchershaveadoptedAI-basedsolutionstopromotethedevelopment of EC.
(2) In spite of the rapid development of AI, its application relies on strong computing power.
Traditional cloud computing can provide abundant computing and storage resources, but
cloud-based AI reasoning and training may lead to significant delay as well as data privacy
andsecurityissues.ByexecutingAItasksinedgenodesclosertotheuserside,ECcangreatly
alleviate theaforementionedissueswithimprovedstability,reliability,and userexperience.
At present, researchers have made many great achievements in the above research problems.
Thisarticlesummarizes theseresults,hopingthatreaderscan quicklyget updatedwiththelatest
researchstatusand relevantresults.
1.4 Review of Existing Surveys
EC and AI are very popular research fields, and some related reviews have been published. In
Reference [ 11], authors focus on the motivation and research work of deploying AI algorithm on
the edge of the network. The latest development of ML in mobile EC is reviewed in Reference
[12], which includes the development of 5G network in automatic adaptive resource allocation,
mobility modeling, security, and energy efficiency. Survey work [ 13] reviews the application of
DL in EC, and it focuses on how to use DL to promote the development of edge applications, e.g.,
intelligentmultimedia,intelligenttransportation,intelligentcity,andintelligentindustry.Various
methods of fast implementation of DL reasoning in the combination of end devices, edge servers
and cloud, and the methods of training DL models in multiple edge devices are also discussed
in Reference [ 14]. To achieve the best performance of DL training and reasoning, Reference [ 15]
comprehensivelydiscusseshowtodesignECarchitecturewithcommunication,computingpower,
and energy consumption constraints. From the perspective of algorithms and systems, [ 16] csys-
tematically summarizes the latest approaches to overcome the communication challenges caused
by AI reasoningand trainingat theedgeof thenetwork.
Nonetheless,themutuallybeneficialrelationshipbetweenECandAI(especiallytraditionalML,
DL,reinforcement learning (RL) ,a n ddeep reinforcement learning (DRL) ) are seldom dis-
cussed in previous surveys. From this point of view, this article reviews existing works on EC
performanceoptimizationanddifferentapplicationscenariosofAI.InadditiontotheDLmethods
discussed in References [ 13–15], other ML algorithms, especially RL and DRL, are also discussed
in thisarticle.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 4 ====
184:4 H.Huaetal.
Fig.1. Structureof thesurvey.
1.5 Our Contributions
Ourmain contributionsin thisarticleare asfollows:
(1) We first outline the basic definition and architecture of EC and discuss the necessity of EC
inthepresenceof cloud computing.Wealso describetheproblemsstudiedby EC.
(2) Wediscussthemotivationsfor combiningAI andEC fromtwo perspectives:
•AIalgorithms canbe utilizedto optimizeEC;
•EC enables AI to be deployed on the edge to bring faster response speeds and network
stabilityforAI applicationsin differentfields.
We summarize three ideas of deploying AI training and reasoning tasks in the EC architec-
turebasedonexistingstudiesand analyze theiradvantages anddisadvantages.
(3) WemainlyintroducepopularMLalgorithmsinthefieldofAIandanalyzestheirrespective
advantages.WesummarizethelatestresearchonsolvingtheproblemsofECandoptimizing
theperformanceofECbyusingAIalgorithms.Wealsoreviewthelatestresearchonapplying
AI tootherfieldsunder theEC architecture.
Roadmap. The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2introduces the defini-
tionofEC,discusseswhyweneedEC,andenumeratesthechallengesfacedbyECandcorrespond-
ingtraditional(non-AI)solutions.InSection 3,wecombineECandAI.Wefirstdiscussthetrends
andreasonsforthecombinationofthetwo,thenintroducethecorrespondingAIalgorithms,and
finallyconductacomprehensivereviewoftheresearchonusingAIalgorithmstooptimizeEC.In
Section4,wesummarizerecentworksonapplyingAItootherfieldsunderEC.Wesummarizethis
articleinSection 5.Thed i ag rami nFi g ur e 1showsaclear pictureofthestructureofthisarticle.
2 INTRODUCTION OF EDGE COMPUTING
Cloudcomputinghasbeenaverypopularorevenahouseholdconceptforthepastdecade.Cloud
computing brings many conveniences. For example, small- and medium-sized enterprises only
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 5 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:5
need to purchase cloud server resources at a relatively low cost, without the need of purchasing
their own hardware and equipment at high prices. This greatly reduces the cost of business oper-
ationsand thethresholdfor companiestoengage in technologyresearchand development.
The centralized computing, storage, and network resources of cloud computing has exposed a
series of problems with the development of the times. In this context, EC, a new computing para-
digm,hasbeguntoattracttheattentionofallareas.Inthissection,wewillgiveabriefoverviewof
EC.WewillfirstdiscusswhyECisneeded,andthenintroducewhatECis.Finally,wewilldiscuss
the problems of EC and corresponding traditional solutions, and point out the shortcomings of
thesetraditionalsolutions.
2.1 Why We Need Edge Computing
WewillexplainthenecessityofECfromthefollowingthreeaspects:the“bigdataera”causedby
IoT, more stringent requirements of high network stability and response speed, and the consider-
ation ofprivacyand security.
2.1.1 TheBigData EraCausedbyInternet of Things. TheconceptofIoTwasproposedin 1999
for supply chain management, but now IoT covers a much wider area [ 17]. With the integration
of IoT into traditional industries, many new application areas have been spawned, such as smart
home, smart grid, smart traffic, and intelligent manufacturing. The idea of IoT is that things con-
nected to the Internet form a huge network, achieving the interconnection of these things at any
time and place. With the continuous development of IoT, the number of various sensors, smart-
phones, healthcare applications and online social platforms is soaring, and the resulting global
data will increase to 175 zeta bytes (ZB) by 2025 according to the prediction of International
Data Corporation(IDC) [18]. Thishuge datavolume hasfacilitatedtheworld of bigdata[ 19].
In the era of big data, the most direct and simple method for handling those data is to transfer
thedatatothecloudforprocessing.TheannualglobalcloudIPtrafficof2016was6.0ZB,anditis
expectedtoreach19.5ZBin2021,reportedbyCiscoin2018[ 20].However,thecomputingpower
ofthecloudisincreasinglinearly[ 21],whichismuchslowerthanthecurrentrateofdatagrowth.
Withtherapidgrowthof data,cloud computingwillno longer befully trusted.
2.1.2 More Stringent Requirements of Network Stability and Response Speed. There are some
IoTapplicationscenariosthatrequireextremelyfastresponsespeeds.Forexample,inthescenario
ofintelligentdriving,sensordevicessuchascamerasareinstalledinautonomousvehicles.These
sensor devices can continuously obtain data from the surrounding environment during the au-
tonomous driving mode. In the cloud computing model, these data will be uploaded to the cloud
forcomputing,andtheresultswillbereturnedbacktothevehicle’scontrolchip.Consideringthe
complicated driving environment of a vehicle, this method is actually very time-consuming, and
itmayevencausethesmartvehicletofailtomaketherightdecisioninatimelymanner,resulting
in seriousconsequences[ 3].
Inthefieldsof augmentedreality(AR) andvirtualreality(VR) ,mobileAR/VRapplications
need to continuously transmit high-resolution videos, so they have high requirements for data
computing capabilities, network stability, and response speed [ 22]. At the current rate of data
growth, the cloud’s computing power becomes less and less proficient in meeting these require-
ments.However,uploadingallthedatatothecloudwillcauseseriousnetworkcongestion.Dueto
thelimitednetworkbandwidth,thedatageneratedbyalargenumberofIoTdeviceswillimposea
lotofpressureonthenetworkbandwidth,causingcloudcomputingtonolongermeettherequire-
ments of latency and response speed in these scenarios. In addition, these data may have a large
proportion of noise and errors. Some survey shows that only one third of the data obtained by
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 6 ====
184:6 H.Huaetal.
mostsensorsarecorrect[ 23].Puttingtheseworthlessdataintothecloudwillcauseahugewaste
ofcloud serverresourcesanda wasteof networkbandwidth.
2.1.3 PrivacyandSecurity. Cloudcomputinghasoutsourcingfeatures.Usersneedtohostlocal
data to the cloud when using cloud computing. This leads to a series of data security and privacy
issues [21]. The data loss during long-distance transmission between devices and the cloud can
damagetheintegrityandaccuracyofthedata.Inaddition,highlycentralizedcomputingandstor-
age can also become serious problems. When one device in a centralized system goes wrong due
to benign errors or malicious attacks, other devices will be negatively affected. The data privacy
problemreferstothetheftandutilizationbyotherunauthorizedpersons,companiesororganiza-
tions. Actually, data owners have lost control of their data uploaded to the cloud, so it is difficult
toguaranteedataprivacy[ 24].
2.2 The Definition of Edge Computing
TheoriginofECcanbetracedbackto1999whenAkamaiproposed contentdeliverynetworks
(CDN)for web page caching near the clients, aiming to improve the efficiency of web page load-
ing[25].TheconceptofECwasborrowedfromthecloudcomputinginfrastructuretoexpandthe
conceptof CDN[ 26].
EC now has many different definitions. For example, Openstack defines EC as a model that
provides application developers and service providers with cloud services and IT environmental
services at the edge of the network [ 27]. In Reference [ 28], the authors believe that the “edge” in
EC refers to any computing and network resources between the data source and the cloud, such
as smart phones, gateways, micro data center, and cloudnet. It can also be understood that EC
offloadssome cloudresourcesand taskstotheedge nearusersanddata sources.
It should be noted that EC cannot replace the roles and advantages of cloud computing due to
the indispensable computing power and storage capacity of the cloud. The emergence of EC is
to make up for the limitations of cloud computing, and the relationship between EC and cloud
computing should be complementary. Therefore, how to coordinate the relationship between the
cloud and the edge so that the two can cooperate more efficiently and securely is a problem that
needstobestudied.
EC’s general architecture is three-layered, as shown in Figure 2,w h i c ha r ee n d ,e d g e ,a n d
cloud[29].
•End.This layer has two main functions. The first is to perceive the world, which is to ob-
serve, obtain and digitize the information of the physical world. This function is completed
byvarioustypesofsensors,suchasspeedsensorsonsmartcars,orcamerasinsmartcities.
The second is to receive information or data from the edge or cloud and perform the cor-
responding tasks. Data obtained from the end is processed by the edge and the cloud, and
then the results will be fed back to the end according to user needs, such as control signals
in smart driving or video traffic accepted by smartphones. Devices in this layer may have
somebutvery limited computingand storagecapabilities.
•Edge.Theedgelayerisbetweenthecloudandtheend.Thislayercontainscertaincomputing,
storage, and network resources, so some tasks that were originally performed in the cloud
canbedelegatedtothislayerforexecution.Sincethislayerisclosertoenddevices,EChas
the advantages of low latency. Generally, the edge layer is composed of gateways, control
units,storageunits,and computingunits.
•Cloud.This layer actually refers to cloud servers that has been widely used in practice. In
additiontoitspowerfulcomputingandstoragecapabilities,thecloudalsohastheabilityto
macro-controltheentireECarchitecture.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 7 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:7
Fig. 2. Architecture of EC. Gray arrows indicate the data transmission between the end, the edge, and the
cloud. Blueand grayboxes indicate that thetaskis scheduledtotheedge and thecloud,respectively.
EC has advantages in offloading some resources and tasks on the cloud to the edge. The edge
layerisclosertoendusersanddatasource,sothetransmissiondistanceisgreatlyshortened,and
the corresponding transmission time is greatly reduced. This effectively improves the response
speed of user requests. At the same time, the shortened transmission distance also reduces the
cost and data security issues caused by the long-distance transmission. From the perspective of
thecloud,large-scalerawdatawillbeprocessedontheedgetofilteroutalargenumberofuseless
and erroneous data first, and then the edge uploads important data or information to the cloud.
This greatly reduces the bandwidth pressure, the transmission cost, and the possibility of user
privacyleakage.
2.3 Problems Studied in Edge Computing
Next, we will describe three problems studied in the field of EC in detail: computing offloading,
resourceallocation,andprivacyandsecurity.Wewillalsoexplaintheshortcomingsoftraditional
solutionsto theseproblems.
2.3.1 Computing Offloading. Computation offloading was originally proposed in cloud com-
puting. The definition is that the terminal devices with limited computing power delegates part
or all of the computing tasks to the cloud for execution. Similarly, computing offloading in EC
refers to the problem that terminal devices with limited computing power delegate part or all of
its computing tasks to the edge [ 30]. The main considerations are whether terminal devices will
offload, how much they will offload and to which nodes they will offload. Computing offloading
solves theproblemsofinsufficientresourcesand highenergy consumptionin terminaldevices.
Traditional methods of computing offloading applied to cloud computing are based on many
assumptions, including that the default server has sufficient computing power and does not care
about its energy consumption or network condition. However, traditional methods based on
the above assumptions are not suitable for solving the computing offloading in EC where edge
devices and servers have limited computing capabilities [ 31]. Reasonable computing offloading
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 8 ====
184:8 H.Huaetal.
strategies are able to reduce energy consumption and latency. Therefore, computing offloading is
animportantresearchtopicforoptimizing EC.
2.3.2 Resource Allocation. Compared to traditional cloud computing, the most prominent ad-
vantageofECisthatitdoesnotneedtouploadallthedatatothecloudforcomputingandstorage
tasks, which largely frees up network bandwidth and other resources occupied by cloud comput-
ing. In the meanwhile, since tasks are distributed on each edge node with limited resources, an
intelligentand efficientsolutionforresourcemanagement is crucialforEC.
2.3.3 Privacy and Security. EC also faces new challenges regarding data security and pri-
vacy [32]. Some of these challenges come from the inherent problems of cloud computing, and
otherscomefromthedistributedandheterogeneitynatureofECitself[ 33].Traditionalsolutions
for data security and privacy issues of cloud computing are not applicable to the non-centralized
computing model of EC. Therefore, further improving data security and further protecting data
privacyisa problemworthyofresearchers’attention.
2.4 Summary
Aiming at the problems described above, many studies based on traditional methods have made
good progress. In solving the problem of resource allocation and computing offloading in EC,
someresearchersadoptLyapunovoptimizationalgorithm[ 34]tofindtheoptimaldecision[ 35,36].
Some studies also regard resource allocation and computing offloading as optimization problems
such as linear programming [ 37] and mixed integer non-linear programming [ 38–40]. Other tra-
ditional methods include alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [41], Stack-
elberg game [ 42], and so on. In terms of security, Jing et al. [ 43] adopt a linear programming
method to reduce data loss. Kang et al. [ 44] use blockchain technology to protect the security of
data storage and sharing. In terms of privacy protection, traditional methods include differential
privacy[45],wavelet transform[ 46],and soon.
AlthoughtraditionalmethodsabovehaveachievedgoodresultsinoptimizingEC,theystillhave
someshortcomings.First,theunderlyingmodelneedstobeknown,whichisnotaneasytaskdue
to the complexity and dynamics of EC itself. Second, they are easy to converge to local optima,
and their efficiency is usually very low. Moreover, they lack the ability to perform deep and high-
dimensionaldatamining,automaticallyextractimportantfeaturestomakefastoptimaldecisions,
and make prediction. Note that these are all advantages of AI algorithms, and we will describe
howtheyoptimize ECin thenext section.
Insummary,thissectionmainlyfocusesontheconceptandmotivationofEC.Atthesametime,
theproblemsandchallengesfacedbythedevelopmentofECarealsodescribed.Itisworthnoting
thattraditionalmethodshaveachievedgoodresultsinsolvingtheseproblems,buttheystillsuffer
someshortcomings.In thefuture,AI algorithms might become more adaptableto new situations,
abletochangeinputs,outputs,andconstraintsmoreeasily,anddonotneedmathematicalmodels
whendataaresufficient[ 12].
3 WHEN EDGE COMPUTING MEETS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
In this section, we will first analyze the respective development of AI and EC and the motiva-
tion for the combination of the two, and then we will give an overview of related AI algorithms.
Finally,wewillsummarizeAI-basedalgorithmsfortopicssuchascomputingoffloadingoptimiza-
tion,non-computingoffloadingmethodstoreduceenergyconsumption,ECsecurity,dataprivacy,
andresourceallocationoptimization.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 9 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:9
Fig. 3. Mutually beneficial relationship between AI and EC. The right-to-left arrow indicates that the opti-
mization and development of EC require the assistance of AI algorithms (e.g., computation offloading opti-
mization).Theleft-to-rightarrowindicatesthatECneedstobedeployedclosertoterminaldevicestomeet
therequirements of somelatency-sensitiveAI applications (e.g., smart city).
3.1 Motivations of Combining Edge Computing and Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence is a very critical technology in the era of big data. It brings intelligence and
reasoning capabilities to a large number of terminal devices in IoT. At present, many studies and
applicationshavecombinedthetwohotareasofAIandEC,andtheirmotivationscanberoughly
divided intotwo aspects:
•Theoptimization anddeployment of ECrequirestheassistanceof AI algorithms;
•EC provides necessary computing functions for AI applications that need to be deployed
close toterminaldevicesfor low latencyand highnetworkstability[ 47].
ItcanbeseenthatthedevelopmentofAIandECismutuallybeneficial(seeFigure 3forastraight-
forward description), and the combined development of the two has attracted the attention of
many researchers.
3.1.1 Edge Computing Benefits Artificial Intelligence. In detail, EC brings benefits to the appli-
cation of AI. With the advent of the big data era, the widespread application of AI in people’s
daily lives has become an irresistible trend. Of course, this trend still faces challenges. For exam-
ple, AI’s reasoning and training requires strong computing power and sufficient energy support,
but terminal devices often do not meet these two requirements. In recent years, cloud computing
hasfulfilledtheseneedsbyoffloadingAImodeltrainingandreasoningtasksthatterminaldevices
cannot perform to the cloud server. However, relying solely on cloud computing will cause prob-
lemslikeinsufficientbandwidthandhighlatencywhenalargenumberofAImodelsareusedbya
largenumberofterminaldevices[ 48].WiththeadventofEC,AIcanbedeployednearterminalde-
vicesandusersontheedgeandterminalwithcertaincomputingresourcesandstorageresources,
thereforemeetingtheneedsfor low latencyand highnetworkstability[ 11].
Inreturn,ECalsobringsthreeideastotheapplicationofAIinotherfields(visuallyrepresented
by Figure 4).
(a) Massive data are preprocessed and then uploaded to the cloud for AI training and reason-
ing[49].Althoughthisideahasgreatlyreducedthepressureofmassivedataonbandwidth
and transmission costs, it does not meet the requirements of many applications in terms of
latency (e.g.,IoV andAR/VRapplications).
(b) To reduce the latency of applications, AI reasoning tasks are performed on the edge or the
end, whilemodeltrainingtasksarestillperformedinthecloud [ 50].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 10 ====
184:10 H.Huaetal.
Fig.4. HierarchicalmodesfordeployingAIinEC.Thefigureisdividedintothreepartsbytwoverticaldotted
lines,whichcorrespondtothreehierarchicalmodes.Neuralnetworksandcylindersrepresenttrainingtasks
andreasoningtasks,respectively.(a)Theleftmostpartdescribesthatbothtrainingandreasoningtasksare
deployedinthecloud.(b)Thebluepartinthemiddledescribesthatthetrainingtasksareperformedinthe
cloud, but the reasoning tasks are performed in both cloud and edge. The red part in the middle describes
that the training tasks are in the cloud, while the reasoning tasks are performed completely on the edge.
(c)Thebluepartintherightmostpartindicatesthatbothtrainingandreasoningtasksaredeployedinboth
cloudand edge. Theredpart describes thetrainingand reasoningtasksperformedonlyonthe edge.
(c) Delegate part or all of AI training and reasoning tasks to the edge [ 51]. With distributed
characteristics,thisideahelpsenhancethelocationawarenessofAImodelswhilereducing
thelatencyandbandwidthpressure[ 33].Notethattherequirementsforenergyconsumption
and computing power of edge devices will also increase as the number of tasks devolved to
theedgeside increases.
Ascanbeseenfromtheabove,thesethreeideashavetheirownadvantagesanddisadvantages,so
existingstudiesare more inclinedto choosethebestidea accordingtothespecificsituation.
3.1.2 ArtificialIntelligenceBenefitsEdgeComputing. AIisplayinganimportantroleintheopti-
mizationofEC[ 52].SinceECisdistributedandtheworkloadofeachedgedevicechangesdynam-
ically with time and location, this uncertainty and unpredictability have brought huge obstacles
to the application of EC. In this sense, EC still needs to be optimized and improved in many as-
pects, such as optimizing computing offloading, optimizing resource allocation, reducing latency
andenergy consumption,and improvinguserexperience.
Many optimization problems in EC are very complex non-convex problems. As the number of
devices and usersincreases,the scale of theseproblems willalso rapidly increase[ 53]. Compared
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 11 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:11
totraditionalmethods,MLismoresuitableforsolvingoptimizationproblemsofECandhasbetter
results[54].Inaddition,AIalgorithmsarealsogoodateffectivelymininghiddeninformationand
lawsfromdataincomplexandnoisyECenvironments,whichhasplaguedtraditionaloptimization
methodsfor along time.
3.2 Introduction of Artificial Intelligence Algorithms in Edge Computing
WearegoingtointroducetheseAIalgorithmsusedinEC,namely,traditionalMLalgorithms,DL,
RL and DRL algorithms. We will also provide some examples of application accordingly. In this
article,wemainlyfocusonthefieldofMLinAIalgorithm.Otheralgorithmssuchasevolutionary
algorithmare notthefocusofthisarticle,butarebrieflyintroducedin thissection.
3.2.1 Traditional Machine Learning. The traditional ML algorithms in this work particularly
refer to those ML algorithms other than DL and RL. Given the availability of label information,
the traditional ML algorithms can be divided into supervised learning, semi-supervised learn-
ing, and unsupervised learning. Among them, supervised learning requires labeled data to train
the model, while unsupervised learning can autonomously discover the principles implicit in the
data.Asahybridofsupervisedlearningandunsupervisedlearning,semi-supervisedlearninghas
access to both labeled data and unlabeled data. For example, the common supervised learning
methods include support vector machines (SVM) , boosting, and random forests; the common
semi-supervised learning methods include label propagation and graphical models; the common
unsupervisedlearningmethodsincludeclusteringalgorithmssuchasK-meansanddimensionre-
ductionalgorithms suchas principal componentanalysis(PCA) .
There are some obvious shortcomings of traditional ML algorithms. For instance, they are sen-
sitivetodatasets,thedatabecomelesseffectivewhenthedatasetislargeenough,andtheyneed
complicatedartificialfeatureengineering.Inspiteoftheseshortcomings,traditionalMLhassmall
energy consumption, small computing power cost, and is easy to deploy compared to DL and
RL. Due to the distributed nature of EC, the appropriate AI algorithm can be reasonably selected
according to the resource situation and task requirements of each edge and terminal device, so
traditionalMLcan alsorely on theseadvantagesto find itsplacein EC[ 55].
3.2.2 Deep Learning. DL resembles the functions of human brains. It has the ability to au-
tonomously learn high-level features from raw data, thereby efficiently performing classification
and prediction tasks [ 56,57]. DL is usually deployed in a multi-layer structure. These layers can
befullyconnectedlayers,convolutionallayers,poolinglayers,normalizationlayers,oractivation
layers. A DL algorithm can be formed by the free combination of these layers. The more layers
thealgorithmincludes,the“deeper”itis.Theinputofaneuronineachlayeristheweightedsum
of the outputs of the neurons in the previous layer. After the input is activated by an activation
function, the obtained number is used as the output of the neuron [ 58]. Compared to traditional
ML algorithms, DL has a more powerful ability to extract high-level features from massive data
due toitsmultilayer structure[ 59].
The common DL models include: deep neural networks (DNN) ,convolutional neural net-
works(CNN) ,recurrent neural networks(RNN) ,andso on.
•DNN,alsoknownas multiplelinearperceptrons(MLP) ,isaneuralnetworkwithmulti-
ple hidden layers. The neural network layer in DNN can be divided into three types: input
layer, hidden layer and output layer. By adding hidden layers, DNN model can obtain more
powerfullearningability.
•CNN is composed of a series of different convolution layers. High-level features hidden in
the input data can be extracted through the convolution operation in these convolution
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 12 ====
184:12 H.Huaetal.
layers [60]. CNN has powerful representation abilities and picture recognition capabilities.
Based on this, some studies have adopted CNN algorithms in the fields of fault detection
andvideosurveillanceinEC.Forexample,Zhangetal.[ 61]detectsmicroseismiceventsby
deployingCNNmodels on edgedevices.
•RNNisaDNNalgorithmthatisgoodatmodelingandprocessingsequencedata.However,a
majordisadvantageofRNNisthatitiseasytoforget.Thatis,theimpactoftheinputofthe
startingmomentonthelatermomentswillbecomesmallerandsmallerwithtime.Therefore,
an improved version of RNN named long short-term memory (LSTM) [62]i sp r o p o s e d .
Atpresent,somestudies[ 63–65]haveadoptedtheLSTMalgorithmtosolvetheissuesfaced
byEC.
When a large number of labeled data are available, compared with traditional ML algorithms,
DL performs better in natural language processing, computer vision and many other fields [ 57].
ThecharacteristicsofECmakethedatacollectedfromthephysicalenvironmentcanbeprocessed
locally, which meets the requirements of DL. Therefore, some EC studies also focus on using DL
in EC anomaly detection [ 66], task scheduling and resource allocation in EC [ 67], and privacy
protection[ 68].
3.2.3 Reinforcement Learning and Deep Reinforcement Learning. Unlike supervised learning
and unsupervised learning that rely on static data, RL is a learning algorithm that trains mod-
els through dynamic interaction with the environment. The core idea is that agents receive the
stateofenvironmentandmakeactionstomaximizetherewardaccordingtohistoricalexperience.
Becausereinforcementlearningisgoodatsolvingdecision-makingproblems,somestudies[ 69,70]
have adopted RL algorithm in the decision-making of EC resource management, allocation, and
scheduling.
Typical algorithms in RL are model-free and value-based Q-learning algorithm [ 71]. Each iter-
ation of Q-learning algorithm will calculate an expected cumulative reward, called the Q-value,
accordingtocurrentstateandgivenaction.However,astheenvironmentbecomesmorecomplex,
the state space and action space will expand exponentially, thus reducing the convergence speed
andtakingupa lotof memory [ 72].
To solve this problem, deep Q network (DQN) [73]i sp r o p o s e d ,w h i c hu t i l i z e saD N Nt oa p -
proximate the Q-values. Compared with the classical RL algorithms, DQN has three advantages
in dealing with EC with high complexity [ 74]. First, it is able to deal with high dimensional and
complex systems. Second, it can learn the regularity of system environment. Last but not least, it
is able to make optimal decisions based on current and past long-term reward. Therefore, some
studies[75,76]useDQNalgorithmstooptimizethecontroldecision-makingproblemsinECand
obtaingoodresults.
However, DQN also has its shortcomings. Especially, when using nonlinear functions such as
neural network to approximate the Q-function, the learning result of DRL is unstable or even
divergent. To solve this problem, an experience replay mechanism using the prior experience is
integratedintoDQN [ 77,78].
3.2.4 FederatedLearning. Federatedlearning(FL) isadistributedMLframework,whichcan
effectively help multiple organizations train models under the requirements of user privacy pro-
tection,datasecurity,andgovernmentregulations[ 79].Inthisframework,differentlocalusersdo
notneedtoputalltherawdataonthecentralserverfortraining,buttrainthelocalmodelthrough
privacy related data, then all the local models are aggregated into a global model on the central
server[80].
As discussed above, the goal of EC is to deploy computing tasks at the edge of the network
near the client. However, the data of a single edge node may not meet the requirements of model
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 13 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:13
training. Therefore, the cooperation model training between different nodes under data privacy
protectionis aresearchhotspot;see,e.g.,Reference[ 81].
3.2.5 Evolutionary Algorithms. Evolutionary algorithms are a kind of optimization methods
inspiredbybiologicalevolutionmechanismandbiologicalbehavior[ 82].Evolutionaryalgorithms
includeparticleswarmoptimization(PSO) ,geneticalgorithm(GA) ,differentialevolution
(DE),and soon.
Generallyspeaking,evolutionaryalgorithmsaredividedintothefollowingsteps.Thefirststep
is to initialize variables. After that, the evolutionary algorithms continuously iterate three steps
named fitness evaluation and selection, population reproduction and variation, and population
updating[ 82].Finally,thesecondstepisiterateduntiltheterminationconditionis satisfied.
Atpresent,evolutionaryalgorithmhasbeenappliedinmanyproblemsofEC,suchasresource
scheduling optimization [ 83], load balancing [ 84], and task scheduling [ 85]. In this article, we
mainlydiscussML,arecentlypopularAIsubclass,soevolutionaryalgorithmisonlybrieflyintro-
ducedhere.
3.3 Artificial Intelligence Solutions for Optimizing Edge Computing
Now,wearegoingtoprovideacomprehensivesummaryofstudies(listedinTable 1)thatusesAI
methods to optimize EC in different scenarios including computing offloading, reducing energy
consumption,increasingthesecurityof EC,keepingdata privacy,and resourceallocation.
3.3.1 Computing Offloading Optimization. At present, more and more studies have begun to
makefulluseofAItosolvecomputingoffloading[ 86].WewillsummarizetheAI-basedcomputing
offloadingschemesinexistingresearchtoreduceenergyconsumption,reducelatency,andreduce
both.
Reducing energy consumption. In terms of reducing energy consumption, a partial computing
offloading scheme based on DL decision-making is proposed by Ali et al. [ 31]. The authors estab-
lish a new typeof decision-makingprocess,whichcan intelligently selectthe optimalcomputing
offloadingstrategy,thusreducingthetotalenergyconsumedintheexecutionofcomputingtasks.
ComparedwithitspreviousworkinReference[ 87],thisstrategyadditionallyconsiderstheenergy
consumptionofuserequipmentinthecostfunction,whichreducesitsenergyconsumptionby3%.
Reducing latency. Although EC itself has the advantage of low latency compared to cloud com-
puting, it still has room for optimization. Smart-Edge-CoCaCo [ 88] is proposed to minimize the
latency by jointly optimizing the wireless communication model, the collaborative filter caching
model, and the computing offloading model. In addition, since the computing power of edge de-
vices is limited, offloading all tasks to edge devices may exceed the capacity of the edge device.
Withthisinmind,Xuetal.[ 89]proposeaDL-basedheuristicoffloadingmethod.Thismethoduses
origin-destinationelectroniccommunicationsnetworkdistanceestimationandheuristicsearching
to findtheoptimalcomputingoffloading strategy.
Reducing both energy consumption and latency. All the methods mentioned in previous para-
graphseitheronlyminimizeenergyconsumption,oronlyminimizelatency.Therearealsostudies
that consider the minimization of both through RL. Kiran et al. [ 54] propose a scheme that uses
Q-learning to make optimal control decisions to reduce the delay in EC and adds constraints to
thecostfunctiontoreduceenergyconsumptioninEC.Althoughthisschemehasagoodeffecton
reducingenergyconsumptionanddelay,itdoesnottakeintoaccountthecurse-of-dimensionality
problemofEC.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 14 ====
184:14 H.Huaetal.
Table 1. Summaryof Research on AI-optimized EC
Problem Goal Citation AI Contribution
Reduceenergy
consumption[98] Distributed DL-based
offloadingalgorithmAddthe costof changinglocal
executiontasks in thecost
function
Reduce
latency[88] Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
algorithm based on
DLJoint optimization ofwireless
communication,collaborative
filtercachingand computing
offloading
[89] A heuristic offloading
methodOrigin-destination electronic
communicationnetwork
distanceestimationandheuristic
searching to findoptimal
strategy forshorting the
transmission delay ofDL tasks
[54]C o o p e r a t i v e
Q-learningImprovethe search speed of
traditional Q-learning
[90] TD learning with
postdecision state and
semi-gradient descent
methodApproximate dynamic
programming to copewith
curse-of-dimensionality
[91] OnlineRL Special structureof thestate
transitions toovercome
curse-of-dimensionality;
additionally considerthe EC
scenario withenergy harvesting
Computing
offloading
optimizationReduceboth
energy
consumption
andlatency[93] DRL-basedoffloading
schemeNoprior knowledgeof
transmission delay and energy
consumptionmodel; compress
thestate space dimension
throughDRL tofurther improve
thelearning rate; additionally
considerthe ECscenario with
energyharvesting
[94] DRL-based computing
offloading approachMarkov decisionprocess to
represent computing offloading;
learnnetwork dynamics through
DRL
[95] Q-function
decomposition
techniquecombined
with doubleDQNDoubledeep Q-networkto
obtainoptimal computing
offloadingwithoutprior
knowledge;anew function
approximator-based DNN model
to deal with high dimensional
state spaces
[10] RL based on neural
networkarchitecturesAninfinite-horizon
average-rewardcontinuous-time
Markov decisionprocess to
represent the optimal problem;a
newvaluefunction
approximator to deal with high
dimensional state spaces
(Continued)
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 15 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:15
Table 1. Continued
Problem Goal Citation AI Contribution
Optimizethe
hardware
structure of
edgedevices[102] Binary-weight CNN A staticrandomaccessmemory
for binary-weight CNN to
reduce memorydata
throughput; parallelexecution
ofCNN
[104] DNNs FPGA-based binarizedDNN
acceleratorforweed species
classification
Otherwaysto
reduce energy
consumptionControl
device
operating
status[105] DRL-based joint
modeselectionand
resource
management
approachReduce themedium-and
long-termenergy consumption
bycontrollingthe
communicationmodeofthe
user equipmentandthe
light-onstate oftheprocessors
Combine
withenergy
Internet[106] Model-basedDRL Solve theenergy supply
problemofthemulti-access
edgeserver
[70] RL A fog-computingnodepowered
by a renewableenergy
generator
[113] Minimax-Qlearning Graduallylearntheoptimal
strategy by increasing the
spectral efficiencythroughput
[114] Onlinelearning Reduced bandwidthusage by
choosingthemostreliable
server
[115] MultipleAI
algorithmsAlgorithmselection mechanism
capableofintelligently
selectingoptimalAIalgorithm
Security of
edge
computing[117] Hypergraph
clusteringImprovethe recognition rateby
modelingtherelationship
be t w ee nedg en ode san dD D oS
through hypergraph clustering
[112] ExtremeLearning
MachineShowfaster convergence speed
andstronger generalization
performance ofthe Extreme
Learning Machineclassifier
thanmostclassicalalgorithms
[56] Distributed DL Reduce theburden ofmodel
trainingandimprovethe
accuracyofthe model
[120] DL, restricted
BoltzmannmachinesGive activelearningcapabilities
toimprove unknownattack
recognition
(Continued)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 16 ====
184:16 H.Huaetal.
Table 1. Continued
Problem Goal Citation AI Contribution
[122] Deep PDS-Learning Speed up thetraining with
additionalinformation(e.g., the
energy utilizationofedge
devices)
Privacy
protection[124] Generative
adversarial networksAnobjective perturbation
algorithmandanoutput
perturbationalgorithmthat
satisfy differential privacy
[125] Adeep inference
frameworkcalled
EdgeSanitizerDatacan beused tothe
maximumextent,while
ensuring privacyprotection
[77] Deep Q-learning Derive trust valuesusing
uncertainreasoning;avoidlocal
convergence by adjusting the
learningrate
Resource
allocation
optimization[166] Actor-criticRL AnadditionalDNNtorepresent
aparameterizedstochastic
policytofurtherimprove
performanceandconvergence
speed; a naturalpolicygradient
methodtoavoid local
convergence
[76] DRL-basedresource
allocationschemeAdditionalSDNtoimproveQoS
[127] Multi-taskDRL Transform thelastlayerof
DNNthatestimatesQ-function
tosupporthigherdimensional
actionspaces
The curse-of-dimensionality refers to the problem that the complexity of the problem solving
will increase at an exponential speed as the dimensionality increases [ 90,91]. To solve the curse-
of-dimensionality problem, Xu et al. [ 91] propose an algorithm that uses the special structure of
statetransitionsoftheconsideredECsystemtoovercomethecurse-of-dimensionalityproblem.It
is worth noting that the authors use energy harvesting [ 92] to reduce the consumption of tradi-
tionalenergybyfullyutilizingrenewableenergy,butthetransmissiondelaymodelandtheenergy
consumptionmodelarerequiredtobeknown(thisrequirementcanbeeliminatedbythemethod
proposedin Reference[ 93]).
Compared with RL algorithms, DRL algorithms have stronger abilities to deal with high-
dimensional state space. Therefore, Cheng et al. [ 94] propose a model-free DRL-based comput-
ing offloading method based on a space-air-ground integrated network to reduce EC latency and
energy consumption. This method uses Markov decision process to represent the computing of-
floadingdecisionprocess,andusesDRLto learnnetworkdynamics.
YettheabilityofDRLalgorithmstocopewithhigh-dimensionalstatespaceisnotperfectinev-
eryrespect.Chenetal.[ 95]proposeanewDNNmodelbasedonfunctionapproximator,andthey
alsoadoptdoubledeepQ-networksothattheoptimaloffloadingstrategycanbediscoveredwith-
out prior knowledge. Similarly, Lei et al. [ 10] propose a new type of value function approximator
to deal with high-dimensional state equations. The authors also use an infinite-horizon average-
reward continuous-time Markov decision process to represent the optimal problem. Finally, DRL
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 17 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:17
is applied to solve the optimal computing offloading decision to reduce the energy consumption
and latencyof EC.
TheDRL-basedmethodsmentionedaboveuseacentralizedstyleformodellearning.However,
there is a potential assumption in this style that edge devices in EC have sufficient computing
power. In fact, many edge devices do not yet have such powerful computing capabilities. As a
result,Renetal.proposeadistributedcomputingoffloadingstrategycombiningfederatedlearning
andmultipleDRLs[ 96].Itisprovedbyexperimentsthatthismethodoutperformsthecentralized
learning method in reducing the transmission cost in EC. In addition, distributed learning also
has the advantage of fast convergence [ 97]. This is proved in Reference [ 98] by the method of
optimizing computingoffloadingthroughdistributedML.
3.3.2 Non-computation Offloading Methods to Reduce Energy Consumption. EC provides cer-
tain computing capabilities near the data source, so that many computing tasks do not need to
be delivered to the cloud for execution. While this model brings high response speed to people,
it will inevitably cause a surge in energy consumption on the edge side. Moreover, many applica-
tionsinECrequireAIalgorithmstomakereal-timedecisions(suchasintelligentdriving[ 99]and
intelligentmonitoringsystems[ 100]),butAIalgorithmsarecomputationallyintensivetovarying
degrees. This is a huge challenge for devices with limited power. From the perspective of overall
energy consumption, with the gradual popularization and widespread application of AI, how to
controlglobaloverallenergy consumptionor improve energyefficiencyisalso veryimportant.
Apart from computation offloading, there are many other factors that affect the energy con-
sumption of edge devices. For example, different AI algorithms and different hardware structures
adoptedbyedgedeviceswillalsoaffectenergyconsumption[ 101].WewillintroduceAIsolutions
toreduceECenergyconsumptionintermsofoptimizinghardwarestructure,controllingoperating
status,and combiningenergy Internet.
Optimizing hardware structure. Astatic random access memory (SRAM) [102] is able to re-
duce memory data throughput, and it combines parallel CNNs to enable simultaneous access to
different memory blocks. Experiments show that this architecture significantly reduces energy
consumption compared to traditional digital accelerator using small bitwidths. Based on field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) [103], Lammie et al. [ 104] design a binarized DNN accelera-
tor for weed species classification, which reduces energy consumption by 7 times compared with
GPU-basedacceleratorunderthesameconditions.Theauthorsbelievethatwell-cultivatedFPGA-
based accelerator for AI algorithms is an ideal choice for edge devices with limited resources but
needto performlearningandreasoningtasks.
Controlling operating status. Sun et al. propose a method based on DRL to reduce the medium
andlong-termenergyconsumptionofECbycontrollingthecommunicationmodesofuserdevices
and the light-on state of processors [ 105]. This method uses Markov process to model the energy
consumptionofcachestatesandcloudprocessorsandDRLtomakedecisions.Accordingtosome
constraints(qualityofserviceconstraints,transmissionpowerconstraints,andthecomputingca-
pabilityconstraintinthecloud),themethodusesaniterativealgorithmtooptimizetheprecoding
of userdevices.
Combining Energy Internet. EC has distributed characteristics, and the workload of edge-side
deviceswilldynamicallychangewithdifferentgeographicallocationsandtimes,whichmakesthe
energy consumption of each edge node unpredictable and uneven. To deal with the huge energy
demand of EC and its heterogeneity, the combination of energy Internet (including smart grid
and microgrid) with EC can provide renewable energy for EC [ 70,106]. Energy Internet is a dis-
tributed energy production model that achieves local energy self-sufficiency by making full use
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 18 ====
184:18 H.Huaetal.
ofrenewableenergysources[ 107,108].ThisfeatureofenergyInternetisverysuitableforprovid-
ing energy to EC, thereby reducing the consumption of non-renewable energy. Since renewable
energyisinfinite,reducingnon-renewableenergyconsumptionisalsoequivalenttoreducingen-
ergy consumption. However, due to the uncertainty of renewable energy production [ 109], some
studies[70,106]alsoaimtobalancetheenergysupplyanddemandofECthroughDRL-basedcon-
trolstrategies.WiththedeploymentofECdevicesintoenergyInternet,energymanagementwill
alsobecomemorecomplex[ 110].DRLcombinedwithcurriculumlearning[ 111]hasbeenusedto
realizea bottom-upenergy management scheme[ 110].
3.3.3 Security of Edge Computing. Delegating computing and storage tasks from the cloud to
the edge can reduce the security problems caused by network congestion and centralization to
someextent.However,thedistributedenvironmentofECalsobringsnewsecurityproblems,such
asdistributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks and jamming attacks that cause illegal distri-
bution of distributed system resources [ 33,112]. What was previously applicable to a centralized
environment (like cloud computing) is no longer applicable to solving these new security issues.
Inthispart,we willreview thestudieson improvingthesecurityof EC basedon AI algorithms.
Traditionalmachinelearningmethods. TraditionalMLcanhelpwiththeidentificationandclas-
sification of different attacks. In response to jamming attacks that threaten EC security, Wang
et al. [113] propose a stochastic game framework that maximizes the spectral efficiency through-
put by minimax-Q learning, thereby gradually learning the optimal strategy. The disadvantage
of this method is that it needs extra bandwidth to avoid jamming attacks. This can be avoided
by selecting the most reliable server based on online learning to reduce the security risks caused
by jamming attacks [ 114]. To reduce the false alarm rate and data transmission delay of tradi-
tionalintrusiondetectionsystems,analgorithmselectionmechanismcanbedeployedontheedge
side [115]. This enables intelligent selection of the optimal ML algorithm for edge devices to dis-
tinguish false alarms. The experimental results prove that the method based on AI algorithm can
improve thesecurityof ECmore effectivelythanthemethodbasedon non-AIalgorithm.
Amongvariousnetworkattacks,DDoSisarelativelycommonattackmethod.Hypergraphclus-
tering [116] can be adopted to model the relationship between edge nodes and DDoS to improve
the recognition rate [ 117]. Kozik et al. uses a single-layer neural network to build the extreme
learningmachineclassifier[ 112].Inthismethod,thetrainingtaskoftheattackdetectionclassifier
modelisperformedinthecloudwithpowerfulcomputingresources.Thetrainedclassifiermodel
isthenoffloadedtotheedgedevicesforattackdetection.Inaddition,experimentshavealsoproven
that the extreme learning machine classifier has faster convergence speed and stronger general-
ization performance than most traditional classification algorithms (such as SVM, or single-layer
perceptron).
DL methods. Although traditional ML algorithms can improve the accuracy and robustness
of network attack detection and recognition, they lack the ability of automatic feature extrac-
tion [118]. As a result, traditional AI algorithms are not sensitive to known but slightly changed
attacks. At the same time, due to the lack of prior knowledge of unknown vulnerabilities, they
can not effectively detect zero-day attacks [ 119]. Deep learning, however, has been successfully
applied in image processing, computer vision and many other fields in recent years because of
its structure that can automatically mine and learn the hidden features in massive data [ 63]. Re-
searchers begin to focus on DL, since the problem of cyber-security attack identification in EC is
similarto thetasksin thesefields.
Abeshu et al. [ 56] propose a DL-based method for attack detection in EC. To reduce the bur-
den of model training and improve the accuracy of the model, this method uses a pretrained
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 19 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:19
stackedautoencodertoscreentherealvaluablefeaturesandthenusessoftmaxtodoclassification.
This method shows great advantages in the aspects of availability, scalability and effectiveness
compared with traditional ML algorithms. However, the authors fail to take into account the im-
provementofthedetectionrateofnewattacks.Thiscanbesolvedbyunsupervisedlearning.The
DL-based algorithm proposed in Reference [ 120] learns the characteristics of the attack through
the deep belief network and uses the softmax function to identify various attacks on the EC. The
differenceisthatthissolutionincorporatesunsupervisedlearningrestrictedBoltzmannmachines
intotheproposedmodel.SinceunsupervisedlearningrestrictedBoltzmannmachinesisastochas-
ticartificialneuralnetworkwithactivelearningcharacteristics,thismodelenablesactivelearning
to improve therecognitionrateofattacksthathaveneveroccurredbefore.
3.3.4 DataPrivacy. Toacertainextent,ECreducestheriskofprivacyleakagecausedbyupload-
ingdatatocloudserversthatuserscannotcontrol.However,theproblemofdataprivacyleakage
alsoexistsontheedgeside.Ontheonehand,thedistributednatureofECbringsnewchallengesto
privacyprotection.Ontheotherhand,theapplicationofAIontheedgesiderequiresmassivedata
formodeltrainingandreasoning,whichareinevitablymixedwithalargeamountofuserprivacy.
During the training process, some models may save part of the training set with private data, so
an attacker can illegally obtain users’ privacy by analyzing these models [ 121]. Consequently, it
isveryimportanttoensurethedataprivacyandsecurityofedge-sideuserswithoutaffectingthe
performanceofEC.Thistopichasattractedtheattentionofmany researchersin recentyears.
Post-decisionstatelearning. Apost-decisionstate(PDS) learningmethodisproposedinRefer-
ence[122],inwhichthestatetransitionfunctionisfactoredintoknownandunknowncomponents.
This method first uses the Markov decision process to describe EC’s offloading problem and then
solves the problem by combining PDS-learning technique with the traditional deep Q-network
algorithm. This combination can well balance task scheduling and privacy protection. It is worth
noting that compared with the traditional deep Q-network, the new algorithm can speed up the
model training by learning some additional information (such as the energy utilization of edge
devices).
Federatedlearning. Aprivacy-preservingasynchronousFLmechanism(PAFLM) forECis
proposed, which allows multiple edge nodes to realize more efficient FL without sharing private
dataandaffectinginferenceaccuracy[ 81].Becausethelocalmodeltrainingofeachnodedepends
onthedatainsidethenodetoalargeextent,itiseasiertoleadtolocaloptimum.ThroughFL,the
local model can be optimized with the help of the model parameters of other nodes, which can
solve localoptimumproblemandimprove theaccuracyofmodel.
Differentialprivacy. ToprotecttheuserprivacyinthetrainingdatasetunderEC,AIalgorithms
are usually combined with differential privacy, a system where including or excluding any piece
of data will not change the results of related data analysis to a great extent [ 123]. In other words,
by applying differential privacy, observers cannot tell from its output if any particular piece of
information has been used [ 123]. Du et al. [ 124] propose two AI-based algorithms that satisfy
differential privacy: objective perturbation algorithm and output perturbation algorithm. The dif-
ference between the two is that objective perturbation adds Laplace noise to objective functions,
while output perturbation adds the noise to outputs. By injecting Laplace noise, ML algorithms
show better efficiency and accuracy in prediction, and they are more effective in protecting the
privacy of training data used in EC. Similarly, a deep reasoning framework based on differential
privacy,calledEdgeSanitizer,isproposedinReference[ 125].Theframeworkusesasmuchuseful
informationaspossiblewithaDL-baseddataminimizationmethod.Thenitremovesasmuchsen-
sitive private information as possible from data sets by adding random noise to the original data
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 20 ====
184:20 H.Huaetal.
through a local differential privacy method [ 126]. This approach ensures that the data is used to
themaximum extentwhile protectingtheprivacyin EC.
3.3.5 Resource Allocation Optimization. DRL has been proven to be capable of handling dy-
namic decision problems with high-dimensional states and action spaces [ 127]. At present, some
studieshave focusedon DRLtosolve theresourceallocationprobleminEC.
The method in Reference [ 77] captures the fact that the EC environment state is constantly
changing. The information about wireless channel conditions, each node’s trust value, the con-
tents in the cache, and the vacant computational capacity is passed to the DNN to estimate the
Q-function. The network operator’s revenue is regarded as the reward, and the agent trains the
DNN through the obtained reward. It avoids local convergence by adjusting the learning rate. Al-
though this method has a good effect, there is still room for improvement in convergence and
performance.
Although the study above proves that DQN has a good performance in optimizing dynamic
decisionproblemswithhigh-dimensionalstatespace,therearestillsomelimitationswhensolving
problemsbasedonhigh-dimensionalactionspace.Therefore,Chenetal.[ 127]proposeanewDRL-
basedresourceallocationdecisionframeworkthatmakesthefollowing two contributions:
•The framework uses DNN to train with a self-supervised training process to predict the
resourceallocationaction,withthetrainingdatageneratedbythe MonteCarlotreesearch
(MCTS)[128] algorithm;
•The authors modify the last layer of the traditional DNN used to estimate Q-function, so
thatit cansupporthigher-dimensionalactionspace.
The experiment proves that compared with the method of directly using DQN, this method has
reducedthedelay by 51.71%.
3.4 Summary
In this section, we first explain the mutual benefit between AI and EC. Then, we introduce AI
algorithms(especiallytraditionalML,DL,RL,andDRL)indetail.Finally,fromtheperspectivesof
taskscheduling,resourceallocation,privacyprotectionandsecurity,theresearchresultsofusing
AIalgorithmstooptimizetheperformanceofECarereviewed.Inthefuture,consideringthatthe
EC is faced with large-scale computing tasks, it would be very important to combine the multi-
dimensional perspectives of network, computing, power allocation, and task scheduling for real-
timejointoptimization.Todealwiththesecomplexoptimizationproblems,itisapotentialresearch
directionthatusesthemodel-free methodofAI algorithms tolearn efficientstrategies[ 11].
4 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE UNDER EDGE COMPUTING
Inrecentyears,AIhasmademanyachievementsinvariousfields.Amongthem,smartcity,smart
manufacturing, and the IoV usually have more critical requirements for network delay and sta-
bility than other scenarios such as AR/VR, online gaming, or content distribution. Unfortunately,
traditional cloud computing often fails to guarantee these requirements. Some researchers have
started using EC to provide computing and storage resources on edge. To emphasize the advan-
tages of EC in AI applications, this section will focus on summarizing the research results of AI
applicationsinsmart city,smart manufacturing,andtheIoV undertheECframework.
This section summarize the existing research from the perspective of EC hierarchical architec-
ture. The categorization of EC architecture, together with the corresponding target field and AI
(ML)algorithm, aredetailedin Table 2.
In this article, different EC architectures used in AI applications are summarized into three
categories with detailed explanation and analysis. The three modes are: (a) the edge side is only
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 21 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:21
Table 2. Summaryof AIAlgorithmsand Architectures
Field Goal DL DRL RLTraditional
MLEC Architecture Citation
√(c) [ 131]
Security ofcity√(c) [ 100]√(c) [ 132]√(b) [ 133]
Smart cityUrban healthcare√(b) [ 135]√(c) [ 51]√(a) [ 49]
Urban energy
management√(a) [ 138]√(b)&(c) [ 140]
√√(a) [ 143]
Smart
manufacturing√(b) [ 50]√(a) [ 65]√(b) [ 145]√(b) [ 61]
√(c) [ 149]
Internet of Vehicles√(c) [ 152]√(c) [ 53]√√(b) [ 153]√(b) [ 157]
The ECarchitectures aredefinedin Section 4,which canbedivided into thefollowingthree categories. (a)Theedge
side is onlyresponsible fordatacleaning,andthecloud is responsiblefor trainingandreasoning. (b)The cloud is
responsible fortraining,whilethe edgeside isresponsible for inference.(c)Delegatepartor allof AItraining and
reasoning tasks to theedge(see Section 3.3.1andFigure 4for details).
responsiblefordatacleaning,andthecloudisresponsiblefortrainingandreasoning;(b)thecloud
is responsible for training, while the edge side is responsible for inference; (c) part or all of AI
training and reasoning tasks are delegated to the edge (see Section 3.3.1and Figure 4for details).
This section will accordingly summarize the research works (listed in Table 2) of AI application
in many fields under above different EC hierarchical modes to emphasize the advantages of EC
inAIapplication.Table 2classifiesandsummarizesthemfromtheperspectiveofarchitecture,AI
algorithm, andtarget field.
4.1 Smart City
Withtheexplosivegrowthofurbanpopulationandthetrendofurbanization,theconceptofsmart
cityhasbeenproposedandattractedwidespreadattention.Smartcityusessmartmeanstoreduce
energy consumption in cities, enhance energy efficiency, ease traffic pressure [ 129], ensure the
safetyofcitiesandresidents,andimprovethequalityoflifeofresidents.Inthesmartcityenviron-
ment,therearealargenumberofhardwaredevicesthatgeneratedataallthetime.Thesedevices
includelightsmartdevicesfordailylife(suchassmartphones,smartbracelets,andportablemedi-
caldevices),aswellassurveillancecamerasandvariousenvironmentaldetectionsensorsforurban
security. AI is a good choice for smart city to improve the accuracy and efficacy of data analysis
becauseof itsproficiencyin dealingwithmassivedata [ 130].
Inapopulation-andequipment-intensivearealikeacity,smartcityhasstricterrequirementson
real-timeresponseandnetworkstabilitytoensurethecomfortandsecurityofcivillifeinthecity.
However,theintensivecomputingtasksofAItrainingandreasoningposeagreatchallengetothe
above requirements. To meet this challenge, some researchers have turned their attention to EC.
WewillsubsequentlydescribeindetailtheschemesofusingAIalgorithmsunderECarchitecture
to dealwiththeproblemsin smart cityscenarios.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 22 ====
184:22 H.Huaetal.
4.1.1 SecurityofCity. Smartcitiesneedtocontinuouslymonitortheinfrastructureandopera-
tionofthecity,andtheyneedtomakequickjudgmentsandrespondquicklytosecurityincidents.
IntegratingAIalgorithmscanimprovetheaccuracyofsecurityeventidentification.However,the
network bandwidth is limited, and excessive data transmission will cause instability in network
transmission. How to deal with massive data is therefore a very difficult problem for real-time
monitoring systems. EC performs most of the data processing and analysis tasks on the edge and
transmitsonlypartofthedatatothecloud.Thiscangreatlyreducethenetworktransmissionpres-
surecausedby massivemonitoringdata whileimprovingtheresponsespeedof theapplication.
Toensurethesafetyofurbanresidentsinpublicplacesorprivateplaces,aseriesofmonitoring
systems(e.g.,trafficmonitoring,indoorandoutdoormonitoring,facilitymonitoring,violenceand
crime detection) need to be widely deployed to analyze and tackle the surrounding environment
in real time. In urban monitoring, for instance, person re-identification is an important part to
ensure the safety of residents. A new Siamese network architecture for person re-identification
is proposed in Reference [ 131]. This architecture speeds up the retrieval of pedestrians by intro-
ducingEC.Consideringthattraditionalmethodsmaylearnpoorlyandinefficientlyduetothelow
resolutionofimages,togetherwiththelimitedcomputingpowerontheedgeside,thearchitecture
introduces a residual model layer that can mine deep features and reduce the complexity of the
global average poolinglayer.
UtilizingthedistributedcharacteristicsofECandthegeo-distributioncharacteristicsofmonitor-
ingdata,itisagoodideatoapplydifferentAIalgorithmstoECinadistributedway.Amonitoring
systembasedondistributeddeeplearningmodelismentionedinReference[ 100].Byintroducing
EC,thesystemreducesthecostofcommunicationandimprovesresponsespeed.Thisarticleuses
thedistributedcharacteristicsoftheedgesidetodeployadistributedDLtrainingmethodbasedon
task-levelandmodel-levelparalleltraining.Thegoalistospeedupthetrainingofthesub-modelby
takingadvantageofdifferentlearningmodelswhilealsousingthecomputingpowerofedgenodes.
Incontrast,Tangetal.[ 132]adopttheideaofconfiguringdifferentAIalgorithmsintheedgeand
the cloud. The proposed general-purpose EC architecture for urban pipeline monitoring systems
takes advantage of the low latency of edge nodes so that pipeline faults can be discovered in
time,andresponsedecisionscanbemadequickly.Thearchitectureconsistsoffourlayers,andthe
architecture deploys different AI algorithms and control strategies in different layers to achieve
lowlatency,lowenergyconsumption,andhighaccuracyforsmartpipelinemonitoringtoensure
thesafetyof pipelinesincities.
Challenges. Intheprocessofprotectingurbansecurity,dataprivacyandsecurityarealsocrucial.
AIisaneffectivemethodofidentifyingmaliciousattacksandpreventingprivacyleakage,butthe
computing resources of edge devices are limited. Therefore, it is still a major challenge to design
lightweightand effectiveAI algorithmssuitablefor EC[ 131].
4.1.2 Urban Healthcare. With the popularity of IoT and cloud computing, more and more
personal medical devices are being used in daily life. These devices can collect users’ physical
data and upload the data to a cloud server. Through AI analysis, these data can greatly improve
the accuracy of medical systems for disease classification and diagnosis. However, this model of
cloud computing cannot really meet the requirements of telemedicine for time delay and data
transmission.
Compared with traditional cloud computing, the application of EC meets the requirements of
medical system for stable data transmission, transmission delay, and data security. In some emer-
gencysituations,forexample,justtheoccurrenceoferrorssuchaslongresponsetimeordataloss
may directly threaten human life. Besides, EC has strong location awareness characteristics [ 33].
ThehigherprocessingspeedofECbecomesacriticalfactorforlocation-sensitivemedicalsystems.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 23 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:23
Next, we will summarize existing urban medical and residents’ health works that use EC to
improve AI algorithms in terms of remote diagnosis and early warning of diseases, infectious
diseasepreventionand control,andsmart assessment.
Remotediagnosisandearlywarning. Muhammadetal.[ 133]proposeavoicedisorderassessment
and treatment system. The sound data collected by the system is pre-processed by edge devices
before being uploaded to the cloud. The system configures the CNN model to the edge server, so
thattheedgesidehasthecapabilityofvoicedisorderdetectionandclassification.Comparedwith
the method without EC architecture in Reference [ 134], this method has lower latency and can
effectively reduce the pressure on network bandwidth. However, this system still needs to send
thediagnosis toa humanexpert,andthehuman expertdecidesthetreatmentplan.
Forsomediseasesthatarenoteasytodetectatanearlystageandthosethatcanbebesttreated
in the early stages of the disease (e.g., lung cancer), the patient’s survival can be significantly
extended if a patient is diagnosed and treated early in the disease [ 135]. To improve the early
diagnosisrateandaccuracyoflungcancer,alungcancerdiagnosissystembasedonECandAIis
proposedin Reference [ 135]. This systemcan not only improve the early accuracyof lung cancer
but also improve the efficiency and security of diagnosis. In the future, how to combine EC and
AIalgorithmstodiagnosediseasesandgeneratecorrespondingtreatmentplanswithoutahuman
doctoris avaluable researchdirection.
Infectious disease prevention and control. The use of EC’s powerful location awareness feature
caneffectivelystrengthenthepreventionandcontrolofinfectiousdiseases.Thehealthcareframe-
work proposed in Reference [ 51] can diagnose whether a user has been infected by Kyasanur
forestdiseaseandcanmapoutareaswhereinfectiousdiseasesarelikelytooccuronthemap.The
network edge near the data source in this structure is responsible for data preprocessing, model
trainingandreasoning.Tomoreaccuratelyidentifyinfectedpeopleandoutbreak-proneareas,this
layer incorporates a classifier called EO-NN, which combines hybridization of the extremal op-
timization (EO) and theneural networks (NN) . Once a new infected person is detected,it will
inform the infected person and nearby hospitals immediately. With the distributed nature of EC,
thesystemhastheability toidentify areaspronetoinfectiousdiseases.
Smart assessment. Residents’ daily dietary structure management is also an important part of
urban medical care, which also plays an important role in the prevention of diseases. Based on
foodimagerecognition,Liuetal.[ 49]proposeadietaryassessmentsystemunderanECarchitec-
ture.Theedgelayerbetweenendusersandthecloudcanminimizetheresponsetimeandenergy
consumption, and the CNN algorithm can improve the accuracy of recognition. Compared to the
previous system in Reference [ 136], which is only suitable for small data computing tasks, this
systemhastheability toperformlarge-scale datacomputingtasks.
Challenges. Medicaldiagnosisneedsaccuratejudgment,whichrequiresAIalgorithmstoextract
all useful information from big data. However, the useful information that can be obtained by
existing algorithms is rather limited. For supervised learning, manual labeling of data may also
leadtounknownmistakes.Inaddition,thedataacquisitionsystemofsmartmedicalinthefuture
willbemainlydeployedonwearabledevices.Toquicklyanalyzeandrespondtothecollecteddata,
it is also an important direction to deploy AI model to these wearable devices [ 136], which poses
agreatchallengetotheenergysupplyofdevices.Howtobalancetheaccuracyandlightweightof
AI models is adirectionworthyof studying[ 137].
4.1.3 Urban Energy Management. The trend of urbanization is also prompting the rapid in-
creaseofenergyconsumptionincities.Thisposesmanychallengesforurbanenergymanagement.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 24 ====
184:24 H.Huaetal.
Fig.5. Atypicalstructureofsmartenergymanagementinsmartcity[ 140].Thearchitecturemainlyincludes
threeparts:(1)cloudwithcentralcontrolcapabilityandpowerfulcomputingresources;(2)edgeseverswith
local energy control through data analysis; (3) energy devices deployed at the terminal, including users,
energy-producingand energy-consumingequipment, sensors,andsoon.
Forexample,tomeetthecity’sdemandforenergy,energycompaniesneedtoproduceexcesselec-
tricity to ensure continuous energy supply to the city. This leads to a certain degree of waste of
energy [138]. In the era of big data, a large number of sensors deployed in various corners of the
city can obtain data related to energy consumption in real time. These data include population
density, electricity usage, and a wealth of environmental information that helps predict energy
consumptionandenergymanagement.Inaddition,applyingAIalgorithmtoenergymanagement
has greater advantages than traditional methods [ 139]. Under these conditions, the introduction
of EC and AI can make energy consumption prediction and energy management faster and more
accurate.AtypicalEC-basedsmartcity energymanagement architectureis showninFigure 5.
Real-time energy management decisions require dynamic predictions of energy consumption.
However, the complexity and diversity of energy data and the dynamic nature of IoT data make
it rather difficult to build an effective energy prediction system. In response to this problem, Liu
etal.[140]designanEC-basedenergymanagementframeworkforreducingenergyconsumption
incities.Underthisframework,theauthorsproposetwoDRL-basedenergyschedulingstrategies:
•Edge DRL :modeltrainingandreasoningtasksare executedontheedge;
•Cooperative DRL : model training tasks are executed in the cloud, and dynamic energy man-
agement isimplemented ontheedge sidebasedon modelsobtainedfromthecloud.
The authors prove by experiment that cloud-edge collaboration works best in terms of energy
consumption, followed by the method of deploying AI algorithms only on the edge side, and the
worstisthemethodofdeployingAIalgorithmsonlyonthecloud[ 138].ThisalsoindicatesthatEC
isnotasubstituteforcloudcomputing,andtherelationshipbetweenthetwoshouldbesynergistic
andcomplementary.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 25 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:25
Challenges. Therapidgrowthofthenumberofedgedevicesdeployedtocitieshasexacerbated
theglobalenergycrisisandglobalwarming.Onewaytoalleviatethisproblemistouserenewable
energytopoweredgedevices.Consideringthatedgedevicesarescatteredindifferentlocationsof
thecity,theenergyconsumptionoftraditionalenergycanbegreatlyreducedbyusingdistributed
renewable energy generation devices. However, this solution still faces many challenges, such as
how to minimize the consumption of traditional energy while ensuring the normal operation of
edgedevices,andhowtoestablishacomplementarypowersystemfordifferentedgedevices[ 140].
As a control center in EI system, energy router needs certain computing power [ 141,142]. There-
fore,it isalso afeasibleidea tocombine energy routerwithEC infutureresearch.
4.2 Smart Manufacturing
Introducing EC and AI in industrial production can maximize the use of hardware devices and
theuseofdistributedcomputingandstorageresources.Thecombinationofthetwoalsoachieves
efficient and secure resource management and task distribution, thereby greatly improving the
plant’sproductionefficiency,productionqualityand plantsafety[ 143,144].
Dynamic control. To improve the automation and intelligence of the real-time production con-
trolprocess,theauthorsofReference[ 143]proposeanintelligentrobotfactorysystemarchitecture
callediRobot-Factory.WiththeassistanceofEC,thearchitecturecandynamicallyadjustthecon-
figuration of the production line, collect and process a variety of data generated in the factory in
realtime,andidentifyandjudgebyAImeanstoachievemoreefficientfeedbackcontrol.Thearchi-
tecture shows great advantages over the traditional factory using cloud computing with respect
to network communication time delay and recognition rate. Different devices in the factory need
to cooperate with each other through groups to achieve swarm intelligence, not just each device
operatingindependently.Torealizeswarmintelligence,howtouseAIandECtechnologyinsmart
factoryisa new challenge.
Equipment monitoring. In terms of industrial production site safety, it is essential to monitor
the operating status of the machinery in the factory, since the quality issue of the machinery
will inevitably arise during long-term work. To detect the running status of the machine, Wu
et al. [50] propose an EC framework that includes a device layer, a local private edge cloud near
the device layer, and a remote public cloud. The framework uses powerful public cloud to train
the predictive model and then delegates the model to private edge cloud where online diagnostic
and prognosis tasks are performed. This reduces the delay to a certain extent and enhances the
accuracyof diagnosisand prognosis.
To better monitor and manage the equipment in the factory, it is important to clarify the type
and quantity of onsite equipment. In response to the high cost of manual classification methods,
a non-intrusive load monitoring system is proposed based on EC and LSTM [ 65]. In the system
architecture, the edge is responsible for data cleaning and feature selection, while the cloud with
the LSTM algorithm deployed analyzes power features uploaded by edge devices to classify and
countfield devices.
Defective product detection. In addition to ensuring the safety of factory equipment, some re-
searchershavealsoturnedtheirattentiontomonitorthequalityofproductsmoreaccuratelyand
efficiently. Li et al. [ 145] build a DL-based product quality classification system for production
qualitymonitoring,sothatproductswithqualitydefectscanbequicklydetectedontheedgeside.
The system deploys lower-level CNN layers at edge layers to capture defective products that are
moreeasilytoidentifyandhigh-levelCNNinthecloudtocapturedefectiveproductsthataredif-
ficulttoidentifywithedgelayers.Thisdesignimprovestheefficiencyandaccuracyofidentifying
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 26 ====
184:26 H.Huaetal.
defective products, on the one hand, and it also reduces the network transmission cost, on the
otherhand.
Microseismic monitoring. In oil and gas production, the low signal-to-noise ratio and the need
forreal-timedatatransmissionbringchallengesinhigh-precisionmicroseismicmonitoring.Zhang
et al. [61] design a neural network-based EC architecture called Edge-to-Center LearnReduce Mi-
croseismic Monitoring Platform under the environment of oil and gas production. The platform
uses EC architecture with a new microseismic events detection algorithm based on LSTM, and
CNN is deployed in the data center (i.e., the cloud). The model obtained through data training in
thecloudwillbedelegatedtoeachedgedevice,sothattheedgedevicehastheabilitytorecognize
microseismicevents.Thereal-timeperformanceisimprovedbyanalyzingandprocessingdataon
the edge side that can get detection results faster and take corresponding actions. However, the
datageneratedwillfirstbeprocessedbytheedgedevicetoextractusefulinformationforthedata
center. This greatly reduces the volume of the data that need to transfer to the data center, so the
platform can effectively improve transmission efficiency and reduce network transmission pres-
sure. Experiments have shown that this monitoring platform combining neural network and EC
can achieve an accuracy rate of more than 96% and improve the data transmission efficiency by
about90%.
4.3 Internet of Vehicles
IoV is currently a hot academic and commercial field, and it is a key step for humans to move
towards an intelligent life in the future [ 147]. IoV can ease traffic congestion, reduce traffic acci-
dents caused by improper driving, and improve passenger experience [ 99]. Abundant in-vehicle
applications,roadconditionsensors,andintelligentsystemsbringaveryconvenient,comfortable,
andsafe ridingexperiencefor peopletraveling.
Although traditional cloud computing is currently the mainstream solution to the challenges
broughtbytheincreasingnumberofapplicationsanddata,itcannotmeettherequirementsofIoV
(e.g., stable networks and low latency), due to the limitations of cloud computing itself. Using EC
can effectively make up for the limitations of cloud computing [ 148]. IoV has the characteristics
oflimitedresources,suchasdistributedcomputingandstorage.Howtoallocatelimitedresources
andhow toscheduletasksaretheproblemsthatIoV needsto solve.
ECandAIcanbringfasterandmoreprecisecontrol,fasternetworkcommunication,betteruser
experience, and more computing resources for traditional vehicular network [ 149]. A typical EC-
basedIoVarchitectureisshowninFigure 6.Today,moreandmorefieldsuseAIasameanstosolve
optimalstrategies,andAIalgorithmscanalsobeappliedtoIoVtodealwiththeaboveproblems.We
will summarize the application of the combination of EC and AI in IoV from three perspectives:
optimizing task offloading and resource allocation in IoV, improving the user experience of on-
boardentertainment,and improvingvehicle intelligence.
4.3.1 OptimizingTaskOffloadingandResourceAllocation. Therapidlychangingnetworkstruc-
ture,communicationstatus,andcomputingloadhaveledtothedynamicsanduncertaintyoftask
offloading [ 150], making efficient task offloading and resource allocation decisions more difficult.
Feng et al. [ 148] use the ant colony optimization algorithm with fast convergence to solve the
NP-hardtaskassignmentproblem.Thismethodestablishesmultipleobjectivefunctions,anduses
heuristics algorithm for optimization. However, this method is not good at making optimal de-
cisions for offloading multiple data dependency tasks. In response to this problem, an EC frame-
work for obtaining the optimal solution of task offloading through DRL is proposed in Reference
[149].Theframeworktakesintoaccountdatadependencies,aswellasresourcerequirements,ve-
hicle movements, and access networks. It uses the asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C)
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 27 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:27
Fig. 6. A typical structure of IoV [ 146]. In this architecture, the edge is composed of roadside units with
certain computing capabilities, so computing tasks on vehicles can be offloaded directly to roadside units
for processinginsteadof offloadingintothedistantcloud [ 146].
algorithm [ 151] for the online optimization of task offloading decision to adapt to the dynamic
changes of the vehicular network. Edge nodes will first distribute the trained decision model to
thesurroundingvehicles,andthenuploadthedecisionmodelonlineaftervehicles’completelearn-
ing. To improve the performance of resource allocation and management, the prediction of wire-
less channel parameters is a very important means. Liu et al. [ 152] use LSTM to excel in spatio-
temporalcorrelationin channelparametersand proposea wirelesschannelparameterprediction
model based on LSTM and EC to optimize resource allocation and task scheduling in vehicular
network.
InIoV,energyconsumptionisahugeobstaclethatrestrictsitsdevelopment.However,thestud-
ies mentioned above fail to consider the issue of energy consumption while making optimal of-
floading decisions. Yang et al. [ 53] put forward a joint optimization problem consisting of power
control,userassociation,andresourceallocationtominimize energyconsumptioninIoV.Finally,
thefeasiblesolutionofthisproblemisobtainedbyanalgorithmbasedonfuzzyc-meansclustering
thatallows onedata pointto join multipleclusters.
4.3.2 Improving On-board Experience. The maturity and application of autonomous driving
technology will bring more free time to passengers and drivers in the future. This will increase
passengersanddrivers’demandforon-boardentertainment,suchaslisteningtomusic,watching
videos,andmore[ 153].Theseon-boardentertainmentactivitieshaveextremelyhighrequirements
for network latency, so implementing these computing-intensive applications in a connected ve-
hiclewithlimitedresourcesisfacinggreatchallenges[ 154].Thesechallengesincludehowtoeffi-
ciently cachenetworkcontentand howtoefficientlyscheduletasksand allocateresources.
Thetraditionalcontentcachingmethodistocachethecurrentpopularcontentinroadsideunits
in advance, but this also causes a waste of storage resources. To coordinate passenger experience
and content caching costs, Hou et al. [ 153] propose a Q-learning-based caching strategy under
the EC architecture. The action of this caching strategy consists of two parts, one is the cache
amount, and the other is the roadside units to which the content is cached. The reward of this
caching strategy is the elapsed time of transmitting the content required by the user. In addition,
thisarticleusesLSTMtopredictthedrivingdirectionofthevehicletobetterselectroadsideunits.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 28 ====
184:28 H.Huaetal.
Incontrast,themethodofReference[ 155]imposesthetaskofcontentcachingonbothroadside
unitsandvehicles.ItusesacollaborativemodelbasedonQ-learningvehiclesandroadsideunitsfor
contentcachingandcomputationdistribution.Thismodelcanmakefulluseofthelimitedstorage
and computing resources of vehicles. In other words, the system will select vehicles and roadside
units to perform the tasks of caching and computing according to the position and direction of
motion of the car requesting the service. If the vehicles and roadside units around the car cannot
meet their requirements, then the cache and calculation tasks will be handed over to the base
station.
Aiming at the challenges of executing compute-intensive applications on cars with limited re-
sources, Ning et al. [ 154] first use finite-state Markov chains to model vehicle-to-infrastructure
communication and computing states and then express the resource allocation and task schedul-
ingstrategyasa goal to maximize users’ quality of experience (QoE) .
4.3.3 Improving Vehicle Intelligence. In addition to the macro-control of resource allocation, it
isalsoanimportantresearchdirectiontogiveAItechnologytovehicleintelligenceundertheEC
architecture [ 156]. For example, Ferdowsi et al. [ 157] propose an EC architecture that integrates
DL to handle complex vehicle and traffic information. The architecture enables functions such as
vehicleautomaticcontrolanddrivingrouteanalysis.ThisarchitectureusesdifferentDLalgorithms
accordingto thecharacteristicsof different problems:
•RestrictedBoltzmannmachinesareusedtoprocesscomplexdatain intelligenttransporta-
tion systems(ITS) ;
•CNNand LSTMare usedtoperformreal-time analysisof road conditions;
•Bi-RNNisusedto predictdriver behavior;
•LSTMis usedtoensuredatatransmissionsecurity.
The increasing number of vehicles aggravates the problem of traffic jam. Traffic scheduling is a
very effective way to deal with this problem. However, due to the large number of vehicles and
the scale of road network, the number of routes that vehicles can choose increases exponentially.
Therefore,itisnotfeasibletousecentralizedcontrollerforrouteplanning.Basedonthisproblem,
a distributed cooperative routing algorithm based on evolutionary game theory is proposed in
Reference[ 158].Eachedgenodedeploysa roadsideunit(RSU) ,inwhichnormalRSUisrespon-
sible for collecting traffic information, and game RSU controls nearby vehicles through proposed
evolutionarygame strategy.
4.3.4 Challenges. ThecombinationofECandIoVimprovestheresponsespeedofvehiclesched-
uling and control, which further promotes the vehicle intelligence. However, there are still some
challenges [ 159]. For example, when the vehicle is moving at a high speed, its communication
connection needs to be switched between different edge servers, which may lead to a series of
problems, such as disconnection or the degradation of user experience. In addition, one of the
cores of IoV systems is resource sharing between different vehicles. As a result, how to set a rea-
sonableincentivemechanismtoencourageparticipantstoshareresourcesisvital.Finally,resource
sharingwillalsobringsome dataprivacyand securityissues[ 160].
4.4 Summary
Table2summarizes the research works of combining EC with three different AI application sce-
narios. Apparently, these works adopt different AI algorithms and EC architectures in different
scenarios according to their respective requirements for response speed, privacy, and so on, to
maximize theperformanceof theAI models.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 29 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:29
In essence, offloading all or part of the computing process of AI algorithms to the edge of the
networkisneverthelesstotransferAI computingtasksfromaresourceintensiveenvironmentto
a resource limited environment [ 6]. Therefore, how to lighten AI models so that they can work
efficiently at the edge of the network with limited computing, energy, and other resources needs
further exploration [ 164]. In addition, an AI application often needs to collect data from different
edge nodes, which poses a great threat to user privacy. Federated learning, as a very popular and
potential research direction [ 96] can enable participants to learn jointly without sharing data. In
recentyears,theblockchaintechnologyhasbeenwidelyappliedinmanyfieldstoestablishmutual
trust among participants in an open and distributed way [ 162,165]. Incorporating blockchain to
tacklethechallengesofcombinedsystemsofAIandECmentionedinthissectionisalsoadirection
worthyoffurtherexploration.
5 CONCLUSION
EC is a very promising new computing paradigm to make up for the shortcomings of existing
cloudcomputing,whileAIisaverypopularfieldinbothacademiaandindustry.Bysummarizing
theexistingresearchresultsonthecombinationofAIandEC,wecometotwoconclusions.Onthe
onehand,AIcanfurtherimproveandoptimizetheperformanceofEC,becausetraditionalnon-AI
methods have limitations in dealing with the complicated and dynamic environment in EC. On
theotherhand,ECcanbringfasterresponsetimeandmorestablenetworkstatustothepractical
applicationof AI.
Although the research on combining AI and EC has made a lot of progress, there are still prob-
lems to be solved. For example, in the first aspect mentioned above, the complexity, dynamics,
and high dimensions of the EC process make accurate modeling rather difficult. Therefore, it is
animportantresearchdirectiontodesignandadoptmodel-freemethodstoobtainefficientstrate-
gies [94]. In addition, for the second aspect, the key to deploying AI to the edge of the network
is how to enhance the efficiency of AI algorithms with limited computing and energy resources,
whichrequiresfurtherresearchanddesign of lightweightAI models [ 6,164].
Insummary,wehopethatresearcherswillunderstandtheimportanceofcombiningAIandEC
and the mutually beneficial relationship between them through this article. We believe that there
should be more academic research focusing on enabling EC to have higher computing offloading,
privacy,andsecurityperformanceandtoenablewideruseofAI.Inthefuture,weplantoexplore
more research fields that combine the two, for example, distributed training and reasoning in the
settingofEC.
REFERENCES
[1] A. U. R. Khan, M. Othman, S. A. Madani, and S. U. Khan. 2014. A survey of mobile cloud computing application
models.IEEECommun. Surv. Tutor. 16,1(2014),393–413.
[2] F. Durao, F. Carvalho, A. Fonseka, and V. C. Garcia. 2014. A systematic review on cloud computing. J. Supercomput.
68,3(2014),1321–1346.
[3] W.Shi andS. Dustdar.2016.The promiseof edgecomputing. Computer 49,5(2016),78–81.
[4] M. Qin, L. Chen, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, F. R. Yu, and G. Wei. 2018. Power-constrained edge computing with maximum
processing capacityforIoTnetworks. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,3(2018),4330–4343.
[5] A. M. Ghosh and K. Grolinger. 2021. Edge-cloud computing for internet of things data analytics: Embedding intelli-
genceinthe edgewithdeep learning. IEEETrans.Ind.Inform. 17,3(2021),2191–2200.
[6] P.Zhou,W.Chen,S.Ji,H.Jiang,L.Yu,andD.Wu.2019.Privacy-preservingonlinetaskallocationinedge-computing-
enabledmassive crowdsensing. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,5(2019),7773–7787.
[7] E.I. Gauraetal.2013.Edgeminingthe internetof things. IEEESens.J 13,10(2013),3816–3825.
[8] Z.Xuetal.2020.ArtificialintelligenceforsecuringIoTservicesinedgecomputing:Asurvey. Secur.Commun.Netw .
2020(2020),1–13.
[9] C. Savaglio and G. Fortino. 2021. A simulation-driven methodology for IoT data mining based on edge computing.
ACMTrans. Internet.Techn. 21,2(2021),1–22.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 30 ====
184:30 H.Huaetal.
[10] L.Lei,H.Xu,X.Xiong,K.Zheng,W.Xiang,andX.Wang.2019.Multiuserresourcecontrolwithdeepreinforcement
learningin IoTedgecomputing. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,6(2019),10119–10133.
[11] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang. 2019. Edge intelligence: Paving the last mile of artificial
intelligencewith edgecomputing. Proc. IEEE 107,8(2019),1738–1762.
[12] M. Miranda, C. Cristina, and S. Sebastiá. 2020. Deep learning at the mobile edge: Opportunities for 5G networks.
Appl.Sci. 10,14(2020),4735.
[13] F.Wang,M.Zhang,X.Wang,X.Ma,andJ.Liu.2020.Deeplearningforedgecomputingapplications:Astate-of-the-
art survey. IEEEAccess 8(2020),58322–58336.
[14] J. Chenand X.Ran.2019.Deeplearningwithedgecomputing:A review. Proc. IEEE 107,8 (2019),1655–1674.
[15] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. M. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen. 2020. Convergence of edge computing and deep
learning:A comprehensive survey. IEEECommun.Surv. Tut. 22,2(2020),869–904.
[16] Y.Shi,K.Yang,T.Jiang,J.Zhang,andK.B.Letaief.2019.Communication-efficientedgeAI:Algorithmsandsystems.
IEEECommun. Surv. Tut. 22,4(2020),2167–2191.
[17] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami. 2013. Internet of things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements,
andfuture directions. Future Gener.Comp. Syst. 29,7(2013),1645–1660.
[18] D.Reinsel,J.Gantz,andJ.Rydning.2018.Dataage2025. TheDigitizationoftheWorld:FromEdgetoCore .IDCWhite
Paper #US44413318.
[19] M. Marjani, F. Nasaruddin, A. Gani, I. Abaker, T. Hashem, A. Siddiqa, and I. Yaqoob. 2017. Big IoT data analytics:
Architecture, opportunities, andopenresearch challenges. IEEEAccess 5(2017),5247–5261.
[20] Index,Cisco GlobalCloud.Forecast andMethodology, 2016–2021White Paper.Updated:February 1,2018.
[21] J. Zhang, B. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Cheng, and F. Hu. 2018. Data security and privacy-preserving in edge computing
paradigm:Survey andopen issues. IEEEAccess 6(2018),18209–18237.
[22] S. Sukhmani, M. Sadeghi, M. Erol-Kantarci, and A. E. Saddik. 2019. Edge caching and computing in 5G for mobile
AR/VR andtactileinternet. IEEEMultiMedia 26,1(2019),21–30.
[23] H.Cai,B.Xu,L.Jiang,andA.V.Vasilakos.2017.IoT-basedbigdatastoragesystemsincloudcomputing:perspectives
andchallenges. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 4,1(2017),75–87.
[24] M. B. Mollah, M. A. K. Azad, and A. Vasilakos. 2017. Security and privacy challenges in mobile cloud computing:
Survey andwayahead. J.Netw.Comput.Appl. 84(2017),38–54.
[25] Content Delivery Network. Retrieved from https://www.akamai.com/us/en/resources/content-delivery-network.
jsp.
[26] M. Satyanarayanan.2017.The emergenceof edge computing. Computer 50,1(2017),30–39.
[27] BrianE.Whitaker.2019.Cloudedgecomputing:Beyondthedatacenter.Retrievedfrom https://www.openstack.org/
edge-computing/cloud-edge-computing-beyond-the-data-center/ .
[28] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Xu. 2016. Edge computing: Vision and challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 3, 5
(2016),637–646.
[29] R.Yang,F.Yu,P.Si,Z.Yang,andY.Zhang.2019.Integratedblockchainandedgecomputingsystems:Asurvey,some
research issues andchallenges. IEEECommun. Surv.Tutor. 21,2(2019),1508–1532.
[30] L.Huang,X.Feng,A.Feng,Y.Huang,andL.Qian.2018.Distributeddeeplearning-basedoffloadingformobileedge
computingnetworks. Mobile Netw.Appl. (2018),1–1. DOI:10.1007/s11036-018-1177-x
[31] Z. Ali, L. Jiao, T. Baker, G. Abbas, Z. H. Abbas, and S. Khaf. 2019. A deep learning approach for energy efficient
computationaloffloadinginmobileedgecomputing. IEEEAccess 7(2019),149623–149633.
[32] M. Yahuza, M. Idris, A. Wahid, A. T. S. Ho, S. Khan, N. Musa, and A. Taha. 2020. Systematic review on security and
privacy requirements in edge computing: State of the art and future research opportunities. IEEE Access 8 (2020),
76541–76567.
[33] D. Liu, Z. Yan, W. Ding, and M. Atiquzzaman. 2019. A survey on secure data analytics in edge computing. IEEE
InternetThings J. 6,3(2019),4946–4967.
[34] G. Wang, X. Yang, W. Cai, and Y. Zhang. 2021. Event-triggered online energy flow control strategy for regional
integratedenergy system using Lyapunovoptimization. Int.J.Elec. Power 125,3(2021),106451.
[35] L. Chen, S. Zhou, and J. Xu. 2018. Computation peer offloading for energy-constrained mobile edge computing in
small-cellnetworks. IEEEA CMT ra ns.Netw . 26,4(2018),1619–1632.
[36] C.Liu,M.Bennis,M.Debbah,andH.V.Poor.2019.Dynamictaskoffloadingandresourceallocationforultra-reliable
low-latencyedgecomputing. IEEETrans.Commun. 67,6(2019),4132–4150.
[37] Y.Chiang,T.Zhang,andY.Ji.2019.Jointcotask-awareoffloadingandschedulinginmobileedgecomputingsystems.
IEEEAccess 7(2019),105008–105018.
[38] M.ChenandY.Hao.2018.Taskoffloadingformobileedgecomputinginsoftwaredefinedultra-densenetwork. IEEE
J.Select. Areas Commun. 36,3 (2018),587–597.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 31 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:31
[39] Z. Ning, P. Dong, X. Kong, and F. Xia. 2019. A cooperative partial computation offloading scheme for mobile edge
computingenabledinternetof things. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,3(2019),4804–4814.
[40] J. Du, L. Zhao, J. Feng, and X. Chu. 2018. Computation offloading and resource allocation in mixed fog/cloud com-
putingsystems withmin-maxfairness guarantee. IEEETrans.Commun. 66,4(2018),1594–1608.
[41] Y.Wang,X.Tao,X.Zhang,P.Zhang,andY.H.Hou.2019.Cooperativetaskoffloadinginthree-tiermobilecomputing
networks: An ADMMframework. IEEETrans.Veh.Technol. 68,3(2019),2763–2776.
[42] Z. Zheng, L. Song, Z. Han, G. Y. Li, and H. V. Poor. 2018. A stackelberg game approach to proactive caching in
large-scalemobileedgenetworks. IEEETrans. Wirel.Commun. 17,8 (2018),5198–5211.
[43] W.Jing,Q.Miao,H.Song,andX.Chen.2019.Datalossandreconstructionoflocationdifferentialprivacyprotection
basedon edgecomputing. IEEEAccess 7,(2019),75890–75900.
[44] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang. 2019. Blockchain for secure and efficient data
sharing invehicular edgecomputingandnetworks. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 3,6(2019),4660–4670.
[45] Q.Wang,D.Chen,N.Zhang,Z.Ding,andZ.Qin.2017.PCP:Aprivacy-preservingcontent-basedpublish-subscribe
schemewith differentialprivacyin fogcomputing. IEEEAccess 5(2017),17962–17974.
[46] Y. Qiao, Z. Liu, H. Lv, M. Li, Z. Huang, Z. Li, and W. Liu. 2019. An effective data privacy protection algorithm based
on differentialprivacyin edgecomputing. IEEEAccess 7(2019),136203–136213.
[47] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and S. U. Amin. 2018. Improving consumer satisfaction in smart cities using edge
computingandcaching:A casestudy of datefruitsclassification. FutureGener. Comp.Syst. 88(2018),333–341.
[48] F. Samie, L. Bauer, and J. Henkel. 2019. From cloud down to things: An overview of machine learning in internet of
things.IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,3(2019),4921–4934.
[49] C. Liu, Y. Cao, L. Yan, G. Chen, and H. Peng. 2018. A new deep learning-based food recognition system for dietary
assessment onanedge computingservice infrastructure. IEEETrans.Serv. Comput. 11(2019),249–261.
[50] D. Wu, S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Terpenny, R. Gao, T. Kurfess, and J. Guzzo. 2017. A fog computing-based framework for
process monitoring andprognosis incyber-manufacturing. J.Manuf. Syst. 43(2017),25–34.
[51] M. Abhishek, D. Tapas, et al. 2018. Kyasanur forest disease classification framework using novel extremal optimiza-
tiontuned neuralnetwork infog computingenvironment. J.Med. Syst 42,10(2018),187.
[52] S. Deng, H. Zhao, W. Fang, J. Yin, S. Dustdar, and A. Y. Zomaya. 2020. Edge intelligence: The confluence of edge
computingandartificialintelligence. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 7,8(2020),7457–7469.
[53] Z. Yang, C. Pan, K. Wang, and M. Shikh-Bahaei. 2019. Energy efficient resource allocation in UAV-enabled mobile
edgecomputingnetworks. IEEETrans.Wirel.Commun. 18,9(2019),4576–4589.
[54] N. Kiran, C. Pan, S. Wang, and C. Yin. 2020. Joint resource allocation and computation offloading in mobile edge
computingforSDN basedwireless networks. J.Commun.Netw .22,1(2020),1–11. DOI:10.1109/JCN.2019.000046
[55] Y. Guo, S. Wang, A. Zhou, J. Xu, J. Yuan, and C. Hsu. 2019. User allocation-aware edge cloud placement in mobile
edgecomputing. Software Pract. Exper. 50,10(2019),489–502.
[56] A. Abeshu and N. Chilamkurti. 2018. Deep learning: The frontier for distributed attack detection in fog-to-things
computing. IEEECommun. Mag. 56,2(2018),169–175.
[57] Y.LeCun andY.Bengio.2015.Deeplearning. Nature521,7553(2015),436–444.
[58] D.L.Elliot.1993. ABetterActivationFunctionforArtificialNeuralNetworks .UniversityofMaryland,SystemsResearch
Center.
[59] H.Li,K.Ota,andM.Dong.2018.LearningIoTinedge:Deeplearningfortheinternetofthingswithedgecomputing.
IEEENetw. 32,1(2018),96–101.
[60] P.Monkam,S.Qi,H.Ma,W.Gao,Y.Yao,andW.Qian.2019.Detectionandclassificationofpulmonarynodulesusing
convolutional neuralnetworks: A survey. IEEEAccess 7(2019),78075–78091.
[61] X. Zhang, J. Lin, et al. 2018. An efficient neural-network-based microseismic monitoring platform for hydraulic
fractureon anedgecomputingarchitecture. Sensors18,6 (2018),1828.
[62] S. Hochreiter andJ.Schmidhuber. 1997.Longshort-term memory. Neural Comput. 9,8(1997),1735–1780.
[63] A.DiroandN.Chilamkurti.2016.LeveragingLSTMnetworksforattackdetectioninfog-to-thingscommunications.
IEEECommun.Mag. 56,9(2016),124–130.
[64] D. Park, S. Kim, Y. An, and J. Jung. 2018. iReD: A light-weight real-time fault detection system for edge computing
using LSTMrecurrent neural networks. Sensors18(2018),2110–2124.
[65] C.Lai,W.Chen,L.Yang,andW.Qiang.2019.LSTMandedgecomputingforbigdatafeaturerecognitionofindustrial
electricalequipment. IEEETrans. Ind.Inform. 15(2019),2469–2477.
[66] B.Hussain,Q.Du,S.Zhang,A.Imran,andM.A.Imran.2019.Mobileedgecomputing-baseddata-drivendeeplearning
frameworkfor anomalydetection. IEEEAccess 7(2019),137656–137667.
[67] R. Dong, C. She, W. Hardjawana, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic. 2019. Deep learning for hybrid 5G services in mobile edge
computingsystems: Learnfrom adigitaltwin. IEEETrans.Wirel.Commun. 18,10(2019),4692–4707.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 32 ====
184:32 H.Huaetal.
[68] S.A.Osia,A.S.Shamsabadi,A.Taheri,H.R.Rabiee,andH.Haddadi.2018.Privateandscalablepersonaldataanalytics
using hybrid edge-to-cloud deep learning. Computer 51,5(2018),42–49.
[69] Y.Wang,K.Wang,H.Huang,T.Miyazaki,andS.Guo.2019.Trafficandcomputationco-offloadingwithreinforcement
learningin fogcomputingfor industrial applications. IEEETrans.Ind.Inf. 15,2(2019),976–986.
[70] S. Conti, G. Faraci, R. Nicolosi, S. A. Rizzo, and G. Schembra. 2017. Battery management in a green fog-computing
node: A reinforcement-learningapproach. IEEEAccess 5(2017),21126–21138.
[71] X.Zhao,G.Huang,L.Gao,andM.Li.2021.LowloadDIDStaskschedulingbasedonQ-learninginedgecomputing
environment. J.Netw.Comput. Appl. 188,1(2021),103095.
[72] B. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, and H. Yang. 2019. Deep-Q-network-based multimedia multi-service QoS optimization
for mobileedgecomputingsystems. IEEEAccess 7(2019),160961–160972.
[73] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, et al. 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature518, 7540
(2015),529–533.
[74] F. Xu, F. Yang, S. Bao, and C. Zhao. 2019. DQN inspired joint computing and caching resource allocation approach
for softwaredefinedinformation-centric internetof things network. IEEEAccess 7(2019),61987–61996.
[75] D. Zeng, L. Gu, S. Pan, J. Cai, and S. Guo. 2019. Resource management at the network edge: A deep reinforcement
learningapproach. IEEENetw. 33,3(2019),26–33.
[76] J.Wang,L.Zhao,J.Liu,andN.Kato.2019.Smartresourceallocationformobileedgecomputing:Adeepreinforcement
learningapproach. IEEETrans.Emerg. Top. Com .DOI:10.1109/TETC.2019.2902661
[77] Y.He,F.Yu,Y.He,S.Maharjan,andY.Zhang.2019.Securesocialnetworksin5Gsystemswithmobileedgecomput-
ing,caching,and device-to-devicecommunications. IEEEWirel. Commun. 25,3(2019),103–109.
[78] Z. Qin, D. Liu, H. Hua, and J. Cao. 2021. Privacy preserving load control of residential microgrid via deep reinforce-
mentlearning. IEEETrans. Smart Grid 12,5(2021),4079–4089.
[79] B.McMahan,E.Moore,D.Ramage,S.Hampson,andB.A.Arcas.2017.Communication-efficientlearningofdeepnet-
worksfromdecentralizeddata. Proceedingsofthe20thInternationalConferenceonArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics
(AISTATS) .Washington, USA. 1273–1282.
[80] S. Yu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, X. Gong, and D. Wu. 2021. When deep reinforcement learning meets federated learning:
Intelligent multitimescale resource management for multiaccess edge computing in 5G ultradense network. IEEE
InternetThings J. 8,4(2021),2238–2251.
[81] X. Lu, Y. Liao, P. Lio, and P. Hui. 2020. Privacy-preserving asynchronous federated learning mechanism for edge
network computing. IEEEAccess 8(2020),48970–48981.
[82] J.Zhang,Z.Zhan,Y.Lin,N.Chen,andY.Gong.2020.Evolutionarycomputationmeetsmachinelearning:Asurvey.
IEEEComput.Intell.Mag. 6,4(2020),68–75.
[83] Y.LiandS.Wang.2018.Anenergy-awareedgeserverplacementalgorithminmobileedgecomputing.In Proceedings
of theIEEEInternational ConferenceonEdgeComputing (EDGE’18) . IEEE. SanFrancisco. 2018,66–73.
[84] H. Gao, W. Li, R. Banez, Z. Han, and H. Poor. 2019. Mean field evolutionary dynamics in ultra dense mobile edge
computingsystems. In Proceedings oftheIEEEGlobal Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) .IEEE, 1–6.
[85] C.DongandW.Wen.2019.Jointoptimizationfortaskoffloadinginedgecomputing:Anevolutionarygameapproach.
Sensors19,3(2019),740–764.
[86] Y. Zhan, S. Guo, P. Li, and J. Zhang. 2020. A deep reinforcement learning based offloading game in edge computing.
IEEETrans.Comput. 69,6(2020),883–893.
[87] S.Yu,X.Wang,andR.Langar.2017.Computationoffloadingformobileedgecomputing:Adeeplearningapproach.
InProceedings of the IEEE Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC’17) . IEEE, 1–6.
[88] Y. Hao, Y. Mian, L. Hu, M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and S. U. Amin. 2019. Smart-edge-coCaCo: AI-enabled smart
edgewith jointcomputation,caching,andcommunicationinheterogeneous IoT. IEEENetw. 33,2(2019),58–64.
[89] X. Xu, D. Li, Z. Dai, S. Li, and X. Chen. 2019. A heuristic offloading method for deep learning edge services in 5G
networks. IEEEAccess 7(2019),67734–67744.
[90] L.Lei,H.Xu,X.Xiong,K.Zheng,andW.Xiang.2019.Jointcomputationoffloadingandmultiuserschedulingusing
approximatedynamicprogramminginNB-IoTedgecomputingsystem. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,3(2019),5345–5362.
[91] J. Xu, L. Chen, and S. Ren. 2017. Online learning for offloading and autoscaling in energy harvesting mobile edge
computing. IEEETrans.Cogn.Commun.Netw. 3,3 (2017),361–373.
[92] D.Mishra,S.De,S.Jana,S.Basagni,K.Chowdhury,andW.Heinzelman.2015.SmartRFenergyharvestingcommu-
nications: Challengesandopportunities. IEEECommun.Mag. 53,4(2015),70–78.
[93] M. Min, L. Xiao, Y. Chen, P. Cheng, D. Wu, and W. Zhuang. 2019. Learning-based computation offloading for IoT
devices withenergyharvesting. IEEETrans.Veh.Technol. 68,2(2019),1930–1941.
[94] X. Cheng, L. Feng, W. Quan, C. Zhou, H. He, W. Shi, and X. Shen. 2019. Space/aerial-assisted computing offloading
for IoTapplications:A learning-basedapproach. IEEEJ.Sel.Area.Comm. 37,5(2019),1117–1129.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 33 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:33
[95] X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Mao, Y. Ji, and M. Bennis. 2019. Optimized computation offloading performance in
virtualedge computingsystems viadeep reinforcementlearning. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,3 (2019),4005–4018.
[96] J.Ren,H.Wang,T.Hou,S.Zheng,andC.Tang.2019.Federatedlearning-basedcomputationoffloadingoptimization
inedgecomputing-supported internet of things. IEEEAccess 7(2019),69194–69201.
[97] H.CaoandJ.Cai.2018.Distributedmultiusercomputationoffloadingforcloudlet-basedmobilecloudcomputing:A
game-theoreticmachinelearningapproach. IEEETrans.Veh.Technol. 67,1(2018),752–764.
[98] L.Huang,X.Feng,A.Feng,Y.Huang,andL.Qian.2018.Distributeddeeplearning-basedoffloadingformobileedge
computingnetworks. MobileNetw.Appl. 66,12(2018),6353–6367.
[99] Z.Ning,P.Dong,X.Wang,L.Guo,andR.Kwok.2019.Deepreinforcementlearningforintelligentinternetofvehicles:
An energy-efficientcomputationaloffloadingscheme. IEEETrans.Cogn.Commun. 5(2019),1060–1072.
[100] J. Chen, K. Li, Q. Deng, K. Li, and P. Yu. 2019. Distributed deep learning model for intelligent video surveillance
systems withedgecomputing. IEEETrans.Ind.Inform. 5,4(2019),1060–1072.
[101] S.A.Magid,F.Petrini,andB.Dezfouli.2019.ImageclassificationonIoTedgedevices:Profilingandmodeling. Cluster
Comput.23(2019),1025–1043.
[102] A. Biswas and A. P. Chandrakasan. 2019. CONV-SRAM: An energy-efficient SRAM with in-memory dot-product
computationfor low-powerconvolutional neuralnetworks. IEEEJ.Solid-St.Circ. 54,1(2019),217–230.
[103] C.Maxfield.2004.Thedesign warrior’s guideto FPGAs: Devices,tools andFlows.Elsevier.
[104] C. Lammie, A. Olsen, T. Carrick, and M. Rahimi Azghadi. 2019. Low-power and high-speed deep FPGA inference
enginesfor weedclassificationatthe edge. IEEEAccess 7 (2019),51171–51184.
[105] Y.Sun,M.Peng,andS.Mao.2019.Deepreinforcementlearning-basedmodeselectionandresourcemanagementfor
greenfogradio access networks. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,2 (2019),1960–1971.
[106] M. S. Munir, S. F. Abedin, N. H. Tran, and C. S. Hong. 2019. When edge computing meets microgrid: A deep rein-
forcementlearningapproach. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,5(2019),7360–7374.
[107] H. Hua, Y. Qin, C. Hao, and J. Cao. 2018. Stochastic optimal control for energy internet: A bottom-up energy man-
agementapproach. IEEETrans.Ind.Inf. 15,3(2019),1788–1797.
[108] Y.Qin,H.Hua,andJ.Cao.2019.Stochasticoptimalcontrolschemeforbatterylifetimeextensioninislandedmicro-
grid.IEEETrans.Smart Grid 10,4(2019),4467–4475.
[109] H.Hua,J,Cao,G.Yang,andR.Guang.2018.Voltagecontrolforuncertainstochasticnonlinearsystemwithapplica-
tionto energyinternet: Non-fragilerobust H∞approach. J.Math.Anal.Appl. 463,1(2018),93–110.
[110] H. Hua, Z. Qin, N. Dong, M. Ye, Z. Wang, X. Chen, and J. Cao. 2022. Data-driven dynamical control for bottom-up
energyinternetsystem. IEEETrans.Sustain. Energ. 13,4,(2022),315–327.
[111] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston. 2009. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the International
ConferenceonMachine Learning (ICML’09) .ACM. Montreal,2009,41–48.
[112] R. Kozik, M. Ficco, M. Choraś, and F. Palmieri. 2018. A scalable distributed machine learning approach for attack
detectionin edgecomputingenvironments. J.Parallel Distr.Com. 119(2018),18–26.
[113] B. Wang, Y. Wu, K. R. Liu, and T. C. Clancy. 2011. An anti-jamming stochastic game for cognitive radio networks.
IEEEJ.Select.Area. Commun. 29,4(2011),877–889.
[114] B. Li, T. Chen, and G. B. Giannakis. 2019. Secure mobile edge computing in IoT via collaborative online learning.
IEEETrans.Signal Process. 67,23(2019),5922–5935.
[115] Y.Wang,W.Meng,W.Li,Z.Liu,Y.Liu,andH.Xue.2019.Adaptivemachinelearning-basedalarmreductionviaedge
computingfordistributed intrusion detectionsystems. Concurr.Comp.-Pract. E 31,19(2019),1–12.
[116] L.Yu,X.Shen,J.Yang,K.Wei,andR.Xiang.2020.Hypergraphclusteringbasedongame-theoryforminingmicrobial
high-order interaction module. Evolution.Bioinform. Online 16(2020),117693432097057.
[117] X.An,J.Su,X.Lu,andF.Lin.2018.Hypergraphclusteringmodel-basedassociationanalysisofDDOSattacksinfog
computingintrusion detection system. J.Wirel.Comm. Netw. 1(2018),249–258.
[118] L. Fernández Maimó, A. Huertas Celdrán, M. Gil Pérez, F. García Clemente, and G. Martínez Pérez. 2019. Dynamic
management of a deep learning-based anomaly detection system for 5G networks. J. Amb. Intel. Hum. Comp. 10, 8
(2019),3083–3097.
[119] M. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Jajodia, A. Singhal, and A. Massimiliano. 2016. Network diversity: A security metric for
evaluatingtheresilienceofnetworksagainstzero-dayattacks. IEEETrans.Inf.Foren .Section11,5(2016),1071–1086.
[120] Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Maharjan, M. Alam, and T. Wu. 2019. Deep learning for secure mobile edge computing in
cyber-physicaltransportation systems. IEEENetw. 33,4(2019),36–41.
[121] M. Du, K. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Wang, and Y. Sun. 2018. Big data privacy preserving in multi-access edge computing
for heterogeneous internetof things. IEEECommun. Mag. 56,8(2018),62–67.
[122] X. He, R. Jin, and H. Dai. 2019. Deep PDS-learning for privacy-aware offloading in MEC-enabled IoT. IEEE Internet
Things J. 6,3(2019),4547–4555.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 34 ====
184:34 H.Huaetal.
[123] T. Wang, H. Hua, Z. Wei, and J. Cao. 2022. Challenges of blockchain in new generation energy systems and future
outlooks. Int.J.Elec. Power 135,107499(2022),265–284.
[124] M. Du, K. Wang, Z. Xia, and Y. Zhang. 2020. Differential privacy preserving of training model in wireless big data
withedgecomputing. IEEETrans. Big Data 6,2(2020),283–295.
[125] C. Xu, J. Ren, L. She, Y. Zhang, Z. Qin, and K. Ren. 2019. EdgeSanitizer: Locally differentially private deep inference
atthe edgefor mobiledataanalytics. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6(2019),5140–5151.
[126] C. Dwork and A. Roth. 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends. Theor. Comput. Sci.
9,3 (2014),211–407.
[127] J. Chen, S. Chen, Q. Wang, B. Cao, G. Feng, and J. Hu. 2019. iRAF: A deep reinforcement learning approach for
collaborativemobileedge computingIoTnetworks. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,4(2019),7011–7024.
[128] G. Chaslot, S. Bakkes, I. Szita, and P. Spronck. 2008. Monte-carlo tree search: A new framework for game AI. In
Proceedings ofthe4th AAAIConferenceon Artificial Intelligence andInteractive Digital Entertainment .216–217.
[129] C. Chen, B. Liu, S. Wan, P. Qiao, and Q. Pei. 2021. An edge traffic flow detection scheme based on deep learning in
anintelligenttransportation system. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. 22,3(2021),1840–1852.
[130] I. Hashem,V. Chang,etal.2016.The roleof bigdatainsmart city. Int.J.Inform. Manage. 36,5(2016),748–758.
[131] S. Pang, S. Qiao, T. Song, J. Zhao, and P. Zheng. 2019. An improved convolutional network architecture based on
residual modelingfor person re-identificationin edgecomputing. IEEEAccess 7(2019),106749–106760.
[132] B.Tang,Z.Chen,G.Hefferman,S.Pei,W.Tao,H.He,andQ.Yang.2017.Incorporatingintelligenceinfogcomputing
for bigdataanalysis insmart cities. IEEETrans.Ind.Inform. 13,5(2017),2140–2150.
[133] G. Muhammad, M. Alhamid, M. Alsulaiman, and B. Gupta. 2018. Edge computing with cloud for voice disorder
assessment andtreatment. IEEECommun. Mag. 56,4(2018),60–65.
[134] G. Muhammad, M. Rahman, A. Alelaiwi, and A. Alamri. 2017. Smart health solution integrating IoT and cloud: A
case study of voice pathologymonitoring. IEEECommun. Mag. 55,1(2017),69–73.
[135] M.Prabukumar,L.Agilandeeswari,andK.Ganesan.2017.Anintelligentlungcancerdiagnosissystemusingcuckoo
search optimization andsupport vector machineclassifier. J.Amb. Intel.Hum. Comp. 3(2017),1–27.
[136] V. Stantchev, A. Barnawi, S. Ghulam, and J. Schubert. 2015. Smart items, fog and cloud computing as enablers of
servitization inhealthcare. SensorsTransduc. 185(2015),121–128.
[137] J.ZhangandD.Tao.2020.Empoweringthingswithintelligence:Asurveyoftheprogress,challenges,andopportu-
nities inartificialintelligenceof things. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 8,10(2020),7789–7817.
[138] H.Luo,H.Cai,Y.Sun,andL.Jiang.2019.Ashort-termenergypredictionsystembasedonedgecomputingforsmart
city.Future Gener.Comp. Syst. 101(2019),444–457.
[139] H.Hua,Z.Wei,Y.Qin,T.Wang,andJ.Cao.2021.AreviewofdistributedcontrolandoptimizationinenergyInternet:
Fromtraditionalmethodstoartificialintelligence-basedmethods, IETCy-Phys.Syst.:TheoryAppl. 6,2(2021),63–79.
[140] Y. Liu,C. Yang,et al. 2019.Intelligentedge computingfor IoT-based energy managementin smart cities. IEEE Netw.
33,2(2019),111–117.
[141] C. Hao, Y. Qin, and H. Hua. 2020. Energy “routers,” “computers,” and “protocols.” In Energy Internet: Systems and
Applications .Springer Nature SwitzerlandAG,193–208.
[142] H.Liang,H.Hua,Y.Qin,M.Ye,S.Zhang,andJ.Cao.2022.Stochasticoptimalenergystoragemanagementforenergy
routers via compressive sensing. IEEETrans. Ind.Inform. 18,4(2022)2192–2202.
[143] L.Hu,Y.Miao,G.Wu,M.Hassan,andI.Humar.2018.IRobot-factory:Anintelligentrobotfactorybasedoncognitive
manufacturingandedgecomputing,futuregener. Comp.Syst. 90,10(2018),1–13.
[144] F. Liang, W. Yu, X. Liu, D. Griffith, and N. Golmie. 2020. Toward edge-based deep learning in industrial internet of
things.IEEEInternetThingsJ. 7,5 (2020),4329–4341.
[145] L.Li,K.Ota,andM.Dong.2018.Deeplearningforsmartindustry:Efficientmanufactureinspectionsystemwithfog
computing. IEEETrans.Ind.Inform. 14(2018),4665–4673.
[146] Z.Ning,P.Dong,X.Wang,L.Guo,andR.Kwok.2019.Deepreinforcementlearningforintelligentinternetofvehicles:
An energy-efficientcomputationaloffloadingscheme. IEEET. Cogn.Commun.Netw. 5,4(2019),1060–1072.
[147] L. Guo, M. Dong, Z. Chen, S. Feng, and G. Fang. 2017. A secure mechanism for big data collection in large scale
internetof vehicle. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 4,2(2017),601–610.
[148] J. Feng, Z. Liu, C. Wu, and Y. Ji. 2017. AVE: Autonomous vehicular edge computing framework with ACO-based
scheduling. IEEETrans.Veh.Technol. 66,12(2017),10660–10675.
[149] Q. Qi, J. Wang, Z. Ma, H. Sun, Y. Cao, L. Zhang, and J. Liao. 2019. Knowledge-driven service offloading decision for
vehicular edgecomputing:A deep reinforcementlearningapproach. IEEETrans. Veh.Technol. 68(2019),4192–4203.
[150] Y. Sun, X. Guo, J. Song, S. Zhou, Z. Jiang, X. Liu, and Z. Niu. 2019. Adaptive learning-based task offloading for
vehicular edgecomputingsystems. IEEETrans. Veh.Technol. 68(2019),3061–3074.
[151] H. Hua, Y. Qin, C. Hao, and J. Cao. 2019. Optimal energy management strategies for energy internet via deep rein-
forcementlearningapproach. Appl.Energ. 239(2019),598–609.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 35 ====
EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:35
[152] G. Liu, Y. Xu, Z. He, Y. Rao, J. Xia, and L. Fan. 2019. Deep learning-based channel prediction for edge computing
networks towardintelligentconnected vehicles. IEEEAccess 7(2019),114487–114495.
[153] L. Hou, L. Lei L, Z. Kan, and X. Wang. 2018. A Q-learning based proactive caching strategy for non-safety related
services invehicular networks. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6(2018),4512–4520.
[154] Z. Ning, P. Dong, J. Rodrigues, and Z. Ning. 2019. Deep reinforcement learning for vehicular edge computing: an
intelligentoffloadingsystem. ACMTrans.Intel.Syst.Tec. 10,6(2019),1–1.
[155] T. Le and R. Hu. 2018. Mobility-aware edge caching and computing in vehicle networks: A deep reinforcement
learning. IEEETrans. Veh.Technol. 67(2018),10190–10203.
[156] M. Khayyat, I. A. Elgendy, A. Muthanna, A. Alshahrani, S. Alharbi, and A. Koucheryavy. 2020. Advanced deep
learning-based computational offloading for multilevel vehicular edge-cloud computing networks. IEEE Access
8(2020),137052–137062.
[157] A.Ferdowsi,U.Challita,andW.Saad.2018.Deeplearningforreliablemobileedgeanalyticsinintelligenttransporta-
tionsystems. IEEEVeh.Technol.Mag. 14,1 (2018),62–70.
[158] J.Lu,J.Li,YuanQ,andB.Chen.2019.Amulti-vehiclecooperativeroutingmethodbasedonevolutionarygametheory.
InProceedings oftheIEEEIntelligentTransportationSystems Conference(ITSC’19) .IEEE. New Zealand.987–994.
[159] X.Hou,Z.Rem,J.Wang,W.Cheng,andH.Zhang.2020.Reliablecomputationoffloadingforedge-computing-enabled
software-definedIoV. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 7,8(2020),7097–7111.
[160] J.ZhangandK.B.Letaief.2020.Mobileedgeintelligenceandcomputingfortheinternetof vehicles. Proc.IEEE108,
2(2020),246–261.
[161] X.Wang,Y.Han,V.Leung,D.Niyato,X.Yan,andX.Chen.2019.Convergenceofedgecomputinganddeeplearning:
A comprehensivesurvey. IEEECommun. Surv. Tut. 22,2 (2019),869–904.
[162] M. KKowalski, Z. Lee, and T. Chan. 2021. Blockchain technology and trust relationships in trade finance. Technol.
Forecast. Soc .166(2020),120641.
[163] T.Wang,J.Guo,etal.2021.RBT:Adistributedreputationsystemforblockchain-basedpeer-to-peerenergytrading
withfairness consideration. Appl.Energ. 295,1(2021),117056.
[164] S. Pang, S. Qiao, T. Song, J. Zhao, and P. Zheng. 2019. An improved convolutional network architecture based on
residual modelingforperson re-identificationinedge computing. IEEEAccess 7(2019),106748–106759.
[165] J. Li, J. Wu, J. Li, A. K. Bashir, M. J. Piran, and A. Anjum. 2021. Blockchain-based trust edge knowledge inference of
multi-robotsystems for collaborativetasks. IEEECommun. Mag. 59,7(2021),94–100.
[166] Y.Wei,F.Yu,M.Song,andZ.Han.2019.Jointoptimizationofcaching,computing,andradioresourcesforfog-enabled
IoTusing naturalactor-critic deep reinforcementlearning. IEEEInternetThingsJ. 6,2(2019),2061–2073.
Received 17September 2021; revised 18June2022; accepted 8 August 2022
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.

