==== Page 1 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning
Models Smaller, Faster, and Better
GAURAV MENGHANI, Google Research, USA
Deep Learning has revolutionized the fields of computer vision, natural language understanding, speech recog-
nition, information retrieval and more. However, with the progressive improvements in deep learning models,
their number of parameters, latency, resources required to train, etc. have all have increased significantly.
Consequently, it has become important to pay attention to these footprint metrics of a model as well, not just
its quality. We present and motivate the problem of efficiency in deep learning, followed by a thorough survey
of the five core areas of model efficiency (spanning modeling techniques, infrastructure, and hardware) and the
seminal work there. We also present an experiment-based guide along with code, for practitioners to optimize
their model training and deployment. We believe this is the first comprehensive survey in the efficient deep
learning space that covers the landscape of model efficiency from modeling techniques to hardware support.
Our hope is that this survey would provide the reader with the mental model and the necessary understanding
of the field to apply generic efficiency techniques to immediately get significant improvements, and also equip
them with ideas for further research and experimentation to achieve additional gains.
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep Learning with neural networks has been the dominant methodology of training new machine
learning models for the past decade. Its rise to prominence is often attributed to the ImageNet
competition [ 45] in 2012. That year, a University of Toronto team submitted a deep convolutional
network (AlexNet [ 92], named after the lead developer Alex Krizhevsky), performed 41% better
than the next best submission. As a result of this trailblazing work, there was a race to create
deeper networks with an ever increasing number of parameters and complexity. Several model
architectures such as VGGNet [ 141], Inception [ 146], ResNet [ 73] etc. successively beat previous
records at ImageNet competitions in the subsequent years, while also increasing in their footprint
(model size, latency, etc.)
This effect has also been noted in natural language understanding (NLU), where the Transformer
[155] architecture based on primarily Attention layers, spurred the development of general purpose
language encoders like BERT [ 47], GPT-3 [ 26], etc. BERT specifically beat 11 NLU benchmarks
when it was published. GPT-3 has also been used in several places in the industry via its API. The
common aspect amongst these domains is the rapid growth in the model footprint (Refer to Figure
1), and the cost associated with training and deploying them.
Since deep learning research has been focused on improving the state of the art, progressive
improvements on benchmarks like image classification, text classification, etc. have been correlated
with an increase in the network complexity, number of parameters, the amount of training resources
required to train the network, prediction latency, etc. For instance, GPT-3 comprises of 175 billion
parameters, and costs millions of dollars to train just one iteration ([ 26]). This excludes the cost of
experimentation / trying combinations of different hyper-parameters, which is also computationally
expensive.
While these models perform well on the tasks they are trained on, they might not necessarily be
efficient enough for direct deployment in the real world. A deep learning practitioner might face
the following challenges when training or deploying a model.
•Sustainable Server-Side Scaling : Training and deploying large deep learning models is
costly. While training could be a one-time cost (or could be free if one is using a pre-trained
model), deploying and letting inference run for over a long period of time could still turn
Author’s address: Gaurav Menghani, gmenghani@google.com, Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA, 95054.arXiv:2106.08962v2  [cs.LG]  21 Jun 2021

==== Page 2 ====
2 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Computer Vision Models
(b) Natural Language Models
Fig. 1. Growth in the number of parameters in Computer Vision models over time. [118]
out to be expensive in terms of consumption of server-side RAM, CPU, etc.. There is also
a very real concern around the carbon footprint of datacenters even for organizations like
Google, Facebook, Amazon, etc. which spend several billion dollars each per year in capital
expenditure on their data-centers.
•Enabling On-Device Deployment : Certain deep learning applications need to run realtime
on IoT and smart devices (where the model inference happens directly on the device), for a
multitude of reasons (privacy, connectivity, responsiveness). Thus, it becomes imperative to
optimize the models for the target devices.
•Privacy & Data Sensitivity : Being able to use as little data as possible for training is critical
when the user-data might be sensitive. Hence, efficiently training models with a fraction of
the data means lesser data-collection required.
•New Applications : Certain new applications offer new constraints (around model quality
or footprint) that existing off-the-shelf models might not be able to address.
•Explosion of Models : While a singular model might work well, training and/or deploying
multiple models on the same infrastructure (colocation) for different applications might end
up exhausting the available resources.

==== Page 3 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 3
1.1 Efficient Deep Learning
The common theme around the above challenges is efficiency . We can break it down further as
follows:
•Inference Efficiency : This primarily deals with questions that someone deploying a model
for inference (computing the model outputs for a given input), would ask. Is the model small?
Is it fast, etc.? More concretely, how many parameters does the model have, what is the disk
size, RAM consumption during inference, inference latency, etc.
•Training Efficiency : This involves questions someone training a model would ask, such as
How long does the model take to train? How many devices? Can the model fit in memory?,
etc. It might also include questions like, how much data would the model need to achieve the
desired performance on the given task?
If we were to be given two models, performing equally well on a given task, we might want to
choose a model which does better in either one, or ideally both of the above aspects. If one were to
be deploying a model on devices where inference is constrained (such as mobile and embedded
devices), or expensive (cloud servers), it might be worth paying attention to inference efficiency.
Similarly, if one is training a large model from scratch on either with limited or costly training
resources, developing models that are designed for training efficiency would help.
Fig. 2. Pareto Optimality: Green dots represent pareto-optimal models (together forming the pareto-frontier),
where none of the other models (red dots) get better accuracy with the same inference latency, or the other
way around.
Regardless of what one might be optimizing for, we want to achieve pareto-optimality . This
implies that any model that we choose is the best for the tradeoffs that we care about. As an example
in Figure 2, the green dots represent pareto-optimal models, where none of the other models (red
dots) get better accuracy with the same inference latency, or the other way around. Together, the
pareto-optimal models (green dots) form our pareto-frontier . The models in the pareto-frontier
are by definition more efficient than the other models, since they perform the best for their given
tradeoff. Hence, when we seek efficiency, we should be thinking about discovering and improving
on the pareto-frontier.
To achieve this goal, we propose turning towards a collection of algorithms, techniques, tools,
and infrastructure that work together to allow users to train and deploy pareto-optimal models
with respect to model quality and its footprint.

==== Page 4 ====
4 Gaurav Menghani
2 A MENTAL MODEL
In this section we present the mental model to think about the collection of algorithms, techniques,
and tools related to efficient deep learning. We propose to structure them in five major areas, with
the first four focused on modeling, and the final one around infrastructure and tools.
Fig. 3. A mental model for thinking about algorithms, techniques, and tools related to efficiency in Deep
Learning.
(1)Compression Techniques : These are general techniques and algorithms that look at op-
timizing the model’s architecture, typically by compressing its layers. A classical example
is quantization [ 82], which tries to compress the weight matrices of a layer, by reducing its
precision (eg., from 32-bit floating point values to 8-bit unsigned integers), with minimal loss
in quality.
(2)Learning Techniques : These are algorithms which focus on training the model differently
(to make fewer prediction errors, require less data, converge faster, etc.). The improved
quality can then be exchanged for a smaller footprint / a more efficient model by trimming
the number of parameters if needed. An example of a learning technique is distillation [ 75],
which allows improving the accuracy of a smaller model by learning to mimic a larger model.
(3)Automation : These are tools for improving the core metrics of the given model using
automation. An example is hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) [ 61] where optimizing the
hyper-parameters helps increase the accuracy, which could then be then exchanged for a
model with lesser parameters. Similarly, architecture search [ 168] falls in this category too,
where the architecture itself is tuned and the search helps find a model that optimizes both
the loss / accuracy, and some other metric such as model latency, model size, etc.
(4)Efficient Architectures : These are fundamental blocks that were designed from scratch
(convolutional layers, attention, etc.), that are a significant leap over the baseline methods used
before them (fully connected layers, and RNNs respectively). As an example, convolutional
layers introduced parameter sharing for use in image classification, which avoids having
to learn separate weights for each input pixel, and also makes them robust to overfitting.
Similarly, attention layers [ 21] solved the problem of Information Bottleneck in Seq2Seq
models. These architectures can be used directly for efficiency gains.
(5)Infrastructure : Finally, we also need a foundation of infrastructure and tools that help us
build and leverage efficient models. This includes the model training framework, such as
Tensorflow [ 1], PyTorch [ 119], etc. (along with the tools required specifically for deploying
efficient models such as Tensorflow Lite (TFLite), PyTorch Mobile, etc.). We depend on the
infrastructure and tooling to leverage gains from efficient models. For example, to get both

==== Page 5 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 5
size and latency improvements with quantized models, we need the inference platform to
support common neural network layers in quantized mode.
We will survey each of these areas in depth in the following section.
3 LANDSCAPE OF EFFICIENT DEEP LEARNING
3.1 Compression Techniques
Compression techniques as mentioned earlier, are usually generic techniques for achieving a more
efficient representation of one or more layers in a neural network, with a possible quality trade off.
The efficiency goal could be to optimize the model for one or more of the footprint metrics, such
as model size, inference latency, training time required for convergence, etc. in exchange for as
little quality loss as possible. In some cases if the model is over-parameterized, these techniques
can improve model generalization.
3.1.1 Pruning. Given a neural network 𝑓(𝑋,𝑊), where𝑋is the input and 𝑊is the set of parameters
(or weights), pruning is a technique for coming up with a minimal subset 𝑊′such that the rest of
the parameters of 𝑊are pruned (or set to 0), while ensuring that the quality of the model remains
above the desired threshold. After pruning, we can say the network has been made sparse , where
the sparsity can be quantified as the ratio of the number of parameters that were pruned to the
number of parameters in the original network ( 𝑠=(1−|𝑊′|
|𝑊|)). The higher the sparsity, the lesser
the number of non-zero parameters in the pruned networks.
Fig. 4. A simplified illustration of pruning weights (connections) and neurons (nodes) in a neural network
comprising of fully connected layers.
Some of the classical works in this area are Optimal Brain Damage (OBD) by LeCun et al. [ 98], and
Optimal Brain Surgeon paper (OBD) by Hassibi et al. [ 72]. These methods usually take a network that
has been pre-trained to a reasonable quality and then iteratively prune the parameters which have
the lowest ‘saliency’ score, such that the impact on the validation loss is minimized. Once pruning

==== Page 6 ====
6 Gaurav Menghani
concludes, the network is fine-tuned with the remaining parameters. This process is repeated a
number of times until the desired number of original parameters are pruned (Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1: Standard Network Pruning with Fine-Tuning
Data: Pre-trained dense network with weights 𝑊, inputs𝑋, number of pruning rounds 𝑁, fraction of
parameters to prune per round 𝑝.
Result: Pruned network with weights 𝑊′.
1𝑊′←𝑊;
2for𝑖←1to𝑁do
3𝑆←compute_saliency_scores (𝑊′);
4𝑊′←𝑊′−select_min_k(𝑆,|𝑊′|
𝑝);
5𝑊′←fine_tune (𝑋,𝑊′)
6end
7return𝑊′
OBD approximates the saliency score by using a second-derivative of the parameters (𝜕2𝐿
𝜕𝑤2
𝑖),
where𝐿is the loss function, and 𝑤𝑖is the candidate parameter for removal. The intuition is that
the higher this value for a given parameter, the larger the change in the loss function’s gradient if
it were to be pruned.
For the purpose of speeding up the computation of the second-derivatives, OBD ignores cross-
interaction between the weights (𝜕2𝐿
𝜕𝑤𝑖𝜕𝑤𝑗), and hence computes only the diagonal elements of the
Hessian matrix. Otherwise, computing the full Hessian matrix is unwieldy for even a reasonable
number of weights (with 𝑛=104, the size of the matrix is 104×104=108). In terms of results,
LeCun et al. demonstrate that pruning reduced the parameters in a well-trained neural net by 8x
(combination of both automatic and manual removal) without a drop in classification accuracy.
Across different pruning strategies, the core algorithm could remain similar, with changes in the
following aspects.
•Saliency : While [ 72,98] use second-order derivatives, other methods rely on simpler magni-
tude based pruning [ 68,69], or momentum based pruning [ 46] etc. to determine the saliency
score.
•Structured v/s Unstructured : The most flexible way of pruning is unstructured (or random)
pruning, where all given parameters are treated equally. In structured pruning, parameters
are pruned in blocks (such as pruning row-wise in a weight matrix, or pruning channel-
wise in a convolutional filter [ 5,100,106,112], etc.). The latter allows easier leveraging of
inference-time gains in size and latency, since these blocks of pruned parameters can be
intelligently skipped for storage and inference. Note that unstructured pruning can also be
viewed as structured pruning with block size = 1.
•Distribution : The decision about how to distribute the sparsity budget (number of parame-
ters to be pruned), could be made either by pooling in all the parameters from the network
and then deciding which parameters to prune, or by smartly selecting how much to prune in
each layer individually [ 50,74]. [52,66] have found that some architectures like MobileNetV2,
EfficientNet [ 147] have thin first layers that do not contribute significantly to the number of
parameters and pruning them leads to an accuracy drop without much gain. Hence, intuitively
it would be helpful to allocate sparsity on a per-layer basis.
•Scheduling : Another question is how much to prune, and when? Should we prune an equal
number of parameters every round [ 69,72,98], or should we prune at a higher pace in the
beginning and gradually decrease [46, 167].

==== Page 7 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 7
Model Architecture Sparsity Type Sparsity % FLOPs Top-1 Accuracy % Source
MobileNet v2 - 1.0Dense (Baseline) 0% 1x 72.0% Sandler et al. [133]
Unstructured 75% 0.27x 67.7% Zhu et al. [167]
Unstructured 75% 0.52x 71.9% Evci et al. [54]
Structured (block-wise) 85% 0.11x 69.7% Elsen et al.
Unstructured 90% 0.12x 61.8% Zhu et al. [167]
Unstructured 90% 0.12x 69.7% Evci et al. [54]
Table 1. A sample of various sparsity results on the MobileNet v2 architecture with depth multiplier = 1.0.
•Regrowth : Some methods allow regrowing pruned connections [ 46,54] to keep the same
level of sparsity through constant cycles of prune-redistribute-regrow. Dettmers et al. [ 46]
estimate training time speedups between 2.7x - 5.6x by starting and operating with a sparse
model throughout. However there is a gap in terms of implementation of sparse operations
on CPU, GPU, and other hardware.
Beyond Model Optimization : Frankle et al.’s [ 57] work on the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis took
a different look at pruning, and postulated that within every large network lies a smaller network,
which can be extracted with the original initialization of its parameters, and retrained on its own to
match or exceed the performance of the larger network. The authors demonstrated these results on
multiple datasets, but others such as [ 58,107] were not able to replicate this on larger datasets such
as ImageNet [ 45]. Rather Liu et al. [ 107] demonstrate that the pruned architecture with random
initialization does no worse than the pruned architecture with the trained weights.
Discussion : There is a significant body of work that demonstrates impressive theoretical re-
duction in the model size (via number of parameters), or estimates the savings in FLOPs (Table 1).
However, a large fraction of the results are on unstructured pruning, where it is not currently clear
how these improvements can lead to reduction in footprint metrics (apart from using standard file
compression tools like GZip).
On the other hand, structured pruning with a meaningful block size is conducive to latency
improvements. Elsen et al. [ 52,66] construct sparse convolutional networks that outperform their
dense counterparts by 1.3-2.4×with≈66% of the parameters, while retaining the same Top-1
accuracy. They do this via their library to convert from the NHWC (channels-last) standard dense
representation to a special NCHW (channels-first) ‘Block Compressed Sparse Row’ (BCSR) repre-
sentation which is suitable for fast inference using their fast kernels on ARM devices, WebAssembly
etc. [ 18]. Although they also introduce some constraints on the kinds of sparse networks that can
be accelerated [ 19]. Overall, this is a promising step towards practical improvements in footprint
metrics with pruned networks.
3.1.2 Quantization. Almost all the weights and activations of a typical network are in 32-bit
floating-point values. One of the ideas of reducing model footprint is to reduce the precision for
the weights and activations by quantizing to a lower-precision datatype (often 8-bit fixed-point
integers). There are two kinds of gains that we can get from quantization: (a) lower model size,
and (b) lower inference latency. Often, only the model size is a constraint, and in this case we can
employ a technique called weight quantization and get model size improvements [ 13], where only
the model weights are in reduced precision. In order to get latency improvements, the activations
need to be in fixed-point as well (Activation Quantization [ 82,153], such that all the operations in
the quantized graph are happening in fixed-point math as well.
Weight Quantization : A simple scheme for quantizing weights to get model size improvements
(similar to [ 90]) is as follows. Given a 32-bit floating-point weight matrix in a model, we can map

==== Page 8 ====
8 Gaurav Menghani
the minimum weight value ( 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛) in that matrix to 0, and the maximum value ( 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥) to2𝑏−1
(where𝑏is the number of bits of precision, and 𝑏<32). Then we can linearly extrapolate all
values between them to an integer value in [ 0,2𝑏−1] (Figure 5). Thus, we are able to map each
floating point value to a fixed-point value where the latter requires a lesser number of bits than the
floating-point representation. This process can also be done for signed 𝑏-bit fixed-point integers,
where the output values will be in the range [- 2𝑏
2−1,2𝑏
2−1]. One of the reasonable values of 𝑏is
8, since this would lead to a 32/8=4×reduction in space, and also because of the near-universal
support for uint8_t andint8_t datatypes.
During inference, we go in the reverse direction where we recover a lossy estimate of the original
floating point value ( dequantization ) using just the 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥. This estimate is lossy since we
lost32−𝑏bits of information when did the rounding (another way to look at it is that a range of
floating point values map to the same quantized value).
Fig. 5. Quantizing floating-point continuous values to discrete fixed-point values. The continuous values
are clamped to the range 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛to𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥, and are mapped to discrete values in [ 0,2𝑏−1] (in the above figure,
𝑏=3, hence the quantized values are in the range [ 0,7].
[82, 90] formalize the quantization scheme with the following two constraints:
•The quantization scheme should be linear (affine transformation), so that the precision bits
are linearly distributed.
•0.0should map exactly to a fixed-point value 𝑥𝑞0, such that dequantizing 𝑥𝑞0gives us 0.0. This
is an implementation constraint, since 0is also used for padding to signify missing elements
in tensors, and if dequantizing 𝑥𝑞0leads to a non-zero value, then it might be interpreted
incorrectly as a valid element at that index.
The second constraint described above requires that 0be a part of the quantization range, which
in turn requires updating 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥, followed by clamping 𝑥to lie in[𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥]. Following
this, we can quantize 𝑥by constructing a piece-wise linear transformation as follows:
quantize(𝑥)=𝑥𝑞=round𝑥
𝑠
+𝑧 (1)
𝑠is the floating-point scale value (can be thought of as the inverse of the slope, which can be
computed using 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥and the range of the fixed-point values). 𝑧is an integer zero-point
value which is the quantized value that is assigned to 𝑥=0.0. This is the terminology followed in
literature [82, 90] (Algorithm 2).

==== Page 9 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 9
The dequantization step constructs ˆ𝑥, which is a lossy estimate of 𝑥, since we lose precision
when quantizing to a lower number of bits. We can compute it as follows:
dequantize(𝑥𝑞)=ˆ𝑥=𝑠(𝑥𝑞−𝑧) (2)
Since𝑠is in floating-point, ˆ𝑥is also a floating-point value (Algorithm 3). Note that the quantization
and dequantization steps can be performed for signed integers too by appropriately changing the
value𝑥𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛(which is the lowest fixed-point value in 𝑏-bits) in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Quantizing a given weight ma-
trixX
Data: Floating-point tensor to compress X, number
of precision bits 𝑏for the fixed-point
representation.
Result: Quantized tensor Xq.
1X𝑚𝑖𝑛,X𝑚𝑎𝑥←min(X,0),max(X,0);
2X←clamp(X,X𝑚𝑖𝑛,X𝑚𝑎𝑥);
3𝑠←𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛
2𝑏−1;
4𝑧←round
𝑥𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛−𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑠
;
5Xq←round
X𝑠
+𝑧;
6return Xq;Algorithm 3: Dequantizing a given
fixed-point weight matrix Xq
Data: Fixed-point matrix to dequantize Xq,
along with the scale 𝑠, and zero-point
𝑧values which were calculated
during quantization.
Result: Dequantized floating-point weight
matrix bX.
1bX←𝑠(Xq−𝑧);
2returnbX;
We can utilize the above two algorithms for quantizing and dequantizing the model’s weight
matrices. Quantizing a pre-trained model’s weights for reducing the size is termed as post-training
quantization in literature [ 13]. This might be sufficient for the purpose of reducing the model size
when there is sufficient representational capacity in the model.
There are other works in literature [ 80,99,127] that demonstrate slightly different variants of
quantization. XNOR-Net [ 127], Binarized Neural Networks [ 80] and others use 𝑏=1, and thus
have weight matrices which just have two possible values 0or1, and the quantization function
there is simply the sign(𝑥)function (assuming the weights are symmetrically distributed around 0).
The promise with such extreme quantization approaches is the theoretical 32/1=32×reduction
in model size without much quality loss. Some of the works claim improvements on larger net-
works like AlexNet [ 92], VGG [ 141], Inception [ 146] etc., which might already be more amenable
to compression. A more informative task would be to demonstrate extreme quantization on smaller
networks like the MobileNet family [ 77,133]. Additionally binary quantization (and other quan-
tization schemes like ternary [ 99], bit-shift based networks [ 127], etc.) promise latency-efficient
implementations of standard operations where multiplications and divisions are replaced by cheaper
operations like addition, subtraction, etc. These claims need to be verified because even if these
lead to theoretical reduction in FLOPs, the implementations still need support from the under-
lying hardware. A fair comparison would be using standard quantization with 𝑏=8, where the
multiplications and divisions also become cheaper, and are supported by the hardware efficiently
via SIMD instructions which allow for low-level data parallelism (for example, on x86 via the
SSE instruction set, on ARM via the Neon [ 108] intrinsics, and even on specialized DSPs like the
Qualcomm Hexagon [19]).
Activation Quantization : To be able to get latency improvements with quantized networks, the
math operations have to be done in fixed-point representations too. This means all intermediate

==== Page 10 ====
10 Gaurav Menghani
layer inputs and outputs are also in fixed-point, and there is no need to dequantize the weight-
matrices since they can be used directly along with the inputs.
Vanhoucke et al. [ 153] demonstrated a 3×inference speedup using a fully fixed-point model on an
x86 CPU, when compared to a floating-point model on the same CPU, without sacrificing accuracy.
The weights are still quantized similar to post-training quantization, however all layer inputs
(except the first layer) and the activations are fixed-point. In terms of performance, the primary
driver for this improvement was the availability of fixed-point SIMD instructions in Intel’s SSE4
instruction set [ 41], where commonly used building-block operations like the Multiply-Accumulate
(MAC) [ 40] can be parallelized. Since the paper was published, Intel has released two more iterations
of these instruction sets [37] which might further improve the speedups.
Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) : The network that Vanhoucke et al. mention was a 5
layer feed-forward network that was post-training quantized. However post-training quantization
can lead to quality loss during inference as highlighted in [ 82,90,156] as the networks become more
complex. These could be because of: (a) outlier weights that skew the computation of the quantized
values for the entire input range towards the outliers, leading to less number of bits being allocated
to the bulk of the range, or (b) Different distribution of weights within the weight matrix, for eg.
within a convolutional layer the distribution of weights between each filter might be different, but
they are quantized the same way. These effects might be more pronounced at low-bit widths due
to an even worse loss of precision. Wang et al. [ 156] try to retain the post-training quantization
but with new heuristics to allocate the precision bits in a learned fashion. Tools like the TFLite
Converter [ 149] augment post-training quantization with a representative dataset provided by the
user, to actively correct for errors at different points in the model by comparing the error between
the activations of the quantized and unquantized graphs.
Jacob et al. [ 82] propose (and further detailed by Krishnamoorthi et al. [ 90]) a training regime
which is quantization-aware . In this setting, the training happens in floating-point but the forward-
pass simulates the quantization behavior during inference. Both weights and activations are passed
through a function that simulates this quantization behavior ( fake-quantized is the term used by
many works [82, 90]).
Assuming Xis the tensor to be fake-quantized, Jacob et al. [ 82] propose adding special quanti-
zation nodes in the training graph that collect the statistics (moving averages of 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
related to the weights and activations to be quantized (see Figure 6(a) for an illustration). Once we
have these values for each X, we can derive the respective bXusing equations (1 and 2) as follows.
bX=FakeQuant(X)
=Dequantize(Quantize(X))
=𝑠((roundclamp(X,𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
𝑠
+𝑧)−𝑧)
=𝑠
roundclamp(X,𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
𝑠(3)
Since the above equation is not directly differentiable because of the rounding behavior, to
optimize a loss function 𝐿w.r.t. X, we can compute𝜕𝐿
𝜕Xby chain-rule using the Straight-Through
Estimator (STE) [ 22]. This allows us to make the staircase function differentiable with a linear
approximation (See [90] for details).
Quantization-Aware Training allows the network to adapt to tolerate the noise introduced by
the clamping and rounding behavior during inference. Once the network is trained, tools such as

==== Page 11 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 11
Model Architecture Quantization Type Top-1 Accuracy Size (MB) Latency (ms, Pixel2)
MobileNet v2-1.0 (224)Baseline 71.9% 14 89
Post-Training Quantization 63.7% 3.6 98
Quantization-Aware Training 70.9% 3.6 54
Table 2. A sample of various quantization results on the MobileNet v2 architecture for 8-bit quantization
[150]. We picked results on 8-bit, since from they can be readily used with hardware and software that exists
today.
the TFLite Model Converter [ 15] can generate the appropriate fixed-point inference model from a
network annotated with the quantization nodes.
Other Notable Works : Polino et al. [ 124] allow non-uniform distribution of precision with
learning a vector of quantization-points 𝑝, along with using distillation to further reduce loss of
accuracy. The results for simpler datasets like CIFAR-10 are comparable to [ 82,90]. However, when
working with ResNet architecture on the ImageNet dataset, they achieve lower model size and faster
inference by using shallower student networks. This is not a fair comparison, since other works do
not mix distillation along with quantization. Fan et al. [ 55] demonstrate accuracy improvement on
top of standard QAT ([ 82]) with𝑏<8. They hypothesize that the networks will learn better if the
fake-quantization is not applied to the complete tensor at the same time to allow unbiased gradients
to flow (instead of the STE approximation). Instead, they apply the fake-quantization operation
stochastically in a block-wise manner on the given tensor. They also demonstrate improvements
over QAT on 4-bit quantized Transformer and EfficientNet [147] networks.
Results : Refer to Table 2 for a comparison between the baseline floating-point model, post-
training quantized, and quantization-aware trained models [ 13]. The model with post-training
quantization gets close to the baseline, but there is still a significant accuracy difference. The model
size is 4×smaller, however the latency is slightly higher due to the need to dequantize the weights
during inference. The model with 8-bit Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) gets quite close to the
baseline floating point model while requiring 4×less disk space and being 1.64×faster.
Discussion :
•Quantization is a well-studied technique for model optimization and can help with very
significant reduction in model size (often 4×when using 8-bit quantization) and inference
latency.
•Weight quantization is straight-forward enough that it can be implemented by itself for
reducing model size. Activation quantization should be strongly considered because it en-
ables both latency reduction, as well as lower working memory required for intermediate
computations in the model (which is essential for devices with low memory availability)
•When possible, Quantization-Aware Training should be used. It has been shown to dominate
post-training quantization in terms of accuracy.
•However, tools like Tensorflow Lite have made it easy to rely on post-training quantization.
[149] shows that often there is minimal loss when using post-training quantization, and
with the help of a representative dataset this is further shrunk down. Wherever there is an
opportunity for switching to fixed-point operations, the infrastructure allows using them.
•For performance reasons, it is best to consider the common operations that follow a typical
layer such as Batch-Norm, Activation, etc. and ‘fold’ them in the quantization operations.
3.1.3 Other Compression Techniques. There are other compression techniques like Low-Rank
Matrix Factorization, K-Means Clustering, Weight-Sharing etc. which are also actively being used
for model compression [117] and might be suitable for further compressing hotspots in a model.

==== Page 12 ====
12 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Quantization-Aware Training
 (b) Final fixed-point inference graph
Fig. 6. (a) shows the injection of fake-quantization nodes to simulate quantization effect and collecting tensor
statistics, for exporting a fully fixed-point inference graph. (b) shows the inference graph derived from the
same graph as (a). Inputs and weights are in uint8 , and results of common operations are in uint32 . Biases
are kept in uint32 [82, 90]
.
3.2 Learning Techniques
Learning techniques try to train a model differently in order to obtain better quality metrics
(accuracy, F1 score, precision, recall, etc.) while allowing supplementing, or in some cases replacing
the traditional supervised learning. The improvement in quality can sometimes be traded off for a
smaller footprint by reducing the number of parameters / layers in the model and achieving the
same baseline quality with a smaller model. An incentive of paying attention to learning techniques
is that they are applied only on the training, without impacting the inference.
3.2.1 Distillation. Ensembles are well known to help with generalization [ 71,93]. The intuition
is that this enables learning multiple independent hypotheses, which are likely to be better than
learning a single hypothesis. [ 48] goes over some of the standard ensembling methods such as
bagging (learning models that are trained on non-overlapping data and then ensembling them),
boosting (learning models that are trained to fix the classification errors of other models in the
ensemble), averaging (voting by all the ensemble models), etc.Bucila et al. [ 27] used large ensembles
to label synthetic data that they generated using various schemes. A smaller neural net is then
trained to learn not just from the labeled data but also from this weakly labeled synthetic data.
They found that single neural nets were able to mimic the performance of larger ensembles, while
being 1000×smaller and faster. This demonstrated that it is possible to transfer the cumulative
knowledge of ensembles to a single small model. Though it might not be sufficient to rely on just
the existing labeled data.
Hinton et al. [ 75], in their seminal work explored how smaller networks (students) can be taught
to extract ‘dark knowledge’ from larger models / ensembles of larger models (teachers) in a slightly
different manner. Instead of having to generate synthetic-data, they use the larger teacher model
to generate soft-labels on existing labeled data. The soft-labels assign a probability to each class,
instead of hard binary values in the original data. The intuition is that these soft-labels capture the
relationship between the different classes which the model can learn from. For example, a truck is

==== Page 13 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 13
more similar to a car than to an apple, which the model might not be able to learn directly from
hard labels.
The student network learns to minimize the cross-entropy loss on these soft labels, along with
the original ground-truth hard labels. Since the probabilities of the incorrect classes might be
very small, the logits are scaled down by a ‘temperature’ value ≥1.0, so that the distribution is
‘softened’. If the input vector is X, and the teacher model’s logits are Z(t), the teacher model’s
softened probabilities with temperature 𝑇can be calculated as follows using the familiar softmax
function:
Y(𝑡)
𝑖=exp(Z(t)
i/𝑇)
𝑛∑︁
𝑗=1exp(Z(t)
j/𝑇)(4)
Note that as 𝑇increases, the relative differences between the various elements of 𝑌(𝑡)decreases.
This happens because if all elements are divided by the same constant, the softmax function would
lead to a larger drop for the bigger values. Hence, as the temperature 𝑇increases, we see the
distribution of 𝑌(𝑡)‘soften’ further.
When training along with labeled data ( X,Y), and the student model’s output ( Y(s)), we can
describe the loss function as:
𝐿=𝜆1·𝐿ground−truth+𝜆2·𝐿distillation
=𝜆1·CrossEntropy(Y,Y(s);𝜃)+𝜆2·CrossEntropy(Y(t),Y(s);𝜃)(5)
CrossEntropy is the cross-entropy loss function, which takes in the labels and the output. For
the first loss term, we pass along the ground truth labels, and for the second loss term we pass the
corresponding soft labels from the teacher model for the same input. 𝜆1and𝜆2control the relative
importance of the standard ground truth loss and the distillation loss respectively. When 𝜆1=0,
the student model is trained with just the distillation loss. Similarly, when 𝜆2=0, it is equivalent to
training with just the ground-truth labels. Usually, the teacher network is pre-trained and frozen
during this process, and only the student network is updated. Refer to Figure 7 for an illustration
of this process.
In the paper, Hinton et al. [ 75] were able to closely match the accuracy of a 10 model ensemble for
a speech recognition task with a single distilled model. Urban et al. [ 152] did a comprehensive study
demonstrating that distillation significantly improves performance of shallow student networks as
small as an MLP with one hidden layer on tasks like CIFAR-10. Sanh et al. [ 134] use the distillation
loss for compressing a BERT [ 47] model (along with a cosine loss that minimizes the cosine distance
between two internal vector representation of the input as seen by the teacher and student models).
Their model retains 97% of the performance of BERT-Base while being 40% smaller and 60% faster
on CPU.
It is possible to adapt the general idea of distillation to work on intermediate outputs of teachers
and students. Zagoruyko et al. [ 165] transfer intermediate ‘attention maps’ between teacher and
student convolutional networks. The intuition is to make the student focus on the parts of the
image where the teacher is paying attention to. MobileBERT [ 144] uses a progressive-knowledge
transfer strategy where they do layer-wise distillation between the BERT student and teacher
models, but they do so in stages, where the first 𝑙layers are distilled in the 𝑙-th stage. Along with
other architecture improvements, they obtain a 4.3 ×smaller and 5.5×faster BERT with small losses
in quality.

==== Page 14 ====
14 Gaurav Menghani
Fig. 7. Distillation of a smaller student model from a larger pre-trained teacher model. Both the teacher and
student models receive the same input. The teacher is used to generate ‘soft-labels’ for the student, which
gives the student more information than just hard binary labels. The student is trained using the regular
cross-entropy loss with the hard labels, as well as using the distillation loss function which uses the soft labels
from the teacher. In this setting, the teacher is frozen, and only the student receives the gradient updates.
Another idea that has been well explored is exploiting a model trained in a supervised training
to label unlabeled data. Blum et al. [ 24] in their paper from 1998, report halving the error rate of
their classifiers by retraining on a subset of pseudo-labels generated using the previous classifiers.
This has been extended through distillation to use the teacher model to label a large corpus of
unlabeled data, which can then be used to improve the quality of the student model [ 109,161,162].
Overall, distillation has been empirically shown to improve both the accuracy as well as the
speed of convergence of student models across many domains. Hence, it enables training smaller
models which might otherwise not be have an acceptable quality for deployment.
Discussion :
•Distillation is an adaptable technique that needs minimal changes in the training infrastruc-
ture to be used. Even if the teacher model cannot be executed at the same time as the student
model, the teacher model’s predictions can be collected offline and treated as another source
of labels.
•When there is sufficient label data, there is ample evidence that distillation is likely to improve
the student model’s predictions. If there is a large corpus of unlabeled data, the teacher model
can be used to generate pseudo-labels on the unlabeled data, which can further improve the
student model’s accuracy.
•Strategies for intermediate-layer distillation have also shown to be effective in the case of
complex networks. In such scenarios, a new loss term minimizing the difference between the
outputs of the two networks at some semantically identical intermediate point(s) needs to be
added.
3.2.2 Data Augmentation. When training large models for complex tasks in a supervised learning
regime, the size of the training data corpus correlates with improvement in generalization. [ 143]
demonstrates logarithmic increase in the prediction accuracy with increase in the number of labeled

==== Page 15 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 15
examples. However, getting high-quality labeled data often requires a human in the loop and could
be expensive.
Data Augmentation is a nifty way of addressing the scarcity of labeled data, by synthetically
inflating the existing dataset through some augmentation methods . These augmentation methods
are transformations that can be applied cheaply on the given examples, such that the new label of
the augmented example does not change, or can be cheaply inferred. As an example, consider the
classical image classification task of labeling a given image to be a cat or a dog. Given an image of
a dog, translating the image horizontally / vertically by a small number of pixels, rotating it by a
small angle, etc. would not materially change the image, so the transformed image should still be
labeled as ‘dog’ by the classifier. This forces the classifier to learn a robust representation of the
image that generalizes better across these transformations.
The transformations as described above have long been demonstrated to improve accuracy of
convolutional networks [ 36,140]. They have also been a core part of seminal works in Image
Classification. A prime example is AlexNet [ 92], where such transformations were used to increase
the effective size of the training dataset by 2048 ×, which won the ImageNet competition in 2012.
Since then it has became common to use such transformations for Image Classification models
(Inception [146], XCeption [34], ResNet [73], etc.).
We can categorize data-augmentation methods as follows (also refer to Figure 8):
•Label-Invariant Transformations : These are some of the most common transformations,
where the transformed example retains the original label. These can include simple geometric
transformations such as translation, flipping, cropping, rotation, distortion, scaling, shearing,
etc. However the user has to verify the label-invariance property with each transformation
for the specific task at hand.
•Label-Mixing Transformations : Transformations such as Mixup [ 166], mix inputs from
two different classes in a weighted manner and treat the label to be a correspondingly weighted
combination of the two classes (in the same ratio). The intuition is that the model should be
able to extract out features that are relevant for both the classes. Other transformations like
Sample Pairing also seem to help [81].
•Data-Dependent Transformations : In this case, transformations are chosen such that they
maximize the loss for that example [ 56], or are adversarially chosen so as to fool the classifier
[67].
•Synthetic Sampling : These methods synthetically create new training examples. Algorithms
like SMOTE [ 30] allow re-balancing the dataset to make up for skew in the datasets, and
GANs can be used to synthetically create new samples [167] to improve model accuracy.
•Composition of Transformations : These are transformations that are themselves com-
posed of other transformations, and the labels are computed depending on the nature of
transformations that stacked.
Fig. 8. Some common types of data augmentations. Source: [102]

==== Page 16 ====
16 Gaurav Menghani
TransformationValidation Accuracy
Improvement (%)
rotate 1.3
shear-x 0.9
shear-y 0.9
translate-x 0.4
translate-y 0.4
sharpness 0.1
autoContrast 0.1
Table 3. A breakdown of the contribution of various transformations on the validation accuracy of a model
trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Source: [44].
Discussion : Apart from Computer Vision, Data-Augmentation has also been used in NLP, and
Speech. In NLP, a common idea that has been used is ‘back-translation’ [ 163] where augmented
examples are created by training two translation models, one going from the source language to the
target language, and the other going back from the target language to the original source language.
Since the back-translation is not exact, this process is able to generate augmented samples for the
given input. Other methods like WordDropout [ 139] stochastically set embeddings of certain words
to zero. SwitchOut [ 158] introduces a similarity measure to disallow augmentations that are too
dissimilar to the original input. In Speech [70], the input audio samples are translated to the left /
right before being passed to the decoder.
While the augmentation policies are usually hand-tuned, there are also methods such as Au-
toAugment [ 43] where the augmentation policy is learned through a Reinforcement-Learning
(RL) based search, searching for the transformations to be applied, as well as their respective
hyper-parameters. Though this is shown to improve accuracy, it is also complicated and expensive
to setup a separate search for augmentation, taking as many as 15000 GPU hours to learn the
optimal policy on ImageNet. The RandAugment [ 44] paper demonstrated that it is possible to
achieve similar results while reducing the search space to just two hyper-parameters (number of
augmentation methods, and the strength of the distortion) for a given model and dataset.
Overall, we see that data-augmentation leads to better generalization of the given models. Some
techniques can be specific for their domains RandAugment (Vision), BackTranslation and SwitchOut
(NLP), etc. However, the core principles behind them make it likely that similar methods can be
derived for other domains too (refer to our categorization of data-augmentation methods above).
3.2.3 Self-Supervised Learning. The Supervised-Learning paradigm relies heavily on labeled data.
As mentioned earlier, it requires human intervention, and is expensive as well. To achieve reasonable
quality on a non-trivial task, the amount of labeled data requires is large too. While techniques like
Data-Augmentation, Distillation etc., help, they too rely on the presence of some labeled data to
achieve a baseline performance.
Self-Supervised learning (SSL) avoids the need for labeled data to learn generalized representa-
tions, by aiming to extract more supervisory bits from each example. Since it focuses on learning
robust representations of the example itself, it does not need to focus narrowly on the label. This
is typically done by solving a pretext task where the model pretends that a part / structure of the
input is missing and learns to predict it (Refer to Figure 9 for examples). Since unlabeled data is vast
in many domains (Books, Wikipedia, and other text for NLP, Web Images & Videos for Computer
Vision, etc.), the model would not be bottlenecked by data for learning to solve these pretext tasks.
Once the models learn generic representations that transfer well across tasks, they can be adapted
to solve the target task by adding some layers that project the representation to the label space, and

==== Page 17 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 17
Fig. 9. General theme of pretext tasks. Source: [96]
fine-tuning the model with the labeled data. Since the labeled data is not being used for learning
rudimentary features, but rather how to map the high-level representations into the label space, the
quantum of labeled data is going to be a fraction of what would have been required for training the
model from scratch. From this lens, fine-tuning models pre-trained with Self-Supervised learning
aredata-efficient (they converge faster, attain better quality for the same amount of labeled data
when compared to training from scratch, etc.) ([47, 78]).
Fig. 10. Validation Error w.r.t. number of training examples for different training methods on IMDb (from
scratch, ULMFiT Supervised: pre-training with WikiText-103 and fine-tuning using labeled data, ULMFit
Semi-Supervised: Pre-Training with WikiText-103 as well as unlabeled data from the target dataset and
fine-tuning with labeled data). Source: [78]
An example of this two step process of pre-training on unlabeled data and fine-tuning on labeled
data has gained rapid acceptance in the NLP community. ULMFiT [ 78] pioneered the idea of training
a general purpose language model, where the model learns to solve the pretext task of predicting
the next word in a given sentence, without the neeof an associated label. The authors found that
using a large corpus of preprocessed unlabeled data such as the WikiText-103 dataset (derived from
English Wikipedia pages) was a good choice for the pre-training step. This was sufficient for the
model to learn general properties about the language, and the authors found that fine-tuning such
a pre-trained model for a binary classification problem (IMDb dataset) required only 100 labeled
examples (≈10×less labeled examples otherwise). Refer to Figure 10. If we add a middle-step of
pre-training using unlabeled data from the same target dataset, the authors report needing ≈20×
fewer labeled examples.
This idea of pre-training followed by fine-tuning is also used in BERT [ 47] (and other related
models like GPT, RoBERTa, T5, etc.) where the pre-training steps involves learning to solve two
tasks. Firstly, the Masked Language Model where about 15% of the tokens in the given sentence are
masked and the model needs to predict the masked token. The second task is, given two sentences
𝐴and𝐵, predict if𝐵follows𝐴. The pre-training loss is the mean of the losses for the two tasks.
Once pre-trained the model can then be used for classification or seq2seq tasks by adding additional

==== Page 18 ====
18 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Detecting relative order of patches.
Source: [49].
(b) Predicting the degree of rotation of
a given image.
Fig. 11. Pretext tasks for vision problems.
layers on top of the last hidden layer. When it was published, BERT beat the State-of-the-Art on
eleven NLP tasks.
Similar to NLP, the pretext tasks in Vision have been used to train models that learn general
representations. [ 49] extracts two patches from a training example and then trains the model to
predict their relative position in the image (Refer to Figure 11(a)). They demonstrate that using
a network pre-trained in this fashion improves the quality of the final object detection task, as
compared to randomly initializing the network. Similarly, another task is to predict the degree
of rotation for a given rotated image [ 59]. The authors report that the network trained in a self-
supervised manner this way can be fine-tuned to perform nearly as well as a fully supervised
network.
Another common theme is Contrastive Learning, where the model is trained to distinguish
between similar and dissimilar inputs. Frameworks such as SimCLR [ 32,33], try to learn representa-
tionsℎ𝑖andℎ𝑗for two given inputs ˜𝑥𝑖and ˜𝑥𝑗, where the latter two are differently augmented views
of the same input, such that the cosine similarity of the projections of ℎ𝑖andℎ𝑗,𝑧𝑖and𝑧𝑗(using a
separate function 𝑔(.)) can be maximized. Similarly, for dissimilar inputs the cosine similarity of 𝑧𝑖
and𝑧𝑗should be minimized. The authors report a Top-1 accuracy of 73.9%on ImageNet with only
1% labels (13 labels per class), and outperform the ResNet-50 supervised baseline with only 10%
labels.
Fig. 12. SimCLR framework for learning visual representations. Source: [32]
Discussion : Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has demonstrated significant success in the general
representational learning with unlabeled data, followed by fine-tuning to adapt the model to the
target task with a modest number of labeled examples. Yann LeCun has likened Self-Supervision as
the cake, and Supervised Learning as the icing on top [ 96], implying that SSL will be the primary

==== Page 19 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 19
way of training high-quality models in the future as we move beyond tasks where labeled data is
abundant.
With unlabeled data being practically limitless, SSL’s success is dependent on creating useful
pretext tasks for the domain of interest. As demonstrated across NLP [ 47,78], Vision [ 32,120],
Speech [ 60], etc., Self-Supervision is indeed not just helpful in speeding and improving convergence,
but also enabling achieving high quality in tasks where it was intractable to get enough labeled
samples.
Practically, for someone training Deep Learning models on a custom task (say a speech recognition
model for a remote African dialect), having a pre-trained checkpoint of a model trained in a self-
supervised fashion (such as wav2vec [ 20], which pre-trained in a similar way to BERT [ 47]), enables
them to only spend an extremely tiny fraction of resources on both data labeling, as well as training
to fine-tune to a good enough quality. In some cases, such as SimCLR [ 33], SSL approaches have
actually beaten previous supervised baselines with sophisticated models like ResNet-50. Hence, we
are hopeful that SSL methods will be crucial for ML practitioners for training high-quality models
cheaply.
3.3 Automation
It is possible to delegate some of the work around efficiency to automation, and letting automated
approaches search for ways of training more efficient models. Apart from reducing work for
humans, it also lowers the bias that manual decisions might introduce in model training, apart
from systematically and automatically looking for optimal solutions. The trade-off is that these
methods might require large computational resources, and hence have to be carefully applied.
3.3.1 Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO). One of the commonly used methods that fall under
this category is Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO) [ 164]. Hyper-parameters such as initial
learning rate, weight decay, etc. have to be carefully tuned for faster convergence [ 85]. They can
also decide the network architecture such as the number of fully connected layers, number of filters
in a convolutional layer, etc.
Experimentation can help us build an intuition for the range in which these parameters might lie,
but finding the best values requires a search for the exact values that optimize the given objective
function (typically the loss value on the validation set). Manually searching for these quickly
becomes tedious with the growth in the number of hyper-parameters and/or their possible values.
Hence, let us explore possible algorithms for automating the search. To formalize this, let us assume
without the loss of generalization, that we are optimizing the loss value on the given dataset’s
validation split. Then, let Lbe the loss function, 𝑓be the model function that is learnt with the set
of hyper-parameters ( 𝜆),𝑥be the input, and 𝜃be the model parameters. With the search, we are
trying to find 𝜆∗such that,
𝜆∗=argmin
𝜆∈ΛL(𝑓𝜆(𝑥;𝜃),𝑦) (6)
Λis the set of all possible hyper-parameters. In practice, the Λcan be a very large set containing
all possible combinations of the hyper-parameters, which would often be intractable since hyper-
parameters like learning rate are real-valued. A common strategy is to approximate Λby picking a
finite set of trials ,𝑆={𝜆(1),𝜆(2),...,𝜆(𝑛)}, such that𝑆∈Λ, and then we can approximate Equation
(6) with:
𝜆∗≈ argmin
𝜆∈{𝜆(1),...,𝜆(𝑛)}L(𝑓𝜆(𝑥;𝜃),𝑦) (7)

==== Page 20 ====
20 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Grid Search
 (b) Random Search
 (c) Bayesian Optimization
Fig. 13. Hyper-Parameter Search algorithms. Source: [39]
As we see, the choice of 𝑆is crucial for the approximation to work. The user has to construct a
range of reasonable values for each hyper-parameter 𝜆𝑖∈𝜆. This can be based on prior experience
with those hyper-parameters.
A simple algorithm for automating HPO is Grid Search (also referred to as Parameter Sweep),
where𝑆consists of all the distinct and valid combinations of the given hyper-parameters based
on their specified ranges. Each trial can then be run in parallel since each trial is independent
of the others, and the optimal combination of the hyper-parameters is found once all the trials
have completed. Since this approach tries all possible combinations, it suffers from the curse of
dimensionality , where the total number of trials grow very quickly.
Another approach is Random Search where trials are sampled randomly from the search space
[23]. Since each trial is independent of the others, it can still be executed randomly. However, there
are few critical benefits of Random Search:
(1)Since the trials are i.i.d. (not the case for Grid Search), the resolution of the search can be
changed on-the-fly (if the computational budget has changed, or certain trials have failed).
(2)Likelihood of finding the optimal 𝜆∗increases with the number of trials, which is not the
case with Grid Search.
(3)If there are𝐾real-valued hyper-parameters, and 𝑁total trials, grid search would pick 𝑁1
𝐾
for each hyper-parameter. However, not all hyper-parameters might be important. Random
Search picks a random value for each hyper-parameter per trial. Hence, in cases with low
effective dimensionality of the search space, Random Search performs better than Grid Search.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) based search [ 2,111] is a model-based sequential approach where
the search is guided by actively estimating the value of the objective function at different points in
the search space, and then spawning trials based on the information gathered so far. The estimation
of the objective function is done using a surrogate function that starts off with a prior estimate.
The trials are created using an acquisition function which picks the next trial using the surrogate
function, the likelihood of improving on the optimum so far, whether to explore / exploit etc. As the
trials complete, both these functions will refine their estimates. Since the method keeps an internal
model of how the objective function looks and plans the next trials based on that knowledge, it is
model-based. Also, since the selection of trials depends on the results of the past trials, this method
is sequential. BO improves over Random Search in that the search is guided rather than random,
thus fewer trials are required to reach the optimum. However, it also makes the search sequential
(though it is possible to run multiple trials in parallel, overall it will lead to some wasted trials).
One of the strategies to save training resources with the above search algorithms is the Early
Stopping of trials that are not promising. Google’s Vizier [ 61] uses Median Stopping Rule for early

==== Page 21 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 21
stopping, where a trial is terminated if it’s performance at a time step 𝑡is below the the median
performance of all trials run till that point of time.
Other algorithms for HPO include:
(1)Population Based Training (PBT) [83]: This method is similar to evolutionary approaches
like genetic algorithms, where a fixed number of trials (referred to as the population) are
spawned and trained to convergence. Each trial starts with a random set of hyper-parameters,
and trained to a pre-determined number of steps. At this point, all trials are paused, and every
trial’s weights and parameters might be replaced by the weights and parameters from the
‘best’ trial in the population so far. This is the exploitation part of the search. For exploration ,
these hyper-parameters are perturbed from their original values. This process repeats till
convergence. It combines both the search and training in a fixed number of trials that run in
parallel. It also only works with adaptive hyper-parameters like learning rate, weight-decay,
etc. but cannot be used where hyper-parameters change the model structure. Note that the
criteria for picking the ‘best’ trial does not have to be differentiable.
(2)Multi-Armed Bandit Algorithms : Methods like Successive Halving (SHA) [ 84] and Hyper-
Band [ 101] are similar to random search, but they allocate more resources to the trials which
are performing well. Both these methods need the user to specify the total computational
budget𝐵for the search (can be the total number of epochs of training, for instance). They
then spawn and train a fixed number of trials with randomly sampled hyper-parameters
while allocating the training budget. Once the budget is exhausted, the worse performing
fraction (𝜂−1
𝜂) of the trials are eliminated, and the remaining trials’ new budget is multiplied
by𝜂. In the case of SHA, 𝜂is 2, so the bottom1
2of the trials are dropped, and the training
budget for the remaining trials is doubled. For Hyper-Band 𝜂is 3 or 4. Hyper-Band differs
from SHA in that the user does not need to specify the maximum number of parallel trials,
which introduces a trade-off between the total budget and the per-trial allocation.
HPO Toolkits : There are several software toolkits that incorporate HPO algorithms as well as
an easy to use interface (UI, as well as a way to specify the hyper-parameters and their ranges).
Vizier [ 61] (an internal Google tool, also available via Google Cloud for blackbox tuning). Amazon
offers Sagemaker [ 122] which is functionally similar and can also be accessed as an AWS service.
NNI [ 131], Tune [ 103], Advisor [ 31] are other open-source HPO software packages that can be used
locally.
3.3.2 Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Neural Architecture Search can be thought of an extension
of Hyper-Parameter Optimization wherein we are searching for parameters that change the network
architecture itself.
We find that there is consensus in the literature [ 53] around categorizing NAS as a system
comprising of the following parts:
(1)Search Space : These are the operations that are allowed in the graph (Convolution ( 1×1,3×
3,5×5), Fully Connected, Pooling, etc.), as well as the semantics of how these operations
and their outputs connect to other parts of the network.
(2)Search Algorithm & State : This is the algorithm that controls the architecture search
itself. Typically the standard algorithms that apply in HPO (Grid Search, Random Search,
Bayesian Optimization, Evolutionary Algorithms), can be used for NAS as well. However,
using Reinforcement Learning (RL) [ 168], and Gradient Descent [ 105] are popular alternatives
too.
(3)Evaluation Strategy : This defines how we evaluate a model for fitness. It can simply be a
conventional metric like validation loss, accuracy, etc. Or it can also be a compound metric,

==== Page 22 ====
22 Gaurav Menghani
as in the case of MNasNet [ 147] which creates a single custom metric based on accuracy as
well as latency.
Fig. 14. Neural Architecture Search: The controller can be thought of as a unit that encodes the search space,
the search algorithm itself, and the state it maintains (typically the model that helps generate the candidates).
The algorithm generates candidate models in the search space 𝑆, and receives an evaluation feedback. This
feedback is used to update the state, and generate better candidate models.
The user is supposed to either explicitly or implicitly encode the search space. Together with the
search algorithm, we can view this as a ‘controller’ which generates sample candidate networks
(Refer to Figure 14). The evaluation stage will then train and evaluate these candidates for fitness.
This fitness value is then passed as feedback to the search algorithm, which will use it for generating
better candidates. While the implementation of each of these blocks vary, this structure is common
across the seminal work in this area.
Zoph et. al’s paper from 2016 [ 168], demonstrated that end-to-end neural network architectures
can be generated using Reinforcement Learning. In this case, the controller is a Recurrent Neural
Network, which generates the architectural hyper-parameters of a feed-forward network one
layer at a time, for example, number of filters, stride, filter size, etc. They also support adding skip
connections (refer Figure 15). The network semantics are baked into the controller, so generating
a network that behaves differently requires changing the controller. Also, training the controller
itself is expensive (taking 22,400 GPU hours [ 169]), since the entire candidate network has to be
trained from scratch for a single gradient update to happen. In a follow up paper [ 169], they come
up with a refined search space where instead of searching for the end-to-end architecture, they
search for cells: A ‘Normal Cell’ that takes in an input, processes it, and returns an output of the
same spatial dimensions. And a ‘Reduction Cell’ that process its input, and returns an output whose
spatial dimensions are scaled down by a factor of 2. Each cell is a combination of 𝐵blocks. The
controller’s RNN generates one block at a time, where it picks outputs of two blocks in the past, the
respective operations to apply on them, and how to combine them into a single output. The Normal
and Reduction cells are stacked in alternating fashion ( 𝑁Normal cells followed by 1 Reduction
cell, where𝑁is tunable) to construct an end-to-end network for CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Learning
these cells individually rather than learning the entire network seems to improve the search time
by 7×, when compared to the end-to-end network search in [ 168], while beating the state-of-the-art
in CIFAR-10 at that time.
Other approaches such as evolutionary techniques [ 130], differentiable architecture search [ 105],
progressive search [ 104], parameter sharing [ 123], etc. try to reduce the cost of architecture search
(in some cases reducing the compute cost to a couple of GPU days instead of thousands of GPU
days). These are covered in detail in [53].
While most of the early papers focused on finding the architectures that performed best on
quality metrics like accuracy, unconstrained by the footprint metrics. However, when focusing on
efficiency, we are often interested in specific tradeoffs between quality and footprint. Architecture
Search can help with multi-objective searches that optimize for both quality and footprint. MNasNet

==== Page 23 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 23
Fig. 15. A NASNet controller generating the architecture, recursively making one decision at a time and
generating a single block in the image (making a total of 5 decisions). Source: [169].
[147] is one such work. It incorporates the model’s latency on the target device into the objective
function directly, as follows:
maximize𝑚𝐴𝐶𝐶(𝑚)×𝐿𝐴𝑇(𝑚)
𝑇𝑤
(8)
Where𝑚is the candidate model, 𝐴𝐶𝐶 is the accuracy metric, and 𝐿𝐴𝑇 is the latency of the given
model on the desired device. 𝑇is the target latency. 𝑤is recommended to be −0.07. FBNet [ 160]
uses a similar approach with a compound reward function that has a weighted combination of the
loss value on the validation set and the latency. However instead of measuring the latency of the
candidate model on device, they use a pre-computed lookup table to approximate the latency to
speed up the search process. They achieve networks that are upto 2.4×smaller and 1.5×faster than
MobileNet, while finishing the search in 216 GPU Hours. Other works such as MONAS [ 79] use
Reinforcement Learning to incorporate power consumption into the reward function along with
hard constraints on the number of MAC operations in the model, and discover pareto-frontiers
under the given constraints.
Discussion : Automation plays a critical role in model efficiency. Hyper-Parameter Optimization
(HPO) is now a natural step in training models and can extract significant quality improvements,
while minimizing human involvement. In case the cost HPO becomes large, algorithms like Bayesian
Optimization, Hyper-Band etc. with early stopping techniques can be used. HPO is also available
in ready-to-use software packages like Tune [ 103], Vizier via Google Cloud [ 61], NNI [ 131], etc.
Similarly, recent advances in Neural Architecture Search (NAS) also make it feasible to construct
architectures in a learned manner, while having constraints on both quality and footprint [ 147].
Assuming several hundred GPU hours worth of compute required for the NAS run to finish, and an
approx cost of $3 GPU / hour on leading cloud computing services, this makes using NAS methods
financially feasible and not similar in cost to manual experimentation with model architecture
when optimizing for multiple objectives.
3.4 Efficient Architectures
Another common theme for tackling efficiency problems is to go back to the drawing board, and
design layers and models that are efficient by design to replace the baseline. They are typically
designed with some insight which might lead to a design that is better in general, or it might be
better suited for the specific task. In this section, we lay out an examples of such efficient layers
and models to illustrate this idea.
3.4.1 Vision. One of the classical example of efficient layers in the Vision domain are the Convolu-
tional layers, which improved over Fully Connected (FC) layers in Vision models. FC layers suffer
from two primary issues:

==== Page 24 ====
24 Gaurav Menghani
(1)FC layers ignore the spatial information of the input pixels. Intuitively, it is hard to build an
understanding of the given input by looking at individual pixel values in isolation. They also
ignore the spatial locality in nearby regions.
(2)Secondly, using FC layers also leads to an explosion in the number of parameters when
working with even moderately sized inputs. A 100×100RGB image with 3 channels, would
lead to each neuron in the first layer having 3×104connections. This makes the network
susceptible to overfitting also.
Convolutional layers avoid this by learning ‘filters’, where each filter is a 3D weight matrix of a
fixed size ( 3×3,5×5, etc.), with the third dimension being the same as the number of channels
in the input. Each filter is convolved over the input to generate a feature map for that given filter.
These filters learn to detect specific features, and convolving them with a particular input patch
results in a single scalar value that is higher if the feature is present in that input patch.
These learned features are simpler in lower layers (such as edges (horizontal, vertical, diagonal,
etc.)), and more complex in subsequent layers (texture, shapes, etc.). This happens because the
subsequent layers use the feature maps generated by previous layers, and each pixel in the input
feature map of the 𝑖-th layer, depends on the past 𝑖−1layers. This increases the receptive field of
the said pixel as 𝑖increases, progressively increasing the complexity of the features that can be
encoded in a filter.
The core idea behind the efficiency of Convolutional Layers is that the same filter is used
everywhere in the image, regardless of where the filter is applied. Hence, enforcing spatial invariance
while sharing the parameters. Going back to the example of a 100×100RGB image with 3 channels,
a5×5filter would imply a total of 75(5×5×3) parameters. Each layer can learn multiple unique
filters, and still be within a very reasonable parameter budget. This also has a regularizing effect,
wherein a dramatically reduced number of parameters allow for easier optimization, and reducing
the likelihood of overfitting.
Convolutional Layers are usually coupled with Pooling Layers, which allow dimensionality
reduction by subsampling the input (aggregating a sliding 2-D window of pixels, using functions
like max, avg, etc.). Pooling would lead to smaller feature maps for the next layer to process,
which makes it faster to process. LeNet5 [ 97] was the first Convolutional Network which included
convolutional layers, pooling, etc. Subsequently, many iterations of these networks have been
proposed with various improvements. AlexNet [ 92], Inception [ 146], ResNet [ 73], etc. have all made
significant improvements over time on known image classification benchmarks using Convolutional
Layers.
Depth-Separable Convolutional Layers : In the convolution operation, each filter is used to
convolve over the two spatial dimensions and the third channel dimension. As a result, the size of
each filter is 𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×input_channels , where𝑠𝑥and𝑠𝑦are typically equal. This is done for each
filter, resulting in the convolution operation happening both spatially in the 𝑥and𝑦dimensions,
and depthwise in the 𝑧dimension.
Depth-separable convolution breaks this into two steps (Refer to Figure 16):
(1)Doing a point-wise convolution with 1×1filters, such that the resulting feature map now
has a depth of output_channels .
(2) Doing a spatial convolution with 𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦filters in the 𝑥and𝑦dimensions.
These two operations stacked together (without any intermediate non-linear activation) re-
sults in an output of the same shape as a regular convolution, with much fewer parameters ( 1×
1×input_channels×output_channels)+(𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×output_channels), v/s𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×input_channels
×output_channels for the regular convolution). Similarly there is an order of magnitude less
computation since the point-wise convolution is much cheaper for convolving with each input

==== Page 25 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 25
Fig. 16. Depth-Separable Convolution. Source: [151].
channel depth-wise (for more calculations refer to [ 133]). The Xception model architecture [ 34]
demonstrated that using depth-wise separable convolutions in the Inception architecture, allowed
reaching convergence sooner in terms of steps and a higher accuracy on the ImageNet dataset
while keeping the number of parameters the same.
The MobileNet model architecture [ 133] which was designed for mobile and embedded devices,
also uses the depth-wise separable layers instead of the regular convolutional layers. This helps
them reduce the number of parameters as well as the number of multiply-add operations by 7−10×
and allows deployment on Mobile for Computer Vision tasks. Users can expect a latency between
10-100ms depending on the model. MobileNet also provides a knob via the depth-multiplier for
scaling the network to allow the user to trade-off between accuracy and latency.
3.4.2 Natural Language Understanding.
Attention Mechanism & Transformer Family : One of the issues plaguing classical Sequence-
to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) models for solving tasks such as Machine Translation (MT), was that of the
information-bottleneck. Seq2Seq models typically have one or more encoder layers which encode
the given input sequence ( x=(𝑥1,𝑥2,...,𝑥 𝑇)) into a fixed length vector(s) (also referred to as the
context, c), and one or more decoder layers which generate another sequence using this context.
In the case of MT, the input sequence can be a sentence in the source language, and the output
sequence can be the sentence in the target language.
However, in classical Seq2Seq models such as [ 145] the decoder layers could only see the hidden
state of the final encoder step ( 𝑐=ℎ𝑇). This is a bottleneck because the encoder block has to squash
all the information about the sequence in a single context vector for all the decoding steps, and the
decoder block has to somehow infer the entire encoded sequence from it (Refer to Figure 17). It is
possible to increase the size of the context vector, but it would lead to an increase in the hidden
state of all the intermediate steps, and make the model larger and slower.
The Attention mechanism was introduced in Bahdanau et al. [21] to be able to create a custom
context vector for each output token, by allowing all hidden states to be visible to the decoder
and then creating a weighted context vector, based on the output token’s alignment with each
input token. Essentially, the new weighted context vector is 𝑐𝑖=Í𝑇
𝑗𝛼𝑖 𝑗.ℎ𝑗, where𝛼𝑖 𝑗is the learned
alignment (attention weight) between the decoder hidden state 𝑠𝑖−1and the hidden state for the
𝑗-th token (ℎ𝑗).𝛼𝑖 𝑗could be viewed as how much attention should the 𝑖-th input token be given
when processing the 𝑗-th input token. This model is generalized in some cases by having explicit
Query (𝑄), Key (𝐾), and Value ( 𝑉) vectors. Where we seek to learn the attention weight distribution
(𝛼) between𝑄and𝐾, and use it to compute the weighted context vector ( c) over𝑉. In the above
encoder-decoder architecture, 𝑄is the decoder hidden state 𝑠𝑖−1, and𝐾=𝑉is the encoder hidden
stateℎ𝑗. Attention has been used to solve a variety of NLU tasks (MT, Question Answering, Text

==== Page 26 ====
26 Gaurav Menghani
Fig. 17. Information Bottleneck in a Seq2Seq model for trans-
lating from English to Hindi. The context vector 𝑐that the
decoder has access to is fixed, and is typically the last hidden
state (ℎ𝑇).
Fig. 18. Attention module learning a
weighted context vector for each output
token from the hidden states. Source: [ 21].
Classification, Sentiment Analysis), as well as Vision, Multi-Modal Tasks etc. [ 29]. We refer the
reader to [29] for further details on the taxonomy of attention models.
Fig. 19. Transformer with its Encoder and Decoder blocks. Source: [3].
The Transformer architecture [ 155] was proposed in 2017, which introduced using Self-Attention
layers for both the Encoder and the Decoder. They demonstrated that Attention layers could be
used to replace traditional RNN based Seq2Seq models. The Self-Attention layer the query, key,
and value vectors are all derived from the same sequence by using different projection matrices.
Self-Attention also allows parallelizing the process of deriving relationships between the tokens
in the input sequences. RNNs inherently force the process to occur one step at a time, i.e., learning
long range dependencies is 𝑂(𝑛), where𝑛is the number of tokens. With Self-Attention, all tokens
are processed together and pairwise relationships can be learnt in 𝑂(1)[155]. This makes it easier
to leverage optimized training devices like GPUs and TPUs. The authors reported up to 300×less
training FLOPs as required to converge to a similar quality when compared to other recurrent and
convolutional models. Tay et al. [ 148] discuss the computation and memory efficiency of several
Transformer variants and their underlying self-attention mechanisms in detail.
As introduced earlier, the BERT model architecture [ 47] beat the state-of-the-art in several
NLU benchmarks. BERT is a stack of Transformer encoder layers that are pre-trained using a
bi-directional masked language model training objective. It can also be used as a general purpose
encoder which can then be used for other tasks. Other similar models like the GPT family [ 26]
have also been used for solving many NLU tasks.
Random Projection Layers & Models Pre-trained token representations such as word2vec
[110], GLoVE [ 121], etc. are common for NLU tasks. However, since they require a 𝑑-dimensional

==== Page 27 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 27
(a) PRADO Model. Source: [ 87].
(b) PQRNN Model. Source: [88]
 (c) Proformer Model.
Source: [136].
Fig. 20. Collection of notable Random-Projection based models.
vector for storing each token, the total size consumed by the table quickly grows very large if the
vocabulary size 𝑉is substantial ( 𝑂(𝑉.𝑑)).
If model size is a constraint for deployment, we can either rely on compression techniques (as
illustrated earlier) to help with Embedding Table compression, or evaluate layers and models that
can work around the need for embedding tables. Random Projection based methods [ 87,88,128,129]
are one such family of models that do so. They propose replacing the embedding table and lookup
by mapping the input feature 𝑥(unicode token / word token, etc.), into a lower dimensional
space. This is done using the random projection operator P, such that P(𝑥)∈{ 0,1}𝑇 .𝑟, which can
be decomposed into 𝑇individual projection operations each generating an 𝑟-bit representation
(P(𝑥)=[P1(𝑥),...,P𝑇(𝑥)], where P𝑖(𝑥)∈0,1𝑟).𝑇and𝑟can be manually chosen.
Each random projection operation P𝑖is implemented using Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
[28,129], each using a different hash function (via different seeds). For theoretical guarantees about
the Random Projection operation, refer to [ 28], which demonstrates that the operation preserves
the similarity between two points in the lower-dimensional space it maps these points to (this is
crucial for the model to be learn the semantics about the inputs). If this relationship holds in the
lower-dimensional space, the projection operation can be used to learn discriminative features for
the given input. The core-benefit of the projection operation when compared to embedding tables
is𝑂(𝑇)space required instead of 𝑂(𝑉.𝑑)(𝑇seeds required for 𝑇hash functions). On the other
hand, random-projection computation is 𝑂(𝑇)too v/s𝑂(1)for embedding table lookup. Hence,
the projection layer is clearly useful when model size is the primary focus of optimization.
Across the various papers in the projection model family, there are subtle differences in imple-
mentation (computing complex features before ([ 129]) v/s after the projection operation ([ 87,135]),
generating a ternary representation instead of binary ([ 87,88]), applying complex layers and
networks on top like Attention ([87]), QRNN ([88])), etc.
Some of the Projection-based models (refer to Figure 20) have demonstrated impressive results
on NLU tasks. PRADO ([ 87]) generates n-gram features from the projected inputs, followed by
having a Multi-Headed Attention layer on top. It achieved accuracies comparable to standard LSTM
models, while being 100×smaller, and taking 20-40 ms for inference on a Nexus 5X device. PQRNN
[88], another Projection-based model that additionally uses a fast RNN implementation (QRNN)

==== Page 28 ====
28 Gaurav Menghani
[25] on top of the projected features. They report outperforming LSTMs while being 140×smaller,
and achieving 97.1%of the quality of a BERT-like model while being 350×smaller.
Proformer [ 136] introduces a Local Projected Attention (LPA) Layer, which combines the Pro-
jection operation with localized attention. They demonstrate reaching ≈97.2% BERT-base’s per-
formance while occupying only 13% of BERT-base’s memory. ProFormer also had 14.4 million
parameters, compared to 110 million parameters of BERT-base.
3.5 Infrastructure
In order to be able to train and run inference efficiently, there has to be a robust software and
hardware infrastructure foundation. In this section we go over both these aspects. Refer to Figure
21 for a mental model of the software and hardware infrastructure, and how they interact with each
other. In this section we provide a non-exhaustive but comprehensive survey of leading software
and hardware infrastructure components that are critical to model efficiency.
Fig. 21. A visualization of the hardware and software infrastructure with emphasis on efficiency. On the
left hand side is the model-training phase, which generates a trained model checkpoint. This model is then
used on the inference side, which could either be server-side (conventional machines in cloud or on-prem), or
on-device (mobile phones, IoT, edge devices, etc.).
3.5.1 Tensorflow Ecosystem. Tensorflow (TF) [ 1,14] is a popular machine learning framework,
that has been used in production by many large enterprises. It has some of the most extensive
software support for model efficiency.
Tensorflow Lite for On-Device Usecases : Tensorflow Lite (TFLite) [ 16] is a collection of tools
and libraries designed for inference in low-resource environments. At a high-level we can break
down the TFLite project into two core parts:
•Interpreter and Op Kernels : TFLite provides an interpreter for running specialized TFLite
models, along with implementations of common neural net operations (Fully Connected,
Convolution, Max Pooling, ReLu, Softmax, etc. each of which as an Op). The implementation
of such an operation is known as an Op Kernel . Both the interpreter and Op Kernels are
primarily optimized for inference on ARM-based processors as of the time of writing this
paper. They can also leverage smartphone DSPs such as Qualcomm’s Hexagon [ 19] for faster
execution. The interpreter also allows the user to set multiple threads for execution.
•Converter : The TFLite converter as the name suggests is useful for converting the given TF
model into a single flatbuffer file for inference by the interpreter. Apart from the conversion

==== Page 29 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 29
itself, it handles a lot of internal details like getting a graph ready for quantized inference,
fusing operations, adding other metadata to the model, etc. With respect to quantization, it
also allows post-training quantization as mentioned earlier with an optional representative
dataset to improve accuracy.
Other Tools for On-Device Inference : TF Micro [ 159] goes further, and consists of a slimmed
down interpreter, and a smaller set of ops for inference on very low resource microcontrollers.
TF Model Optimization toolkit [ 12] is a Tensorflow library for applying common compression
techniques like quantization, pruning, clustering etc. TensorflowJS (TF.JS) is a library within the TF
ecosystem that can be used to train and run neural networks within the browser or using Node.js
[113]. These models can also accelerated through GPUs via the WebGL interface [ 42]. It supports
both, importing models trained in TF, as well as creating new models from scratch in TF.JS.
XLA for Server-Side Acceleration : Typically a TF model graph is executed by TF’s executor
process and it uses standard optimized kernels for running it on CPU, GPU, etc. XLA [ 17] is a graph
compiler that can optimize linear algebra computations in a model, by generating new kernels
that are customized for the graph. These kernels are optimized for the model graph in question.
For example, certain operations which can be fused together are combined in a single composite
op. This avoids having to do multiple costly writes to RAM, when the operands can directly be
operated on while they are still in cheaper caches. Kanwar et al. [ 89] report a 7×increase in training
throughput, and 5×increase in the maximum batch size that can be used for BERT training. This
allows training a BERT model for $32 on Google Cloud.
3.5.2 PyTorch Ecosystem. PyTorch [ 119] is another popular machine-learning platform actively
used by both academia and industry. It is often compared with Tensorflow in terms of usability and
features.
On-Device Usecases : PyTorch also has a light-weight interpreter that enables running PyTorch
models on Mobile [ 9], with native runtimes for Android and iOS. This is analogous to the TFLite
interpreter and runtime as introduced earlier. Similar to TFLite, PyTorch offers post-training
quantization [ 10], and other graph optimization steps such as constant folding, fusing certain
operations together, putting the channels last (NHWC) format for optimizing convolutional layers.
General Model Optimization : PyTorch also offers the Just-in-Time (JIT) compilation facility
[11], which might seem similar to Tensorflow’s XLA, but is actually a mechanism for generating
a serializable intermediate representation (high-level IR, per [ 102]) of the model from the code
in TorchScript [ 11], which is a subset of Python. TorchScript adds constraints on the code that
it can convert, such as type-checks, which allows it to sidestep some pitfalls of typical Python
programming, while being Python compatible. It allows creating a bridge between the flexible
PyTorch code for research and development, to a representation that can be deployed for inference
in production. For example, exporting to TorchScript is a requirement to run on mobile devices [ 9].
This representation is analogous to the static inference mode graphs generated by TensorFlow. The
alternative for XLA in the PyTorch world seem to be the Glow [ 132] and TensorComprehension
[154] compilers. They help in generating the lower-level intermediate representation that is derived
from the higher-level IR (TorchScript, TF Graph). These low-level deep learning compilers are
compared in detail in [102].
PyTorch offers a model tuning guide [ 8], which details various options that ML practitioners
have at their disposal. Some of the core ideas in there are:
•Turn on mixed-precision training [ 7] when using NVIDIA GPUs. This is described further in
detail in the GPU sub-section in 3.5.4.
•Fusion of pointwise-operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide, etc.) using PyTorch JIT. Even
though this should happen automatically, but adding the torch.jit.script decorator to

==== Page 30 ====
30 Gaurav Menghani
methods which are completely composed of pointwise operations can force the TorchScript
compiler to fuse them.
•Enabling buffer checkpointing allows keeping the outputs of only certain layers in memory,
and computing the rest during the backward pass. This specifically helps with cheap to
compute layers with large outputs like activations. A reduced memory usage can be exchanged
for a larger batch size which improves utilization of the training platform (CPU, GPU, TPU,
etc.).
•Enabling device-specific optimizations, such as the cuDNN library, and Mixed Precision
Training with NVIDIA GPUs (explained in the GPU subsection).
•Train with Distributed Data Parallel Training, which is suitable when there is a large amount
of data and multiple GPUs are available for training. Each GPU gets its own copy of the
model and optimizer, and operates on its own subset of the data. Each replicas gradients are
periodically accumulated and then averaged.
3.5.3 Hardware-Optimized Libraries. We can further extract efficiency by optimizing for the hard-
ware the neural networks run on. A prime deployment target is ARM’s Cortex-family of processors.
Cortex supports SIMD (Single-Instruction Multiple Data) instructions via the Neon [ 108] archi-
tecture extension. SIMD instructions are useful for operating upon registers with vectors of data,
which are essential for speeding up linear algebra operations through vectorization of these opera-
tions. QNNPACK [ 51] and XNNPACK [ 18] libraries are optimized for ARM Neon for mobile and
embedded devices, and for x86 SSE2, AVX architectures, etc. QNNPACK supports several common
ops in quantized inference mode for PyTorch. XNNPACK supports 32-bit floating point models and
16-bit floating point for TFLite. If a certain operation isn’t supported in XNNPACK, it falls back to
the default implementation in TFLite.
Similarly, there are other low-level libraries like Accelerate for iOS [ 6], and NNAPI for Android [ 4]
that try to abstract away the hardware-level acceleration decision from higher level ML frameworks.
3.5.4 Hardware. GPU : Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) were originally designed for acclerating
computer graphics, but began to be used for general-purpose usecases with the availability of the
CUDA library [ 38] in 2007, and libraries like like cuBLAS for speeding up linear algebra operations.
In 2009, Raina et al. [ 125] demonstrated that GPUs can be used to accelerate deep learning models.
In 2012, following the AlexNet model’s [ 92] substantial improvement over the next entrant in the
ImageNet competition further standardized the use of GPUs for deep learning models. Since then
Nvidia has released several iterations of its GPU microarchitectures with increasing focus on deep
learning performance. It has also introduced Tensor Cores [ 115,142] which are dedicated execution
units in their GPUs, which are specialized for Deep Learning applications. TensorCores support
training and inference in a range of precisions (fp32, TensorFloat32, fp16, bfloat16, int8, int4). As
demonstrated earlier in quantization, switching to a lower precision is not always a significant
trade-off, since the difference in model quality might often be minimal.
Fig. 22. Reduced Precision Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) operation: An illustration of the A=(B×C)+D
operation. BandCare in a reduced precision (fp16, bfloat16, TensorFloat32 etc.), while AandDare in fp32.
The speedup comes from doing the expensive matrix-multiplication with a reduced precision format.

==== Page 31 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 31
Tensor Cores optimize the standard Multiply-and-Accumulate (MAC) operation [ 40],A=(B×
C)+D. Where, BandCare in a reduced precision (fp16, bfloat16, TensorFloat32), while AandD
are in fp32. The core speedup comes from doing the expensive matrix-multiplication in a lower-
precision. The result of the multiplication is in fp32, which can be relatively cheaply added with
D.When training with reduced-precision, NVIDIA reports between 1 ×to 15×training speedup
depending on the model architecture and the GPU chosen [ 142]. Tensor Cores in NVidia’s latest
Ampere architecture GPUs also support faster inference with sparsity (specifically, structured
sparsity in the ratio 2:4, where 2 elements out of a block of 4 elements are sparse) [ 114]. They
demonstrate an up to 1.5 ×speed up in inference time, and up to 1.8 ×speedup in individual layers.
NVIDIA also offers the cuDNN libary [ 114] that contains optimized versions of standard neural
network operations such as fully-connected, convolution, batch-norm, activation, etc.
Fig. 23. Common floating point format used in Training & Inference: fp32 is the standard 32-bit floating
point number from IEEE-754 standard [ 157]. One bit is allocated for storing the sign. The exponent controls
the range of the floating point value that can be expressed with that format, and the mantissa controls
the precision. Note that fp16 reduces the precision as well as range. The bfloat16 format is a reasonable
compromise because it keeps the same range as fp32 while trading of precision to take up a total of 16 bits.
NVidia GPUs also support Tensor Float 32 format that allocates 3 more bits to the mantissa than bfloat16
to achieve better precision. However, it takes up a total of 19 bits which does not make it a trivially portable
format.
TPU : TPUs are proprietary application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) that Google has
designed to accelerate deep learning applications with Tensorflow. Because they are not general
purpose devices, they need not cater for any non-ML applications (which most GPUs have had to),
hence they are finely tuned for parallelizing and accelerating linear algebra operations. The first
iteration of the TPU was designed for inference with 8-bit integers, and was being used in Google
for a year prior to their announcement in 2016 [ 86]. Subsequent iterations of the TPU architectures
enabled both training and inference with TPUs in floating point too. Google also opened up access
to these TPUs via their Google Cloud service in 2018 [62].
The core architecture of the TPU chips leverages the Systolic Array design [ 94,95] (refer to Figure
24), where a large computation is split across a mesh-like topology, where each cell computes
a partial result and passes it on to the next cell in the order, every clock-step (in a rhythmic
manner analogous to the systolic cardiac rhythm). Since there is no need to access registers for the
intermediate results, once the required data is fetched the computation is not memory bound. Each
TPU chip has two Tensor Cores (not to be confused with NVidia’s Tensor Cores), each of which
has a mesh of systolic arrays. There are 4 inter-connected TPU chips on a single TPU board. To

==== Page 32 ====
32 Gaurav Menghani
(a) A Systolic Array Cell
implementing a
Multiply-Accumulate (MAC)
operation.
(b) 4x4 Matrix Multiplication using
Systolic Array
Fig. 24. Systolic Arrays in TPUs: Figure (a) shows a Systolic Array implementing a MAC operation, where
the variables 𝐴and𝐵are received by the cell, and 𝐶is the resident memory. 𝐴is passed to the horizontally
adjacent cell on the right, and 𝐵is passed to the vertically adjacent cell below on the next clock tick. Figure (b)
demonstrates how two 4 ×4 matrices are multiplied using Systolic Arrays which is a mesh of cells constructed
in Figure (a). The 𝑖-th row of array is fed the 𝑖-th column of 𝐴(preceded by 𝑖−10s, which act as a delay).
Similarly, the 𝑖-th column of the array is fed the 𝑖-th column of 𝐵(preceded by 𝑖−10s). The corresponding
𝑎𝑖 𝑗and𝑏𝑗𝑘are passed to the neighboring cells on the next clock tick.
further scale training and inference, a larger number of TPU boards can be connected in a mesh
topology to form a ’pod’. As per publicly released numbers, each TPU chip (v3) can achieve 420
teraflops, and a TPU pod can reach 100+ petaflops [137].
TPUs have been used inside Google for applications like training models for Google Search,
general purpose BERT models [ 47], for applications like DeepMind’s world beating AlphaGo and
AlphaZero models [ 138], and many other research applications [ 147]. They have also set model
training time records in the MLPerf benchmarks. Similar to the GPUs, TPUs support the bfloat16
data-type [ 157] which is a reduced-precision alternative to training in full floating point 32-bit
precision. XLA support allows transparently switching to bfloat16 without any model changes.
EdgeTPU : EdgeTPU is a custom ASIC chip designed by Google for running inference on edge
devices, with low power requirements (4 Tera Ops / sec (TOPS) using 2 watts of power [ 64]). Like
the TPU, it is specialized for accelerating linear algebra operations, but only for inference and
with a much lower compute budget. It is further limited to only a subset of operations [ 65], and
works only with int8 quantized Tensorflow Lite models. Google releases the EdgeTPU using the
Coral platform in various form-factors, ranging from a Raspberry-Pi like Dev Board to independent
solderable modules [ 63]. It has also been released with the Pixel 4 smartphones as the Pixel Neural
Core [ 126], for accelerating on-device deep learning applications. The EdgeTPU chip itself is smaller
than a US penny, making it amenable for deployment in many kinds of IoT devices.
Jetson : Jetson [ 116] is a family of accelerators by Nvidia to enable deep learning applications for
embedded and IoT devices. It comprises of the Nano, which is a low-powered "system on a module"
(SoM) designed for lightweight deployments, as well as the more powerful Xavier and TX variants,
which are based on the NVidia Volta and Pascal GPU architectures. As expected, the difference
within the Jetson family is primarily the type and number of GPU cores on the accelerators. This

==== Page 33 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 33
makes the Nano suited for applications like home automation, and the rest for more compute
intensive applications like industrial robotics.
4 A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO EFFICIENCY
Fig. 25. Trade off between Model Quality and Footprint: There exists a trade-off between model quality
and model footprint. Model quality can be improved with techniques like distillation, data-augmentation,
hyper-param tuning etc. Compression techniques can in turn help trade off some model quality for a better
model footprint. Some / all of the improvement in footprint metrics can also be traded for better quality by
simply adding more model capacity.
So far, we presented a broad set of tools and techniques in the Efficient Deep Learning landscape.
In this section, we present a practical guide for practitioners to use, and how these tools and
techniques work with each other. As mentioned earlier, what we seek are pareto-optimal models,
where we would like to achieve the best possible result in one dimension, while holding the other
dimensions constant. Typically, one of these dimensions is Quality , and the other is Footprint .
Quality related metrics could included Accuracy, F1, Precision, Recall, AUC, etc. While Footprint
related metrics can include Model Size, Latency, RAM, etc.
Naturally, there exists a trade-off between Quality and Footprint metrics. A higher-capacity /
deeper model is more likely to achieve a better accuracy, but at the cost of model size, latency, etc.
On the other hand a model with lesser capcity / shallower, while possibly suitable for deployment,
is also likely to be worse in accuracy. As illustrated in Figure 25, we can traverse from a model with
better quality metrics, and exchange some of the quality for better footprint by naively compressing
the model / reducing the model capacity ( Shrink ). Similarly it is possible to naively improve quality
by adding more capacity to the model ( Grow ). Growing can be addressed by the author of the model
via appropriately increasing model capacity and tweaking other hyper-parameters to improve
model quality. Shrinking can be achieved via Compression Techniques (Quantization, Pruning,
Low-Rank Approximation, etc.), Efficient Layers & Models, Architecture Search via Automation, etc.
In addition, we can also Improve the quality metrics, while keeping the footprint same through
Learning Techniques (Distillation, Data Augmentation, Self-Supervised Tuning), Hyper-Parameter
Tuning, etc. (See Table 4 for more examples.)
Combining these three phases, we propose two strategies towards achieving pareto-optimal
models:
(1)Shrink-and-Improve for Footprint-Sensitive Models : If as a practitioner, you want to
reduce your footprint, while keeping the quality the same, this could be a useful strategy
for on-device deployments and server-side model optimization. Shrinking should ideally be
minimally lossy in terms of quality (can be achieved via learned compression techniques,
architecture search etc.), but in some cases even naively reducing capacity can also be

==== Page 34 ====
34 Gaurav Menghani
Grow
(Model Capacity)Shrink
(Footprint)Improve
(Quality)
Add layers, width, etc.
either manually or
using width / depth /
compound scaling
multipliersReduce layers, width, etc.
either manually or using
width / depth / compound
scaling multipliersManual Tuning (Architecture /
Hyper-Parameters /
Features, etc.)
Compression Techniques :
Quantization, Pruning,
Low-Rank Factorization, etc.Learning Techniques :
Data-Augmentation, Distillation,
Unsupervised Learning, etc.
Automation :
Hyper-Param Optimization,
Architecture Search, etc.Automation :
Hyper-Param Optimization,
Architecture Search, etc.
Efficient Layers & Models :
Projection, PQRNN, (NLP),
Separable Convolution (Vision),
etc.Efficient Layers & Models :
Transformers (NLP),
Vi-T (Vision), etc.
Table 4. Examples of techniques to use in the Grow, Shrink, and Improve phases.
compensated by the Improve phase. It is also possible to do the Improve phase before the
Shrink phase.
(2)Grow-Improve-and-Shrink for Quality-Sensitive Models : When you want to deploy
models that have better quality while keeping the same footprint, it might make sense to
follow this strategy. Here, the capacity is first added by growing the model as illustrated
earlier. The model is then improved using via learning techniques, automation, etc. and then
shrunk back either naively or in a learned manner. Alternatively, the model could be shrunk
back either in a learned manner directly after growing the model too.
We consider both these strategies as a way of going from a potentially non pareto-optimal model
to another one that lies on the pareto-frontier with the trade-off that is appropriate for the user.
Each efficiency technique individually helps move us closer to that target model.
4.1 Experiments
In order to demonstrate what we proposed above, we undertook the task of going through the
exercise of making a given Deep Learning model efficient. Concretely, we had the following goals
with this exercise:
(1)Achieve a new pareto-frontier using the efficiency techniques. Hence, demonstrating that
these techniques can be used in isolation as well as in combination with other techniques, in
the real-world by ML Practitioners.
(2)With various combinations of efficiency techniques and model scaling, demonstrate the
tradeoffs for both ‘Shrink-and-Improve’, and ‘Grow-Improve-and-Shrink’ strategies for dis-
covering and traversing the pareto-frontier. In other words, provide empirical evidence that
it is possible for practitioners to either reduce model capacity to bring down the footprint
(shrink) and then recover the model quality that they traded off (improve), or increase the
model capacity to improve quality (growing) followed by model compression (shrinking) to
improve model footprint.
We picked the problem of classifying images in the CIFAR-10 dataset [ 91] on compute constrained
devices such as smartphones, IoT devices etc. We designed a deep convolutional architecture where

==== Page 35 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 35
Width
Multiplier# Params
(K)Model
Size
(KB)Accuracy
(%)Average Latency (ms)
Baseline AugmentationAugmentation
+ DistillationOppo
A5Pixel
3XLGalaxy
S10
0.05 14.7 65.45 70.17 71.71 72.89 6.72 0.6 0.78
0.1 26 109.61 75.93 78.22 78.93 6.85 1.7 0.85
0.25 98.57 392.49 80.6 84.14 84.51 8.15 2.02 0.93
0.5 350.05 1374.11 83.04 87.47 88.03 11.46 2.8 1.33
0.75 764.87 2993.71 83.79 89.06 89.51 16.7 4.09 1.92
1 1343.01 5251.34 84.42 89.41 89.92 24 5.99 2.68
Table 5. Quality and Footprint metrics for Floating-Point models for the CIFAR-10 dataset.
we could scale the model capacity up or down, by increasing or decreasing the ‘width multiplier’
(𝑤) value. In the implementation, 𝑤scales the number of filters for the convolutional layers (except
the first two). Hence, using different values of 𝑤in[0.1,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0]we obtain a family of
models with different quality and footprint tradeoffs. We trained these models with some manual
tuning to achieve a baseline of quality v/s footprint metrics. In this case, we measured quality
through accuracy, and footprint through number of parameters, model size, and latency. In terms
of techniques, we used Quantization for Shrinking, and Data Augmentation and Distillation for
Improving. Many other techniques could be used to further drive the point home (Automation such
as Hyper-Parameter Tuning, Efficient Layers such as Separable Convolutions), but were skipped to
keep the interpretation of the results simpler. We used the Tensorflow-backed Keras APIs [ 35] for
training, and the TFLite [ 16] framework for inference. The latencies were measured on three kinds
of devices, low-end (Oppo A5), mid-end (Pixel 3XL), and high-end (Galaxy S10), in order of their
increasing CPU compute power. The model size numbers reported are the sizes of the generated
TFLite models, and the latency numbers are the average single-threaded CPU latency after warmup
on the target device. The code for the experiments is available via an IPython notebook here.
Table 5 compiles the results for 6 width-multipliers in increasing order, ranging from 0.05to
1.0. Between the smallest to the largest models, the number of params grows by ≈91.4×, and the
model size grows by ≈80.2×. The latency numbers also grow between 3.5−10×based on the
device. Within the same row, footprint metrics will not change since we are not changing the model
architecture. In Table 5 we purely work with techniques that will improve the model quality (Data
Augmentation and Distillation). Table 6 reports the numbers for the Quantized versions of the
corresponding models in Table 5. We use Quantization for the Shrink phase, to reduce model size
by≈4×, and reduce the average latency by 1.5−2.65×. Figures 26 and 27 plot the notable results
from Tables 5 and 6.
4.2 Discussion
Let us try to interpret the above data to validate if our strategies can be used practically.
Shrink-and-Improve for Footprint-Sensitive Models : Refer to Table 5 and Figure 26. If our
goal was to deploy the model with Width Multiplier ( 𝑤) =1.0and accuracy 84.42%, but the bottleneck
was the model size (5.25 MB) and latency on a low-end device (24 ms on Oppo A5). This is the classic
case of the footprint metrics not meeting the bar, hence we could apply the Shrink-and-Improve
strategy, by first naively scaling our model down to a Width Multiplier ( 𝑤) of0.25. This smaller
model when manually tuned, as seen in Table 5, achieves an accuracy of 80.76%. However, when

==== Page 36 ====
36 Gaurav Menghani
Width
Multiplier# Params
(K)Model
Size
(KB)Accuracy
(%)Average Latency (ms)
Baseline AugmentationAugmentation
+ DistillationOppo
A5Pixel
3XLGalaxy
S10
0.05 14.7 26.87 69.9 71.72 72.7 4.06 0.49 0.43
0.1 26 38.55 75.98 78.19 78.55 4.5 1.25 0.47
0.25 98.57 111 80.76 83.98 84.18 4.52 1.31 0.48
0.5 350.05 359.31 83 87.32 87.86 6.32 1.73 0.58
0.75 764.87 767.09 83.6 88.57 89.29 8.53 2.36 0.77
1 1343.01 1334.41 84.52 89.28 89.91 11.73 3.27 1.01
Table 6. Quality and Footprint metrics for Quantized models for the CIFAR-10 dataset. Each model is the
quantized equivalent of the corresponding model in Table 5.
15 100 400 800 1,400707580859095
Number of Params (K, log scale)Accuracy (%)CIFAR-10 Number of Params v/s Accuracy (%)
Baseline - Manually Tuned
Data Augmentation
Distillation + Data Aug.
(a) Number of Params v/s Accuracy
25 50 100 400 1,000 4,000 10,000707580859095
Model Size (KB, log scale)Accuracy (%)CIFAR-10 Model Size v/s Accuracy (%)
Baseline - Manually Tuned
Distill. + Data Aug. (DD)
DD + Quantization. (b) Model Size v/s Accuracy
Fig. 26. Change in Accuracy with respect to Number of Params and Model Size. Each point on a curve is a
model from Table 5 in figure (a) and from Table 6 in figure (b).
0 4 8 12 16 20 24707580859095
Latency on a Low-End Device Oppo A5 (ms)Accuracy (%)CIFAR-10 Latency on Oppo A5 (ms) v/s Accuracy (%)
Baseline - Manually Tuned
Distill + Data Aug. (DD)
DD + Quantization
(a) Low-End Device Latency
0 1 2 3 4 5 6707580859095
Latency on a Mid-End Device Pixel 3XL (ms)Accuracy (%)CIFAR-10 Latency on Pixel 3XL (ms) v/s Accuracy (%)
Baseline - Manually Tuned
Distill + Data Aug. (DD)
DD + Quantization (b) Mid-Tier Device Latency
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3707580859095
Latency on a High-End Device Galaxy S10 (ms)Accuracy (%)CIFAR-10 Latency on Galaxy S10 (ms) v/s Accuracy (%)
Baseline - Manually Tuned
Distill + Data Aug. (DD)
DD + Quantization (c) High-End Device Latency
Fig. 27. Average latency of models on different devices (low-, mid-, and high-end smartphones). The orange
curve denotes the quantized models in addition to being trained with distillation and data augmentation.

==== Page 37 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 37
we use a combination of Data Augmentation & Distillation from a separately trained larger teacher
model with an accuracy of 90.86%, the accuracy of the smaller model improves to 84.18%, very
close to the target model that we want to deploy. The size of this smaller model is 392.49 KB, which
is13.8×smaller, and the latency is 8.15 ms, which is 2.94×faster at a comparable accuracy. It is
possible to further compress this model by using Quantization for some additional shrinking. The
same smaller model ( 𝑤=0.25) when Quantized in Table 6, is 111 KB in size ( 47.3×smaller ) and
has a latency of 4.52 ms ( 5.31×faster ), while retaining an accuracy of 84.18%. It is possible to do
this for other pairs of points on the curves.
Grow-Improve-Shrink for Quality-Sensitive Models : Assuming our goal is to deploy a
model that has footprint metrics comparable to the model with 𝑤=0.25(392.49 KB model size,
0.93 ms on a high-end Galaxy S10 device), but an accuracy better than the baseline 80.6%(refer to
Table 5). In this case, we can choose to first grow our model to 𝑤=0.5. This instantly blows up the
model size to 1.37 MB ( 3.49×bigger), and latency to 1.33 ms ( 1.43×slower). However, we ignore
that for a bit and improve our model’s quality to 88.03%with Data Augmentation & Distillation.
Then using Quantization for shrinking (refer to Table 6), we can get a model that is 359.31 KB in
size (32 KB smaller) and has a 0.58 ms latency on Galaxy S10 ( 1.6×faster), with an accuracy of
87.86%, an absolute 7.10% increase in accuracy while keeping the model size approximately same
and making it 1.6×faster. It is also possible to apply this strategy to other pairs of models.
Thus, we’ve verified that the above two strategies can work both ways, whether your goal is to
optimize for quality metrics or footprint metrics. We were also able to visually inspect through
Figures 26 and 27 that efficiency techniques can improve on the pareto frontiers constructed
through manual tuning. To contain the scope of experimentation, we selected two sets of efficiency
techniques (Compression Techniques (Quantization), and Learning Techniques (Data Augmentation
& Distillation). Hence, it would be useful to explore other techniques as well such as Automation (for
Hyper-Parameter Tuning to further improve on results), and Efficient Layers & Models (Separable
Convolution as illustrated in MobileNet [ 133] could be used in place of larger convolutional layers).
Finally, we would also like to emphasize paying attention to performance of Deep Learning models
(optimized or not) on underrepresented classes and out-of-distribution data to ensure model fairness,
since quality metrics alone might not be sufficient for discovering deeper issues with models [ 76].
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we started with demonstrating the rapid growth in Deep Learning models, and
motivating the fact that someone training and deploying models today has to make either implicit
or explicit decisions about efficiency. However, the landscape of model efficiency is vast.
To help with this, we laid out a mental model for the readers to wrap their heads around
the multiple focus areas of model efficiency and optimization. The surveys of the core model
optimization techniques give the reader an opportunity to understand the state-of-the-art, apply
these techniques in the modelling process, and/or use them as a starting point for exploration. The
infrastructure section also lays out the software libraries and hardware which make training and
inference of efficient models possible.
Finally, we presented a section of explicit and actionable insights supplemented by code, for a
practitioner to use as a guide in this space. This section will hopefully give concrete and actionable
takeaways, as well as tradeoffs to think about when optimizing a model for training and deploy-
ment. To conclude, we feel that with this survey we have equipped the reader with the necessary
understanding to break-down the steps required to go from a sub-optimal model to one that meets
their constraints for both quality as well as footprint.

==== Page 38 ====
38 Gaurav Menghani
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the Learn2Compress team at Google Research for their support with
this work. We would also like to thank Akanksha Saran and Aditya Sarawgi for their help with
proof-reading and suggestions for improving the content.
REFERENCES
[1]Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghe-
mawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al .2016. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th
{USENIX}symposium on operating systems design and implementation ( {OSDI}16). 265–283.
[2] Apoorv Agnihotri and Nipun Batra. 2020. Exploring bayesian optimization. Distill 5, 5 (2020), e26.
[3]Jay Alammar. 2021. The Illustrated Transformer. https://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer [Online; accessed
3. Jun. 2021].
[4]Android Developers. 2021. Neural Networks API |Android NDK|Android Developers. https://developer.android.
com/ndk/guides/neuralnetworks [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[5]Sajid Anwar, Kyuyeon Hwang, and Wonyong Sung. 2017. Structured pruning of deep convolutional neural networks.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems (JETC) 13, 3 (2017), 1–18.
[6]Apple Authors. 2021. Accelerate |Apple Developer Documentation. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/
accelerate [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[7]PyTorch Authors. 2021. Automatic Mixed Precision examples — PyTorch 1.8.1 documentation. https://pytorch.org/
docs/stable/notes/amp_examples.html [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[8]PyTorch Authors. 2021. Performance Tuning Guide — PyTorch Tutorials 1.8.1+cu102 documentation. https:
//pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/tuning_guide.html [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[9] PyTorch Authors. 2021. PyTorch Mobile. https://pytorch.org/mobile/home [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[10] PyTorch Authors. 2021. Quantization Recipe — PyTorch Tutorials 1.8.1+cu102 documentation. https://pytorch.org/
tutorials/recipes/quantization.html [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[11] PyTorch Authors. 2021. torch.jit.script — PyTorch 1.8.1 documentation. https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/
torch.jit.script.html [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[12] Tensorflow Authors. 2020. TensorFlow Model Optimization. https://www.tensorflow.org/model_optimization
[Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[13] Tensorflow Authors. 2021. Post-training quantization |TensorFlow Lite. https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/
performance/post_training_quantization [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[14] Tensorflow Authors. 2021. TensorFlow. https://www.tensorflow.org [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[15] Tensorflow Authors. 2021. TensorFlow Lite converter. https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/convert [Online; accessed 3.
Jun. 2021].
[16] Tensorflow Authors. 2021. TensorFlow Lite |ML for Mobile and Edge Devices. https://www.tensorflow.org/lite
[Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[17] Tensorflow Authors. 2021. XLA: Optimizing Compiler for Machine Learning |TensorFlow. https://www.tensorflow.
org/xla [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[18] XNNPACK Authors. 2021. XNNPACK. https://github.com/google/XNNPACK [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[19] XNNPACK Authors. 2021. XNNPACK backend for TensorFlow Lite. https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/blob/
master/tensorflow/lite/delegates/xnnpack/README.md/#sparse-inference [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[20] Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for
self-supervised learning of speech representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11477 (2020).
[21] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[22] Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. 2013. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic
neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 (2013).
[23] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of machine
learning research 13, 2 (2012).
[24] Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. 1998. Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceedings of the
eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theory . 92–100.
[25] James Bradbury, Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2016. Quasi-recurrent neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01576 (2016).
[26] Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al .2020. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165 (2020).

==== Page 39 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 39
[27] Cristian Bucilu ˇa, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. 2006. Model compression. In Proceedings of the 12th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining . 535–541.
[28] Moses S Charikar. 2002. Similarity estimation techniques from rounding algorithms. In Proceedings of the thiry-fourth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing . 380–388.
[29] Sneha Chaudhari, Varun Mithal, Gungor Polatkan, and Rohan Ramanath. 2019. An attentive survey of attention
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02874 (2019).
[30] Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. SMOTE: synthetic minority
over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research 16 (2002), 321–357.
[31] Dihao Chen. 2021. advisor. https://github.com/tobegit3hub/advisor [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[32] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 1597–1607.
[33] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. Big self-supervised
models are strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029 (2020).
[34] François Chollet. 2017. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 1251–1258.
[35] Francois Chollet. 2020. The Keras Blog. https://blog.keras.io [Online; accessed 4. Jun. 2021].
[36] Dan C Cireşan, Ueli Meier, Jonathan Masci, Luca M Gambardella, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2011. High-performance
neural networks for visual object classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1102.0183 (2011).
[37] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. AVX-512 - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=AVX-
512&oldid=1025044245 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[38] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. CUDA - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CUDA&
oldid=1025500257 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[39] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. Hyperparameter optimization - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Hyperparameter_optimization&oldid=1022309479 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[40] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. Multiply–accumulate operation - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Multiply-accumulate_operation&oldid=1026461481 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[41] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. SSE4 - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SSE4&
oldid=1023092035 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[42] Contributors to Wikimedia projects. 2021. WebGL - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=WebGL&
oldid=1026775533 [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[43] Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V Le. 2019. Autoaugment: Learning
augmentation strategies from data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 113–123.
[44] Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. 2020. Randaugment: Practical automated data
augmentation with a reduced search space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops . 702–703.
[45] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 248–255. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
2009.5206848
[46] Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. Sparse networks from scratch: Faster training without losing performance.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04840 (2019).
[47] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[48] Thomas G Dietterich. 2000. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In International workshop on multiple classifier
systems . Springer, 1–15.
[49] Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. 2015. Unsupervised visual representation learning by context
prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 1422–1430.
[50] Xin Dong, Shangyu Chen, and Sinno Jialin Pan. 2017. Learning to prune deep neural networks via layer-wise optimal
brain surgeon. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07565 (2017).
[51] Marat Dukhan, Yiming Wu Wu, and Hao Lu. 2020. QNNPACK: Open source library for optimized mobile deep
learning - Facebook Engineering. https://engineering.fb.com/2018/10/29/ml-applications/qnnpack [Online; accessed
3. Jun. 2021].
[52] Erich Elsen, Marat Dukhan, Trevor Gale, and Karen Simonyan. 2020. Fast sparse convnets. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 14629–14638.
[53] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, Frank Hutter, et al .2019. Neural architecture search: A survey. J. Mach. Learn.
Res.20, 55 (2019), 1–21.

==== Page 40 ====
40 Gaurav Menghani
[54] Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. 2020. Rigging the lottery: Making all
tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2943–2952.
[55] Angela Fan, Pierre Stock, Benjamin Graham, Edouard Grave, Rémi Gribonval, Hervé Jégou, and Armand Joulin. 2020.
Training with quantization noise for extreme model compression. arXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv–2004.
[56] Alhussein Fawzi, Horst Samulowitz, Deepak Turaga, and Pascal Frossard. 2016. Adaptive data augmentation for
image classification. In 2016 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP) . Ieee, 3688–3692.
[57] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. 2018. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Training pruned neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.03635 2 (2018).
[58] Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. 2019. The State of Sparsity in Deep Neural Networks. CoRR abs/1902.09574
(2019). arXiv:1902.09574 http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09574
[59] Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. 2018. Unsupervised representation learning by predicting
image rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07728 (2018).
[60] James Glass. 2012. Towards unsupervised speech processing. In 2012 11th International Conference on Information
Science, Signal Processing and their Applications (ISSPA) . IEEE, 1–4.
[61] Daniel Golovin, Benjamin Solnik, Subhodeep Moitra, Greg Kochanski, John Karro, and D Sculley. 2017. Google vizier:
A service for black-box optimization. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining . 1487–1495.
[62] Google. 2021. Cloud TPU |Google Cloud. https://cloud.google.com/tpu [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[63] Google. 2021. Coral. https://coral.ai [Online; accessed 4. Jun. 2021].
[64] Google. 2021. Edge TPU performance benchmarks |Coral. https://coral.ai/docs/edgetpu/benchmarks [Online;
accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[65] Google. 2021. TensorFlow models on the Edge TPU |Coral. https://coral.ai/docs/edgetpu/models-intro/#supported-
operations [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[66] google research. 2021. google-research. https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/
fastconvnets [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[67] Arjun Gopalan, Da-Cheng Juan, Cesar Ilharco Magalhaes, Chun-Sung Ferng, Allan Heydon, Chun-Ta Lu, Philip Pham,
George Yu, Yicheng Fan, and Yueqi Wang. 2021. Neural structured learning: training neural networks with structured
signals. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining . 1150–1153.
[68] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. 2015. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning,
trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149 (2015).
[69] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William J Dally. 2015. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02626 (2015).
[70] Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh,
Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et al .2014. Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.5567 (2014).
[71] Lars Kai Hansen and Peter Salamon. 1990. Neural network ensembles. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence 12, 10 (1990), 993–1001.
[72] Babak Hassibi, David G Stork, and Gregory J Wolff. 1993. Optimal brain surgeon and general network pruning. In
IEEE international conference on neural networks . IEEE, 293–299.
[73] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 770–778.
[74] Yihui He, Ji Lin, Zhijian Liu, Hanrui Wang, Li-Jia Li, and Song Han. 2018. Amc: Automl for model compression and
acceleration on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . 784–800.
[75] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. 2015. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531 (2015).
[76] Sara Hooker, Nyalleng Moorosi, Gregory Clark, Samy Bengio, and Emily Denton. 2020. Characterising bias in
compressed models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03058 (2020).
[77] Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun Wang, Yukun Zhu,
Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al .2019. Searching for mobilenetv3. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision . 1314–1324.
[78] Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.06146 (2018).
[79] Chi-Hung Hsu, Shu-Huan Chang, Jhao-Hong Liang, Hsin-Ping Chou, Chun-Hao Liu, Shih-Chieh Chang, Jia-Yu
Pan, Yu-Ting Chen, Wei Wei, and Da-Cheng Juan. 2018. Monas: Multi-objective neural architecture search using
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10332 (2018).
[80] Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Binarized neural networks.
InProceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 4114–4122.

==== Page 41 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 41
[81] Hiroshi Inoue. 2018. Data augmentation by pairing samples for images classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02929
(2018).
[82] Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and
Dmitry Kalenichenko. 2018. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only
inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2704–2713.
[83] Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali Razavi, Oriol Vinyals,
Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al .2017. Population based training of neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.09846 (2017).
[84] Kevin Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. 2016. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter optimization.
InArtificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 240–248.
[85] Jeremy Jordan. 2020. Setting the learning rate of your neural network. Jeremy Jordan (Aug 2020). https://www.
jeremyjordan.me/nn-learning-rate
[86] Norman P Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh
Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, et al .2017. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In
Proceedings of the 44th annual international symposium on computer architecture . 1–12.
[87] Prabhu Kaliamoorthi, Sujith Ravi, and Zornitsa Kozareva. 2019. PRADO: Projection Attention Networks for Document
Classification On-Device. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . 5012–5021.
[88] Prabhu Kaliamoorthi, Aditya Siddhant, Edward Li, and Melvin Johnson. 2021. Distilling Large Language Models into
Tiny and Effective Students using pQRNN. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08890 (2021).
[89] Pankaj Kanwar, Peter Brandt, and Zongwei Zhou. 2021. TensorFlow 2 MLPerf submissions demonstrate best-in-class
performance on Google Cloud. https://blog.tensorflow.org/2020/07/tensorflow-2-mlperf-submissions.html [Online;
accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[90] Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi. 2018. Quantizing deep convolutional networks for efficient inference: A whitepaper.
arXiv (Jun 2018). arXiv:1806.08342 https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.08342v1
[91] Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. (2009).
[92] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural
networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 25 (2012), 1097–1105.
[93] Anders Krogh and Jesper Vedelsby. 1994. Neural network ensembles, cross validation and active learning. In NIPS’94:
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 231–238. https://doi.org/10.5555/2998687.2998716
[94] HT Kung and CE Leiserson. 1980. Introduction to VLSI systems. Mead, C. A_, and Conway, L.,(Eds), Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA (1980), 271–292.
[95] Hsiang-Tsung Kung. 1982. Why systolic architectures? IEEE computer 15, 1 (1982), 37–46.
[96] Yann LeCun. 2018. Yann LeCun @EPFL - "Self-supervised learning: could machines learn like humans?". https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=7I0Qt7GALVk&t=316s [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[97] Yann Lecun, Leon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to document
recognition. Proc. IEEE 86, 11 (Nov 1998), 2278–2324. https://doi.org/10.1109/5.726791
[98] Yann LeCun, John S Denker, and Sara A Solla. 1990. Optimal brain damage. In Advances in neural information
processing systems . 598–605.
[99] Fengfu Li, Bo Zhang, and Bin Liu. 2016. Ternary weight networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04711 (2016).
[100] Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan Samet, and Hans Peter Graf. 2016. Pruning Filters for Efficient ConvNets.
InICLR (Poster) .
[101] Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2017. Hyperband: A novel
bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 18, 1 (2017),
6765–6816.
[102] Sharon Y. Li. 2020. Automating Data Augmentation: Practice, Theory and New Direction. SAIL Blog (Apr 2020).
http://ai.stanford.edu/blog/data-augmentation
[103] Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2018. Tune: A research
platform for distributed model selection and training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05118 (2018).
[104] Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, Alan Yuille, Jonathan
Huang, and Kevin Murphy. 2018. Progressive neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV) . 19–34.
[105] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. 2018. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.09055 (2018).
[106] Zechun Liu, Haoyuan Mu, Xiangyu Zhang, Zichao Guo, Xin Yang, Kwang-Ting Cheng, and Jian Sun. 2019. Metaprun-
ing: Meta learning for automatic neural network channel pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International

==== Page 42 ====
42 Gaurav Menghani
Conference on Computer Vision . 3296–3305.
[107] Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. 2018. Rethinking the Value of Network
Pruning. CoRR abs/1810.05270 (2018). arXiv:1810.05270 http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.05270
[108] Arm Ltd. 2021. SIMD ISAs |Neon – Arm Developer. https://developer.arm.com/architectures/instruction-sets/simd-
isas/neon [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[109] Gaurav Menghani and Sujith Ravi. 2019. Learning from a Teacher using Unlabeled Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05275
(2019).
[110] Tomas Mikolov, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Christian Puhrsch, and Armand Joulin. 2017. Advances in
pre-training distributed word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09405 (2017).
[111] Jonas Močkus. 1975. On Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization techniques IFIP technical
conference . Springer, 400–404.
[112] Pavlo Molchanov, Stephen Tyree, Tero Karras, Timo Aila, and Jan Kautz. 2016. Pruning Convolutional Neural
Networks for Resource Efficient Transfer Learning. CoRR abs/1611.06440 (2016). arXiv:1611.06440 http://arxiv.org/
abs/1611.06440
[113] Node.js Authors. 2021. Node.js. https://nodejs.org/en [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[114] NVIDIA. 2020. GTC 2020: Accelerating Sparsity in the NVIDIA Ampere Architecture. https://developer.nvidia.com/
gtc/2020/video/s22085-vid [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[115] NVIDIA. 2020. Inside Volta: The World’s Most Advanced Data Center GPU |NVIDIA Developer Blog. https:
//developer.nvidia.com/blog/inside-volta [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[116] NVIDIA. 2021. NVIDIA Embedded Systems for Next-Gen Autonomous Machines. https://www.nvidia.com/en-
us/autonomous-machines/embedded-systems [Online; accessed 4. Jun. 2021].
[117] Rina Panigrahy. 2021. Matrix Compression Operator. https://blog.tensorflow.org/2020/02/matrix-compression-
operator-tensorflow.html [Online; accessed 5. Jun. 2021].
[118] PapersWithCode.com. 2021. Papers with Code - The latest in Machine Learning. https://paperswithcode.com
[Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[119] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming
Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al .2019. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01703 (2019).
[120] Mandela Patrick, Yuki M Asano, Polina Kuznetsova, Ruth Fong, João F Henriques, Geoffrey Zweig, and Andrea
Vedaldi. 2020. Multi-modal self-supervision from generalized data transformations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04298
(2020).
[121] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
InProceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) . 1532–1543.
[122] Valerio Perrone, Huibin Shen, Aida Zolic, Iaroslav Shcherbatyi, Amr Ahmed, Tanya Bansal, Michele Donini, Fela
Winkelmolen, Rodolphe Jenatton, Jean Baptiste Faddoul, et al .2020. Amazon SageMaker Automatic Model Tuning:
Scalable Black-box Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08489 (2020).
[123] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. 2018. Efficient neural architecture search via
parameters sharing. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 4095–4104.
[124] Antonio Polino, Razvan Pascanu, and Dan Alistarh. 2018. Model compression via distillation and quantization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05668 (2018).
[125] Rajat Raina, Anand Madhavan, and Andrew Y Ng. 2009. Large-scale deep unsupervised learning using graphics
processors. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning . 873–880.
[126] Brian Rakowski. 2019. Pixel 4 is here to help. Google (Oct 2019). https://blog.google/products/pixel/pixel-4
[127] Mohammad Rastegari, Vicente Ordonez, Joseph Redmon, and Ali Farhadi. 2016. Xnor-net: Imagenet classification
using binary convolutional neural networks. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 525–542.
[128] Sujith Ravi. 2017. Projectionnet: Learning efficient on-device deep networks using neural projections. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.00630 (2017).
[129] Sujith Ravi and Zornitsa Kozareva. 2018. Self-governing neural networks for on-device short text classification. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 887–893.
[130] Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. 2019. Regularized evolution for image classifier
architecture search. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 33. 4780–4789.
[131] Microsoft Research. 2019. Neural Network Intelligence - Microsoft Research. https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/project/neural-network-intelligence [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[132] Nadav Rotem, Jordan Fix, Saleem Abdulrasool, Garret Catron, Summer Deng, Roman Dzhabarov, Nick Gibson, James
Hegeman, Meghan Lele, Roman Levenstein, et al .2018. Glow: Graph lowering compiler techniques for neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00907 (2018).

==== Page 43 ====
Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 43
[133] Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. 2018. Mobilenetv2:
Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition . 4510–4520.
[134] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2019. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT:
smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 (2019).
[135] Chinnadhurai Sankar, Sujith Ravi, and Zornitsa Kozareva. 2019. Transferable neural projection representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.01605 (2019).
[136] Chinnadhurai Sankar, Sujith Ravi, and Zornitsa Kozareva. 2020. ProFormer: Towards On-Device LSH Projection
Based Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05801 (2020).
[137] Kaz Sato. 2021. What makes TPUs fine-tuned for deep learning? |Google Cloud Blog. https://cloud.google.com/
blog/products/ai-machine-learning/what-makes-tpus-fine-tuned-for-deep-learning [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[138] Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon Schmitt, Arthur
Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al .2020. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning
with a learned model. Nature 588, 7839 (2020), 604–609.
[139] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Edinburgh neural machine translation systems for wmt 16.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02891 (2016).
[140] Patrice Y Simard, David Steinkraus, John C Platt, et al .2003. Best practices for convolutional neural networks applied
to visual document analysis.. In Icdar , Vol. 3. Citeseer.
[141] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[142] Dusan Stosic. 2020. Training Neural Networks with Tensor Cores - Dusan Stosic, NVIDIA. https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=jF4-_ZK_tyc [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[143] Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. 2017. Revisiting unreasonable effectiveness of
data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 843–852.
[144] Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. 2020. Mobilebert: a compact
task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02984 (2020).
[145] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.3215 (2014).
[146] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent
Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. 2015. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition . 1–9.
[147] Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and Quoc V Le. 2019.
Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2820–2828.
[148] Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. 2020. Efficient transformers: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.06732 (2020).
[149] TensorFlow. 2019. TensorFlow Model Optimization Toolkit — Post-Training Integer Quantization. Medium (Nov
2019). https://medium.com/tensorflow/tensorflow-model-optimization-toolkit-post-training-integer-quantization-
b4964a1ea9ba
[150] TensorFlow. 2021. Model optimization |TensorFlow Lite. https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/performance/model_
optimization [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[151] Sik-Ho Tsang. 2019. Review: Xception — With Depthwise Separable Convolution, Better Than Inception-v3 (Image
Classification). Medium (Mar 2019). https://towardsdatascience.com/review-xception-with-depthwise-separable-
convolution-better-than-inception-v3-image-dc967dd42568
[152] Gregor Urban, Krzysztof J Geras, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Ozlem Aslan, Shengjie Wang, Rich Caruana, Abdelrahman
Mohamed, Matthai Philipose, and Matt Richardson. 2016. Do deep convolutional nets really need to be deep and
convolutional? arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05691 (2016).
[153] Vincent Vanhoucke, Andrew Senior, and Mark Z Mao. 2011. Improving the speed of neural networks on CPUs.
(2011).
[154] Nicolas Vasilache, Oleksandr Zinenko, Theodoros Theodoridis, Priya Goyal, Zachary DeVito, William S Moses,
Sven Verdoolaege, Andrew Adams, and Albert Cohen. 2018. Tensor comprehensions: Framework-agnostic high-
performance machine learning abstractions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04730 (2018).
[155] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762 (2017).
[156] Peisong Wang, Qiang Chen, Xiangyu He, and Jian Cheng. 2020. Towards Accurate Post-training Network Quantization
via Bit-Split and Stitching. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 9847–9856. http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v119/wang20c.html

==== Page 44 ====
44 Gaurav Menghani
[157] Shibo Wang and Pankaj Kanwar. 2021. BFloat16: The secret to high performance on Cloud TPUs |Google Cloud
Blog. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/bfloat16-the-secret-to-high-performance-on-
cloud-tpus [Online; accessed 3. Jun. 2021].
[158] Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, and Graham Neubig. 2018. Switchout: an efficient data augmentation algorithm
for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07512 (2018).
[159] Pete Warden and Daniel Situnayake. 2019. Tinyml: Machine learning with tensorflow lite on arduino and ultra-low-power
microcontrollers . " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[160] Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang, Fei Sun, Yiming Wu, Yuandong Tian, Peter Vajda, Yangqing
Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. 2019. Fbnet: Hardware-aware efficient convnet design via differentiable neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 10734–10742.
[161] Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V Le. 2020. Self-training with noisy student improves imagenet
classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 10687–10698.
[162] I Zeki Yalniz, Hervé Jégou, Kan Chen, Manohar Paluri, and Dhruv Mahajan. 2019. Billion-scale semi-supervised
learning for image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00546 (2019).
[163] Adams Wei Yu, David Dohan, Minh-Thang Luong, Rui Zhao, Kai Chen, Mohammad Norouzi, and Quoc V Le.
2018. Qanet: Combining local convolution with global self-attention for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.09541 (2018).
[164] Tong Yu and Hong Zhu. 2020. Hyper-parameter optimization: A review of algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.05689 (2020).
[165] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. 2016. Paying more attention to attention: Improving the performance of
convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.03928 (2016).
[166] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. 2017. mixup: Beyond empirical risk
minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412 (2017).
[167] Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. 2018. To Prune, or Not to Prune: Exploring the Efficacy of Pruning for Model
Compression. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 -
May 3, 2018, Workshop Track Proceedings . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy1iIDkPM
[168] Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. 2016. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01578 (2016).
[169] Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. 2018. Learning transferable architectures for scalable
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 8697–8710.

