==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2006.12703v1  [cs.NE]  23 Jun 2020EFFICIENT HYPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION IN DEEP
LEARNING USING A VARIABLE LENGTH GENETIC ALGORITHM
A P REPRINT
Xueli Xiao
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
xxiao2@student.gsu.eduMing Yan
Institute of High Performance Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore
yanmingtop@yahoo.comSunitha Basodi
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
sbasodi1@student.gsu.edu
Chunyan Ji
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
cji2@student.gsu.eduYi Pan
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
yipan@gsu.edu
June 25, 2020
ABSTRACT
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have gained great succ ess in many artiﬁcial intelligence
tasks. However, ﬁnding a good set of hyperparameters for a CN N remains a challenging task. It usu-
ally takes an expert with deep knowledge, and trials and erro rs. Genetic algorithms have been used
in hyperparameter optimizations. However, traditional ge netic algorithms with ﬁxed-length chromo-
somes may not be a good ﬁt for optimizing deep learning hyperp arameters, because deep learning
models have variable number of hyperparameters depending o n the model depth. As the depth in-
creases, the number of hyperparameters grows exponentiall y, and searching becomes exponentially
harder. It is important to have an efﬁcient algorithm that ca n ﬁnd a good model in reasonable time.
In this article, we propose to use a variable length genetic a lgorithm (GA) to systematically and
automatically tune the hyperparameters of a CNN to improve i ts performance. Experimental re-
sults show that our algorithm can ﬁnd good CNN hyperparamete rs efﬁciently. It is clear from our
experiments that if more time is spent on optimizing the hype rparameters, better results could be
achieved. Theoretically, if we had unlimited time and CPU po wer, we could ﬁnd the optimized
hyperparameters and achieve the best results in the future.
Keywords Genetic Algorithms ·Hyperparameter Optimization ·Deep Learning ·Convolutional Neural Networks
1 Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has achieved great pe rformance in the area of computer vision. Designing
the architecture of CNNs so that it produces good results on a task is challenging. It involves decisions on various
hyperparameters of the network, such as how many layers are i n the network, how many ﬁlters are in a layer, what
are the sizes of convolutional windows, and so on. All the dif ferent combinations of the hyperparameters create a
huge number of possibilities for CNN models. Traditionally , the selection of hyperparameters is done by hand tuning,
ie. manually testing different sets of parameters that may w ork well. This requires certain level of knowledge and
expertise in deep learning, and the process of trial and erro r is tedious, time-consuming, and may be discouraging
to the novices. It is thus beneﬁcial to automatically search for a CNN architecture that suits the needs of the task.
Searching for a good deep learning model is challenging, ver y computationally intensive, and time consuming. The
lengthy search time is caused by many factors: the evaluatio n time for a single deep learning model is long, the search

==== Page 2 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
space grows exponentially large as the model depth increase s, and the access to GPU resources is limited – many
researchers only have access to one or a few GPUs. Given the ab ove mentioned reasons, it is certainly not practical to
traverse every single possibility to ﬁnd the best model.
Evolutionary algorithms have been used in hyperparameter o ptimization of deep learning models. Young et al. [1] used
a genetic algorithm (GA) to optimize the hyperparameter of a 3-layer CNN. The algorithm is not suitable for situations
where we do not know the how many layers are needed there. Real et al. [2] used a mutation only evolutionary
algorithm, and gradually grows the deep learning model to ﬁn d a good set of combinations. The evolutionary process
is slow due to the mutation only nature.
Inspired by the work of [1] and [2], we propose a variable leng th genetic algorithm to efﬁciently optimize the hyper-
parameters in CNNs. Models of various hyperparameters sett ings are ﬁrst created and evolved using the algorithm.
We do not put a constraint on the model depth, and various tech niques such as crossover operation in the evolving
process makes the algorithm more efﬁcient. Experimental re sults show that our method can efﬁciently ﬁnd good hy-
perparameter combinations even when the search space becom es exponentially large. Hyperparameter optimization is
itself a time consuming process. Having an efﬁcient algorit hm is especially helpful when the access to GPU hardware
is limited and the search space is very large. The major contr ibution of this work is as follows:
•Our method can efﬁciently discover deep learning models wit h variable depths. It makes hyperparameter
optimization more feasible for researchers with limited co mputing resources.
•Our algorithm does not have a constraint on the depth of deep l earning models, which means our method can
handle problems of different sizes.
•We incorporated crossover operation in our model evolution process along with efﬁcient model evaluation
techniques to make the model discovering process more effec tive.
The rest of the work is organized as follows: Section II descr ibes related work in hyperparameter optimization. Section
III introduces our method in searching for the best hyperpar ameter combinations. Section IV includes experiment
details and settings. Section V is conclusion and possible f uture research directions.
2 Background
2.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a type of deep artiﬁc ial neural network and it is assumed to be used for
images. Classical CNNs contain convolutional layers, pool ing layers, ReLU activations, and fully connected layers.
Convolutional layers have convolutional windows that can e xtract features from images. These windows are usually
called ﬁlters or kernels. The kernels move through the image s, performing convolutions on local image data and
produce feature maps.
Pooling is used to reduce the number of parameters in a CNN, it is also called downsampling or subsampling. It can
help reduce computation complexity. If a feature map is of si ze 2020, using pooling of size 22 and step of size 2, the
dimension can be reduced to 1010 .There are different types o f pooling layers: max pooling, average pooling, fractional
max pooling and so on. Max pooling takes the pixel of the bigge st value in the pooling window, whereas average
pooling calculates the average of all the pixels in the windo w. These are the two commonly used pooling methods in
convolutional neural networks. Activation function ReLU s tands for Rectiﬁed Linear Unit, it introduces nonlinearity
into the network. ReLU activation keeps all positive input a nd makes negative input to be zero: f(x)=Max(0,x). Some
of the other types of activation functions include tanh, Exp onential Linear Unit (ELU) [3], Scaled Exponential Linear
Unit (SELU) [4] and so on. Fully connected layer has full conn ections to neurons in the previous layer.
2.2 Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms are biologically inspired. It learns fr om Darwin’s evolutionary theory. In Darwin’s theory of natu ral
selection, the ﬁttest individuals are selected and they pro duce offsprings. The characteristics of these individuals are
passed on the next generations. If the parents have higher ﬁt ness, their offsprings tend to be ﬁtter and have more
chances of survival.
Genetic algorithms learn from this idea. They can be used to s olve optimization and search problems. In genetic
algorithms candidate solutions are evolved to generate bet ter ones. A set of solutions form a search space and the goal
is to ﬁnd the best ones among them. This is similar to ﬁnding th e ﬁttest individual in a population. Genetic algorithms
start with a population that contains random solutions with in the search space.
2

==== Page 3 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Each solution has a chromosome, which contains properties a bout the solution. These chromosomes can be altered.
A typical genetic algorithm has three bio-inspired operato rs that can be used on a chromosome: selection, crossover,
and mutation. Selection means to select a portion of the popu lation as candidates to produce offsprings and generate
more solutions. Usually the ﬁtter individuals are selected . The ﬁtness of a solution can be calculated using a ﬁtness
function, and it reﬂects how good the solution is. Crossover combines the chromosomes of two parents, and produces
a chromosome for the offspring. The offspring’s chromosome inherits the properties from both parents. The Mutation
operator is like biological mutation: it changes one or more values in the chromosome. This introduces more diversities
in the population.
Genetic algorithms are simple yet effective. They have been applied on various research problems such as vehicle
routing problems [5], dynamic channel-assignment problem s [6], neuroscience search problems [7] [8], deep learning
hyperparameter optimizations [1] [2], neural network weig ht optimizations [9] [10] and so on. Genetic algorithms
with variable chromosome length have also been applied to ma ny problems [11] [12].
2.3 Hyperparameter Optimization Algorithms
Grid search and random search [13] are two popular methods fo r hyperparameter optimization. Grid search selects the
best model among many models built on predeﬁned hyperparame ter settings. It evaluates all the models to guarantee
the best one is found. As the number of hyperparameters grow, and search space gets increasingly larger, the amount
of time it takes for grid search grows exponentially, making it impractical to be used. Random search [13]takes less
time than grid search, because unlike grid search, it does no t search all possibilities exhaustively. Instead of trying out
all possibilities, it randomly selects models with differe nt hyperparameter combinations. There is a trade-off betwe en
search time and quality of discovered models. It is not guara nteed that the optimal hyperparameter combination within
the search space will be found. It turns out random search can achieve similar results compared with grid search, while
being more efﬁcient.
Besides grid search and random search there are other approa ches, such as Bayesian optimization, gradient based
methods, reinforcement learning based methods, and evolut ionary algorithms. Bayesian optimization methods [14]
[15] [16] use an acquisition function to smartly decide wher e should the algorithm explore next in the search space. A
probabilistic model is built to balance exploration and exp loitation. Gradient based methods can be used if the hyper-
parameters are continuous. Luketina et al.[17] and Fu et al. [18] used gradient descent to optimize hyperparameters.
Reinforcement learning based methods are used to automatic ally discover CNN architectures. Zoph et al. [19] used
a Recurrent Neural Network to generate CNN model structure, and applied reinforcement learning to improve the
generated architecture. Baker et al. [20] used a Q-learning agent to discover a network layer by layer.
Another large category of hyperparameter optimization met hod is based on evolutionary algorithms. Research work
under this category differs in their evolutionary algorith ms used, the search space, the encoding scheme for CNN
model architecture, ways of reducing computational cost an d so on. Young et al. [1] performed genetic algorithms to
optimize hyperparameters in CNNs. A three layer ﬁxed-archi tecture CNN is used, and only six hyper parameters are
tuned. The problem with a ﬁxed layer architecture is that the models may be too small to ﬁt the problem, leading to a
high bias. Real et al.[2] evolved complex CNN architectures from very simple individuals by applying different kinds
of mutation operations. Model structures are encoded as gra phs in [2]. While the method by Real et al.[2] can ﬁnd
accurate models for challenging tasks, the computational c ost is very high: 250 workers are used and the searching
time is over 250 hours. A mutation only algorithm can contrib ute to high computational cost since the evolutionary
process is very slow. Many hyperparameter optimization met hods use the model’s accuracy on the held out validation
dataset as an evaluation of the model. Albelwi et al.[21] too k a different approach of evaluating how good a CNN
model is. Images are reconstructed from the learned ﬁlters u sing deconvnet, and the similarity between the original
image and the reconstructed image is used as the ﬁtness of a CN N architecture. There are various ways of deﬁning
models’ structures too. Suaganuma et al.[22] used Cartesia n genetic programming encoding scheme to deﬁne CNN
models. It enables them to incorporate modules such as tenso r concatenation into the model architecture. Baldominos
et al.[23] used backus-naur form to deﬁne a grammar for model topologies, allowing more ﬂexible representations of
CNN architectures.
3 Method
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) are inspired by the process of natural selection. They are commonly used to produce
high-quality solutions when the search space is large. The i dea of EA is to produce an initial population that is made
up of diverse solutions, and evolve them for many generation s to produce better ones. The genes of the better solutions
will survive and pass on to further generations, whereas the worse solutions die off.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Both Young et al. and Real et. al use EA, and there are limitati ons. For the purpose of optimizing hyperparameters
for deep learning models, no constraints should be put on the network layers. Limiting the number of layers could
make the network size too small for the problem, leading to un derﬁtting. Young et. al used a classical ﬁxed length
genetic algorithm (GA), the most popular type of GA, to optim ize a CNN model for the CIFAR-10 dataset [24]. A
ﬁxed length GA means the CNN model has predeﬁned ﬁxed number o f layers. However, for a given problem, one
never knows how many layers are enough before experiments ar e done. Having a too large network on the other hand,
can lead to overﬁtting. Thus it makes sense to start from a sma ll network, and gradually grow it as needed. Real et. al
do so by using a mutation only EA. Although high accuracies ar e obtained on the CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 dataset,
the computational cost of their method is very high. The whol e process takes 250 parallel computers and over 250
hours to complete. Those who rely on automatic hyperparamet er optimization tools usually do not have that kind of
computational resource.
Because of the above mentioned limitations, we propose a var iable length genetic algorithm for deep learning hyper-
parameter optimization. It starts from a small network mode l and gradually builds on top of it. Crossover operation
along with other techniques are used in this EA to accelerate the optimization process, making it affordable for those
with limited resources.
3.1 Variable Length Genetic Algorithms
Classical GA requires ﬁxed chromosome length. Since the num ber of convolutional layers varies in different CNN
models, and more hyperparameters are involved as the model g rows deeper, a variable length GA is more suitable for
the purpose of our task.
A chromosome in the variable length GA contains parameters t hat deﬁne a solution, in this case, a hyperparameter
conﬁguration for a network model. How the solution is encode d in the chromosome is discussed in section 3.2.
Figure 1 describes the overall procedure for the variable le ngth GA. The initial population with two convolutional
layers is ﬁrst produced, and the individuals/solutions are initialized with random hyperparameters. The individuals are
then evaluated and sorted based on how ﬁt they are. The ﬁtness of an individual is made to be the corresponding CNN
model’s accuracy on the validation dataset. Then the ﬁtter i ndividuals gets directly picked, and survive into the next
generation. The rest of the next generation are produced by i ndividuals from the current generation using crossovers
and mutations, common operations of a GA. In crossover, two i ndividuals are selected as parents to produce a child
that inherits the parents’ properties. In mutation, some pr operties of the individual are changed to other values. Afte r
the 2-layer models have been evolved for some generations, t he algorithm enters the next phase that enables more
layers and hyperparameters.
A new phase in the algorithm simply means the chromosome leng th increases, bringing more hyperparameters in, and
the corresponding CNN models have more layers.
The steps of our hyperparameter optimization method are as f ollows:
1. Initialize the number of populations pand generations gaccording to user input.
2. Create the initial population. Each individual in the pop ulation has randomized hyperparameters. The size of
the population is pas speciﬁed by the user.
3. Evaluate the ﬁtness of each individual in the current gene ration. The ﬁtness is the accuracy of the individual
on the validation dataset.
4. Sort each individual according to their ﬁtness value, fro m high to low.
5. Select the ﬁttest individuals. Select a portion of the pop ulation that has the highest ﬁtness values, and let them
survive into the next generation. The percentage of this sur vival rate can be set manually.
6. Allow some less ﬁt individuals to survive. For the rest of t he individuals in the current population, give them
a small chance to survive into the next generation. This prob ability is set manually.
7. Randomly mutate some individuals in the next generation. The mutation rate is manually conﬁgured. If an
individual is chosen to mutate, one of its hyperparameter’s value will be changed.
8. Produce new individuals. Randomly select two individual s from the next population to serve as parents, and
perform crossover operation to produce a child. Each hyperp arameter in the child is randomly set to be one
of its parent’s hyperparameter value. Repeat the crossover operation on different random individuals many
times until the next generation has pindividuals. Now the next generation becomes the current ge neration.
9. Repeat Step 3 - 8 until the number of generations has reache d g.
10. Select the best individual from the current population.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 1: The hyperparameter optimization steps using our v ariable length genetic algorithm.
11. Produce population with longer chromosome length. For e ach individual of the population, one part of the
chromosome is from the best individual in Step 10, the other p art is randomly generated.
12. Repeat step 9 - 11 until convergence.
13. Select the best individual and train for more epochs unti l convergence.
3.2 Encoding Scheme
The hyperparameter information of each individual, or CNN m odel, is encoded into what’s called a chromosome in
GA. The chromosome may have different representations, suc h as a bit string that contains 1’s and 0’s. For the purpose
of hyperparameter optimization, the chromosome of our expe riments have many ﬁelds that contain different values. It
deﬁnes the hyperparameters of a CNN architecture, such as th e number of neurons, activation function type, and so
on. Once a chromosome is known, a CNN model can be built accord ing to the chromosome.
In the initial phase (Phase 0) of the algorithm, there are two convolutional layers a and b. Relevant hyperparameters
are encoded in the chromosome as shown is Figure 2. For each co nvolutional layer, the hyperparameters include the
number of output feature maps, the size of the convolutional windows, and whether or not to include batch normaliza-
tion. For this two-layer block, there are three additional h yperparameters: whether to include pooling in this block,
what is the pooling type, and whether or not to include a skip c onnection. If there is a pooling layer for this block, it is
going to be added after the ﬁrst convolutional layer. If a ski p connection exists, it is going to have a 1x1 convolution,
and its output is going to be added with the output of the whole block. Figure 3 is an example of the skip connection.
There is an additional “activation type” ﬁeld in the chromos ome for Phase 0. This deﬁnes what type of activation
function is going to be used for the whole model. Figure 2 is th e encoding scheme of Phase 0, the initial phase that
represents a model with two convolutional layers.
For every phase after Phase 0, we allow the algorithm to still add two convolutional layers (Layer a and Layer b) in
each phase, but we give the ﬂexibility and let the algorithm d ecide whether to add one or two convolutional layers in
the phase. The chromosome encoding for a Phase after Phase 0 i s as shown in Figure 4. New ﬁelds are concatenated
to the chromosome of the previous phase. The new part is very s imilar to the encoding for Phase 0, except that it does
not have an “Activation Type” ﬁeld, and has a new ﬁeld “Includ e Layer?” that can take two values: 0 or 1. If the value
is 1, there will be two convolutional layers in this phase, an d if 0, there will be only one.
Going into a new phase means that the chromosomes are longer, and models being discovered by the algorithm grow
deeper. And part of the hyperparameters in the deeper model c omes from the best model in the previous phase. An
5

==== Page 6 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 2: The initial chromosome (Phase 0). In the chromosom e, what type of activation function to be used for the
whole model is encoded. It also includes hyperparameter inf ormation for the ﬁrst two convolutional layers: the size
of the convolutional windows, number of output channels, an d whether or not to include batch normalization for the
layer. For the whole two-layer block, there are three additi onal hyperparameters: whether to add a pooling layer after
the ﬁrst convolutional layer, what is the pooling type, and i f a skip connection should be included.
Figure 3: An example of a skip connection. This block contain s two convolutional layers: Layer a and Layer b. The
skip connection performs a 1x1 convolution on the input, and its output is added with the output of Layer b. Stride size
and number of ﬁlters of the skip connection is setup such that its output tensor has the same shape as that of Layer b.
example can be found in Figure 5. Assume to the left is the best model discovered in Phase 0. The part in the
dashboard box is encoded in Phase 0 chromosome. When the algo rithm enters Phase 1, the chromosomes grows
longer, and the corresponding CNN models are deeper. The dee per models share some common properties: part of
their hyperparameter settings come from the best model in Ph ase 0. See the right part in Figure 5 for an example of
Phase 1 model. The part bounded by dashed box is being searche d in Phase 1, and the gray part above is from Phase 0.
Figure 6 shows the corresponding chromosomes for the two mod els in Figure 5. In Figure 6, the yellow ﬁelds indicate
hyperparameters that are being searched in that phase, and g ray ﬁelds indicate hyperparameters from previous phases.
3.3 Fitness of individuals
The ﬁtness of an individual is its accuracy on the validation dataset. One way is to train the models to converge, and
then compare. While this is more accurate in terms of compari ng the models’ performance on the test set, this process
takes very long time and needs a great amount of computing pow er. To save time, models can be trained for just a few
epochs to compare their relative ﬁtness with each other. Mod els that are ﬁtter in the ﬁrst few training epochs tend to
also perform better later. In the experiments, the number of training epochs for comparing relative ﬁtness is set to be
5.
This way of evaluation is unfair when the size of the model dif fers greatly. A deeper model might have similar or
even worse test accuracy compared with a shallower model whe n both are only trained for a small number of epochs
such as ﬁve. To solve this problem, we introduce weight trans fer from shallow models to deeper ones. In Figure 7,
when the algorithm enters a new phase, it searches for deeper models (the right part). New layers are added to the best
model from the previous phase (the left part). Instead of ini tializing all the weights randomly in the new models, some
of their weights are transferred from the previous best mode l, and some are done through random initialization. This
takes advantage of the previous trained models and saves som e training time. To evaluate its ﬁtness, the deeper model
is simply trained for ﬁve epochs, since part of it already rec eived some training.
6

==== Page 7 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 4: Encoding for Phases after Phase 0. Chromosome in th e current phase is an extension of the one from the
previous phase plus some new ﬁelds. Chromosomes are longer, and the represented models have more layers. The
ﬁeld with gray background indicate the chromosome from the p revious phase. The rest deﬁnes the properties of new
layers in the current phase. In the current, two convolution al layers can be added, with the ﬂexibility of letting the
algorithm to decide whether to add one or two. This is achieve d by adding a “Include Layer b?” ﬁeld, the one with
yellow background, in the chromosome.
Figure 5: The model grows deeper when a new phase begins. The m odels in the new phase are built based on the best
model in the previous phase. To the left is an example of the be st model found in Phase 0, and to the right is a model
in Phase 1.
4 Experiments and Results
4.1 Datasets
Experiments were done on the CIFAR-10 dataset [24]. This dat aset contains 60000 color images of size 32X32 in 10
classes: each class has 6000 images. There are 50000 images f or training, and 10000 for testing.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 6: The corresponding chromosomes for models in Figur e 5. Chromosomes grows longer when a new phase is
entered. The chromosome in the new phase is extended from the best chromosome in the previous phase.
4.2 Search Space
The search space deﬁnes all the possible solutions that can b e searched. A relatively small search space may take the
algorithm less time to ﬁnd a satisfying CNN model, but may be c onstrictive due to the limited number of possible mod-
els included in this space. A larger one, on the other hand, is more time consuming and requires more computational
power.
In our experiments, the search space includes the number of o utput feature maps in each convolutional layer, convo-
lutional ﬁlter size, activation function type, pooling typ e, whether to have a skip connection, whether to include batc h
normalization in a layer, and total number of layers. Most of the hyperparameters, such as number of output feature
maps and convolutional ﬁlter sizes need to be decided in ever y convolutional layer. Thus as the model grows deeper,
the search space becomes exponentially larger, and the sear ching more difﬁcult. Most of the previous works do not
include pooling types in their search space. In our work howe ver, various pooling layers can exist in a single model.
Table 1 describes the default search space of our experiment s. The left column are the types of hyperparameters and
the right column are their choices. Unless otherwise noted, our variable length genetic algorithm uses this space. Fig-
ure 8 shows how the search space of algorithm grows as the numb er of layer increases. Initially models have two
layers and the search space contains 156,800 different comb inations of hyperparameters. When the the number of
layers increases to 14, the search space grows to about 1035.
The possible options of each hyperparameter type are carefu lly chosen. ReLU, Tanh, ELU and SELU are possible
choices for the activation functions. Tanh is chosen in favo r of Sigmoid because it is zero centered.
4.3 Experiment Setup
Our proposed method is implemented in Python, and CNN model a re created using Keras. Experiments were run on
a single GPU. To save time, the ﬁtness of each individual is ma de to be the test accuracy after ﬁve training epochs.
Weight transfer is also used to save the experiment running t ime. If a model survives into a new generation, it does
not need to be trained again because all of its weights are sav ed. If the algorithm enters a new phase where the new
population with longer chromosomes are built on top of previ ous stage’s best individuals, the old best model’s trained
weights are transferred into the new models, and the new ones are trained for another ﬁve epochs to get their ﬁtness
value.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 7: Weight initialization scheme for deeper models. A deeper model of the current phase is built on top of the
best model from the previous phase. Part of its weights is tra nsferred from the previous best model, part is initialized
randomly.
4.4 Genetic Algorithm Settings
There are parameters that need to be set up in our variable len gth genetic algorithm: the size of the population, number
of generations, number of phases, mutation rate, and surviv al chance of less ﬁt individuals. In the experiments, 50%
of the ﬁttest individual survive into the next generation, t he survival rate of less ﬁt individual is set to be 0.2, and the
mutation rate is set to be 0.2. We do not set a predeﬁned number of phases in our method. Instead, a stopping condition
is set to stop the algorithm. Section 4.5 discusses the stopp ing condition in details.
4.5 Stopping Condition
The evolutionary process stops when there is no more improve ment on validation accuracy when more layers are
added. A threshold value is set for the stopping condition: w hen the best ﬁtness in the new phase is smaller than
the best ﬁtness in the previous phases by more than 0.01, the e volving process stops, and the individual with the best
ﬁtness is returned. This individual then receives further t raining. In Figure 9, the evolutionary process stops at the 1 4th
phase. The best individual ﬁtness at Phase 14 is 0.8070, wher eas the best in the previous phases is 0.8233 (at Phase
13). The evolutionary process thus stops, and the best indiv idual at Phase 13 is picked to receive further training.
4.6 Results
Figure 10 shows the result of 20 individuals evolved for 5 gen erations in each phase. Each individual is trained for
5 epochs to evaluate the ﬁtness. The evolution stops at Phase 14, when the stopping condition is met. The number
of convolutional layers increases in each phase. Initially , when the algorithm enters a new phase, there is a great
improvement in the accuracy of the individuals, this improv ement gradually declines in the later phases. This shows
the increase of convolutional layers can have great inﬂuenc e on the model performance, especially when the model is
9

==== Page 10 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Layers1071011101510191023102710311035Search Space Size
Figure 8: The size of the search space grows exponentially as the number of layers in the deep learning model increases.
In the initial phase of our algorithm, models have two layers and the search space is 156,800. As the model goes deeper,
this number grows exponentially. When the number of layers r eaches 14, the search space grows to about 1035.
Table 1: The default search space used by our variable length genetic algorithm.
Hyperparameter Choices
Number of 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512
Output Channels
Convolutional 1x1, 3x3, 5x5, 7x7, 9x9
Filter Size
Activation Function ReLU, Tanh, ELU, SELU
Type
Pooling Max pooling, Average pooling
Type
Skip Yes, No
Connection
Batch Yes, No
Normalization
Number of ≥2
Layers
relatively shallow. When the network is shallow, its size co uld be too small to ﬁt the problem. As the number of layers
increase, the size of the network grows, and so is the capabil ity of the network.
We compare the results of our variable length genetic algori thm with random search, classical genetic algorithm [1],
and large scale evolution [2].
Unlike our method that allows for a dynamic search space that grows as the number of layers increases, random search
requires that the search space to be ﬁxed, which means the max imum number of layers need to be speciﬁed. We make
the number of layers for random search in the range [2,10]. Other search space settings are similar to our method.
We implemented classical genetic algorithm [1] with the sam e genetic algorithm settings mentioned in the paper,
except that instead using a population of size 500, we use muc h smaller population sizes. Because the ﬁtness score
is the model’s test accuracy after being trained for 4000 ite rations, it takes very long time to evaluate one model.
Evaluating the initial 500 models would go far beyond 30 hour s. If a 30 hour limit is enforced, the ﬁnal result would
simply be one of the models from the initial population, with out any evolution involved. Figure 11 shows the results
produced by the classical genetic algorithm. A 30 hour time c onstraints only allows evaluation for around 75 models,
thus the more individuals in a population, the less generati ons the population will evolve. If there are 50 individuals i n
10

==== Page 11 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Phase0.450.500.550.600.650.700.750.80Best Individual Fitness
Figure 9: The evolutionary process stops when the stopping c ondition is met. In this example the algorithm stops at
Phase 14 because the ﬁtness drop is larger than the threshold . The best individual, in this case at Phase 13, is picked
to receive further training.
the population, the algorithm will stop in the middle of the s econd generation, and we do not have much beneﬁts from
evolution.
We implemented large scale evolution [2] on top of a public av ailable implementation [25]. We ran the implementation
with different population size: 30, 50, and 80. The ﬁtness of discovered individuals is shown in Figure 12. Large scale
evolution can produce good models when given great amount of computing hardware and time. However, when there
is limited time and computational hardware available, it is not an ideal algorithm to use. As can be told from Figure
12a, when time is restricted to 1 GPU and 30 hours, the ﬁtness o f discovered individuals are relatively low. When the
population size is 30, the ﬁtness starts to plateau. This cou ld be due to the lack of variety in the chromosome because
the population size is small. When the population size is 80, there is still room for the ﬁtness to improve, but because
of a mutation only evolution, it does not grow as fast as our va riable length genetic algorithm shown in Figure 10.
Table 2 shows the comparison between our method and random se arch, traditional genetic algorithm [1], and large
scale evolution [2]. In our method we sample 20 individuals f rom the initial search space and evolve for 5 generations
in each phase. The best model discovered has 88.92% test accu racy and the total time is around 25 hours. We ran
random search, classical genetic algorithm [1], and large s cale evolution [2] with the 30 hour constraint and report
the best result found. When we have limited GPU resources, wi thin similar amount of time, large scale evolution
gives a model with lowest accuracy. This is because large sca le evolution starts with very small models and there
are only mutation operations on chromosomes. Without cross over, the evolution process is much slower. Large scale
evolution gives very good results when hardware and time is n ot a problem. However, it is not practical for the average
research lab. Classical GA gives a model with relatively hig h accuracy. This is because the deﬁned search space is
much smaller: the number of convolutional layers is ﬁxed to b e three according to the paper. It is necessary to ﬁx the
layer number because classical GA has ﬁxed length chromosom es. Setting a predeﬁned number of layers is not very
practical when we encounter a new problem because we usually do not have much idea of how many layers would be
a good ﬁt for the problem. Our method can ﬁnd better models com pared with the other three when there are limited
computational resources available.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Phase0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Individual Fitness
Figure 10: The ﬁtness of 20 individuals evolved for 5 generat ions in each phase. The algorithm stops at Phase 14
when the stopping condition is met. The best individual foun d in this evolutionary process is chosen to receive more
training. The overall evolution time is less than 25 hours.
Table 2: Accuracy Comparison of Discovered models when usin g similar time (less than 30 hours).
Method Comparison
Name Accuracy Time(hrs)
Random 58.66% 30
Search
[13]
Classical 80.75% 30
GA
[1]
Large Scale 51.90% 30
Evolution
[2]
Variable Length 88.92% 24.55
GA (Ours)
12

==== Page 13 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of Individuals0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8FitnessGeneration 1
Generation 2
(a)0 5 10 15
Number of Individuals0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8FitnessGeneration 1
Generation 2
Generation 3
Generation 4
(b)
0 2 4 6 8
Number of Individuals0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8FitnessGeneration 1
Generation 2
Generation 3
Generation 4
Generation 5
Generation 6
Generation 7
Generation 8
(c)
Figure 11: We implemented classical genetic algorithm and r an the experiment with various population sizes and 30
hour time constraint. We sort the ﬁtness of individuals in ea ch generation and plot their ﬁtness. (a)(b)(c) are plots for
50, 20, and 10 population respectively. Since each model is e valuated for 4000 iterations, 30 hour time constraint only
allows evaluation of about 75 models. The larger the populat ion size, the less generations will be produced. When the
population size is 50, the algorithm stops in the middle of th e second generation.
13

==== Page 14 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
0 100 200 300 400 500
Individuals Produced0.10.20.30.40.5Fitness
(a)0 100 200 300 400 500
Individuals Produced0.10.20.30.40.5Fitness
(b)
0 100 200 300 400
Individuals Produced0.10.20.30.40.5Fitness
(c)
Figure 12: We implemented large scale evolution on top of a pu blic repository, and ran the experiment with different
population setting for 30 hours. (a)(b)(c) are plots for 30, 50, and 80 population respectively. The ﬁtness of the best
discovered individuals are slightly above 0.5 when time is r estricted to 30 hours on 1 Nvidia Tesla V100 GPU.
14

==== Page 15 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work we propose to use a variable length genetic algor ithm to efﬁciently ﬁnd good hyperparameter settings
for deep convolutional neural networks. Experiments were p erformed on CIFAR-10 dataset, and results are compared
with random search [13], classical genetic algorithm [1], a nd large scale evolution [2]. Experimental results show tha t
our algorithm can ﬁnd much better models within a time constr aint.
There are ways of making our algorithm more efﬁcient. For exa mple, right now in each phase all models are trained
for 5 epochs for ﬁtness evaluation, even if a model has poor hy perparameter conﬁgurations. In the future we can detect
these bad conﬁgurations in the early stage of ﬁtness evaluat ion, so we do not spend more computational resources in
training them. Other evolutionary algorithms such as ant co lony can also be applied to this problem [26][27]. We have
used fuzzy set theory and evolutionary computing to design a genetic fuzzy routing algorithm in wireless networks
[28]. We have also designed a deep fuzzy neural network for ca ncer detection [29]. In the future we plan to apply
fuzzy set theory to our algorithm to further improve it.
Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge molecular basis of disease (MBD) at Georgia State University for supporting this research,
as well as the high performance computing resources at Georg ia State University (https://ursa.research.gsu.edu/hig h-
performance-computing) for providing GPU resources. This research is also supported in part by a NVIDIA Academic
Hardware Grant.
References
[1] Steven R. Young, Derek C. Rose, Thomas P. Karnowski, Seun g-Hwan Lim, and Robert M. Patton. Optimizing
deep learning hyper-parameters through an evolutionary al gorithm. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine
Learning in High-Performance Computing Environments - MLH PC ’15 , pages 1–5, Austin, Texas, USA, 2015.
ACM Press.
[2] Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxen a, Yutaka Leon Suematsu, Jie Tan, Quoc Le, and Alex
Kurakin. Large-Scale Evolution of Image Classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning - Volume 70 , pages 2902–2911, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017.
[3] Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochr eiter. Fast and accurate deep network learning by
exponential linear units (ELUs). arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289 , 2015.
[4] Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, an d Sepp Hochreiter. Self-Normalizing Neural Net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02515 , 2017.
[5] Barrie M. Baker and M.A. Ayechew. A Genetic Algorithm for the Vehicle Routing Problem. Computers &
Operations Research , 30(5):787–800, 4 2003.
[6] X Fu, AG Bourgeois, P Fan, and Y Pan. Using a genetic algori thm approach to solve the dynamic channel-
assignment problem. International Journal of Mobile Communications , 4(3):333–353, 2006.
[7] Xiuchun Xiao, Bing Liu, Jing Zhang, Xueli Xiao, and Yi Pan . An Optimized Method for Bayesian Connectivity
Change Point Model. Journal of Computational Biology , 25(3):337–347, 3 2018.
[8] Xiuchun Xiao, Bing Liu, Jing Zhang, Xueli Xiao, and Yi Pan . Detecting Change Points in fMRI Data via
Bayesian Inference and Genetic Algorithm Model. In ISBRA 2017: Bioinformatics Research and Applications ,
pages 314–324. Springer, Cham, 2017.
[9] Jatinder N.D Gupta and Randall S Sexton. Comparing backp ropagation with a genetic algorithm for neural
network training. Omega , 27(6):679–684, 12 1999.
[10] David J Montana and Lawrence Davis. Training Feedforwa rd Neural Networks Using Genetic Algorithms. In
Proceedings of the 11th international joint conference on A rtiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 762–767, San Francisco,
CA, USA, 1989. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[11] Sunil Nilkanth Pawar and Rajankumar Sadashivrao Bichk ar. Genetic Algorithm with Variable Length Chromo-
somes for Network Intrusion Detection. International Journal of Automation and Computing , 12(3):337–342, 6
2015.
[12] R. Srikanth, R. George, N. Warsi, D. Prabhu, F.E. Petry, and B.P. Buckles. A Variable-Length Genetic Algorithm
for Clustering and Classiﬁcation. Pattern Recognition Letters , 16(8):789–800, 8 1995.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
[13] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random Search for Hyp er-Parameter Optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. ,
13:281–305, 2012.
[14] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practi cal Bayesian Optimization of Machine Learning
Algorithms. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems -
Volume 2 , pages 2951–2959, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, USA, 2012.
[15] Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams , and Nando De Freitas. Taking the Human Out of
the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104(1):148–175, 2016.
[16] Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan P Adams. Multi-Ta sk Bayesian Optimization. In Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on Neural Information Proce ssing Systems - Volume 2 , pages 2004–2012, Lake
Tahoe, Nevada, USA, 2013.
[17] Jelena Luketina, Mathias Berglund, Klaus Greff, and Ta pani Raiko. Scalable Gradient-Based Tuning of Con-
tinuous Regularization Hyperparameters. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Intern ational
Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48 , pages 2952–2960, 2016.
[18] Jie Fu, Hongyin Luo, Jiashi Feng, Kian Hsiang Low, and Ta t-Seng Chua. DrMAD: Distilling Reverse-Mode
Automatic Differentiation for Optimizing Hyperparameter s of Deep Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1469–1475, 1 2016.
[19] Barret Zoph and Quoc V . Le. Neural Architecture Search w ith Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01578 , 11 2017.
[20] Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Ras kar. Designing Neural Network Architectures using
Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02167 , 11 2016.
[21] Saleh Albelwi and Ausif Mahmood. A Framework for Design ing the Architectures of Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks. Entropy , 19(6):242, 2017.
[22] Masanori Suganuma, Shinichi Shirakawa, and Tomoharu N agao. A genetic programming approach to design-
ing convolutional neural network architectures. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference on - GECCO ’17 , pages 497–504, Berlin, Germany, 4 2017. ACM Press.
[23] Alejandro Baldominos, Yago Saez, and Pedro Isasi. Evol utionary convolutional neural networks: An application
to handwriting recognition. Neurocomputing , 283:38–52, 3 2018.
[24] Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report, Department of
Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
[25] Marijnvk. Large scale evolution. https://github.com/marijnvk/LargeScaleEvolution/ , 2018.
[26] Z Wang, H Xing, T Li, Y Yang, R Qu, and Y Pan. A modiﬁed ant co lony optimization algorithm for network
coding resource minimization. IEEE Transactions on evolutionary computation , 20(3):325–342, 2015.
[27] X Wang, Q Li, N Xiong, and Y Pan. Ant Colony Optimization- Based Location-Aware Routing for Wireless
Sensor Networks. Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and Applications , pages 109–120, 2008.
[28] Hui Liu, Jie Li, Yan-Qing Zhang, and Yi Pan. An adaptive g enetic fuzzy multi-path routing protocol for wireless
ad-hoc networks. In Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering, A rtiﬁcial Intelligence, Network-
ing and Parallel/Distributed Computing and First ACIS Inte rnational Workshop on Self-Assembling Wireless
Network , pages 468–475, 2005.
[29] TK Bamunu Mudiyanselage, X Xiao, Y Zhang, and Y Pan. Deep Fuzzy Neural Networks for Biomarker Selec-
tion for Accurate Cancer Detection. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , 2019.
16

