==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020-00002-7
OPINION PAPER
Emerging challenges in AI and the need for AI ethics education
Jason Borenstein1 · Ayanna Howard2
Received: 15 July 2020 / Accepted: 23 July 2020 / Published online: 6 October 2020 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is reshaping the world in profound ways; some of its impacts are certainly beneficial but wide-
spread and lasting harms can result from the technology as well. The integration of AI into various aspects of human life 
is underway, and the complex ethical concerns emerging from the design, deployment, and use of the technology serves 
as a reminder that it is time to revisit what future developers and designers, along with professionals, are learning when it 
comes to AI. It is of paramount importance to train future members of the AI community, and other stakeholders as well, 
to reflect on the ways in which AI might impact people’s lives and to embrace their responsibilities to enhance its benefits 
while mitigating its potential harms. This could occur in part through the fuller and more systematic inclusion of AI ethics 
into the curriculum. In this paper, we briefly describe different approaches to AI ethics and offer a set of recommendations 
related to AI ethics pedagogy.
Keywords AI ethics · Artificial intelligence · Design ethics · Ethics education · Professional responsibility
1 Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is becoming pervasive. The 
technology is reaching into so many facets of our lives that 
we have no choice but to confront its impacts. The creation 
and deployment of AI is changing our lives and communi-
ties in countless ways. These changes are often difficult to 
understand and anticipate, and are only accelerating due to 
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Although AI provides 
observable benefits, the collection, use, and abuse of data 
used to train and feed into AI, as well as the algorithm itself, 
may expose people to risks that they were not even aware 
existed. Employers can monitor workplace performance and 
behavior in covert and unexpected ways. And a potential 
employee might be turned down for a job because of the 
information an automated tool collects while scraping the 
person’s social media profile. A local government might use facial recognition to identify each and every individual that 
passes through a public area. It was not that long ago that 
such scenarios would seem farfetched. But now we see a 
rise in the use of these tools by industry, government, and 
even academic institutions as they deploy AI algorithms to 
make decisions that alter our lives in direct, and potentially 
detrimental, ways. The frequently voiced justification for the 
use of such AI tools is that they are “better” than a human 
decision-maker. Should not an algorithm be fair and free 
of human biases? After all, it shouldn’t be burdened with 
the biases derived from our lived experiences, right? Then 
again, an algorithm is made by humans, and humans make 
mistakes, including during the designing, programming, 
calibrating, and evaluating of the algorithm’s performance. 
Therein lies a key problem: how can fallible humans design 
AI that effectively lives up to its promised benefits while 
ensuring its outcomes aren’t biased or otherwise harmful? 
Complicating matters is how do imperfect humans even go 
about defining “fairness”? It is a messy task, especially con-
sidering that the concept has numerous candidate definitions 
and what counts as “fair” can fundamentally shift over time.
At times, AI is intensifying societal ills, and it would 
be misleading to imply that a single, simple solution is on 
the horizon. Fix the bias in the data. Fix the bias within the 
algorithms. Fix the bias in the outputs. All of these practices 
may get us closer to mitigating part of the problem; but these  * Jason Borenstein 
 borenstein@gatech.edu
1 Center for Ethics and Technology, School of Public 
Policy and Office of Graduate Studies, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
2 Linda J. and Mark C. Smith Professor and Chair, School 
of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, USA

==== Page 2 ====
62 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65
1 3
are only necessary but not sufficient conditions for fixing 
them. Addressing these and other ethical concerns requires 
starting with the root of the problem (i.e., people). Tackling 
the problem head-on requires educating ourselves at the 
beginning stages of our interaction with AI–irrespective of 
whether we are developers, first learning about AI, or users, 
just starting to interact with AI. The opportunity to learn 
about how data are used to train AI, about the applications 
that the AI can enable, etc., should be available to any person 
that interacts at any stage with AI. If we focus just on those 
designing AI technology, there is tremendous potential to 
shape what developers are learning and encourage them to 
embrace the crucial message that ethics is intertwined with 
the entire design process (before, during, and after). Moreo-
ver, ethics should not be a slapped-on component after-the-
fact, a standalone lesson, or a second thought. It is integral 
at every stage when learning about AI. When we teach the 
mathematical derivations of a linear regression function for 
supervised learning in AI, we can also mention the use of 
disparate impact as a metric to evaluate fairness of the output 
in the hopes that we move closer to a result that is “correct” 
and “fairer”.
The underlying hypothesis we propose is thus based on 
the belief that a key measure for potentially adjusting to 
a world that is rapidly evolving due, in part to an increas-
ing reliance on AI, is to revisit the instruction that future 
generations of developers (e.g., students) are receiving on 
AI-related topics. This is especially important given that 
they may have a direct role in reshaping society as develop-
ers-in-training or future adopters of AI technology. In this 
thought piece, our focus is on the rising need to prepare 
emerging developers, and working professionals as well, 
with the skills needed to grapple with the complex and 
multifaceted ethical challenges emerging from the growing 
infusion of AI in our day-to-day activities. The educational 
community, broadly defined, needs to renew its emphasis on 
nurturing the ability to recognize and engage with ethical 
issues emerging in relation to AI. Many essential topics are 
in this space, including the ethical design of AI algorithms, 
mitigating the risks of AI outcomes, and improving data 
acquisition and other research practices. Vague concepts of 
fairness and bias, separated from context or without under -
standing that people are more than just data or inputs, are not 
helpful. Within this realm, we highlight recent approaches 
to AI ethics education, especially as they pertain to current 
societal concerns.
2  Emerging ethical challenges in AI
AI technology is filtering into our personal and profes-
sional lives in countless ways, and not all of its impacts are 
positive. For instance, AI holds a lot of promise in terms of how it could alter the healthcare landscape. Some claim 
that AI algorithms could potentially read medical images 
more quickly than a radiologist could (e.g., [27]). Yet algo-
rithmic bias and other ethical challenges must be overcome 
to prevent harm to patients. It has already been found, for 
example, that an AI system used for recommending fol-
low-on healthcare services failed black patients by refer -
ring them at a lower rate than their white counterparts even 
when both groups had a similar diagnosis [26].
Over the past few years, governments and other entities 
have had a surge of interest in facial recognition. Yet the 
technology is drawing much scrutiny in part because it is 
far less reliable when used to identify people who are not 
white males. In addition, the increasing loss of privacy 
due to facial recognition is a real worry. During protests 
sparked by the death of George Floyd, the US govern-
ment allegedly used facial recognition to identify protest-
ers [19]. Recently, the use of facial recognition software in 
Detroit resulted in a Black man being falsely arrested for 
a crime he did not commit [1 ]. Even though the specific 
manner in which it might be used is difficult to discern, 
AI, including facial recognition, might come to play a key 
role in China’s social credit scoring system [4 ], a system 
which many find to be ethically problematic. Responses 
to the use of facial recognition technology include calls 
from civil liberty groups to regulate this AI tool, along 
with recent announcements by a number of tech companies 
that they will purportedly no longer offer their technology 
to police departments [10]. Yet many thorny ethical issues 
still need to be resolved.
The contribution of AI to privacy erosion is also intensi-
fying with the advent of tools such as Clearview AI, which 
can in principle search Internet sources for all of a person’s 
online photos [7 ]. And given that much of our information is 
freely available for anyone to scrub when we post it online, 
without the typical safeguards found in physical infrastruc-
tures, it is profoundly difficult to even discern who is using 
such tools and for which purposes.
Trust in AI technology is another crucial and timely 
ethical issue. Going back to the aforementioned medical 
imaging example, if an AI algorithm proves itself “trust-
worthy”, not only could it complement human judgment, 
it could become an eventual replacement for that judg-
ment. This could perhaps even extend to cover cases the 
algorithm was not designed to handle (somewhat akin to 
the practice of “off-label” use of medical products). Or, in 
a different scenario, during a conversation with a therapy 
chatbot, the person may begin to trust it and think the 
technology can provide guidance for circumstances that 
go beyond the bounds of its programming. Another impor -
tant facet of (over)trust is that users might believe AI can 
mitigate harm when it does not have the capacity to do 
so. For instance, a person wearing a robotic exoskeleton 

==== Page 3 ====
63 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65 
1 3
might assume the device will provide warnings in danger -
ous circumstances when it does not actually possess that 
feature [2 ].
These examples are only a small fraction of the types of 
ethical issues and challenges circulating around AI [13, 14]. 
Yet its usage continues to expand. Thus, passively waiting, 
in the belief that ethical problems will somehow disappear 
or magically resolve themselves, is not a viable option. We 
must, instead, be deliberative and proactive in creating not 
just good AI applications, but ethically sound practices and 
policies surrounding these applications.
3  Attempts to address AI’s ethical 
challenges
Many initiatives have arisen to address the ethical chal-
lenges emerging in relation to AI technology. This includes 
the drafting of AI ethics documents by a variety of stake-
holders, including academic institutions, government agen-
cies, NGOs, and industry. The Montreal Declaration, for 
example, is largely an initiative from an academic institu-
tion and focuses on the responsible development of AI [8 ]. 
The professional organization IEEE [16] has drafted a report 
on the ethics of intelligent systems and is in the process of 
developing a series of technical standards for such systems. 
Many companies are highlighting, through press releases 
or other documents, which ethical issues, such as fairness 
and transparency, they deem to be important (e.g., Google 
[9], Deloitte [6 ]). A sizeable collection of AI ethics is being 
produced around the globe, which has even led to topical 
analyses of such documents (e.g., [12, 17]). Whether these 
documents are generating tangible change, including in 
terms of new regulations or industry practices, is unclear.
The emergence of organizations such as the Partnership 
on AI and AI now, and conferences such as ACM FAccT 
with a mission tied to AI ethics-related issues is a relatively 
recent occurrence. Funding agencies, such as the National 
Science Foundation (NSF [ 25]), are supporting efforts to 
examine Fairness, Ethics, Accountability, and Transparency 
(FEAT) in computing fields. This can be taken as evidence 
of the seriousness that AI ethics should warrant.
Even if these attempts are trying to move the needle in 
terms of addressing AI’s ethical challenges, the fundamen-
tal root of the problem remains: that of human fallibility 
and other related human shortcomings, and how they shape 
the design and use of technology. While it is doubtful that 
most people are intentionally designing AI to be malicious 
in nature or want their systems to deliver biased outputs, the 
fact remains that they are not consistently being asked to 
look in the mirror to identify their own biases and the values 
that they are building into the technology.4  Fostering a professional mindset
As is illustrated by the above discussion, many individuals and 
organizations are proposing remedies to the ethical challenges 
resulting from AI, but solutions (technical or otherwise) are 
hard to identify and implement. Yet a key piece of the puzzle is 
enabling developers to understand that the technology they are 
building is intertwined with ethical dimensions, and that, as 
developers, they have a vital role and responsibility to engage 
with ethical considerations. The first aim in establishing an 
authentic professional mindset is related to cultivating moral 
sensitivity; in other words, they need the ability to recognize 
that professional, including “technical”, decision-making is 
intertwined with ethical considerations. The view that technol-
ogy is “value neutral” hides and obscures the reality that ethi-
cal issues are fundamentally embedded in the selection, design, 
deployment, and use of technology. For example, building a 
dating app that only offers a binary option for a user’s gender 
is a value-laden choice by the app’s creator. When you then 
integrate AI to identify the user’s best match, you are thus con-
structing a system that has bias woven throughout its design.
A second related point is how those in the AI community 
view their professional responsibilities. Oftentimes, develop-
ers believe (a view sometimes reinforced through the STEM 
curriculum and in other ways) that ethics is someone else’s 
problem. They may think something like “We deal with the 
technology; let the lawyers or ethicists resolve the ethical 
concerns.” However, when making choices during the design 
process, those choices not only have ethical ramifications but 
they reflect the designer’s ethical values (e.g., whether to err 
on the side of a false positive or a false negative with medi-
cal imaging or evaluating recidivism). Such choices not only 
shape the technology, but they end up shaping individual lives 
and society more generally.
Taking the example of medicine, physicians may promise 
to uphold the Hippocratic Oath. While a professional oath is 
not a panacea, it can serve as a statement of and a commitment 
to a social contract between a profession and the public. Even 
if physicians do not literally voice the pledge, the Hippocratic 
Oath is a reminder of their ethical obligation to improve the 
health of the public. When AI provides similar benefits, and 
harms, to the public, what should we expect in terms of the 
ethical responsibilities of those who develop the technology? 
Should their responsibilities be anything less? A key step is 
enabling AI developers and the broader computing community 
to more fully understand what those responsibilities are.

==== Page 4 ====
64 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65
1 3
5  AI ethics instruction
Imparting lessons regarding what is means to be a pro-
fessional and what one’s associated ethical responsibili-
ties are can ideally be achieved through both formal and 
informal education. Yet at the present time, AI ethics 
education has not fully taken root within the computing 
curriculum (e.g., [22]). According to Brundage et al. [3 ], 
“Educational efforts might be beneficial in highlighting the 
risks of malicious applications to AI researchers”. In this 
regard, education can foster a professional mindset for the 
next generations of AI developers. Of course, if ethics is 
already taught within the engineering or computing cur -
riculum, this requires evaluating and potentially rethink -
ing how it’s done—because either it is not working or not 
pervasive enough to impact a change in mindset.
Some attempts to incorporate ethics into the curriculum 
involve a focus on increasing students’ familiarity with 
professional codes of ethics. While an important step, it 
is not sufficient. Skeptics may point out that just because 
one is aware of a code, it does not necessarily mean that it 
will influence behavior; for example, according to a study 
by McNamara et al. [23], introducing students to the ACM 
code of ethics did not seem to have a tangible impact on 
decision-making.
While AI is not the specific target, the Mozilla Foun-
dation [24] is supporting the development of ethics peda-
gogy in order to try to reshape the computer science cur -
riculum. Funding from the Mozilla program has enabled 
a team at Georgia Tech, including one of the authors of 
this editorial, to create an autonomous vehicle role-play -
ing scenario for undergraduate CS courses. The scenario 
places students in different roles, including ones that are 
“technical” such as a computer scientist and ones that are 
“non-technical” such as an active transportation advocate. 
The students, representing different stakeholders, are sup-
posed to work as a committee to advise a hypothetical city 
on whether to permit a fictional company to test a self-
driving bus fleet in the city’s downtown area. We hope 
that this kind of approach can foster students’ moral sen-
sitivity and enable them to appreciate a broader range of 
perspectives. Yet it is clear that educational efforts must 
continue to move beyond drop-in modules or single ethics 
courses [11].
Guided by the aim of nurturing a professional mindset 
in those who are part of the AI community, we propose 
three elements that could help familiarize students with 
the emerging ethical challenges of AI:
1. Teaching the ethical design of AI algorithms; this should 
include but not be limited to “FEAT” considerations. 
Learning about the importance of participatory design could also be an important lesson. For example, the new 
AI ethics course in the online Master of Science in Com-
puter Science program at Georgia Tech, taught by one 
of the authors of this editorial, has the potential to train 
a huge generation of AI developers to think through the 
ethical design of their algorithms (Howard [15]).
2. Incorporating fundamental concepts of data science and 
the ethics of data acquisition; using real-world data sets 
that requires students to address privacy, fairness, and 
legal issues while developing AI solutions.
3. Offering ethics-related lessons in multiple ways and at 
multiple times; “ethics across the curriculum” is a model 
for putting this into practice (e.g., [20]), but the general 
notion is regularly reinforcing the significance of ethics, 
including in “technical” courses.
A related point is the importance of having interdisci-
plinary teams who create AI ethics content and potentially 
teach it. The challenges emerging in relation to AI cross 
over disciplinary lines and are too complex for any single 
type of expertise to handle. Insights from lawyers, sociolo-
gists, policy scholars, philosophers, and others along with 
scientists and engineers can be especially valuable when 
determining how to educate students about AI ethics. This 
hopefully will attune students to AI’s ethical challenges and 
encourage them to have the willingness to engage with those 
challenges seriously. Another key facet of AI ethics edu-
cation is cultivating critical thinking and ethical reasoning 
skills in students that are transferable across different profes -
sional contexts. While there are debates about the value of 
including ethical theory in professional ethics courses (an 
issue we will not seek to resolve here), such courses should 
nurture reason and reflection; they are vital components of 
the professional mindset.
6  The future of AI ethics
AI is changing our lives in ways that are difficult to antici-
pate and understand. If the technology is going to be directed 
in a more socially responsible way, it is time to dedicate time 
and attention to AI ethics education. Not only is it important 
for the computing community to more resolutely embrace 
ethics as a part of its core identity, but from a practical per -
spective, jobs are starting to emerge in the realm of AI ethics 
(e.g., [5 ]). Lewis [21 ] suggests that some companies may 
consider having a chief artificial intelligence ethics officer. 
One hopes that this is part of a sincere effort toward taking 
ethics more seriously rather than an exercise in “ethics wash-
ing” [18]. A pathway towards increasing that likelihood is 
making sure that ethics has a central place in AI educational 
efforts.

==== Page 5 ====
65 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:61–65 
1 3
References
 1. Allyn, B.: ‘The Computer Got It Wrong’: how facial recogni-
tion led to false arrest of black man. NPR. https ://www.npr.
org/2020/06/24/88268 3463/the-compu ter-got-it-wrong -how-facia  
l-recog  nitio n-led-to-a-false  -arres  t-in-michi  g (2020). Accessed 24 
June 2020
 2. Borenstein, J., Mahajan, H.P., Wagner, A.R., Howard, A.: Trust 
and pediatric exoskeletons: a comparative study of clinician and 
parental perspectives. IEEE Trans. Technol. Soc. 1 (2), 83–88 
(2020). https ://doi.org/10.1109/TTS.2020.29749 90
 3. Brundage, M., Shahar, A., Jack, C., Helen, T., Peter, E., Ben, 
G., Allan, D. et al.: The malicious use of artificial intelligence: 
forecasting, prevention, and mitigation. Future of Humanity Insti -
tute, Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, Center for a New 
American Security, Electronic Frontier Foundation, OpenAI. https  
://arxiv  .org/abs/1802.07228  (2018)
 4. Chowdhury, D, Neha, M.: Reports of ‘big brother’ China social 
credit system untrue: AI expert Xue Lan. Reuters. https ://www.
reute rs.com/artic le/us-davos -meeti ng-lan/repor  ts-of-big-broth  
er-china  -socia  l-credi  t-syste  m-untru  e-ai-exper  t-xue-lan-idUSK  
BN1ZL 2P9 (2020). Accessed 22 Jan 2020
 5. Davenport, T.: “What does an AI ethicist do?” World Economic 
Forum. https ://www.wefor  um.org/agend a/2019/08/what-does-an-
ai-ethic ist-do/ (2019)
 6. Deloitte.: AI ethics: a business imperative for boards and C-suites. 
https ://www2.deloi tte.com/us/en/pages /regul atory /artic les/ai-ethic  
s-respo nsibl e-ai-gover  nance .html (no date)
 7. Duffy, C.: The ACLU sues Clearview AI, calling the tool an 
‘unprecedented violation’ of privacy rights. Cnn.com. https ://
www.cnn.com/2020/05/28/tech/clear  view-ai-aclu-lawsu it/index  
.html (2020). Accessed 29 May 2020
 8. Gibert, M., Christophe, M., Guillaume, C.: Montréal declaration 
of responsible AI: 2018 overview of international recommenda-
tions for AI Ethics. University of Montréal. https ://www.montr  
ealde clara tion-respo nsibl eai.com/repor  ts-of-montr  eal-decla ratio  
n (2018)
 9. Google: Artificial intelligence at Google: our principles. https ://
ai.googl e/princ iples / (no date)
 10. Greene, J.: Microsoft won’t sell police its facial-recognition 
technology, following similar moves by Amazon and IBM. The 
Washington Post, https ://www.washi ngton  post.com/techn ology  
/2020/06/11/micro soft-facia l-recog nitio n/ (2020)
 11. Greengard, S.: A new class of AI ethics. Commun. ACM (2020). 
https ://cacm.acm.org/news/24512 1-a-new-class -of-ai-ethic s/fullt  
ext
 12. Hagendorff, T.: The ethics of AI Ethics: an evaluation of guide-
lines. Minds Mach. (2020). https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1102 3-020-
09517 -8
 13. Howard, A., Borenstein, J.: The ugly truth about ourselves and our 
robot creations: the problem of bias and social inequity. Sci. Eng. 
Ethics J. 24(5), 1521–1536 (2018)
 14. Howard, A., Borenstein, J.: AI, robots, and ethics in the age of 
COVID-19. MIT sloan management review. https ://sloan revie  
w.mit.edu/artic le/ai-robot s-and-ethic s-in-the-age-of-covid -19/  
(2020). 15. Howard, A.: CS 8803 O10: AI, ethics, and society. Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology. https ://omscs .gatec  h.edu/cs-8803-o10-ai-ethic  
s-and-socie  ty (no date)
 16. IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent 
Systems.: Ethically aligned design: a vision for prioritizing human 
well-being with autonomous and intelligent systems, 1st edition. 
Piscataway, New Jersey. https ://stand ards.ieee.org/conte nt/ieee-
stand  ards/en/indus  try-conne  ction  s/ec/auton  omous  -syste  ms.html  
(2019)
 17. Jobin, A., Ienca, M., Vayena, E.: The global landscape of AI ethics 
guidelines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1 (9), 389–399 (2019). https ://doi.
org/10.1038/s4225 6-019-0088-2
 18. Johnson, K.: How AI companies can avoid ethics washing. Ven-
tureBeat. https ://ventu rebea t.com/2019/07/17/how-ai-compa nies-
can-avoid -ethic s-washi ng/ (2019). Accessed 17 July 2020
 19. Kanno-Youngs, Z.: U.S. watched George Floyd protests in 15 cit-
ies Uusing aerial surveillance. The New York Times, New York 
(2020)
 20. Karoff, P.: Embedding ethics in computer science curriculum. The 
Harvard Gazette. https ://news.harva rd.edu/gazet te/story /2019/01/
harva rd-works -to-embed -ethic s-in-compu ter-scien ce-curri culum  
/ (2019)
 21. Lewis, N.: Why having a chief AI Officer should matter to HR. 
SHRM. https ://www.shrm.org/Resou rcesA ndToo ls/hr-topic s/
techn ology /Pages /Why-Havin g-a-Chief -AI-Offic er-Shoul d-Matte 
r-to-HR.aspx (2020)
 22. Macaulay, T.: Study: only 18% of data science students are 
learning about AI ethics. TNW. https ://thene  xtweb .com/neura  
l/2020/07/03/study  -only-18-of-data-scien tists -are-learn ing-about  
-ai-ethic s/ (2020)
 23. McNamara, A., Justin, S., Emerson, M.-H.: Does ACM’s code of 
ethics change ethical decision making in software development?” 
ESEC/FSE 2018. Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM joint meet -
ing on european software engineering conference and symposium 
on the foundations of software engineering (2018)
 24. Mozilla Foundation.: Announcing a competition for ethics in com-
puter science, with up to $3.5 Million in Prizes. The Mozilla Blog. 
https ://blog.mozil la.org/blog/2018/10/10/annou ncing -a-compe  
titio n-for-ethic s-in-compu ter-scien ce-with-up-to-3-5-milli on-in-
prize s (2018). Accessed 31 July 2020
 25. National Science Foundation.: Artificial intelligence (AI) at NSF. 
https ://www.nsf.gov/cise/ai.jsp (2019)
 26. Obermeyer, Z., Brian, P., Christine, V., Sendhil, M.: Dissect-
ing racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of 
populations. Science 366(6464), 447–453 (2019). https ://doi.
org/10.1126/scien ce.aax23 42
 27. Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Ball, R.L., Zhu, K., Yang, B., Mehta, 
H., et al.: Deep learning for chest radiograph diagnosis: a retro-
spective comparison of the CheXNeXt algorithm to practicing 
radiologists. PLoS Med. 15(11), e1002686 (2018). https ://doi.
org/10.1371/journ al.pmed.10026 86
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

