==== Page 1 ====
electronics
Article
End-To-End Deep Learning Framework for
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Detection and Monitoring
Nora El-Rashidy1
, Shaker El-Sappagh2,3,*, S. M. Riazul Islam4,*
, Hazem M. El-Bakry5and
Samir Abdelrazek5
1Machine Learning and Information Retrieval Department, Faculty of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Kafrelsheiksh University, Kafrelsheiksh 13518, Egypt; noura.alrashidy@ai.kfs.edu.eg
2Centro Singular de Investigaci ón en Tecnolox ías Intelixentes (CiTIUS),
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain
3Information Systems Department, Faculty of Computers and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Benha University,
Banha 13518, Egypt
4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea
5Information Systems Department, Faculty of Computers and Information, Mansoura University,
Mansoura 13518, Egypt; elbakry@mans.edu.eg (H.M.E.-B.); samir.abdelrazek@mans.edu.eg (S.A.)
*Correspondence: shaker.elsappagh@usc.es (S.E.-S.); riaz@sejong.ac.kr (S.M.R.I.)
Received: 10 August 2020; Accepted: 31 August 2020; Published: 3 September 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a new virus of viral pneumonia. It can outbreak in the world
through person-to-person transmission. Although several medical companies provide cooperative
monitoring healthcare systems, these solutions lack o ering of the end-to-end management of
the disease. The main objective of the proposed framework is to bridge the current gap between
current technologies and healthcare systems. The wireless body area network, cloud computing,
fog computing, and clinical decision support system are integrated to provide a comprehensive and
complete model for disease detection and monitoring. By monitoring a person with COVID-19 in real
time, physicians can guide patients with the right decisions. The proposed framework has three main
layers (i.e., a patient layer, cloud layer, and hospital layer). In the patient layer, the patient is tracked
through a set of wearable sensors and a mobile app. In the cloud layer, a fog network architecture is
proposed to solve the issues of storage and data transmission. In the hospital layer, we propose a
convolutional neural network-based deep learning model for COVID-19 detection based on patient’s
X-ray scan images and transfer learning. The proposed model achieved promising results compared
to the state-of-the art (i.e., accuracy of 97.95% and speciﬁcity of 98.85%). Our framework is a useful
application, through which we expect signiﬁcant e ects on COVID-19 proliferation and considerable
lowering in healthcare expenses.
Keywords: electronic health; electronic health record; COVID-19; clinical-decision support system;
convolutional neural network; deep learning; remote patient monitoring; wireless body area network
1. Introduction
Real-time monitoring systems have a substantial impact on developing healthcare-monitoring
and therapeutic interventions. Patient-monitoring systems are considered to be the most important
mobile health service that helps patients to perform their daily life activities, by monitoring their
vital signs [ 1,2]. In the e-healthcare sector, several technologies, such as the Internet of Things (IoT),
cloud computing, and fog computing, are recently being integrated to provide elastic real-time clinical
solutions. These solutions are not only enriching business by reducing costs, but also by addressing various
clinical challenges, by facilitating a set of operations such as the sensing, processing, and communication of
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439; doi:10.3390 /electronics9091439 www.mdpi.com /journal /electronics

==== Page 2 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 2 of 25
physical and biomedical parameters [ 3]. The IoT-based wireless body area network (WBAN) (IoT-WBAN)
is mainly constructed of a wireless sensor network of wearable embedded computing devices. The term
of IoT-WBAN offers new opportunities for real-time monitoring of patient health status and momentary
controlling quick patients’ reactions. Manirabona et al. [ 4] introduced WBAN as a promising solution for
patient monitoring in medical environments. They made maximized the utilization of data by sharing the
information generated by sensors placed on the patient’s body or under the skin. These sensors are used
to collect certain body parameters or vital signs (e.g., electrocardiogram (ECG), electroencephalogram
(EEG), body movement, temperature, blood pressure, blood glucose, heartbeat, and respiration rate levels).
The collected data are then used for different purposes such as in-hospital monitoring, remote diagnosis,
ambulatory patient monitoring, and trigger emergency services. Every WBAN node has a way for
implementation within the body and a role in the network, as suggested by IEEE 802.15.6 taxonomy.
WBAN could have a significant impact on the management of the spread of COVID-19 infection.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is considered one of the most critical viruses on earth. It can
spread quickly among humans, as well as animals [ 5]. One Harvard professor stated that around 70% of
the global population might be infected with COVID-19 during the incoming years. The distribution of
COVID-19 cases for the most infected ten counties between 22 January 2020 and 5 August 2020 is shown
in Figure 1. As a result, the need for monitoring systems is highly increasing [ 6]. COVID-19 conﬁrmed
cases need an isolation room with continuous monitoring, and 6% of them need ICU beds to save
their lives. Most developing countries su er from a serious shortage in hospital rooms, as well as ICU
beds. As a result, patients whose lives are at risk are being turned away from the ICU units. Four in
ﬁve intensive care units are having to send patients to other hospitals due to the shortage in care units [ 7].
On the other hand, high-risk patients outside hospitals need to be monitored frequently by checking
their vital signs, like temperature, blood pressure, respiratory rate, drip level, etc. The admission time
to ICU is a critical decision, and various studies demonstrated that the late identiﬁcation of clinical
deterioration will lead to delay of therapeutic intervention and result in increasing of mortality rate [ 8].
With the rapid growing of number of COVID-19 cases, it is impossible for the non-expert physicians to
take the most accurate decisions in the right time. Therefore, various studies have been conducted
based on COVID-19 infection statistics and patient’s metadata. Some studies tried to ﬁnd relation
between the risk of being infected and other factors, such as age [ 9] and diseases (e.g., diabetes) [ 9].
Other studies used patients’ chest X-ray images or CT scans to build deep learning models for detecting
patients with sepsis [10,11].
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 25 
 various clinical challenges , by facilitating a set of operations such as the  sensing, processing, and 
communication of physical and biomedical parameters [3]. The IoT -based wireless b ody area 
network (WBAN) (IoT -WBAN) is mainly constructed of a wireless sensor network of wearable 
embedded computing devices. The term of IoT -WBAN of fers new opportunities for real -time 
monitoring of patient health status and momentary controlling quick patients’ reactions. Manirabona  
et al. [4] introduced WBAN as a promising solution for patient monitoring in medical environments. 
They made maximiz ed the utilization of data by  sharing the information generated by sensors placed 
on the patient’s body or under the skin. These sensors are used to collect certain body parameters or 
vital signs (e.g., electrocardiogram  (ECG), electroencephalogram (EEG), bod y movement, 
temperature, blood pressure, blood glucose, heartbeat, and respiration rate levels) . The collected data 
are then used for different purposes such as in -hospital monitoring, remote diagnosis, ambulatory 
patient monitoring, and trigger emergency services. Every WBAN node has a way for 
implementation within the body and a role in the network , as suggested by IEEE 802.15.6 taxonomy . 
WBAN could  have a significan t impact on the management of the spread of COVID -19 infection.  
Coronavirus disease (COVID -19) is considered one of the most critical viruses on earth. It c an 
spread quickly among humans , as well as animals  [5]. One Harvard professor stated that around 70% 
of the global population might be infected with COVID -19 during the incoming years.  The 
distribution of COVID -19 cases for the most infected ten counties between 22 January  2020 and 5 
August  2020 is shown in Figure 1. As a result, the need for monitoring systems is highly increasing  
[6]. COVID -19 confirmed cases need an isolation room wi th continuous monitoring , and  6% of them 
need ICU  beds  to save their li ves. Most developing countries  suffer from a serious shortage in hospital 
rooms , as well as ICU beds. As a result, patients whose lives are at risk are being turned away from 
the ICU units. Four in five intensive care units are having to send patients to other hospitals due to 
the shortage in care units [7]. On the other hand, high -risk patients outside hospitals need to be 
monitored frequently  by check ing their vital signs , like tempera ture, blood pressure, respiratory rate, 
drip level, etc. T he admission time to ICU is a critical decision , and various studies demonstrated that  
the late identification of clinical deterioration will lead to delay of therapeutic intervention and result 
in increasing of mortality rate [8]. With the rapid growing of number of COVID -19 cases, it is 
impossible for the non-expert physician s to take the most accurate decisions in the right time. 
Therefore,  various studies have been conducted based on COVID -19 infection statistics and patient’s 
metadata. Some studies tr ied to find relation between the risk of being infected and other factors , 
such as age  [9] and diseases  (e.g., diabetes)  [9]. Other studies used patients ’ chest  X-ray images or CT 
scan s to build deep learning model s for detect ing patients with sepsis [10,11]. 
 
Figure 1.  Distribution of COVID -19 from 22 January  to 5 August  2020.  
In this paper , we propose a complete mobile clinical -decision -support system (CDSS) that could 
continuously monitor patient s inside and outside hospitals. The system automatically collect s patient 
data  and provide s an online communication link between a patient an d healthcare professional . This 
will contribute to improve the quality of patient care. Our system perspective  is based on a set of  
sensors including  temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, SPO2 saturation, blood pressure, etc. 
Figure 1. Distribution of COVID-19 from 22 January to 5 August 2020.
In this paper, we propose a complete mobile clinical-decision-support system (CDSS) that could
continuously monitor patients inside and outside hospitals. The system automatically collects patient
data and provides an online communication link between a patient and healthcare professional.
This will contribute to improve the quality of patient care. Our system perspective is based on a set
of sensors including temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, SPO2 saturation, blood pressure, etc.

==== Page 3 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 3 of 25
Smart devices, such as smart phones, remotely receive the information sensed by these sensors and act
as bridges between patients and healthcare personnel [ 12]. Collected information is aggregated in an
electronic health record (EHR) database stored on the cloud [ 13]. In addition to that, in the hospital
side, a deep neural network is proposed based on a patient’s X-ray images for chest scan, to help
non-expert physicians to automatically detect COVID-19 cases. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:
(a) This is the ﬁrst work that provides an end-to-end (E2E) deep-learning-assisted communication
framework for COVID-19 disease management.
(b) It provides a monitoring system that could limit the spread of infection through the continuous
monitoring for all suspected and infected patients.
(c) The proposed scheme is the ﬁrst attempt in the COVID-19 domain that integrates both fog and
cloud computing paradigms to solve the problems related to power consumption, transmission
issues, data analysis, etc.
(d) Unlike existing works, the present work focuses on building complete data from patients’ data,
to help clinicians in diagnosis.
(e) The proposed classiﬁcation model could detect and classify COVID-19 patients based on the
chest X-ray images with promising results.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work.
The challenges of a remote patient-monitoring system (RPMS) are discussed in Section 3. The proposed
framework is presented in Section 4. Section 5 contains a dataset descript. Classiﬁcation model
discussed in Section 6. Results are discussed in Section 7. Section 8 provides the limitations of our
contribution. Finally, a conclusion is provided in Section 9.
2. Related Work
2.1. COVID-19 Pandemic
Coronaviruses are non-segmented positive RNA viruses that belong to the Coronaviridae family,
which is widely distributed among humans and other mammals. Although coronavirus infections for
humans are mild, the epidemics of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) [ 14]
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [ 15] have resulted in more than
10,000 cumulative cases in the past wo decades (with mortality rates of 10% for SARS-CoV [ 16] and
37% for MERS-CoV [ 17]). In 2019, many unknown cases of pneumonia appeared in Wuhan, China.
Sequence of deep studies on respiratory tract samples revealed a novel coronavirus, which called is
COVID-19. To date, more than 19,193,980 patients have been reported in 210 di erent countries and
territories around the world. Therefore, various medical and non-medical studies have been conducted
to understand the nature of virus.
First, several studies have been conducted to ﬁnd a correlation between COVID-19 progression
and other factors, such as age, heart diseases, etc. In References [ 18–21], the authors reported that
age is one of the main risk factors for diseases complication. Among 44,000 infected cases in China,
the fatality rate between elderly >80 was 14.8%; 70–78 years was 8.0%; and 60–69 years was 3.6%.
The epidemiologic data in the USA also reported that the fatality rate between people aged of more
than 85 years ranged between 10% and 27%, followed by people aged between 65 and 84, with 3%
to 11%. Other studies reported case fatality of 10.5% between patients with cardiovascular disease,
7% for patients with diabetes, and approximately 6% for patients with respiratory diseases [ 9,19,22].
Huang et al. [ 23] aggregated metadata of COVID-19 patients and used data-mining techniques to
analyze these data, such as extracting relations between smoking and infection.
Second, many studies tried to forecast the number of infected cases based on the currently collected
statistics. Id et al. [ 24] used time-series forecasting techniques to predict the number of deaths and
recoveries. Li et al. [ 25] tried to ﬁnd propagation rule of the virus. First, they developed a dynamic

==== Page 4 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 4 of 25
model for infected cases; second, they built a statistical model based on time-series analysis and used
data mining to ﬁnd an epidemic law of infection. Jia et al. [ 26] used three machine learning (ML)
models (logistic model, Bertalan y model, and Gompertz model) to analyze the collected number of
infections and to predict the expected number of infections.
Third, various studies depending on ML and deep learning models have been used to predict,
identify, and classify patients with COIVD-19 cases [ 27]. For example, Ozturk el al. [ 28] provided a
deep learning model that was based on Dark Net and convolution neural network (CNN) trained on
125 chest X-ray; they achieved 87.02% in terms of multiclass classiﬁcation (COVID-19 vs. pneumonia
vs. no ﬁnding), and they achieved an accuracy of 98.08% for COVID-19 vs. no-ﬁnding problem.
The same idea has been done in References [ 29,30]. Barstugan el al. [ 31] utilized 150 CT images for
the detection of COVID-19. First, they used wavelet transform (DWT) to extract features, and then
they used a support vector machine (SVM) for classiﬁcation. They achieved 99.68% classiﬁcation
accuracy with 10-fold cross-validation. Pathak el al. [ 10] used the ResNet (Residual Neural Network)
transfer-learning technique to classify CT-scan images.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing studies focuses on the deep-learning-aided E2E
communication system to limit the infection of COVID-19. Therefore, a complete tracking system is
highly required, which is the main objective of this study.
2.2. Healthcare Monitoring Systems
In this subsection, we concentrate on the role of mobile monitoring systems in the management
of dierent diseases, including heart diseases, disability diseases, etc. [ 32,33]. These systems aim
to make a patient’s life easier through introducing various supportive systems (e.g., telemedicine,
teleconsultations, etc.). A comprehensive review of mobile health-monitoring systems (MHMs) is
presented by El-Sappagh et al. [ 34] and Sruthi et al. [ 35]. Researches in MHMs divided the development
of monitoring systems into three main steps: (1) patient’s data and vital signs acquisition, (2) data
transmission across various network systems, and (3) backend system (database system), usually
located in the hospital or on the cloud. In this subsection, various studies are analyzed, at di erent
levels of details, to provide complete image of monitoring systems. Pandey et al. [ 36] proposed
a monitoring system for cardiovascular diseases. They use wearable sensors to collect vital signs
(e.g., blood pressure, galvanic skin response (GSR), and electrocardiogram (ECG)), then Bluetooth is
used to transmit WSN data to a mobile device. The aggregated data are stored on patient’s mobile
device and then used to classify the patient’s health status, to determine patient condition “continued
risk” or “no longer risk”, using support vector machine (SVM). Sahoo et al. [ 37] proposed a mobile
monitoring system that used the noncontact method to automatically measure patient’s biomedical
signals. The idea of this research is to monitor patient ECG on various locations (e.g., o ce, car, etc.)
through fabric sensor electrodes embedded in a patient’s chair. The Bluetooth is used to transmit signals
from the sensor to a patient’s mobile device, and the system provides feedback to the patient when any
risk is detected. Such types of systems that depend only on a mobile device in the patient-monitoring
process are not suitable for chronic disease patient, as they have many limitations relating to limited
storage and reliance on incomplete patient personal and medical data. These limitations prevented
their acceptance by the medical community. Therefore, building e ective and e cient RPM systems is
highly required, especially with the health organizations’ inability to provide health services due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Using cloud service added many capabilities and solved many limitations in RPM. Cloud computing
(CC) provided services that can be divided into three layers of services: infrastructure as a service
(IaaS), which provided high-volume storage, such as in Amazon storage service S3; platform as a service
(PaaS), which offers both storage and service, such as Google App; and software as a service (SaaS).
Cloud computing combined with WSN provided promising monitoring systems that enhance the quality
of service. It allows real-time access to patient data at any time and from anywhere. It also permits
processing, analyzing, and sharing data; moreover, it provides high-volume storage at a low cost and

==== Page 5 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 5 of 25
reduces the burden of in-hospital data management. Pandey et al. [ 38] proposed a system that integrates
mobile computing and cloud computing to analyze ECG data. The authors provided a cloud environment
to collect people’s health data, such as ECG data, and disseminated them to a cloud-based information
repository, which facilitated the analysis of the data by using software services hosted in the cloud.
Limitations and challenges of cloud computing in RPM systems are confined to the power and time
consumption, privacy , and security of the transmitted data. The proposed system tried to handle some
RPM challenges and used COVID-19 as a case study . Table A1 in Appendix A provides a summarization
of patient-monitoring systems.
3. The General Architecture of RPMS
Most patient-monitoring systems consist of three main layers: data acquisition layer, storage layer,
and backend layer. Figure 2 depicts the general architecture of RPMs.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 25 
 by using software services hosted in the cloud.  Limitations and challenges of cloud computing in 
RPM systems  are confined to the power and time consumption, privacy, and security of the 
transmitted data . The proposed syst em tried to hand le some  RPM challenges  and used COVID -19 as 
a case study.  Table A 1 in Appendix  A provides a summarization of patient -monitoring systems.  
3. The General A rchitecture of RPMS  
Most patient -monitoring systems consist of three main layers : data acquisition layer, storage 
layer , and backend layer . Figure 2 depicts the general architecture of RPMs . 
 
Figure 2.  General architecture of remote patient -monitoring system s (RPMs ). 
3.1. Data -Acquisition Layer  
Sensors play a key role in RPM s. A sensor  acts as a bridge between the physical world and the 
digital domain  [39]. An R PMS uses various sensors to collect data about a patient’s health status (i.e., 
ECG, SPO2, HR, etc.) and context data (i.e. , room oxygen level, gas leakage, room temperature, light 
level, etc.). Actuators can respond to feedback from decision support systems (for example, adjust 
insulin dose delivered to a patient based on collected sensors data). A WBAN is an IoT -based wireless 
Figure 2. General architecture of remote patient-monitoring systems (RPMs).

==== Page 6 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 6 of 25
3.1. Data-Acquisition Layer
Sensors play a key role in RPMs. A sensor acts as a bridge between the physical world and the
digital domain [ 39]. An RPMS uses various sensors to collect data about a patient’s health status
(i.e., ECG, SPO2, HR, etc.) and context data (i.e., room oxygen level, gas leakage, room temperature,
light level, etc.). Actuators can respond to feedback from decision support systems (for example,
adjust insulin dose delivered to a patient based on collected sensors data). A WBAN is an IoT-based
wireless network used for remote and real-time monitoring. In healthcare applications, wireless sensor
nodes are classiﬁed into two main types based on implementation technique: (1) implanted sensors,
which are implanted either in the patient’s body or under the skin, and (2) external sensors, which are
directly attached to the patient’s skin or separated from the patient by 2–5 cm [ 40,41]. These sensors
continuously measure the patient’s vital signs and transmit the collected data to a remote location,
using a wireless communication protocol (i.e., LoRa, WLAN, WiMAX, LTE, and UMTS).
Wireless sensor nodes allow RPMSs to capture features and information about patients, such as
aggregating real-time vital signs, tracking patient’s symptoms, and the e ect of therapy plan, monitoring
patient communications and social activities, etc. Various healthcare systems depend on wireless
sensors such as vital-sign-monitoring and health-assessment systems [ 42], reminder systems [ 43–46],
and fall-detection-monitoring systems [47].
3.2. Storage Layer
3.2.1. Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is a new paradigm that adds fruitful beneﬁts to healthcare care systems [ 48].
Beneﬁts could be summarized as the following points: (1) It increases speed and e ciency;
cloud monitoring systems usually use a group of servers to manage patient status, which increases
system speed and e cacy. Ahnn et al. [ 49] showed that CC increased the speed by 20 times and the
energy e ciency by 10 times. In addition, a hardware failure in one server does not dramatically a ect
the performance of the overall system. (2) It provides enormous amounts of storage for saving big
healthcare data ﬁles (e.g., imaging data, time series data, etc.). Moreover, it easily provides a means to
share these ﬁles with other hospitals. (3) It helps in analyzing all patients’ data (such as demographics,
symptoms, therapy plans, and treatment) and makes all the data available, to support and improve
decision-making processes [ 50,51]. (4) It provides more secure servers than do local servers for storing
patient data, as it uses security layers to secure cloud data from theft or hacks.
Cloud computing in conjunction with a WSN enables promising monitoring systems that can
enhance the quality of service (QoS). The combination o ers physicians the ability to monitor all patient
data sensed with biosensors, regardless of the type of patient data. The limitations and challenges of
cloud computing in RPMS are conﬁned to the power and time consumption, privacy, and security
of the transmitted data. In the last decades, fog computing was developed to handle the challenges
associated with CC.
3.2.2. Fog Computing
Fog computing extends the traditional cloud to edge network. The point of using fog computing
is to transfer the processing of some sensitive application to the edge (near the end device), while others
can be done over the cloud. Problems related to location awareness, reliability, latency, and many other
challenges are resolved by using the fog-computing architecture [ 52]. Fog computing in RPMS is a
new concept. It provides many advantages over cloud:
 Data processed and analyzed locally instead of sending them to the cloud; this led to the
consumption of less bandwidth and decreased the overall costs [53].
 Processing data locally decreased the time-latency during transmission, which helps to avoid
problems especially for time-sensitive applications (e.g., real-time monitoring, self-driving car, etc.).

==== Page 7 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 7 of 25
 Providing better privacy to users, as patient’s data can be analyzed locally instead of sending
them to the cloud.
 Deploying fog servers in RPMS decreased the required bandwidth for transmission, providing
real-time data to doctors, without the need for an internet connection [54].
 Saves on power consumption while continuously transmitting to cloud servers [55].
Fog IoT systems are divided into three main layers: device layer, fog layer, and cloud layer.
Dastjerdi et al. [ 56] provided a tutorial that discusses the di erences between edge computing,
fog computing and cloud computing. Stojmenovic et al. [ 57] discussed the role of fog computing
in various domains. Figure 3 shows the basic architecture of fog computing model for RPMS.
Table 1 provides in terms of many factors. Note: The comparison concentrates on factors related to
real-time monitoring.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 25 
 computing and cloud computing. Stojmenovic  et al. [57] discussed the role of fog computing in 
various dom ains. Fig ure 3 show s the basic  architecture of fog computing model for RPMS. Table 1 
provide s in terms of many factors. Note: The comparison concentrate s on factors r elated to real -time 
monitoring.  
 
Figure 3.  Fog computing in remote monitoring system.  
Table 1.  Difference between cloud computing and fog computing . 
Factor  Cloud C omputing  Fog C omputing  
Goal  Enhance the execution process data that 
should be transferred to the cloud for 
handling and storage  Give a powerful storage, 
realistic and efficient 
management  
Latency  High  Low  
Mobility  Limited  Supported  
Geo-
distribution  Centralized  Distributed  
Bandwidth cost  High  Low  
Storage 
capability  Strong  Weak  
Energy 
consumption  High  Low  
Location 
awareness  Partially supported  Fully supported  
No. of servers  Few Large  
Real -time 
interaction  Supported  Supported  
Security  Undefined  Defined  
Location of 
service  With the internet  At the edge of the local 
network  
Run time  Real time  Rea time  
Transmission  Device -to-device  Device -to-cloud  
Response time  Low  High  
Scalability  High  High  
Multitasking  Yes Yes 
3.3. Back end Layer  
This section focus es on the data base layer (third layer) and its role in remote patient monitoring. 
Medical data  are varying  in nature  and characteristics , with uncertainty  and high ly missing data  [58]. 
The early developments of artificial intelligence and medical informatics fields have culminated in 
what is known as the clinical -decision -support system (CDSS)  [13]. CDSS  is considered to be the brain 
Figure 3. Fog computing in remote monitoring system.
Table 1. Dierence between cloud computing and fog computing.
Factor Cloud Computing Fog Computing
GoalEnhance the execution process data that should be
transferred to the cloud for handling and storageGive a powerful storage, realistic
and e cient management
Latency High Low
Mobility Limited Supported
Geo-distribution Centralized Distributed
Bandwidth cost High Low
Storage capability Strong Weak
Energy consumption High Low
Location awareness Partially supported Fully supported
No. of servers Few Large
Real-time interaction Supported Supported
Security Undeﬁned Deﬁned
Location of service With the internet At the edge of the local network
Run time Real time Rea time
Transmission Device-to-device Device-to-cloud
Response time Low High
Scalability High High
Multitasking Yes Yes
3.3. Backend Layer
This section focuses on the database layer (third layer) and its role in remote patient monitoring.
Medical data are varying in nature and characteristics, with uncertainty and highly missing data [ 58].
The early developments of artiﬁcial intelligence and medical informatics ﬁelds have culminated in
what is known as the clinical-decision-support system (CDSS) [ 13]. CDSS is considered to be the brain
of a healthcare system, and it is used to assist healthcare teams in the decision-making process [ 59].

==== Page 8 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 8 of 25
The literature indicates that the use of CDSSs has an important impact on monitoring systems.
CDSSs could provide the following: (1) a comprehensive healthcare view of the patient’s medical history;
(2) help to non-expert physicians by providing clinical guidelines, practice standards, and di erential
diagnoses; (3) and help to patients by o ering several assistive tools, such as drug-schedule reminders,
drug prescriptions, and drug-dose interactions. All these factors improve the importance of using
CDSS in remote monitoring systems, especially in remote areas. Velickovski et al. [ 60] provided CDSS
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPE). CDSSs have also been used for other diseases,
such as Alzheimer’s [ 61] and diabetes [ 62]. To build an e cient CDSS, various components must be
integrated to provide a complete image of a patient’s health status, such as patient EHR, knowledge
base, clinical principle guidelines, etc. Furthermore, ML should continuously refresh the CDSS’s
knowledge base. For the convenience of reader Appendix B, Table A2 inlclude all terms with its
abbreviation’s.
4. The Proposed Framework
The main objective of our framework is to provide a complete system that limits the proliferation
of COVID-19. It concentrates on early detection and isolation because these are the most important
factors that could help in reducing the number of COVID-19 cases. There are many MHMs, but most of
them focus on helping patients by monitoring their vital signs through wearable sensors. Other studies
focus on other issues, including data transmission and integration. None of the previous research
studies proposed an end-to-end solution. Therefore, in this study, a complete health-monitoring
system is proposed. The system helps in early detection, continuous monitoring for suspected cases,
and ensuring patient isolation for suspected and conﬁrmed cases. The framework is divided into three
main parts (i.e., patient side, cloud side, and hospital side). Figure 4 depicts the ﬂow of data in the
proposed framework.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 25 
 of a healthcare system, and it is used to a ssist healthcare teams in the decision -making process [59]. 
The literature indicates that the use of CDSSs has an important impact on monitoring systems. CDSSs 
could provide  the following : (1) a comprehensive healthcare view of the patient’s medical histor y; (2) 
help to non-expert physicians by providing clinical guidelines, practice standa rds, and differential 
diagnoses ; (3) and help to patient s by offering several assistive tools , such as drug -schedule 
reminders, drug prescriptions, and drug -dose  interactions. All these factors improve the importance 
of using  CDSS in remote monitoring systems , especially in remote areas.  Velickovski et al. [60] 
provide d CDSS for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPE) . CDSS s have also been used for 
other disea ses, such  as Alzheimer ’s [61] and diabetes [62]. To build an efficient CDSS, various 
component s must be integrated to provide a complete image of a patient’s health status , such as 
patient EHR, knowledge base, clinical principle guidelines, etc.  Furthermore, ML should 
continuously refresh the CDSS’s  knowledge base.  For the convenience  of reader Appendix B, Table 
A2 inlclude all terms with its abbreviation’s.  
4. The Proposed F ramework  
The main objective of our framework is to provide a complete sys tem that limit s the proliferation 
of COVID -19. It concentrate s on early detection and isolation  because these  are the most important 
factors  that could  help in reduc ing the  number of COVID -19 cases. There  are many MH Ms, but most 
of them focus on help ing patients by monitoring their vital signs through wearable sensors . Other 
studies focus on other issues , includ ing data transmission and integration. None of the previous 
research  studies  propose d an end-to-end solution. Therefore, in this study, a complete health -
monitoring system is proposed . The system helps  in early detection, continuous monitoring for 
suspected cases , and ensuring patient isolation  for suspected and confirmed cases . The framework is 
divide d into three main parts ( i.e., patient side, clou d side , and hospital side). Figure 4 depicts the 
flow of data in the proposed framework.  
 
Figure 4.  The proposed framework . 
4.1. Patient Side  
Figure 4. The proposed framework.

==== Page 9 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 9 of 25
4.1. Patient Side
The proposed system in this side depends on a lightweight mobile application that could
continuously track the patient status. The following is the set of modules in our mobile system: (1) person
identiﬁcation—each person creates an account using his /her identiﬁcation number; and (2) patients
tracking—all suspected and infected patients are tracked, using a GPS geolocation function of his /her
mobile device. Figure 5 shows the di erent stages of patients in our proposed system. In Figure 6,
(1)–(4) show the screens of the mobile app for identifying and tracking. All of the patient’s data
updates include status, measurements, and movements, and they are updated frequently in the
backend database. On the other hand, each building or public transportation takes a unique QR
code, adding this code on print media (such as brochures or ﬂyers) in front of them. People are not
permitted to pass unless they scan the QR code. Figure 6 (5) shows the QR screen. Once a person
scans the QR code, the person’s status (normal, infected, etc.) is retrieved form the backend database.
Healthy cases are permitted to normally pass, but suspected cases are passed through a special path,
to control the spread of infection, and other infected cases are not permitted to pass. Tracking peoples’
movements prevents all suspected and conﬁrmed cases from walking around and spreading the
infections. Additionally, if anyone is infected by COVID-19 at any time, all close contacts of him /her
will be traced and followed, using these data.
In our proposed framework, we treat with patient at five stages (normal, suspected, highly suspected,
confirmed, and recovered). For each of these stages, different steps are taken to ensure patient safety.
Mobile application is used to manage cases at early stages of the disease.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 25 
 The proposed system in this side depends on a lightweight mobile application that could 
continuously track the patient status. The following is the set of modules in our mobile system: (1) 
person identification —each person creates an account using his/her identification number ; and (2) 
patients tracking —all suspected and infected patients are tracked , using a GPS g eolocation function 
of his/her  mobile device. Figure 5 shows the different stages of patients in our proposed system. In 
Figure 6 , (1)–(4) show the screens of the mobile app for identifying and tracking. All of the patient’s 
data updates include status, me asurements, and  movements, and they are updated frequently in the 
backend database. On the other hand, each building or public transportation take s a unique QR code, 
adding this code on print media (such as brochures or flyers) in front of them. People are  not 
permitted to pass unless they scan the QR code. Figure 6 (5) shows the QR screen. Once a person 
scan s the QR code, the person’s status (normal, infected, etc.) is retrieved form the backend database. 
Healthy cases are permitted to normally pass, but s uspected cases are passed through a special path , 
to control the spread of infection , and other infected cases are not permitted to pass. Tracking  peoples’  
movements prevent s all suspected and confirmed cases from walking around and spread ing the 
infection s. Additionally, if anyone is infected by COVID -19 at any time, all close contacts of him /her 
will be traced and followed , using these data.  
In our proposed framework , we treat with patient at five stages ( normal, suspected, highly 
suspected, confirmed , and recovered). For each of these stages, different steps are taken to ensure 
patient safety. Mobile application is used to manage cases at early stages of the disease.  
 
Figure 5.  Patient’s side.  
Normal cases : In case anyone start s feeling any symptoms , such as temperature, vomiting, 
infiltration, etc., he/she firstly make s an initial COVID -19 score. This score is based on the W HO 
guidelines [63]. We provide  a graphical user interface ( GUI) form for the patient to manually enter 
the list of symptoms whic h determine the initial state of the patient. In a study of 10,114 patients [64], 
fever was present as the first symptoms for COVID -19 cases. In another studies, authors reported that 
vomiting or diarrhea sometimes are presented prior to fever [65 ,66]. Tab le 2 contains all symptoms 
and their score. If the initial score equal to six or more. Patient status will be updated as a suspected 
patient and will be asked to make the lab tests.  
Table 2.  Initial COVID  score. 
Factor  Score  
Temperature  1 
Cough  2 
Diarrhea  1 
Vomiting  1 
Infiltration  1 
Figure 5. Patient’s side.
Normal cases: In case anyone starts feeling any symptoms, such as temperature, vomiting,
inﬁltration, etc., he /she ﬁrstly makes an initial COVID-19 score. This score is based on the WHO
guidelines [ 63]. We provide a graphical user interface (GUI) form for the patient to manually enter the
list of symptoms which determine the initial state of the patient. In a study of 10,114 patients [ 64],
fever was present as the ﬁrst symptoms for COVID-19 cases. In another studies, authors reported that
vomiting or diarrhea sometimes are presented prior to fever [ 65,66]. Table 2 contains all symptoms
and their score. If the initial score equal to six or more. Patient status will be updated as a suspected
patient and will be asked to make the lab tests.

==== Page 10 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 10 of 25
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 25 
  
Figure 6.  Main functions of mobile app. 
Frontend App  
For users (patients, homeowners, and physicians), they deal with the android application with 
different profiles. A patient use s his/her app to register his /her basic information and collect data 
from wearable devices. The p hysician monitors patient data a nd set s up the personalized notification. 
Figure 6 shows the main functions of the android app.  
4.2. Cloud S ide 
In this layer , we need what is called “real-time analysis”. Most healthcare systems use cloud 
systems to store , analyz e, and visualiz e all patie nts’ data . Ideally, this scenario might be suitable for 
some healthcare systems, but with the current pandemic , where general population is increasingly 
being affected, the speed and the quality  of care  are the key s of the game. As a result, we need a layer 
that acts as a bridge between the cloud system and IoT devices , a layer that could analyze a patient’s 
data quickly and does not affect  neither  with internet connection status nor bandwidth status. Fog 
computing  can handle all of these challenges . As mentioned above, fog computing allows devices to 
make critical analysis on their own, without the need of a cloud storage process. Therefore, using fog 
nodes could be the key for making the system incredibly useful for  home -care patients.  The collected 
information from sensors  is sent to the nearest fog node , using the LoRa network. LoRa is a 
remarkable protocol for short messages carried over a long range . It could send 12 bit s every ten 
minute s, and t hat is exactly wh at we want when patients are out of range of cell phone towers.  
4.2.1. Fog A rchitecture  
The goal of this experiment was to investigate the effectiveness of fog computing , to provide a 
better business solution that c ould  improve the overall performance of our monitoring framework. 
The setting of this experi ment was conducted upon a personal c omputer (PC) with an Intel Core i5 -
4210U 1.70  GHz (c/TB 2.70 GHz), 4  GB RAM/Disco Duro 500  GB, and a 64 -bit PC (AMD64) Ubuntu 
operat ing system  (Intel, Santa Clara, CA, USA) . The Network Simulation version -2 (NS2.35)  [75] was 
Figure 6. Main functions of mobile app.
Table 2. Initial COVID score.
Factor Score
Temperature 1
Cough 2
Diarrhea 1
Vomiting 1
Inﬁltration 1
Shortness of breath 2
Have chronic diseases 1
Working in health care sector 3
Travel in the last 14 days 3
Suspected case: According to the score that results from the previous step, patients are asked to
take the recommended plasma test if the initial score exceeded six. Depending on plasma returned
to the shortage in of CAT Scan Machines and other kits used in the SWAP test, it is considered
as a ﬁltration step. According to Reference [ 67], WHO stated that there is a correlation between
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and white blood cells to the COVIOD-19 infection. Several studies
reported that lymphopenia is the common ﬁnding between more than 83% of the hospitalized patients.
Lymphopenia, neutrophilia, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, high C-Reactive
Protein (CRP), and high ferritin levels are associated with highly illness severity [ 19,61,64,68,69].
Table 3 includes all lab tests recommend by WHO.

==== Page 11 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 11 of 25
Table 3. Plasma test.
Plasma Test Normal Range
White Blood Cells (WBC) (4–11)
Lymphocytopenia (3–9)
Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) (140–280)
C-Reactive Protein (CRP) <3 mg /L
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) (0–20) mm /h
Ferritin Level Blood Test (12–150) ng /mL
Highly suspected case: In this step, patients will do a SWAP test and CT scan, and all data on
each of the previous steps are updated on patent’s data.
Conﬁrmed case: In this step, patients are categorized into two categories. The ﬁrst is serve
disease, where patients require hospitalization to manage COVID-19 complications, such as hypoxemic
respiratory failure (ARDS), pneumonia, sepsis, etc. [ 20,69–71]. The second is mild-to-moderate diseases,
where patients may not require hospitalization, and their health status could be managed at home or
through continuous monitoring system. This type of patient is the core of our work. The decision of
the monitoring system (inpatient, outpatient) should be speciﬁed case by case. It depends on several
factors, including the results of clinical examination, the potential of risk factors, and the ability to
make home isolation. People with risk for serve diseases should have close monitoring to avoid the
progression especially in the second week of infection [18,23,69].
To enable home monitoring systems, sensors and actuators are deployed in a patient’s home.
It includes wearable sensors, such as a temperature sensor and heart rate senor, and environmental
sensors, such as motion-detection sensor. The homeowner logs into patient’s mobile application
installed on his /her device and authorizes the access to device data.
Recovered case: The incubation period for COVID-19 (the time between the initial infection and
the onset of symptoms) is estimated to be 14 days, with an average time of four to ﬁve days [ 68,72].
Minaee et al. [ 73] reported that 97.5% of patients who develop COVID-19 symptoms will recover
within 11.5 days. However, Ruiyun et al. [ 74] reported that 4% of COVID-19 patients may be able to
spread infection even after all symptoms disappeared. Therefore, we depend on re-SWAP tests to
ensure patient safety and limit the spread of infection.
Frontend App
For users (patients, homeowners, and physicians), they deal with the android application with
dierent proﬁles. A patient uses his /her app to register his /her basic information and collect data
from wearable devices. The physician monitors patient data and sets up the personalized notiﬁcation.
Figure 6 shows the main functions of the android app.
4.2. Cloud Side
In this layer, we need what is called “real-time analysis”. Most healthcare systems use cloud
systems to store, analyze, and visualize all patients’ data. Ideally, this scenario might be suitable for
some healthcare systems, but with the current pandemic, where general population is increasingly
being a ected, the speed and the quality of care are the keys of the game. As a result, we need a
layer that acts as a bridge between the cloud system and IoT devices, a layer that could analyze a
patient’s data quickly and does not a ect neither with internet connection status nor bandwidth status.
Fog computing can handle all of these challenges. As mentioned above, fog computing allows devices
to make critical analysis on their own, without the need of a cloud storage process. Therefore, using fog
nodes could be the key for making the system incredibly useful for home-care patients. The collected
information from sensors is sent to the nearest fog node, using the LoRa network. LoRa is a remarkable
protocol for short messages carried over a long range. It could send 12 bits every ten minutes, and that
is exactly what we want when patients are out of range of cell phone towers.

==== Page 12 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 12 of 25
4.2.1. Fog Architecture
The goal of this experiment was to investigate the e ectiveness of fog computing, to provide a
better business solution that could improve the overall performance of our monitoring framework.
The setting of this experiment was conducted upon a personal computer (PC) with an Intel Core
i5-4210U 1.70 GHz (c /TB 2.70 GHz), 4 GB RAM /Disco Duro 500 GB, and a 64-bit PC (AMD64) Ubuntu
operating system (Intel, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The Network Simulation version-2 (NS2.35) [ 75] was
used as a prototype platform; being highly portable and an open-source, it was designed to handle the
events continuously generated by sensor networks.
The proposed scenario to integrate fog computing with sensor network in NS2.35 was done
through three main steps: (i) initializing the network topology by Tool command language (TCL)
with varying network range (10–100) nodes, (ii) modifying a set of sensor node to act as a fog nodes
(this modiﬁcation follows the reference guide known for Fog Hierarchical Deployment Model from
OpenFog Reference Architecture [ 76]), and (iii) the rest of sensor nodes work as the ordinary nodes,
and therefore they can exchange data among themselves. All experiment settings are illustrated in
Table 4.
Table 4. Parameters for fog experiments.
Parameter Value
No. of Nodes 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100
Simulation Time 300 s
Channel Type Wireless Channel
Routing Protocol AODV
MAC Protocol IEEE 802.11p
Trac Source CBR
Energy Model Battery
In Figure 7, an application of the proposed scenario is introduced. The TCL ﬁle simulates the
sensor network through a set of ordinary sensor nodes and two fog nodes. As mentioned before,
the fog nodes are conﬁgured into NS2.35 according to the Fog Hierarchical Deployment Model from
OpenFog Reference Architecture. The code for these fog nodes was written in the C ++language
program, to facilitate the event exchange over the network. X-dimension of topography was 1800,
and Y-dimension topography was 840.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 25 
 used as a prototype platform ; being  highly portable and an open -source , it was designed to handle 
the events continuousl y generated by sensor networks.  
The proposed scenario to integrate fog computing with sensor network in NS2.35 was done 
through three main steps: (i) initializin g the network topology by Tool command l anguage (TCL)  
with varying network range (10 –100) nodes, (ii) modifying a set of sensor  node to act as a fog nodes 
(this modification follows the reference guide known for Fog Hierarchical Deployment Model from 
OpenFog Reference Architecture [76]), and (iii) the rest of sensor nodes work as the ordinary nodes , 
and therefore they can exchange  data among themselves. All experiment setting s are illustrated in 
Table 4.  
Table 4.  Parameters for fog experiments . 
Parameter  Value  
No. of Nodes  10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 
Simulation Time  300 s 
Channel Type  Wireless Channel  
Routing Protocol  AODV  
MAC Protocol  IEEE 802.11p  
Traffic Source  CBR  
Energy Model  Battery  
In Figure 7, an application of the proposed scenario is introduced. The TCL file simulates the 
sensor network through a set of ordinary sensor nodes and two fog nodes. As mentioned before, the 
fog nodes are configured into NS2.35 according to the Fog Hierarchical Depl oyment Model from 
OpenFog Reference Architecture. The code for these fog nodes was written in the C++ language 
program , to facilitate the event exchange over the network. X -dimension of topography was 1800 , 
and Y-dimension topography was 840.  
 
Figure 7.  Tool command l anguage ( TCL ) file for the proposed fog scenario . 
To figure out the overall efficiency of the proposed scenario, a comparison between a system 
with applying fog computing approach and another system without applying it was conducted. As 
seen in Figure 8, the proposed scenario with fog technology outperforms the traditional network 
without fog technology , due to its capability to reduce the total rate of data transmission, and 
therefore the network bandwidth and power consumption are vastly imp roved.  
Figure 7. Tool command language (TCL) ﬁle for the proposed fog scenario.

==== Page 13 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 13 of 25
To ﬁgure out the overall e ciency of the proposed scenario, a comparison between a system with
applying fog computing approach and another system without applying it was conducted. As seen in
Figure 8, the proposed scenario with fog technology outperforms the traditional network without fog
technology, due to its capability to reduce the total rate of data transmission, and therefore the network
bandwidth and power consumption are vastly improved.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 25 
  
Figure 8.  A comparison between system with fog and system without fog technology . 
4.2.2. Backend Cloud D atabase  
To enable the centralized storage of all clinical features, we develop ed a backend cloud database 
that utiliz es the  red hat Linux 9, Ap ache, PHP, and MySQL. First, we set  up Apache, MySQL, and 
PHP over Linux environment  for Apache as web servicing, and MySQL as database management 
and storage system. PHP is the language allow server to interact with the application. We built a 
database th at revolves around fog node  and could easily engage with the database . It contains four 
main tables , namely  patients, physicians, devices, and the extract information from patient data. 
Building a cloud database provide s dedicated storage cluster , which provide s many advantages , 
includ ing synchronous data replication, scalability in adding and removing replicas, and reducing 
complexity by using CLI and API . 
A patient’s data and status from different sources , such as medical presentation, wearable 
devices, scan test, etc. , are continuously updated in the patient’s electronic health record ( EHR ), saved 
on the cloud , and sent to analytics module , to determine whether the potential risk is exceeding the 
predefined threshold. After determining that  there  is a problem, notifications are sent to both the 
patient  and physician.  
4.3. Hospital S ide 
For the  in-hospital side , we concentrate on three  main points : (1) build a classification model that 
could classify X -ray images to COVID -19 cases or normal cases ; (2) build complete cloud -integrate d 
EHR system that aggregate s data  from patient sensors, medical presentation, lab test, and X-ray test ; 
and (3) build a CDSS system that depend s on the distributed EHR , in addition to WHO’s clinical 
practice guidelines (CPGs).  
5. Dataset Description  
The COVID -19 dataset was collected from different regions in the world and is publicly available 
from References  [77,78]. It consists of 622 cases ( 122 for COVID -19, and 500 for normal) . Due to 
shortage in training sample , and to make the data balanced, we performed  a data augmentation 
process to increase the training sample size  in COVID -19 class. We end up with 750 images (250 for 
COVID -19, and 500 for no-finding) , and  all images were reshaped  to 192 × 192. Data were  randomly 
selected to include 70% for training, 15% for validation , and 15% for testin g. 
6. Classification M odel  
According to the guidelines of WHO, the diagnosis of COVID -19 can be  confirmed with either 
a SWAP test , CT-Scan , or X-ray chest scan. During the current situation, most health organization s’ 
Figure 8. A comparison between system with fog and system without fog technology.
4.2.2. Backend Cloud Database
To enable the centralized storage of all clinical features, we developed a backend cloud database
that utilizes the red hat Linux 9, Apache, PHP , and MySQL. First, we set up Apache, MySQL, and PHP
over Linux environment for Apache as web servicing, and MySQL as database management and
storage system. PHP is the language allow server to interact with the application. We built a database
that revolves around fog node and could easily engage with the database. It contains four main tables,
namely patients, physicians, devices, and the extract information from patient data. Building a cloud
database provides dedicated storage cluster, which provides many advantages, including synchronous
data replication, scalability in adding and removing replicas, and reducing complexity by using CLI
and API.
A patient’s data and status from di erent sources, such as medical presentation, wearable devices,
scan test, etc., are continuously updated in the patient’s electronic health record (EHR), saved on
the cloud, and sent to analytics module, to determine whether the potential risk is exceeding the
predeﬁned threshold. After determining that there is a problem, notiﬁcations are sent to both the
patient and physician.
4.3. Hospital Side
For the in-hospital side, we concentrate on three main points: (1) build a classiﬁcation model that
could classify X-ray images to COVID-19 cases or normal cases; (2) build complete cloud-integrated
EHR system that aggregates data from patient sensors, medical presentation, lab test, and X-ray test;
and (3) build a CDSS system that depends on the distributed EHR, in addition to WHO’s clinical
practice guidelines (CPGs).
5. Dataset Description
The COVID-19 dataset was collected from di erent regions in the world and is publicly available
from References [ 77,78]. It consists of 622 cases (122 for COVID-19, and 500 for normal). Due to
shortage in training sample, and to make the data balanced, we performed a data augmentation process
to increase the training sample size in COVID-19 class. We end up with 750 images (250 for COVID-19,

==== Page 14 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 14 of 25
and 500 for no-ﬁnding), and all images were reshaped to 192 192. Data were randomly selected to
include 70% for training, 15% for validation, and 15% for testing.
6. Classiﬁcation Model
According to the guidelines of WHO, the diagnosis of COVID-19 can be conﬁrmed with either
a SWAP test, CT-Scan, or X-ray chest scan. During the current situation, most health organizations’
identiﬁcation procedure for COVID-19 patients are not quick enough to limit the risk of infections to
the larger population. Therefore, an automatic identiﬁcation tool in highly required.
Our classiﬁer is based on the deep convolution neural network (CNN /ConvNet) that could
automatically identify COVID-19 cases based on chest X-ray images. CNN is a deep learning algorithm
that could take images as input, assigning weights to various aspects /characteristics in a way that
could distinguish one from another.
The following steps summarize the roles of CNN layers. (1) To track and evaluate potential
features, CNN implements multiple convolutions and pooling layers. (2) The max pooling layer is used
to minimize the spatial size of convolutional features and solves issues related to overﬁtting. It extracts
the maximum region obtained from the previous convolutional layer. Figure 9a shows the max pooling
layer, using stride 1 and kernel size of 3. (3) Rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) is an activation function used
to map between an input and its target variable, using linear function. Figure 9b shows the calculation
method of ReLU activation function. (4) Dropout layers are used to minimize overﬁtting in the training
data. (5) Fully connected layers are used as a classiﬁer that utilize features to classify objects.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 25 
 identification procedure for  COVID -19 patients are not quick enough to limit the risk of infections to 
the larger populatio n. Therefore, an automatic identifi cation tool in highly required.  
Our classifier i s based on the  deep convolution neural network (CNN/ConvNet) that could 
automatic ally identify COVID -19 cases based on chest X -ray images. CNN is a deep learning 
algorithm that could take images a s input , assigning weights to various aspects/characteristics in a 
way that coul d distinguish one fr om another.  
The following steps summarize  the roles of  CNN layers . (1) To track and evaluate potential 
features, CNN implements multiple c onvolutions and pooling layers . (2) The max pooling laye r is 
used to minimize the spatial size of convolutional features  and solve s issues related to overfitting. It 
extract s the maximum region obtained from the previous convolutional layer. Figure  9a show s the 
max pooling layer , using stride 1 and kernel size of 3. (3) Rectified linear unit (ReLU) is an activation 
function used to map between an input and its target variable , using linear function. Figure 9b show s 
the calculation method of ReLU activation function . (4) D ropout layers are used to minimize 
overfi tting in the training data. (5) F ully connected layers are used as a classifier that utilize features 
to classify objects.  
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 9.  (a) Representation of max pooling layer  and (b) rectified linear unit (R eLU) activation 
function . 
Unfortunately, one of the biggest challenges that face researchers in the analysis of medical data 
is the shortage of the available dataset. Deep learning models mainly depend on the availability of 
lots of labeled data. Therefore, the transfer -learning me thod is consider ed the most suitable technique 
with a small number of datasets. Transfer learning is a method that allow s training models with a 
small dataset to gain information (learning parameters) from a pre-trained model on a large dataset  
[79]. This technique has the benefit of decreasing the training time  and the generalization error and 
increas ing the overall performance of the model. Three popular models are used for transfer learning : 
VGG (VGG 16 or VGG 19), GOOGLENet (Inception V3) , and Residual Network (e.g. , RestNet50)  [80]. 
ResNet  (Residual Neural Network) is an effective pre -trained model that was developed in 2015; 
it is an improved version of CNN. It consists of 50 -layer network that trained on the ImageNet 
dataset. ImageNet is an image dataset with 14 million image and 20 thousand categories [73]. The 
main advantage in RestN et-50 is the us e of a new concept called “skip connection ”, which helps to 
mitigate the problem of vanishing gradient. Skip connection (identify mapping) is depicted in Figure 
10. Th is shortcut connection help s in understanding the global features  [74]. It also allows the 
netwo rk to skip the disposable layers , thus result ing in optimal tuning and faster learning by 
increasing the network capacity [73]. Therefore, in our study , we use d a ResNet -50 pre -trained model 
to obtain higher prediction accuracy with a small number of X -ray chest dataset s. Figure 11 show s 
the block diagram of the pre -trained  ResNet model used in this study. Mathematically, if we consider 
the input to be  𝑋, then the output , H, is defined as follows:  
        𝐻(𝑋)=𝐹(𝑥)+𝑋 (1) 
Layers weights learn a residual mapping that is given by  the following:  
Figure 9. (a) Representation of max pooling layer and ( b) rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation function.
Unfortunately, one of the biggest challenges that face researchers in the analysis of medical data is
the shortage of the available dataset. Deep learning models mainly depend on the availability of lots of
labeled data. Therefore, the transfer-learning method is considered the most suitable technique with
a small number of datasets. Transfer learning is a method that allows training models with a small
dataset to gain information (learning parameters) from a pre-trained model on a large dataset [ 79].
This technique has the beneﬁt of decreasing the training time and the generalization error and increasing
the overall performance of the model. Three popular models are used for transfer learning: VGG (VGG
16 or VGG 19), GOOGLENet (Inception V3), and Residual Network (e.g., RestNet50) [80].
ResNet (Residual Neural Network) is an e ective pre-trained model that was developed in 2015;
it is an improved version of CNN. It consists of 50-layer network that trained on the ImageNet dataset.
ImageNet is an image dataset with 14 million image and 20 thousand categories [ 73]. The main
advantage in RestNet-50 is the use of a new concept called “skip connection”, which helps to mitigate
the problem of vanishing gradient. Skip connection (identify mapping) is depicted in Figure 10.
This shortcut connection helps in understanding the global features [ 74]. It also allows the network
to skip the disposable layers, thus resulting in optimal tuning and faster learning by increasing the
network capacity [ 73]. Therefore, in our study, we used a ResNet-50 pre-trained model to obtain higher

==== Page 15 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 15 of 25
prediction accuracy with a small number of X-ray chest datasets. Figure 11 shows the block diagram of
the pre-trained ResNet model used in this study. Mathematically, if we consider the input to be X,
then the output, H, is deﬁned as follows:
H(X)=F(x)+X (1)
Layers weights learn a residual mapping that is given by the following:
F(x)=H(x) X (2)
where F(x)considers the stacked non-linear weight layers. ResNet-50 consists of several layers,
as follows: (1) 77convolutional layer with 64 kernels, (2) 33max pooling layer with 16 residual
block, (3) 77average pooling layer with stride 7, (4) fully connected layer, and (5) ﬁnally, SoftMax
layer that is set to 40, which is equal to the number of classes in the dataset [81].
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 25 
 𝐹(𝑥)=𝐻(𝑥)−𝑋 (2) 
where 𝐹(𝑥)  consider s the stacked non -linear weight layers. ResNet -50 consists of several layers , as 
follows: (1) 7×7 convolutional layer with 64 kernels, (2) 3×3 max pooling layer with 16 residual 
block, (3) 7×7 average pooling layer with stride 7, (4) fully connected layer , and  (5) finally, SoftMax 
layer that is set to 40 , which  is equal to the number of classes in the dataset [81]. 
 
Figure 10.  Building block for the residual learning . 
 
Figure 11.  The proposed classification model architecture . 
The following steps summarize the steps for building COVID -19 classification mod el using  the 
ResNet technique. (1) T he fully connected layer of ResNet -50 was removed from the model , and the 
other convolutional layers were used as a base network for  our classification model. (2) B atch 
normalization, dropout , and fully connected layer were added to the base network. Batch 
normalization was added to provide rapid training for the base m odel. Dropout layers were added 
to avoi d the overfitting problem. (3) T he SoftMax activation function was added in the last layer , 
which was  used to classify images in the two classe s (COVID -19 and normal cases). Our experiment 
was developed based on 1824 X-ray image (122 for COVID -19, 500 for normal cases). All images were 
resized to 192 × 192. F igure 10 show s the architecture of the classification model based on ResNet -50. 
7. Results  
Figure 10. Building block for the residual learning.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 25 
 𝐹(𝑥)=𝐻(𝑥)−𝑋 (2) 
where 𝐹(𝑥)  consider s the stacked non -linear weight layers. ResNet -50 consists of several layers , as 
follows: (1) 7×7 convolutional layer with 64 kernels, (2) 3×3 max pooling layer with 16 residual 
block, (3) 7×7 average pooling layer with stride 7, (4) fully connected layer , and  (5) finally, SoftMax 
layer that is set to 40 , which  is equal to the number of classes in the dataset [81]. 
 
Figure 10.  Building block for the residual learning . 
 
Figure 11.  The proposed classification model architecture . 
The following steps summarize the steps for building COVID -19 classification mod el using  the 
ResNet technique. (1) T he fully connected layer of ResNet -50 was removed from the model , and the 
other convolutional layers were used as a base network for  our classification model. (2) B atch 
normalization, dropout , and fully connected layer were added to the base network. Batch 
normalization was added to provide rapid training for the base m odel. Dropout layers were added 
to avoi d the overfitting problem. (3) T he SoftMax activation function was added in the last layer , 
which was  used to classify images in the two classe s (COVID -19 and normal cases). Our experiment 
was developed based on 1824 X-ray image (122 for COVID -19, 500 for normal cases). All images were 
resized to 192 × 192. F igure 10 show s the architecture of the classification model based on ResNet -50. 
7. Results  
Figure 11. The proposed classiﬁcation model architecture.

==== Page 16 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 16 of 25
The following steps summarize the steps for building COVID-19 classification model using the
ResNet technique. (1) The fully connected layer of ResNet-50 was removed from the model, and the other
convolutional layers were used as a base network for our classification model. (2) Batch normalization,
dropout, and fully connected layer were added to the base network. Batch normalization was added to
provide rapid training for the base model. Dropout layers were added to avoid the overfitting problem.
(3) The SoftMax activation function was added in the last layer, which was used to classify images in the
two classes (COVID-19 and normal cases). Our experiment was developed based on 1824 X-ray image
(122 for COVID-19, 500 for normal cases). All images were resized to 192 192. Figure 10 shows the
architecture of the classification model based on ResNet-50.
7. Results
7.1. Experiment Setup
The classiﬁcation model was implemented by using python libraries (SKLearn, Keras, NumPy,
and Pandas), under Windows 10 operating system, on an Intel Core i7 with 4 GB graphics cared and
16 GB-Ram. The dataset was randomly divided into training, validation, and testing data with 70%,
15%, and 15%, respectively. The adaptive learning method Adam was used to optimize parameters
during training. Learning rate was randomly selected to be 10–2, and dropout was selected to be 0.30.
For batch normalization, 10 5was chosen for epsilon, and 0.1 for momentum.
7.2. Evaluation Metrics
We used ﬁve criteria to evaluate our transfer-learning model:
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+FP+TN +FN(3)
Precision =TP
TP+FP(4)
Recall =TP
TP+TN(5)
Speciﬁcity =TN
TN +FP(6)
F1 score =2Precision Recall
Precision +Recall(7)
where true positive (TP) represents the positive samples (COVID-19 cases) that are correctly classiﬁed,
and true negative (TN) represents the proportion of negative samples (normal cases) that are correctly
classiﬁed. Samples that are COVID-19 cases and classiﬁed as normal represent the false negative ratio,
and samples that are negative and classiﬁed as COVID-19 cases represent the false-positive (FP) ratio.
COVID-19 images are limited in data source (Chest X-ray and CT scan).
7.3. Discussion
In this study, we depend on chest X-ray images to predict the infection of corona virus
disease. A popular pre-trained model (i.e., ResNet50) was used to train and test our classiﬁcation
model. Dropout, batch normalization and fully connected layer were used after the ResNet model.
Then, the ﬁnal layer used the SoftMax activation to output the classiﬁcation result (1 for COVID-19
class, and 0 for no ﬁnding). As we can see in Table 5, the model was trained using 25 epochs. We chose
to build the model with only 25 epochs, to avoid overﬁtting in the training phase. The performance of
the ConvNet is summarized in Table 6. The F1 score, precision, and recall are 0.972, 0.974, and 0.975,
respectively. Table 6 shows the classiﬁcation result using the test data.

==== Page 17 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 17 of 25
Table 5. Classiﬁcation results based on training and validation dataset.
Epoch Number Time Training ACC Validation ACC Loss Validation Loss
1 812s 0.5487 0.4432 2.032 6.734
2 930s 0.6319 0.5523 0.6310 3.007
3 864s 0.7728 0.6312 0.5062 2.987
4 1064s 0.8572 0.8113 03564 1.5642
5 952s 0.8734 0.8215 0.2987 0.9832
6 10,242 0.9398 0.8512 0.1721 0.6743
7 920s 0.9615 0.9123 0.1172 0.3298
8 991s 0.9659 0.8912 0.1043 0.3353
9 1109s 0.9721 0.9131 0.0817 0.2169
10 1013s 0.9770 0.9331 0.0679 0.1899
11 1366s 0.9417 0.8832 0.1681 0.2966
12 968s 0.9683 0.8912 0.0915 0.1187
13 851s 0.9671 0.9002 0.1072 0.1100
14 878s 0.9584 0.8643 0.1121 0.1965
15 967s 0.9528 0.9012 0.1153 0.2187
16 1353s 0.9820 0.9112 0.0508 0.1652
17 936s 0.9830 0.9198 0.0477 0.1312
18 1583s 0.9919 0.9236 0.0230 0.1120
19 920s 0.9919 0.9261 0.0271 0.051
20 1153s 0.9963 0.9314 0.1430 0.0321
21 1923s 0.9969 0.9352 0.0143 0.0222
22 3421s 0.9994 0.9433 0.032 0.0421
23 1276s 0.9957 0.9526 0.0137 0.0221
24 1397s 0.9969 0.9666 0.077 0.0135
25 1285s 1.000 0.9798 0.0017 0.0120
Table 6. Classiﬁcation results based on testing data.
Metric Percentage
Accuracy 0.9795
Recall 0.9759
Precision 0.9740
Speciﬁcity 0.9885
F1-Score 0.9729
AUC 0.9754
As COVID-19 is a new pandemic; therefore, a small number of chest X-rays are available
for the development of detection and classiﬁcation models. Few studies used a small number
of images and di erent techniques, such as Inception V3, DarkConvnet, ConvNet, etc. [ 29,82,83].
Table 7 compares the proposed model with the other four models. Our model achieved better results
than COVID-Net (92.4%) in Reference [ 84], with sample size 5551 [53( +), 5526(  )], and ResNet-50
(95.38%) in Reference [ 85], with sample size 50 [25( +), 25(  )]. Reference [ 73], using SqueezeNet,
with sample size 2496 [496( +), 2000(  )], achieved similar results to our model (97.4%), but they showed
inconsistency between true positive and true negative values. Unless Reference [ 28] achieved an
accuracy of 98.00%, which outperforms our results, they are built based on a very small dataset of
100 [50( +), 50( )] patients. As a result, it is expected that the model could achieve higher results.
Accordingly, our model achieved good accuracy (97.78%), as compared to the existing works of sample
size around 622 [122( +), 500(  )]. On the other hand, our model did not show much di erence between
training and testing accuracy and shows consistency between true positive and true negative values.
Therefore, the proposed model could be considered to be more robust and reliable, could be used as an
alternative to the existing COVID-19 diagnosis testing, and could help radiologists in conﬁrmation of
the infection of COVID-19.

==== Page 18 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 18 of 25
Table 7. Comparison with other classiﬁcation model.
Reference Number Technique Sample Size Accuracy
[84] COVID-Net 5551 [53( +), 5526(  )] 92.4%
[85] ResNet-50 50 [25( +), 25( )] 95.38%
[28] ResNet-50 100 [50( +), 50( )] 98.53%
[73] SqueezeNet 2496 [496( +), 2000(  )] 97.4%
Proposed model ResNet-50 622 [122( +), 500(  )] 97.78
Note: ResNet =Residual Neural Network.
8. Limitations and Future Scope
Our study has the following limitations. The identiﬁcation of COVID-19 cases based on the initial
score may not be accurate in all cases. Several studies [ 86–89] documented infections among patients
who never su ered from any symptoms (asymptomatic). The power consumption of the wireless
sensors is a big challenge in our monitoring system, and the capacity is highly consuming during
sensing and transmission. Additionally, not all smart devices permit the automatic transmission of
the aggregated vital signs without human intervention. Despite the advantages of using fog nodes
(i.e., privacy, security, productivity, etc.), using fog nodes may add more complexity to the network
infrastructure. It also required more maintenance to the distributed storage nodes.
The work reported in this paper is part of an ongoing project, and we will be working to integrate
the data-collection part within the framework. The paper primarily proposes an E2E framework
for patient monitoring and diagnosis. The framework integrated the mobile monitoring process
with hospital EHR. First, we detected the infected patient, in real time, based on the sensor data.
Second, we managed the infected patient by using a chest-image-processing module via deep learning.
The framework thus puts more emphasis on the image processing part because collected data for
real-time COVID-19 monitoring are lacking. As such, the proposed framework is complete in terms of
deep-learning-assisted E2E communication protocol and will, however, be investigated when the data
become available to understand the real-world performances.
Another question may arise why ResNet was favored over VGG or GOOGLENet. Please note
that ResNet is much more popular in the context of image processing. It achieved better results in
many domains. We just followed the guidelines [ 73,81,82] that asserted the high performance of this
network architecture. A comparison with other networks in the context of our framework would also
be worth investigating in future.
9. Conclusions
The rapid increasing of the COVID-19 spread ratio made a glitch in healthcare sectors, due to
the shortage of ICU units and medical sta . Therefore, most countries ﬁnd that home isolation is the
best practice to limit the spread of the virus. In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end framework for
COVID-19 to enable a real-time monitoring of patient at home and in hospital. For the patient side,
the framework aimed to provide early detection and isolation for infected patient, tracking his /her
contacts to ensure safety. For the hospital side, we propose fog network architecture to achieve the
eectiveness of using both cloud and fog in the monitoring system. For the hospital side, the framework
aimed to provide a complete EHR system that could beneﬁt from all patients’ data and help non-expert
physicians to take the right decision to save a patient’s life. We proposed a deep learning model based
on X-rays of the chest and transfer learning, to classify the patient as either infected or normal, and we
achieved promising results.

==== Page 19 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 19 of 25
Author Contributions: All authors participated in the design and implementation processes of this manuscript.
They participated in drafting the article and critically revising it. Authors N.E.-R. and S.E.-S. provided the
conceptualization of the model by designing the proposed framework. Author N.E.-R. designed the mobile
app and implemented the deep learning model. S.E.-S. proposed the methodology. Authors S.A. and S.M.R.I.
analyzed the models and results. Authors H.M.E.-B., S.A., and S.M.R.I. reviewed the proposed model and its
implementation; H.M.E.-B., S.A., and S.M.R.I. provided the validation of the model and collected the results of the
system. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research work was partially supported by the Sejong University Research Faculty Program (20192021).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
Appendix A. Summarization of the Most Important Monitoring System
Table A1. Summarization of patient-monitoring systems.
# Diseases DM WBAN Cloud Hospital Integration CDSS
[90] Chronic diseases X   X X
[91] Cardiovascular X    
[92] Heart diseases   X  
[93] Pain assessment  X   
[94] Monitor elders X X   X
[42] Heart diseases  X X  
[95] Heart diseases  X X  
[96] Hypertension, hypotension     
[97] Knees rehabilitation  X X  
[98] Chronic diseases  X X X X
[98] Hypertension X X X  X
[50] Tracking daily activities  X X  
[99] Diabetes  X   
[100] Context aware monitoring  X X  
[101] Diabetes and diet monitoring     X
[102] Heart diseases     X
[58] Diabetes    X X
[103] Diabetes X  X X X
[104] Mental disorder X    X
[105] Chronic diseases X    X
[106] Lung cancer     X
[107] Monitor patients with depression X X X X X
[36] Cardiovascular diseases X X  X X
[108] Heart failure X X X  X
[109] Parkinson X X   X
[110] Congestive heart failure X X X X 
[111] Hypertension, hypotension X X X  X
[112] Diabetes X X   
[113] Heart diseases X X   
[114] Heart diseases X X X  
[115] Elderly X X X  X
[116] Diabetes X X   
[117] Parkinson’s disease X X   X
[118] Chronic diseases X   X X
[58] Diabetes    X X
Notes: WBAN =wireless body area network; CDSS =clinical-decision-support system.

==== Page 20 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 20 of 25
Appendix B
Table A2. List of abbreviations.
Term Abbreviation
PMS patient-monitoring systems
EHR electronic health record
IoT Internet of Things
COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases
WBAN wireless body area network
ECG electrocardiogram
EMG electromyogram
CC cloud computing
KB knowledge base
DL deep learning
ReLU rectiﬁed linear unit
ResNet-50 residual neural network
HIS hospital information system
References
1. Chowdhury, M.Z.; Jang, Y.M.; Hasan, M.K.; Shahjalal, M. Real-Time Healthcare Data Transmission for
Remote Patient Monitoring in Patch-Based Hybrid OCC /BLE Networks. Sensors 2019 ,19, 1208.
2. Kalid, N.; Zaidan, A.A.; Zaidan, B.B.; Salman, O.H.; Hashim, M.; Muzammil, H. Based Real Time Remote
Health Monitoring Systems: A Review on Patients Prioritization and Related “Big Data” Using Body Sensors
information and Communication Technology. J. Med. Syst. 2017 ,42, 30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Elhayatmy, G.; Dey, N.; Ashour, A.S. Internet of Things Based Wireless Body Area Network in Healthcare.
Stud. Big Data 2018 ,30, 3–20.
4. Manirabona, A.; Fourati, L.C. A 4-tiers architecture for mobile WBAN based health remote monitoring
system. Wirel. Netw. 2017 ,24, 2179–2190. [CrossRef]
5. East, M.; Surveillance, G. Home Care for Patients with COVID-19 Presenting with Mild Symptoms and Management
of Their Contacts ; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 17–20.
6. World Health Organization. Operational considerations for case management of COVID-19 in health facility
and community. Interim guidance. Pediatr. Med. Rodz. 2020 ,16, 27–32. [CrossRef]
7. ICU Shortage. Available online: https: //www.theguardian.com /society /2018/mar/07/patients-turned-away-
intensive-care-lack-beds-shortage-hospitals (accessed on 19 November 2018).
8. Yoon, J.; Alaa, A.; Hu, S.; Schaar, M. ForecastICU: A Prognostic Decision Support System for Timely Prediction
of Intensive Care Unit Admission. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference Machine Learning,
New York, NY, USA, 19–24 June 2016; pp. 1680–1689.
9. Arentz, M.; Yim, E.; Kla , L.; Lokhandwala, S.; Riedo, F.X.; Chong, M.; Lee, M. Characteristics and Outcomes
of 21 Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 in Washington State. JAMA 2020 ,323, 1612. [CrossRef]
10. Pathak, Y.; Shukla, P .; Tiwari, A.; Stalin, S.; Singh, S.; Shukla, P .K.; Shukla, P .K. Deep Transfer Learning Based
Classiﬁcation Model for COVID-19 Disease. IRBM 2020 ,1, 1–6. [CrossRef]
11. Alom, Z.; Rahman, M.M.S.; Nasrin, M.S.; Taha, T.M.; Asari, V .K. COVID MTNet: COVID-19 Detection
with Multi-Task Deep Learning Approaches. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/2004.03747 (accessed on
22 July 2020).
12. Versteeg, H.; Pedersen, S.S.; Mastenbroek, M.H.; Redekop, W.K.; Schwab, J.O.; Mabo, P .; Meine, M. Patient
perspective on remote monitoring of cardiovascular implantable electronic devices: Rationale and design of
the REMOTE-CIED study. Neth. Hear. J. 2014 ,22, 423–428. [CrossRef]
13. El-Sappagh, S.H.; El-Masri, S. A distributed clinical decision support system architecture. J. King Saud Univ.
Comput. Inf. Sci. 2014 ,26, 69–78. [CrossRef]
14. Falsey, A.R.; Walsh, E.E. Novel coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet 2003 ,361,
1312–1313. [CrossRef]

==== Page 21 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 21 of 25
15. Ahmad, Z.; Singh, K.; Akhtar, J.; Shakya, P . Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in
India. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Res. 2017 ,8, 4496–4512.
16. Drosten, C.; Günther, S.; Preiser, W.; Van Der Werf, S.; Brodt, H.-R.; Becker, S.; Rabenau, H.; Panning, M.;
Kolesnikova, L.; Fouchier, R.; et al. Identiﬁcation of a Novel Coronavirus in Patients with Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 2003 ,348, 1967–1976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Zaki, A.M.; Van Boheemen, S.; Bestebroer, T.M.; Osterhaus, A.D.M.E.; Fouchier, R.A. Isolation of a Novel
Coronavirus from a Man with Pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012 ,367, 1814–1820. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
18. Dong, Y.; Mo, X.; Hu, Y.; Qi, X.; Jiang, F.; Jiang, Z.; Tong, S. Epidemiology of COVID-19 among Children in
China. Pediatrics 2020 ,145, e20200702. [CrossRef]
19. Wu, C.; Chen, X.; Cai, Y.; Xia, J.; Zhou, X.; Xu, S.; Huang, H.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, X.; Du, C.; et al. Risk Factors
Associated with Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Death in Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019
Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern. Med. 2020 ,180, 934–943. [CrossRef]
20. To, K.K.-W.; Tsang, O.T.-Y.; Leung, W.-S.; Tam, A.R.; Wu, T.-C.; Lung, D.C.; Yip, C.C.-Y.; Cai, J.-P .; Chan, J.M.-C.;
Chik, T.S.-H.; et al. Temporal proﬁles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum
antibody responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: An observational cohort study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 2020 ,
20, 565–574. [CrossRef]
21. Jeong, H.W.; Heo, J.Y.; Kim, H.-W.; Choi, Y.K.; Song, M.-S.; Bin Seo, Y.; Lee, J. Persistent Environmental
Contamination and Prolonged Viral Shedding in MERS Patients During MERS-CoV Outbreak in South
Korea. Open Forum Infect. Dis. 2015 ,2, 755–760. [CrossRef]
22. Livingston, E.; Bucher, K. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Italy. JAMA 2020 ,323, 1335. [CrossRef]
23. Huang, C.; Wang, Y.; Li, X.; Ren, L.; Zhao, J.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Fan, G.; Xu, J.; Gu, X.; et al. Clinical features
of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020 ,395, 497–506. [CrossRef]
24. Petropoulos, F.; Makridakis, S. Forecasting the novel coronavirus COVID-19. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15. [CrossRef]
25. Allaoui, A.E.; Melliani, S.; Chadli, L.S. A Mathematical Modeling and Epidemic Prediction of COVID-19.
Coronavirus Res. Repos. 2020 . [CrossRef]
26. Jia, L. Prediction and Analysis of Coronavirus Disease 2019. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/2003.05447
(accessed on 22 July 2020).
27. Lee, W.-M. Python®Machine Learning ; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2019; pp. 269–284. [CrossRef]
28. Ozturk, T.; Talo, M.; Yildirim, E.A.; Baloglu, U.B.; Yildirim, O.; Acharya, U.R. Automated detection of
COVID-19 cases using deep neural networks with X-ray images. Comput. Boil. Med. 2020 ,121, 103792.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Hemdan, E.E.-D.; Shouman, M.A.; Karar, M.E. COVIDX-Net: A Framework of Deep Learning Classifiers to
Diagnose COVID-19 in X-Ray Images. Available online: https: //arxiv .org /abs/2003.11055 (accessed on 22 July 2020).
30. Singh, D.; Kumar, V .; Vaishali; Kaur, M. Classiﬁcation of COVID-19 patients from chest CT images
using multi-objective di erential evolution–based convolutional neural networks. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol.
Infectious Dis. 2020 ,39, 1379–1389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Barstugan, M.; Ozkaya, U.; Ozturk, S. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Classification using CT Images by Machine
Learning Methods. 2020, pp. 1–10. Available online: https: //arxiv .org /abs/2003.09424 (accessed on 10 July 2020).
32. Mahmoud, N.; El-Sappagh, S.; Abdelrazek, S.; El-Bakry, H.M. A Real-time Framework for Patient Monitoring
Systems based on a Wireless Body Area Network. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2020 ,176, 12–21. [CrossRef]
33. El-Rashidy, N.; El-Sappagh, S.; AbuHmed, T.; Abdelrazek, S.M.; El-Bakry, H.M.; Mahmoud, N. Intensive
Care Unit Mortality Prediction: An Improved Patient-Speciﬁc Stacking Ensemble Model. IEEE Access 2020 ,
8, 133541–133564. [CrossRef]
34. El-Sappagh, S.; Ali, F.; El-Masri, S.; Kim, K.; Ali, A.; Kwak, K.-S. Mobile Health Technologies for Diabetes
Mellitus: Current State and Future Challenges. IEEE Access 2018 ,7, 21917–21947. [CrossRef]
35. Sruthi, K.; Kripesh, E.V .; Menon, K.A.U. A survey of remote patient monitoring systems for the measurement
of multiple physiological parameters. Health Technol. 2016 ,7, 153–159. [CrossRef]
36. Boursalie, O.; Samavi, R.; Doyle, T.E. M4CVD: Mobile Machine Learning Model for Monitoring Cardiovascular
Disease. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2015 ,63, 384–391. [CrossRef]
37. Fong, E.-M.; Chung, W.-Y. Mobile Cloud-Computing-Based Healthcare Service by Noncontact ECG
Monitoring. Sensors 2013 ,13, 16451–16473. [CrossRef]

==== Page 22 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 22 of 25
38. Pandey, S.; Voorsluys, W.; Niu, S.; Khandoker, A.H.; Buyya, R. An autonomic cloud environment for hosting
ECG data analysis services. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 2012 ,28, 147–154. [CrossRef]
39. Sahoo, P .K.; Thakkar, H.K.; Lee, M.-Y. A Cardiac Early Warning System with Multi Channel SCG and ECG
Monitoring for Mobile Health. Sensors 2017 ,17, 711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Yuce, M.R. Implementation of wireless body area networks for healthcare systems. Sens. Actuators A Phys.
2010 ,162, 116–129. [CrossRef]
41. Gelogo, Y.E.; Hwang, H.J.; Kim, H.-K. Internet of Things (IoT) Framework for u-healthcare System. Int. J.
Smart Home 2015 ,9, 323–330. [CrossRef]
42. Li, C.; Hu, X.; Zhang, L. The IoT-based heart disease monitoring system for pervasive healthcare service.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 2017 ,112, 2328–2334. [CrossRef]
43. Wang, X.; DeSalvo, N.; Zhao, X.; Feng, T.; Loveland, K.; Gnawali, O.; Shi, L. Eye Contact Reminder System for
People with Autism. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Mobile Computing, Applications
and Services, Austin, TX, USA, 6–7 November 2014.
44. Moshnyaga, V .; Koyanagi, M.; Hirayama, F.; Takahama, A.; Hashimoto, K. A medication adherence
monitoring system for people with dementia. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), Budapest, Hungary, 9–12 October 2016; pp. 194–199.
45. Silva, V .; Rodrigues, M.A.S.; Barreto, R.; De Lucena, J.V .F. UbMed: A ubiquitous system for monitoring
medication adherence. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking,
Applications and Services (Healthcom), Munich, Germany, 14–16 September 2016; pp. 16–19.
46. Hezarjaribi, N.; Fallahzadeh, R.; Ghasemzadeh, H. A Machine Learning Approach for Medication Adherence
Monitoring Using Body-Worn Sensors. In Proceedings of the 2016 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference & Exhibition (DATE), Dresden, Germany, 14–18 March 2016; pp. 842–845.
47. Singh, N.R.; Rothe, P .R.; Rathkanthiwar, A.P . Implementation of safety alert system for elderly people using
multi-sensors. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference of Electronics, Communication and
Aerospace Technology (ICECA), Coimbatore, India, 20–22 April 2017; pp. 282–286.
48. Hidalgo, J.A.; Cajiao, A.; Hern ández, C.M.; L ópez, D.; Quintero, V .M. VISIGNET: A wireless body area
network with cloud data storage for the telemonitoring of vital signs. Health Technol. 2015 ,5, 115–126.
[CrossRef]
49. Ahnn, J.H.; Potkonjak, M. mHealthMon: Toward Energy-E cient and Distributed Mobile Health Monitoring
Using Parallel O oading. J. Med. Syst. 2013 ,37, 1–5. [CrossRef]
50. Almashaqbeh, G.; Al-Hayajneh, T.; Vasilakos, A.V .; Mohd, B.J. QoS-Aware Health Monitoring System Using
Cloud-Based WBANs. J. Med. Syst. 2014 ,38. [CrossRef]
51. Advantages of Cloud Monitoring of Environmental Conditions. Available online: https: //www.sensaphone.
com/pdf/Cloud_Tech_Resources-1.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2020).
52. Verma, P .; Sood, S.K. Fog Assisted-IoT Enabled Patient Health Monitoring in Smart Homes. IEEE Internet
Things J. 2018 ,5, 1789–1796. [CrossRef]
53. Yi, S.; Li, C.; Li, Q. A Survey of Fog Computing. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on
Community-Organized Multimodal Mining: Opportunities for Novel Solutions-MMCommons’15,
Brisbane, Australia, 26–30 October 2015; pp. 37–42.
54. Kharel, J.; Reda, H.T.; Shin, S.Y. An Architecture for Smart Health Monitoring System Based on Fog
Computing. J. Commun. 2017 ,12, 228–233. [CrossRef]
55. Kraemer, F.A.; Braten, A.E.; Tamkittikhun, N.; Palma, D. Fog Computing in Healthcare—A Review and
Discussion. IEEE Access 2020 ,5, 9206–9222. [CrossRef]
56. Dastjerdi, A.V .; Buyya, R. Fog Computing: Helping the Internet of Things Realize Its Potential. Computer
2016 ,49, 112–116. [CrossRef]
57. Stojmenovic, I. Fog computing: A cloud to the ground support for smart things and machine-to-machine
networks. In Proceedings of the 2014 Australasian Telecommunication Networks and Applications
Conference (ATNAC), Melbourne, Australia, 26–28 November 2014; pp. 117–122. [CrossRef]
58. El Sappagh, S.; Elmogy, M.; Riad, A.E.M. A CBR system for diabetes mellitus diagnosis: Case-base standard
data model. Int. J. Med. Eng. Inform. 2015 ,7, 191. [CrossRef]
59. Anooj, P . Clinical decision support system: Risk level prediction of heart disease using weighted fuzzy rules.
J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. 2012 ,24, 27–40. [CrossRef]

==== Page 23 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 23 of 25
60. Velickovski, F.; Ceccaroni, L.; Roca, J.; Burgos, F.; G áldiz, J.B.; Marina, N.; Ariet, M.I. Clinical Decision Support
Systems (CDSS) for preventive management of COPD patients. J. Transl. Med. 2014 ,12, S9. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
61. El-Sappagh, S.; AbuHmed, T.; Islam, S.R.; Kwak, K.-S. Multimodal Multitask Deep Learning Model for
Alzheimer’s Disease Progression Detection Based on Time Series Data. Neurocomputing 2020 . [CrossRef]
62. Rashid, T.A.; Abdulla, S.M.; Abdulla, R.M. Decision Support System for Diabetes Mellitus through Machine
Learning Techniques. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2016 ,7, 170–178. [CrossRef]
63. World Health Organization. Clinical Mangemnt of COVID-19 ; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland,
2010; pp. 1–62.
64. Ai, T.; Yang, Z.; Hou, H.; Zhan, C.; Chen, C.; Lv, W.; Tao, Q.; Sun, Z.; Xia, L. Correlation of Chest CT and
RT-PCR Testing for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China: A Report of 1014 Cases. Radiology 2020 ,
296, E32–E40. [CrossRef]
65. Guastalegname, M.; Vallone, A. Could chloroquine /hydroxychloroquine be harmful in Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) treatment? Clin. Infect. Dis. 2020 ,71, 2019–2020. [CrossRef]
66. Yang, X.; Yu, Y.; Xu, J.; Shu, H.; Xia, J.; Liu, H.; Wu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Yu, Z.; Fang, M.; et al. Clinical course
and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: A single-centered,
retrospective, observational study. Lancet Respir. Med. 2020 ,8, 475–481. [CrossRef]
67. Available online: https: //doi.org /doi:10.1038 /d41586-020-00154-w (accessed on 22 July 2020).
68. Guan, W.-J.; Ni, Z.-Y.; Hu, Y.; Liang, W.-H.; Ou, C.-Q.; He, J.-X.; Liu, L.; Shan, H.; Lei, C.-L.; Hui, D.S.; et al.
Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020 ,382, 1708–1720.
[CrossRef]
69. Wu, Z.; McGoogan, J.M. Characteristics of and Important Lessons from the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72314 Cases from the Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2020 ,323, 1239–1242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Bikdeli, B.; Madhavan, M.V .; Jimenez, D.; Chuich, T.; Dreyfus, I.; Driggin, E.; Der Nigoghossian, C.;
Ageno, W.; Madjid, M.; Guo, Y.; et al. COVID-19 and Thrombotic or Thromboembolic Disease: Implications
for Prevention, Antithrombotic Therapy, and Follow-Up. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2020 ,75, 2950–2973. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
71. Lippi, G.; Favaloro, E.J. D-dimer is Associated with Severity of Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Pooled Analysis.
Thromb. Haemost. 2020 ,120, 876–878. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Lauer, S.A.; Grantz, K.H.; Bi, Q.; Jones, F.K.; Zheng, Q.; Meredith, H.R.; Lessler, J. The Incubation Period of
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) From Publicly Reported Conﬁrmed Cases: Estimation and Application.
Ann. Internal Med. 2020 ,172, 577–582. [CrossRef]
73. Minaee, S.; Kaﬁeh, R.; Sonka, M.; Yazdani, S.; Souﬁ, G.J. Deep-COVID: Predicting COVID-19 from chest
X-ray images using deep transfer learning. Med. Image Anal. 2020 ,65, 101794. [CrossRef]
74. Li, R.; Pei, S.; Chen, B.; Song, Y.; Zhang, T.; Yang, W.; Shaman, J. Substantial undocumented infection
facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science 2020 ,368, 489–493. [CrossRef]
75. NS. Ns2 O cal Web Site. Available online: https: //ns2tutor.weebly.com /wirelesssimulation.html (accessed on
17 April 2020).
76. Openfog Reference Architecture for Fog Computing. Available online: https: //www.openfogconsortium.org /
(accessed on 17 April 2020).
77. COVID-19 Chest X-ray. Available online: https: //github.com /ieee8023 /covid-chestxray-dataset (accessed on
17 July 2020).
78. Altun, A.; Erdogan, O. A Chest X-Ray Image. Cardiol. Rev. 2003 ,11, 301–302. [CrossRef]
79. Mao, Q.; Jay, M.; Ho man, J.; Calvert, J.; Barton, C.; Shimabukuro, D.; Shieh, L.; Chettipally, U.; Fletcher, G.;
Kerem, Y.; et al. Multicentre validation of a sepsis prediction algorithm using only vital sign data in the
emergency department, general ward and ICU. BMJ Open 2018 ,8, e017833. [CrossRef]
80. Khalifa, N.E.M.; Taha, M.H.N.; Hassanien, A.E.; Elghamrawy , S. Detection of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Associated
Pneumonia based on Generative Adversarial Networks and a Fine-Tuned Deep Transfer Learning Model using
Chest X-ray Dataset. Available online: https: //arxiv .org /abs/2004.01184 (accessed on 25 June 2020).
81. Tao, S. Deep Neural Network Ensembles. Bioinf. Res. Appl. 2019 ,11943 LNCS , 1–12. [CrossRef]
82. He, K. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016.

==== Page 24 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 24 of 25
83. Zeng, G.; He, Y.; Yu, Z.; Yang, X.; Yang, R.; Zhang, L. Preparation of novel high copper ions removal membranes
by embedding organosilane-functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotube. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2015 ,
91, 2322–2330. [CrossRef]
84. Wang, L.; Lin, Z.Q.; Wong, A. COVID-Net: A Tailored Deep Convolutional Neural Network Design for
Detection of COVID-19 Cases from Chest X-Ray Images. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/2003.09871
(accessed on 20 July 2020).
85. Kumar, P .; Kumari, S. Detection of coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) based on Deep Features. Int. J. Math.
Eng. Manag. Sci. 2020 . [CrossRef]
86. Tong, Z.-D.; Tang, A.; Li, K.-F.; Li, P .; Wang, H.-L.; Yi, J.-P .; Zhang, Y.-L.; Yan, J.-B. Potential Presymptomatic
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2, Zhejiang Province, China, 2020. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2020 ,26, 1052–1054.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Wang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Liu, L.; Wang, X.; Luo, N.; Ling, L. Clinical Outcomes in 55 Patients with Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Who Were Asymptomatic at Hospital Admission in Shenzhen, China.
J. Infect. Dis. 2020 ,221, 1770–1774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Chan, J.F.-W.; Yuan, S.; Kok, K.-H.; To, K.K.-W.; Chu, H.; Yang, J.; Xing, F.; Liu, J.; Yip, C.C.-Y.; Poon, R.W.-S.; et al.
A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person
transmission: A study of a family cluster. Lancet 2020 ,395, 514–523. [CrossRef]
89. Anandh, U. SARS CoV-2 infection in children. J. Renal Nutr. Metab. 2020 ,6, 12. [CrossRef]
90. Zhang, Y.-F.; Gou, L.; Zhou, T.-S.; Lin, D.-N.; Zheng, J.; Li, Y.; Li, J.-S. An ontology-based approach to patient
follow-up assessment for continuous and personalized chronic disease management. J. Biomed. Inform. 2017 ,
72, 45–59. [CrossRef]
91. Waqialla, M.; Alshammari, R.; Razzak, M.I.; Mohammad, W. An ontology for remote monitoring of
cardiac implantable electronic devices. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Computer,
Communications, and Control Technology (I4CT), Sarawak, Malaysia, 21–23 April 2015; pp. 520–523.
92. Yang, Z.; Zhou, Q.; Lei, L.; Zheng, K.; Xiang, W. An IoT-cloud Based Wearable ECG Monitoring System for
Smart Healthcare. J. Med. Syst. 2016 ,40. [CrossRef]
93. Yang, G.; Jiang, M.; Ouyang, W.; Ji, G.; Xie, H.; Rahmani, A.M.; Liljeberg, P .; Tenhunen, H. IoT-Based Remote
Pain Monitoring System: From Device to Cloud Platform. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2018 ,22, 1711–1719.
[CrossRef]
94. Lyle, A. Smart Home Project. 2012. Available online: https: //www.jamk.ﬁ /globalassets /koulutus--education /
tekniikan-ala /smart-home /report-team3.pdf (accessed on 2 September 2020).
95. Rotariu, C.; Manta, V . Wireless system for remote monitoring of oxygen saturation and heart rate.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Federated Conference Computer Science and Information System FedCSIS
2012, Wrocław, Poland, 9–12 September 2012; pp. 193–196.
96. Gómez, J.; Oviedo, B.; Zhuma, E. Patient Monitoring System Based on Internet of Things. Procedia Comput. Sci.
2016 ,83, 90–97. [CrossRef]
97. Balasubramanian, V .; Stranieri, A. A scalable cloud Platform for Active healthcare monitoring applications.
In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Conference on e-Learning, e-Management and e-Services (IC3e), Hawthorn,
Australia, 10–12 December 2014; pp. 93–98.
98. Melillo, P .; Orrico, A.; Scala, P .; Crispino, F.; Pecchia, L. Cloud-Based Smart Health Monitoring System
for Automatic Cardiovascular and Fall Risk Assessment in Hypertensive Patients. J. Med. Syst. 2015 ,39.
[CrossRef]
99. Chen, B.; Varkey, J.P .; Pompili, D.; Li, J.K.-J.; Marsic, I. Patient vital signs monitoring using Wireless Body Area
Networks. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 36th Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC),
New York, NY, USA, 26–28 March 2010; pp. 1–2.
100. Forkan, A.R.M.; Khalil, I. A clinical decision-making mechanism for context-aware and patient-speciﬁc
remote monitoring systems using the correlations of multiple vital signs. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed.
2017 ,139, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Caballero-Ruiz, E.; S áez, G.G.; Rigla, M.; Villaplana, M.; Pons, B.; Hernando, M.E. A web-based clinical
decision support system for gestational diabetes: Automatic diet prescription and detection of insulin needs.
Int. J. Med. Inform. 2017 ,102, 35–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Nazari, S.; Fallah, M.; Kazemipoor, H.; Salehipour, A. A fuzzy inference-fuzzy analytic hierarchy process-based
clinical decision support system for diagnosis of heart diseases. Expert Syst. Appl. 2018 ,95, 261–271. [CrossRef]

==== Page 25 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 1439 25 of 25
103. El-Sappagh, S.; Elmogy, M. A Decision Support System for Diabetes Mellitus Management. Diabetes Case Rep.
2016 ,1, 1–13. [CrossRef]
104. Ivascu, T.; Manate, B.; Negru, V . A Multi-agent Architecture for Ontology-Based Diagnosis of Mental
Disorders. In Proceedings of the 2015 17th International Symposium on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms
for Scientiﬁc Computing (SYNASC), Timisoara, Romania, 21–24 September 2015; pp. 423–430.
105. Zhanwei, D.; Yongjian, Y . Semi-automatic remote medicine monitoring system of mobile users. China Commun.
2015 ,12, 1–9. [CrossRef]
106. Sesen, M. Evaluating OWL 2 Reasoners in the Context of Clinical Decision Support in Lung Cancer Treatment
Selection. OWL Reason 2013 . Available online: http: //ceur-ws.org /V ol-1015 /paper_10.pdf (accessed on 22 July 2020).
107. Help4Mood Project. Available online: http: //www.help4mood.info /site/default.aspx (accessed on 22 July 2018).
108. Suh, M.-K.; Chen, C.-A.; Woodbridge, J.; Tu, M.; Kim, J.I.; Nahapetian, A.; Evangelista, L.S.; Sarrafzadeh, M.
A Remote Patient Monitoring System for Congestive Heart Failure. J. Med. Syst. 2011 ,35, 1165–1179.
[CrossRef]
109. (HELP) Home-Based Empowered Living for Parkinsons Diseas Patients Project. Available online: http:
//www.aal-europe.eu /projects /help/(accessed on 19 July 2018).
110. HEALTH@HOME Project. Available online: http: //www.aal-europe.eu /projects /healthhome /(accessed on
22 July 2018).
111. Hassan, M.K.; El Desouky, A.I.; Elghamrawy, S.M.; Sarhan, A. Intelligent hybrid remote patient-monitoring
model with cloud-based framework for knowledge discovery. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2018 ,70, 1034–1048.
[CrossRef]
112. Zulj, S.; Seketa, G.; Dzaja, D.; Sklebar, F.; Drobnjak, S.; Celic, L.; Magjarevic, R. Supporting Diabetic Patients
with a Remote Patient Monitoring Systems. World Congr. Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng. 2017 ,60, 577–580.
113. Dhulipala, V .R.S.; Kanagachidambaresan, G.R. Cardiac Care Assistance using Self Conﬁgured Sensor
Network—A Remote Patient Monitoring System. J. Inst. Eng. Ser. B 2014 ,95, 101–106. [CrossRef]
114. Rani, N.S.; Vimala, K.; Kalaivani, V . A Remote Healthcare Monitoring System for Faster Identification of Cardiac
Abnormalities from Compressed ECG Using Advanced Data Mining Approach. Lect. Notes Electr. Eng. 2013 ,
222, 227–236.
115. Zanjal, S.V .; Talmale, G.R. Medicine Reminder and Monitoring System for Secure Health Using IOT.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016 ,78, 471–476. [CrossRef]
116. Vivekanandan, S.; Devanand, M. Remote monitoring for diabetes disorder: Pilot study using InDiaTel
prototype. Eur. Res. Telemed. 2015 ,4, 63–69. [CrossRef]
117. Delrobaei, M.; Memar, S.; Pieterman, M.; Stratton, T.W.; McIsaac, K.; Jog, M. Towards remote monitoring
of Parkinson’s disease tremor using wearable motion capture systems. J. Neurol. Sci. 2018 ,384, 38–45.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Colantonio, S.; de Pietro, G.; Esposito, M.; Mach ì, A.; Martinelli, M.; Salvetti, O. Decision Support for the
Remote Management of Chronic Patients. In MobiHealth 2011: Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare ;
Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 38–45.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

