==== Page 1 ====
EnsembleDAgger: A Bayesian Approach
to Safe Imitation Learning
Kunal Menda,1Katherine Driggs-Campbell,2and Mykel J. Kochenderfer1
Abstract — Although imitation learning is often used in
robotics, the approach frequently suffers from data mismatch
and compounding errors. DAgger is an iterative algorithm that
addresses these issues by aggregating training data from both
the expert and novice policies, but does not consider the impact
of safety. We present a probabilistic extension to DAgger, which
attempts to quantify the conﬁdence of the novice policy as a
proxy for safety. Our method, EnsembleDAgger, approximates
a Gaussian Process using an ensemble of neural networks.
Using the variance as a measure of conﬁdence, we compute
a decision rule that captures how much we doubt the novice,
thus determining when it is safe to allow the novice to act. With
this approach, we aim to maximize the novice’s share of actions,
while constraining the probability of failure. We demonstrate
improved safety and learning performance compared to other
DAgger variants and classic imitation learning on an inverted
pendulum and in the MuJoCo HalfCheetah environment.
I. I NTRODUCTION
To be truly intelligent, robotic systems must have the
ability to learn by exploring their environment and state space
in a safe way [1]. One method to guide exploration is to
learn from expert demonstrations [2], [3], [4]. In contrast
to reinforcement learning, where an explicit reward func-
tion must be deﬁned, imitation learning guides exploration
through expert supervision, allowing a robot to effectively
learn from direct experience [5]. However, such supervised
approaches are often suboptimal or fail when the policy that
is being trained (referred to as the novice policy) encounters
situations that are not adequately represented in the dataset
provided by the expert [6], [7]. While failures may be
insigniﬁcant in simulation, safe learning is important when
acting in the real world [1].
There are several methods for guided policy search in
imitation learning settings [8]. One example is DAgger,
which improves the training dataset by aggregating new
data from both the expert and novice policies [7]. DAgger
has many desirable properties, including online functionality
and theoretical guarantees. This approach, however, does not
guarantee safety. Recent work extended DAgger to address
some inherent drawbacks [9], [10]. In particular, SafeDAgger
augments DAgger with a decision rule policy to provide safe
exploration while minimizing queries to the expert [11].
The shared goal of these methods is to efﬁciently train
the novice to control the system while minimizing expert
intervention. These algorithms assume that by allowing the
novice to act, the system will likely deviate from the expert
trajectory set and sample a new state. There is a chance,
1Kunal Menda and Mykel J. Kochenderfer are at Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA fkmenda,mykelg@stanford.edu
2Katherine Driggs-Campbell is at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, IL 61820, USA krdc@illinois.eduhowever, that the state visited is unsafe, or is a failure state.
If the expert acts instead, we assume that the system will
move along a safe trajectory, which is likely through states
similar to those previously observed. The goal of this paper
is to present an algorithm that maximizes the novice’s share
of actions, while constraining the probability of failure.
Ideally, the proximity to a failure state (measured as an l2-
distance or likelihood of encountering the state under some
operating condition) is known, and a safety envelope can be
computed to guarantee safety [12]. In the case of model-free
learning, such guarantees are much more difﬁcult to make. If
we consider the novice action to be a perturbed form of the
expert action, then we hypothesize that for many systems,
the magnitude of permissible perturbation to expert actions
is related to the distance from unsafe regions. Further, in a
model-free case where expert demonstrations are available,
we hypothesize that there is an inverse relationship between
a state’s similarity to those in expert trajectories and allowed
perturbations. We visualize this intuition in Figure 1. In the
left panel, we see that the maximum permissible deviation
from an expert action should be low as the system approaches
a wall, which is considered a dangerous state. In such
settings, experts will likely prefer trajectories that maintain
some margin of distance from unsafe states. Assuming this
to be the case, it follows that in unfamiliar states, the system
is likely at higher risk of entering failure states, and thus it
is safer to allow the expert to act. While in familiar regions,
it is permissible for the novice to act with large deviation
from expert action.
This paper extends DAgger to a probabilistic domain, and
aims to minimize expert intevention while constraining the
likelihood of failure. While SafeDAgger uses the discrepancy
between the expert and the novice to determine safety, we
measure doubt by quantifying the uncertainty or conﬁdence
of the novice policy. To quantify doubt, we use an ensemble
of neural networks to estimate the variance of the novice
action in a particular state, which we show can effectively
approximate Gaussian Processes (GPs), even in complex,
high-dimensional spaces [13].
We demonstrate how our method out-performs existing
DAgger variants in an imitation learning setting. This paper
makes two key contributions: (1) we present EnsembleDAg-
ger, a Bayesian extension to DAgger, which introduces a
probabilistic notion of safety to minimize expert interven-
tion while constraining the probability of failure; and (2)
we demonstrate the utility of this approach with improved
performance and safety in an imitation learning case study
on an inverted pendulum and demonstrate the scalability of
the approach on the MuJoCo HalfCheetah domain.
1arXiv:1807.08364v3  [cs.LG]  19 Jul 2019

==== Page 2 ====
Max Allowed Perturbation
Similarity to Demonstration Distance to a Failure State
Small acceptable perturbation
 Large acceptable perturbation
Fig. 1: Visualization of the tradeoffs between familiarity and risk. (left) Example scenarios of where perturbations are (not) permissible
due to low (high) risk. Red trajectories illustrate expert corrections and the blue trajectory illustrate novice actions. (right) Plots visualizing
the ideal tradeoff between distance to failure state and allowed deviations and the approximate of this tradeoff using similarity to expert
demonstrations and deviations.
II. B ACKGROUND
This section presents a brief technical overview of DAgger,
SafeDAgger, and different methods for approximating GPs
using neural networks.
A. DAgger and SafeDAgger
The DAgger framework extends traditional supervised
learning approaches by simultaneously running both an ex-
pert policy that we wish to clone and a novice policy we
wish to train [14]. By aggregating new data from the expert,
the underlying model and reward structure are uncovered.
Using supervised learning, we train an initial novice policy
nov;0on some initial training set D0generated by the
expert policy exp. With this initialization, DAgger itera-
tively collects additional training examples from a mixture
of the expert and novice policy. During a given episode,
the combined expert and novice system interacts with the
environment under the supervision of a decision rule. The
decision rule, referred to as DR ()in Algorithm 1, decides at
every time-step twhether to use the action from the novice
or expert to interact with the environment (Figure 2). The
observations otreceived during each epoch and the expert’s
choice of corresponding actions make up a new dataset called
Di. The new dataset of training examples is combined with
the previous sets:D D[D i, and the novice policy is then
re-trained onD, as presented in Algorithm 1.
By allowing the novice to act, the combined system
explores parts of the state space further from the nominal
trajectories of the expert. In querying the expert in these
parts of the state space, the novice is able to learn a more
robust policy. However, allowing the novice to always act
risks the possibility of encountering an unsafe state, which
can be costly in real-world experiments. The VanillaDAgger
algorithm and SafeDAgger balance this trade-off by their
choice of decision rules.
Under VanillaDAgger (Algorithm 2), the expert’s action
is chosen with probability i2[0;1], whereidenotes the
DAgger epoch. If i=i 1for some2(0;1), then the
novice takes increasingly more actions each epoch. As the
novice is given more training labels from previous epochs, it
is allowed greater autonomy in exploring the state space. The
VanillaDAgger decision-rule does not consider any similarity
measure between the novice and expert actions. Hence, evenexp(ot)
nov(ot)Decision Rule
Environmentaexp;t
anov;tat
ot
Fig. 2: Flowchart for DAgger variants, where the decision rule
differs between approaches.
Algorithm 1 DAGGER
1:procedure DAGGER (DR())
2: InitializeD ;
3: Initializenov;i
4: forepochi= 1 :K
5: SampleT-step trajectories using DR
6: GetDi=fot;exp(ot)jt21 :Tg
7: Aggregate datasets: D D[D i
8: Trainnov;i+1onD
if the novice suggests a highly unsafe action, VanillaDAgger
allows the novice to act with probability (1 i).
The “optimal” decision-rule approximated by SafeDAgger,
presented in Algorithm 3 and referred to as SafeDAgger*,
computes the discrepancy between the expert and novice
actions and allows the novice to act if the distance between
the actions is less than some chosen threshold [11].1
Though this decision rule is claimed to be optimal, we argue
that it has a shortcoming.
An ideal decision rule would allow the novice to act
if there is a sufﬁciently low probability that the system
can transition to an unsafe state. If the combined system
is currently near an unsafe state, the tolerable perturbation
from the expert’s choice of action is smaller than when the
system is far from unsafe states. Hence, in practice, the
1To reduce the number of expert queries, SafeDAgger approximates the
SafeDAgger* decision rule using a deep policy that determines whether
or not the novice policy is likely to deviate from the reference policy.
Unlike SafeDAgger, we are not concerned with minimizing expert queries
during a given episode. Hence, we compare to the SafeDAgger* decision
rule directly, as opposed to the approximation.
2

==== Page 3 ====
Algorithm 2 VANILLA DAGGER Decision Rule
1:procedure DR(ot;i; 0;)
2:anov;t nov(ot)
3:aexp;t exp(ot)
4:i i0
5:zUniform (0;1)
6: ifzi
7: returnaexp;t
8: else
9: returnanov;t
Algorithm 3 SAFEDAGGER * Decision Rule
1:procedure DR(ot;)
2:anov;t nov(ot)
3:aexp;t exp(ot)
4: ifkanov;t aexp;tk2
5: returnanov;t
6: else
7: returnaexp;t
single threshold employed in SafeDAgger* is either too
conservative when the system is far from unsafe states or too
relaxed when near them. To approximate the ideal decision
rule in a model-free manner, we propose not just considering
the distance between the novice’s and expert’s actions, but
also the uncertainty in the novice policy at a given state.
To estimate the uncertainty of the novice policy, we use
Bayesian deep learning.
There are two works which build on the algorithm pre-
sented in this work. Kelly et al. [15] perform experiments
on an autonomous vehicle and ﬁnd a safe method to query
humans for demonstrations, and calibrating the threshold
parameters of the algorithm presented in our work. Cronrath
et al. [16] propose an extension of our ideas that attempt
to combine the improved safety of a Bayesian extension to
DAgger with the query efﬁciency of SafeDAgger.
B. Bayesian Approximation Methods
Recent research has focused on approximating GPs with
neural networks [17]. While GPs alone have shown great
success in modeling uncertainty and approximating safety
[18], traditional GP approaches are computationally expen-
sive for high-dimensional feature spaces and large datasets
[13]. Advances in deep learning have shown great success in
handling these complexities. Two methods for approximat-
ing GPs with deep neural networks are ensemble methods
[19] and Monte-Carlo dropout [20]. Refer to Appendix A
for a summary of advantages and disadvantages of these
approaches and an empirical evaluation of these methods.
In this work, we chose to use the ensemble method, which
is a technique for training a collection of neural networks to
execute the same task and then combining the output into a
single prediction. This approach has shown to signiﬁcantly
improve performance in practice [21]. There is a work thatemployed an ensemble of neural networks to approximate
GPs and demonstrated that this is a more straightforward
approach to estimate predictive uncertainty [19]. Typically,
neural networks predict point estimates of the output that
are optimized to minimize the mean squared error on the
training set. The authors claim that this approach does
not capture irreducible, or aleatoric uncertainty, but only
epistemic uncertainty. They propose using a proper scoring
rule, like negative log-likelihood, as a loss function to train
an ensemble in which each network predicts a mean and
a variance of a Gaussian distribution over the output. They
postulate that such loss functions provide a better measure
of the quality of predictive uncertainty and thus reward
better calibrated predictions. Network predictions are then
combined as a mixture of Gaussians.
III. E NSEMBLE DAGGER
We present the EnsembleDAgger decision rule, in which
thediscrepancy between the expert’s and the novice’s mean
action, as well as the novice’s doubt , which is variance of
the novice’s action, are used to decide whether to choose the
novice action. According to the EnsembleDAgger decision
rule, the novice must satisfy two conditions in order to act.
The ﬁrst is that the discrepancy between the novice and
expert’s action, i.e. kanov;t aexp;tk2, must be less than some
threshold. This is the SafeDAgger* decision rule, but will
henceforth be referred to as the discrepancy rule . Assuming
the novice policy outputs a variance on its predicted action
2
anov;t, as an ensemble of neural networks would, then the
second condition is that 2
anov;tis less than some threshold
. We refer this condition as the doubt rule . As shown
in Figure 3, in order for the novice to act according to
the EnsembleDAgger decision rule, it must satisfy both the
discrepncy rule and the double rule. The algorithm, described
in Algorithm 4, is parameterized by the values and.
We restate the assumptions made to explain why the this
decision rule is able to better guarantee the system’s safety:
1) The expert prefers trajectories that avoid failure states,
and rarely visits near failure states, implying that states
dissimilar to those in expert trajectories (or states
unfamiliar to the novice) are likely to be in closer
proximity to failure states.
2) Following from (1), and by capturing epistemic uncer-
tainty, or lack of familiarity with states in the training
dataset, the novice’s doubt provides a model-free proxy
for proximity to failure states.
3) In order to constrain the probability of encountering a
failure state, the discrepancy between the action taken
and the expert’s action is less than some bound.
4) The ideal bounds should be state-dependent, such that
the bound is tighter in close proximity to failure states.
5) Following from (2, 4), the bound on discrepancy
should decrease as the novice’s doubt increases.
Also, it is assumed that the expert policy is primarily uni-
modal, as is commonly assumed in most imitation learning
settings. Further, using a neural network based dissimilarity
measure is useful for imitation learning as neural networks
3

==== Page 4 ====
Novice DoubtNovice Discrepancy Novice Acts

Fig. 3: The EnsembleDAgger decision rule is parametrized by
doubt () and discrepancy ( ) bounds, and is a low-order, model-
free approximation to the ‘ideal’ decision rule, shown in green.
Algorithm 4 EnsembleDAgger Decision Rule
1:procedure DR(ot;; )
2: anov;t;2
anov;t nov(ot)
3:aexp;t exp(ot)
4: ^ kanov;t aexp;tk2
5: ^ 2
anov;t
6: if^and^
7: return anov;t
8: else
9: returnaexp;t
scale more gracefully to high-dimensional input spaces and
large datasets than most non-parametric measures.
Given that we have a measure of doubt via the variance on
novice actions, we ideally would like to specify the bound on
discrepancy as a monotonically increasing function of doubt.
To meet this end, we have experimented with the idea of
making the discrepancy bound proportional to the inverse
of doubt. However, the parameters specifying an arbitrary
function mapping doubt to a discrepancy bound must be
considered hyperparameters to the algorithm and tuned by
the practitioner. We opt for the low-order approximation to
the ideal functional mapping, shown in Figure 3, because the
two hyperparameters, and, are easy to interpret.
By appropriately choosing the hyper-parameters and,
we satisfy the dual objectives of allowing the novice to act
only if it is sufﬁciently conﬁdent in its action and close
to the expert. As !1 , the decision rule converges to
that of SafeDAgger*. As !1 , the decision rule ignores
discrepancy, and allows the novice to act if it is conﬁdent
without comparison to what the expert action is. However,
since the novice is only conﬁdent in states similar to those
inD, it is likely that the novice having low doubt causes
its action to also have low discrepancy, implying that the
algorithm is less sensitive to an arbitrary increase in than
to an arbitrary increase in . This statement is qualiﬁed in
the next section by showing that using the doubt rule alone
(by setting=1) leads to better performance than using
the discrepancy rule alone (by setting =1). Though not
the focus of this work, it is also worth noting that the expert
u
Fig. 4: The inverted pendulum environment has a state space of
[;_]and an action space of the torque u.
 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024
[rad]_[rad/s]Expert converages
Initial conditions
Fig. 5: This ﬁgure shows states in the expert’s basin of attraction,
i.e. states from which the expert converges to the origin. The ﬁgure
also shows the set from which initial conditions of DAgger epochs
are uniformly drawn in this experiment.
only needs to be queried if the doubt rule is satisﬁed, thereby
leading to query efﬁciency.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experimental validation for the
following claims we have made:
Using the discrepancy rule alone with ﬁxed is waste-
fully conservative in some regions of the state space,
while not conservative enough in others.
The variance of the novice policy’s output is a good
measure of dissimilarity between the query state and
states in the training dataset.
Using the doubt rule alone with ﬁxed trains a better
performing novice policy for the same compromise to
the combined (expert and novice) system’s safety.
Combining the two decision rules in the EnsembleDAg-
ger framework improves the trained novice policy per-
formance while making the combined system strictly
safer.
To justify the ﬁrst two of the above claims, we make use of
a simple inverted pendulum domain. Such a simple domain
is chosen because it allows us to visualize the portion of
the state-space in which a given decision rule allows a given
novice policy to act. We justify the latter two claims on the
MuJoCo HalfCheetah OpenAI Gym environment.
A. Inverted Pendulum domain
Following the experimental protocol presented by
Berkenkamp et al., we concretely visualize behavior by
considering a deterministic but non-linear control problem
of stabilizing an inverted pendulum, which has a two-
dimensional state space of [;_]and a one-dimensional
action space of u, as shown in Figure 4 [22]. The control law
4

==== Page 5 ====
was derived using by feedback linearization [23]. Figure 5
shows the controller’s basin of attraction and highlights the
states from which initial conditions are sampled uniformly
during the successive epochs of DAgger. The dynamics and
control law are provided in Appendix B.
The neural network model representing the novice policy
is an ensemble of ten multi-layer perceptrons, each with
four hidden layers of size [64;64;32;32]respectively. At
each DAgger epoch, the ten networks are each trained
for 200 training epochs with a learning rate of 10 3,l2-
weight regularization of 10 5, and a mini-batch size of 16.
The maximum length of any trajectory is 100. No dropout
or batch normalization is used. Since the data labeled by
the deterministic expert is noise-free, the networks do not
individually predict variance and are trained with MSE loss.
In order to compare the two decision rules, we are
interested in analyzing the regions of the state space in
which they allow the novice to act. We deﬁne the permitted
setfor some decision rule, given some novice and expert
policies, to be the set of states in which the decision rule
chooses the novice action. In Figure 6, states in the permitted
set are shown as black circles. Similarly, we deﬁne the
permitted set volume to be the fraction of states grid-sampled
in2[ ;];_2[ 5;5]that are in the permitted set of a
given decision rule, given some novice and expert policies.
Additionally, we deﬁne the novice basin of attraction to be
the set of statesX0from which, if the novice is initialized in
X0and allowed to act alone (without the help of the expert),
the novice converges to the origin.
In order to make an apples-to-apples comparison between
the two decision rules, we provide a budget , and analyze how
the two decisions utilize this budget. The budget chosen is
a ﬁxed volume for the permitted set. At each epoch, since
the novice has learned from more data, we linearly grow
the permitted set volume budget. Prior to each episode, we
solve for the value of andthat will make the doubt
and discrepancy rules respectively yield permitted sets with
the desired volume. These values are found using bisection
search.
The goal of this experiment is to show that, for some ﬁxed
volume permitted set, the doubt rule allocates that volume in
the neighborhood of states represented in D, justifying the
claim that the novice’s output variance is a good measure
of dissimilarity between the query state and familiar states.
Additionally, we show that the discrepancy rule haphazardly
allocates volume to regions of the state space in which
the novice and expert agree by chance, indicating that it is
wastefully conservative in some regions of the state space,
while not conservative enough in others.
In an additional experiment on this domain that can be
found in the Appendix C, we compare the decision rules
in a manner meaningful to a practitioner, by ﬁxing the
hyperparameters a priori and keeping them ﬁxed over all
epochs. For both experiments on this domain, we control the
random seed specifying the initial condition for each epoch
such that it varies across epoch but is the same regardless
of decision rule. The trajectory followed from that initial
condition will, of course, depend on the decision rule. Inall experiments, as in all variants of DAgger, we initialize
Dwith a zeroth epoch where only the expert is queried for
the action, and the decision rule is used from the ﬁrst epoch
onward [14].
Figure 6 shows the evolution of the permitted set under the
doubt rule and the discrepancy rule for the ﬁrst three epochs
of an experiment. Under the doubt rule, the permitted set is
concentrated in the neighborhood of the labeled states in D.
This is because the variance of the function ﬁtting Dgrows
as we move away from labeled states, so the permitted set
is constrained to be within some neighborhood of labeled
states under the doubt rule. On the other hand, under the
discrepancy rule, the permitted set is more haphazardly
distributed over the state space with a smaller portion of the
allotted volume being in the neighborhood of labeled states.
We observe this because there exist arbitrary regions of the
state space in which the function ﬁtting the Dhappens to
intersect the true control law purely by chance, leading to
low discrepancy in these, often dangerous, regions.
We can see in Figure 6 that the trajectories resulting under
the doubt rule carry the system to the edge of a familiar
region of the state space, after which the expert is handed
control to navigate unfamiliar regions. This behavior leads
to a novice basin of attraction that is much larger than under
the discrepancy rule, while no trajectories enter dangerous
territory. However, under the discrepancy rule, we see that
the novice is rarely allowed to carry the system away from
an expert trajectory, thereby aggregating a dataset that is not
much more likely to be informative than behavior cloning.
This observation qualitatively suggests that the doubt rule can
train a better performing novice policy for the same level of
compromise to the combined (expert and novice) system’s
safety. This claim will be justiﬁed in the next experiment.
B. MuJoCo HalfCheetah domain
As stated earlier, in this experiment, we aim to demonstrate
the superiority of the doubt rule over the discrepancy rule
in a more complex domain with a large state and action
space. Further, we show the effect of combining instances of
the doubt and discrepancy rule under the EnsembleDAgger
decision rule. We ﬁnd that the resulting decision rule is
strictly more conservative, but in some cases can lead to im-
provement over the component decision rules. Decision rules
are compared across various settings of the hyperparameters
and, which are selected a priori and held constant over
a given experiment, unlike in the previous experiment.
The MuJoCo HalfCheetah-v1 domain (shown in Figure 7)
is an OpenAI Gym environment with observations in R18and
actions in R6[24]. We train an expert policy on this domain
using the TRPO algorithm from the rllab codebase [25]. The
goal is to learn a stable gait, with a reward for the distance
from the origin reached. The purpose of this experiment is to
compare the doubt rule, discrepancy rule, and a combination
of the rules, in their ability to safely learn a policy that
matches the expert score.
In this experiment, we use an ensemble of ﬁve neural net-
works, each with ﬁve hidden layers with 16-neuron widths,
as the policy being trained. We use a smaller ensemble than
5

==== Page 6 ====
 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024Doubt RuleEpoch 1
 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024_[rad/s]Epoch 2
 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024_[rad/s]Epoch 3
 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024
[rad]Discrepancy Rule
Latest trajectory
Trajectories inD 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024
[rad]_[rad/s]
State in permitted set
Expert converges alone 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 2024
[rad]_[rad/s]
Novice, expert converge alone
Novice converges alone
Fig. 6: Three epochs of DAgger are compared when using the doubt rule (top) and discrepancy rule (bottom). The permitted set, i.e.
states at which the novice is allowed to act, denoted by black circles, of the doubt rule is concentrated in the neighborhood of states
represented in D, where as the permitted set of the discrepancy rule is distributed more haphazardly across the state space. States in which
the novice alone is able to converge to the origin are indicated in pink.
Fig. 7: The MuJoCo HalfCheetah domain.
in the last experiment to reduce simulation time. In general,
the computational complexity of querying and training the
novice policy is linear in the ensemble size, though larger
ensembles give more accurate estimates of novice doubt.
The system is trained for seven epochs. Each epoch
samples one additional trajectory of interaction with the
environment, followed by re-training the novice policy on
the aggregated dataset. Each trajectory is an episode with a
maximum length of 100 time-steps. When training the policy
on the aggregated dataset, we use a learning rate of 10 3,
a batch size of 32, and train for 2000 optimization epochs.
Since the expert policy is stochastic, it is appropriate for
the neural networks to predict the parameters of a Gaussian
distribution as opposed to a point estimate of the actions.However, the networks used in this experiment simply predict
point estimates since they are easier to train, and epistemic
uncertainty is still captured. When training, the score over a
trajectory of the lone novice and the system combined under
the experiment’s decision rule are queried at each epoch.
Queries average the score of the policy being tested over 20
trajectories.
We deﬁne the performance of an instance of a given
decision rule by the performance of the lone novice and the
performance of the combined system, which are deﬁned as
follows. The performance of the lone novice is the average
score of the novice, trained under a given decision rule
instance, summed over the seven epochs of training. A better
performing lone novice implies that the decision rule instance
is able to quickly bring the novice to expert-level scores.
Similarly, the performance of the combined system is the
average score of the expert and novice, combined under a
given decision rule instance, summed over the seven epochs
that train the novice.
Though we have no strict notion of safety in this domain,
a better performing combined system implies that trajec-
tories perturbed under the decision rule instance are still
high-scoring, are thus compromising states that one may
consider to be failure states are being better avoided. We
compare decision rules based on their ability to maximize the
novice performance while compromising the performance of
the combined system as little as possible. We sample the
performance of each instance of a decision rule 100 times,
6

==== Page 7 ====
0:75 0:8 0:85 0:9 0:95 10:450:50:55
Performance (Combined)Performance (Novice) Doubt Rule
Discrepancy Rule
Both Rules
Fig. 8: Performance of various instances of the doubt rule, dis-
crepancy rule, and combined EnsembleDAgger decision rules on
the HalfCheetah domain. Consistent markers indicate the instances
of the doubt and discrepancy ruled in an instance of the Ensem-
bleDAgger decision rule.
presenting their mean and standard errors.
We test the doubt rule and the discrepancy rule using
values of:
= [0:02;0:05;0:1;0:2;0:5]
= [0:2;0:5;1:0;2:0;5:0];
and the full EnsembleDAgger decision rule at (;) =
[(0:2;0:02);(0:5;0:05);(1:0;0:1);(2:0;0:2);(5:0;0:5)]:
Though we sample (;)only on a line in the positive
quadrant of R2, this ratio between andis chosen so
the two rules are approximately equally responsible for
preventing the novice action in the ﬁrst training epoch.
The performance of the various decision rules for the
parameters stated are shown in Figure 8 in the form of
Pareto frontiers (since varying the hyperparameter trades-
off between performance of the combined system and of the
lone novice). We see that the doubt rule Pareto dominates the
discrepancy rule, as the rule’s frontier achieves better novice
performance for the same compromise on the combined
system’s performance.
The fact that the doubt rule Pareto dominates the dis-
crepancy rule in terms of performance is consistent with
the trends observed in the inverted pendulum experiment–the
doubt rule constrains the novice to act only when the state
is familiar. Consequently, the perturbation from an expert
action caused by choosing the novice’s action is unlikely
to compromise the score of the overall trajectory, though it
will likely carry the system into marginally more unfamiliar
territory, thereby allowing the novice to learn a more robust
policy. The doubt rule, however, allows an arbitrarily large
perturbation in sufﬁciently familiar states, and thereby can
still lead to unsafe states. There exist settings of and
that can make the EnsembleDAgger decision rule safe
in all states, bounding the maximum perturbation from the
expert action even in very familiar states. We only sample
values ofandalong a line in R2, and hence do not
ﬁnd that points along this line show strict improvement over
the independent decision rules in all cases, but see slight
improvement in novice performance over the doubt rule forthe case of (;) = (0:5;0:05). Additionally, we ﬁnd the
EnsembleDAgger decision to be strictly more conservative
than either of the component decision rules and thus always
improves the combined system performance, as expected.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we presented an extension to the DAgger
algorithm that considers the safety of the novice-expert
system that provides the trajectories from which the novice
learns. To avoid requiring precise knowledge of safety, we
assume the risk of a state to be inversely related to the size
of the perturbation to an expert’s action that it can accept
without compromising safety. We therefore use a model-free
proxy for safety by making a key assumption that the risk of
a given state correlates with our familiarity with the state in
the datasetD. We expect this assumption to hold in domains
where the expert is designed to maintain a margin of safety.
Our algorithm replaces a weighted coin-ﬂip that decides
whether the novice acts in the VanillaDAgger decision rule.
To act, the novice proposes an action that is bounded in its
deviation from the expert’s choice of action, as proposed by
SafeDAgger* [11], but also must exhibit low variance in its
choice.
In our experiments, we compared these two conditions
independently, calling the ﬁrst the discrepancy rule and
the second the doubt rule. We found that the doubt rule
effectively constrains the novice to act only in states it is
familiar with, i.e. states that are within some neighborhood
of states labeled in D, while the discrepancy rule haphazardly
allows the novice to act in states where there is chance
agreement between their actions. Since the domain satisﬁes
the assumptions regarding risk that are made, we ﬁnd that
the doubt rule is superior to the discrepancy rule in both
its ability to have the novice rapidly attain expert-level
control, as well as preventing the novice from carrying the
combined expert-novice system into severly compromising
states. Though the doubt rule alone is shown to be superior
to the discrepancy rule alone, there exist hyperaparameter
settings in which the conjunction of the rules is better than
either individually.
Future work includes investigating methods for relaxing
our risk assumptions, in particular the conﬂation of safety
and familiarity. There exist environments with ‘bottleneck’
states in which the expert must frequently travel close to
unsafe states to achieve its goal. Additionally, we have not
provided a method for choosing the hyperparameters and
, and thus intend to develop heuristic strategies that can
safely discover the most suitable setting of these parameters.
A recent work has already demonstrated a method for doing
so on real vehicles [15].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by SAIC
Innovation Center, a subsidiary of SAIC Motors. The authors
would like to acknowledge the useful feedback of Apoorva
Sharma and Michael Kelly.
7

==== Page 8 ====
REFERENCES
[1] D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano, J. Schulman,
and D. Man ´e, “Concrete problems in AI safety,” Available on
arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016.
[2] B. Price and C. Boutilier, “Accelerating reinforcement learning through
implicit imitation,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , vol. 19,
pp. 569–629, 2003.
[3] S. Schaal, “Learning from demonstration,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 1997, pp. 1040–1046.
[4] J. Kober and J. Peters, “Imitation and reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Robotics Automation Magazine , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 55–62, June 2010.
[5] B. D. Argall, S. Chernova, M. Veloso, and B. Browning, “A survey
of robot learning from demonstration,” Robotics and Autonomous
Systems , vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 469–483, 2009.
[6] H. Daum ´e, J. Langford, and D. Marcu, “Search-based structured
prediction,” Machine Learning , vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 297–325, 2009.
[7] S. Ross and D. Bagnell, “Efﬁcient reductions for imitation learning,”
inInternational Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics ,
2010, pp. 661–668.
[8] S. Levine and V . Koltun, “Guided policy search,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2013, pp. 1–9.
[9] B. Kim and J. Pineau, “Maximum mean discrepancy imitation learn-
ing,” in Robotics: Science and Systems , 2013.
[10] M. Laskey, S. Staszak, W. Y .-S. Hsieh, J. Mahler, F. T. Pokorny, A. D.
Dragan, and K. Goldberg, “Shiv: Reducing supervisor burden in DAg-
ger using support vectors for efﬁcient learning from demonstrations
in high dimensional state spaces,” in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2016, pp. 462–469.
[11] J. Zhang and K. Cho, “Query-efﬁcient imitation learning for end-to-
end autonomous driving,” Available on arXiv:1605.06450 , 2016.
[12] A. K. Akametalu, J. F. Fisac, J. H. Gillula, S. Kaynama, M. N.
Zeilinger, and C. J. Tomlin, “Reachability-based safe learning with
Gaussian processes,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC) , 2014, pp. 1424–1431.
[13] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for
Machine Learning . MIT Press, 2005.
[14] S. Ross, G. J. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation
learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2011,
pp. 627–635.
[15] M. Kelly, C. Sidrane, K. Driggs-Campbell, and M. J. Kochenderfer,
“HG-DAgger: Interactive imitation learning with human experts,”
Available on arXiv:1810.02890 , 2018.
[16] C. Cronrath, E. Jorge, J. Moberg, M. Jirstrand, and B. Lennartson,
“BAgger: A Bayesian algorithm for safe and query-efﬁcient imitation
learning.”
[17] J. Lee, Y . Bahri, R. Novak, S. S. Schoenholz, J. Pennington, and
J. Sohl-Dickstein, “Deep neural networks as Gaussian processes,”
Available on arXiv:1711.00165 , 2017.
[18] F. Berkenkamp, R. Moriconi, A. P. Schoellig, and A. Krause, “Safe
learning of regions of attraction for uncertain, nonlinear systems with
gaussian processes,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC) , 2016, pp. 4661–4666.
[19] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and
scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2017, pp.
6405–6416.
[20] Y . Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approxima-
tion: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” Available on
arXiv:1506.02142 , 2015.
[21] Z.-H. Zhou, J. Wu, and W. Tang, “Ensembling neural networks: many
could be better than all,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 137, no. 1-2, pp.
239–263, 2002.
[22] F. Berkenkamp, M. Turchetta, A. Schoellig, and A. Krause, “Safe
model-based reinforcement learning with stability guarantees,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2017,
pp. 908–919.
[23] H. K. Khalil, “Feedback linearization,” in Nonlinear Systems . Upper
Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall, 2002, ch. 13, pp. 505–508.
[24] G. Brockman, V . Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schul-
man, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba, “OpenAI Gym,” Available on
arXiv:1606.01540 , 2016.
[25] Y . Duan, X. Chen, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, and P. Abbeel,
“Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for continuous control,”
inInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2016, pp.
1329–1338.[26] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from
overﬁtting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
[27] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V . Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V . Dubourg, J. Van-
derplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
8

==== Page 9 ====
APPENDIX
A. Bayesian Approximation Techniques
We examine two approximations of GPs: ensemble meth-
ods and Monte-Carlo dropout.
Gal et al. propose approximating Bayesian models with
neural networks trained with dropout [20]. By applying
dropout at every weight layer in a network, an approximation
of a Gaussian process is obtained. Given a policy trained
with dropout, the network can be queried Ntimes per
input observation to obtain a distribution over actions, using
randomly sampled dropout masks [20], [26].
The ensemble method is a technique for training a col-
lection of neural networks to execute the same task and
then combining the output into a single prediction. This
approach has shown to signiﬁcantly improve performance in
practice [21]. [19] employed an ensemble of neural networks
to approximate GPs and demonstrated that this is a more
straightforward approach to estimate predictive uncertainty
(PU). Typically, neural networks predict point estimates of
the output are optimized to minimize the mean squared error
on the training set. The authors claim that this does not
capture aleatoric uncertainty, but only epistemic uncertainty.
They propose using a proper scoring rule , like negative log-
likelihood, as a loss function to train an ensemble in which
each network predicts a mean and a variance of a Gaussian
distribution over the output. They postulate that such loss
functions provide a better measure of the quality of predictive
uncertainty and thus reward better calibrated predictions.
1) Empirical Evaluation: To determine which approxi-
mation approach is most effective in practice, we evaluate
the ability of four different methods to learn the function
f(x) = sin(x)+0:2 sin(4x)with only eight samples. The
codebase used for the evaluation (as well as the proposed
algorithms) is provided in the supplementary material.
First, we ﬁt the function with a traditional Gaussian
process to act as a baseline. We use a squared-exponential
kernel with a length-scale of 10. The kernel parameters
chosen are the best of nine optimizer restarts [27]. Then,
we ﬁt a ten network ensemble trained with Mean-Square-
Error (MSE) loss for 300 epochs, referred to as the Vanilla
Ensemble. The same ensemble is trained with Negative-Log-
Likelihood (NLL) loss for 2400 epochs, so each network
directly predicts uncertainty. Finally, a single network is
trained using Monte-Carlo Dropout with MSE loss and a
keep-probability of 75%, also trained for 2400 epochs.
All neural network models have hidden layers of size
[128;64;64;64], respectively. ADAM with a learning rate
of10 3is used to optimize the vanilla ensemble and MC-
dropout, while a learning rate of 10 4is used for the en-
semble with predictive uncertainty. No weight regularization
or batch normalization are used. We use a batch size of 4.
Each model is queried for a mean and standard deviation
for its estimate of f(x)forx2[ 1:5;1:5]. The standard
deviations of each model are scaled such that their sum
matches that of the GP, for ease of visual comparison. The
results of each method are shown in Figure 9.
We see that the vanilla ensemble of models and ensemble 1:5 1 0:50 0:5 1 1:5 2 1012
xf(x)True Function
(a) Gaussian Process 1:5 1 0:50 0:5 1 1:5 2 1012
xTraining Data
(b) Vanilla Ensemble
 1:5 1 0:50 0:5 1 1:5 2 1012
xMean Estimate
(c) Ensemble with PU 1:5 1 0:50 0:5 1 1:5 2 1012
xEstimate Bound
(d) MC-Dropout
Fig. 9: Comparing Gaussian process approximation methods.
with predictive uncertainty have the most visual similarity to
a GP. We also note that the vanilla ensemble achieves this
performance in a small fraction of the number of epochs
with which the latter two models are trained. Therefore, in
our experiments, the novice neural network architecture takes
the form of an ensemble of neural networks, and we train
the neural network with MSE loss.
It should be noted that the implementations did not utilize
adversarial training, as recommended by Lakshminarayanan
et al. [19]. Additionally, the training data is noiseless, which
does not highlight the potential beneﬁt of using an ensemble
with predictive uncertainty or MC-Dropout.
B. The Inverted Pendulum domain
The inverted pendulum has a two-dimensional state space
of[;_]and a one-dimensional action space of u, as shown
in Figure 4.
The inverted pendulum is guided by the following dynam-
ical equation:
=1
asin b_+cu (1)
The system can be driven to the equilibrium at [0;0]by
feedback linearization, using the following control law:
u= a
csin 1
cK1K2
_
(2)
With feedback linearization, the gain vector Kis computed
to stabilize the linear system speciﬁed by the new dynamics:

_v1
_v2
=
0 1
0 b
v1
v2
+
0
1
u (3)
wherev1andv2are the residual linear terms. The resulting
controller is deterministic but sufﬁciently non-linear to pose
an interesting learning problem. The dynamics of this en-
vironment and control law found by feedback linearization
follow the example presented by Khalil et al. [23].
9

==== Page 10 ====
1 2 3 4 5 600:20:40:60:81
EpochLearning Performance Doubt Rule = 10 3
Discrep. Rule = 10 1
Discrep. Rule = 510 2
(a) Learning Performance1 2 3 4 5 60246810
EpochFailure Rate [ %]
(b) Failure Rate1 2 3 4 5 600:10:20:30:4
EpochPermitted Set V olume
(c) Permitted Set V olume
Fig. 10: Comparison of the learning performance, failure rate, and permitted set volume for the doubt and discrepancy rule, where 
andare chosen a priori .
We consider the problem instance in which a= 10 ,b= 2,
c= 10 . Additionally, the control uis saturated to lie within
[ 1;1]. The gains Kare found to be [0:316;0:175] using a
linear quadratic regulator with cost function J=R1
0v2
1+
v2
2+ 10u2. Due to the control saturation, the controller does
not converge to the desired ﬁxed point from an arbitrary
initial condition, but has the basin of attraction shown in
Figure 5. Figure 5 also shows the region of the state space
from which initial conditions are sampled uniformly during
the successive epochs of DAgger.
C. Inverted Pendulum: Selecting Hyperparameters
In the inverted pendulum experiment discussed in the body
of this paper, we solve for the hyperparameters andat
every DAgger epoch such that the corresponding decision
rules create a permitted set of some desired volume. Though
useful for visually comparing the two decision rules, solving
for the hyperparameters in this manner is not tractable in
more complex problems with higher dimensional state-action
spaces or with a non-deterministic expert. Hence, in our
second experiment, we compare the behavior of the two
decision rules in a manner more useful to a practitioner—in
which the hyperparameters andare chosen a priori .
We introduce additional metrics of performance:
Learning Performance : The fraction of states grid-
sampled from 2[ ;];_2[ 5;5], in both the
expert and novice basin of attractions.
Failure Rate : The fraction of repetitions of a given
experiment in which the trajectory acquired at a given
epoch, for a given decision rule and expert policy, leaves
the expert’s basin of attraction.
For a given choice of hyperparameters, the instances of the
decision rules are compared over six epochs, and results areaveraged over 30 repetitions of the experiment. During each
epoch, we track the learning performance, failure rate, and
permitted set volume.
Figure 10 shows the results for an instance of the doubt
rule with= 10 3, the discrepancy rule with = 10 1and
the discrepancy rule with = 510 2. As shown in Fig-
ure 10a, this instance of the doubt rule demonstrates superior
learning performance to either instance of the discrepancy
rule. In addition to demonstrating more rapid learning, this
instance exhibits no failures in any of the six epochs in
any of the repeated experiments, as shown in Figure 10b.
Neither instance of the discrepancy rule is failure-free, and
choosing the more conservative reduces the failure rate at
the expense of learning performance.
It is also interesting to note the evolution of the permitted
set volume over the six epochs for ﬁxed hyperparameter
choices. It appears that in this domain, the permitted set
volumes grow monotonically, which matches expectations.
However, we can see that the permitted set volumes for the
discrepancy rule are many times larger than that of the doubt
rule. This conﬁrms the observations made in the previous
experiment: the doubt rule is less permissive in allowing
the novice to act, but is nonetheless able to generative more
informative trajectories.
The results of this experiment conﬁrm the observations
made in the ﬁrst inverted pendulum quantitatively. As a
consequence of the discrepancy rule being too conservative
in states familiar to the novice, the system is prevented from
entering states that are informative to the novice’s learning,
and hence we see poor learning performance. Furthermore,
since the discrepancy rule is not conservative enough in
risky states, the discrepancy rule encounters failures more
frequently than the doubt rule.
10

