==== Page 1 ====
EnsembleLearning
Zhi-HuaZhou
NationalKeyLaboratory for NovelSoftwareTechnology,Nanjing University,Nanjing 210093, China
zhouzh@nju.edu.cn
Synonyms
Committee-basedlearning; Multiple classiﬁer systems; Classiﬁer combination
Deﬁnition
Ensemblelearningisamachinelearningparadigmwheremultiplelearnersaretrainedtosolvethesameproblem.Incontrast
to ordinary machine learning approaches which try to learn onehypothesis from training data, ensemble methods try to
constructa setof hypothesesand combine them to use.
MainBody Text
Introduction
Anensemblecontainsanumberoflearnerswhichareusuallycalled baselearners .Thegeneralization abilityofanensemble
is usually much stronger than that of base learners. Actually, ensemble learning is appealing because that it is able to boost
weak learners which are slightly better than random guess to strong learners which can make very accurate predictions. So,
“base learners” are also referred as “weak learners”. It is noteworthy, however, that although most theoretical analyses work
on weak learners, base learners used in practice are not necessarily weak since using not-so-weak base learners often results
inbetter performance.
Base learners are usually generated from training data by a base learning algorithm which can be decision tree, neural
network or other kinds of machine learning algorithms. Most ensemble methods use a single base learning algorithm to
producehomogeneous base learners, but there are also some methods which use multiple learning algorithms to produce
heterogeneous learners. In the latter case there is no single base learning algorithm and thus, some people prefer calling the
learnersindividuallearners orcomponentlearners to“baselearners”,whilethenames“individuallearners”and“component
learners” can also be used for homogeneous base learners.
It is difﬁcult to trace the starting point of the history of ensemble methods since the basic idea of deploying multiple
modelshasbeeninuseforalongtime,yetitisclearthatthehotwaveofresearchonensemblelearningsincethe1990sowes
much to two works. The ﬁrst is an applied research conducted by Hansen and Salamon [ 1] at the end of 1980s, where they
found that predictions made by the combination of a set of classiﬁers are often more accurate than predictions made by the
best single classiﬁer. The second is a theoretical research conducted in 1989, where Schapire [ 2] proved that weak learners
canbe boosted to stronglearners ,and the proof resulted in Boosting, one of the most inﬂuential ensemble methods.
ConstructingEnsembles
Typically, an ensemble is constructed in two steps. First, a number of base learners are produced, which can be generated in
aparallelstyle or in a sequential style where the generation of a base learner has inﬂuence on the generation of subsequent

==== Page 2 ====
2 Zhi-Hua Zhou
learners. Then, the base learners are combined to use, where among the most popular combination schemes are majority
votingforclassiﬁcation and weighted averaging forregression.
Generally, to get a good ensemble, the base learners should be as more accurate as possible, and as more diverse as
possible. This has been formally shown by Krogh and Vedelsby [ 3], and emphasized by many other people. There are many
effective processes for estimating the accuracy of learners, such as cross-validation , hold-out test, etc. However, there is
no rigorous deﬁnition on what is intuitively perceived as diversity. Although a number of diversity measures have been
designed, Kuncheva and Whitaker [ 4] disclosed that the usefulness of existing diversity measures in constructing ensembles
is suspectable. In practice, the diversity of the base learners can be introduced from different channels, such as subsampling
the training examples, manipulating the attributes, manipulating the outputs, injecting randomness into learning algorithms,
or even using multiple mechanisms simultaneously. The employment of different base learner generation processes and/or
differentcombination schemes leads to differentensemble methods.
There are many effective ensemble methods. The following will brieﬂy introduce three representative methods, Boost-
ing[2,5],Bagging [6] andStacking [7]. Here, binary classiﬁcation is considered for simplicity. That is, let Xand
Ydenote the instance space and the set of class labels, respectively, assuming Y=f¡1;+1g. A training data set
D=f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);¢¢¢;(xm; ym)gisgiven,where xi2 Xandyi2 Y(i= 1;¢¢¢; m).
Boosting is in fact a family of algorithms since there are many variants. Here, the most famous algorithm, AdaBoost [ 5],
isconsideredasanexample.First,itassignsequalweightstoallthetrainingexamples.Denotethedistributionoftheweights
at the t-th learning round as Dt. From the training data set and Dtthe algorithm generates a base learner ht:X ! Yby
callingthebaselearningalgorithm.Then,itusesthetrainingexamplestotest ht,andtheweightsoftheincorrectlyclassiﬁed
examples will be increased. Thus, an updated weight distribution Dt+1is obtained. From the training data set and Dt+1
AdaBoostgeneratesanotherbaselearnerbycallingthebaselearningalgorithmagain.Suchaprocessisrepeatedfor Ttimes,
each of which is called a round, and the ﬁnal learner is derived by weighted majority voting of the Tbase learners, where
the weights of the learners are determined during the training process. In practice, the base learning algorithm may be a
learning algorithm which can use weighted training examples directly; otherwise the weights can be exploited by sampling
thetraining examplesaccording to the weight distribution Dt. The pseudo-code of AdaBoost is shownin Fig. 1.
Input:Data set D=f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);¢¢¢;(xm; ym)g;
Base learning algorithm L;
Number of learning rounds T.
Process:
D1(i) = 1 =m. % Initialize the weight distribution
fort= 1;¢¢¢; T:
ht=L(D; Dt); % Traina base learner htfromDusing distribution Dt
²t=Pri»Di[ht(xi6=yi)]; % Measure the error of ht
®t=1
2ln
1¡²t
²t
; % Determine the weight of ht
Dt+1(i) =Dt(i)
Zt£exp(¡®t)ifht(xi) =yi
exp(®t)ifht(xi)6=yi
=Dt(i)exp(¡®tyiht(xi))
Zt%Update the distribution,where Ztis a normalization
% factorwhich enables Dt+1to be a distribution
end.
Output: H(x) =sign(f(x)) =signPT
t=1®tht(x)
Fig. 1.The AdaBoost algorithm
Bagging[ 6]trainsanumberofbaselearnerseachfromadifferent bootstrapsample bycallingabaselearningalgorithm.A
bootstrapsampleisobtainedbysubsamplingthetrainingdatasetwithreplacement,wherethesizeofasampleisasthesame
as that of the training data set. Thus, for a bootstrap sample, some training examples may appear but some may not, where
the probability that an example appears at least once is about 0.632. After obtaining the base learners, Bagging combines
them by majority voting and the most-voted class is predicted. The pseudo-code of Bagging is shown in Fig. 2. It is worth
mentioning that a variant of Bagging, Random Forests [8], has been deemed as one of the most powerful ensemble methods
upto date.

==== Page 3 ====
EnsembleLearning 3
Input:Data set D=f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);¢¢¢;(xm; ym)g;
Baselearning algorithm L;
Numberof learning rounds T.
Process:
fort= 1;¢¢¢; T:
Dt=Bootstrap (D); % Generate a bootstrap sample from D
ht=L(Dt)% Traina base learner htfromthe bootstrap sample
end.
Output: H(x) =argmaxy2YPT
t=11(y=ht(x))%the valueof 1 (a)is1ifaistrueand0otherwise
Fig. 2.The Bagging algorithm
InatypicalimplementationofStacking[ 7],anumberofﬁrst-levelindividuallearnersaregeneratedfromthetrainingdata
setbyemployingdifferentlearningalgorithms.Thoseindividuallearnersarethencombinedbyasecond-levellearnerwhich
is called as meta-learner . The pseudo-code of Stacking is shown in Fig. 3. It is evident that Stacking has close relation with
informationfusion methods.
Input:Data set D=f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);¢¢¢;(xm; ym)g;
First-levellearning algorithms L1;¢¢¢;LT;
Second-levellearning algorithm L.
Process:
fort= 1;¢¢¢; T:
ht=Lt(D)% Traina ﬁrst-levelindividuallearner htby applying the ﬁrst-level
end; % learning algorithm Lttothe original data set D
D0=;; % Generate a newdata set
fori= 1;¢¢¢; m:
fort= 1;¢¢¢; T:
zit=ht(xi)% Use httoclassify the training example xi
end;
D0=D0[ f((zi1; zi2;¢¢¢; ziT); yi)g
end;
h0=L(D0). % Trainthe second-levellearner h0by applying the second-level
% learning algorithm Lto the newdata set D0
Output: H(x) =h0(h1(x);¢¢¢; hT(x))
Fig. 3.TheStacking algorithm
Generally speaking, there is no ensemble method which outperforms other ensemble methods consistently. Empirical
studies on popular ensemble methods can be found in many papers such as [ 9,10,11]. Previously, it was thought that using
morebaselearnerswillleadtoabetterperformance,yetZhouetal.[ 12]provedthe“manycouldbebetterthanall”theorem
which indicates that this may not be the fact. It was shown that after generating a set of base learners, selecting some base
learnersinsteadofusingallofthemtocomposeanensembleisabetterchoice.Suchensemblesarecalled selectiveensembles .
It is worth mentioning that in addition to classiﬁcation and regression, ensemble methods have also been designed for
clustering[ 13]and other kinds of machine learning tasks.
WhyEnsembles Superior to Singles
To understand that why the generalization ability of an ensemble is usually much stronger than that of a single learner,
Dietterich [ 14] gave three reasons by viewing the nature of machine learning as searching a hypothesis space for the most
accurate hypothesis. The ﬁrst reason is that, the training data might not provide sufﬁcient information for choosing a single
best learner. For example, there may be many learners perform equally well on the training data set. Thus, combining these

==== Page 4 ====
4 Zhi-Hua Zhou
learnersmaybeabetterchoice.Thesecondreasonisthat,thesearchprocessesofthelearningalgorithmsmightbeimperfect.
For example, even if there exists a unique best hypothesis, it might be difﬁcult to achieve since running the algorithms
result in sub-optimal hypotheses. Thus, ensembles can compensate for such imperfect search processes. The third reason is
that, the hypothesis space being searched might not contain the true target function, while ensembles can give some good
approximation. For example, it is well-known that the classiﬁcation boundaries of decision trees are linear segments parallel
to coordinate axes. If the target classiﬁcation boundary is a smooth diagonal line, using a single decision tree cannot lead to
a good result yet a good approximation can be achieved by combining a set of decision trees. Note that those are intuitive
insteadof rigorous theoretical explanations.
There are many theoretical studies on famous ensemble methods such as Boosting and Bagging, yet it is far from a clear
understandingoftheunderlyingmechanismofthesemethods.Forexample,empiricalobservationsshowthatBoostingoften
doesnotsuffer from overﬁtting even after a large number of rounds, and sometimes it is even able to reduce the general-
izationerror after the training error has already reached zero. Although many researchers have studied this phenomenon,
theoreticalexplanationsare still in arguing.
Thebias-variancedecomposition isoftenusedinstudyingtheperformanceofensemblemethods[ 9,12].Itisknownthat
Baggingcansigniﬁcantlyreducethevariance,andthereforeitisbettertobeappliedtolearnerssufferedfromlargevariance,
e.g., unstable learners such as decision trees or neural networks. Boosting can signiﬁcantly reduce the bias in addition to
reducingthe variance,and therefore, on weak learners such as decision stumps, Boosting is usually more effective.
Applications
Ensemble learning has already been used in diverse applications such as optical character recognition, text categorization,
face recognition, computer-aided medical diagnosis, gene expression analysis, etc. Actually, ensemble learning can be used
wherevermachine learning techniques can be used.
Summary
Ensemble learning is a powerful machine learning paradigm which has exhibited apparent advantages in many applications.
By using multiple learners, the generalization ability of an ensemble can be much better than that of a single learner. A
serious deﬁciency of current ensemble methods is the lack of comprehensibility, i.e., the knowledge learned by ensembles is
not understandable to the user. Improving the comprehensibility of ensembles [ 15] is an important yet largely understudied
direction. Another important issue is that currently no diversity measures is satisfying [ 4] although it is known that diversity
playsanimportantroleinensembles.Ifthoseissuescanbeaddressedwell,ensemblelearningwillbeabletocontributemore
tomore applications.
RelatedEntries
Boosting,Classiﬁer design, Machine learning, Multiple classiﬁer systems, Multiple experts.
References
1.Hansen, L.K., Salamon, P.: Neural network ensembles. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 12(10)
(1990) 993–1001
2.Schapire, R.E.: The strength of weak learnability. Machine Learning 5(2) (1990) 197–227
3.Krogh,A.,Vedelsby,J.: Neuralnetworkensembles,crossvalidation,andactivelearning. InTesauro,G.,Touretzky,D.S.,Leen,T.K.,
eds.: Advancesin Neural Information Processing Systems 7. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1995) 231–238
4.Kuncheva, L.I., Whitaker, C.J.: Measures of diversity in classiﬁer ensembles and their relationship with the ensemble accuracy.
Machine Learning 51(2) (2003) 181–207
5.Freund,Y.,Schapire,R.E.: Adecision-theoreticgeneralizationofon-linelearningandanapplicationtoBoosting. JournalofComputer
and System Sciences 55(1) (1997) 119–139
6.Breiman, L.: Bagging predictors. Machine Learning 24(2)(1996) 123–140
7.Wolpert,D.H.: Stackedgeneralization. Neural Networks 5(2) (1992) 241–260
8.Breiman, L.: Random forests. Machine Learning 45(1)(2001) 5–32

==== Page 5 ====
EnsembleLearning 5
9.Bauer, E., Kohavi, R.: An empirical comparison of voting classiﬁcation algorithms: Bagging, Boosting, and variants. Machine
Learning 36(1-2)(1999) 105–139
10.Ting,K.M., Witten,I.H.: Issues in stackedgeneralization. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 10(1999) 271–289
11.Opitz, D., Maclin, R.: Popular ensemble methods: An empirical study. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 11(1999) 169–198
12.Zhou, Z.H., Wu, J., Tang, W.: Ensembling neural networks: Many could be better than all. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 137(1-2) (2002)
239–263
13.Strehl, A., Ghosh, J.: Cluster ensembles - a knowledge reuse framework for combining multiple partitionings. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3(2002) 583–617
14.Dietterich, T.G.: Machine learning research: Fourcurrent directions. AI Magazine 18(4)(1997) 97–136
15.Zhou,Z.H.,Jiang,Y.,Chen,S.F.: Extractingsymbolicrulesfromtrainedneuralnetworkensembles. AICommunications 16(1)(2003)
3–15
DeﬁnitionalEntries
Bias-Variance Decomposition
An important tool for analyzing machine learning approaches. Given a learning target and the size of training data set, it
breaks the expected error of a learning approach into the sum of three non-negative quantities, i.e., the intrinsic noise , the
biasand thevariance. The intrinsic noise is a lower bound on the expected error of any learning approach on the target;
the bias measures how closely the average estimate of the learning approach is able to approximate the target; the variance
measureshowmuch the estimate of the learning approach ﬂuctuates for the differenttraining sets of the same size.
Cross-Validation
A popular approach to estimating how well the result learned from a given training data set is going to generalize on unseen
newdata.Itpartitionsthetrainingdatasetinto ksubsetswithequalsize,andthenusestheunionof k¡1subsetsfortraining
while the remaining subset for performance evaluation. The ﬁnal estimate is obtained by averaging after every subset has
been used for evaluation once. A popular settings of kis 10 and in this case it is called as 10-fold cross-validation ; another
popularsetting of kis the number of training examplesand in this case it is called as LOO (i.e., Leave-One-Out )test.
Generalization
Themostcentralconceptin machinelearning,whichcharacterizeshowwelltheresultlearned fromagiventrainingdata set
canbe applied to unseen newdata.
Overﬁtting
Thephenomenonthatthelearningresultperformsverygoodontrainingdatabutpoorlyonunseennewdata,whichiscaused
by that the learning approach has ﬁt the training data too much such that some malign particularities that prevents a good
generalizationhas also been captured by the learning result.

