==== Page 1 ====
Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach
Towards AI for Social Good
Elizabeth Bondi,∗1Lily Xu,∗1Diana Acosta-Navas,2Jackson A. Killian1
{ebondi,lily_xu,jkillian}@g.harvard.edu,diana_acosta_navas@hks.harvard.edu
1John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2Department of Philosophy, Harvard University
ABSTRACT
Research in artificial intelligence (AI) for social good presupposes
some definition of social good, but potential definitions have been
seldom suggested and never agreed upon. The normative ques-
tion of what AI for social good research should be “for” is not
thoughtfully elaborated, or is frequently addressed with a utilitar-
ian outlook that prioritizes the needs of the majority over those
who have been historically marginalized, brushing aside realities of
injustice and inequity. We argue that AI for social good ought to be
assessed by the communities that the AI system will impact, using
as a guide the capabilities approach, a framework to measure the
ability of different policies to improve human welfare equity. Fur-
thermore, we lay out how AI research has the potential to catalyze
social progress by expanding and equalizing capabilities. We show
how the capabilities approach aligns with a participatory approach
for the design and implementation of AI for social good research
in a framework we introduce called PACT, in which community
members affected should be brought in as partners and their input
prioritized throughout the project. We conclude by providing an
incomplete set of guiding questions for carrying out such participa-
tory AI research in a way that elicits and respects a community’s
own definition of social good.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Participatory design ;•Com-
puting methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;•General and
reference→Cross-computing tools and techniques .
KEYWORDS
artificial intelligence for social good; capabilities approach; partici-
patory design
ACM Reference Format:
Elizabeth Bondi,∗1Lily Xu,∗1Diana Acosta-Navas,2Jackson A. Killian1.
2021. Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach Towards AI for
Social Good. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society (AIES ’21), May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462612
*Equal contribution. Order determined by coin flip.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8473-5/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462612
PACTcapabilities approachparticipatory approachconceptrealizationFigure 1: The framework we propose, Participatory Ap-
proach to enable Capabilities in communiTies (PACT),
melds the capabilities approach (see Figure 3) with a partici-
patory approach (see Figures 4 and 5) to center the needs of
communities in AI research projects.
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) for social good, hereafter AI4SG, has re-
ceived growing attention across academia and industry. Countless
research groups, workshops, initiatives, and industry efforts tout
programs to advance computing and AI “for social good.” Work in
domains from healthcare to conservation has been brought into
this category [ 43,73,83]. We, the authors, ourselves have endeav-
ored towards AI4SG work as computer science and philosophy
researchers.
Despite the rapidly growing popularity of AI4SG, social good
has a nebulous definition in the computing world and elsewhere
[27], making it unclear at times what work ought to be considered
social good. For example, can a COVID-19 contact tracing app be
considered to fall within this lauded category, even with privacy
risks? Recent work has begun to dive into this question of defining
AI4SG [ 22,23,49]; we will explore these efforts in more depth in
Section 2.
However, we point out that context is critical, so no single
tractable set of rules can determine whether a project is “for so-
cial good.” Instead, whether a project may bring about social good
must be determined by those who live within the context of the
system itself; that is, the community that it will affect. This point
echoes recent calls for decolonial and power-shifting approaches to
AI that focus on elevating traditionally marginalized populations
[5, 36, 45, 54, 55, 84].
The community-centered, context-specific conception of social
good that we propose raises its own questions, such as how toarXiv:2105.01774v2  [cs.CY]  18 Jun 2021

==== Page 2 ====
reconcile multiple viewpoints. We therefore address these concerns
with an integrated framework, called the Participatory Approach
to enable Capabilities in communi Ties, or PACT, that allows re-
searchers to assess “goodness" across different stakeholder groups
and different projects. We illustrate PACT in Figure 1. As part of
this framework, we first suggest ethical guidelines rooted in capa-
bility theory to guide such evaluations [ 59,70]. We reject a view
that favors courses of action solely for their aggregate net benefits,
regardless of how they are distributed and what resulting injustices
arise. Such an additive accounting may easily err toward favor-
ing the values and interests of majorities, excluding traditionally
underrepresented community members from the design process
altogether.
Instead, we employ the capabilities approach , designed to mea-
sure human development by focusing on the substantive liberties
that individuals and communities enjoy, to lead the kind of lives
they have reason to value [ 70]. A capability-focused approach to so-
cial good is aimed at increasing opportunities for people to achieve
combinations of “functionings”—that is, combinations of things
they may find valuable doing or being. While common assessment
methods might overlook new or existing social inequalities if some
measure of “utility” is increased high enough in aggregate, our
approach would only define an endeavor as contributing to social
good if it takes concrete steps toward empowering all members of
the affected community to each enjoy the substantive liberties to
function in the ways they have reason to value.
We then propose to enact this conception of social good with
aparticipatory approach that involves community members in “a
process of investigating, understanding, reflecting upon, establish-
ing, developing, and supporting mutual learning between multiple
participants” [ 75], in order for the community itself to define what
those substantive liberties and functionings should be. In other
words, communities define social good in their context.
Our contributions are therefore (i) arguing that the capabilities
approach is a worthy candidate for conceptualizing social good, es-
pecially in diverse-stakeholder settings (Section 3), (ii) highlighting
the role that AI can play in expanding and equalizing capabilities
(Section 4), (iii) explaining how a participatory approach is best
served to identify desired capabilities (Section 5), and (iv) presenting
and discussing our proposed guiding principles of a participatory
approach (Section 6). These contributions come together to form
PACT.
2 GROWING CRITICISMS OF AI FOR SOCIAL
GOOD
As a technical field whose interactions on social-facing problems
are young but monumental in impact, the field of AI has yet to fully
develop a moral compass. On the whole, the subfield of AI for social
good is not an exception.
We highlight criticisms that have arisen against AI4SG research,
which serve as a call to action to reform the field. Later, we ar-
gue that a participatory approach rooted in enabling capabilities
will provide needed direction to the field by letting the affected
communities—particularly those who are most vulnerable—be the
guide.Recent years have seen calls for AI and computational researchers
to more closely engage with the ethical implications of their work.
Green [26] implores researchers to view themselves and their work
through a political lens, asking not just how the systems they build
will impact society, but also how even the problems and methods
they choose to explore (and notexplore) serve to normalize the
types of research that ought to be done. Latonero [44] offers a
critical view of technosolutionism as it has recently manifested in
AI4SG efforts emerging from industry, such as Intel’s TrailGuard
AI that detects poachers in camera trap images, which have the
potential to individually identify a person. Latonero argues that
while companies may have good intentions, they often lack the
ability to gain the expertise and local context required to tackle
complex social issues. In a related spirit, Blumenstock [7]urges
researchers not to forget “the people behind the numbers” when
developing data-driven solutions, especially in development con-
texts. De-Arteaga et al . [19] focus on a specific subset of AI4SG
dubbed machine learning for development (ML4D) and similarly
express the importance of considering local context to ensure that
researcher and stakeholder goals are aligned.
Also manifesting recently are meta-critiques of AI4SG specifi-
cally, which contend that the subfield is vaguely defined, to trou-
bling implications. Moore [56] focuses specifically on how the
choice of the word “good” can serve to distract from potentially
negative consequences of the development of certain technolo-
gies, retorting that AI4SG should be re-branded as AI for “not bad”.
Malliaraki [51] argues that AI4SG’s imprecise definition hurts its
ability to progress as a discipline, since the lack of clarity around
what values are held or what progress is being made hinders the
ability of the field to establish specific expertise. Green [27] points
out that AI4SG is sufficiently vague to encompass projects aimed
at police reform as well as predictive policing, and therefore simply
lacks meaning. Green also argues that AI4SG’s orientation toward
“good” biases researchers toward incremental technological im-
provements to existing systems and away from larger reformative
efforts that could be better.
Others have gone further, calling for reforms in the field to say
that “good” AI should seek to shift power to the traditionally dis-
advantaged. Mohamed et al . [55] put forth a decolonial view of
AI that suggests that AI systems should be built specifically to
dismantle traditional forms of colonial oppression. They provide
examples of how AI can perpetuate colonialism in the digital age,
such as through algorithmic exploitation via Mechanical Turk–
style “ghost work” [ 25] or through algorithmic dispossesion in
which disadvantaged communities are designed forwithout being
allowed a seat at the design table. They also offer three “tactics” for
moving toward decolonial AI, namely: (1) a critical technical prac-
tice to analyze whether systems promote fairness, diversity, safety,
and mechanisms of anticolonial resistance; (2) reciprocal engage-
ments that engender co-design between affected communities and
researchers; and (3) a change in attitude from benevolence to soli-
darity, that again necessitates active engagement with communities
and grassroots organizations. In a similar spirit, Kalluri [36]calls for
researchers to critically analyze the power structures of the systems
they design for and consider pursuing projects that empower the
people they are intended to help. For example, researchers may seek
to empower those represented in the data that enables the system,

==== Page 3 ====
rather than the decision-maker who is privileged with a wealth of
data. This could be accomplished by designing systems for users to
audit or demand recourse based on an AI system’s decision [36].
In tandem with these criticisms, there have been corresponding
efforts to define AI4SG. Floridi et al . [22] provide a report of an
early initiative to develop guidelines in support of AI for good.
Therein, they highlight risks and opportunities for such systems,
outline core ethical principles to be considered, and offer several
recommendations for how AI efforts can be given a “firm foun-
dation” in support of social good. Floridi et al . [23] later expand
on this work by proposing a three-part account, which includes a
definition, a set of guiding principles, and a set of “essential factors
for success.” They define AI4SG as “the design, development, and
deployment of AI systems in ways that (i) prevent, mitigate, or
resolve problems adversely affecting human life and/or the well-
being of the natural world, and/or (ii) enable socially preferable
and/or environmentally sustainable developments.” Note that this
disjunctive definition captures a broad spectrum of projects with
widely diverging outcomes, leaving open still the possible critiques
discussed above. However, their principles and essential factors
contribute to establishing rough guidelines for projects in the field,
as others have done [49, 81] in lieu of seeking a definition.
3 THE CAPABILITIES APPROACH
Clearly, AI for social good is in need of a stricter set of ethical
criteria and stronger guidance. To understand what steps take us
in the direction of a more equitable, just, and fair society, we must
find the right conceptual tools and frameworks. Utilitarian ethics,
a widely referenced framework, adopts the aggregation of utility
(broadly understood) as the sole standard to determine the moral
value of an action [68, 80].
According to classic utilitarianism, the right action to take in
any given context is whichever action maximizes utility for society.
This brand of utilitarianism seems particularly attractive in science-
oriented circles, due to its claim that a moral decision can be made
by simply maximizing an objective function. For example, in the
social choice literature, Bogomolnaia et al . [8] argue for the use
of utilitarianism as “it is efficient, strategyproof and treats equally
agents and outcomes.” However, the apparent transparency of the
utilitarian argument obscures its major shortcomings. First, like
the problem of class imbalance in machine learning, a maximizing
strategy will bias its objective towards the majority class. Hence,
effects on minority and marginalized groups may be easily over-
looked. Second, which course of action can maximize utility for
society overall cannot be determined on simple cost–benefit analy-
ses. Any such procedure involves serious trade-offs, and a moral
decision requires that we acknowledge tensions and navigate them
responsibly.
To take a recent example, the development of digital contact
tracing apps in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic represented a
massive potential benefit for public health, yet posed a serious threat
to privacy rights, and all the values that privacy protects—including
freedom of thought and expression, personal autonomy, and demo-
cratic legitimacy. Which course of action will maximize utility? It
is not just controversial. What verdict is reached will necessarily
depend on what fundamental choices and liberties individuals valuemost, and which they are willing to forgo. Furthermore, for some
groups the losses may be more significant than for others, and this
fact requires due consideration.
A related, though distinct, standard might put aside the ambition
of maximizing good and adopt some threshold condition instead.
As long as it generates a net improvement over the status quo , some-
one might say, an action can be said to promote social and public
good. This strategy raises three additional problems: first, utility
aggregates are insensitive to allocation and distribution; second,
they are not sensitive to individual liberties and fundamental rights;
and third, to the extent that they consider stakeholders’ preferences,
they do not take into account the idea that individuals’ preferences
depend on their circumstances and in better circumstances could
have different preferences [ 70]. Why should this matter? Because
attempts to increase utility may be too easily signed off as progress
while inflicting serious harm and contributing to the entrenchment of
existing inequality.
For this reason, we believe that respect for liberty, fairness of
distribution, and sensitivity to interpersonal variations in utility
functions should serve as moral constraints, to channel utility in-
crements towards more valuable social outcomes. Operating within
these constraints suggests shifting the focal point from utility to
a different standard. In the spirit of enabling capabilities, we sug-
gest that such standard should be based on an understanding of
the kinds of lives individuals have reason to value, how the dis-
tribution of resources in combination with environmental factors
may create (or eliminate) opportunities for them to actualize these
lives, and designing projects that create fertile conditions for these
opportunities to be secured.
This reorientation of the moral assessment framework is in line
with a view of AI as a tool to shift power to individuals and groups
in situations of disadvantage, as advocated by Kalluri [36]. What
this shift means, in operational terms, is not yet fully elucidated.
We therefore hope to contribute to this endeavor by exploring
conceptual tools that may guide developers in the process, providing
intermediate landmarks. We consider “capabilities” to be suitable
candidates for this task, as they constitute a step in the direction
of empowering disadvantaged individuals to decide what, in their
view, that shift should consist of.
The capabilities approach, which stands at the intersection of
ethics and development economics, was originally proposed by
Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum [ 60,70]. The approach focuses
on the notion that all human beings should have a set of substan-
tive liberties that allow them to function in society in the ways
they choose [ 60]. These substantive liberties include both freedom
from external obstruction and the external conditions conducive to
such functioning. The capability set includes all of the foundational
abilities a human being ought to have to flourish in society, such
as, freedom of speech, thought and association; bodily health and
integrity; and control over one’s political and material environ-
ment; among others. The capabilities approach has inspired the
creation of the United Nations Human Development Index (Fig-
ure 2), marking a shift away from utilitarian evaluations such as
gross domestic product to people-centered policies that prioritize
substantive capabilities [82].
A capability-oriented AI does not rest content with increasing
aggregate utility and respecting legal rights. It asks itself what it is

==== Page 4 ====
Figure 2: The United Nations Human Development Index
(HDI) was inspired by the capabilities approach, which
serves as the foundation of the participatory approach that
we propose. The above map from Wikimedia Commons
shows the HDI rankings of countries around the world,
where darker color indicates a higher index.
doing, and how it interacts with existing social realities, to enhance
or reduce the opportunities of the most vulnerable members of
society to pursue the lives they have reason to value. It asks whether
the social, political, and economic environment that it contributes
to create deprives individuals of those capabilities or fosters the
conditions in which they may enjoy equal substantive liberties to
flourish. In this framework, a measure of social good is how much
a given project contributes to bolster the enjoyment of substantive
liberties, especially by members of marginalized groups. This kind
of measure is respectful of individual liberties, sensitive to questions
of distribution, and responsive to interpersonal variations in utility.
Before discussing the relation between AI and capabilities, we
would like to dispel a potential objection to our framework. The
capabilities approach has been criticized for not paying sufficient
attention to groups, institutions, and social structures, thus render-
ing itself unable to account for power imbalances and dynamics
[30,40]. This characteristic would make the approach unappealing
for a field that seeks to address injustices in the distribution of
power. However, the approach does indeed place substantial em-
phasis on conceptualizing the factors that affect (particularly those
which may enhance) individuals’ power. Its emphasis on substantial
opportunities is itself a way of conceptualizing what individuals
have the power to do or to be. These powers are determined in
large part by the broader social environment, which includes group
membership, inter-group relations, institutions, and social prac-
tices. Furthermore, the approach explicitly focuses on enhancing
the power of the most vulnerable members of society. In fact, the
creation and enhancement of capabilities constitute intermediate
steps on the way towards shifting power, promoting the welfare
and broadening the liberties of those who have been historically
deprived. For this reason, it provides a fruitful framework to assess
genuine moral progress and a promising tool for AI projects seeking
to promote social good.
Light discussion of the capabilities approach has begun inside
the AI community. Moore [56] references the capabilities approach
to call for greater accountability and individual control of private
data. Coeckelbergh [16] proposes taking a capabilities approach to
health care, particularly when using AI assistance to replace humancare, but focuses on Nussbaum’s proposed set of capabilities rather
than eliciting desired capabilities from affected patients. We signif-
icantly build on these claims by discussing the potential of AI to
enhance capabilities and argue that the capabilities approach goes
hand-in-hand with a participatory approach. Two papers specifi-
cally ground their work in the capabilities approach; we highlight
these as exemplars for future work in AI4SG. Thinyane and Bhat
[79] invoke the capabilities approach, specifically to empower the
agency of marginalized groups, to motivate their development of a
mobile app to identify victims of human trafficking in Thai fisheries.
Kumar et al . [42] conduct an empirical study of women’s health in
India through the lens of Nussbaum’s central human capabilities.
4 AI AND CAPABILITIES
The capabilities approach may serve AI researchers and developers
to assess the potential impact of projects and interventions along
two dimensions of social progress: capability expansion and distri-
bution. This section argues that, when they interact productively
with other social factors, AI projects can contribute to equalizing
and enhancing capabilities—and that therein lies their potential
to bring about social good. For instance, an AI-based system Vi-
sual Question Answering System can enhance the capabilities of
the visually impaired to access relevant information about their
environment [38].
When considering equalizing and enhancing capabilities, it is
important to notice that whether an individual or group enjoys a
set of capabilities is not solely a matter of having certain personal
characteristics or being free from external obstruction. External
conditions need also be conducive to enable individuals’ choices
among the set of alternatives that constitutes the capability set
[60]. This is why these liberties are described as substantial , as
opposed to formal or negative. Hence, capabilities, or substantive
liberties, are composed of (1) individuals’ personal characteristics
(including skills, conditions, and traits), (2) external resources they
have access to, and (3) the configuration of their wider material and
social environment [34].
Prior work at the intersection of technology and capabilities has
addressed the potential of technology to empower users, by en-
hancing their capabilities and choice sets. Johnstone [34] proposes
the capabilities approach as a key framework for computer ethics,
suggesting that technological objects may serve as tools or external
resources that enhance individuals’ range of potential action and
choice [ 17,39]. This is an important role that AI-based technologies
may play in enhancing capabilities: providing tools for geographic
navigation, efficient communications, accurate health diagnoses,
and climate forecasts. Technology may also foster the development
of new skills, abilities, and traits that broaden an individual’s choice
sets. We diagram in Figure 3 the relationship between an AI4SG
project on an individual’s characteristics, resources, and environ-
ments, and thus the potential of AI to alter (both positively and
negatively) capability sets.
Technological objects may also become part of social structures,
forming networks of interdependencies with people, groups, and
other artifacts [ 62,85]. When focusing on AI-based technologies, it
is crucial to also acknowledge their potential to affect the social and
material environment, which may render it more or less conducive

==== Page 5 ====
AI4SGexternal resources goods availablewider material &  social environmentindividuals’ internal characteristics skills, conditions, traitscapability setsfunctionings achievedjointly createindividual choicemay providealtershelps fosterFigure 3: AI for social good research projects can expand and equalize capabilities by fostering individuals’ internal charac-
teristics, providing external resources, or altering the wider material and social environment, thus creating capability sets to
improve social welfare and fight injustice.
to secure capability sets for individuals and communities. For exam-
ple, AI-based predictive policing may increase the presence of law
enforcement agents in specific areas, which may in turn affect the
capability sets of community members residing in those areas. If
this presence increases security from, say, armed robbery, commu-
nity members may enjoy some more liberties than they previously
did. And yet, if this acts to reinforce the disparate impact of law
enforcement on members of vulnerable communities, along with
other inequalities, then it may not only diminish the substantive
liberties of those individuals impacted, but also alter the way in
which such liberties are distributed across the population.
Assessing this kind of trade-off ought to be a crucial step in
evaluating the ability of a particular project to promote social good.
This assessment must be aligned with the kinds of choices and
opportunities community members have reasons to pursue [ 72]. A
project should not be granted the moral standing of being “for social
good” if it leads to localized utility increments, at the expense of
reducing the ability of members of the larger community to choose
the lives they value. Most importantly, this assessment must be
made by community members themselves, as the following section
argues.
5 COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
As Ismail and Kumar [32] contend, communities should ultimately
be the ones to decide whether and how they would like to use AI.
If the former condition is met and the community agrees that an AI
solution may be relevant and useful, the latter requires the inclusive
design of an AI system through a close and continued relationship
between the AI researcher and those impacted.
This close partnership is particularly important as the gross
effects of AI-based social interventions on communities’ capabilities
are unlikely to be exclusively positive. Tradeoffs may be forced on
designers and stakeholders; some are likely to be intergroup, and
some, intragroup. For this reason, it is only consistent with the
proposed approach that designers consult stakeholders from all
groups on their preferred ways to navigate such tradeoffs. In other
words, if PACT is focused on creating capabilities, it must enableimpacted individuals to have a say on what alternatives are opened
(or closed) to them.
Moreover, AI projects that incorporate stakeholders’ choices
into their design process may contribute to create what Wolff and
De-Shalit [86]refer to as “fertile functionings. ” That is, functionings
that, when secured, are likely to secure other functionings. Fertile
functionings include, though are not limited to, the ability to work
and the ability to have social affiliations. These are the kinds of
functionings that either enable other functionings (e.g. control over
one’s environment) or reduce the risk associated with them.
Projects in AI that create propitious environments and enable
individuals to make decisions over the capability sets they value in
turn give those individuals the capability to function in a way that
leads to the creation of other capabilities. If this kind of participatory
space is offered to those who are the most vulnerable, AI could
plausibly act against disadvantage, and contribute to shifting the
distribution of power. In this way, the PACT framework is aligned
with the principles of Design Justice in prioritizing the voices of
affected communities and viewing positive change as a result of an
accountable collaborative process [18].
The PACT framework is also committed to the notion that, when
applying capabilities to AI, we must include all stakeholders, espe-
cially vulnerable members of society. But how do we accomplish
this concretely, and how does this affect the different steps in an
AI4SG research project? In the following section, we will first intro-
duce suggested mechanisms of a participatory approach rooted in
capabilities, and then discuss how these come into play in (1) deter-
mining which capability sets to pursue at the beginning of a project,
and (2) evaluating the success of an AI4SG system in terms of its
impact, particularly on groups’ sets of substantive liberties.
The approach we propose is diagrammed in Figure 4, which
embeds community participation into each stage. By beginning
first with defining capability sets, we resist the temptation to im-
mediately apply established tools to address ingrained social issues,
which would only restrict the possibilities for change [ 48]. These
participatory approaches constitute bottom-up approaches for em-
bedding value into AI systems, by learning values from human

==== Page 6 ====
A Participatory Approach to AI4SGdetermine desired capability setsevaluate successproject design + developmentFigure 4: Our proposed approach to AI4SG projects, where
the key is that stakeholder participation is centered
throughout. We do not explicitly comment on the design
and development of the project other than calling for the
inclusion of community participation and iterative evalua-
tion of success, in terms of whether the project realized the
desired capability sets.
interaction and engagement rather than being decided through the
centralized and non-representative lens of AI researchers [46].
6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR A
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH
To direct the participatory approach we propose, we provide the fol-
lowing set of guiding questions, outlined in Figure 5 and elaborated
on below. These questions are specifically worded to avoid binary
answers of yes or no. When vaguely stated requirements are put
forth as list items to check off, there is a risk of offering a cheap seal
of approval on projects that aren’t sufficiently assessed in terms of
their ethical and societal implications. Instead, we expect that in
nearly all cases, none of these questions will be fully resolved. Thus,
these questions are meant to serve as a constant navigation guide
to help researchers regularly and critically reassess their intended
work.
We begin our discussion on how a participatory approach to
AI4SG would look with our first guiding question:
How are impacted communities identified and how are they rep-
resented in this process? Who represents historically marginalized
groups?
This question is one of the most important and potentially dif-
ficult. As such, we encourage readers to research their domain
of interest and seek partners as an important first step, but of-
fer some advice from our experience. We often consider seeking
partners at non-profits, community-based organizations, and/or
(non-) governmental organizations (NGOs), and have even had some
experience with non-profits or NGOs finding us. Finding these
groups as an AI researcher may be done with the help of an institu-
tion’s experts on partnerships (e.g., university or company officials
focused on forming external partnerships), prior collaborators or
acquaintances, discussions with peers within an institution in dif-
ferent departments (e.g., public health or ecology researchers), or
“cold emails.” Young et al . [87] provide further guiding questions
for finding these partners, particularly in their companion guide
[50]. In any case, some vetting and research is an important step.AI researchers may also co-organize workshops, such as a pair
of “AI vs. tuberculosis” workshops held by some of the authors in
Mumbai, India which brought together domain experts, non-profits,
state and local health officials, industry experts, and researchers,
identified by Mumbai-based collaborators who specialize in building
relationships across health-focused organizations in India. The
varied backgrounds of the stakeholders at these workshops was
conducive to quickly identifying areas of greatest need across the
spectrum of tuberculosis care in India, many of which would not
have been considered by AI researchers alone. Further, these group
forums sparked conversations between stakeholders that often
would not otherwise communicate, but that led to initial ideas
for solutions. This highlights that such approaches are often most
successful when AI researchers move out of their usual spheres and
into the venues of the domains that their projects impact.
At the inception of a project, the designers and initial partners
should together identify all relevant stakeholders that will be im-
pacted by the proposed project, bringing them on as partners or
members of a (possibly informal) advisory panel. Every effort should
be made to include at least one member from each impacted group.
If stakeholders were initially omitted and are later identified, they
should then be added. Initial consultation with panel members and
partners should be carried out in a way that facilitates open and can-
did discussion to ensure all voices are represented and accounted
for during the project design phase [ 87]. We additionally propose
that during the lifetime of the project, the panel and partners should,
if possible, be available for ongoing consultation during mutually
agreed upon checkpoints to ensure the project continues to align
with stakeholder values. Similar practices have been suggested by
Perrault et al . [66] , who advocate for close, long-term collaborations
with domain experts. Likewise, the Design Justice network pursues
non-exploitative and community-led design processes, in which
designers serve more as facilitators than experts. This framework
is modeled on the idea of a horizontal relation in which affected
communities are given the role of domain experts, given their lived
experience and direct understanding of projects’ impact [18].
How are plans laid out for maintaining and sustaining this work in
the long-term, and how would the partnership be ended?
We believe partnership norms should be established at the begin-
ning of the partnership, including ensuring that the community
representatives and experiential experts have the power to end
the project and partnership, in addition to the designers and other
stakeholders. As noted by Madaio et al . [49] , this should also neces-
sitate an internal discussion amongst the research team to decide
what, if any, criteria would be grounds for such a cessation, e.g., if it
becomes clear that the problem at hand requires methods in which
the research team does not have sufficient expertise. Discussions
with the broader partners should also lay out the expected time
scale and potential benefits and risks for all involved.
Once the relationship is underway, it should be maintained as
discussed, with regular communication. When a project reaches
the point where a potential deployment is possible, we advocate
for an incremental deployment, such as the example of Germany’s
teststrecken for self-driving cars, which sets constraints for auton-
omy, then expands these constraints once certain criteria are met
[23].

==== Page 7 ====
Guiding Principles for a Participatory Approach to AI4SGHow are impacted communities identi/f.shortied? Represented?         Including marginalized groups? Long-term plans for maintaining work?  Compensation for their input? Are they valued as partners? How to incorporate divergent viewpoints? How are concerns addressed?Determining Capability SetsWhat functionings do stakeholders want to achieve? What functionings are priority for the most vulnerable? Are any of the capability sets fertile? Do the values of the project match those of the community?Evaluating AI4SGHow does the new AI4SG system aﬀect all stakeholders' capabilities, particularly those selected at the start? Are any capabilities or functionings negatively aﬀected? What should the role of an AI researcher be?Figure 5: Guiding principles for the participatory approach we propose. The key message is to center the community’s desired
capabilities throughout, and to ensure that the goals of the project are properly aligned to do so without negatively impacting
other capabilities.
What kind of compensation are stakeholders receiving for their time
and input? Does that compensation respect them as partners?
Stakeholders must be respected as experiential or domain experts
and be considered as partners. They must be compensated in some
way, whether monetarily or otherwise. We advocate for compen-
sation to avoid establishing an approach made under the guise of
participatory AI that ends up being extractive [ 63]. One notable
drawback to a participatory approach is the potential for these com-
munity interactions to become exploitative if not done with inten-
tion, compensation, or long-term interactions [ 76]. Collaborators
who have significantly influenced the design or implementation of
a project ought to be recognized as coauthors or otherwise acknowl-
edged in resulting publications, presentations, media coverage, etc.
How can we understand and incorporate viewpoints from many groups
of stakeholders?
Surveys or voting may seem a natural choice. However, a simple
voting mechanism is risky, as it may find that a majority of the
community favors, for example, building a heavily polluting factory
near a river, while the impacted community living at the proposed
site would object that this factory would severely degrade their
quality of life. These concerns from the marginalized group must
be given due weight. This emphasis on the welfare of marginal-
ized groups is based on the premise that the evaluation of human
capabilities must consider individual capabilities [59]. In short, all
individual capabilities are valuable as ends in their own right; they
should never be considered means to someone else’s rights or wel-
fare. We must, therefore, guard against depriving individuals of
basic entitlements as a means to enhancing overall welfare.Hence, we endorse a deliberative approach, which aims to un-
cover “overlapping consensus” [ 67]. This approach is based on the
expectation that, in allowing diverse worldviews, value systems,
and preference sets to engage in conversation, with appropriate
moderation and technical tools, social groups may find a core set
of decisions that all participants can reasonably agree with. De-
liberative approaches to democracy have been operationalized by
programs such as vTaiwan, which uses digital technology to inform
policy by building consensus through civic engagement and dia-
logue [ 31]. vTaiwan uses the consensus-oriented voting platform
Pol.is which seeks to identify a set of common values upon which
to shape legislation, rather than arbitrating between polarized sides
[78]. Similarly, OPPi serves as a platform for consensus building
through bottom-up crowd-sourcing [ 47]. This tool is tailored for
opinion sharing and seeking, oriented towards finding common
ground among stakeholders.
An alternative to fully public deliberative processes are targeted
efforts such as Diverse Voices panels [ 87] which focus on including
traditionally marginalized groups in existing policy-making pro-
cesses. Specifically, they advocate for informal elicitation sessions
with partners, asking questions such as, “What do you do currently?
What would support your work?” [ 37]. They also suggest consider-
ing whether tech should be used in the first place and highlight that
a key challenge of participatory design is to determine a course of
action if multiple participants disagree. We add that it remains a
challenge to assemble these panels.
Simonsen and Robertson [75] provide multiple strategies as well,
particularly with the goal of coming to a common language and
fostering communication between groups of experts from different

==== Page 8 ====
backgrounds. They suggest strategies to invite discussion, such as
games, acting out design proposals, storytelling, group brainstorms
of what a perfect utopian solution would look like, participatory
prototyping, and probing. In the case of probing, for example, one
strategy was to provide participants with a cultural probe kit, con-
sisting of items such as a diary and a camera, in order to understand
people’s reactions to their environments [24].
Further, several fields in artificial intelligence have devoted a
great deal of thought to learning and aggregating preferences: pref-
erence elicitation [ 12], which learns agent utility functions; com-
putational social choice [9], which deals with truthful agents; and
mechanism design [ 74], which deals with strategic agents. As an ex-
ample, Kahng et al . [35] form what they call a “virtual democracy”
for a food rescue program. They collect data about preferences
on which food pantry should receive food, then use these prefer-
ences to create and aggregate the preferences of virtual voters. The
goal is to make ethical decisions without needing to reach out to
stakeholders each time a food distribution decision needs to be
made.
These fields have highlighted theoretical limitations in prefer-
ence aggregation, such as Arrow’s impossibility theorem [ 4] which
reveals limitations in the ability to aggregate preferences with as
few as three voters, but these results do not necessarily inhibit us
from designing good systems in practice [ 53,71]. Such areas provide
rich directions for future research, particularly at the intersection
of participatory methods and social science research.
What specific concerns are raised during the deliberative process, and
how are these addressed?
Diverse Voices panels [ 87] with experiential experts (both from
non-profits and from within the community) may also be used to
identify potential issues by asking questions such as “What mistakes
could be made by decision makers because of how this proposal
is currently worded?” and, “What does the proposal not say that
you wish it said?” Other strategies we discussed for understanding
multiple viewpoints may also have a role to play here when tailored
towards sharing concerns. However, we also stress the importance
of ongoing partnerships with impacted community members be-
yond just an initial session. By ensuring that the community has a
voice throughout the project’s lifetime, their values are always kept
front-and-center. As others have argued, it is not sufficient to inter-
view impacted communities once simply to “check the participatory
box” [76].
6.1 Determining Capability Sets
Now, equipped with some guiding questions and concrete examples
of a participatory approach, we will apply these principles directly
to selecting capability sets at the outset of an AI4SG project. To
identify what capabilities to work towards, some scholars such as
Nussbaum [59] have proposed well-defined sets of capabilities and
argued that society ought to focus on enabling those capabilities.
However, we endorse the view that the selection of an optimal set
of capabilities should be based on community consensus [ 70]. We
argue that an AI project can only be for social good if it is responsive
to the values of the communities affected by the AI system.
What functionings do members of the various stakeholder groups wish
they could achieve through the implementation of the project?In the fair machine learning literature, Martin Jr. et al . [52] pro-
pose a participatory method called community-based system dy-
namics (CBSD) to bring stakeholders in to help formulate a machine
learning problem and mitigate bias. Their method is designed to
understand causal relationships, specifically feedback loops, par-
ticularly those in high-stakes environments such as health care or
criminal justice, that may disadvantage marginalized and vulnerable
groups. This process is intended to bring in relevant stakeholders
and recognize that their lived experience makes these participants
more qualified to recognize the effects of these interventions. Us-
ing visual diagrams designed by impacted community members,
the CBSD method can help identify levers that may help enable
or inhibit functionings, particularly for those who are most vul-
nerable. Similarly, Simonsen and Robertson [75] suggest the use
of mock-ups and prototypes to facilitate communication between
experiential experts and developers. Other strategies discussed for
understanding multiple viewpoints may also apply if tailored to-
wards determining capabilities.
What functionings are the priority for those most vulnerable? Is there
an overlap between their priorities and the goals of other stakeholders?
We need to pay attention to those who are most vulnerable.
The capabilities approach may be leveraged to fight inequality by
thinking in terms of capability equalizing. To identify capabilities
that are not yet available to marginalized members of a community,
we must listen to their concerns and ensure those concerns are
prioritized, for example via strategies proposed in our discussions
on finding those impacted by AI systems and including multiple
viewpoints.
As an example of the consequences of failing to include those
most vulnerable throughout the lifetime of an AI system, consider
one of the initial steps of data collection. Women are often ignored
in datasets and therefore their needs are underreported [ 20]. For
example, crash-test dummies were designed to resemble the average
male, and vehicles were evaluated to be safe based on these male
dummies—leaving women 47% more likely to be seriously injured
in a crash [ 65]. These imbalances are often also intersectional, as
Buolamwini and Gebru [10] demonstrate by revealing stark racial
and gender-based disparities in facial recognition algorithms.
Beyond the inclusion of all groups in datasets, data must be prop-
erly stratified to expose disparities. During the COVID-19 pandemic
in December 2020, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported a loss
of 140,000 net jobs. The stratified data reveal that all losses were
women’s: women lost 156,000 jobs while men gained 16,000, and un-
employment was most severe for Black, Latinx, and Asian women
[21]. Without accounting for the capabilities of all people affected
by such systems, it is difficult to claim that these technologies were
for social good.
On the other hand, prioritizing the needs of the most marginal-
ized groups may at times offer an accelerated path towards achiev-
ing collective goals. Project Drawdown identified and ranked 100
practical solutions for stopping climate change [ 29]. Number 6 on its
list was the education of girls, recognizing that women with higher
levels of education marry later and have fewer children, as well
as manage agricultural plots with greater yield. Another solution
advocates for securing land tenure of indigenous peoples, whose

==== Page 9 ====
stewardship of the land fights deforestation, resource extraction,
and monocropping.
Are any of these capability sets fertile, in the sense of securing other
capabilities?
To maximize the capabilities of various communities, we may
wish to focus on capabilities that produce fertile functionings, as
discussed in Section 5. Specifically, many functionings are necessary
inputs to produce others; for example, achieving physical fitness
from playing sports requires as input good health and nourishment
[15]. Some of Nussbaum’s 10 central capabilities—including bodily
integrity (security against violence and freedom of mobility) and
control over one’s environment (right of political participation, to
hold property, and dignified work)—may be viewed as fertile [ 59].
Reading, for instance, may secure the capability to work, associate
with others, and have control over one’s environment. AI has the
potential to help achieve many of these capabilities. For example,
accessible crowdwork, done thoughtfully, offers the opportunity
for people with disabilities to find flexible work without the need
for transit [88].
How closely do the values of the project match those of the community
as opposed to the designers? How does the focus of the project respond
to their expressed needs and concerns? Does the project have the
capacity to respond to those needs?
Consider the scenario where a community finds it acceptable to
hunt elephants, while the designers are trying to prevent poach-
ing. There could be agreement on high-level values, such as public
health, but disagreement on whether to prioritize specific interven-
tions to promote public health. There could even be a complete lack
of interest in the proposed AI system by the community.
At an early stage of a project, AI researchers need to facilitate
a consultation method to understand communities’ values and
choices. Note that this process could allow stark differences in pri-
ority between stakeholders to surface which prevent the project
from starting so as not to over-invest in a project that will later
be terminated because of difference in values. We may consider
several of the strategies we discussed previously in this case, such
as deliberative democratic processes, Diverse Voices panels, or com-
putational social choice methods. It may subsequently be necessary
to end the project if these strategies do not work.
6.2 Evaluating AI for Social Good
Once AI researchers and practitioners have a system tailored to
these capabilities, we believe that communities should be the ones
to judge the success of this new system. This stage of the process
may pose additional challenges, given the difficulty of measuring
capabilities [ 34]. Though we do not here endorse any measurement
methodology, various attempts to operationalize the capabilities
approach give us confidence that such methodologies are feasible
and may be implemented in the course of evaluating AI projects
[3].
First and foremost, we maintain that the evaluation of success
should be done throughout the lifecycle of the AI4SG project (and
beyond) as discussed above, especially via community feedback.
However, we wish to emphasize that we as AI researchers need
to keep capabilities in mind as we evaluate the success of AI4SG
projects to avoid “unintended consequences” and a short-sightedfocus on improved performance on metrics such as accuracy, preci-
sion, or recall.
How does the new AI4SG system affect all stakeholders’ capabilities,
particularly those selected at the start?
This question is related to the literature on measuring capabilities
[34], and is therefore difficult to answer. We will aim to provide a
few examples, which may not apply well to every AI4SG system,
nor will it be an exhaustive list of techniques that could be valid.
First, based on the idea of AI as a diagnostic to measure social
problems [ 1], we may be able to (partially) probe this question us-
ing data. Sweeney [77] show through ad data that advertisements
related to arrest records were more likely to be displayed when
searching for “Black-sounding” names, which may affect a candi-
date’s employment capability, for example. Obermeyer et al . [61]
analyze predictions, model inputs and parameters, and true health
outcome data to show that the capability of health is violated for
Black communities, as they are included in certain health programs
less frequently than white communities due to a biased algorithm.
There could additionally be feedback mechanisms when an in-
tervention is deployed, whether via the AI system itself, or possibly
by collaborating with local non-profits and NGOs. This may be
especially useful in cases where these organizations are already
engaged in tracking and improving key capabilities such as health
outcomes, e.g., World Health Partners [ 14] or CARE international
[33]. Again, these examples will likely not apply to all cases and
opens the door for further, interdisciplinary research. However, no
matter what strategy is taken, it is imperative that we continue
to center communities in all attempts to measure the effects on
stakeholders’ capabilities.
Are other valued capabilities or functionings negatively affected as a
result of the project? Are stakeholders’ values and priority rankings
in line with such tradeoffs?
We have a responsibility to actively think about possible outcomes;
it is neglect to dismiss negative possibilities as “unintended conse-
quences” [ 64]. These participatory mechanisms should thus ensure
that the perspective of the most vulnerable and most impacted
stakeholders is given due consideration. We recognize that this can
be especially challenging, as discussed in our first guiding ques-
tion for identifying impacted communities. Therefore, we further
suggest that the evaluation of an AI4SG project should employ
consultation mechanisms that are open to all community mem-
bers throughout the implementation process, such as the feedback
mechanisms suggested previously.
What should my role be as an AI researcher? As a student?
We believe that AI researchers at all levels should participate in
this work. This work involves all of the above points, including
learning about the domain to understand who stakeholders are,
discussing with the stakeholders, and evaluating performance. We
also acknowledge that we AI researchers may not always be the
best suited to lead participatory efforts, and so encourage inter-
disciplinary collaborations between computer science and other
disciplines, such as social sciences. A strong example would be the
Center for Analytical Approaches to Social Innovation (CAASI) at
the University of Pittsburgh, which brings together interdisciplinary
teams from policy, computing, and social work [ 11]. However, AI

==== Page 10 ====
researchers should not completely offload these important scenar-
ios to social science or non-profit colleagues. It should be a team
effort, which we believe will bring fruitful research in social science,
computer science, and even more disciplines.
AI researchers and students can also advocate for systematic
change from within, which we discuss more in depth in the con-
clusion. Although student researchers are limited by constraints
such as research opportunities and funding, they may establish a
set of moral aspirations for their work and set aside time for people-
centered activities, such as mentoring and community-building
[13].
7 CONCLUSION: THOUGHTS ON AI FOR
SOCIAL GOOD AS A FIELD
In this paper, we lay out a community-centered approach to defining
AI for social good research that focuses on elevating the capabilities
of those members who are most marginalized. This focus on capa-
bilities, we argue, is best enacted through a participatory approach
that includes those affected throughout the design, development
and deployment process, and gives them ground to choose their
desired capability sets as well as influence how they wish to see
those capabilities realized.
We recognize that the participatory approach we lay out requires
a significant investment of time, energy, and resources beyond
what is typical in AI or even much existing AI4SG research. We
highlight this discrepancy to urge a reformation within the AI research
community to reconsider existing incentives to encourage researchers
to pursue more socially impactful work.
Institutions have the power to catalyze change by (1) establish-
ing requirements for community engagement in research related
to public-facing AI systems; and (2) increasing incentives for re-
searchers to meaningfully engage impacted communities while
simultaneously producing more impactful research [6].
While engaging in collaborative work with communities can
give rise to some technical directions of independent interest to the
AI community [ 19], such a shift to encourage community-focused
work will in part require reconsidering evaluation criteria used
when reviewing papers at top AI conferences. Greater value must
be placed on papers with positive social outcomes, including those
with potential for impact, if the work has not yet been deployed.
Such new criteria are necessary since long-term, successful AI4SG
partnerships often also lead to non-technical contributions, as well
as situated programs which do not focus necessarily on general-
izability [ 66]. We encourage conferences to additionally consider
rewarding socially beneficial work with analogies to Best Paper
awards, such as the “New Horizons” award from the MD4SG 2020
Workshop, and institutions to recognize impactful work such as the
Social Impact Award at the Berkeley School of Information [58].
In the meantime, we suggest that researchers look to nontradi-
tional or interdisciplinary venues for publishing their impactful
community-focused work. These venues often gather researchers
from a variety of disciplines outside computer science, opening the
door for future collaborations. For example, researchers could con-
sider COMPASS, IAAI, MD4SG/EAAMO [ 2], the LIMITS workshop
[57], and special tracks at AAAI and IJCAI, among others. Venues
such as the Computational Sustainability Doctoral Consortium andCRCS Rising Stars workshop bring students together from multiple
disciplines to build relationships with each other. Researchers could
also consider domain workshops and conferences, such as those in
ecology or public health.
The incentive structure in AI research is often stacked against
thoughtful deployment. Whereas a traditional experimental section
may take as little as a week to prepare, a deployment in the field
may take months or years, but is rarely afforded corresponding
weight by reviewers and committee members. This extended time-
line weighs most heavily on PhD students and untenured faculty
who are evaluated on shorter timescales. We should thus reward
both incremental and long-term deployment, freeing researchers
from the pressure to rush to deployment before an approach is
validated and ready.
In addition to the need for bringing stakeholders into the design
process of AI research, we must ensure that all communities are
welcomed as AI researchers as well. Such an effort could counteract
existing disparities and inequities within the field. For example, as
is the case in other academic disciplines, systemic anti-Blackness is
ingrained in the AI community, with racial discrepancies in physi-
cal resources such as access to a secure environment in which to
focus, social resources such as access to project collaborators or
referrals for internships, and measures such as the GRE or teacher
evaluations [ 28]. Further, as of 2018, only around 20% of tenure-
track computer science faculty were women [ 69]. To combat these
inequities, people across the academic ladder may actively work
to change who they hire, with whom they collaborate, including
collaborations with minority-serving institutions [ 41], and how
much time they spend on service activities to improve diversity
efforts [28].
The above reformations could contribute greatly to making the
use of participatory approaches the norm in AI4SG research, rather
than the exception. PACT, we argue, is a meaningful new way
to answer the question: “what is AI for social good?” We, as AI
researchers dedicated to the advancement of social good, must
make a PACT with communities to find our way forward together.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Jamelle Watson-Daniels and Milind Tambe
for valuable discussions. Thank you to all those we have collab-
orated with throughout our AI4SG journey for their partnership,
wisdom, guidance, and insights. This work was supported by the
Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS) at the
Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sci-
ences.
REFERENCES
[1]Rediet Abebe, Solon Barocas, Jon Kleinberg, Karen Levy, Manish Raghavan, and
David G Robinson. 2020. Roles for computing in social change. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . 252–260.
[2]Rediet Abebe and Kira Goldner. 2018. Mechanism design for social good. AI
Matters 4, 3 (2018), 27–34.
[3]Paul Anand, Graham Hunter, Ian Carter, Keith Dowding, Francesco Guala, and
Martin Van Hees. 2009. The development of capability indicators. Journal of
Human Development and Capabilities 10, 1 (2009), 125–152.
[4]Kenneth J Arrow. 1950. A difficulty in the concept of social welfare. Journal of
political economy 58, 4 (1950), 328–346.
[5]Abeba Birhane and Olivia Guest. 2020. Towards decolonising computational
sciences. Women, Gender and Research (2020).

==== Page 11 ====
[6]Emily Black, Joshua Williams, Michael A. Madaio, and Priya L. Donti. 2020. A
call for universities to develop requirements for community engagement in ai
research. In The Fair and Responsible AI Workshop at the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems .
[7]Joshua Blumenstock. 2018. Don’t forget people in the use of big data for devel-
opment. Nature 561 (2018), 170–172.
[8]Anna Bogomolnaia, Hervé Moulin, and Richard Stong. 2005. Collective choice
under dichotomous preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 122, 2 (2005), 165–
184.
[9]Felix Brandt, Vincent Conitzer, Ulle Endriss, Jérôme Lang, and Ariel D Procaccia.
2016. Handbook of computational social choice . Cambridge University Press.
[10] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender shades: Intersectional accu-
racy disparities in commercial gender classification. In Conference on fairness,
accountability and transparency . PMLR, 77–91.
[11] CAASI. 2021. Center for Analytical Approaches to Social Innovation. http:
//caasi.pitt.edu/
[12] Urszula Chajewska, Daphne Koller, and Ronald Parr. 2000. Making rational
decisions using adaptive utility elicitation. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-00) . 363–369.
[13] Alan Chan. 2020. Approaching Ethical Impacts in AI Research: The Role of a
Graduate Student. In Resistance AI Workshop at NeurIPS .
[14] Annapurna Chavali. 2011. World health partners. Hyderabad, India: ACCESS
Health International Centre for Emerging Markets Solutions Indian School of Busi-
ness (2011).
[15] David A Clark. 2005. Sen’s capability approach and the many spaces of human
well-being. The Journal of Development Studies 41, 8 (2005), 1339–1368.
[16] Mark Coeckelbergh. 2010. Health care, capabilities, and AI assistive technologies.
Ethical theory and moral practice 13, 2 (2010), 181–190.
[17] Julie E Cohen. 2012. Configuring the networked self: Law, code, and the play of
everyday practice . Yale University Press.
[18] Sasha Constanza-Chock. 2020. Introduction: #TravelingWhileTrans, De-
sign Justice, and Escape from the Matrix of Domination. In Design Jus-
tice(1 ed.). https://design-justice.pubpub.org/pub/ap8rgw5e https://design-
justice.pubpub.org/pub/ap8rgw5e.
[19] Maria De-Arteaga, William Herlands, Daniel B Neill, and Artur Dubrawski. 2018.
Machine learning for the developing world. ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems (TMIS) 9, 2 (2018), 1–14.
[20] Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F Klein. 2020. Data feminism . MIT Press.
[21] Claire Ewing-Nelson. 2021. All of the Jobs Lost in December Were Women’s Jobs.
National Women’s Law Center Fact Sheet (2021).
[22] Luciano Floridi, Josh Cowls, Monica Beltrametti, Raja Chatila, Patrice Chazerand,
Virginia Dignum, Christoph Luetge, Robert Madelin, Ugo Pagallo, Francesca Rossi,
et al.2018. AI4People—an ethical framework for a good AI society: opportunities,
risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds and Machines 28, 4 (2018), 689–
707.
[23] Luciano Floridi, Josh Cowls, Thomas C King, and Mariarosaria Taddeo. 2020.
How to design AI for social good: Seven essential factors. Science and Engineering
Ethics 26, 3 (2020), 1771–1796.
[24] Bill Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti. 1999. Design: cultural probes. inter-
actions 6, 1 (1999), 21–29.
[25] Mary L Gray and Siddharth Suri. 2019. Ghost work: How to stop Silicon Valley
from building a new global underclass . Eamon Dolan Books.
[26] Ben Green. 2018. Data science as political action: grounding data science in a
politics of justice. Available at SSRN 3658431 (2018).
[27] Ben Green. 2019. “Good” isn’t good enough. In AI for Social Good Workshop at
NeurIPS .
[28] Devin Guillory. 2020. Combating anti-Blackness in the AI community. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.16879 (2020).
[29] Paul Hawken. 2017. Drawdown: The most comprehensive plan ever proposed to
reverse global warming . Penguin.
[30] Marianne Hill. 2003. Development as empowerment. Feminist economics 9, 2-3
(2003), 117–135.
[31] Yu-Tang Hsiao, Shu-Yang Lin, Audrey Tang, Darshana Narayanan, and Claudina
Sarahe. 2018. vTaiwan: An empirical study of open consultation process in
Taiwan. SocArXiv (2018).
[32] Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar. 2021. AI in Global Health: The View from the Front
Lines. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
[33] Barney Jeffries. 2017. CARE International Annual Report FY17. CARE Interna-
tional (2017).
[34] Justine Johnstone. 2007. Technology as empowerment: A capability approach to
computer ethics. Ethics and Information Technology 9, 1 (2007), 73–87.
[35] Anson Kahng, Min Kyung Lee, Ritesh Noothigattu, Ariel Procaccia, and Christos-
Alexandros Psomas. 2019. Statistical foundations of virtual democracy. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning . 3173–3182.
[36] Pratyusha Kalluri. 2020. Don’t ask if artificial intelligence is good or fair, ask
how it shifts power. Nature 583, 7815 (2020), 169–169.
[37] Michael Katell, Meg Young, Dharma Dailey, Bernease Herman, Vivian Guetler,
Aaron Tam, Corinne Bintz, Daniella Raz, and PM Krafft. 2020. Toward situatedinterventions for algorithmic equity: lessons from the field. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . 45–55.
[38] Jin-Hwa Kim, Soohyun Lim, Jaesun Park, and Hansu Cho. 2019. Korean Local-
ization of Visual Question Answering for Blind People. In AI for Social Good
Workshop at NeurIPS .
[39] Dorothea Kleine. 2013. Technologies of choice?: ICTs, development, and the capa-
bilities approach . MIT Press.
[40] Christine Koggel. 2003. Globalization and women’s paid work: expanding free-
dom? Feminist Economics 9, 2-3 (2003), 163–184.
[41] Caitlin Kuhlman, Latifa Jackson, and Rumi Chunara. 2020. No computation
without representation: Avoiding data and algorithm biases through diversity.
InProceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining .
[42] Neha Kumar, Naveena Karusala, Azra Ismail, and Anupriya Tuli. 2020. Taking the
long, holistic, and intersectional view to women’s wellbeing. ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 4 (2020), 1–32.
[43] Roberta Kwok. 2019. AI empowers conservation biology. Nature 567, 7746 (2019),
133–135.
[44] Mark Latonero. 2019. Opinion: AI For Good Is Often Bad. https://www.wired.
com/story/opinion-ai-for-good-is-often-bad/.
[45] Jason Edward Lewis, Angie Abdilla, Noelani Arista, Kaipulaumakaniolono Baker,
Scott Benesiinaabandan, Michelle Brown, Melanie Cheung, Meredith Coleman,
Ashley Cordes, Joel Davison, et al .2020. Indigenous Protocol and Artificial
Intelligence Position Paper. Concordia Spectrum (2020).
[46] Q Vera Liao and Michael Muller. 2019. Enabling Value Sensitive AI Systems
through Participatory Design Fictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07381 (2019).
[47] Adrian Liew, Wong Seong Cheng, Santosh Kumar, Wayne Neo, Yinxue Tay,
Kim Ng, and Jennifer Lewis. Accessed 2021. The pulse of the people. https:
//www.oppi.live/.
[48] Audre Lorde. 1984. The master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house.
InSister outsider: Essays and speeches . Ten Speed Press.
[49] Michael A Madaio, Luke Stark, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Hanna Wallach.
2020. Co-Designing Checklists to Understand Organizational Challenges and
Opportunities around Fairness in AI. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14.
[50] Lassana Magassa, Meg Young, and Batya Friedman. 2017. Diverse Voices:
a method for underrepresented voices to strengthen tech policy docu-
ments. https://techpolicylab.uw.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/TPL_Diverse_
Voices_How-To_Guide_2017.pdf.
[51] Eirini Malliaraki. 2019. What is this “AI for Social Good”? https://eirinimalliaraki.
medium.com/what-is-this-ai-for-social-good-f37ad7ad7e91.
[52] Donald Martin Jr., Vinod Prabhakaran, Jill Kuhlberg, Andrew Smart, and
William S Isaac. 2020. Participatory problem formulation for fairer machine
learning through community based system dynamics. In Eighth International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[53] Eric Maskin and Amartya Sen. 2014. The Arrow impossibility theorem . Columbia
University Press.
[54] Sabelo Mhlambi. 2020. From Rationality to Relationality: Ubuntu as an Ethical
and Human Rights Framework for Artificial Intelligence Governance. Carr Center
Discussion Paper Series (2020).
[55] Shakir Mohamed, Marie-Therese Png, and William Isaac. 2020. Decolonial ai:
Decolonial theory as sociotechnical foresight in artificial intelligence. Philosophy
& Technology (2020), 1–26.
[56] Jared Moore. 2019. AI for not bad. Frontiers in Big Data 2 (2019), 32.
[57] Bonnie Nardi, Bill Tomlinson, Donald J Patterson, Jay Chen, Daniel Pargman,
Barath Raghavan, and Birgit Penzenstadler. 2018. Computing within limits.
Commun. ACM 61, 10 (2018), 86–93.
[58] Berkeley ISchool News. 2021. New Award Supports Social Good . https://www.
ischool.berkeley.edu/news/2021/new-award-supports-social-good
[59] Martha C. Nussbaum. 2000. Introduction: Feminism and International Develop-
ment. In Women and human development: the capabilities approach . Cambridge
University Press.
[60] Martha C Nussbaum. 2011. Creating capabilities . Harvard University Press.
[61] Ziad Obermeyer, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2019.
Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.
Science 366, 6464 (2019), 447–453.
[62] Ilse Oosterlaken. 2015. Technology and human development . Routledge.
[63] Rachel Pain and Peter Francis. 2003. Reflections on participatory research. Area
35, 1 (2003), 46–54.
[64] Nassim Parvin and Anne Pollock. 2020. Unintended by Design: On the Political
Uses of “Unintended Consequences”. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society
(2020).
[65] Caroline Criado Perez. 2019. Invisible women: Exposing data bias in a world
designed for men . Random House.
[66] Andrew Perrault, Fei Fang, Arunesh Sinha, and Milind Tambe. 2020. AI for Social
Impact: Learning and Planning in the Data-to-Deployment Pipeline. AI Magazine
41, 4 (2020).
[67] John Rawls. 1971. A Theory of Justice . Harvard University Press.

==== Page 12 ====
[68] Christopher Robichaud. 2005. With great power comes great responsibility: On the
moral duties of the super-powerful and super-heroic . Open Court.
[69] Joseph Roy. 2019. Engineering by the numbers. In Engineering by the numbers .
American Society for Engineering Education, 1–40.
[70] Amartya Sen. 1999. Development as Freedom . Alfred A. Knopf.
[71] Amartya Sen. 1999. The possibility of social choice. American economic review
89, 3 (1999), 349–378.
[72] Amartya Sen. 2017. Collective choice and social welfare . Harvard University Press.
[73] Zheyuan Ryan Shi, Claire Wang, and Fei Fang. 2020. Artificial intelligence for
social good: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01818 (2020).
[74] Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2008. Multiagent systems: Algorithmic,
game-theoretic, and logical foundations . Cambridge University Press.
[75] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson. 2012. Routledge international handbook of
participatory design . Routledge.
[76] Mona Sloane, Emanuel Moss, Olaitan Awomolo, and Laura Forlano. 2020. Partic-
ipation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02423
(2020).
[77] Latanya Sweeney. 2013. Discrimination in online ad delivery. Commun. ACM 56,
5 (2013), 44–54.
[78] Audrey Tang. 2020. Inside Taiwan’s new digital democracy. The Economist
(2020).
[79] Hannah Thinyane and Karthik S Bhat. 2019. Apprise: Supporting the critical-
agency of victims of human trafficking in Thailand. In Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14.[80] Mark Timmons. 2013. Moral theory: An introduction . Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.
[81] Nenad Tomašev, Julien Cornebise, Frank Hutter, Shakir Mohamed, Angela Piccia-
riello, Bec Connelly, Danielle CM Belgrave, Daphne Ezer, Fanny Cachat van der
Haert, Frank Mugisha, et al .2020. AI for social good: unlocking the opportunity
for positive impact. Nature Communications 11, 1 (2020), 1–6.
[82] Mahbub Ul Haq. 2003. The birth of the human development index. Readings in
human development (2003), 127–137.
[83] Fei Wang and Anita Preininger. 2019. AI in health: state of the art, challenges,
and future directions. Yearbook of medical informatics 28, 1 (2019), 16.
[84] Meredith Whittaker, Meryl Alper, Cynthia L Bennett, Sara Hendren, Liz Kaziunas,
Mara Mills, Meredith Ringel Morris, Joy Rankin, Emily Rogers, Marcel Salas, et al .
2019. Disability, Bias, and AI. AI Now Institute (2019).
[85] Langdon Winner. 1980. Do artifacts have politics? Daedalus (1980), 121–136.
[86] Jonathan Wolff and Avner De-Shalit. 2007. Disadvantage . Oxford university press
on demand.
[87] Meg Young, Lassana Magassa, and Batya Friedman. 2019. Toward inclusive tech
policy design: a method for underrepresented voices to strengthen tech policy
documents. Ethics and Information Technology 21, 2 (2019), 89–103.
[88] Kathryn Zyskowski, Meredith Ringel Morris, Jeffrey P Bigham, Mary L Gray, and
Shaun K Kane. 2015. Accessible crowdwork? Understanding the value in and
challenge of microtask employment for people with disabilities. In Proceedings
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing . 1682–1693.

