==== Page 1 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Kai Sheng Tai1Peter Bailis1Gregory Valiant1
Abstract
How can prior knowledge on the transforma-
tion invariances of a domain be incorporated
into the architecture of a neural network? We
propose Equivariant Transformers (ETs), a fam-
ily of differentiable image-to-image mappings
that improve the robustness of models towards
pre-deﬁned continuous transformation groups.
Through the use of specially-derived canonical co-
ordinate systems, ETs incorporate functions that
are equivariant by construction with respect to
these transformations. We show empirically that
ETs can be ﬂexibly composed to improve model
robustness towards more complicated transforma-
tion groups in several parameters. On a real-world
image classiﬁcation task, ETs improve the sample
efﬁciency of ResNet classiﬁers, achieving rela-
tive improvements in error rate of up to 15% in
the limited data regime while increasing model
parameter count by less than 1%.
1. Introduction
In computer vision, we are often equipped with prior knowl-
edge on the transformation invariances of a domain. Con-
sider, for example, the problem of classifying street signs
in real-world images. In this domain, we know that the
appearance of a sign in an image is subject to various defor-
mations: the sign may be rotated, its scale will depend on its
distance, and it may appear distorted due to perspective in
3D space. Regardless, the identity of the street sign should
remain invariant to these transformations.
With the exception of translation invariance, convolutional
neural network (CNN) architectures typically do not take
advantage of such prior knowledge on the transformation
invariances of the domain. Instead, current standard practice
heuristically incorporates these priors during training via
data augmentation ( e.g., by applying a random rotation or
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kai Sheng Tai <kst@cs.stanford.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).scaling to each training image). While data augmentation
typically helps reduce the test error of CNN-based models,
there is no guarantee that transformation invariance will be
enforced for data not seen during training.
In contrast to training time approaches like data augmen-
tation, recent work on group equivariant CNNs (Cohen &
Welling, 2016; Dieleman et al., 2016; Marcos et al., 2017;
Worrall et al., 2017; Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Cohen
et al., 2018) has explored new CNN architectures that are
guaranteed to respond predictably to particular transforma-
tions of the input. For example, the CNN model family
may be constrained such that a rotation of the input results
in a corresponding rotation of its subsequent representa-
tion, a property known as equivariance. However, these
techniques—most commonly designed for rotations and
translations of the input ( e.g., Dieleman et al. (2016); Mar-
cos et al. (2017); Worrall et al. (2017))—fail to generalize
to deeper compositions of continuous transformations. This
limits the applicability of these techniques in more compli-
cated real-world scenarios involving continuous transforma-
tions in several dimensions, such as the above example of
street sign classiﬁcation.
To address these shortcomings of group equivariant CNNs,
we propose Equivariant Transformer (ET) layers, a ﬂexible
class of functions that improves robustness towards arbitrary
pre-deﬁned groups of continuous transformations. An ET
layer for a transformation group Gis an image-to-image
mapping that satisﬁes the following local invariance prop-
erty: for any input image and transformation T2G, the
imagesandTare both mapped to the same output im-
age. ET layers are differentiable with respect to both their
parameters and input, and thus can be easily incorporated
into existing CNN architectures. Additionally, ET layers
can be ﬂexibly combined to achieve improved invariance
towards more complicated compositions of transformations
(e.g., simultaneous rotation, scale, shear, and perspective
transformations).
Importantly, the invariance property of ETs holds by con-
struction , without any dependence on additional heuristics
during training. We achieve this by using the method of
canonical coordinates for Lie groups (Rubinstein et al.,
1991). The key property of canonical coordinates that we
utilize is their ability to reduce arbitrary continuous transfor-

==== Page 2 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
mations to translation. For example, polar coordinates are
canonical coordinates for the rotation group, since a rotation
reduces to a translation in the angular coordinate. These
specialized coordinates can be analytically derived for a
given transformation and efﬁciently implemented within a
neural network.
We evaluate the performance of ETs using both synthetic
and real-world image classiﬁcation tasks. Empirically, ET
layers improve the sample efﬁciency of image classiﬁers rel-
ative to standard Spatial Transformer layers (Jaderberg et al.,
2015). In particular, we demonstrate that ET layers improve
the sample efﬁciency of modern ResNet classiﬁers on the
Street View House Numbers dataset, with relative improve-
ments in error rate of up to 15% in the limited data regime.
Moreover, we show that a ResNet-10 classiﬁer augmented
with ET layers is able to exceed the accuracy achieved by
a more complicated ResNet-34 classiﬁer without ETs, thus
reducing both memory usage and computational cost.
2. Related Work
Equivariant CNNs. There has been substantial recent in-
terest in CNN architectures that are equivariant with respect
to transformation groups other than translation. Equivari-
ance with respect to discrete transformation groups ( e.g., re-
ﬂections and 90orotations) can be achieved by transforming
CNN ﬁlters or feature maps using the group action (Cohen
& Welling, 2016; Dieleman et al., 2016; Laptev et al., 2016;
Marcos et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017). Invariance can then
be achieved by pooling over this additional dimension in
the output of each layer. In practice, this technique supports
only relatively small discrete groups since its computational
cost scales linearly with the cardinality of the group.
Methods for achieving equivariance with respect to con-
tinuous transformation groups fall into one of two classes:
those that expand the input in a steerable basis (Amari,
1978; Freeman & Adelson, 1991; Teo, 1998; Worrall et al.,
2017; Jacobsen et al., 2017; Weiler et al., 2018; Cohen
et al., 2018), and those that compute convolutions under
a specialized coordinate system (Rubinstein et al., 1991;
Segman et al., 1992; Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Esteves
et al., 2018). The relationship between these two categories
of methods is analogous to the duality between frequency
domain and time domain methods of signal analysis. Our
work falls under the latter category that uses coordinate
systems specialized to the transformation groups of interest.
Equivariance via Canonical Coordinates. Henriques &
Vedaldi (2017) apply CNNs to images represented using
coordinate grids computed using a given pair of continuous,
commutative transformations. Closely related to this tech-
nique are Polar Transformer Networks (Esteves et al., 2018),
a method that handles images deformed by translation, rota-tion, and dilation by ﬁrst predicting an origin for each image
before applying a CNN over log-polar coordinates. Unlike
these methods, we handle higher-dimensional transforma-
tion groups by passing an input image through a sequence
of ET layers in series. In contrast to Henriques & Vedaldi
(2017), where a pair of commutative transformations is
assumed to be given as input, we show how canonical co-
ordinate systems can be analytically derived given only a
single one-parameter transformation group using technical
tools described by Rubinstein et al. (1991).
Spatial Transformer Networks. As with Spatial Trans-
former (ST) layers (Jaderberg et al., 2015), our ET layers
aim to factor out nuisance modes of variation in images due
to various geometric transformations. Unlike STs, ETs in-
corporate additional structure in the functions used to predict
transformations. We expand on the relationship between
ETs and STs in the following sections.
Locally-Linear Approximations. Gens & Domingos
(2014) use local search to approximately align ﬁlters to
image patches, in contrast to our use of a global change
of coordinates. The sequential pose prediction process in
a stack of ET layers is also reminiscent of the iterative
nature of the Lucas-Kanade (LK) algorithm and its descen-
dants (Lucas & Kanade, 1981; Lin & Lucey, 2017).
Image Registration and Canonicalization. ETs are re-
lated to classic “phase correlation” techniques for image
registration that compare the Fourier or Fourier-Mellin trans-
forms of an image pair (De Castro & Morandi, 1987; Reddy
& Chatterji, 1996); these methods can be interpreted as
Fourier basis expansions under canonical coordinate sys-
tems for the relevant transformations. Additionally, the
notion of image canonicalization relates to work on de-
formable templates , where object instances are generated
via deformations of a prototypical object (Amit et al., 1991;
Yuille, 1991; Shu et al., 2018).
3. Problem Statement
In this section, we begin by reviewing inﬂuential prior
work on image canonicalization with Spatial Transform-
ers (Jaderberg et al., 2015). We then argue that the lack of
self-consistency in pose prediction is a key weakness with
the standard ST that results in poor sample efﬁciency.
3.1. Image Canonicalization with Spatial Transformers
Suppose that we observed a collection of images (x), each
of which is a mapping from image coordinates x2R2to
pixel intensities in each channel. Each image is a trans-
formed version of some latent canonical image:=
T:=(Tx), where the transformation T:R2!R2
is modulated by pose parameters 2Rk.

==== Page 3 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Figure 1. Sample complexity for predicting rotations. Predicted rotation angles vs. true angles for a rotated MNIST digit (left). The
predictions of a self-consistent pose predictor will be parallel to the diagonal (dotted line). (a)After training with 10k rotated examples, a
pose prediction CNN is not self-consistent; (b)with 50k rotated examples, it is only self-consistent over a limited range of angles. In
contrast, (c)a rotationally-equivariant CNN outputs self-consistent predictions after 10k examples (with small error due to interpolation
and boundary effects). There is a nonzero bias in ^since the pose labels are latent and there is no preferred image orientation.
If the transformation family and the pose parameters 
for each image are known, then the learning problem
may be greatly simpliﬁed. If Tis invertible, then ac-
cess toimplies that we can recover fromvia
T 1
=T 1
T=. This is advantageous for learning
whenis drawn from a small or even ﬁnite set ( e.g.,
could be sampled from a ﬁnite set of digits, while belongs
to an inﬁnite set of transformed images).
When the pose parameters are latent, as is typical in practice,
we can attempt to predict an appropriate inverse transfor-
mation from the observed input.1Based on this intuition, a
Spatial Transformer (ST) layer L: !(Jaderberg et al.,
2015) transforms an input image using pose parameters
^=f()that are predicted as a function of the input:
L() =T 1
f();
where the pose predictor f: !Rkis typically parame-
terized as a CNN or fully-connected network.
3.2. Self-Consistent Pose Prediction
A key weakness of standard STs is the pose predictor’s
lack of robustness to transformations of its input. As a
motivating example, consider images in a domain that is
known to be rotationally invariant ( e.g., classiﬁcation of
astronomical objects), and suppose that we train an ST-
augmented CNN that aims to canonicalize the rotation angle
of input images. For some input , let the output of the pose
predictor be f() =^for some ^2[0;2). Then given
T(i.e., the same image rotated by an additional angle ),
we should expect the output of an ideal pose predictor to be
f(T) =^++ 2mfor some integer m. In other words,
the pose prediction for an input should constrain those for
Tover the entire orbit of the transformation.
We refer to this desired property of the pose prediction
function as self-consistency (Figure 2). In general, we say
1For example, the apparent convergence of parallel lines in the
background of an image can provide information on the correct
inverse projective transformation to be applied.
2 T
^^+Images
Predicted posesT
f
+f
Figure 2. Self-consistent pose prediction. We call a function
f: !Rkself-consistent if the action of a transformation T
on its input results in a corresponding increment of in its output.
Self-consistency is desirable for functions that predict the pose
(e.g., rotation angle) of an object in an image.
that a pose prediction function f: !Rkisself-consistent
with respect to a transformation group Gparameterized
by2Rkiff(T) =f() +, for any image and
transformation T2G. We note that self-consistency is a
special case of group equivariance.2
However, there is no guarantee that self-consistency should
hold when pose prediction is performed using a standard
CNN or fully-connected network: while standard CNNs are
equivariant with respect to translation, they are not equivari-
ant with respect to other transformation groups (Cohen &
Welling, 2016). In Figure 1, we illustrate a simple example
of this limitation of standard CNNs. Using MNIST digits
rotated by angles uniformly sampled in 2[0;2), we
train a CNN classiﬁer with a ST layer that predicts the ro-
tation angle of the input image. During training, the model
receives a rotated image as input along with the class la-
bely2f0;:::; 9g; the true rotation angle is unobserved.
In this example task, we ﬁnd that the poses predicted by
the CNN are only approximately self-consistent within a
small range of angles, even when the network is trained with
50,000 examples. In contrast, a rotation-equivariant CNN
can achieve approximate self-consistency given only 10,000
training examples.
2A functionfisequivariant with respect to the group Gif
there exist transformations TgandT0
gsuch thatf(Tg) =T0
gf()
for allg2Gand2.

==== Page 4 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
4. Equivariant Transformers
Due to this weakness of standard CNN pose predictors,
we will instead use functions that are guaranteed by con-
struction to satisfy self-consistency. We achieve this by
leveraging the translation equivariance of standard CNN
architectures in combination with specialized canonical co-
ordinate systems designed for the particular transformation
groups of interest. Canonical coordinates allow us to reduce
the problem of self-consistent prediction with respect to an
arbitrary continuous transformation group to that of self-
consistent prediction with respect to the translation group.
We begin with preliminaries on canonical coordinates sys-
tems (x4.1). We then describe our proposed Equivariant
Transformer architecture ( x4.2). Next, we describe how
canonical coordinates can be derived for a given transfor-
mation (x4.3). Finally, we describe how ET layers can be
applied sequentially to handle compositions of several trans-
formations (x4.4) and cover implementation details ( x4.5).
4.1. Canonical Coordinate Systems for Lie Groups
The method of canonical coordinates was ﬁrst described
by Rubinstein et al. (1991) and later developed in more
generality by Segman et al. (1992) for the purpose of com-
puting image descriptors that are invariant under the action
of continuous transformation groups.
ALie group with parameters 2Rkis a group of transfor-
mations of the form T:Rd!Rdthat are differentiable
with respect to . We let the parameter = 0correspond to
the identity element, T0x=x. A canonical coordinate sys-
tem forGis deﬁned by an injective map from Cartesian
coordinates to the new coordinate system that satisﬁes
(Tx) =(x) +kX
i=1iek; (1)
for allT2G, where eidenotes the ith standard basis
vector. Thus, a transformation by Tappears as a translation
byunder the canonical coordinate system. To help build
intuition, we give two examples of canonical coordinates:
Example 1 (Rotation). ForTx= (x1cos 
x2sin;x1sin+x2cos), a canonical coordinate
system is the polar coordinate system, (x) =
(tan 1(x2=x1);p
x2
1+x2
2).
Example 2 (Horizontal Dilation). ForTx= (x1e;x2),
a canonical coordinate system is (x) = (logx1;x2).
Reduction to Translation. The key property of canon-
ical coordinates is their ability to adapt translation self-
consistency to other transformation groups. Formally, this
is captured in the following result (we defer the straightfor-
ward proof to the Appendix):
f ^T 1
^
(a) Spatial Transformer (ST)

 f ^T 1
^
(b) Equivariant Transformer (ET)
Figure 3. Spatial and Equivariant Transformer architectures.
In both cases, pose parameters ^estimated as a function fof the
input image are used to apply an inverse transformation to the
image. The ET predicts ^in a self-consistent manner using a
canonical coordinate system .
Proposition 1. Letf: !Rkbe self-consistent with
respect to translation and let be a canonical coordinate
system with respect to a transformation group Gparameter-
ized by2Rk. Thenf():=f( 1)is self-consistent
with respect to G.
Given a canonical coordinate system for a groupG, we
can thus immediately achieve self-consistency with respect
toGby ﬁrst performing a change of coordinates into , and
then applying a function that is self-consistent with respect
to translation.
4.2. Equivariant Transformer Layers
Our proposed Equivariant Transformer layer leverages
canonical coordinates to incorporate prior knowledge on
the invariances of a domain into the network architecture:
AnEquivariant Transformer (ET) layerLG;: !
for the group Gwith canonical coordinates is deﬁned
as:
LG;():=T 1
f() (2)
where the self-consistent pose predictor fis a CNN
whose input is represented using the coordinates .
The ET layer is an image-to-image mapping that applies the
inverse transformation of the predicted input pose, where the
pose prediction is performed using a network that satisﬁes
self-consistency with respect to a pre-deﬁned group G. A
standard Spatial Transformer layer can be viewed as an ET
whereis simply the identity map. Like the ST, the ET
layer is differentiable with respect to both its parameters
and its input; thus, it is easily incorporated as a layer in
existing CNN architectures. We summarize the computation
encapsulated in the ET layer in Figure 3.

==== Page 5 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Local Invariance. Unlike ST layers, ET layers are en-
dowed with a form of local transformation invariance: for
any input image , we have that LG;() =LG;(T)
for allT2G. In other words, an ET layer collapses the
orbit generated by the group action on an image to a single,
“canonical” point. This property follows directly from the
self-consistency of the pose predictor with respect to the
groupG. Importantly, local invariance holds for anysetting
of the parameters of the ET layer; thus, ETs are equipped
with a strong inductive bias towards invariance with respect
to the transformation group G.
Implementing Self-Consistency. We implement transla-
tion self-consistency in fby ﬁrst predicting a spatial distri-
bution by passing a 2D CNN feature map through a softmax
function, and then outputting the coordinates of the centroid
of this distribution. By the translation equivariance of CNNs,
a shift in the CNN input results in a corresponding shift in
the predicted spatial distribution, and hence the location of
the centroid. We rescale the centroid coordinates to match
the scale of the input coordinate grid.
4.3. Constructing Canonical Coordinates (Algorithm 1)
In order to construct an ET layer, we derive a canonical coor-
dinate system for the target transformation. Canonical coor-
dinate systems exist for all one-parameter Lie groups (Seg-
man et al., 1992; Theorem 1). For Lie groups with more
than one parameter, canonical coordinates exist for Abelian
groups of dimension kd: that is, groups whose transfor-
mations are commutative.
Here, we summarize the procedure described in Segman
et al. (1992). For clarity of exposition, we will focus on
Lie groups representing transformations on R2with one
parameter2R. This corresponds to the practically useful
case of one-parameter deformations of 2D images. In this
setting, condition (1) reduces to:
(Tx) =(x) +e1:
Taking the derivative with respect to , we can see that it
sufﬁces forto satisfy the following ﬁrst-order PDEs:
@(Tx)1
@
=0@
@x1+@(Tx)2
@
=0@
@x2
1(x) = 1;
(3)@(Tx)1
@
=0@
@x1+@(Tx)2
@
=0@
@x2
2(x) = 0:
(4)
We can solve these ﬁrst-order PDEs using the method of
characteristics ( e.g., Strauss, 2007). Observe that the homo-
geneous equation (4) admits an inﬁnite set of solutions 2;
each solution is a different coordinate function that is invari-
ant to the transformation T. Thus, there exists a degree ofAlgorithm 1 Constructing a canonical coordinate system
Input: Transformation group fTg
Output: Canonical coordinates (x)
vi(x) (@(Tx)i=@)j=0; i= 1;2
Dx (v1(x)@=@x 1+v2(x)@=@x 2)
1(x) a solution of Dx1(x) = 1
2(x) a solution of Dx2(x) = 0
Return(x) = (1(x);2(x))
freedom in choosing invariant coordinate functions; due to
the ﬁnite resolution of images in practice, we recommend
choosing coordinates that minimally distort the input image
to mitigate the introduction of resampling artifacts.
Example 3 (Hyperbolic Rotation). As a concrete exam-
ple, we will derive a set of canonical coordinates for hyper-
bolic rotation, Tx= (x1e;x2e ). This is a “squeeze”
distortion that dilates an image along one axis and com-
presses it along the other. We obtain the following PDEs:
(x1@=@x 1 x2@=@x 2)1(x) = 1;
(x1@=@x 1 x2@=@x 2)2(x) = 0:
In the ﬁrst quadrant, the solution to the inhomogeneous
equation is1(x) = logp
x1=x2+c1, wherec1is an arbi-
trary constant, and the solution to the homogeneous equation
is2(x) =h(x1x2), wherehis an arbitrary differentiable
function in one variable (the choice h(z) =pzis known as
the hyperbolic coordinate system). These coordinates can
be deﬁned analogously for the remaining quadrants to yield
a representation of the entire image plane, excluding the
linesx1= 0andx2= 0.
4.4. Compositions of Transformations
A single transformation group with one parameter is typ-
ically insufﬁcient to capture the full range of variation in
object pose in natural images. For example, an important
transformation group in practice is the 8-parameter pro-
jective linear group PGL(3;R)that represents perspective
transformations in 3D space.
In the special case of two-parameter Abelian Lie groups,
we can construct canonical coordinates that yield self-
consistency simultaneously for both parameters (Segman
et al., 1992; Theorem 1). For example, log-polar coordi-
nates are canonical for both rotation and dilation. How-
ever, for transformations on Rd, a canonical coordinate
system can only satisfy condition (1) for up to dparameters.
Thus, a single canonical coordinate system is insufﬁcient
for higher-dimensional transformation groups on R2such
asPGL(3;R).
Stacked ETs. Since we cannot always achieve simulta-
neous self-consistency with respect to all the parameters

==== Page 6 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
of the transformation group, we instead adopt the heuristic
approach of using a sequence of ET layers, each of which
implements self-consistency with respect to a subgroup of
the full transformation group. Intuitively, each ET layer
aims to remove the effect of its corresponding subgroup.
Speciﬁcally, let Tbe ak-parameter transformation that
admits a decomposition into one-parameter transformations:
T=T(1)
0
1T(2)
0
2T(k)
0
k;
where0
i2R. For example, in the case of PGL(3;R), we
can decompose an arbitrary transformation into a composi-
tion of one-parameter translation, dilation, rotation, shear,
and perspective transformations. We then apply a sequence
of ET layers in the reverse order of the transformations:
L() =LG(k);(k)LG(k 1);(k 1)LG(1);(1)();
where(i)are canonical coordinates for each one-parameter
subgroupG(i).
While we can no longer guarantee self-consistency for a
composition of ET layers, we show empirically ( x5) that this
stacking heuristic works well in practice for transformation
groups in several parameters.
4.5. Implementation
Here we highlight particularly salient details of our im-
plementation of ETs. Our PyTorch implementation is
available at github.com/stanford-futuredata/
equivariant-transformers .
Change of Coordinates. We implement coordinate trans-
formations by resampling the input image over a rectangular
grid in the new coordinate system. This grid consists of
rows and columns that are equally spaced in the intervals
[umin
1;umax
1]and[umin
2;umax
2], where the limits of these in-
tervals are chosen to achieve good coverage of the input
image. These points uin the canonical coordinate system
deﬁne a set of sampling points  1(u)in Cartesian coordi-
nates. We use bilinear interpolation for points that do not
coincide with pixel locations in the original image, as is
typical with ST layers (Jaderberg et al., 2015).
Avoiding Resampling. When using multiple ET layers,
iterated resampling of the input image will degrade image
quality and amplify the effect of interpolation artifacts. In
our implementation, we circumvent this issue by resampling
the image lazily. More speciﬁcally, let (i)denote the image
obtained after itransformations, where (0)is the original
input image. At each iteration i, we represent (i)implic-
itly using the sampling grid Gi:=
T(1)
^1T(i)
^i
G0,
whereG0represents the Cartesian grid over the original in-
put. We materialize (i)(under the appropriate canonical
Figure 4. Projective MNIST. Examples of transformed digits
from each class (ﬁrst row: 0–4, second row: 5–9). Each base
MNIST image is transformed using a transformation sampled from
a 6-parameter group ( i.e.,PGL(3;R)without translation).
coordinates) in order to predict ^i+1. By appending the next
predicted transformation T(i+1)
^i+1to the transformation stack,
we thus obtain the subsequent sampling grid, Gi+1.
5. Experiments
We evaluate ETs on two image classiﬁcation datasets: an
MNIST variant where the digits are distorted under ran-
dom projective transformations ( x5.1), and the real-world
Street View House Numbers (SVHN) dataset ( x5.2). Using
projectively-transformed MNIST data, we evaluate the per-
formance of ETs relative to STs in a setting where images
are deformed by a known transformation group in several
parameters. The SVHN task evaluates the utility of ET
layers when used in combination with modern CNN archi-
tectures in a realistic image classiﬁcation task. In both cases,
we validate the sample efﬁciency beneﬁts conferred by ETs
relative to standard STs and baseline CNN architectures.3
5.1. Projective MNIST
We introduce the Projective MNIST dataset, a variant of
the MNIST dataset where the digits are distorted using
randomly sampled projective transformations: namely ro-
tation, shear, x- andy-dilation, and x- andy-perspective
transformations ( i.e., 6 pose parameters in total). The Pro-
jective MNIST training set contains 10,000 base images
sampled without replacement from the MNIST training set.
Each image is resized to 6464and transformed using an
independently-sampled set of pose parameters.
We also generated three larger versions of the dataset for the
purpose of controlled evaluation of the effect of (idealized)
data augmentation: these additional datasets respectively
contain 2, 4, and 8 copies of the base MNIST images, each
transformed under different sets of parameters.
Unlike other MNIST variants such as Rotated
MNIST (Larochelle et al., 2007), MNIST-RTS (Jaderberg
et al., 2015), and SIM2MNIST (Esteves et al., 2018), our
3In the Appendix, we report additional experimental results on
robustness to transformations not seen at training time.

==== Page 7 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Table 1. Classiﬁcation error rates on Projective MNIST ( x5.1).
All methods use the same CNN architecture for classiﬁcation and
differ in the transformations applied to the input images. We train
on up to 8 sampled transformations for each base MNIST image.
LP: log-polar coordinates; shx:x-shear; hr: hyperbolic rotation;
px:x-perspective; py:y-perspective.
Method Transformations# sampled transformations
1 2 4 8
Cartesian - 11.91 9.67 7.64 6.93
Log-polar - 6.55 5.05 4.48 3.83
ST-LP shx 5.77 4.27 3.97 3.47
ST-LP shxhr 4.92 3.87 3.22 3.03
ST-LP* shxhrpxpy – – – –
ET-LP shx 5.48 4.67 3.63 3.21
ET-LP shxhr 4.18 3.17 2.96 2.62
ET-LP shxhrpxpy 3.76 3.11 2.80 2.60
*We omit this conﬁguration due to training instability.
Projective MNIST dataset incorporates higher-dimensional
combinations of transformations, including projective trans-
formations not considered in prior work ( e.g., perspective
transforms). We provide further details on the construction
of the dataset in the Appendix.
Network Architectures. We used a CNN architecture
based on the Z2CNN from Cohen & Welling (2016), with 7
layers of 33convolutions with 32 channels, batch normal-
ization after convolutional layers, and dropout after the 3rd
and 6th layers. In addition to this baseline “Cartesian” CNN,
we also evaluated a more rotation- and dilation-robust net-
work where the inputs are ﬁrst transformed to log-polar co-
ordinates (Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Esteves et al., 2018).
We introduce a sequence of transformer layers before the
log-polar coordinate transformation to handle the remaining
geometric transformations applied to the input. For both the
baseline STs and ETs, we apply a sequence of transformer
layers, with each layer predicting a single pose parameter.
The pose predictor networks in both cases are 3-layer CNNs
with 32 channels in each layer. We selected the transforma-
tion order, dropout rate, and learning rate schedule based on
validation accuracy (see the Appendix for details).
Classiﬁcation Accuracy (Table 1). We ﬁnd that the ET
layers consistently improve on test error rate over both the
log-polar and ST baselines. By accounting for additional
transformations, the ET improves on the error rate of the
baseline log-polar CNN by 2.79%—a relative improvement
of 43%—when trained on a single pose per prototype. Note
that we omit the ST baseline with the full transformation
sequence due to training instability, despite more extensive
hyperparameter tuning than the ET. We ﬁnd that all methods
improve from augmentation with additional poses, with the
Figure 5. Sensitivity to initial learning rate. For each learning
rate setting, we plot the minimum, mean, and maximum validation
error rates over 10 runs for networks trained with ETs and STs.
The predicted transformations are x-shear and hyperbolic rotation.
We ﬁnd that ETs are signiﬁcantly more robust than STs to the
learning rate hyperparameter.
ET retaining its advantage but at a reduced margin.
Hyperparameter Sensitivity (Figure 5). We compared
the sensitivity of ET and ST networks to the initial learn-
ing rate by comparing validation error when training with
learning rate values ranging from 110 4to410 3.
For each setting, we trained 10 networks with independent
random initializations on Projective MNIST with 10,000
examples, computing the validation error after each epoch
and recording the minimum observed error in each run. We
ﬁnd that STs were signiﬁcantly more sensitive to learning
rate than ET, with far higher variance in error rate between
runs. This suggests that the self-consistency constraint im-
posed on ETs helps improve the training-time stability of
networks augmented with transformer layers.
5.2. Street View House Numbers (SVHN)
The goal of the single-digit classiﬁcation task of the SVHN
dataset (Netzer et al., 2011) is to classify the digit in the
center of 3232RGB images of house numbers. SVHN
is well-suited to evaluating the effect of transformer lay-
ers since there is a natural range of geometric variation
in the data due to differences in camera position—unlike
Projective MNIST, we do not artiﬁcially apply further trans-
formations to the data. The training set consists of 73,257
examples; we use a randomly-chosen subset of 5,000 exam-
ples for validation and use the remaining 68,257 examples
for training. In order to evaluate the data efﬁciency of each
method, we also trained models using smaller subsets of
10,000 and 20,000 examples. The dataset also includes
531,131 additional images that can be used as extra train-
ing data; we thus additionally evaluate our methods on the
concatenation of this set and the training set.
Network Architectures. We use 10-, 18-, and 34-layer
ResNet architectures (He et al., 2016) as baseline networks.
Each transformer layer uses a 3-layer CNN with 32 chan-

==== Page 8 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Table 2. Classiﬁcation error rates on SVHN ( x5.2). For both
STs and ETs, we used the following transformations: x- andy-
translation, rotation, and x-scaling. Error rates are each averaged
over 3 runs. ETs achieve the largest accuracy gains relative to STs
and the baseline CNNs in the limited data regime.
Network Transformer# training examples
10k 20k 68k 600k
ResNet-10 None 9.83 7.90 5.35 2.96
Spatial 9.80 7.66 4.96 2.92
Equivariant 8.24 6.71 4.84 2.70
ResNet-18 None 9.23 7.31 4.81 2.76
Spatial 9.10 7.17 4.51 2.70
Equivariant 7.81 6.37 4.50 2.57
ResNet-34 None 8.73 7.05 4.67 2.53
Spatial 8.60 6.91 4.37 2.66
Equivariant 7.72 5.98 4.23 2.47
nels per layer for pose prediction. We applied x- andy-
translation, rotation, and x- andy-scaling to the input im-
ages: these were selected from among the subgroups of the
projective group using the validation set.
Results (Table 2). We ﬁnd that ETs improve on the error
rate achieved by both STs and the baseline ResNets, with the
largest gains seen in the limited data regime: with 10,000
examples, ETs improve on the error rates of the baseline
CNNs and ST-augmented CNNs by 0.9–1.6%, or a rela-
tive improvement of 10–16%. We see smaller gains when
more training data is available: the relative improvement
between ETs and the baseline CNNs is 11–13% with 20,000
examples, and 6.4–9.5% with 68,257 examples.
When data is limited, we ﬁnd that a simpler classiﬁer where
prior knowledge on geometric invariances has been encoded
using ETs can outperform more complex classiﬁers that
are not equipped with this additional structure. In particu-
lar, when trained on 10,000 examples, a ResNet-10 classi-
ﬁer with ET layers achieves lower error than the baseline
ResNet-34 classiﬁer. The baseline ResNet-34 has over 5.3M
parameters; in contrast, the ResNet-10 has 1.2M parame-
ters, with the ET layers adding only 31k parameters in total.
The ET-augmented ResNet-10 therefore achieves improved
error rate with an architecture that incurs less memory and
computational cost than a ResNet-34.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
Limitations of ETs. The self-consistency guarantee of
ETs can fail due to boundary effects that occur when image
content is cropped after a transformation. This issue can be
mitigated by padding the input such that the transformed
image does not fall “out of frame”. Even without a strict
self-consistency guarantee, we still observe gains when ET
layers are used in practice ( e.g., in our SVHN experiments).
input x-shear hyp. rot. x-persp.y-persp.
input translation rot./scale x-scale
Figure 6. Predicted transformations. On Projective MNIST
(top), ETs reverse the effect of distortions such as shear and per-
spective, despite being provided no direct supervision on pose
parameters (the ﬁnal images remain rotated and scaled since the
classiﬁcation CNN operates over their log-polar representation).
On SVHN (bottom), the ﬁnal x-scale transformation has a crop-
ping effect that removes distractor digits.
As discussed inx4.4, the method of stacking ET layers
is ultimately a heuristic approach as it does not guaran-
tee self-consistency with respect to the full transformation
group. Moreover, higher-dimensional groups require the
use of long sequences of ET layers, resulting in high com-
putational cost. In such cases, we could employ a hybrid
approach where “difﬁcult” subgroups are handled by ET lay-
ers, while the remaining degrees of freedom are handled by
a standard ST layer. In general, enforcing equivariance guar-
antees for higher-dimensional transformation groups in a
computationally scalable fashion remains an open problem.
In contrast to the use of prior knowledge on transformation
invariances in this work, there is a separate line of research
that concerns learning various classes of transformations
from data (Hashimoto et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2018).
Extending ETs to these more ﬂexible notions of invariance
may prove to be an interesting direction for future work.
Conclusion. We proposed a neural network layer that
builds in prior knowledge on the continuous transformation
invariances of its input domain. By encapsulating equiv-
ariant functions within an image-to-image mapping, ETs
expose a convenient interface for ﬂexible composition of lay-
ers tailored to different transformation groups. Empirically,
we demonstrated that ETs improve the sample efﬁciency of
CNNs on image classiﬁcation tasks with latent transforma-
tion parameters. Using libraries of ET layers, practitioners
are able to quickly experiment with multiple combinations
of transformations to realize gains in predictive accuracy,
particularly in domains where labeled data is scarce.

==== Page 9 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Acknowledgements
We thank Pratiksha Thaker, Kexin Rong, and our anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback on earlier ver-
sions of this manuscript. This research was supported in part
by afﬁliate members and other supporters of the Stanford
DAWN project—Ant Financial, Facebook, Google, Intel,
Microsoft, NEC, SAP, Teradata, and VMware—as well as
Toyota Research Institute, Keysight Technologies, Northrop
Grumman, Hitachi, NSF awards AF-1813049 and CCF-
1704417, an ONR Young Investigator Award N00014-18-1-
2295, and Department of Energy award DE-SC0019205.
References
Amari, S. Feature Spaces which Admit and Detect Invariant
Signal Transformations. In International Joint Confer-
ence on Pattern Recognition , 1978.
Amit, Y ., Grenander, U., and Piccioni, M. Structural image
restoration through deformable templates. Journal of the
American Statistical Association , 1991.
Cohen, T. S. and Welling, M. Group Equivariant Convolu-
tional Networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , 2016.
Cohen, T. S., Geiger, M., K ¨ohler, J., and Welling, M. Spher-
ical CNNs. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2018.
De Castro, E. and Morandi, C. Registration of translated
and rotated images using ﬁnite Fourier transforms. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence , pp. 700–703, 1987.
Dieleman, S., De Fauw, J., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Exploit-
ing cyclic symmetry in convolutional neural networks.
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2016.
Esteves, C., Allen-Blanchette, C., Zhou, X., and Daniilidis,
K. Polar Transformer Networks. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations , 2018.
Freeman, W. T. and Adelson, E. H. The design and use of
steerable ﬁlters. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , pp. 891–906, 1991.
Gens, R. and Domingos, P. M. Deep Symmetry Networks.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2014.
Hashimoto, T. B., Liang, P. S., and Duchi, J. C. Unsu-
pervised transformation learning via convex relaxations.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2017.He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learn-
ing for image recognition. In IEEE Conf. on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016.
Henriques, J. F. and Vedaldi, A. Warped Convolutions:
Efﬁcient Invariance to Spatial Transformations. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning , 2017.
Jacobsen, J.-H., De Brabandere, B., and Smeulders, A. W.
Dynamic Steerable Blocks in Deep Residual Networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00598 , 2017.
Jaderberg, M., Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., and
Kavukcuoglu, K. Spatial Transformer Networks. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015.
Laptev, D., Savinov, N., Buhmann, J. M., and Pollefeys,
M. TI-POOLING: transformation-invariant pooling for
feature learning in convolutional neural networks. In
IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , 2016.
Larochelle, H., Erhan, D., Courville, A., Bergstra, J., and
Bengio, Y . An empirical evaluation of deep architectures
on problems with many factors of variation. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2007.
Lin, C.-H. and Lucey, S. Inverse Compositional Spatial
Transformer Networks. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017.
Lucas, B. D. and Kanade, T. An iterative image registra-
tion technique with an application to stereo vision. In
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial intelligence ,
1981.
Marcos, D., V olpi, M., Komodakis, N., and Tuia, D. Rota-
tion Equivariant Vector Field Networks. In International
Conference on Computer Vision , 2017.
Netzer, Y ., Wang, T., Coates, A., Bissacco, A., Wu, B.,
and Ng, A. Y . Reading digits in natural images with
unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS workshop on
deep learning and unsupervised feature learning , 2011.
Rawlinson, D., Ahmed, A., and Kowadlo, G. Sparse un-
supervised capsules generalize better. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.06094 , 2018.
Reddi, S. J., Kale, S., and Kumar, S. On the Convergence
of Adam and Beyond. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2018.
Reddy, B. S. and Chatterji, B. N. An FFT-based technique
for translation, rotation, and scale-invariant image regis-
tration. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 5(8):
1266–1271, 1996.

==== Page 10 ====
Equivariant Transformer Networks
Rubinstein, J., Segman, J., and Zeevi, Y . Recognition of dis-
torted patterns by invariance kernels. Pattern Recognition ,
24(10):959–967, 1991.
Sabour, S., Frosst, N., and Hinton, G. E. Dynamic routing
between capsules. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2017.
Segman, J., Rubinstein, J., and Zeevi, Y . Y . The canonical
coordinates method for pattern deformation: Theoretical
and computational considerations. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , pp. 1171–
1183, 1992.
Shu, Z., Sahasrabudhe, M., Alp Guler, R., Samaras, D.,
Paragios, N., and Kokkinos, I. Deforming Autoencoders:
Unsupervised Disentangling of Shape and Appearance.
InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,
2018.
Strauss, W. A. Partial Differential Equations: An Introduc-
tion. Wiley, 2007.
Teo, P. C. Theory and Applications of Steerable Functions .
PhD thesis, Stanford University, 1998.
Thomas, A., Gu, A., Dao, T., Rudra, A., and R ´e, C. Learn-
ing compressed transforms with low displacement rank.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2018.
Weiler, M., Hamprecht, F. A., and Storath, M. Learn-
ing Steerable Filters for Rotation Equivariant CNNs. In
IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , 2018.
Worrall, D. E., Garbin, S. J., Turmukhambetov, D., and
Brostow, G. J. Harmonic Networks: Deep Translation
and Rotation Equivariance. In IEEE Conf. on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017.
Yuille, A. L. Deformable templates for face recognition.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 1991.
Zhou, Y ., Ye, Q., Qiu, Q., and Jiao, J. Oriented response
networks. In IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , 2017.

