==== Page 1 ====
Ethical standards in Robotics and AI  
A new generation of ethical standards in robotics and artificial intelligence is emerging  as a 
direct response to a growing awareness of the ethical, legal and societal impact of the fields . 
But what exactly are these ethical standards and h ow do they differ from conventional 
standards ? 
 
Alan Winfield  
 
Standards are a vital part of the infrastructure of the modern world : invisible , but no 
less important than roads, airports and telephone networks. It  is hard  to think of any 
aspect of everyday life untouched by standards. The International Organization for 
Standardisation (ISO)  – just one of several standards bodies – lists a total of 22,482 
published standards. Take the simple act of bru shing your teeth in the  morning:  there 
are standards for your toothbrush (both manual ISO 20126 and electric ISO 20127), 
your toothpast e and its packaging ( ISO 11609) , and the quality of your  tap water 
(ISO 5667 -5). Although it might seem odd to w ax lyrical on standards, they  do 
represent a truly remarkable body of work – drafted by countless expert volunteers – 
with a n extraordinary impact on individual and societal health and safety . 
 
All standards embody  a principle and often it is an ethical principle  or value . Safety 
standar ds are founded on the general principle th at products and systems should do 
no harm – that they should be safe; ISO 13482 , for instance, sets out safety 
requirements for personal care r obots . Quality management standard s, such as  ISO 
9001 , describe  how things should be done, and can be thought of as expressing the 
principle that shared best practice leads to improved qualit y. And technical 
standards, like IEEE 802.11  (better  known as WiFi), can be thought of as embodying 
the benefits of interoperability. Even the basic idea of standards as codifying shared 
ways of doing thing s can be thought of as expressing the values of cooperation and 
harmonisation. All standards can therefore be thought of as implicit  ethical standards.  
 
We can define an explicit  ethical standard as one that addresses clearly articulated 
ethical  concerns, and seeks – through its application – to, at best remove, hopefully 
reduce, or at the very least highlight the potential for unethical impacts or their 
consequences.  
 
What are the ethical principles which underpin these new ethical standards? An 
informal survey1 in December  2017  listed  a total of ten  different sets of ethical 
principles for robotics and AI . The earliest (1950) are Asimov’s laws of robotics : 
important because they established the principle that robots should be governed by 
princip les. Very recently we have seen a proliferation of principles;  of the ten sets 
surveyed seven were published  in 2017.  
 
Perhaps not surprisingly t hese ethical principles have much in common . In summary : 
robots and artificial intelligences (AIs) should do no harm, while being free of bias 
and deception ; respect human rights and freedoms, including dignity and privacy, 
while promoting well -being ; and be transparent and dependable while ensuring that 
the locus of responsibility and accountability re mains with their human designers or 
operators. Just as  interesting is the  increasing frequency of their publication: clear 

==== Page 2 ====
evidence for a growing awareness of the urgent need for ethical principles for 
robotics and AI . But, while an important and necessary  foundation,  principles are not 
practice. Ethical standards are the next important step toward ethical governance in 
robotics and AI2. 
 
Ethical risk assessment  
Almost  certainly the world’s first explicit ethical standard in robotics is BS 8611  Guide 
to the Ethical Design and Application of Robots and Robotic Systems3, which was 
published in April 2016. Incorporating the EPSRC principles of robotics4, BS8611 is 
not a code of practice, but instead guidance on how  designers can undertake an 
ethical risk assessment  of their robot or system, and mitigate any ethical risks so 
identified. At its heart is a set of 20 distinct ethical hazards and risks, grouped under 
four categories: so cietal, application, commercial & financial, and environmental. 
Advice on measures to mitigate the impact of each risk is given, along with 
suggestions on how such measures might be verified or validated . The societal 
hazards include, for e xample, loss of trust, deception, infringements of privacy and 
confidentiality, addiction, and loss of employment. The idea of ethical risk 
assessment is of course not new – it is essentially what research ethics committees 
do – but a method for assessing robots for ethical risks is a powerful new addition to 
the ethical roboticist’s toolkit.  
 
In April 2016 , the IEEE Standards Association launc hed a global initiative on the 
Ethics of Aut onomous and Intelligent Systems5. The significance of this initiative 
cannot be overstated;  coming  from a professional  body with the standing and reach  
of the IEEE Standards Association it marks a watershed in the emergence of ethical 
standards. And it is a radical step. As I’ve argued above  all standards are – even if 
not explicitly – based on ethical principles. But for a respected standards body to 
launch an initiative which explicitly aims to address the deep  ethical challenges that 
face the whole of autonomous and intelligent systems  – from driverless car autopilots 
to medical diagnosis AIs, drones to deep learning, and care robots to chat bots – is 
both ambitious  and unprecedented.  
 
Humanity first  
The IEEE initiative position s human well -being  as its central tenet6. This is a bold and 
political stance since it  explicitly  seeks to reposition robotics and AI as technologies 
for improving the human condition  rather than simply  vehicles  for economic growth.  
The initiative’s mission is “to ensure every stakeholder involv ed in the design and 
development of autonomous and intelligent systems is educated, trained, and 
empowered to prioritize ethical considerations so that these technologies are 
advanced for the benefit of humanity”.  
 
The first major output from the IEEE Sta ndards Association’s global ethics initiative is 
a discussion document called Ethically Aligned Design  (EAD)7, developed through  an 
iterative process which invited public feedback.  The published second edition  of EAD 
sets out more than 100 eth ical issues a nd recommendations, and a third edition will 
be launched early in 2019.  The work of  more than 1000  volunteers across  thirteen  
committees, EAD covers: general (ethical) principles; how to embed values into 
autonomous intelligent systems; methods to guide et hical design ; safety and 

==== Page 3 ====
beneficence of artificial general intelligence and artificial superintelligence; personal 
data and individual access control; reframing autonomous weapons systems; 
economics and humanitarian issues; law; affective computing; classi cal ethics in AI; 
policy; mixed -reality, and well -being.  
 
Each EAD committee was additionally tasked with identifying, recommending and 
promoting new candidate standards, and – to date – a total of 14 new IEEE 
standards working groups have started work on drafting so called  human  standards  
(Box 1) .  
 
// start Box 1  
Box 1: IEEE P7000 series h uman standards  in development   
P7000  – Model Process for Addressing Ethical Concerns During System Design  
P7001  – Transparency of Autonomous Systems  
P7002  – Data Privacy Process  
P7003  – Algorithmic Bias Considerations  
P7004  – Standard for Child and Student Data Governance  
P7005  – Standard for Transparent Employer Data Governance  
P7006  – Standard for Personal Data Artificial Intelligence (AI) Agent  
P7007  – Ontological Standard  for Ethically Driven Robotics and Automation Systems  
P7008  – Standard for Ethically Driven Nudging for Robotic, Intelligent and 
Autonomous Systems  
P7009 – Standard for Fail -Safe Design of Autonomous and Semi -Autonomous 
Systems  
P7010  – Wellbeing Metrics Standard for Ethical Artificial Intelligence and 
Autonomous Systems  
P7011  – Standard for the Process of Identifying and Rating the Trustworthiness of 
News Sources  
P7012  – Standard for Machine Readable Personal Privacy Terms  
P7013  – Inclusion and Application Standards for Automated Facial Analysis 
Technology  
// end Box 1  
 
The importance of transparency  and explainability  
Consider P7001 as a  case study.  One of the general princ iples8 of EAD asks “how 
can we ensure that autonomous and intelligent systems are transparent? ”, and 
recommends a new standard for transparency. P7001 Transparency in Autonomous 
Systems was i nitiated as a direct response.  IEEE P7001 directly addresses  the 
straightforward ethical principle that it should always be possible to find out why an 
autonomous system made a particular decision.  
 
A robot or AI is transparent if it is possible to find out why it behaves in a certain way. 
We might for instance want to discover why it made a particular decision, especially if 
that decision caused an accident – or for the less serious reason that the robot or 
AI’s behavio ur is puzzling. Transparency is not intrinsic to robots and AIs, but must 
be designed for , and  it is a  property which autonomous systems might have more or 
less of . And full transparency might be very challenging to provide , for instance in 

==== Page 4 ====
systems based on artificial neural networks ( deep learning systems), or systems that 
are continually learning.  
 
There are two reasons transparency is so important.  
 
First, because modern robots and AI s are designed to work with or alongside  
humans, who need to be able to understand what they are doing and why. If we take 
an assisted living robot as an example transparency (or to be precise , explainability ) 
means the user can understand what the robot might do in different circumstances. 
An elderly person might be very unsure about robots, so it is important that her robot 
is helpful, predictable – never does an ything that frightens her – and above all safe. It 
should be easy for her to learn what the r obot does and why,  in different 
circumstances. An explainer system that allows her to ask the robot “why did you just 
do that ?” and receive a simple natural langua ge explanation would be very helpful in 
providing this kind of transparency. A higher level of transparency  would be the 
ability to ask questions like “what would you do if I fell down? ” or “what would you do 
if I forget to take my medicine? ” This allows her to build a mental  model of how the 
robot will behave in different situations.  
 
And second, because robots and AIs can and do go wrong. If physical robots go 
wrong they can cause physical harm or injury.  Real world trials of driverless cars 
have already resulted in several fatalities9. Even a software AI can cause harm. A 
medical diagnosis AI might, for instance, give the wrong diagnosis, or a biased  credit 
scoring AI might cause someone’s loan application to be wrongly rejected. Without 
transparency , discovering what went wrong is extremely difficult and may – in some 
cases – be impossible. The ability to find out what went wrong and why is not  only 
important to accident investigators, it might also be important to establish who is 
responsible, for in surance purposes, or in a court of law. And following high profile 
accidents wider society needs the reassurance of knowing that problems have been 
found and fixed.  
 
Transparency and explainability measured  
But transparency is not one thing. Clearly an elderly relative does  not require the 
same level of understanding of a care robot as the engineer who repairs it. The 
P7001 working group has defined  five distinct groups of stakeholders  (the 
beneficiaries of the standard): users , safety certifiers or agencie s, accident 
investigators , lawyers or expert witness , and the wider public . For each of these 
stakeholder groups , P7001 is setting out  measurable, testable levels of transparency 
so that autonomous systems can be objectively assessed and levels of compliance 
determined, in a range that defines minimum levels up to the highest achievable 
standards of transparency.  
 
Of course , the way in which transparency is provided is very different for each group. 
Safety certification agencies need access to technical details of how the system 
works, together with verified test results. Accident investigators will need access to 
data logs of exactly wh at happened prior to and during an accident, most likely 
provided by something akin to an aircraft flight data recorder10. Lawyers and expert 
witnesses will need access to the reports of safety certifiers and accident 

==== Page 5 ====
investigators, along with evidence of the developer or manufacturer’s quality 
management processes. And wider society need s accessible documentary -type 
science communication to explain autonomous systems and how they work.  P7001 
will provide system designers with a toolkit for self -assessing t ransparency, and 
recommendations for how to achieve greater  transparency  and explainability . 
 
Outlook  
How might these new ethical standards be applied when, like m ost standards , they 
are voluntary?  First, standards which relate to safety (and especially s afety -critical 
systems), can be mandated by licensing authorities , so that compliance with those 
standards becomes a de facto  requirement of obtaining a  licence to operate that 
system; for the P7000 series candidates might include P7001 and P7009. Second, in 
a competitive market, compliance with ethical standards can be used to gain market 
advantage – especially among ethically aware consumers. Third, the re is growing 
pressure from professional bodies for the ir members to behave ethically. E merging 
professional codes of ethical conduct such as the recently published ACM11 and 
IEEE12 code s of ethics and professional conduct  are very encouraging; i n turn , those 
professionals  are increasingly likely to exert internal pressure on their employers to 
adopt ethical standards . And fourth,  soft governance  plays an important role in the 
adoption of new standards: by requiring compliance with standards as a condition of 
awarding procurement contracts governments can and do influence and direct the 
adoption of standards – across an entire supply chain – without explicit regulation. 
For data - or privacy -critical applications, a number of the P7000 standards  
(P7002/3/4/5/ 12 and 13 , for instance ) could find application this way.  
 
While some argue over the pace and level of impact of robotics and AI (on jobs, for 
instance), most agree that increasingly capable intelligent systems create significant 
ethical challenges , as well as great promise. Th is new generation of ethical 
standards takes a powerful first step  toward  addressing those challenges. Standards, 
like open science13, are a trust technology . Without ethical standards , it is hard to see 
how robots and AIs will  be trusted  and widely accepted, and without that acceptance 
their great promise will not be realised.  
 
Alan Winfield is Professor of Robot Ethics  at the Bristol Robotics Laboratory, UWE 
Bristol, and visiting professor  at the University of York. He chairs IEEE Standards 
Working Group P7001.  
e-mail: Alan.Winfield@brl.ac.uk  
 
The views expressed in this article are those of the author only, and do not represent 
the opinions of any organisation mentioned, or with which I am affiliated.  
 
 
References  
 
1. http://alanwinfield.blogspot.com/2017/12/a -round -up-of-robotics -and-ai-
ethics.html  
2. Winfield, A. F. & Jirotka, M. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A  376, 20180085 (2018); 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2018.0085  

==== Page 6 ====
3. British Standards Institute, BS 8611:2016 Robots and robotic devices. Guide to 
the ethical design and application of robots and robotic systems  (2016) 
https://shop.bsigroup.com/ProductDetail/?pid=000000000030320089  
4.  EPSRC , Principle s of Robotics (2011) 
https://epsrc.ukri.org/research/ourportfolio/themes/engineering/activities/principl
esofrobotics/  
5. https://standards.ieee.org/industry -connections/ec/autonomous -systems.html  
6. http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/ec_about_u s.pdf  
7. IEEE Standards Association, Ethically Aligned Design (2017) 
https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/  
8. https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieee -
standards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_general_principles_v2.pdf  
9. Stilgoe J , Winfield A, The Guardian, 13 April 2018 
https://www.theguardian.com/science/political -scienc e/2018/apr/13/self -driving -
car-companies -should -not-be-allowed -to-investigate -their-own-crashes  
10. Winfield A.F. , Jirotka M. (2017) The Case  for an Ethical Black Box. In: Gao Y., 
Fallah S., Jin Y., Lekakou C. (eds) Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 
10454. Springer, Cham . 
11. https://www.acm.org/code -of-ethics  
12.  https://www.ieee.org/about/corporate/governance/p7 -8.html  
13. Grand , A., Wilkinson , C., Bultitude, K. & Winfield, A.F. Open Science: A new 
‘trust technology’? Science Communication  34, 679 - 689 (2012).  
 

