==== Page 1 ====
EV-SegNet: Semantic Segmentation for Event-based Cameras
I˜nigo Alonso
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
inigo@unizar.esAna C. Murillo
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
acm@unizar.es
Abstract
Event cameras are very promising sensors which have
shown several advantages over frame-based cameras. Deep
learning based approaches, which are leading the state-of-
the-art in visual recognition tasks, could potentially take
advantage of the beneﬁts of these cameras, but some adap-
tations are still needed in order to effectively work on event
data. This work introduces the ﬁrst baseline for semantic
segmentation with this kind of data. We build a seman-
tic segmentation CNN based on state-of-the-art techniques
which takes event information as the only input. Besides,
we propose a novel representation for DVS data that out-
performs previously used event representations for related
tasks. Since there is no existing labeled dataset for this
task, we propose how to automatically generate approx-
imated semantic segmentation labels for some sequences
of the DDD17 dataset, which we publish together with the
model, and demonstrate they are valid to train a model for
DVS data only. We compare our results on semantic seg-
mentation from DVS data with results using corresponding
grayscale images, demonstrating how they are complemen-
tary and worth combining.
Supplementary Material
A video showing the performance of our
method in the test sequence is available at:
https://youtu.be/YQXBjWUSiaA. We release the dataset
and code at: https://github.com/Shathe/Ev-SegNet
1. Introduction
Event cameras, as Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [21],
are promising sensors which register intensity changes of
the captured environment. In contrast to conventional cam-
eras, this sensor does not acquire images at a ﬁxed frame-
rate. These cameras, as their name suggests, capture events
and record a stream of asynchronous events. An event in-
dicates an intensity change at a speciﬁc moment and at a
particular pixel (more details on how events are acquired in
Figure 1. Two examples of semantic segmentation (left) from
event based camera data (middle). The semantic segmentation is
the prediction of our CNN, fed only with event data. Grayscale
images (right) are displayed only to facilitate visualization.
Section 3.2). Event cameras offer multiple advantages over
more conventional cameras, 1) mainly its very high tempo-
ral resolution, which allows the capture of multiple events in
microseconds; 2) its very high dynamic range, which allows
the information capture at difﬁcult lighting environments;
3) its low power and bandwidth requirements. Maqueda et
al. [24] show how visual recognition tasks can beneﬁt from
these advantages in their work emphasizing that event cam-
eras are natural motion detectors and automatically ﬁlter out
any temporally-redundant information. Besides, they show
that these cameras provide richer information than just sub-
tracting consecutive conventional images.
These cameras offer a wide range of new possibilities
and features that could boost solutions for many computer
vision applications. However, new algorithms still have
to be developed in order to fully exploit their capabilities,
especially regarding recognition tasks. Most of the latest
achievements based on deep learning solutions for image
data have not yet been even attempted on event cameras.
One of the main reasons is the output of these cameras: they
do not provide standard images, and there is not yet a clearly
adopted way of representing the stream of events to feed a
CNN. Another challenge is the lack of labeled training data,
which is key to training most recognition models. Our work
includes simple but effective novel ideas to deal with these
two challenges. They could be helpful in many DVS ap-
plications, but we focus on an application not explored yet


==== Page 2 ====
with this sensor, semantic segmentation.
This work proposes to combine the potential of event
cameras with deep learning techniques on the challenging
task of semantic segmentation. Semantic segmentation may
intuitively seem a task much better suited to models using
appearance information. However, we show how, with an
appropriate model and representation, event cameras pro-
vide very promising results for this task.
Figure 1 shows two visual results as an example of the
output of our work. Our main contributions are:
•First results, up to our knowledge, on semantic seg-
mentation using DVS data. We build an Xception-
based CNN that takes this data as input. Since there is
no benchmark available for this problem, we propose
how to generate approximated semantic segmentation
labels for some sequences of the DDD17 event-based
dataset. Model and data are being released.
•A comparison of different DVS data representation
performance on semantic segmentation (including a
new proposed representation that is shown to outper-
form existing ones), and an analysis of beneﬁts and
drawbacks compared to conventional images.
2. Related work
2.1. Event Camera Applications
As previously mentioned, event cameras provide valu-
able advantages over conventional cameras in many situa-
tions. We ﬁnd recent works which have proved these advan-
tages in several tasks typically solved with conventional vi-
sion sensors. Most of these works focus their efforts on 3D
reconstruction [28, 19, 35, 34] and 6-DOF camera tracking
[29, 11]. Although 3D reconstruction and localization solu-
tions are very mature on RGB images, existing algorithms
cannot be applied exactly the same way on event cameras.
The aforementioned works propose different approaches for
adapting them.
We ﬁnd recent approaches that explore the use of these
cameras for other tasks, such as optical ﬂow estimation
[12, 23, 36] or, closer to our target tasks, object detection
and recognition [26, 6, 20, 30]. Regarding the data used in
these recognition works, Orchard et al. [26] and Lagorce et
al. [20] performed the recognition task on small datasets,
detecting mainly characters and numbers. The most recent
works, start to use more challenging (but scarce) recordings
in real scenarios, such as N-CARS dataset, used in Sironi et
al. [30], or DDD17 dataset [2], which we use in this work
because of the real world urban scenarios it contains.
Most of these approaches have a common ﬁrst step: en-
code the event information into an image-like representa-
tion, in order to facilitate its processing.We discuss in detail different previous work event rep-
resentations (encoding spatial and temporal information) as
well as our proposed representation (with a different way of
encoding the temporal information) in Sec. 3.
2.2. Semantic Segmentation
Semantic segmentation is a visual recognition problem
which consists of assigning a semantic label to each pixel
in the image. State-of-the-art on this problem is currently
achieved by deep learning based solutions, most of them
proposing different variations of encoder-decoder CNN ar-
chitectures [5, 4, 17, 16].
Some of the existing solutions for semantic segmentation
target an instance-level semantic segmentation, e.g., Mask-
RCNN [15], that includes three main steps: region proposal,
binary segmentation, and classiﬁcation. Other solutions,
such as DeepLabv3+ [5], target class-level semantic seg-
mentation. Deeplabv3+ is a fully convolutional extension of
Xception [7], which is also a state-of-the-art architecture for
image classiﬁcation and the base architecture of our work.
A survey on image segmentation by Zhu et al. [37] pro-
vides a detailed compilation of more conventional solutions
for semantic segmentation, while Garcia et al. [13] present
a discussion of more recent deep learning based approaches
for semantic segmentation, covering from new architectures
to common datasets.
The works discussed so far show the effectiveness
of CNNs for semantic segmentation using RGB images.
Closer to our work, we ﬁnd additional works which prove
great performance in semantic segmentation tasks using ad-
ditional input data modalities to the standard RGB image.
For example, a common additional input data for semantic
segmentation is depth information. Cao et al. [3] and Gupta
et al. [14] are two good examples of how to combine RGB
images with depth information using convolutional neural
networks. Similarly, a very common sensor in the robotics
ﬁeld, the Lidar sensor, has also been shown to provide use-
ful additional information when performing semantic seg-
mentation [32, 10]. Other works show how to combine less
frequent modalities such as ﬂuorescence information [1] or
how to perform semantic segmentation on multi-spectral
images [10]. Semantic segmentation tasks for medical im-
age analysis [22] also typically apply or adapt CNN based
approaches designed for RGB images to different medical
imaging sensors, such as MRI images [18] and CT data [8].
Our work is focused on a different modality, event cam-
era data, not explored in prior work for semantic segmen-
tation. Following one of the top performing models on
semantic segmentation for RGB images [5], we base our
network on the Xception design [7] to build an encoder-
decoder architecture for semantic segmentation on event
images. Our experiments show good semantic segmentation
results using only event data from a public benchmark [2],

==== Page 3 ====
close to what is achieved on standard imagery from the
same scenarios. We also demonstrate the complementary
beneﬁts that this modality can bring when combined with
standard cameras to solve this problem more accurately.
3. From Events to Semantic Segmentation
In this section, we will discuss different event represen-
tations used in visual recognition tasks in order to end up
proposing a rich encoding of the event data for semantic
segmentation.
3.1. Event data
Event cameras capture the changes in intensities for each
pixel. The output of an event camera is not a 3-dimensional
image (height, width, and channels) as conventional cam-
eras but a stream of events. An event represents the positive
or negative change in the log of the intensity signal (over an
established threshold σ):
log(It+1)−log(It)≥σ, (1)
beingIt+1andItthe intensity captured at two consecutive
timestamps. Each event ( ei) is then deﬁned by four differ-
ent components: two coordinates ( xi,yi) of the pixel where
the change has been measured, a polarity ( pi) that can be
positive or negative, and a timestamp ( ti):
ei=/braceleftbig
xi,yi,pi,ti/bracerightbig
. (2)
Events are asynchronous and have the described encod-
ing that, by construction, does not provide good input for
broadly used techniques in visual recognition tasks, such
as CNNs. Perhaps the most straightforward representation
would be a nx4matrix, with nthe number of events. But
obviously, this representation does not encode the spatial
relationship between events. Several strategies have been
proposed to encode this information into a dense represen-
tation successfully applied in different applications.
3.2. Event Representation
Basic dense encoding of event location. The most suc-
cessfully applied event data representation creates an im-
age with several channels encoding the following informa-
tion. It stores at each location (xi,yi)information from the
events that happened there at any time tiwithin an estab-
lished integration interval of size T. Variations of this rep-
resentation have been used by many previous works, show-
ing great performance in very different applications: opti-
cal ﬂow estimation [36], object detection [6], classiﬁcation
[20, 27, 30] and regression tasks [24], respectively.
Earlier works used only one channel to encode event oc-
currences. Nguyen et al. [25] stores the information of thelast event that has occurred in each pixel, i.e., the corre-
sponding value chosen to represent a positive event, nega-
tive event or absence of events. One important drawback is
that only the last event information remains.
In a more complete representation, a recent work for
steering wheel angle estimation, from Maqueda et al. [24],
stores the positive and negative event occurrences into two
different channels. In other words, this representation
(Hist ) encodes the 2D histogram of positive and negative
events that occurred at each pixel (xi,yi), as follows:
Hist(x,y,p) =N/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫWδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p),(3)
whereδis the Kronecker delta function (the function is 1 if
the variables are equal, and 0 otherwise), Wis the time win-
dow, or interval, considered to aggregate the event informa-
tion, andNis the number of events occurred within interval
W. Therefore, the multiplication δ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p)
denotes whether an event eimatches its coordinates xi,yi
withx,yvalues and its polarity piwithp. This representa-
tion has two channels, one per polarity p(positive and neg-
ative events). Our proposed representation described later,
will make use of these two histogram channels.
Note that all the representations discussed so far only
use the temporal information (timestamps ti) to see the time
interval where each event belongs to.
Dense encodings including temporal information.
However, temporal information, i.e., the timestamp of
each event ti, contains useful information for recognition
tasks, and it has been shown that including this non-spatial
information of each event into the image-like encodings
is useful. Lagorce et al. [20] propose a 2-channel image,
one channel per polarity, called time surfaces . They store,
for each pixel, information relative only to the most recent
event timestamp during the integration interval W. Later,
Sironi et al. [30] enhance this previous representation by
changing the deﬁnition of the time surfaces . They now
compute the value for each pixel combining information
from all the timestamps of events that occurred within W.
Another recently proposed approach by Zhu et al.
[36] introduces a more complete representation that in-
cludes both channels of event occurrence histograms from
Maqueda et al. [24], and two more channels containing tem-
poral information. These two channels ( Recent ) store, at
each pixel (xi,yi), the normalized timestamp of the most
recent positive or negative event, respectively, that occurred
in that location during the integration interval:
Recent(x,y,p) = max
tiǫWtiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p).(4)

==== Page 4 ====
Grayscale Hist(x,y,−1)S(x,y,−1)Recent(x,y,−1)M(x,y,−1)
Figure 2. Visualization (between 0 and 255 gray values) of different 1-channel encodings of data from events with negative polarity
(p=−1)explained in the Sect. 3.2. In these examples the event information has been integrated for a time interval of 50ms ( T= 50ms).
Grayscale is shown as reference.
All these recent representations normalize the event
timestamps and histograms to be relative values within the
intervalW.
Inspired by all this prior work, we propose an alternative
representation that combines the best ideas demonstrated so
far: the 2-channels of event histograms to encode the spatial
distribution of events, together with information regarding
all timestamps occurred during the integrated time interval.
Our proposed representation. We propose a 6-channel
image representation. The ﬁrst two channels are the his-
togram of positive and negative events (eq. 3). The remain-
ing four channels are a simple but effective way to store
information relative to all event timestamps happening dur-
ing interval W. We could see it as a way to store how they
are distributed along Trather than selecting just one of the
timestamps. We propose to store the mean ( M) and stan-
dard deviation ( S) of the normalized timestamps of events
happening at each pixel (xi,yi), computed separately for
the positive and negative events, as follows:
M(x,y,p) =1
Hist(x,y,p)N/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫWtiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p),
(5)
S(x,y,p) =/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtN/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫW(tiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p)−Mean(x,y,p))2
Hist(x,y,p)−1.
(6)
Then, our representation consists of these six 2D-
channels: Hist(x,y,−1),Hist(x,y,+1),M(x,y,−1),
M(x,y,+1),S(x,y,−1),S(x,y,+1). Figure 2 shows a
visualization of some of these channels. In the event rep-
resentation images, the brighter the pixels, the higher the
value encoded, e.g., white means the highest number of neg-
ative events in the Hist(x,y,−1).
3.3. Semantic Segmentation from Event Data
CNNs have already been shown to work well on dense
event-data representations, detailed in previous section [24,
36], therefore we explore a CNN based architecture to learn
a different visual task, semantic segmentation.
Figure 3. Semantic segmentation from event based cameras. We
process the different 2D event-data encodings with our encoder-
decoder architecture based on Xception [7] (Sec. 3.3 for more
details). Best viewed in color.
Semantic segmentation is often modeled as a per-pixel
classiﬁcation, and therefore the output of semantic segmen-
tation models has the same resolution that the input. As
previously mentioned, there are plenty of recent success-
ful CNN-based approaches to solve this problem both us-
ing RGB data and additional modalities. We have built
an architecture inspired on current state-of-the-art semantic
segmentation CNNs, slightly adapted to use the event data
encodings. Related works commonly follow an encoder-
decoder architecture, as we do. As the encoder, we use the
well-known Xception model [7], which has been shown to
outperform other encoders, both in classiﬁcation [7] and se-
mantic segmentation tasks [5]. As the decoder, also follow-
ing state-of-the-art works [4, 5], we build a light decoder,
concentrating the heavy computation on the encoder. Our
architecture also includes features from the most success-
ful recent models for semantic segmentation, including: the
use of skip connections to help the optimization of deep ar-
chitectures [16, 17] to avoid the vanishing gradient problem
and the use of an auxiliary loss [33] which also improves
the convergence of the learning process. Fig. 3 shows a di-
agram of the architecture built in this work, with the multi-
channel event representation as network input.
As similar architectures, we perform the training opti-
mization via back-propagation of the loss, calculated as the
summation of all per-pixel losses, through the parameter
gradients. We use the common soft-max cross entropy loss
function ( L) described in eq. (7):
L=−1
NN/summationdisplay
j=1M/summationdisplay
c=1yc,jln(ˆyc,j), (7)

==== Page 5 ====
Dataset Classes: ﬂat(road and pavement), background (construction and sky), object ,vegetation ,human ,vehicle
Train Sequences Selected suitable sequence intervals Num. Frames
1487339175 [0, 4150), [5200, 6600) 5550
1487842276 [1310, 1400), [1900, 2000), [2600, 3550) 1140
1487593224 [870, 2190) 995
1487846842 [380, 500), [1800, 2150), [2575, 2730), [3530, 3900) 1320
1487779465 [1800, 3400), [4000, 4700), [8400, 8630), [8800, 9160), [9920, 10175), [18500, 22300) 6945
TOTAL: 15950
Test Sequences Selected suitable sequence intervals Num. Frames
1487417411 [100, 1500), [2150, 3100), [3200, 4430), [4840, 5150) 3890
Table 1. Summary of Ev-Seg Data which consists of several intervals of some sequences of the DDD17 dataset.
whereNis the number of labeled pixels and Mis the num-
ber of classes. yc,jis a binary indicator of pixel jbelonging
to class c(ground truth). ˆyc,jis the CNN predicted proba-
bility of pixel jbelonging to class c.
4. Ev-Seg: Event-Segmentation Data
The Ev-Seg data is an extension for semantic segmenta-
tion of the DDD17 dataset [2]. The DDD17 dataset con-
sists of 40 sequences of different driving set-ups. These se-
quences were recorded on different scenarios (e.g., motor-
ways and urban scenarios). This dataset provides synchro-
nized grayscale and event-based information but, it does not
provide semantic segmentation labels.
Our extension includes generated (automatically gener-
ated, non-manual annotations) semantic segmentation la-
bels to be used as ground truth for a large subset of that
dataset. Besides the labels, to facilitate replication and fur-
ther experimentation, together with the labeling, we also
publish the selected subset of grayscale images and corre-
sponding event data encoded with three different represen-
tations (Maqueda et al. [24], Zhu et al. [36] and the new
one proposed in this work).
Generating the labels. Besides the obvious burden
of manually labeling a semantic segmentation per-pixel
ground truth, if we think of performing this task directly on
the event-based data it turns out even more challenging. We
only need to look at any of the event representations avail-
able (see Fig. 1), to realize that for the human eye is hard to
distinguish many of the classes there if the grayscale image
is not side-by-side. Other works have shown how CNNs are
robust to training with noise [31] or approximated labels[1],
including the work of Chen et al. [6] that also successfully
uses generated labels from grayscale for object detection in
event-based data. We then propose to use the corresponding
grayscale images to generate an approximated set of labels
for training, which we demonstrate is enough to train mod-
els to segment directly on event-based data.
To generate these approximated semantic labels, we per-
formed the following three steps.
First, we have trained a CNN for semantic segmen-
tation on the well known urban environment datasetCityscapes [9], but using grayscale images. The architec-
ture used for this step is the same architecture described in
subsection 3.3, which follows state-of-the-art components
for semantic segmentation. This grayscale segmentation
model was trained for 70 epochs with a learning rate of 1e-
4. The ﬁnal model obtains 83% categories MIoU on the
Cityscapes validation data. This is still a bit far from the
top results obtained on that dataset with RGB images (92%
MIoU), but enough quality for our the process.
Secondly, with this grayscale model, we obtained the se-
mantic segmentation on all grayscale images of the selected
sequences (we detail next which sequences were used and
why). These segmentations are what we will consider the
labels to train our event-based segmentation model.
Lastly, as a ﬁnal post-processing step on the ground truth
labels, we cropped the bottom part of all the images, i.e., 60
bottom rows of the image it always contains the car dash-
board and it only introduces noise into the generated labels.
Subset of DDD17 sequences selection. As previously
mentioned, we have not generated the labels for all the
DDD17 data. We next discuss the reasons and selection
criteria that we followed.
Some DDD17 sequences did not give good labels when
being pass through the CNN. There are several reasons for
this. As the data domain available to train the base grayscale
semantic segmentation model was Cityscapes data, which is
an urban domain, we selected only the DDD17 sequences
from urban scenarios. Besides, only images with enough
contrast (not too bright, not too dark) are likely to provide
a good generated ground truth. Therefore, we only selected
sequences which were recorded during day-time, with no
extreme overexposure. Given these restrictions, only six se-
quences approximately matched them. Therefore, we per-
formed a manual more detailed annotation of the intervals
in each of these sequences where the restrictions applied
(details on Table 1).
Data summary. Table 1 shows a summary of the con-
tents of the Ev-Seg data. From the six sequences selected
as detailed previously, ﬁve sequences were used as training
data and one sequence was used for testing. We chose for

==== Page 6 ====
Grayscale Label
Figure 4. Examples of the test sequence. Semantic label im-
ages (right) have been generated from the grayscale images (left)
through a CNN trained on a grayscale version of Cityscapes.
testing the sequence with more homogeneous class distribu-
tion, i.e., that contained more amount of labels of categories
which appears less such as the human/pedestrian label.
The labels have the same categories than the well-known
Cityscapes dataset [9] (see Table 1), with the exception of
skyandconstruction categories. Although these two cat-
egories were properly learned in the Cityscapes dataset,
when performing inferences on the DDD17 dataset with
grayscale images, these categories were not correctly gener-
ated due to the domain-shift. Therefore in our experiments,
those two categories are learned together, as if they were
the same thing. This domain shift between the Cityscapes
and DDD17 datasets was also the cause of generating the
Cityscapes categories instead of its classes.
Figure 4 shows three examples of grayscale images and
corresponding generated segmentation that belong to our
extension of the DDD17 dataset. We can see that although
the labels are not as perfect as if manually annotated (and
as previously mentioned, classes such as building andsky
were not properly learned using only grayscale), they are
pretty accurate and well deﬁned.
5. Experimental Validation
5.1. Experiment Set­up and Metrics
Metrics. Our work addresses the semantic segmentation
problem, i.e., per pixel classiﬁcation, using event cameras.
Thus, we evaluate our results on the standard metrics for
classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation: Accuracy and
Mean Intersection over Union (MIoU) .
In semantic segmentation, given a predicted image ˆyand
a ground-truth image y, and being Ntheir number of pixels,
which can be classiﬁed in Cdifferent classes, the accuracymetric, eq. (8) is computed as:
Accuracy (y,ˆy) =1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1δ(yi,ˆyi), (8)
and the MIoU is calculated per class as:
MIoU(y,ˆy) =1
CC/summationdisplay
j=1/summationtextN
i=1δ(yi,c,1)δ(yi,c,ˆyi,c)/summationtextN
i=1max(1,δ(yi,c,1)+δ(ˆyi,c,1)),
(9)
whereδdenotes the Kronecker delta function, yiindicates
the class where pixel ibelongs to, and yi,cis a boolean that
indicates if pixel ibelongs to a certain class c.
Set-up. We perform the experiments using the CNN ex-
plained in Sec. 3.3. and the Ev-Seg data detailed in Sec.
4. We train all model variations from scratch using: the
Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e−4and a
polynomial learning rate decay schedule. We train for 30K
iterations using a batch size of 8 and during training we
perform several data augmentation steps: crops, rotations
(-15◦, 15◦), vertical and horizontal shifts (-25%, 25%) and
horizontal ﬂips. Regarding the event information encod-
ing, for training, we always use an integration time interval
T= 50mswhich has been shown to perform well on this
dataset [24].
5.2. Event Semantic Segmentation
Input representation comparison. A good input repre-
sentation is very important for a CNN to properly learn
and exploit the input information. Table 2 compares sev-
eral semantic segmentation models trained with different
input representations. The top three rows correspond to
event-based representations. We compare a basic dense
encoding of event locations, a dense encoding which also
includes temporal information and our proposed encoding
(see Sec.3.2. for details). Our event encoding performs
slightly but consistently better on the semantic segmenta-
tion task on the different metrics and evaluations consid-
ered. Fig. 5 shows a few visual examples of these results.
All models (same architecture, just trained with differ-
ent inputs) have been trained with data encoded using in-
tegration intervals of 50ms, but we also evaluate them us-
ing different interval sizes. This is an interesting evalua-
tion because by changing the time interval, in which the
event information is aggregated, we somehow simulate dif-
ferent camera movement speeds. In other words, intervals
of 50ms or 10ms may encode exactly the same movement
but at different speeds. This point is pretty important be-
cause, in real scenarios, models have to perform well at
different speeds. We can see that all models perform just
slightly worse on test data encoded with different intervals
sizes (10ms, 250ms) that the integration time used during

==== Page 7 ====
Accuracy MIoU Accuracy MIoU Accuracy MIoU
Input representation 50ms 50ms 10ms 10ms 250ms 250ms
Basic dense encoding [24] 88.85 53.07 85.06 42.93 87.09 45.66
Temporal dense encoding [36] 88.99 52.32 86.35 43.65 85.89 45.12
Ours 89.76 54.81 86.46 45.85 87.72 47.56
Grayscale 94.67 64.98 94.67 64.98 94.67 64.98
Grayscale & Ours 95.22 68.36 95.18 67.95 95.29 68.26
Table 2. Semantic segmentation performance of different input representations on the test Ev-Seg data. Models trained using time intervals
(T) of 50ms but tested with different Tvalues: 50ms, 10ms and 250ms.
Basic dense Temporal dense Grayscale
Grayscale img encoding [24] encoding [36] Ours Grayscale & Ours GT Labels
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g)
Figure 5. Semantic segmentation on several test images from Ev-Seg data. Results using different input representations of event data only,
(b) to (d), or using grayscale data (e) and (f). Grayscale original image (a) and ground truth labels are shown for visualization purposes.
Models trained and tested on time intervals of 50ms. Best viewed in color.
training (50ms), see Fig. 6 examples. There are two main
explanations for why the models are performing similarly
on different integration intervals: 1) the encodings are nor-
malized and 2) the training data contains different camera
speeds. Both things help to generalize better at different
time intervals or movement speeds.
Event vs conventional cameras. Table 2 also includes,
in the two bottom rows, results using the corresponding
grayscale image for the semantic segmentation task.
Although conventional cameras capture richer pure ap-
pearance information than event cameras, event cameras
provide motion information, which is also very useful forthe semantic segmentation task. In examples of results us-
ing grayscale data from Fig. 5(e), (f), we can see how event
information helps for example to better segment moving ob-
jects, such as pedestrians (in red in those examples) or to
reﬁne object borders. While conventional cameras suffer
detecting small objects and in general, with any recognition
on extreme illumination (bright or dark) conditions, event
cameras suffer more in recognizing objects with no move-
ment (because they move at the same speed than the camera
or because they are too far to appreciate their movement).
Conventional cameras perform better on their own for
semantic segmentation than event-based cameras on their
own. However, our results show that semantic segmenta-

==== Page 8 ====
T= 250ms T = 50ms T = 10ms
Figure 6. Semantic segmentation results (bottom) using different
integration interval size ( T)for the event data representation (top).
Results obtained with a model trained only on 50ms integrated
event information encoded with our proposed representation.
Grayscale Event representation
Figure 7. Semantic segmentation result (bottom) on a static se-
quence, i.e, a car waiting at a crossing. This is an obvious adver-
sarial case for event cameras, due to lack of event information.
tion results are better when combining both of them. This
suggests they are learning complementary information. In-
terestingly, we should note that the data available for train-
ing and evaluation is precisely data where we could prop-
erly segment the grayscale image, therefore slightly more
beneﬁcial for grayscale images than event-based data (i.e.,
there is no night-time image included in the evaluation set
because there is no ground truth for those).
Two clear complementary situations from our experi-
ments: 1) On one hand, it is already known that one the
major drawback of event cameras is that objects that do not
move with respect to the camera do not trigger events, i.e.,
are invisible. Fig. 7 shows an example of a car waiting at
a pedestrian crossing, where we see that while conventional
cameras can perfectly see the whole scene, event cameras
barely capture any information; 2) On the other hand, event
cameras are able to capture meaningful information on situ-
ations where scene objects are not visible at all for conven-
tional vision sensors, e.g., difﬁcult lighting environments.
This is due to their high dynamic range, Fig. 8 illustrates an
example of a situation where neither of the grayscale nor the
event-based models have been trained for. The event-based
model performs much better due to the minor domain-shift
on the input representation.Grayscale Event representation
Figure 8. Semantic segmentation (bottom) on extreme lighting
conditions (night-time) with different input representations (top):
grayscale image and our event data representation. Corresponding
models trained only on good illuminated daytime samples. This is
an obvious adversarial case for conventional cameras, due to lack
of information in the grayscale capture.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
This work includes the ﬁrst results on semantic seg-
mentation using event camera information. We build an
encoder-decoder architecture which is able to learn seman-
tic segmentation only from event camera data. Since there
is no benchmark available for this problem, we propose how
to generate automatic but approximate semantic segmenta-
tion labels for some sequences of the DDD17 event-based
dataset. Our evaluation shows how this approach allows the
effective learning of semantic segmentation models from
event data. In order to feed the model, we also propose a
novel event camera data representation, which encodes both
the event histogram and their temporal distribution. Our se-
mantic segmentation experiments, comparing different rep-
resentations, show that our approach allows the effective
learning of semantic segmentation models and that our ap-
proach outperforms other previously used event representa-
tions, even when evaluating in different time intervals. We
also compare the segmentation achieved only from event
data to the segmentation from conventional images, show-
ing their beneﬁts, their drawbacks and the beneﬁts of com-
bining both sensors for this task. For future work, one of the
main challenges is still obtaining and generating more and
better semantic segmentation labels, through alternative do-
main adaptation approaches and/or event camera simulators
(they currently do not provide this kind of labels).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank NVIDIA Corporation
for the donation of a Titan Xp GPU used in this work. This
research has been partially funded by the Spanish Govern-
ment projects DPI2015-69376-R and DPI2016-76676-R-
AEI/FEDER-UE, and Arag ´on regional government (DGA
T45 17R/FSE).

==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] I. Alonso, A. Cambra, A. Munoz, T. Treibitz, and A. C.
Murillo. Coral-segmentation: Training dense labeling mod-
els with sparse ground truth. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer
Vision Workshops , pages 2874–2882, 2017.
[2] J. Binas, D. Neil, S.-C. Liu, and T. Delbruck. Ddd17: End-
to-end davis driving dataset. ICML Workshop on Machine
Learning for Autonomous Vehicles , 2017.
[3] Y . Cao, C. Shen, and H. T. Shen. Exploiting depth from
single monocular images for object detection and seman-
tic segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,
26(2):836–846, 2017.
[4] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam. Re-
thinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmenta-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 , 2017.
[5] L.-C. Chen, Y . Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam.
Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for se-
mantic image segmentation. In ECCV , 2018.
[6] N. F. Chen. Pseudo-labels for supervised learning on dy-
namic vision sensor data, applied to object detection un-
der ego-motion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops , pages
644–653, 2018.
[7] F. Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise sep-
arable convolutions. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 1800–1807,
2017.
[8] P. F. Christ, M. E. A. Elshaer, F. Ettlinger, S. Tatavarty,
M. Bickel, P. Bilic, M. Rempﬂer, M. Armbruster, F. Hof-
mann, M. DAnastasi, et al. Automatic liver and lesion seg-
mentation in ct using cascaded fully convolutional neural
networks and 3d conditional random ﬁelds. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention , pages 415–423. Springer, 2016.
[9] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler,
R. Benenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele. The
cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding.
InProc. of IEEE conf. on CVPR , pages 3213–3223, 2016.
[10] C. Dechesne, C. Mallet, A. Le Bris, and V . Gouet-Brunet.
Semantic segmentation of forest stands of pure species com-
bining airborne lidar data and very high resolution multispec-
tral imagery. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing , 126:129–145, 2017.
[11] G. Gallego, J. E. Lund, E. Mueggler, H. Rebecq, T. Delbruck,
and D. Scaramuzza. Event-based, 6-dof camera tracking
from photometric depth maps. IEEE transactions on pat-
tern analysis and machine intelligence , 40(10):2402–2412,
2018.
[12] G. Gallego, H. Rebecq, and D. Scaramuzza. A unifying
contrast maximization framework for event cameras, with
applications to motion, depth, and optical ﬂow estimation.
InIEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.(CVPR) , vol-
ume 1, 2018.
[13] A. Garcia-Garcia, S. Orts-Escolano, S. Oprea, V . Villena-
Martinez, and J. Garcia-Rodriguez. A review on deep learn-
ing techniques applied to semantic segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.06857 , 2017.[14] S. Gupta, R. Girshick, P. Arbel ´aez, and J. Malik. Learn-
ing rich features from rgb-d images for object detection and
segmentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 345–360. Springer, 2014.
[15] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick. Mask R-
CNN. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer Vision , pages 2980–
2988, 2017.
[16] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In Proc. of IEEE CVPR , pages 770–
778, 2016.
[17] S. J ´egou, M. Drozdzal, D. Vazquez, A. Romero, and Y . Ben-
gio. The one hundred layers tiramisu: Fully convolutional
densenets for semantic segmentation. In CVPRW , pages
1175–1183. IEEE, 2017.
[18] B. Kayalibay, G. Jensen, and P. van der Smagt. Cnn-
based segmentation of medical imaging data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.03056 , 2017.
[19] H. Kim, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davison. Real-time 3d
reconstruction and 6-dof tracking with an event camera. In
European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 349–364.
Springer, 2016.
[20] X. Lagorce, G. Orchard, F. Galluppi, B. E. Shi, and R. B.
Benosman. Hots: a hierarchy of event-based time-surfaces
for pattern recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analy-
sis and machine intelligence , 39(7):1346–1359, 2017.
[21] P. Lichtsteiner, C. Posch, and T. Delbruck. A 128 ×128
120 db 15 µs latency asynchronous temporal contrast vision
sensor. IEEE journal of solid-state circuits , 43(2):566–576,
2008.
[22] G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi,
M. Ghafoorian, J. A. Van Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, and
C. I. S ´anchez. A survey on deep learning in medical image
analysis. Medical image analysis , 42:60–88, 2017.
[23] M. Liu and T. Delbruck. Adaptive time-slice block-matching
optical ﬂow algorithm for dynamic vision sensors. Technical
report, 2018.
[24] A. I. Maqueda, A. Loquercio, G. Gallego, N. Garcıa, and
D. Scaramuzza. Event-based vision meets deep learning
on steering prediction for self-driving cars. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 5419–5427, 2018.
[25] A. Nguyen, T.-T. Do, D. G. Caldwell, and N. G. Tsagarakis.
Real-time pose estimation for event cameras with stacked
spatial lstm networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.09011 ,
2017.
[26] G. Orchard, C. Meyer, R. Etienne-Cummings, C. Posch,
N. Thakor, and R. Benosman. Hﬁrst: a temporal approach
to object recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 37(10):2028–2040, 2015.
[27] P. K. Park, B. H. Cho, J. M. Park, K. Lee, H. Y . Kim, H. A.
Kang, H. G. Lee, J. Woo, Y . Roh, W. J. Lee, et al. Perfor-
mance improvement of deep learning based gesture recogni-
tion using spatiotemporal demosaicing technique. In Image
Processing (ICIP), 2016 IEEE International Conference on ,
pages 1624–1628. IEEE, 2016.
[28] H. Rebecq, G. Gallego, E. Mueggler, and D. Scaramuzza.
Emvs: Event-based multi-view stereo3d reconstruction with

==== Page 10 ====
an event camera in real-time. International Journal of Com-
puter Vision , pages 1–21, 2017.
[29] H. Rebecq, T. Horstschaefer, G. Gallego, and D. Scara-
muzza. Evo: A geometric approach to event-based 6-dof
parallel tracking and mapping in real time. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters , 2(2):593–600, 2017.
[30] A. Sironi, M. Brambilla, N. Bourdis, X. Lagorce, and
R. Benosman. Hats: Histograms of averaged time surfaces
for robust event-based object classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 1731–1740, 2018.
[31] C. Sun, A. Shrivastava, S. Singh, and A. Gupta. Revisiting
unreasonable effectiveness of data in deep learning era. In
IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer Vision , 2017.
[32] Y . Sun, X. Zhang, Q. Xin, and J. Huang. Developing a multi-
ﬁlter convolutional neural network for semantic segmenta-
tion using high-resolution aerial imagery and lidar data. IS-
PRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 2018.
[33] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia. Pyramid scene
parsing network. In IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 2881–2890, 2017.
[34] Y . Zhou, G. Gallego, H. Rebecq, L. Kneip, H. Li, and
D. Scaramuzza. Semi-dense 3d reconstruction with a stereo
event camera. ECCV , 2018.
[35] A. Z. Zhu, Y . Chen, and K. Daniilidis. Realtime time syn-
chronized event-based stereo. CVPR , 2018.
[36] A. Z. Zhu, L. Yuan, K. Chaney, and K. Daniilidis. Ev-
ﬂownet: Self-supervised optical ﬂow estimation for event-
based cameras. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06898 , 2018.
[37] H. Zhu, F. Meng, J. Cai, and S. Lu. Beyond pixels: A com-
prehensive survey from bottom-up to semantic image seg-
mentation and cosegmentation. Journal of Visual Communi-
cation and Image Representation , 34:12–27, 2016.

