==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1710.10741v3  [cs.NE]  10 Mar 2019Evolving Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
for Image Classiﬁcation
Yanan Sun, Bing Xue, Mengjie Zhang and Gary G. Yen
Abstract —Evolutionary computation methods have been suc-
cessfully applied to neural networks since two decades ago, while
those methods cannot scale well to the modern deep neural net -
works due to the complicated architectures and large quanti ties
of connection weights. In this paper, we propose a new method
using genetic algorithms for evolving the architectures an d
connection weight initialization values of a deep convolut ional
neural network to address image classiﬁcation problems. In the
proposed algorithm, an efﬁcient variable-length gene enco ding
strategy is designed to represent the different building bl ocks and
the unpredictable optimal depth in convolutional neural ne tworks.
In addition, a new representation scheme is developed for ef fec-
tively initializing connection weights of deep convolutio nal neural
networks, which is expected to avoid networks getting stuck into
local minima which is typically a major issue in the backward
gradient-based optimization. Furthermore, a novel ﬁtness eval-
uation method is proposed to speed up the heuristic search
with substantially less computational resource. The propo sed
algorithm is examined and compared with 22 existing algorit hms
on nine widely used image classiﬁcation tasks, including th e state-
of-the-art methods. The experimental results demonstrate the
remarkable superiority of the proposed algorithm over the s tate-
of-the-art algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation error rate and the
number of parameters (weights).
Index Terms —Genetic algorithms, convolutional neural net-
work, image classiﬁcation, deep learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
their exceptional superiority in visual recognition tasks , such
as trafﬁc sign recognition [1], biological image segmenta-
tion [2], and image classiﬁcation [3]. CNNs are originally
motivated by the computational model of the cat visual corte x
specializing in processing vision and signal related tasks [4].
Since LetNet-5 was proposed in 1989 [5], [6], which is an
implementation of CNNs and whose connection weights are
optimized by the Back-Propagation (BP) algorithm [7], vari ous
variants of CNNs have been developed, such as VGGNet [8]
and ResNet [9]. These variants signiﬁcantly improve the cla s-
siﬁcation accuracies of the best rivals in image classiﬁcat ion
tasks. Diverse variants of CNNs differ from their architect ures
and weight connections.
Mathematically, a CNN can be formulated by (1) in the
context of an image classiﬁcation task with the input (X,Y),


Architecture =F(X,Y)
Weight=G(Architecture )
minimize L (X,Weight,Y)(1)
whereXandYare the input data and corresponding label,
respectively, F(·)denotes the architecture choosing function
with the given data, G(·)refers to the initialization methodof the connection weights Weight based on the chosen ar-
chitecture, and L(·)measures the differences between the
true label and the label predicted by the CNN using X
andWeight . Typically, the Gradient Descend (GD)-based ap-
proaches, e.g., Stochastic GD (SGD), are utilized to minimi ze
L(X,Weight,Y)within the given number of epochs, where
the connection weight values are iteratively updated. Alth ough
L(·)is not differentiable in all occasions, GD-based methods
are preferred due to their effectiveness and good scalabili ty
as the number of connection weights increases. A CNN
commonly has a huge number of connection weights. However,
F(·)andG(·)are countable functions that are discrete and
neither convex or concave, and they are not well addressed in
practice. Furthermore, because the gradient-based optimi zers
are heavily dependent on the initial values of the weights
(including biases), it is essential to choose a suitable G(·)
that can help the consecutive GD-based approaches to escape
from local minima. Furthermore, the performance of assigne d
architectures cannot be evaluated until the minimization o fL(·)
is ﬁnished, while the minimization is a progress of multiple
iterations, which in turn increases the difﬁculty of choosi ng the
potential optimal F(·). Therefore, the architecture design and
connection weight initialization strategy should be caref ully
treated in CNNs.
Typically, most of the architecture design approaches were
initially developed for the deep learning algorithms in the early
date (e.g., the Stacked Auto-Encoders (SAEs) [10], [11] and
the Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) [12]), such as Grid Search
(GS), Random Search (RS) [13], Bayesian-based Gaussion
Process (BGP) [14], [15], Tree-structured Parzen Estimato rs
(TPE) [16], and Sequential Model-Based Global Optimiza-
tion (SMBO) [17]. Theoretically, GS exhaustively tests all
combinations of the parameters to expectedly seize the best
one. However, GS cannot evaluate all combinations within an
acceptable time in reality. Moreover, GS is difﬁcult to opti mize
the parameters of continuous values [13]. RS could reduce th e
exhaustive adverse of GS, but the absolute “random” severel y
challenges the sampling behavior in the search space [18]–[ 20].
In addition, BGP incurs extra parameters (i.e., the kernels ) that
are arduous to tune. TPE treats each parameter independentl y,
while the most key parameters in CNNs are dependent (e.g.,
the convolutional layer size and its stride, more details ca n be
seen in Subsection II-A). The methods mentioned above have
shown their good performance in most SAEs and DBNs, but
are not suitable to CNNs. Their success in SAEs and DBNs is
due largely to the architecture construction approaches, w hich
are greedy layer-wised by stacking a group of building block s

==== Page 2 ====
with the same structures (i.e., the three-layer neural netw orks).
In each building block, these architecture-search methods are
utilized for only optimizing the parameters, such as the num ber
of neurons in the corresponding layer. However in CNNs, the
layer-wised method cannot be applied due to their architect ure
characteristics of non-stacking routine, and we must conﬁr m
the entire architectures at a time. Furthermore, multiple d if-
ferent building blocks exist in CNNs, and different orders
of them would result in signiﬁcantly different performance .
Therefore, the architecture design in CNNs should be carefu lly
treated. Recently, Baker et al. [21] proposed an architecture
design approach for CNNs based on reinforcement learning,
named MetaQNN, which employed 10 Graphic Processing
Unit (GPU) cards with 8-10 days for the experiments on the
CIFAR-10 dataset.
Due to the drawbacks of existing methods and limited
computational resources available to interested research ers,
most of these works in CNNs are typically performed by
experts with rich domain knowledge [13]. Genetic Algorithm s
(GAs), which are a paradigm of the evolutionary algorithms
that do not require rich domain knowledge [22], [23], adapt
the meta-heuristic pattern motivated by the process of natu ral
selection [24] for optimization problems. GAs are preferre d in
various ﬁelds due to their characteristics of gradient-fre e and
insensitivity to local minima [25]. These promising proper ties
are collectively achieved by a repeated series of the selec-
tion, mutation, and crossover operators. Therefore, it can be
naturally utilized for the optimization of architecture de sign
and the connection weight initialization for CNNs. Indeed,
GAs for evolving neural networks can be traced back to
1989 [26]. In 1999, Yao [25] presented a survey about these
different approaches, which are largely for the optimizati on
of connection weights in the ﬁxed architecture topologies.
In 2002, Stanley and Miikkulainen proposed the Neuron-
Evolution Augmenting Topology (NEAT) [27] algorithm to
evolve the architecture and connection weights of a small
scale neural network. Afterwards, the HyperNEAT [28], i.e. ,
NEAT combined with the compositional pattern producing
networks [29], was proposed to evolve a larger scale neural
network with an indirect encoding strategy. Motivated by
the HyperNEAT, multiple variants [30]–[32] were proposed
to evolve even larger scale neural networks. However, the
major deﬁciencies of the HyperNEAT-based approaches are:
1) they are only suitable for evolving deep neural networks
with global connection and single building blocks, such as
SAEs and DBNs, but not CNNs where local connection exists
and multiple different building blocks need to be evolved
simultaneously, and 2) hybrid weigh connections (e.g., con -
nections between two layers that are non-adjacent) may be
evolved, which are contrast to the architectures of CNNs.
Indeed, the views have been many years that evolutionary
algorithms are incapable of evolving the architecture and
connection weights in CNNs due to the tremendous number
of related parameters [33]–[35]. Until very recently in 201 7,
Google showed their Large Evolution for Image Classiﬁcatio n
(LEIC) method specializing at the architecture optimizati onof CNNs [36]. LETC is materialized by GAs without the
crossover operator, implemented on 250 high-end computers ,
and archives competitive performance against the state-of -
the-art on the CIFAR-10 dataset by training for about 20
days. Actually, by directly using GAs for the architecture
design of CNNs, several issues would raise in nature: 1)
the best architecture is unknown until the performance is
received based on it. However, evaluating the performance o f
one individual takes a long time, and appears more severely
for the entire population. This would require much more
computational resources for speeding up the evolution; 2)
the optimal depth of CNNs for one particular problem is
unknown, therefore it is hard to constrain the search space
for the architecture optimization. In this regard, a variab le-
length gene encoding strategy may be the best choice for
both 1) and 2), but how to assign the crossover operation for
different building blocks is a newly resulted problem; and 3 )
the weight initialization values heavily affect the perfor mance
of the conﬁrmed architecture, but addressing this problem
involves a good gene encoding strategy and the optimization
of hundreds and thousands decision variables.
A. Goal
The aim of this paper is to design and develop an effective
and efﬁcient GA method to automatically discover good ar-
chitectures and corresponding connection weight initiali zation
values of CNNs (i.e., the ﬁrst two formulae in (1)) without
manual intervention. To achieve this goal, the objectives b elow
have been speciﬁed:
1) Design a ﬂexible gene encoding scheme of the architec-
ture, which does not constrain the maximal length of
the building blocks in CNNs. With this gene encoding
scheme, the evolved architecture is expected to beneﬁt
CNNs to achieve good performance in solving different
tasks at hand.
2) Investigate the connection weight encoding strategy,
which is capable of representing tremendous numbers of
the connection weights in an economy way. With this
encoding approach, the weight connection initialization
problem in CNNs is expected to be effectively optimized
by the proposed GA.
3) Develop associated selection (including the environmen -
tal selection), crossover, and mutation operators that can
cope with the designed gene encoding strategies of both
architectures and connection weights.
4) Propose an effective ﬁtness measure of the individuals
representing different CNNs, which does not require
intensive computational resources.
5) Investigate whether the new approach signiﬁcantly outpe r-
form the existing methods in both classiﬁcation accuracy
and number of weights.
B. Organization
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: the
background of the CNNs, the related works on the architectur e
design and weight initialization approaches of CNNs are

==== Page 3 ====
Input Feature maps Feature maps Feature maps Feature maps Full connection layer
Convolution Pooling Convolution Pooling24x24 4@20x20 4@10x10 8@8x8 8@4x4 128x1
Flatten
Fig. 1. An general architecture of the Convolutional Neural Network.
reviewed in Section II. The framework and the details of each
step in the proposed algorithm are elaborated in Section III .
The experiment design and experimental results of the pro-
posed algorithm are shown in Sections IV and V, respectively .
Next, further discussions are made in Section VI. Finally, t he
conclusions and future work are detailed in Section VII.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Architecture of Convolutional Neural Network
1)Bone of CNNs :Fig. 1 exhibits an extensive architecture
of one CNN, where there are two convolutional operations,
two pooling operations, the resulted four groups of feature
maps, and the full connection layer in the tail. The last laye r,
which is a full connection layer, receives the input data by
ﬂattening all elements of the fourth group of feature maps.
Generally, the convolutional layers and the pooling layers can
be mixed to stack together in the head of the architecture,
while the full connection layers are constantly stacked wit h
each other in the tail of the architecture. The numbers in Fig . 1
refer to the sizes of the corresponding layer. Particularly , the
input data is with 24×24, the output is with 128×1, and
the other numbers denote the feature map conﬁgurations. For
example, 4@20×20implies there are 4feature maps, each
with the size of 4×4.
In the following, the details of the convolutional layer and
the pooling layer, which are associated with the convolutio n
and the pooling operations, respectively, are documented i n
detail, while the full connection layer is not intended to
describe here because it is well-known.
2)Convolution :Given an input image with the size of
n×n, in order to receive a feature map generated by the
convolutional operations, a ﬁlter must be deﬁned in advance .
Actually, a ﬁlter (it can also be simply seen as a matrix) is
randomly initialized with a predeﬁned size (i.e., the ﬁlter width
and the ﬁlter height). Then, this ﬁlter travels from the left most
to the rightmost of the input data with the step size equal to
a stride (i.e., the stride width), and then travels again aft er
moving downward with the step size equal to a stride (i.e.,
the stride height), until reach the right bottom of the input
image. Depending on whether to keep the same sizes between
the feature map and the input data through padding zeros,
the convolutional operations are categorized into two type s:
the V ALID (without padding) and the SAME (with padding).
Speciﬁcally, each element in the feature map is the sum of the
products of each element from the ﬁlter and the correspondin g
elements this ﬁlter overlaps. If the input data is with multi ple
channels, say 3, one feature map will also require 3differentﬁlters, and each ﬁlter convolves on each channel, then the
results are summed element-wised.
1 0
0 10
1
1
11
0
1
11
1
0
10
1
1
10
2
22
0
22
2
10
1
1
11
0
1
11
1
0
10
1
1
1
Filter {width:2, height:2}
Stride {width:1, height:1}
Input 4x4Feature map 
3x3 Input 4x4
Fig. 2. An illustration of convolutional operation.
An example of the V ALID convolutional operation is illus-
trated by Fig. 2, where the ﬁlter has the same width and height
equal to 2, the input data is with the size of 4×4, and the
stride has the same height and width equal to 1. As shown in
Fig. 2, the generated feature map is with the size of 3×3, the
shadow areas in the input data with different colors refer to
the overlaps with the ﬁlter at different positions of the inp ut
data, the shadow areas in the feature map are the respective
resulted convolutional outcomes, and numbers in the ﬁlter a re
the connection weight values. Generally, convolutional re sults
regarding each ﬁlter are updated by adding a bias term and
then through a nonlinearity, such as the Rectiﬁer Linear Uni t
(ReLU) [37], before they are stored into the feature map. Obv i-
ously, the involved parameters in one convolutional operat ion
are the ﬁlter width , the ﬁlter height , the number of feature
maps , the stride width , the stride height , the convolutional
type, and the connection weight in the ﬁlter.
3)Pooling :Intuitively, the pooling operation resembles the
convolution operation except for the element-wised produc t
and the resulted values of the corresponding feature map.
Brieﬂy, the pooling operation employs a predeﬁned window
(i.e., the kernel) to collect the average value or the maxima l
value of the elements where it slides, and the slide size is
also called “stride” as in the convolutional operation. For
better understanding, an example of the pooling operation i s
illustrated by Fig. 3, where the kernel is with the size of 2×2,
and the both stride width and height are 2, the input data
is with the size of 4×4, the shadows with different colors
refer to the two slide positions and the resulted pooling val ues.
In this example, the maximal pooling operation is employed.
Evidently in the pooling operation, the involved parameter s
are the kernel width , the kernel height , the stride width , the
stride height , and the pooling type .
0
1
1
11
0
1
11
1
0
10
1
1
11
11
10
1
1
11
0
1
11
1
0
10
1
1
1
Kernel {width:2, height:2}
Stride {width:2, height:2}
Input 4x4Feature map 
2x2 Input 4x4
max(0,1,1,0)max(1,0,1,1)
Fig. 3. An illustration of pooling operation.
B. CNN Architecture Design Algorithm
In this subsection, only LEIC [36] is concerned due to its
speciﬁc intention for the architecture design of CNNs. To th is

==== Page 4 ====
end, we will review the algorithm and then point out the
limitations, which are used to highlight the necessity of th e
corresponding work in the proposed algorithm.
LEIC employed a GA to evolve the architectures of CNNs,
where individuals were evolved from scratch, and each indiv id-
ual was encoded with a variable-length chromosome. During
the phase of evolution, different kinds of layers can be inco r-
porated into the individuals by the mutation operation, wit h
the expectation that individuals with promising performan ce
will be generated. Note that, the crossover operation, whic h
are designed for local search in GAs, were not investigated
in the main part of LEIC. Without any crossover operator,
GAs typically require a large population size for reducing
the adverse impact. Therefore, LETC adopted a population
size of103, while that of a magnitude with order 102is
a general setting in the GA community. In addition, 250
high-end computers were employed for LEIC, which was
caused by the ﬁtness assignment approach utilized in LEIC.
In LEIC, each individual was evaluated with the ﬁnal image
classiﬁcation accuracy, which typically took a long time du e to
the iterative nature of GD-based optimizers. However, LEIC
reported an external experiment on the crossover operation ,
which was used only for exchanging the mutation probabiliti es
and the connection weights trained by SGD. Although it is
difﬁcult to reach the actual reason why the crossover has not
been used for evolving the architectures in LETC, it is obvio us
at least that the crossover operations are not easy to achiev e
for chromosomes with different lengths. This would be more
complicated in CNNs that have multiple different building
blocks.
In summary, the main deﬁciency of LEIC is its high com-
putational complexity mainly caused by the ﬁtness evaluati on
strategy it adopts as well as without crossover operations. The
huge computational resource that LEIC requires makes it ver y
intractable in academic environment.
C. Connection Weight Initialization
Typically, the initialization methods are classiﬁed into t hree
different categorises. The ﬁrst employs constant numbers t o
initialize all connection weights, such as the zero initial izer,
one initializer, and other ﬁxed value initializer. The seco nd is
the distribution initializer, such as using the Gaussion di stribu-
tion or uniform distribution to initialize the weights. The third
covers the initialization approaches with some prior knowl -
edge, and the famous Xavier initializer [38] belongs to this
category. Because of the numerous connection weights exist -
ing in CNNs, it is not necessary that all the connection weigh ts
start with the same values, which is the major deﬁciency of th e
ﬁrst initialization method. In the second initialization a pproach,
the shortage of the ﬁrst one has been solved, but the major dif ﬁ-
culty exists in choosing the parameter of the distribution, such
as the range of the uniform distribution, and the mean value a s
well as the standard derivation of the Gaussian distributio n. To
solve this problem, the Xavier initializer presented a rang e for
uniform sampling based on the neuron saturation prior using
the sigmoid activation function [39]. Supposed the number o fneurons in two adjacent layers are n1andn2, the values of
the weights connecting these two layers are initialized wit hin
the range of/bracketleftBig
−/radicalbig
6/(n1+n2),/radicalbig
6/(n1+n2)/bracketrightBig
by uniformly
sampling. Although the Xavier initializer works better tha n the
initialization methods from the other two categories, a cou ple
of major issues exist: 1) It highly relies on the architectur es of
CNNs, particularity the number of neurons in each layer in th e
networks (e.g., n1andn2in its formulation). If the optimal
architectures of the networks are not found, the resulted
initialized parameters perform badly as well, then there is no
way to evaluate the desired performance of the architecture s
and may mislead the adjustment of the architectures. 2) The
Xavier initializer is presented on the usage of the sigmoid
activation, while the widely used activation function in CN Ns
is the ReLU [3], [9], [40], [41].
To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any exist-
ing evolutionary algorithm for searching for the connectio n
weight initialization of deep learning algorithms includi ng
CNNs. The main reason is the tremendous numbers of weights,
which are difﬁcult to be effectively encoded into the chromo -
somes and to be efﬁciently optimized due to its large-scale
global optimization nature [42].
III. T HE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, the proposed Evolving deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (EvoCNN) for image classiﬁcation is docu-
mented in detail.
A. Algorithm Overview
Algorithm 1: Framework of EvoCNN
1P0←Initialize the population with the proposed gene
encoding strategy;
2t←0;
3while termination criterion is not satisﬁed do
4 Evaluate the ﬁtness of individuals in Pt;
5S←Select parent solutions with the developed slack
binary tournament selection;
6Qt←Generate offsprings with the designed genetic
operators from S;
7Pt+1←Environmental selection from Pt∪Qt;
8t←t+1;
9end
10Select the best individual from Ptand decode it to the
corresponding convolutional neural network.
Algorithm 1 outlines the framework of the proposed
EvoCNN method. Firstly, the population is initialized base d on
the proposed ﬂexible gene encoding strategy (line 1). Then, the
evolution begins to take effect until a predeﬁned terminati on
criterion, such as the maximum number of the generations,
has been satisﬁed (lines 3-9). Finally, the best individual is
selected and decoded to the corresponding CNN (line 10) for
ﬁnal training.

==== Page 5 ====
... P F F C P C C
... P F C C
... P F P C C C
C Convolutional P Pooling F Full connection
Fig. 4. An example of three chromosomes with different lengt hs in EvoCNN.
TABLE I
THE ENCODED INFORMATION IN EVOCNN.
Unit Type Encoded Information
convolutional
layerthe ﬁlter width, the ﬁlter height, the number of feature
maps, the stride width, the stride height, the convolu-
tional type, the standard deviation and the mean value
of ﬁlter elements
pooling layer the kernel width, the kernel height, the stride width, the
stride height, and the pooling type (i.e., the average or
the maximal)
full connection
layerthe number of neurons, the standard deviation of
connection weights, and the mean value of connection
weights
During the evolution, all individuals are evaluated ﬁrst ba sed
on the proposed efﬁcient ﬁtness measurement (line 4). After
that, parent solutions are selected by the developed slack
binary tournament selection (line 5), and new offspring are
generated with the designed genetic operators (line 6). Nex t,
representatives are selected from the existing individual s and
the generated offsprings to form the population in the next
generation to participate subsequent evolution (line 7). I n
the following subsections, the key steps in Algorithm 1 are
narrated in detail.
B. Gene Encoding Strategy
As introduced in Subsection II-A, three different building
blocks, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, and the
full connection layer, exist in the architectures of CNNs. There-
fore, they should be encoded in parallel into one chromosome
for evolution. Because the optimal depth of a CNN in solving
one particular problem is unknown prior to conﬁrming its
architecture, the variable-length gene encoding strategy , which
is very suitable for this occasion, is employed in the propos ed
EvoCNN method. Furthermore, because the performance of
CNNs is highly affected by their depths [8], [43]–[45], this
variable-length gene encoding strategy makes the proposed
EvoCNN method have chances to reach the best result due
to no constrains on the architecture search space.
In particular, an example of three chromosomes with dif-
ferent lengths from EvoCNN is illustrated by Fig. 4, and all
represented information in these three layers are detailed in
Table I. Commonly, hundreds of thousands connection weight s
may exist in one convolutional or full connection layer, whi ch
cannot be all explicitly represented by a chromosome and
effectively optimized by GAs. Therefore, in EvoCNN, we use
only two statistical real numbers, the standard derivation andmean value of the connection weights, to represent the numer -
ous weight parameters, which can be easily implemented by
GAs. When the optimal mean value and the standard derivation
are received, the connection weights are sampled from the
corresponding Gaussian distribution. The details of popul ation
initialization in EvoCNN are given in the next subsection
based on the gene encoding strategy introduced above.
C. Population Initialization
Algorithm 2: Population Initialization
Input: The population size N, the maximal number of
convolutional and pooling layers Ncp, and the
maximal number of full connection layers Nf.
Output: Initialized population P0.
1P0←∅;
2while|P0|≤Ndo
3part1←∅;
4ncp←Uniformaly generate an integer between
[1,Ncp];
5 while|part1|≤ncpdo
6 r←Uniformly generated a number between
[0,1];
7 ifr≤0.5then
8 l←Initialize a convolutional layer with
random settings;
9 else
10 l←Initialize a pooling layer with random
settings;
11 end
12 part1←part1∪l;
13 end
14part2←∅;
15nf←Uniformaly generate an integer between
[1,Nf];
16 while|part2|≤nfdo
17 l←Initialize a full connection layer with random
settings;
18 part2←part2∪l;
19 end
20P0←P0∪(part1∪part2);
21end
22ReturnP0.
For convenience of the elaboration, each chromosome is
separated into two parts. The ﬁrst part includes the convolu -
tional layers and the pooling layers, and the other part is th e
full connection layers. Based on the convention of the CNN
architectures, the ﬁrst part starts with one convolutional layer.
The second part can be added to only at the tail of the ﬁrst
part. In addition, the length of each part is set by randomly
choosing a number within a predeﬁned range.
Algorithm 2 shows the major steps of the population initial-
ization, where|·|is a cardinality operator, lines 3-13 show the
generation of the ﬁrst part of one chromosome, and lines 14-
19 show that of the second part. During the initialization of

==== Page 6 ====
the ﬁrst part, a convolutional layer is added ﬁrst. Then, a
convolutional layer or a pooling layer is determined by the
once coin tossing probability and then added to the end, whic h
is repeated until the predeﬁned length of this part is met. Fo r
the second part, full connection layers are chosen and then
added. Note here that, convolutional layers, pooling layer s,
and full connection layers are initialized with the random
settings, i.e., the information encoded into them are rando mly
speciﬁed before they are stored into the corresponding part .
After these two parts ﬁnished, they are combined and returne d
as one chromosome. With the same approach, a population of
individuals are generated.
D. Fitness Evaluation
Algorithm 3: Fitness Evaluation
Input: The population Pt, the training epoch number k
for measuring the accuracy tendency, the training
setDtrain , the ﬁtness evaluation dataset Dfitness ,
and the batch size numofbatch .
Output: The population with ﬁtness Pt.
1foreach individual sinPtdo
2i←1;
3evalsteps←|Dfitness|/numofbatch ;
4 whilei≤kdo
5 Train the connection weights of the CNN
represented by individual s;
6 ifi==kthen
7 accylist←∅;
8 j←1;
9 whilej≤evalsteps do
10 accyj←Evaluate the classiﬁcation error
on thej-th batch data from Dfitness ;
11 accylist←accylist∪accyj;
12 j←j+1;
13 end
14 Calculate the number of parameters in s, the
mean value and standard derivation from
accylist, assign them to individual s, and
updatesfromPt;
15 end
16 i←i+1;
17 end
18end
19ReturnPt.
Fitness evaluation aims at giving a quantitative measure
determining which individuals qualify for serving as paren t
solutions. Algorithm 3 manifests the framework of the ﬁtnes s
evaluation in EvoCNN. Because EvoCNN concerns on solving
image classiﬁcation tasks, the classiﬁcation error is the b est
strategy to assign their ﬁtness. The number of connection
weights is also chosen as an additional indicator to measure
the individual’s quality based on the principle of Occam’s
razor [46].With the conventions, each represented CNN is trained
on the training set Dtrain , and the ﬁtness is estimated on
another dataset Dfitness1. CNNs are frequently with deep
architectures, thus thoroughly training them for receivin g the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation error would take considerable expendit ure
of computing resource and a very long time due to the
large number of training epochs required ( >100 epochs are
invariably treated in fully training CNNs). This will make i t
much more impracticable here due to the population-based
GAs with multiple generations (i.e., each individual will t ake a
full training in each generation). We have designed an efﬁci ent
method to address this concern. In this method, each individ ual
is trained with only a small number of epochs, say 5or10
epochs, based on their architectures and connection weight
initialization values, and then the mean value and the stand ard
derivation of classiﬁcation error are calculated on each ba tch
ofDfitness in the last epoch. Both the mean value and the
standard derivation of classiﬁcation errors, are employed as the
ﬁtness of one individual. Obviously, the smaller mean value ,
the better individual. When the compared individuals are wi th
the same mean values, the less standard derivation indicate s
the better one.
In summary, three indicators are used in the ﬁtness evalu-
ation, which are the mean value, standard derivation, and th e
number of parameters. There are several motivations behind
this ﬁtness evaluation strategy: 1) It is sufﬁcient to inves tigat-
ing only the tendency of the performance. If individuals are
with better performance in the ﬁrst several training epochs of
CNNs, they will probably still have the better performance i n
the following training epochs with greater conﬁdence. 2) Th e
mean value and the standard derivation are statistical sign iﬁ-
cance indicators, thus suitable for investigating this ten dency,
and the ﬁnal classiﬁcation error can be received by optimizi ng
only the best individual evolved by the proposed EvoCNN
method. 3) CNN models with less number of connection
weights are preferred by smart devices (more details are
discussed in Section VI).
E. Slack Binary Tournament Selection
We develop one slack version of the standard binary tour-
nament selection, which are documented in Algorithm 4, to
select parent solutions for the crossover operations in the
proposed EvoCNN method. Brieﬂy, two sets of comparisons
are employed. The comparisons between the mean values of
individuals involves a threshold α, and that comparisons be-
tween the parameter numbers involves another threshold β. If
the parent solution cannot be selected with these compariso ns,
the individual with smaller standard derivation is chosen.
In practice, tremendous number of parameters exist in deep
CNNs, which would easily cause the overﬁtting problem.
Therefore, when the difference between the mean values of
two individuals is smaller than the threshold α, we further con-
sider the number of connection weights. The slight change of
1The original training set is randomly split into Dtrain andDfitness ,
whereDfitness is unseen to the CNN training phase, which can give a good
indication of the generalization accuracy on the test set.

==== Page 7 ====
Algorithm 4: Slack Binary Tournament Selection
Input: Two compared individuals, the mean value
threshold α, and the paramemter number
threshold β.
Output: The selected individual.
1s1←The individual with larger mean value;
2s2←The other individual;
3µ1,µ2←The mean values of s1,s2;
4std1,std2←The standard derivations of s1,s2;
5c1,c2←The parameter numbers of s1,s2;
6ifµ1−µ2> α then
7 Returns1.
8else
9 ifc1−c2> β then
10 Returns2.
11 else
12 ifstd1< std2then
13 Returns1.
14 else ifstd1> std2then
15 Returns2.
16 else
17 Return randon one from{s1,s2}.
18 end
19 end
20end
the parameter numbers will not highly affect the performanc e
of CNNs. Consequently, βis also introduced.
By iteratively performing this selection, parent solution s
are selected and stored into a mating pool. In the proposed
EvoCNN method, the size of the mating pool is set to be the
same of the population size.
F . Offspring Generation
The steps for generating offspring are given as follows:
step 1): randomly select two parent solutions from the matin g
pool;
step 2): use crossover operator on the selected solutions to
generate offspring;
step 3): use mutation operator on the generated offspring;
step 4): store offspring, remove the parent solutions from t he
mating pool, and perform steps 1-3 until the mating
pool is empty.
The proposed crossover operation can be seen in Fig. 5. To
achieve crossover, we design a method called Unit Alignment
(UA) for recombining two individuals with different chromo -
some lengths. During the crossover operation, three differ ent
units, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, an d the
full connection layer, are ﬁrstly collected into three diff erent
lists based on their orders in the corresponding chromosome ,
which refers to the Unit Collection (UC) phase. Then, these
three lists are aligned at the top, and units at the same posit ions
are performed the crossover. This phase is named the UA
and crossover phase. Finally, the Unit Restore (UR) phase isemployed, i.e., when the crossover operation is completed, the
units in these lists are restored to their original position s of
the associated chromosomes. With these three consequentia l
phases (i.e., the UC, the UA and crossover, and the UR), two
chromosomes with different lengths could easily exchange
their gene information for crossover. Because the crossove r
operation is performed on the unit lists where only the units
with the same types are loaded, this proposed UA crossover
operation is natural (because they have the same origins).
For the remaining units, which do not perform crossover
operations due to no paired ones, are kept at the same positio n.
Mutation operations may perform on each position of the
units from one chromosome. For a selected mutation point, a
unit could be added, deleted, or modiﬁed, which is determine d
by a probability of 1/3. In the case of unit addition, a convol u-
tional layer, a pooling layer, or a full connection layer is a dded
by taking a probability of 1/3. If the mutation is to modify an
existing unit, the particular modiﬁcation is dependent on t he
unit type, and all the encoded information in the unit would b e
changed (encoded information on each unit type can be seen in
Table I). Note that all the encoded formation is denoted by re al
numbers, therefore the Simulated Crossover (SBX) [47] and
the polynomial mutation [48] are employed in the proposed
EvoCNN method due to their notable show in real number
gene representations.
G. Environmental Selection
Algorithm 5: Environmental Selection
Input: The elistsm fraction γ, and the current population
Pt∪Qt.
Output: The selected population Pt+1.
1a←Calculate the number of elites based on γand the
predeﬁned population size Nfrom Algorithm 2;
2Pt+1←Selectaindividuals that have the best mean
values from Pt∪Qt;
3Pt∪Qt←Pt∪Qt−Pt+1;
4while|Pt+1|< N do
5s1,s2←Randomly select two individuals from
Pt∪Qt;
6s←Employe Algorithm 4 to select one individual
froms1ands2;
7Pt+1←Pt+1∪s;
8end
9ReturnPt+1.
The environmental selection is shown in Algorithm 5. Dur-
ing the environmental selection, the elitism and the divers ity
are explicitly and elaborately addressed. To be speciﬁc, a f rac-
tion of individuals with promising mean values are chosen ﬁr st,
and then the remaining individuals are selected by the modiﬁ ed
binary tournament selection demonstrated in Subsection II I-F.
By these two strategies, the elitism and the diversity are
considered simultaneously, which are expected to collecti vely
improve the performance of the proposed EvoCNN method.

==== Page 8 ====
C Convolutional P Pooling F Full connection
Convolutional 
unit listPooling
 unit listFull connection 
unit list
C1
C2
C3P1
P2F1
F2
F3Convolutional 
unit list
C1
C2Pooling 
unit listFull connection 
unit list
F1
F2
F3
F4Chromosome #1 Chromosome #2
P1
P2
P3C1 P1 C2 C3 P2 F1 F2 F3 C1 P1 C2 P3 F1 F2 F3 P2 F4
(a) Unit Collection
C1
C2
C3C1
C2P1
P2P1
P2
P3F1
F2
F3F1
F2
F3
F4crossover crossover
crossover crossovercrossover
crossover
crossover
(b) Unit Aligh and Crossover
C1 P1C2 C3 P2F1 F2 F3Offspring #1
C1 P1 C2 P3F1 F2 F3 P2 F4Offspring #2
(c) Unit Restore
Fig. 5. An example to illustrate the entire crossover proces s. In this example, the ﬁrst chromosome is with length 8 inclu ding three convolutional layers, two
pooling layers, and three full connection layers; the other one is with length 9 including two convolutional layers, thr ee pooling layers, and four full connection
layers. In the ﬁrst step of crossover (i.e., the unit collect ion), the convolutiona layers, the pooling layers, and the f ull connection layers are collected from
each chromosome and stacked with the same orders to them in ea ch chromosome (see Fig. 5a). In the second step, the unit list s with the same unit types
are aligned at the top, i.e., the two convolutional layer lis ts are picked and aligned, and the same operations on the othe r two lists. When these unit lists
ﬁnish the alignment, units at the same positions from the eac h two lists are paired and performed crossover operation, wh ich can be shown in Fig. 5b. At last,
units from these unit lists are restored based on the positio ns where they are from (see Fig. 5b). Note in Fig. 5b, the units that have experienced crossover
operations are highlighted with italics and underline font s, while the units that do not perform the crossover operatio ns remain the same.
Note here that, the selected elites are removed before the
tournament selection gets start to work (line 3 of Algorithm 5),
while the individuals selected for the purpose of diversity are
kept in the current population for the next round of tourname nt
selection (lines 4-8 of Algorithm 5) based on the convention
in the community.
H. Best Individual Selection and Decoding
At the end of evolution, multiple individuals are with
promising mean values but different architectures and conn ec-
tion weight initialization values. In this regard, there wi ll be
multiple choices to select the “Best Individual”. For examp le,
if we are only concerned with the best performance, we
could neglect their architecture conﬁgurations and consid er
only the classiﬁcation accuracy. Otherwise, if we emphasis
the smaller number of parameters, corresponding decision
could be made. Once the “Best Individual” is conﬁrmed,
the corresponding CNN is decoded based on the encoded
architecture and connection weight initialization inform ation,
and then the decoded CNN will be deeply trained with a larger
number of epochs by SGD for future usage.
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In order to quantify the performance of the proposed
EvoCNN, a series of experiments are designed and performed
on the chosen image classiﬁcation benchmark datasets, whic hare further compared to state-of-the-art peer competitors . In the
following, these benchmark datasets are brieﬂy introduced at
ﬁrst. Then, the peer competitors are given. Finally, parame ter
settings of the proposed EvoCNN method participating into
these experiments are documented.
A. Benchmark Datasets
In these experiments, nine widely used image classiﬁcation
benchmark datasets are used to examine the performance of
the proposed EvoCNN method. They are the Fashion [49], the
Rectangle [50], the Rectangle Images (RI) [50], the Convex
Sets (CS) [50], the MNIST Basic (MB) [50], the MNIST
with Background Images (MBI) [50], Random Background
(MRB) [50], Rotated Digits (MRD) [50], and with RD plus
Background Images (MRDBI) [50] benchmarks.
Based on the types of the classiﬁcation objects, these
benchmarks are classiﬁed into three different categories. The
ﬁrst category includes only Fashion, which is for recognizi ng
10 fashion objects (e.g., trousers, coats, and so on) in the
50,000 training images and 10,000 test images. The second
one is composed of the MNIST [6] variants including the
MB, MBI, MRB, MRD, and the MRDBI benchmarks for
classifying 10 hand-written digits (i.e., 0-9). Because th e
MNIST has been easily achieved 97%, these MNIST variants
are arbitrarily added into different barriers (e.g., rando m back-
grounds, rotations) from the MNIST to improve the complexit y

==== Page 9 ====
of classiﬁcation algorithms. Furthermore, these variants have
12,000training images and 50,000test images, which further
challenges the classiﬁcation algorithms due to the mush les s
training data while more test data. The third category is for
recognizing the shapes of objects (i.e., the rectangle or no t for
the Rectangle and RI benchmarks, and the convex or not for
the Convex benchmark). Obviously, this category covers the
Rectangle, the RI, and the CS benchmarks that contain 1,200,
12,000, and8,000 training images, respectively, and all of
them include 50,000test images. Compared to the Rectangle
benchmark, the RI is generated by adding randomly sampled
backgrounds from the MNIST for increasing the difﬁculties
of classiﬁcation algorithms.
In addition, each image in these benchmarks is with the size
28×28, and examples from these benchmarks are shown in
Fig. 6 for reference. Furthermore, another reason for using
these benchmark datasets is that different algorithms have
reported their promising results, which is convenient for t he
comparisons on the performance of the proposed EvoCNN
method and these host algorithms (details can be seen Subsec -
tion IV-B).
(a) Examples from the ﬁrst category. From left to right, they are T-shirt, trouser,
pullover, dress, coat, sandal, shirt, sneaker, bag, and ank le boot.
(b) Examples from the second category. From left to right, ea ch two images
are from one group, and each group is from MBi, MRB, MRD, MRDBI , and
MB, respectively. These images refer to the hand-written di gits 0, 4, 2, 6, 0,
5, 7, 5, 9, and 6, respectively.
(c) Examples from the thrid category, From left to right, the ﬁrst three images
are from the Rectangle benchmark, the following four ones ar e from the RI
benchmark, and the remaingings are from the Convex benchmar k. Speciﬁcally,
these examples with the index 1, 2, 6, 7, and 11 are positive sa mples.
Fig. 6. Examples from the benchmarks chosen.
B. Peer Competitors
Ideally, the algorithms for neural network architecture de -
sign discussed in Section I should be collected here as the pe er
competitors. However, because MetaQNN [21] and LEIC [36]
highly rely on the computational resources, it is impossibl e
to reproduce the experimental results in an academic envi-
ronment. Furthermore, the benchmark dataset investigated in
these two algorithms employed different data preprocessin g
and augmentation techniques, which will highly enhance the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy and is invisible to public. As f or
other architecture design approaches introduced in Sectio n I,
such as GS, RS, among others, they are not scalable to CNNs
and not suitable to be directly compared as well.
In the experiments, state-of-the-art algorithms that have
reported promising classiﬁcation errors on the chosen benc h-
marks are collected as the peer competitors of the pro-posed EvoCNN method. To be speciﬁc, the peer com-
petitors on the Fashion benchmark are collected from the
dataset homepage2. They are 2C1P2F+Dropout, 2C1P, 3C2F,
3C1P2F+Dropout, GRU+SVM+Dropout, GoogleNet [41],
AlexNet [3], SqueezeNet-200 [51], MLP 256-128-64, and
VGG16 [52], which perform the experiments on the raw
dataset without any preprocessing. The peer competitors on
other benchmarks are CAE-2 [53], TIRBM [54], PGBM+DN-
1 [55], ScatNet-2 [56], RandNet-2 [57], PCANet-2 (soft-
max) [57], LDANet-2 [57], SVM+RBF [50], SVM+Poly [50],
NNet [50], SAA-3 [50], and DBN-3 [50], which are from
the literature [57] recently published and the provider of t he
benchmarks3.
C. Parameter Settings
All the parameter settings are set based on the conventions
in the communities of evolutionary algorithms [58] and deep
learning [59], in addition to the maximal length of each basi c
layer. Speciﬁcally, the population size and the total gener ation
number are set to be 100. The distribution index of SBX and
Polynomial mutation are both set to be 20, and their associat ed
probabilities are speciﬁed as 0.9and0.1, respectively. The
maximum lengths of the convolutional layers, the pooling
layers, and the full connection layers are set to be the same
as5(i.e., the maximal depths of CNNs in these experiments
are15). Moreover, the proportion of the elitism is set to be
20% based on the Pareto principle. Note that the 20% data
are randomly selected from the training images as the ﬁtness
evaluation dataset. For the implementation of the proposed
EvoCNN method, we constrain the same values of the width
and height for ﬁlter, stride, and kernel. The width and heigh t
for stride in the convolutional layer are set to be 1, those in
the pooling layer are speciﬁed at the same value to its kernel ,
and the convolutional type is ﬁxed to “SAME”.
The proposed EvoCNN method is implemented by Tensor-
ﬂow [60], and each copy of the code runs in a computer
equipped with two GPU cards with the identical model number
GTX1080 . During the ﬁnal training phase, each individual
is imposed by the BatchNorm [61] for speeding up and the
weight decay with an uniﬁed number for preventing from
the overﬁtting. Due to the heuristic nature of the proposed
EvoCNN method, 30independent runs are performed on each
benchmark dataset, and the mean results are estimated for
the comparisons unless otherwise speciﬁed. Furthermore, t he
experiments take 4days on the Fashion benchmark for each
run,2–3days on other benchmarks.
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, the experimental results and analysis of th e
proposed EvoCNN method against peer competitors are shown
in Subsection V-A. Then, the weight initialization method i n
the proposed EvoCNN method are speciﬁcally investigated in
Subsection V-B.
2https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist
3http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/ ∼lisa/twiki/bin/view.cgi/Public/DeepVsShallowCompari sonICML2007

==== Page 10 ====
A. Overall Results
Experimental results on the Fashion benchmark dataset are
shown in Table II, and those on the MB, MRD, MRB, MBI,
MRDBI, Rectangle, RI, and Convex benchmark datasets are
shown in Table III. In Tables II and III, the last two rows
denote the best andmean classiﬁcation errors received from
the proposed EvoCNN method, respectively, and other rows
show the best classiﬁcation errors reported by peer competi-
tors4. In order to conveniently investigate the comparisons, the
terms “(+)” and “(-)” are provided to denote whether the best
result generated by the proposed EvoCNN method is better or
worse that the best result obtained by the corresponding pee r
competitor. The term “—” means there is no available result
reported from the provider or cannot be counted. Most inform a-
tion of the number of parameters and number of training epoch
from the peer competitors on the Fashion benchmark dataset
is available, therefore, such information from EvoCNN is al so
shown in Table II for multi-view comparisons. However, for
the benchmarks in Table III, such information is not present ed
because they are not available from the peer competitors.
Note that all the results from the peer competitors and the
proposed EvoCNN method are without any data augmentation
preprocessing on the benchmarks.
TABLE II
THE CLASSIFICATION ERRORS OF THE PROPOSED EVOCNN METHOD
AGAINST THE PEER COMPETITORS ON THE FASHION BENCHMARK
DATASET .
classiﬁer error(%) # parameters # epochs
2C1P2F+Drouout 8.40(+) 3.27M 300
2C1P 7.50(+) 100K 30
3C2F 9.30(+) — —
3C1P2F+Dropout 7.40(+) 7.14M 150
GRU+SVM+Dropout 10.30(+) — 100
GoogleNet [41] 6.30(+) 101M —
AlexNet [3] 10.10(+) 60M —
SqueezeNet-200 [51] 10.00(+) 500K 200
MLP 256-128-64 10.00(+) 41K 25
VGG16 [52] 6.50(+) 26M 200
EvoCNN (best) 5.47 6.68M 100
EvoCNN (mean) 7.28 6.52M 100
It is clearly shown in Table II that by comparing the best
performance, the proposed EvoCNN method outperforms all
the ten peer competitors. The two state-of-the-art algorit hms,
GoogleNet and VGG16, achieve respectively 6.5% and 6.3%
classiﬁcation error rates, where the difference is only 0.2 %.
The proposed EvoCNN method further decreases the error rate
by 0.83% to 5.47%. Furthermore, the mean performance of
EvoCNN is even better than the best performance of eight
competitors, and only a little worse than the best of GoogleN et
and VGG16. However, EvoCNN has a much smaller number
of connection weights — EvoCNN uses 6.52 million weights
4It is a convention in deep learning community that only the best result is
reported.while GoogleNet uses 101 million and VGG uses 26 million
weights. EvoCNN also employs only half of the numbers of
training epochs used in the VGG16. The results show that the
proposed EvoCNN method obtains much better performance in
the architecture design and connection weight initializat ion of
CNNs on the Fashion benchmark, which signiﬁcantly reduces
the classiﬁcation error of the evolved CNN generated by the
proposed EvoCNN method.
According to Table III, EvoCNN is the best one among all
the 13 different methods. Speciﬁcally, EvoCNN achieves the
best performance on ﬁve of the eight datasets, and the second
best on the other three datasets — the MB, MRD, and Convex
datasets, where LDANet-2, TIRBM, and PCANet-2(softmax)
achieve the lowest classiﬁcation error rate, respectively . Fur-
thermore, comparing the mean performance of EvoCNN with
thebest of the other 12 methods, EvoCNN is the best on four
datasets (MRB, MBI, Rectangle and RI), second best on two
(MRD and Convex), third best and fourth best on the other two
datasets (MRDBI and MB). Particularly on MRB and MBI,
the lowest classiﬁcation error rates of the others are 6.08%
and 11.5%, and the mean error rates of EvoCNN are 3.59%
and 4.62%, respectively. In summary, the best classiﬁcatio n
error of the proposed EvoCNN method wins 80 out of the
84 comparisons against the best results from the 12 peer
competitors, and the mean classiﬁcation error of EvoCNN is
better than the best error of the 12 methods on 75 out of the
84 comparisons.
B. Performance Regarding Weight Initialization
Fashion MB MRD MRB MBI MRDBI Rectangle RI Convex 010 20 30 40 50 60 
Benchmark datasets Classification error (%) 
7.28 
9.28 
1.28 
2.45 
5.46 
6.24 
3.59 
3.93 
4.62 
5.8 
37.38 
41.88 
0.01 
0.23 
5.97 
8.27 
5.39 
6.33 weight initializaed by EvoCNN 
weight initialized by Xavier 
Fig. 7. Performance comparison between the proposed EvoCNN method and
the CNN using the evolved architecture and the Xavier weight initializer.
Further experiments are performed to examine the effec-
tiveness of the connection weight initialization method in the
proposed EvoCNN approach. By comparing different weight
initializers, we would also investigate whether the archit ec-
ture or the connection weight initialization values will af fect
the classiﬁcation performance. To achieve this, we initial ize
another group of CNNs with the same architectures as that of
the evolved EvoCNN, but their weights are initialized with t he
widely used Xavier initializer [38] (details in Subsection II-C).
The comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 7, where the x-
axis denotes the benchmark datasets, and y-axis denotes the
classiﬁcation error rates. Fig. 7 clearly shows that the pro posed
connection weight initialization strategy in EvoCNN impro ves
the classiﬁcation performance on allthe benchmarks over the

==== Page 11 ====
TABLE III
THE CLASSIFICATION ERRORS OF THE PROPOSED EVOCNN METHOD AGAINST THE PEER COMPETITORS ON THE MB, MRD, MRB, MBI, MRDBI,
RECTANGLE , RI, AND CONVEX BENCHMARK DATASETS
classiﬁer MB MRD MRB MBI MRDBI Rectangle RI Convex
CAE-2 [53] 2.48(+) 9.66(+) 10.90(+) 15.50(+) 45.23(+) 1.21(+) 21.54(+) —
TIRBM [54] — 4.20(-) — — 35.50(+) — — —
PGBM+DN-1 [55] — — 6.08(+) 12.25(+) 36.76(+) — — —
ScatNet-2 [56] 1.27(+) 7.48(+) 12.30(+) 18.40(+) 50.48(+) 0.01(=) 8.02(+) 6.50(+)
RandNet-2 [57] 1.25(+) 8.47(+) 13.47(+) 11.65(+) 43.69(+) 0.09(+) 17.00(+) 5.45(+)
PCANet-2 (softmax) [57] 1.40(+) 8.52(+) 6.85(+) 11.55(+) 35.86(+) 0.49(+) 13.39(+) 4.19(-)
LDANet-2 [57] 1.05(-) 7.52(+) 6.81(+) 12.42(+) 38.54(+) 0.14(+) 16.20(+) 7.22(+)
SVM+RBF [50] 3.03(+) 11.11(+) 14.58(+) 22.61(+) 55.18(+) 2.15(+) 24.04(+) 19.13(+)
SVM+Poly [50] 3.69(+) 15.42(+) 16.62(+) 24.01(+) 56.41(+) 2.15(+) 24.05(+) 19.82(+)
NNet [50] 4.69(+) 18.11(+) 20.04(+) 27.41(+) 62.16(+) 7.16(+) 33.20(+) 32.25(+)
SAA-3 [50] 3.46(+) 10.30(+) 11.28(+) 23.00(+) 51.93(+) 2.41(+) 24.05(+) 18.41(+)
DBN-3 [50] 3.11(+) 10.30(+) 6.73(+) 16.31(+) 47.39(+) 2.61(+) 22.50(+) 18.63(+)
EvoCNN (best) 1.18 5.22 2.80 4.53 35.03 0.01 5.03 4.82
EvoCNN (mean) 1.28 5.46 3.59 4.62 37.38 0.01 5.97 5.39
widely used Xavier initializer. To be speciﬁc, the proposed
weight initialization method reaches ≈1.5%classiﬁcation ac-
curacy improvement on the Fashion, MB, MRD, MBI, RI, and
Convex benchmarks, and 4.5%on the MRDBI benchmark. By
comparing with the results in Tables II and III, it also can be
concluded that the architectures of CNNs contribute to the
classiﬁcation performance more than that of the connection
weight initialization. The proposed EvoCNN method gained
promising performance by automatically evolving both the
initial connection weights and the architectures of CNNs.
VI. F URTHER DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we will further discuss the encoding strat-
egy of the architectures and the weights related parameters ,
and the ﬁtness evaluation in the proposed EvoCNN method.
Extra ﬁndings from the experimental results are discussed a s
well, which could provide insights on the applications of th e
proposed EvoCNN method.
In GAs, crossover operators play the role of exploitation
search (i.e., the local search), and mutation operators act
the exploration search (i.e., the global search). Because t he
local search and the global search should complement to each
other, only well designing both of them could remarkably
promote the performance. Generally, the crossover operato rs
operate on the chromosomes with the same lengths, while
the proposed EvoCNN method employs the variable-length
ones. Furthermore, multiple different basic layers exist i n
CNNs, which improve the difﬁculties of designing crossover
operation in this context (because crossover operations ca n
not be easily performed between the genes from different
origins). Therefore, a new crossover operation is introduc ed
to the proposed EvoCNN method. UC, UA, as well as UR are
designed to complete the crossover operation, which enhanc es
the communications between the encoded information, and ex -pectedly leverages the performance in pursuing the promisi ng
architectures of CNNs.
The typically used approaches in optimizing the weights of
CNNs are based on the gradient information. It is well known
that the gradient-based optimizers are sensitive to the sta rting
position of the parameters to be optimized. Without a better
starting position, the gradient-based algorithms are easy to be
trapped into local minima. Intuitively, ﬁnding a better sta rting
position of the connection weights by GAs is intractable due
to the huge numbers of parameters. As we have elaborated, a
huge number of parameters can not be efﬁciently encoded into
the chromosomes, nor effectively optimized. In the propose d
EvoCNN method, an indirect encoding approach is employed,
which only encodes the means and standard derivations of
the weights in each layer. In fact, employing the standard
derivation and the mean to initialize the starting position of
connection weights is a compromised approach and can be
ubiquitously seen from deep learning libraries [60], [62], [63],
which is the motivation of this design in the proposed EvoCNN
method. With this strategy, only two real numbers are used
to denote the hundreds of thousands of parameters, which
could save much computational resource for encoding and
optimization.
Existing techniques for searching for the architectures of
CNNs typically take the ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy as the
ﬁtness of individuals. A ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy typic ally
requires many more epochs of the training, which is a very
time-consuming process. In order to complete the architect ure
design with this ﬁtness evaluation approach, it is natural
to employ a lot of computation resource to perform this
task in parallel to speed up the design. However, computa-
tional resource is not necessarily available to all interes ted
researchers. Furthermore, it also requires extra professi onal
assistances, such as the task schedule and synchronization
in the multi-thread context, which is beyond the expertise

==== Page 12 ====
of most researchers/users. In fact, it is not necessary to
check individual ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy, but a tenden cy
that could predict their future quality would be sufﬁcient.
Therefore, we only employ a small number of epochs to
train these individuals. With this kind of ﬁtness measureme nt,
the proposed EvoCNN method does not highly reply on the
computational resource. In summary, with the well-designe d
yet simplicity encoding strategies and this ﬁtness evaluat ion
method, researchers without rich domain knowledge could
also design the promising CNN models for addressing speciﬁc
tasks in their (academic) environment, where is the computa -
tional resources are typically limited.
TABLE IV
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND THE PARAMETER NUMBERS FROM
THE INDIVIDUALS ON THE FASHION BENCHMARK DATASET .
classiﬁcation accuracy 99% 98% 97% 96% 95%
# parameters 569,250 98,588 7,035 3,205 955
Moreover, interesting ﬁndings have also been discovered
when the proposed EvoCNN method terminates, i.e., multiple
individuals are with the similar performance but signiﬁcan t
different numbers of connection weights (See Table IV), whi ch
are produced due to population-based nature of the proposed
EvoCNN method. Recently, various applications have been
developed, such as the auto-driving car and some interestin g
real-time mobile applications. Due to the limited processi ng
capacity and battery in these devices, trained CNNs with
similar performance but fewer parameters are much more
preferred because they require less computational resourc e
and the energy consumption. In addition, similar performan ce
of the individuals are also found with different lengths of
the basic layers, and there are multiple pieces of hardware
that have been especially designed to speed the primitive
operations in CNNs, such as the specialized hardware for
convolutional operations. In this regard, the proposed Evo CNN
method could give manufacturers more choices to make a
decision based on their own preferences. If the traditional
approaches are employed here, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd out such
models at a single run.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of the paper was to develop a new evolutionary ap-
proach to automatically evolving the architectures and wei ghts
of CNNs for image classiﬁcation problems. This goal has
been successfully achieved by proposing a new representati on
for weight initialization strategy, a new encoding scheme
of variable-length chromosomes, a new genetic operator, a
slacked binary tournament selection, and an efﬁcient ﬁtnes s
evaluation method. This approach was examined and com-
pared with 22 peer competitors including the most state-of-
the-are algorithms on nine benchmark datasets commonly
used in deep learning. The experimental results show that
the proposed EvoCNN method signiﬁcantly outperforms all
of these existing algorithms on almost all these datasets interms of their best classiﬁcation performance. Furthermor e,
the mean classiﬁcation error rate of the proposed algorithm
is even better than the best of others in many cases. In
addition, the model optimized by EvoCNN is with a much
smaller number of parameters yet promising best classiﬁcat ion
performance. Speciﬁcally, the model optimized by EvoCNN
employs 100 epochs to reach the lowest classiﬁcation error
rate of5.47% on the Fasion dataset, while the state-of-the-
art VGG16 employs 200epochs but 6.50% classiﬁcation error
rate. Findings from the experimental results also suggest t hat
the proposed EvoCNN method could provide more options
for the manufacturers that are interested in integrating CN Ns
into their products with limited computational and battery
resources.
In this paper, we investigate the proposed EvoCNN method
only on the commonly used middle-scale benchmarks. How-
ever, large-scale data are also widely exist in the current e ra
of big data. Because evaluating only one epoch on these large -
scale data would require signiﬁcant computational resourc e
and take a long period, the proposed ﬁtness evaluation metho d
is not suitable for them unless a huge amount computational
resources are available. In the future, we will put effort on
efﬁcient ﬁtness evaluation techniques. In addition, we wil l also
investigate evolutionary algorithms for recurrent neural net-
works, which are powerful tools for addressing time-depend ent
data, such as the voice and video data.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Cires ¸An, U. Meier, J. Masci, and J. Schmidhuber, “Mul ti-column
deep neural network for trafﬁc sign classiﬁcation,” Neural Networks ,
vol. 32, pp. 333–338, 2012.
[2] F. Ning, D. Delhomme, Y . LeCun, F. Piano, L. Bottou, and P. E. Barbano,
“Toward automatic phenotyping of developing embryos from v ideos,”
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1360–1371,
2005.
[3] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[4] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex,” The Journal of
Physiology , vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 106–154, 1962.
[5] Y . LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howar d,
W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation applied to ha ndwritten
zip code recognition,” Neural Computation , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 541–551,
1989.
[6] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient -based learning
applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 86,
no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[7] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learni ng represen-
tations by back-propagating errors,” Cognitive Modeling , vol. 5, no. 3,
p. 1, 1988.
[8] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional n etworks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learnin g for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[10] H. Bourlard and Y . Kamp, “Auto-association by multilay er perceptrons
and singular value decomposition,” Biological Cybernetics , vol. 59, no.
4-5, pp. 291–294, 1988.
[11] G. E. Hinton and R. S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum des cription
length, and helmholtz free energy,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 3–3, 1994.
[12] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dime nsionality of
data with neural networks,” Science , vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
2006.

==== Page 13 ====
[13] J. Bergstra and Y . Bengio, “Random search for hyper-par ameter opti-
mization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 13, no. Feb, pp.
281–305, 2012.
[14] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. Williams, Gaussian processes for machine
learning . MIT press Cambridge, 2006, vol. 1.
[15] J. Moˇ ckus, “On bayesian methods for seeking the extrem um,” in
Optimization Techniques IFIP Technical Conference . Springer, 1975,
pp. 400–404.
[16] J. S. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y . Bengio, and B. K´ egl, “Al gorithms
for hyper-parameter optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2011, pp. 2546–2554.
[17] F. Hutter, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown, “Sequential model-based
optimization for general algorithm conﬁguration.” LION , vol. 5, pp. 507–
523, 2011.
[18] J. Beck and T. Fiala, “integer-making theorems,” Discrete Applied
Mathematics , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 1981.
[19] J. Halton and G. Smith, “Radical inverse quasi-random p oint sequence,
algorithm 247,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 7, p. 701, 1964.
[20] E. I. Atanassov, A. Karaivanova, and S. Ivanovska, “Tun ing the genera-
tion of sobol sequence with owen scrambling.” in Large-Scale Scientiﬁc
Computing . Springer, 2009, pp. 459–466.
[21] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing ne ural network
architectures using reinforcement learning,” International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2017.
[22] D. Ashlock, Evolutionary computation for modeling and optimization .
Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[23] T. Back, Evolutionary algorithms in theory and practice: evolution
strategies, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithm s. Oxford
university press, 1996.
[24] M. Mitchell, An introduction to genetic algorithms . MIT press, 1998.
[25] X. Yao, “Evolving artiﬁcial neural networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE ,
vol. 87, no. 9, pp. 1423–1447, 1999.
[26] G. Miller, “Designing neural networks using genetic al gorithms,” Pro-
ceedings of ICGA-89 , 1989.
[27] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolving neural net works through
augmenting topologies,” Evolutionary computation , vol. 10, no. 2, pp.
99–127, 2002.
[28] K. O. Stanley, D. B. D’Ambrosio, and J. Gauci, “A hypercu be-based
encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks,” Artiﬁcial life , vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 185–212, 2009.
[29] K. O. Stanley, “Compositional pattern producing netwo rks: A novel
abstraction of development,” Genetic programming and evolvable ma-
chines , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 131–162, 2007.
[30] J. K. Pugh and K. O. Stanley, “Evolving multimodal contr ollers with
hyperneat,” in Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation . ACM, 2013, pp. 735–742.
[31] M. Kim and L. Rigazio, “Deep clustered convolutional ke rnels,” in
Feature Extraction: Modern Questions and Challenges , 2015, pp. 160–
172.
[32] C. Fernando, D. Banarse, M. Reynolds, F. Besse, D. Pfau, M. Jaderberg,
M. Lanctot, and D. Wierstra, “Convolution by evolution: Dif ferentiable
pattern producing networks,” in Proceedings of the 2016 on Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference . ACM, 2016, pp. 109–116.
[33] B. Zoph and Q. V . Le, “Neural architecture search with re inforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01578 , 2016.
[34] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing ne ural
network architectures using reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02167 , 2016.
[35] P. Verbancsics and J. Harguess, “Generative neuroevol ution for deep
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5355 , 2013.
[36] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y . L. Suematsu, Q. Le, and
A. Kurakin, “Large-scale evolution of image classiﬁers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01041 , 2017.
[37] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y . Bengio, “Deep sparse rectiﬁ er neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2011, pp. 315–323.
[38] X. Glorot and Y . Bengio, “Understanding the difﬁculty o f training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2010, pp. 249–256.
[39] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative descript ion of mem-
brane current and its application to conduction and excitat ion in nerve,”
The Journal of physiology , vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 500–544, 1952.[40] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understand ing con-
volutional networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision .
Springer, 2014, pp. 818–833.
[41] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Angue lov, D. Erhan,
V . Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolu tions,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern
Recognition , 2015, pp. 1–9.
[42] M. N. Omidvar, X. Li, Y . Mei, and X. Yao, “Cooperative co- evolution
with differential grouping for large scale optimization,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 378–393, 2014.
[43] Y . Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representati on learning: A
review and new perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, 2013.
[44] Y . Bengio and O. Delalleau, “On the expressive power of d eep archi-
tectures,” in International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory .
Springer, 2011, pp. 18–36.
[45] O. Delalleau and Y . Bengio, “Shallow vs. deep sum-produ ct networks,”
inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2011, pp. 666–
674.
[46] A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmut h, “Occam’s
razor,” Information Processing Letters , vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 377–380, 1987.
[47] K. Deb and R. B. Agrawal, “Simulated binary crossover fo r continuous
search space,” Complex Systems , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1–15, 1994.
[48] K. Deb, Multi-objective optimization using evolutionary algorit hms.
John Wiley & Sons, 2001, vol. 16.
[49] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. V ollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a no vel image
dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747 , 2017.
[50] H. Larochelle, D. Erhan, A. Courville, J. Bergstra, and Y . Bengio,
“An empirical evaluation of deep architectures on problems with many
factors of variation,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Machine Learning . ACM, 2007, pp. 473–480.
[51] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Da lly,
and K. Keutzer, “Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 5 0x fewer
parameters and <0.5 mb model size,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 ,
2016.
[52] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[53] S. Rifai, P. Vincent, X. Muller, X. Glorot, and Y . Bengio , “Contractive
auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extrac tion,” in Proceed-
ings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learni ng, 2011,
pp. 833–840.
[54] K. Sohn and H. Lee, “Learning invariant representation s with local
transformations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6418 , 2012.
[55] K. Sohn, G. Zhou, C. Lee, and H. Lee, “Learning and select ing features
jointly with point-wise gated boltzmann machines,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning , 2013, pp. 217–225.
[56] J. Bruna and S. Mallat, “Invariant scattering convolut ion networks,”
IEEE transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellig ence, vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 1872–1886, 2013.
[57] T.-H. Chan, K. Jia, S. Gao, J. Lu, Z. Zeng, and Y . Ma, “Pcan et: A simple
deep learning baseline for image classiﬁcation?” IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing , vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 5017–5032, 2015.
[58] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast a nd elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-
lutionary Computation , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
[59] G. E. Hinton, “A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann
machines,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade . Springer, 2012,
pp. 599–619.
[60] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Ci tro, G. S.
Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin et al. , “Tensorﬂow: Large-scale
machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.04467 , 2016.
[61] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Acceler ating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning , 2015, pp. 448–456.
[62] Y . Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick,
S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, “Caffe: Convolutional archi tecture for
fast feature embedding,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international
conference on Multimedia . ACM, 2014, pp. 675–678.
[63] T. Chen, M. Li, Y . Li, M. Lin, N. Wang, M. Wang, T. Xiao, B. X u,
C. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Mxnet: A ﬂexible and efﬁcient machin e
learning library for heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.01274 , 2015.

