==== Page 1 ====
Evolving Losses for Unsupervised Video Representation Learning
AJ Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, Michael S. Ryoo
Research at Google
{ajpiergi,anelia,mryoo }@google.com
Abstract
We present a new method to learn video representations
from large-scale unlabeled video data. Ideally, this rep-
resentation will be generic and transferable, directly us-
able for new tasks such as action recognition and zero or
few-shot learning. We formulate unsupervised representa-
tion learning as a multi-modal, multi-task learning prob-
lem, where the representations are shared across different
modalities via distillation. Further, we introduce the con-
cept of loss function evolution by using an evolutionary
search algorithm to automatically ﬁnd optimal combina-
tion of loss functions capturing many (self-supervised) tasks
and modalities. Thirdly, we propose an unsupervised rep-
resentation evaluation metric using distribution matching
to a large unlabeled dataset as a prior constraint, based
on Zipf’s law. This unsupervised constraint, which is not
guided by any labeling, produces similar results to weakly-
supervised, task-speciﬁc ones. The proposed unsupervised
representation learning results in a single RGB network and
outperforms previous methods. Notably, it is also more ef-
fective than several label-based methods (e.g., ImageNet),
with the exception of large, fully labeled video datasets.
1. Introduction
Video representation learning is an important problem
which beneﬁts high-level perception tasks including action
recognition and video object detection [ 40,6,41]. It has
many key applications, such as web-video retrieval, robot
perception, and smart homes and cities. However, learn-
ing visual representations generally requires a large num-
ber of labeled training examples. This is even more so for
videos, as videos are higher-dimensional input than images
and video CNNs have more learnable parameters than 2D
ones. Simultaneously, videos are more expensive to collect
and annotate than images, as they require additional, and
often ambiguous, temporal annotations [ 34]. Additionally,
in rare event detection, very few examples may be available
to begin with. Thus, obtaining a good video representation
without relying on domain speciﬁc, annotated video sam-
Representation space 
from unlabeled data
Future PredictionReconstruction
Frame Order Detection
=
=Multiple 
self-supervised tasks
...
In order
Out of order
...
Action/event 
clustersVideo CNNFigure 1: Overview of our unsupervised representation
learning framework. The objective is to obtain a good rep-
resentation (blue outlined box) from a set of self-supervised
tasks. We use an evolutionary algorithm to automatically
ﬁnd the optimal combination of tasks and power law distri-
bution matching to ‘supervise’ the clustering and guide the
evolution. No labeling or supervision is needed.
ples, has signiﬁcant impact on real-world scenarios where
large-scale video data curation and labeling is prohibitive.
In this paper, we present a new, principled method for
unsupervised learning of video representations from unla-
beled video data. It is based on the observation that the
optimized combination of multiple self-supervised tasks1,
which are additionally encouraged by multi-modal distil-
lation, is often sufﬁcient to learn good feature representa-
tions. Importantly, we demonstrate that such combination
could be found without per-class or per-video labeling by
instead matching the representation statistics to a general
power distribution of video classes, e.g., Zipf’s law [ 50].
Our approach is to train the network so that its in-
termediate representations reﬂect not just information di-
rectly obtained from its own input modality (e.g., RGB im-
age) but also information from different modalities (e.g.,
1In this work we use unsupervised and self-supervised interchangeably.
1
133


==== Page 2 ====
...
...
Task 1 Task 2 Task N...Task 1 Task 2 Task N
...Task 1 Task 2 Task N
Optical Flow RGBAudio
Distillation
Losses
EaudioxRxFxAλ1,1L1,1λ1,2L1,2λ1,NL1,Nλ2,1L2,1λ2,2L2,2λ2,NL2,NλM,1LM,1λM,2LM,2λM,NLM,N...
...λdFigure 2: The multi-task, multi-modal, unsupervised representation learning framework. Each modality is trained to opti-
mize a set of tasks. Distillation regularization loss terms ‘infuse’ each modality’s information into the main RGB network
(drawn center). We evolve the loss function to automatically ﬁnd the weights for each task and distillation location, via an
unsupervised objective. The goal is to obtain representation from a single RGB network that transfers to recognition tasks.
grayscale, optical ﬂow, and audio). The idea is that synchro-
nized multi-modal data sources should beneﬁt representa-
tion learning of each other as they correspond to the same
content. This is done by the introduction of ‘distillation’
[16] losses between multiple streams of networks. The dis-
tillation losses, as well as the self-supervised tasks, do not
rely on human annotation or supervision. As a result, our
approach is formulated as a multi-modal, multi-task unsu-
pervised learning, where the tasks include single-modality
tasks like frame ordering as well as multi-modality tasks
like video-audio alignment.
However, combining multiple different self-supervised
task losses and distillation losses for unlabeled representa-
tion learning is a challenging problem, as certain tasks and
modalities are more relevant to the ﬁnal task than others
and different loss functions have different scales. Thus, we
newly introduce the concept of using an evolutionary algo-
rithm to obtain a better multi-modal, multi-task loss func-
tion that appropriately combines all the losses to train the
network. AutoML has successfully been applied to archi-
tecture search [ 25] and data augmentation [ 8]. Here we ex-
tend this concept to unsupervised learning by automatically
ﬁnding the weighting of self-supervised tasks for video rep-
resentation learning. The ‘ﬁtness’ of this evolution could
naturally be measured with task speciﬁc labels (e.g., ac-
curacy). However, we instead propose a purely unsuper-
vised alternative based on power law distribution matching
between the datasets, by using KL divergence constraints.
These constraints do not require any labeled data, enabling
fully unsupervised and unlabeled learning.Our goal is to ﬁnd video feature representations, based
on a single RGB network, that can seamlessly improve su-
pervised or unsupervised tasks without additional annota-
tions. The main contributions are:
•Formulation of unsupervised learning as multi-modal,
multi-task learning, including distillation tasks to transfer
features across modalities into a single-stream network.
Once learned, it allows for faster representation compu-
tation while still capturing multi-modal features.
•Evolutionary search for a loss function that automatically
combines self-supervised and distillation tasks that are
beneﬁcial for unsupervised representation learning.
•Introduction of an unsupervised representation evalua-
tion metric based on power law distribution matching,
which requires no labels and performs similarly to the
label-guided one.
This work makes the surprising ﬁnding that large
amounts of unlabeled data, combined with self-supervised
tasks and the power law distribution matching, produces
very powerful feature representations which are only ri-
valed by large datasets with very extensive data labeling:
Our feature representations (obtained with zero labels) out-
perform ImageNet pre-training, and pre-training on small
and medium-size labeled video datasets; it is only outper-
formed by Kinetics pre-training with full annotations based
on human labeling of more than 200,000 videos. Further,
the proposed representations outperform Kinetics training,
when ﬁne-tuned with Kinetics labels. We refer to the model
as‘ELo’ , as it is based on evolving unsupervised losses.
134


==== Page 3 ====
2. Related Work
Unsupervised Video Representation Learning: Ob-
taining labeled video data is expensive, and unlabeled video
data is plentiful, and there have been many methods pro-
posed for self-supervised learning of video representations.
Some tasks take advantage of the temporal structure in
videos, such as predicting if frames appear in order, re-
verse order, shufﬂed, color-consistency across frames, etc.
[12,26,30,24,31,47,19,21,45,46,42]. Other work has
explored using the spatial structure present in images, such
as predicting relative spatial location of image patches [ 28]
or tracking patches over time [ 44], showing promising re-
sults. Reconstruction or prediction of future frames[ 37], or
time-contrastive learning[ 18,33] to obtain representations
has also been successful. Constrastive losses are also com-
mon [ 39]. Learning representations taking advantage of au-
dio and video features has been explored by predicting if
an audio clip is from a video [ 2] or if audio and video are
temporally aligned [ 29,7,22,3].
Multi-task self-supervised learning has also shown
promising results [ 10,32,48], where tasks are assumed
to have equal weights and are not multi-modal. Gener-
ating weak labels using k-means clustering on CNN fea-
tures [ 4,5] or using clustering with meta-learning [ 17] has
also been explored. In this paper, we propose a generalized
approach to unsupervised representation learning, allowing
for multi-modal inputs and automatic discovery of the tasks
that beneﬁt recognition performance.
Activity Recognition: Activity recognition is a active
area of vision research, with a variety of methods pro-
posed [ 43,40,35,11]. With the introduction of large ac-
tivity recognition datasets (e.g., Kinetics and Moments in
Time [ 20,27]), much more accurate deep video CNNs are
possible [ 6]. We here show that they can be further im-
proved by unsupervised representation learning.
3. Method
We formulate unsupervised video representation learn-
ing as a combination of multi-task, multi-modal learning.
The objective is not only to take advantage of multiple self-
supervised tasks for the learning of a (good) representation
space, but also to do so across multiple modalities. The idea
is that models from synchronized multi-modal data, sharing
the same semantic content, will beneﬁt the representation
learning of each other. We encourage that via introducing
‘distillation’ losses. At the same time, each modality may
have multiple self-supervised tasks with their corresponding
losses. Fig. 2illustrates the multi-task, multi-modal formu-
lation with multiple losses and distillation, Section 3.1has
the details.
To facilitate multi-task, multi-modal learning, impor-
tantly, we introduce the new concept of automatically evolv-
ingthe main loss function. Certain tasks and modalities aremore relevant to the ﬁnal task so the representation needs
to focus on those more than the others. The idea is to com-
putationally search for how different multi-task and distil-
lation losses should be combined, instead of constructing
a loss function by trial-and-error. We discuss this more in
Section 3.2.
One key technical question is how one can guide the evo-
lution without a pre-deﬁned task or a ﬁtness function. We
propose an unsupervised method to evaluate each loss func-
tion, based on matching of the power law distribution of
activity classes (Section 3.2.2 ).
3.1. Unsupervised multi­modal learning
We construct a CNN for each modality. Each network is
trained using several tasks not requiring labeled video data,
and the information from each modality is combined using
distillation [ 16] (Fig. 2). More speciﬁcally, we take advan-
tage of multiple self-supervised tasks, such as frame recon-
struction, future frame prediction, and frame temporal or-
dering (Section 3.3discusses them in detail). Each of these
tasks will yield an unsupervised loss for training. Learning
with multiple self-supervised tasks makes our representa-
tions more generic, as they need to generalize to many tasks
and are more transferable to unseen tasks.
For each modality, mand its input Im, we build an em-
bedding network, Em, which generates an embedded rep-
resentation of the input: xm=Em(Im).xmis the fea-
ture representation for modality m. Our embedding net-
works are (2+1)D ResNet-50 models, which take advantage
of both 2D spatial convolutions and 1D temporal convolu-
tions to represent videos; they provide state-of-the-art per-
formance on video understanding tasks. As mentioned, for
each modality, we consider several learning tasks, for ex-
ample, frame reconstruction. Each of the tasks per modality
has its own loss function. Lm,tis the loss from task tand
modality mand{t1,t2...,tNm}is the set of tasks for the
modality.
Further, to better take advantage of the multi-modal rep-
resentations, we use distillation to ‘infuse’ the other modal-
ities into the RGB network at different locations. Our ﬁnal
objective is to train a single RGB network that provides a
strong representation for video understanding. Our formu-
lation allows the RGB network to learn representations from
various tasks and modalities.
We combine the multi-task losses for unsupervised train-
ing, and per each modality, by a weighted sum, and we
further combine it with a number of distillation losses Ld
which fuse or synchronize the multiple modalities:
L=/summationdisplay
m/summationdisplay
tλm,tLm,t+/summationdisplay
dλdLd (1)
whereλm,tandλdare the weights of the losses. The
weighted sum Lis the loss we use to train the entire model.
135


==== Page 4 ====
Evolution IterationsFigure 3: Evolution of the weights deciding our ﬁnal loss function. Each square represents a λm,tand how it changes
over the evolutionary search. The weight symbols are as follows: the ﬁrst letter is representation modality (R=RGB,
A=Audio, F=Flow, G=Grey), The tasks are S=Shufﬂe, C=colorize, A=Audio align, P=Future prediction, B=backward detec-
tion, D=Distill, E=Embed. The numbers indicate the layer the distillation loss is applied.
3.1.1 Distillation
Distillation was introduced to train smaller networks by
matching representation of deeper ones [ 16], or for gen-
erally transferring knowledge from pre-trained networks.
Here, we use distillation to ‘infuse’ representations of dif-
ferent modalities into the main, RGB network. Note that we
distill representations jointly while training. The distilla-
tion losses learn features by transferring information across
modalities. More speciﬁcally, our formulation allows for
the distillation of audio, optical ﬂow and temporal informa-
tion into a single, RGB-based convolutional neural network.
The distillation loss is the L2difference between the ac-
tivations of a layer in the main network Miand a layer in
another network Li. Such constraint encourages the activa-
tions of the main network to match the activations of the
other network, infusing other features into the main net-
work.
Ld(Li,Mi) =||Li−Mi||2 (2)
Distillation has previously been used for combining net-
works such as ensembles [ 16] or learning to predict optical
ﬂow features from RGB [ 38], here we are extending its us-
age for multi-modal representation learning from unlabeled
video data. While in principle distillation can happen across
all modalities, we do distillation only into the RGB stream,
so as to obtain a ﬁnal single-tower efﬁcient representation
for learning subsequent tasks. Using the learned weights for
the RGB network, we can then extract representations for a
set of videos.
3.2. Evolving an unsupervised loss function
Our representation learning is governed by the weight
coefﬁcients of the loss in Equation 1, and they need to be ap-
propriately determined. The weighting supposedly reﬂects
the importance or relevance of each task and modality to
the main task; for example the optical ﬂow modality may
be important for tracking, whereas audio may give more
information for temporal segmentation of videos in certain
settings.3.2.1 Unsupervised loss construction
Instead of manually constructing a loss function, we evolve
the loss function by taking advantage of well-established
evolutionary algorithms, e.g., [ 13]. More speciﬁcally, our
search space consists of all the weights of the loss function,
both task weights and distillation weights. Each λm,tor
λdis constrained to be in [0,1]. Our evolutionary algorithm
maintains a pool (i.e., population) of individuals where each
individual is a set of weight values that compose the ﬁnal
loss function.
3.2.2 Unsupervised Zipf distribution matching
The evolutionary algorithm requires evaluation of the loss
function (i.e., ﬁtness measure) at each round to optimize the
loss weight coefﬁcients. We propose a new, unsupervised
method for this. In order to measure the ﬁtness of each in-
dividual (i.e., the set of weights to combine the tasks and
modalities to form the ﬁnal loss), we apply a k-means clus-
tering on the representation learned with the correspond-
ing loss function, and analyze the cluster distributions. We
ﬁrst train the network using a smaller subset (100k) of unla-
beled, random YouTube videos for 10,000 iterations (using
the corresponding loss function). We then use a subset of
random YouTube videos and similarly extract representa-
tionsxRGB=ERGB(I). Given these representations, we
can then cluster them into kclusters.
k-means clustering can be viewed as a Gaussian Mix-
ture Model with ﬁxed variances and we calculate probabili-
ties of each feature vector belonging to a cluster, which re-
duces to computing the distance. Speciﬁcally, for the cluster
centroids {c1,c2,...ck}whereci∈ RD(aD-dimensional
vector), we can compute the probability of a feature vector
x∈ RDbelonging to a cluster cias:
p(x|ci) =1√
2σ2πexp/parenleftbigg
−(x−ci)2
2σ2/parenrightbigg
(3)
Since we are (naively) assuming all clusters have the same
variance (for simplicity, let 2σ2= 1) and an equal prior
136


==== Page 5 ====
over all clusters, we can use Bayes rules to rewrite as:
p(ci|x) =p(ci)p(x|ci)
/summationtextk
jp(cj)p(x|cj)=exp−(x−ci)2
2σ2/summationtextk
j=1exp−(x−cj)2
2σ2
=exp−(x−ci)2
/summationtextk
j=1exp−(x−cj)2(4)
which we note is the standard softmax function applied to
the squared distances from a feature xto a cluster center ci.
As observed in many large activity recognition datasets,
like A V A [ 14] and Kinetics [ 20], the activity classes of
videos follow a Zipf distribution. We can use this as a prior
constraint on the distribution of the videos in these clusters.
Speciﬁcally, given the above probability of each video be-
longing to each cluster, and the Zipf distribution, we com-
pute the prior probability of each class as q(ci) =1/is
Hk,s
whereHis thekth harmonic number and sis some real
constant. We then let p(ci) =1
N/summationtext
x∈Vp(ci|x), the average
over all videos in the set. Using these two probability func-
tions representing the classes/clusters, we can minimize the
KL divergence:
KL(p||q) =k/summationdisplay
i=1p(ci)log/parenleftbiggp(ci)
q(ci)/parenrightbigg
(5)
By using this as a ﬁtness metric, it poses a prior con-
straint over the distribution of (learned) video representa-
tions in clusters to follow the Zipf distribution. Note that
this method requires no labeled data and is fully unsuper-
vised. We refer to this entirely unsupervised method as
‘ELo’.
Weakly-supervised baseline: As an upper-bound and an
alternative to our approach, we use a handful of class la-
bels to evaluate the clustering (which is referred to as ELo-
weak). This is done for the sake of comparison and is
also a good alternative to align the ﬁnal loss to a down-
stream video classiﬁcation task. A subset of HMDB is used,
andk-means clustering is applied to the output representa-
tion of the RGB stream. The clusters are used for nearest-
neighbors classiﬁcation and the accuracy is the ﬁtness of
the individual. Due to randomness in k-means clustering,
in both settings, we run this processes 20 times and average
ﬁtness across all trials.
3.2.3 Loss evolution
As is typical with evolution approaches, the evolution of
the loss is driven by mutations. Since our search space con-
sists of continuous values in [0,1], we compare two differ-
ent evolutionary strategies: tournament selection [ 13] and
CMA-ES [ 15]. For the tournament selection search, we
mutate an individual loss function by randomly picking one
Aligned 
AudioRGB1
0
Misaligned
AudioFigure 4: Example of the multi-modal alignment tasks. The
networks take input of temporally aligned RGB and Audio
(or other modalities) and a sample from one modality that
is temporally different. The network is trained to predict if
a pair is temporally aligned or not.
weight and assigning new value in uniformly sampled from
[0,1]. For CMA-ES, at each iteration, all the components
are changed based on the ﬁtness of all the individuals in
the evolution pool. For tournament selection, we evolve the
loss function for 2000 rounds, generating and evaluating
2000 different loss functions and we use 250 rounds with
CMA-ES, ﬁnding much faster convergence. Fig. 3shows
an example how our weights evolve over the rounds and
Table 4compares the performance of different search meth-
ods. Since everything is differentiable, we could learn these
weights also with gradient descent, however, we leave this
for future exploration as taking the derivative of the entire
network w.r.t. to task weights is non-trivial.
3.3. Self­supervised tasks
Many tasks have been designed for unsupervised learn-
ing. We describe brieﬂy the tasks we employ for our rep-
resentation learning. Importantly, we allow many possible
tasks and let the evolved loss function automatically dis-
cover which tasks are important and the optimal relative
weightings. We also use tasks like DeepCluster [ 5] and lo-
cal aggregation [ 49].
Reconstruction and prediction tasks: Given the repre-
sentation for a modality, xm, we use a decoder CNN to gen-
erate the output. As the reconstruction is only used as a su-
pervision signal, we do not need to generate extremely high
quality reconstructions. Thus, we use a small, cheap de-
coder with only 6 convolutional layers, saving both memory
and training time. Once the unsupervised learning is com-
plete, we discard the decoders. Further, following previous
work [ 38], our decoders have no temporal convolution, forc-
ing the representations to contain all needed temporal infor-
mation, which is desirable for video understanding. Each
modality (e.g., RGB, optical ﬂow, and audio) will be recon-
structed. We also use several cross-modality transfer tasks:
RGB to Flow, Flow to RGB, etc.
137


==== Page 6 ====
Another way to learn video temporal structure is to train
a decoder to predict the next Nframes given Tframes. Fu-
ture prediction of frames has previously been used for rep-
resentation learning [ 37] and we perform this task for each
modality. For these tasks, we minimize the L2distance be-
tween the ground truth ( I) and predicted output ( ˆI):
LR(ˆI,I) =||ˆI−I||2 (6)
Temporal ordering: We use two tasks to learn repre-
sentations that take advantage of temporal structure: binary
classiﬁcation of ordered frames and shufﬂed frames [ 26]
and binary classiﬁcation of forward and backward videos
[31]. We use a single, fully-connected layer to make a bi-
nary classiﬁcation of the representation: p=Wxm(xm
is the representation for a modality). These are trained to
minimize binary cross-entropy:
LB(p,y) =−(ylog(p)+(1−y)log(1−p)) (7)
wherepis the output of the binary classiﬁer and yis the
ground truth.
Multi-modal contrastive loss: As videos contain multi-
ple modalities, we want to take advantage of these different
representations to learn an a generic representation by using
a multi-modal embedding space. Given the representations
for each modality, xm, we minimize a contrastive loss be-
tween various embedding spaces:
Lc(x1,x2,xn) =||x1−x2||2+max(0 ,α−||x1−xn||2)
(8)
wherexm1andxm2are representations from the same
video but different modalities and xnis a representation
from a different video. This task encourages the represen-
tations from the same video, but different modalities, to
be close in the representation space, while representations
from different videos are further apart.
Multi-modal alignment: We can further take advantage
of both the temporal information and the multi-modal data
by performing a multi-modal alignment task, illustrated in
Fig. 4. The networks take input of temporally aligned sam-
ples from two modalities, and a sample from one modalitiy
from a temporally different region. The model is trained to
make a binary prediction if the two samples are temporally
aligned.
4. Experiments
Unsupervised data source. We use two million random,
unlabeled YouTube video clips sampled randomly from the
Youtube-8M dataset [ 1] (limiting the size for computational
reasons). Previous works on self-supervised learning used
videos from datasets (e.g., Kinetics or AudioSet in [ 22])
while ignoring the labels, leading a bias in the dataset, as
those videos are trimmed to intervals with speciﬁc activi-
ties. Using a random sample from Youtube is less prone toMethod k-means 1-layer ﬁne-tune
Supervised using additional labeled data
Scratch (No Pretraining) 15.7 17.8 35.2
ImageNet Pretrained 32.5 37.8 49.8
Kinetics Pretrained 68.8 71.5 74.3
Unsupervised using unlabeled videos
Frame Shufﬂe [ 26] 22.3 24.3 28.4
Reverse Detection [ 31] 21.3 24.3 27.5
Audio/RGB Align [ 29,22] 32.4 36.8 40.2
RGB to Flow 31.5 36.4 39.9
Predicting 4 future frames 31.8 35.8 39.2
Joint Embedding 29.4 32.5 38.4
Ours, weakly-sup clustering, using unlabeled videos
Evolved Loss - ELo-weak 45.7 64.3 67.8
Ours, unsupervised, using unlabeled videos
Random Loss (unsup.) 26.4 26.9 31.2
Evolved Loss - ELo (unsup.) 43.4 64.5 67.4
Table 1: Evaluation of various self-supervised methods on
HMDB51 [ 23]. We compare to a randomly initialized, Ima-
geNet pretrained and Kinetics pretrained networks. We also
compare to various single-task baselines, an average of 10
randomly sampled loss functions, and the evolved loss func-
tion using both ﬁtness metrics. All tasks were trained on our
random, unlabeled YouTube videos.
bias as the videos are user generated, the labels are automat-
ically tagged (no human veriﬁcation), and potentially offers
a very large set for training (up to 8M). We have veriﬁed
there is no overlap between those datasets and the ones the
models are evaluated on (e.g., HMDB).
Evaluation datasets and protocols. We used the fol-
lowing widely used datasets for evaluation: HMDB [ 23],
UCF101 [ 36],Kinetics [ 20]. We also used Imagenet [ 9]
and Kinetics for reporting results with pre-training, as is
customary in previous work. We use the standard protocols
when evaluating video classiﬁcation results on the labeled
datasets, adopted by prior work as well. Please see the sup.
material for dataset details.
Implementation details. We use a (2+1)D ResNet-50
as our backbone network. Given a loss function, we train
the network for 100 epochs on 2 million unlabeled videos.
The learning rate is set to 0.1 (during both the evolution and
the ﬁnal training).
During search, we used smaller networks, similar to a
ResNet-18 for faster learning. For search, the ﬁtness of each
model can be found in 4 hours using 8 GPUs. The ﬁnal
model uses 64 GPUs for 3 days to train (equivalent time to
training I3D/(2+1)D ResNet-50 on Kinetics).
4.1. Comparison to previous methods
We evaluate our method in comparison to prior unsuper-
vised and supervised representation learning. Speciﬁcally,
138


==== Page 7 ====
Method HMDB UCF101
Supervised
(2+1)D ResNet-50 Scratch 35.2 63.1
(2+1)D ResNet-50 ImageNet 49.8 84.5
(2+1)D ResNet-50 Kinetics 74.3 95.1
Unsupervised
Shufﬂe [ 26] 18.1 50.2
O3N [ 12] 32.5 60.3
OPN [ 24] 37.5 37.5
Patch [ 44] - 41.5
Multisensory [ 29] - 82.1
A VTS [ 22] 61.6 89.0
Weakly guided, HMDB
Evolved Loss (ours) 67.8 94.1
Unsupervised
Evolved Loss (ours, no distiliation) 53.7 84.2
Evolved Loss - ELo (ours) 67.4 93.8
Table 2: Comparison to the state-of-art on HMDB51 and
UCF101. Note that previous approaches train on activity
recognition datasets (e.g., Kinetics) are much more aligned
to the ﬁnal task, whereas we use random video clips. Even
using more difﬁcult data, we outperform the previous meth-
ods. (The top portion shows results for (2+1)D ResNet-50
with supervised pretraining as in Table 1).
0
 56k
 112k
 168k
 225k
Number of Labeled Training Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80Accuracy
Randomly Initialized
Ours (unsupervised)
AVTS
Shuffle
Supervised Baseline
Figure 5: How much labeled, supervised data is needed
once the unsupervised representation is learned. We achieve
comparable performance with roughly half the data and out-
perform the supervised baselines using the entire dataset.
we evaluate the representations in 3 settings: (1) k-means
clustering of the representations (2) ﬁxing the weights of
the network and training a single, fully-connected layer for
classiﬁcation and (3) ﬁne-tuning the entire network. These
three evaluations are done by directly evaluating the repre-
sentation as well as ﬁnetuning the entire network.
We ﬁnd that while all approaches outperform the ran-
domly initialized networks, only our evolved loss function
100k
 500k
 1m
 1.5m
 2m
Number of Unlabeled Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70HMDB Accuracy
Ours
Random Initialized Baseline
ImageNet-Pretrained Baseline
Kinetics-Pretrained Baseline
100k
 500k
 1m
 1.5m
 2m
Number of Unlabeled Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70HMDB Accuracy
Ours
Random Initialized Baseline
ImageNet-Pretrained Baseline
Kinetics-Pretrained BaselineFigure 6: Comparisons of different amounts of unsuper-
vised data. Left: Total number of training iterations ﬁxed
(i.e., less epochs as data is added). Right : Total number of
epochs ﬁxed (i.e., more iterations as more data is added).
We observe that adding more data without increasing train-
ing time improves performance, while training longer on
more data is better. On HMDB.
0
 200
0
1Frame
Shuffle
0
 200Flow
Shuffle
0
 200RGB/Audio
Align
0
 200Flow/Audio
Align
0
 200RGB to
Flow
0
 200Future
RGB
0
 200Future
AudioValue of λt
Evolution Round
Figure 7: The values of the loss function for the various
tasks throughout evolution. Higher weight values indicate
the task is more important. The learned loss functions auto-
matically ﬁnds the tasks that most beneﬁt recognition.
outperforms ImageNet pretraining and performs compara-
bly to the pretrained network with labeled Kinetics data (Ta-
ble1). Furthermore, we outperform all prior unsupervised
methods. Our approach performs similarly to the weakly
supervised version of our evolution method, despite being
unsupervised. We also compare to a loss function randomly
sampled from our search space, which performs poorly.
We ﬁnd that some tasks are not beneﬁcial to representation
learning, thus the evolution is quite important as this allows
automatically ﬁnding the best tasks and weightings.
In Table 2, we compare our approach to previous re-
ported methods. We ﬁnd that even though our approach is
using more difﬁcult unlabeled data, we still outperform the
exiting methods by a signiﬁcant margin.
We also ﬁnd that distillation is extremely important.
Without it, the RGB network can only take advantage of
the other modalities through multi-modal tasks.
4.2. Improving supervised learning
Once we have learned a representation space using large
amounts of unlabeled data, we want to determine how much
labeled data is needed to achieve competitive performance.
In Fig. 5and Table 3, we compare various approaches
trained using our unlabeled videos then ﬁne-tuned on Ki-
139


==== Page 8 ====
Number of Labeled Samples
Method 400 2k 4k 8k 20k 40k 80k 120k 160k225k
(all samples)
Random Init 0.93 2.1 2.8 4.4 6.2 12.5 26.4 52.5 64.3 71.2
Frame Shufﬂe 1.5 5.3 12.4 18.4 28.4 32.5 38.2 57.4 66.8 70.9
Audio Align 2.5 9.8 17.2 28.1 36.0 46.0 54.1 64.3 69.5 71.5
ELo (unsupervised) 3.6 15.8 24.8 47.0 58.3 67.5 69.2 70.2 72.2 74.4
Table 3: Using different amounts of labeled samples on the currently available (March 2019) Kinetics-400 dataset using a
(2+1)D ResNet-50. We achieve similar performance with only ∼50% of the data. Using the entire dataset, we outperform
the randomly initialized network.
Figure 8: Heatmap visualization of the learned loss func-
tion. Higher values indicate the components importance.
See Fig. 3for description.Method Num iter. Acc
Random Search 2000 52.4
Grid Search 2000 57.3
Tournament Selection 2000 61.4
CMA-ES 250 67.4
Table 4: Comparison of best loss found with different evo-
lutionary strategies evaluated on HMDB.
netics using different amounts of labeled data. The Kinet-
ics dataset has 225k labeled samples and we ﬁnd that using
only 25k (10%) yields reasonable performance (58.1% ac-
curacy), only 11% lower than our baseline, fully-supervised
model using all samples.
We are able to match performance using only 120k sam-
ples, about half the dataset. Using the entire dataset, we
outperform the baseline network, due to better initilizations
and the distillation of modalities into the RGB stream.
4.3. Beneﬁt of additional unlabeled data
We explore the effect of using different amounts of unla-
beled data. Given a loss function, we train a network using
Nunlabeled samples. We compare the training both keep-
ing the iterations ﬁxed and the number of epochs ﬁxed.
The results on HMDB are shown in Fig. 6. When ﬁxing
the number of iterations to 100k, the performance increases
as we add more data, even though the number of epochs
(e.g., number of times each sample is seen) decreases. This
suggests that during unsupervised training, the use of more,
diverse data is beneﬁcial, even when samples are seen fewer
times. When ﬁxing the number of epochs to 100, we ﬁnd
that adding more data further improves performance, sug-
gesting that more training plus more data is best.
0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
HMDB Clustering Accuracy
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12Zipf Matching Score
0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
HMDB Clustering Rank
0
20
40
60
80
100Zipf Matching Rank
Figure 9: Comparison of the two ﬁtness measures for 100
different loss functions. The plots show HMDB clustering
and KL-divergence to Zipf distribution on random videos.
The measures are quite correlated. Left: Fitness value (cor-
relationr= 0.93).Right: Ranking of each loss function
(Spearmans’s rho ρ= 0.91).
4.4. Additional Analysis
Examining the weights of the evolved loss function, λm,t
andλd, allows us to check which tasks are more important
for the target task. Fig. 7illustrates the weights for sev-
eral tasks ( λm,t) over the 250 evolution rounds. We observe
tasks such as RGB frame shufﬂe get very low weights, sug-
gesting they are not very useful for the action recognition
task. Tasks such as audio alignment are quite important.
The ﬁnal fully-evolved loss is shown in Fig. 8.
Table 4compares different search methods. As seen
CMA-ES converges the most quickly and to the best ﬁtness.
In Fig. 9, we compare the two different ﬁtness measures,
ﬁnding strong correlation. This suggests that Zipf matching
is suitable for unsupervised representation evaluation.
5. Conclusion
We proposed a uniﬁed framework for multi-task, multi-
modal unsupervised video representation learning and
found it beneﬁts recognition tasks. We further introduced
the concept of loss function evolution to automatically ﬁnd
the weights of the self-supervised tasks and modalities,
with unsupervised ﬁtness measure. We ﬁnd powerful un-
supervised video representations that outperform prior self-
supervised tasks and can match or improve the performance
of networks trained on supervised data.
140


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Sami Abu-El-Haija, Nisarg Kothari, Joonseok Lee, Paul
Natsev, George Toderici, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, and
Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan. Youtube-8m: A large-
scale video classiﬁcation benchmark. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08675 , 2016. 6
[2] Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Look, listen and
learn. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 609–617, 2017. 3
[3] Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Objects that
sound. In Proceedings of European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 3
[4] Miguel A Bautista, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Ekaterina
Tikhoncheva, and Bjorn Ommer. Cliquecnn: Deep un-
supervised exemplar learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , pages 3846–3854,
2016. 3
[5] Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and
Matthijs Douze. Deep clustering for unsupervised learning
of visual features. In Proceedings of European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 132–149, 2018. 3,5
[6] Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action
recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017. 1,3
[7] J. S. Chung and A. Zisserman. Out of time: automated lip
sync in the wild. In Workshop on Multi-view Lip-reading,
ACCV , 2016. 3
[8] Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Vasude-
van, and Quoc V Le. Autoaugment: Learning augmentation
policies from data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09501 , 2018.
2
[9] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
CVPR09 , 2009. 6
[10] Carl Doersch and Andrew Zisserman. Multi-task self-
supervised visual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017.
3
[11] Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Jitendra Malik, and
Kaiming He. Slowfast networks for video recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.03982 , 2018. 3
[12] Basura Fernando, Hakan Bilen, Efstratios Gavves, and
Stephen Gould. Self-supervised video representation learn-
ing with odd-one-out networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , 2017. 3,7
[13] David E. Goldberg and Kalyanmoy Deb. A comparative
analysis of selection schemes used in genetic algorithms. In
Foundations of Genetic Algorithms , pages 69–93. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1991. 4,5
[14] Chunhui Gu, Chen Sun, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Car-
oline Pantofaru, David A. Ross, George Toderici, Yeqing
Li, Susanna Ricco, Rahul Sukthankar, Cordelia Schmid,
and Jitendra Malik. A V A: A video dataset of spatio-
temporally localized atomic visual actions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.08421 , 2017. 5[15] Nikolaus Hansen, Sibylle D M ¨uller, and Petros Koumout-
sakos. Reducing the time complexity of the derandomized
evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (cma-
es).Evolutionary computation , 2003. 5
[16] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distill-
ing the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015. 2,3,4
[17] Kyle Hsu, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Unsupervised
learning via meta-learning. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2019. 3
[18] Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature
extraction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ica. In
D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V . Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R.
Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 29 . 2016. 3
[19] Dinesh Jayaraman and Kristen Grauman. Slow and steady
feature analysis: higher order temporal coherence in video.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016. 3
[20] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang,
Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola,
Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics hu-
man action video dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950 ,
2017. 3,5,6
[21] Dahun Kim, Donghyeon Cho, and In So Kweon. Self-
supervised video representation learning with space-time cu-
bic puzzles. In AAAI , 2018. 3
[22] Bruno Korbar, Du Tran, and Lorenzo Torresani. Cooperative
learning of audio and video models from self-supervised syn-
chronization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS) , pages 7774–7785, 2018. 3,6,7
[23] Hildegard Kuehne, Hueihan Jhuang, Est ´ıbaliz Garrote,
Tomaso Poggio, and Thomas Serre. Hmdb: a large video
database for human motion recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) . IEEE, 2011. 6
[24] Hsin-Ying Lee, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-
Hsuan Yang. Unsupervised representation learning by sort-
ing sequences. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 667–676,
2017. 3,7
[25] Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon
Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, Alan Yuille, Jonathan
Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 2
[26] Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Martial Hebert. Shuf-
ﬂe and learn: unsupervised learning using temporal order
veriﬁcation. In Proceedings of European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2016. 3,6,7
[27] Mathew Monfort, Alex Andonian, Bolei Zhou, Kandan Ra-
makrishnan, Sarah Adel Bargal, Tom Yan, Lisa Brown,
Quanfu Fan, Dan Gutfruend, Carl V ondrick, et al. Moments
in time dataset: one million videos for event understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03150 , 2018. 3
[28] Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of
visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles. In Proceed-
141


==== Page 10 ====
ings of European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,
pages 69–84, 2016. 3
[29] Andrew Owens and Alexei A Efros. Audio-visual scene
analysis with self-supervised multisensory features. In
Proceedings of European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV) , 2018. 3,6,7
[30] Dilip Krishnan Phillip Isola, Daniel Zoran and Edward H
Adelson. Learning visual groups from co-occurrences in
space and time. 2015. 3
[31] Lyndsey C Pickup, Zheng Pan, Donglai Wei, YiChang Shih,
Changshui Zhang, Andrew Zisserman, Bernhard Scholkopf,
and William T Freeman. Seeing the arrow of time. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2014. 3,6
[32] Zhongzheng Ren and Yong Jae Lee. Cross-domain self-
supervised multi-task feature learning using synthetic im-
agery. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018. 3
[33] Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine
Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, and Sergey Levine. Time-
contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from pixels.
2017. 3
[34] Gunnar A Sigurdsson, Olga Russakovsky, and Abhinav
Gupta. What actions are needed for understanding human
actions in videos? arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02696 , 2017.
1
[35] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Two-stream con-
volutional networks for action recognition in videos. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) ,
pages 568–576, 2014. 3
[36] K. Soomro, A. Roshan Zamir, and M. Shah. UCF101: A
dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in the wild.
InCRCV-TR-12-01 , 2012. 6
[37] Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhudi-
nov. Unsupervised learning of video representations using
lstms. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML) , pages 843–852, 2015. 3,6
[38] Jonathan C Stroud, David A Ross, Chen Sun, Jia Deng, and
Rahul Sukthankar. D3d: Distilled 3d networks for video ac-
tion recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08249 , 2018. 4,
5
[39] Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Con-
trastive multiview coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05849 ,
2019. 3
[40] Du Tran, Lubomir D Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torre-
sani, and Manohar Paluri. C3d: generic features for video
analysis. CoRR, abs/1412.0767 , 2(7):8, 2014. 1,3
[41] Du Tran, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, Jamie Ray, Yann
LeCun, and Manohar Paluri. A closer look at spatiotemporal
convolutions for action recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR) , pages 6450–6459, 2018. 1
[42] Carl V ondrick, Abhinav Shrivastava, Alireza Fathi, Sergio
Guadarrama, and Kevin Murphy. Tracking emerges by col-
orizing videos. In Proceedings of European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 3
[43] Heng Wang, Alexander Kl ¨aser, Cordelia Schmid, and
Cheng-Lin Liu. Action recognition by dense trajectories.InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 3169–3176. IEEE,
2011. 3
[44] Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning
of visual representations using videos. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,
pages 2794–2802, 2015. 3,7
[45] X. Wang, K. He, and A. Gupta. Transitive invariance for
selfsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , 2017. 3
[46] Xiaolong Wang, Allan Jabri, and Alexei A. Efros. Learning
correspondence from the cycle-consistency of time. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 3
[47] Donglai Wei, Joseph Lim, Andrew Zisserman, and
William T. Freeman. Learning and using the arrow of time.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018. 3
[48] Amir Zamir, Alexander Sax, William Shen, Leonidas
Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. Taskonomy:
Disentangling task transfer learning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR) , 2018. 3
[49] Chengxu Zhuang, Alex Lin Zhai, and Daniel Yamins. Lo-
cal aggregation for unsupervised learning of visual embed-
dings. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 6002–6012, 2019. 5
[50] George K. Zipf. Human behavior and the principle of least
effort. In Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, Massachusetts , 1949.
1
142


