==== Page 1 ====
1
Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems for Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Why, When, What for, and
Where to?
Alberto Fernandez, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN
Maria Jose del Jesus, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, Department of
Computer Science, University of Jaen, Jaen, SPAIN
Oscar Cordon, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN Francesco Marcelloni,Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa,
ITALY
and Francisco Herrera, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence, University of
Granada, Granada, SPAIN
Abstract
Evolutionary fuzzy systems are one of the greatest advances within the area of computational intelligence. They consist of
evolutionary algorithms applied to the design of fuzzy systems. Thanks to this hybridization, superb abilities are provided to
fuzzy modeling in many different data science scenarios. This contribution is intended to comprise a position paper developing
a comprehensive analysis of the evolutionary fuzzy systems research ﬁeld. To this end, the “4 W” questions are posed and
addressed with the aim of understanding the current context of this topic and its signiﬁcance. Speciﬁcally, it will be pointed out
why evolutionary fuzzy systems are important from an explainable point of view, when they began, what they are used for, and
where the attention of researchers should be directed to in the near future in this area. They must play an important role for the
emerging area of eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) learning from data.
I. W HYEVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS ?
“KNOWLEDGE itself is power” [1]. This simple sentence has led to a wave of continuous interest in developing
models that are able to extract the maximum amount of information from data. In this context, the use of machine
learning (ML) techniques allows stakeholders to obtain useful insights, predictions, and decisions from datasets of many
different sources in an automatic fashion [2]. Current applications come with novel data characteristics as big dimension and
non-standard classiﬁcation problems, and both researchers and practitioners actually aim to understand how the models work.
Therefore, a movement is being witnessed from traditional data mining towards a more proﬁtable and challenging scenario
known as data science [3]. It brings novel technologies, frameworks, methodologies, and skills that are designed to ease the
management of the challenges related to big data applications [4].
Nevertheless, to be able to reach the deepest level when considering all the information available, the knowledge domain
and the data analysis must have a strong synergy. From a data viewpoint, one must be aware of the quality associated with it.
Additionally, representation of the expert knowledge available on the tackled application domain must also be considered.
In this scenario, fuzzy set theory might be regarded as a valuable tool. Proposed by Lofti A. Zadeh in the mid 60s [5], a
linguistic representation of numerical variables is possible by means of a membership degree being assigned to each of them,
which could vary from 0 (full non-membership) to 1 (full membership). Therefore, models that use fuzzy sets as a tool for data
handling provide some important advantages. In terms of semantics, the use of linguistic labels in the fuzzy model structure
is a natural knowledge representation allowing for a direct human interaction [6]. In addition, from a learning perspective,
translating the input features into fuzzy variables with fuzzy membership functions permits obtaining smoothed descriptive
models that adapt well to data with a certain degree of uncertainty.
Based on the former observations, and without lacking generality, the focus of this contribution will be set on fuzzy rule-
based systems (FRBSs) [7]. As their name suggests, FRBSs are composed of fuzzy IF-THEN rules where both antecedents and
consequents usually contain fuzzy sets. The main components of any FRBS are the knowledge base (KB) and the inference
engine module. The KB comprises all the fuzzy rules within a rule base (RB), and the deﬁnition of the fuzzy sets in the data
base (DB). The inference engine includes a fuzziﬁcation interface, an inference system, and a defuzziﬁcation interface.
The learning procedure for FRBSs involves a search for the model that, based on the observations, best approximates a
given performance metric [2]. In particular, ﬁnding the best approach is related to the so-called “empirical risk-loss” function,
which depends on the data the user works with. In other words, any learning algorithm has the ultimate goal of optimizing
Corresponding author: Alberto Fernandez (alberto@decsai.ugr.es)

==== Page 2 ====
2
a mapping function between inputs and outputs. In this sense, the clear advantages of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [8] for
developing this task must be highlighted.
EAs are a type of metaheuristic based optimization techniques that are based on a population of solutions. As the name
suggests, EAs are concerned with biological evolution, so that each solution is encoded as an individual of the population. The
search for the optimal values of the function that is being optimized (the ﬁtness value) is carried out by means of the repeated
application of operators such as reproduction, mutation, recombination and selection. Among the different implementations of
EAs, the most popular is certainly Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [9], where solutions (also known as chromosomes) are encoded
into strings of “genes”, and evolve by means of recombination and/or mutation. EAs are not speciﬁcally designed as ML
techniques. However, it is well-known that a learning task can be modeled as an optimization problem and thus effectively
solved through evolution. EAs’ powerful search in complex, ill-deﬁned problem spaces has allowed for them to be successfully
applied to a huge variety of ML and knowledge discovery tasks [10]. When the accuracy performance is set as the ﬁtness
function of this optimization process, the predictive quality of the system is expected to be boosted.
Considering the issues on predictive performance, the main goal traditionally pursued is to make the model matching reality,
i.e. effectively summarizing the underlying data. Hence, this “quest for accuracy” is the most important requirement when
selecting a solution, and has probably supported the current explosion of black-box ML approaches. This type of system is
known for having an excellent ability to learn accurately from the input data. On the contrary, most of these accurate models
are highly non-transparent, i.e. it is no clear what information in the input data makes them arrive at their decisions [11],
[12]. Nowadays, there is an important need for safety, ethics, and scientiﬁc understanding systems that provide the right to
an explanation where necessary [13]. They must be optimized not only for accuracy but also for other criteria as fairness
or unbiasedness, privacy, reliability, robustness, causality and/or trust, among others. Most of these criteria often cannot be
completely quantiﬁed, but if the system is interpretable , i.e. if it can explain its reasoning, it can be veriﬁed whether that
reasoning is sound with respect to these auxiliary criteria.
There is little consensus on the deﬁnition of interpretability, explainability and some of the auxiliary criteria. In the ML
context, the interpretability is deﬁned as the ability to explain or to present in understandable terms to a human [14]. In recent
years a broader concept known as explainability has emerged in what has been denoted as eXplanaible Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(XAI) . It encompasses ML/AI systems for opening black box models, for improving the understanding of what the models
have learned and/or for explaining individual predictions [11].
The design of this kind of systems includes different aspects to be taken into account:
Designers and developers must have the chance of analyzing the generated model and discerning its meaning. i.e. to
understand the structure of the system.
End-users must use the system as a decision support, so that the model must explain the phenomena under study.
Interpretability is probably the traditional buzz-word, in the context of ML, and explainability in the broader context of AI
(XAI). Both with equivalent meaning and behind the desideratum for accomplishing all the former issues. However, different
sub-concepts can be distinguished associated with terms “interpretability” and “explainability”. Among others, we should refer
to “understandability”, ‘intelligibility” or “comprehensibility” [12], [15].
Understandability andintelligibility can be viewed as synonyms that are associated to a functional understanding of the
model in ML. In other words, it refers to grasp how the model works [16], without trying to elucidate its inner procedure
or to shed light on its internal representation [17]. For FRBSs, intelligibility is primarily associated with inference.
Comprehensibility was deﬁned as the learning algorithm ability for encoding its model in such a way that it may be
inspected and understood by humans [15], [18]. This deﬁnition narrows the focus to the model itself. It is based on the
comprehensibility postulate argued by Michalski [19]: “The results of computer induction should be symbolic descriptions
of given entities, semantically and structurally similar to those a human expert might produce observing the same entities.
Components of these descriptions should be comprehensible as single ‘chunks’ of information, directly interpretable in
natural language, and should relate quantitative and qualitative concepts in an integrated fashion” . In the FRBS context,
the comprehensibility is related with the fuzzy rules, and in general with the KB.
The ﬁnal objective related to explainability is boosting the transparency in the solutions proposed for data science applications,
and therefore the ability to trust the system output [20].
One straightforward way for combining two of the most important concepts in ML (accuracy and interpretability/explainability)
in a natural way, to obtaining XAI models, is by means of the synergy between FRBSs and EAs. Speciﬁcally, the intrinsic
understandability, comprehensibility, and explainability associated with FRBSs, and the potential of EAs as the optimization
technique for improving FRBSs, leads to what is known as evolutionary fuzzy systems (EFSs) [21].
In short, an EFS is a methodology that utilizes EAs for a “ﬁne-setting” of the components of the FRBS, with the aim of
achieving a more reliable solution in terms of any desired objective function, based on accuracy, interpretability, or a combination
of both. The EA may be applied a priori during the building stage of the FRBS, leading to a “learning” stage, or rather to
be considered a posteriori for a ﬁner adjustment of the FRBS, which is known as a “tuning” stage. Different perspectives for
the application of both approaches may be found in the specialized literature. To set up the fuzzy sets, the parameterization
of the fuzzy membership functions, and the selection of the fuzzy rules, among others, should be noted. In addition, a very

==== Page 3 ====
3
interesting extension uses multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) [22], which can consider several design criteria
to be optimized concurrently, thus composing the so-called multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy systems (MOEFSs) [23].
In this contribution, a better insight on the topic of EFS is provided by posing the 4 W questions . The ﬁrst one has been
addressed throughout this section, namely Why are EFSs so signiﬁcant in data science tasks? The main reason has been
discussed above: they have a great potential for obtaining a good trade-off between accurate and explainable models, which is
extremely important in most of the current social and engineering applications.
The remaining 3 W questions are analyzed in depth to set the past, present and future scenarios. Whereas the historical
review (past and present) is intended to set the current context of EFSs, the main novelty in this position paper is related to
future insights. Speciﬁcally, special attention is paid to analyze the capabilities of EFSs, in particular those areas that could
beneﬁt the most from their application. Additionally, some novel scenarios, namely data science, big data and the development
of explainable models, that EFS researchers should focus on for the near future are described. Finally, the paper is concluded
by a thorough discussion on the need for XAI models in ML, which is intended to go beyond the old-fashioned dialectical
exercise on the interpretability-accuracy trade-off, very extended in FRBSs.
To carry out these tasks, the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, Section II considers When did EFSs
begin? , introducing the pioneer works on the topic and the current taxonomy for EFSs. Section III analyzes What should EFSs
be used for? , presenting the good capabilities of EFSs, namely robustness and explainability, for solving current problems
and applications. Section IV is devoted to establishing Where are EFSs going to? , considering some challenges for future
work, and focusing in particular on the big data scenario due to its signiﬁcance for current research. To summarize all thoughts
considered in this position paper, Section V presents an overview of the need for XAI. Finally, Section VI points out some
concluding remarks.
II. W HEN DIDEVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS BEGIN ? PAST AND PRESENT
In order to understand the present and to be able to forecast the future of a speciﬁc topic, the history and state of the art must
be acknowledged. In this regard, this section highlights the main progresses made in EFSs from their proposal to present. To
this aim, the initial milestones on the topic and some well-known reviews are ﬁrst introduced (Section II-A). Then, a complete
taxonomy is presented to frame the EFS techniques in their different categories (Section II-B).
A. EFSs: Pioneering approaches
The pioneering work by Lofti A. Zadeh on fuzzy sets supposed a signiﬁcant contribution in many research areas of control
and modeling [5]. Speciﬁcally, the application of fuzzy set theory as a knowledge representation structure based on fuzzy rules
began in the mid-1970s with the work of Mamdani [7]. Practically at the same time, the basis and theoretical studies on EAs
were established, in particular regarding one of its branches, that of GAs [9]. Despite the early appearance of both approaches,
only in the early 1990s the hybridization between these two computational intelligence techniques was introduced.
Throughout this section, four of the pioneering works in the ﬁeld are discussed in no particular order. They adopted both
tuning and learning methodologies of the components of the FRBS KB by means of GAs.
Karr was the ﬁrst to investigate the genetic tuning of the DB for fuzzy controllers [24]. In his study, the complete deﬁnition
of the DB was intended to be optimized, i.e. the best values of the parameters that deﬁne the fuzzy partitions were automatically
determined. This was obtained thanks to the ease of encoding information on the GA chromosome. In particular, the evolution
of the input and output fuzzy sets was jointly considered.
One of the ﬁrst models of evolutionary learning of a linguistic RB was proposed by Valenzuela-Rendon in [25]. This proposal
used a learning scheme where each solution (chromosome) represented a single rule over the entire RB. The ﬁrst version of
the methodology used a reward distribution scheme. Later, the original proposal was extended to allow reinforcement learning.
A different scheme for learning the RB was deﬁned by Thrift in [26]. The author used a decision matrix to represent the
RB, in that particular case study only with two dimensions. This matrix collected the linguistic labels of the output variable
according to the corresponding input fuzzy labels. It considered an integer coding scheme, using “0” to represent a null value,
thus allowing for the automatic learning of the optimal number of rules. The GA encoded different fuzzy rules, i.e. the whole
RB deﬁnition, on a single chromosome.
Pham and Karaboga proposed a similar approach but using a fuzzy relation Rinstead of the classical crisp relation (decision
table) [27]. The GA was used to modify the fuzzy relational matrix of a single-input / single-output fuzzy model. The
chromosome was obtained by concatenating the M Nelements of R, where MandNwere the number of linguistic terms
associated with the input and output variables, respectively. The main difference with the work in [26] is that the elements of
Rwere real numbers in [0,1] instead of integer values.
All these contributions were considered as milestones for the work on EFSs. From that point on, the interest of researchers
on the topic has signiﬁcantly increased. As a short description of developments throughout the history of EFSs, four surveys
are considered. Ten years after the publication of the ﬁrst approaches, the main achievements in the ﬁeld were compiled in the
2001 monograph by Cord ´on, Herrera, Hoffmann, and Magdalena [21]. After a period of another ten years, Cord ´on proposed
a historical review focusing on the interpretability viewpoint in 2011 [28]. In 2013, Fazzolari, Alcal ´a, Nojima, Ishibuchi, and

==== Page 4 ====
4
Herrera published an overview focused on the MOEFSs topic, which was intended to summarize the main contributions in
this particular ﬁeld [23]. Finally, in 2015 Fern ´andez, L ´opez, del Jesus, and Herrera revisited the topic of EFSs by presenting
a complete taxonomy of the existing proposals, and also posing some new trends and challenges to suggest some potential
research directions [29].
B. EFSs: Current taxonomy
As previously explained at the beginning of this paper, any EFS is developed on top of an FRBS. In this way, the components
of the FRBS are learned or optimized using an evolutionary process commonly taken from available data, as illustrated in
Figure 1. The ﬁnal goal is being able to contextualize the behavior of these systems in a given scenario.
Fuzzyfication(input interface)
InferenceSystem
Defuzzification(output	interface)NumericalDataNumericalDataFuzzySetFuzzySet
KNOWLEDGE BASE
R1: IF Xp1isA11and Xp2isA12thenY isB1
Data Base
Rule Base
EA BasedLearningProcess
Fig. 1. How EFS are built on top of an FRBS. Inspired from [29].
The main reason for using EAs as a tool for the design of FRBSs is related to the possibility of addressing the optimization
of their components as a search problem. Rule sets, membership functions, and many other features of an FRBS can be easily
encoded inside a chromosome. The optimization procedure can be viewed from a double perspective: learning and/or tuning.
In addition, the classical trade-off between accuracy and interpretability must be taken into account [30], [31]. For this task, the
use of an MOEA is probably the option that is best suited. Finally, different ways of representing fuzzy sets may be considered
as another aspect to be embedded in the optimization approach.
Taking all these aspects into account, in [29] authors proposed a complete taxonomy of EFSs, which is illustrated in Figure 2.
Speciﬁcally, three large groups were highlighted depending on several aspects, such as how the FRBSs’ elements are optimized,
the trade-off among the different learning criteria, and the use of new fuzzy set representations.
In what follows, a brief description of the EFS approaches enumerated in the taxonomy is provided. First, the learning and
tuning of FRBSs are introduced. Next, the use of multi-objective optimization in this framework is presented. Finally, several
comments are given on the parameterized construction for new fuzzy representations.
1) Evolutionary learning and tuning of FRBSs’ components: When using an FRBS for modeling a given problem, researchers
and practitioners must decide whether a simple system is enough for the existing requirements, or if a more complex
computational solution is required. In such a case, the use of an EFS is mandatory in order to achieve a robust and accurate
model.
There are two main alternatives for developing EFSs: (a) using EAs in the learning procedure of FRBSs and (b) using EAs
for tuning the elements of FRBSs. Speciﬁcally, learning can be carried out either on the KB components or in conjunction
with the inference engine parameters. The post-processing tuning is devoted to reﬁning a preliminary deﬁnition of the FRBSs.
In the following, a short description of the different approaches for both alternatives is provided.
a.Evolutionary learning . The specialized literature distinguishes between two main cases, depending on whether the learning
is applied just to the KB or to the inference engine parameters as well.
Evolutionary KB learning . Four different learning options have been proposed to obtain the KB:

==== Page 5 ====
5
EvolutionaryFuzzySystemsObjectivesTradeoff(viaMOEFS)Performance vs. InterpretabilityPerformance vs. Performance (control problems)New representationsInteval-ValuedFuzzySetsType-2 FuzzySetsEvolutionaryLearning/ Tuningof FRBS Components(viasingle-objetive orMOEFS)EvolutionaryKB LearningEvolutionarylearningof KB componentsand inferenceengineparameters
EvolutionaryadaptiveinferencesystemEvolutionarytuningof KB parametersEvolutionaryadaptiveinferenceengine
EvolutionaryadaptivedefuzzificationmethodsEvolutionaryRule Selection(a priori rule extraction)EvolutionaryDB Learning
EmbeddedevolutionaryDB learningEvolutionaryrule learning(a priori DB)
A priori evolutionaryDB learningSimultaneousevolutionarylearningof KB components
Evolutionarylearningof linguisticmodelsEvolutionarylearningof approximative/TSK-rulesEvolutionaryTuning
Fig. 2. Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems Taxonomy. First presented in Fern ´andez et al. [29].
i.Evolutionary rule selection. The goal is to remove useless rules in the ﬁnal RB, i.e. those that may degrade the
FRBS accuracy. Thus, a compact and accurate subset of fuzzy rules is intended to be the output for these methods.
ii.Simultaneous evolutionary learning of KB components. As its name suggests, several FRBS elements may be
obtained at once. The hitch in this case is that a larger search space is to be considered, implying a slower and
harder learning process.
iii.Evolutionary rule learning. This is by far the preferred approach in the specialized literature. Starting from a
predeﬁned DB (in most cases, composed of equally distributed fuzzy partitions), the fuzzy rules of the RB are
generated by means of the evolutionary process.
iv.Evolutionary DB learning. In this case, several parameters of the DB are considered. This includes the granularity
degree, the shape of the membership functions, and the scaling functions, among other DB components. This DB
learning can be carried out either after the RB is obtained or at the same time.
Evolutionary learning of KB components and inference engine parameters.
This comprises a special case, in which both the adaptive inference engine and the KB components are optimized.
The main idea is to achieve the best synergy between the former elements, including both in a simultaneous learning
process.
b.Evolutionary tuning . Tuning involves an a-posteriori optimization of the DB or the inference engine parameters. The RB
is initially obtained by using a predeﬁned DB and inference engine. Two different approaches have been proposed:
i.Evolutionary tuning of KB parameters. The parameters of the fuzzy sets are tuned in the evolutionary process.
ii.Evolutionary adaptive inference engine . It is divided into two groups depending on whether it is applied to the
inference system or the defuzziﬁcation method. In the former case, the ﬁnal objective is to obtain a higher cooperation
among fuzzy rules by acting on the inference engine. The linguistic rule interpretability is maintained as the DB
remains homogeneous. In the latter case, if a weighted average operator is used in the defuzziﬁer, its parameters can
be optimized by means of EAs.
2) Objectives trade-off: Approaches for jointly optimizing several objectives: As seen in Section I, there is a growing interest
in developing FRBSs that are both accurate and interpretable [30], [31]. However, this goal is not easy to achieve, as these
criteria are usually in conﬂict. A smart solution is to carry out the learning procedure by means of MOEAs [22]. MOEAs
generate a set of FRBSs with different trade-offs between the different learning objectives being considered in the optimization
process. This solution is known as MOEFS [23], which can consider any metric of performance to carry out the optimization
of the FRBSs, namely the cost, or the simplicity or comprehensibility, among others.
A short description of these techniques based on the multi-objective nature of the problem is given in what follows. In case
of using MOEFSs for learning or tuning FRBS components, the reader should refer to those models introduced in the previous
section.

==== Page 6 ====
6
Performance vs. Interpretability . Fuzzy systems in general, and fuzzy linguistic models in particular, are well suited
to understanding the nature of the problem that they represent. For this reason, it is quite important to consider different
interpretability measures as an estimation of the FRBS potential.
An FRBS is not interpretable per se . Instead, there are many different issues which must be taken into account in order
to obtain a human-interpretable structure. Among others, the rule base compactness or the semantic comprehensibility of
the fuzzy partitions should be considered. Hence, the ML method used to learn the fuzzy model, classiﬁer, or decision
support systems must be properly designed to obtain the desired trade-off for the problem at hand.
Speciﬁcally, two different options can be taken into account. On the one hand, those which are based on the simplicity
could be considered, i.e. the dimensionality, of the system (the simpler, the better). On the other hand, semantic-based
metrics could be considered, i.e. the comprehensibility of the derived system.
Performance vs. Performance . When addressing a control system problem, there are more constraints that must be taken
into account than there are for standard data mining tasks. Speciﬁcally, there is a need to obtain an efﬁcient controller,
with proper stability and, if possible, to have a compact and interpretable structure. Therefore, the use of MOEAs for
designing fuzzy controllers has become a very successful approach.
In this case, both the structure of the controller and its parameters must be obtained. This implies a direct adaptation
for all methods previously introduced for general EFSs. Speciﬁcally, a post-processing tuning step is the most common
approach due to its simplicity and reduced search space.
3) New representations: fuzzy sets extensions: In several applications, where the degree of uncertainty is very high, traditional
fuzzy sets are not able to provide an appropriate representation of the hidden knowledge. To cope with this aspect, some
extensions such as type-2 fuzzy sets and interval-valued fuzzy sets are used instead.
Being special cases of fuzzy set representations, there is no established way of obtaining their parameter values and/or their
structure. For this reason, EAs are a proper tool for the design strategy and/or for optimizing these fuzzy models. For example,
the parameters of type-2 fuzzy sets may be optimized from a given standard fuzzy set, or by considering the direct generation
from data. Recent approaches are aimed at tuning rules and conditions using this kind of fuzzy representation [32], [33].
III. W HAT EVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS SHOULD BEUSED FOR?
In the introduction of this manuscript, several interesting properties of fuzzy systems were highlighted. In short, they provide
two interesting features making them very useful for knowledge representation tasks:
1) On the one hand, the inherent interpretability of the system. This refers to two different aspects. First, the intrinsic
comprehensibility associated with the use of a simple description mechanism in the form of fuzzy linguistic rules, very
close to natural language. And second, the comprehensibility and understandability of the rule-based system and the
inference procedure.
2) On the other hand, the robustness of adapting to and learning from complex problems, i.e. to model scenarios which are
difﬁcult to represent with other types of paradigms. In particular, it is a very interesting tool to apply when users must
deal with the lack of data or uncertainty in the deﬁnition of the input data.
In regards to the aspects associated with the interpretability of FRBSs, ﬁrst the “cointension” term must be highlighted,
deﬁned between fuzzy sets and regular concepts [34]. In particular, Lofti A. Zadeh emphasized that this semantic cointension
was the key for understanding the success of the application of fuzzy models, namely the importance of the human component
in the data science process [15]. This is what can be referred to as human-centric modeling and decision making, which
implies the need to provide descriptive models and decision support systems able to comprehend the underlying human mental
processes in order to manage the information in a more human-oriented style [35]. Human-centric models and descriptive
support systems allow the designer to use the comprehensibility of the designed solutions to both understand the underlying
human reasoning processes and uncover knowledge about the system at hand, as well as to enhance the problem solving [15].
Although the use of linguistic labels provides a solid basis for achieving both facets, many model induction techniques that
use fuzzy systems can impose certain interpretability constraints (linguistic structure, rule length, and rule set size, among
others) in the search for greater accuracy. It is at this point where EFS algorithms can be used to ﬁnd a good trade-off between
interpretability and accuracy [30], [31].
As previously discussed in detail in Section II-B, this can be done in one out of two phases. On the one hand, in the
construction of the model itself, i.e. during the learning process. On the other hand, a posteriori , i.e. once the model has been
obtained, a component tuning can be carried out. In both cases, the properties associated with EAs in regards to the coding of
different types of information provide a clear beneﬁt: ﬂexibility [29]. In fact, they permit optimizing from simple parameters
of fuzzy systems to complete sets of rules. The practitioner will therefore be able to directly pair the necessary interpretability
constraints while generating a model with a high predictive power [30], [31].
Analyzing these properties in detail, the key ability of EFS is to obtain an ML system incorporating the fundamental property
of what was deﬁned as XAI [12]. It is not only about understanding the composition of the model, but also about the fact that
the system is able to explain to the user the process it followed to make the output decision. Therefore, the synergy between
fuzzy systems and the ability of EAs to learn them makes EFSs a very appealing tool for a large number of problems. As an

==== Page 7 ====
7
example of these developments, one may refer to the EFS design that allows the fusion mechanism for a classiﬁer ensemble
to be interpreted by the human designer thanks to a hierarchical fuzzy rule-based structure [36].
Focusing on the robustness properties associated with EFSs, the ﬁrst aspect to be taken into account is their effectiveness in
extracting information that resides in small datasets with low density in the domain, the so-called “lack of data” problem [37].
The reason is simple: by deﬁning the universe of discourse of the fuzzy variables along the overall domain of the attributes that
represent the problem, an integral coverage of the input space is allowed. Furthermore, when there is some overlap between
the fuzzy sets, a smoother transition among the modeled information granules is expected to be obtained.
In addition to the lack of data, the beneﬁts of EFSs in handling imprecise and uncertain data is also of high priority. In these
cases, the ﬂexibility of the deﬁnition of fuzzy partitions as well as the membership functions must be taken into account. In
this sense, it is natural to use different extensions to the traditional type-1 fuzzy sets to add an extra level of freedom in the
representation. However, deﬁning the exact values according to the problem may not be a trivial task performed by a human
operator. Thus, it is of great interest to be able to rely on the use of EAs to learn or adjust the components of the fuzzy DB.
It should be stressed that social network analysis or social mining are application areas that may beneﬁt the most from EFSs
[38]. It has become a hot topic in the last few years due to the increase of social media interactions. Corporations and academia
are very interested in conceptualizing, modeling, analyzing, explaining, and predicting these relationships. There is a natural
connection between graph theory, on which social network analysis is based, and fuzzy set theory. This allows providing an
easier and more robust way to express relationships among nodes in these networks. Furthermore, some research has already
discussed the theoretical and conceptual models for social data based on fuzzy sets [39], [40].
Another area in which the inherent uncertainty of the data imposes a difﬁcult restriction, and also requires interpretable
models in order to be truly useful to the end-users, is ﬁnance. In this environment, the comprehension of how inputs and
outputs are related to each other is crucial in order to be able to make operative and strategic decisions. Therefore, EFSs have
been successfully applied to many ﬁnancial domains [41].
Decisions in medical applications are also considered to be critical. Therefore, any action taken by experts must be taken
conﬁdently. This implies that any decision support system used in this context must be trustworthy and transparent. In other
words, it must explain to both the doctor and the patient, the reasons behind a particular diagnosis. In this sense, an EFS based
on fuzzy linguistic rules might be the proper choice [42].
Finally, current solutions focused on intrusion detection systems are high priority. The reason for this is clear, namely the
vast use of information systems and the need of establishing security policies and rules that allow an undesired system access
to be discriminated. In particular, EFS-based approaches are very interesting for several reasons. First of all, this type of
problem has a common structure. Indeed, they are described by numeric data and therefore crisp thresholds can lead to low
detection accuracy. Additionally, the boundary between legit and abnormal behavior is inherently fuzzy. In other words, small
changes in an intrusion behavior may not be recognized, whereas a small deviation in a normal proﬁle can generate a false
alarm. In accordance with the former, several relevant EFS approaches based on fuzzy linguistic variables may be found in
the specialized literature [43].
IV. W HERE ARE EVOLUTIONARY FUZZY SYSTEMS GOING ? FUTURE PROSPECTS
From Section II, the reader might acknowledge that EFS-based methods have come a long way since the pioneering proposal
of the ﬁrst EFS-based methods more than 25 years ago. Extensive research has been carried out in this ﬁeld, mainly due to
the versatility associated with the learning and tuning of the different components of the FRBS.
Now, researchers and practitioners must look ahead to discern what the future objectives and challenges in the EFS ﬁeld
could be. The open directions for novel research are particularly associated with two basic pillars: (1) efforts focused on the
novel optimization of the internal components of the FRBS (Section IV-A); and (2) analysis of the application of EFSs to
emerging work scenarios in data science (Section IV-B). Finally, the particular characteristics of this big data scenario imply
paying special attention to the design and development of EFSs (Section IV-C).
A. Optimization of novel FRBS’ components
There is a wide variety of FRBS elements whose values can be optimized using an EFS. Enumerating some possibilities,
we should stress the choice of relevant inputs, scaling factors, membership functions, shape functions, granularity, fuzzy rules,
inference parameters, number of rules, and so on. In addition, as previously described the power of EAs permits the joint
learning of several of these components so as to obtain a much more robust FRBS.
However, it must be highlighted once again that for current applications it is not useful to generate models with excessively
complex components. In other words, special attention must be paid to maintain the comprehensibility of the models. For this
reason, the evolution of the multiple components of an FRBS must always be carried out considering the semantic properties
and simplicity of the obtained system.

==== Page 8 ====
8
B. Emerging data science scenarios for EFS
Data science is a quite recent ﬁeld of study, and it is still rapidly expanding. New problems and practical applications
arise and require the development of robust techniques to address new complex paradigms. Speciﬁcally, novel problems are
usually characterized by: i) uncertainty, the available information is often imprecise, uncertain, noisy, or there might be an
acute lack of information; the objective of the modeling or decision problem is ambiguous and the problem structure might be
loosely speciﬁed; and the problem environment may be not stationary but changing; ii) the impressively increasing problem
dimensions, requiring prohibitive computational times to achieve problem tractability; and iii) the need to provide descriptive
models and decision support systems able to comprehend the underlying human mental processes to manage the information
in a more human-oriented style (human-centric modeling and decision making) [44]. EFSs have excelled in many different
scenarios and, in accordance with this general good behavior, a bright future for their use in most of the incoming data science
areas can be predicted.
A ﬁrst case-study is related to non-standard classiﬁcation problems, such as those based on multi-label and multi-instance
learning. In the former case, the model must classify a query instance in a set of non-exclusive categories [45]. In the latter,
incomplete information about the classes or instances implies a handicap during the categorization [46]. Thus, instances are
coupled into a single “bag”, being unaware of which is the one that provides the true label. Finally, both problems can be
combined adding a higher degree of complexity to the design of future solutions. Taking into account this type of relationship
between labels and/or instances, the nature of both problems is well suited for the use of fuzzy sets and systems, and thus for
EFSs. However, at present just a few attempts have been made to solve this task using these tools [47].
The novel topic related to ordinal and monotonic classiﬁcation [48] should be noted. This case study comprises those
problems where both the input attributes and/or the class have a monotonicity constraint. The ﬁrst study that extracts fuzzy
rules satisfying these constraints without the need of a preprocessing stage can be found in [49], where authors incorporate
several mechanisms based on monotonicity with EFS algorithms.
Supervised descriptive rule discovery [50], and in particular subgroup discovery [51], [52], is also another interesting area of
study. The goal is to locate subgroups which are statistically “most interesting” for the user. The obtained model must fulﬁll some
properties such as simplicity (understandable structure with few variables), and both a high signiﬁcance and support. Another
particular case of this scenario is the so-called Emerging Pattern Extraction [53], in which frequency changes signiﬁcantly
from one dataset to another. In this context, the use of MOEFSs has shown that obtained rules allow the descriptions of the
emerging phenomena to be simpler than those in the state of the art [54].
A topic that has gained much attention in the research community of data science is multi-view learning [55], where examples
are described by multiple distinct feature sets. This is related to the way several current-day problems are deﬁned, such as
multimedia-content, web page classiﬁcation, and bioinformatics. The approaches which address multi-view learning via data
integration are quite diverse.
Another interesting area of study is semi-supervised learning. It is based on problems in which only a subset of the instances
are labeled and the algorithm can modify the output of the training data [56]. Considered as an extension to unsupervised
learning, clustering techniques have received much attention. In this context, the use of an FRBS can represent a sort of
linguistic description of the dissimilarity relation among patterns [57], thus helping the recognition of the clusters with fewer
data.
Finally, there are novel domains of application arising everyday that share problems similar to the ones already solved in
other domains. Therefore, it can be of interest to exploit previously acquired knowledge to manage new tasks in a quick and
effective way. This is the premise of the area of research known as transfer learning [58]. Taking advantage of fuzzy learning
methods for this task is evident, regarding the uncertainty that is found in these dynamic environments [59]. They also allow
leveraging knowledge from some referring scenes when there is little data available [60].
These are some of the new data science scenarios without the aim of being very exhaustive. The previous analysis illustrates
that there are not enough scientiﬁc studies using EFSs for such novel and signiﬁcant topics. Therefore, this must be regarded
as a “call-to-action” for current researchers in the area of EFSs to open the way in such promising lines of study, from both
the theoretical and practical points of view.
C. EFSs in big data: a signiﬁcant topic for the near future
One of the hottest topics for current research is related to data science and big data problems [4]. An in-depth analysis of
the current state of this framework was carried out in both [61] and [62], where authors reported the good properties of fuzzy
systems when dealing with such types of applications. However, focusing on the case of EFSs for big data, so far few studies
have been developed in this area of research [63]–[65].
The main reason for the lack of proposals in the specialized literature is the difﬁculty in reaching solutions that are scalable
within the EFS paradigm. Indeed, this constraint is associated with the computation of an accuracy-based ﬁtness function from
data at the core of the evolutionary procedure. In other words, it is not straightforward to develop methodologies that allow
the whole dataset to be handled in a reasonable time.

==== Page 9 ====
9
For this reason, the development of learning and tuning methods must be redirected within a distributed environment. To
this end, MapReduce has established as a de-facto solution to simplify the implementation of these techniques [66].
It is basically an execution environment which lays over a distributed and fault-tolerant ﬁle system, HDFS being the most
common option. By means of two simple functions, Map and Reduce, any implementation can be automatically parallelized
in a transparent way for the programmer. The ﬁrst function allows operating on independent “chunks” of data, by applying
the same procedure. The second merges the outputs of the Map functions to produce a single ﬁnal output.
According to the new MapReduce paradigm of distributed programming, any ML solution can be categorized into two main
types [67]:
1) Local approaches (also known as approximate models) that work directly on the distributed chunks of data by creating
partial models that are then aggregated.
2) Global approaches (also known as exact models) that iterate over all examples to generate the model or build the system
iteratively by optimal merging.
By analyzing the properties of each of these types of methodologies some very interesting insights could be achieved.
Local approaches are a priori easier to develop than the original algorithm would be embedded in the different Map tasks.
However, it would imply a greater effort in the merging phase of the independent sub-models (Reduce function). Another
advantage is an expected efﬁciency increase when augmenting the number of partitions. The main hitch, in this case, would
be to work with a smaller number of data in each of the sub-processes. Fortunately, the good behavior of FRBSs and EFSs
with respect to such an eventuality has been previously highlighted [62] (see Section III).
Global approaches, on the other hand, have as their main virtue the learning of more robust models. This is a theoretical
issue as they comprise the analysis of the complete set of data. However, this is precisely their major disadvantage. Speciﬁcally,
more effort must be devoted to design the methodology to meet the conditions of correctness. In addition to the former, the
efﬁciency can also be reduced as the process must be iterated several times.
A very interesting option in this case is to take advantage of the features of novel environments such as Spark [68]. It
is a distributed computing platform that provides a memory-intensive scheme, being very suitable for ML algorithms [67].
Speciﬁcally, it supports very versatile data structures, together with a wide range of operations for transforming them, such as
ﬁltering, grouping, or set operations, among others.
When referring to big data constraints for the development of novel ML approaches, the efforts are mainly focused on
ﬁnding scalable solutions considering only one-side of the Volume , namely the “Big Instance Size”. However, there is another
signiﬁcant issue in this regard, which is known as the “Big Dimensionality” explosion [69]. There are diverse ways to face
this problem, including smart feature selection [70], fuzzy ensemble models based on bagging for vertically partitioning the
training set [71], [72], and the use of fuzzy decision trees that internally consider a feature ranking mechanism [73].
As it has been discussed throughout this section, the task of addressing big data problems with EFSs is still far from
being fully covered. Many state-of-the-art learning and tuning approaches need to be redesigned and translated into the new
MapReduce paradigm. The objective is to take advantage of the power and quality that these algorithms have already shown,
but using the new applications and current-day data sets. Furthermore, researchers must be aware of this circumstance to be
more ambitious and develop new robust methodologies by taking into account the new functionalities available in the current
programming environments. As a ﬁnal remark, the difﬁculties associated with this framework imply the development of much
more ingenious and effective ideas to achieve greater milestones in this area of research.
V. R EMARKS ON THE NEED FOR INTERPRETABLE AND EXPLAINABLE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Throughout this paper, it has been stressed that there are two main criteria any practitioner must consider when determining
what kind of ML techniques should be used to address a speciﬁc regression, classiﬁcation, or decision-making problem: accuracy
and interpretability/explainability. Of course, the ideal situation would be to obtain jointly high degrees of both but, since they
are in conﬂict, this is a complex task. Figure 3 shows this fact with a trade-off for some well-known ML techniques and the
current challenge to increase the explainability without reducing accuracy. For the most interpretable models the challenge is
to increase both axes.
In practice, one of the two properties usually prevails over the other (use of black-box vs. white- or gray-box mod-
els/classiﬁers). Driven by the need for accuracy, we are witnessing an emerging trend to embrace “black-box” solutions,
in particular those based on neural networks and mainly Deep Learning (DL) [75], [76]. In short, these systems are based
on a number of layers of fully-connected neurons. The ﬁrst layers are devoted to extracting simpler attributes from the data,
which are then combined in the subsequent layers to form more complex and thus more representative attributes. In spite of
the impressive capacity of these black-box solutions to obtain accurate models, this virtue is often associated with a higher
system complexity. Designers are often unable to understand how the systems work, and also to decipher why they produce a
certain output. In fact, the effectiveness of the existing ML methods could be limited by the machines’ inability to explain its
thoughts and actions to human users in some application ﬁelds, and thus may lead to unsafe and incorrect decisions1.
1https://www.statnews.com/2018/07/25/ibm-watson-recommended-unsafe-incorrect-treatments/

==== Page 10 ====
10
Neural
Nets
Bayesian
Belief
ModelsRandom
Forest
(Fuzzy) Rule Based
SystemsAOGsDeep
Learning
SVMsGraphical
Models
Decision
TreesStatistical
ModelsEnsemble
Methods
Markov
Models
Accuracy
ExplainabilityChallengeDesired
V alueCurrent
V alue
Fig. 3. Accuracy vs. Explainability: Venn diagram for several ML models (partially inspired from [74]).
Interpreting and explaining deep networks is a young and emerging ﬁeld of research. In [17] can be found a study of
techniques for interpreting complex machine learning models, with focus on DL. Most of the proposals have focused on
post-hoc interpretability but greater efforts are required in the near future to understand the ML models.
In this scenario, rule-based systems [77] allow to audit the extracted knowledge with a double objective. On the one hand,
obtaining a clear explanation of the cognition process carried out by the system. On the other hand, being able to trust in the
description of the rules and their relationship with the problem that is aimed to be solved. In particular, EFSs combine the
ability to represent knowledge in natural way for human understanding (with fuzzy rules), the strength of fuzzy reasoning and
the ability of EAs for search in complex and ill-deﬁned problems. However, it must be emphasized that FRBSs must remain
simple and understandable, since they are not interpretable per se [78]. It is important to take account of different issues in
order to obtain FRBSs that represent knowledge easily understood by humans. Among others, the rule base compactness or the
semantic comprehensibility of the fuzzy partitions must be stressed. Moreover, the EFSs must be properly designed to obtain
the desired trade-off between accuracy and explainability for the problem at hand. When in the EFS design more attention is
paid to the accuracy than to explainability, the skills of the fuzzy system obtained are hardly comparable with other preferable
and more complex solutions such as DL.
DL is a powerful paradigm that can effectively capture relevant features, in particular for those problems from which a
higher level of abstraction is needed to describe the hidden knowledge [76]. In any way, DL solutions must not be considered
to be rivals for FRBSs and EFSs, but rather as complementary approaches, each one with their strengths and drawbacks. A
promising step forward the achievement of this objective could be to make use of the good interpretability properties of EFSs
in conjunction with DL.
There are some interesting examples of the positive synergy between both paradigms. First, a fuzzy classiﬁer based on
stacking is proposed in [79]. It embeds a zero-order TSK FRBS with a limited number of linguistic labels within a neuron-
layered representation. Thus, each layer becomes a single model within the “ensemble”. After the learning stage using a DL
procedure, rules can be simply extracted from each “neuron” to keep the original interpretability. A different approach is
proposed in [80]. It comprises a hierarchical system composed of a fuzzy rule layer, to manage the ambiguity of the data, and
a DL layer, to reduce the noise and to create higher order variables for a more accurate representation. Then, both parts are
fused leading to a more robust classiﬁcation. Finally, an interpretable structure for DL networks is also proposed in [81]. To
achieve the required explainability, zero-order TSK fuzzy linguistic rules are encoded and learned in the ﬁnal layer of the net
to perform the ﬁnal classiﬁcation, just after the feature extraction.
In summary, EFSs are a very signiﬁcant tool in many ﬁelds of application where the explainability of the decision must be
taken into account. The reader should refer to areas such as medical diagnosis, ﬁnancial problems, or security systems,
among others. It is straightforward to acknowledge that, in these scenarios, the same importance must be given to the
accuracy/conﬁdence of the output and the explainability of the decision made. In other words, ML models based on EFSs are
a desirable choice when the output is intended to be trusted by the human user.
VI. C ONCLUDING REMARKS
The world of data science has changed the way applications are approached. At present, the core of the model not only aims
to achieve the highest possible accuracy but also to make it explainable for researchers and practitioners. In this sense, ML
methods based on EFSs preserve the original essence of comprehensibility exposed by Zadeh, also boosting their modeling

==== Page 11 ====
11
abilities. It is straightforward to acknowledge that this provides several advantages over other paradigms toward handing XAI
learning models including transparency, understanding and comprehensibility.
Throughout this work, a variety of perspectives for understanding the virtues of EFSs have been identiﬁed. A series of “4 W
questions” ( why, when, what for, and where to ) have been posed. The objective was that the answers provide some insight
into the capabilities that EFSs have shown when being adapted to different research areas, and to promote new developments
in the discipline.
It has allowed us to notice the lack of unanimity in the literature about XAI concepts, their formal deﬁnition, quantitative
measures and relations among them. There are currently numerous coexisting approaches to interpretability / explainability.
For this reason, there is a need for a debate within the AI, ML and fuzzy communities to standardize and to assess these
concepts and the auxiliary properties than let to interpret and explain properly the AI models and outputs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to ennoble Prof. Lofti A. Zadeh’s ﬁgure, both from a personal and a professional viewpoint. They
would like to acknowledge the pioneering development of the fuzzy sets and systems research area and the strong positive
inﬂuence Prof. Zadeh played for its development during more than 50 years. The authors are very proud of having met and
collaborated with Prof. Zadeh in many different activities both at the University of Granada and the European Centre for Soft
Computing. They had the chance to recognize how Lotﬁ was not only an impressive researcher with a visionary mind but, and
even more important, an outstanding human being. He will be missed.
This work have been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology under projects TIN2015-68454-
R, TIN2015-67661-P, and TIN2017-89517-P, including European Regional Development Funds.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Bacon, Meditationes Sacrae . Excusum impensis Humfredi Hooper, 1597.
[2] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects,” Science , vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255–260, 2015.
[3] V . Dhar, “Data science and prediction,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 56, pp. 64–73, 2013.
[4] A. Fern ´andez, S. R ´ıo, V . L ´opez, A. Bawakid, M. J. del Jesus, J. M. Ben ´ıtez, and F. Herrera, “Big data with cloud computing: An insight on the computing
environment, MapReduce and programming framework,” WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 380–409, 2014.
[5] L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy sets,” Information and Control , vol. 8, pp. 338–353, 1965.
[6] H. Ishibuchi, T. Nakashima, and M. Nii, Classiﬁcation and Modeling with Linguistic Information Granules . Springer, 2005.
[7] E. H. Mamdani and S. Assilian, “An experiment in linguistic synthesis with a fuzzy logic controller,” International Journal of Man-Machine Studies ,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 1975.
[8] A. E. Eiben and J. E. Smith, Introduction to Evolutionary Computation . Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[9] J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems . Ann Arbor, MI, USA: University of Michigan Press, 1975.
[10] A. Freitas, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery with Evolutionary Algorithms , ser. Natural Computing Series. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 2002.
[11] W. Samek, T. Wiegand, and K. R. M ¨uller, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence: Understanding, visualizing and interpreting deep learning models,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/1708.08296, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/1708.08296
[12] D. Castelvecchi, “Can we open the black box of AI?” Nature , vol. 538, no. 7623, pp. 20–23, 2016.
[13] S. F. Bryce Goodman, “European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a “right to explanation”,” AI Magazine , vol. 38, no. 3, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08813v3
[14] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim, “Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1702.08608, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08608
[15] M. Gleicher, “A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling,” Big Data , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 75–88, 2016.
[16] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability,” CoRR , vol. abs/1606.03490, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03490
[17] G. Montavon, W. Samek, and K. R. M ¨uller, “Methods for interpreting and understanding deep neural networks,” Digital Signal Processing , vol. 73, pp.
1–15, 2018.
[18] M. W. Craven, Extracting comprehensible models from trained neural networks . Thesis. University of Wisconsin, 1996.
[19] R. S. Michalski, “A theory and methodology of inductive learning,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 20, pp. 111–161, 1983.
[20] M. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ““Why should I trust you?” explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[21] O. Cordon, F. Herrera, F. Hoffmann, and L. Magdalena, Genetic fuzzy systems. Evolutionary tuning and learning of fuzzy knowledge bases . Singapore,
Republic of Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 2001.
[22] C. A. Coello-Coello, G. Lamont, and D. van Veldhuizen, Evolutionary algorithms for solving multi-objective problems , 2nd ed., ser. Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2007.
[23] M. Fazzolari, R. Alcala, Y . Nojima, H. Ishibuchi, and F. Herrera, “A review of the application of multi-objective evolutionary systems: Current status
and further directions,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 45–65, 2013.
[24] C. Karr, “Genetic algorithms for fuzzy controllers,” AI Expert , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 26–33, 1991.
[25] M. Valenzuela-Rendon, “The fuzzy classiﬁer system: A classiﬁer system for continuously varying variables,” in 4th International Conference on Genetic
Algorithms (ICGA’91) , 1991, pp. 346–353.
[26] P. Thrift, “Fuzzy logic synthesis with genetic algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Genetic Algorithms (ICGA’91) , 1991,
pp. 509–513.
[27] D. T. Pham and D. Karaboga, “Optimum design of fuzzy logic controllers using genetic algorithms,” Journal of Systems Engineering , vol. 1, pp. 114–118,
1991.
[28] O. Cordon, “A historical review of evolutionary learning methods for Mamdani-type fuzzy rule-based systems: Designing interpretable genetic fuzzy
systems,” Int. J. Approx. Reason. , vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 894–913, 2011.
[29] A. Fernandez, V . Lopez, M. J. del Jesus, and F. Herrera, “Revisiting evolutionary fuzzy systems: Taxonomy, applications, new trends and challenges,”
Knowlegde Based Systems , vol. 80, pp. 109–121, 2015.
[30] J. M. Alonso, L. Magdalena, and G. Gonz ´alez-Rodr ´ıguez, “Looking for a good fuzzy system interpretability index: An experimental approach,”
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning , vol. 51, pp. 115–134, 2009.

==== Page 12 ====
12
[31] M. J. Gacto, R. Alcala, and F. Herrera, “Interpretability of linguistic fuzzy rule-based systems: An overview of interpretability measures,” Inform.
Sciences , vol. 181, no. 20, pp. 4340–4360, 2011.
[32] J. Sanz, D. Bernardo, F. Herrera, H. Bustince, and H. Hagras, “A compact evolutionary interval-valued fuzzy rule-based classiﬁcation system for the
modeling and prediction of real-world ﬁnancial applications with imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 973–990, 2015.
[33] K. Tai, A.-R. El-Sayed, M. Biglarbegian, C. I. Gonzalez, O. Castillo, and S. Mahmud, “Review of recent type-2 fuzzy controller applications,” Algorithms ,
vol. 9, no. 2, 2016.
[34] L. A. Zadeh, “Is there a need for fuzzy logic?” Inform. Sciences , vol. 178, no. 13, pp. 2751–2779, 2008.
[35] P. Guo and W. Pedrycz, Eds., Human-Centric Decision-Making Models for Social Sciences , ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer, 2014,
vol. 502.
[36] K. Trawinski, O. Cordon, L. Sanchez, and A. Quirin, “A genetic fuzzy linguistic combination method for fuzzy rule-based multi-classiﬁers,” IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 950–965, 2013.
[37] V . Lopez, A. Fernandez, S. Garcia, V . Palade, and F. Herrera, “An insight into classiﬁcation with imbalanced data: Empirical results and current trends
on using data intrinsic characteristics,” Inform. Sciences , vol. 250, no. 20, pp. 113–141, 2013.
[38] G. Bello-Orgaz, J. J. Jung, and D. Camacho, “Social big data: Recent achievements and new challenges,” Information Fusion , vol. 28, pp. 45–59, 2016.
[39] S. Bastani, A. K. Jafarabad, and M. H. F. Zarandi, “Fuzzy models for link prediction in social networks,” Int. J. Intell. Syst. , vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 768–786,
2013.
[40] M. Dragoni and G. Petrucci, “A fuzzy-based strategy for multi-domain sentiment analysis,” Int. J. Approx. Reason. , vol. 93, pp. 59–73, 2018.
[41] M. Antonelli, D. Bernardo, H. Hagras, and F. Marcelloni, “Multiobjective evolutionary optimization of type-2 fuzzy rule-based systems for ﬁnancial
data classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 249–264, 2017.
[42] S. A. Mokeddem, “A fuzzy classiﬁcation model for myocardial infarction risk assessment,” Applied Intelligence , vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 1233–1250, 2018.
[43] S. Elhag, A. Fern ´andez, A. Altalhi, S. Alshomrani, and F. Herrera, “A multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy system to obtain a broad and accurate set of
solutions in intrusion detection systems,” Soft Comp. , vol. in press, 2018.
[44] M. Chen, F. Herrera, and K. Hwang, “Cognitive computing: Architecture, technologies and intelligent applications,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 19 774–
19 783, 2018.
[45] F. Herrera, F. Charte, A. J. Rivera, and M. J. del Jesus, Multilabel Classiﬁcation - Problem Analysis, Metrics and Techniques . Springer, 2016.
[46] F. Herrera, S. Ventura, R. Bello, C. Cornelis, A. Zafra, D. S. Tarrag ´o, and S. Vluymans, Multiple Instance Learning - Foundations and Algorithms .
Springer, 2016.
[47] S. Vluymans, D. Sanchez-Tarrago, Y . Saeys, C. Cornelis, and F. Herrera, “Fuzzy multi-instance classiﬁers,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
1395–1409, 2016.
[48] W. Kotlowski and R. Slowinski, “On nonparametric ordinal classiﬁcation with monotonicity constraints,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 25, no. 11,
pp. 2576–2589, 2013.
[49] J. Alcala-Fdez, R. Alcala, S. Gonzalez, Y . Nojima, and S. Garcia, “Evolutionary fuzzy rule-based methods for monotonic classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1376–1390, 2017.
[50] P. K. Novak, N. Lavrac, and G. I. Webb, “Supervised descriptive rule discovery: A unifying survey of contrast set, emerging pattern and subgroup
mining,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 10, pp. 377–403, 2009.
[51] W. Kl ¨osgen, “Explora: A multipattern and multistrategy discovery assistant,” in Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . AAAI, 1996, pp.
249–271.
[52] F. Herrera, C. J. Carmona, P. Gonz ´alez, and M. J. Del Jesus, “An overview on subgroup discovery: Foundations and applications,” Knowl. Inf. Syst. ,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 495–525, 2011.
[53] G. Dong and J. Li, “Mining border descriptions of emerging patterns from dataset pairs,” Knowl. Inf. Syst. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 178–202, 2005.
[54] A. M. Garcia-Vico, C. J. Carmona, P. Gonzalez, and M. J. del Jesus, “MOEA-EFEP: Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for the extraction of fuzzy
emerging patterns,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2861–2872.
[55] J. Zhao, X. Xie, X. Xu, and S. Sun, “Multi-view learning overview: Recent progress and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion , vol. 38, no. C, pp. 43–54, Nov.
2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2017.02.007
[56] I. Triguero, S. Garc ´ıa, and F. Herrera, “Self-labeled techniques for semi-supervised learning: taxonomy, software and empirical study,” Knowl. Inf. Syst. ,
vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 245–284, 2013.
[57] M. G. C. A. Cimino, B. Lazzerini, and F. Marcelloni, “A novel approach to fuzzy clustering based on a dissimilarity relation extracted from data using
a TS system,” Pattern Recogn. , vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 2077–2091, 2006.
[58] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2010.
[59] J. Shell and S. Coupland, “Fuzzy transfer learning: Methodology and application,” Inform. Sciences , vol. 293, pp. 59–79, 2015.
[60] H. Zuo, G. Zhang, W. Pedrycz, V . Behbood, and J. Lu, “Fuzzy regression transfer learning in Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. ,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1795–1807, 2017.
[61] A. Fernandez, C. J. Carmona, M. J. del Jesus, and F. Herrera, “A view on fuzzy systems for big data: Progress and opportunities,” International Journal
of Computational Intelligence Systems , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 69–80, 2016.
[62] A. Fernandez, A. Altalhi, S. Alshomrani, and F. Herrera, “Why linguistic fuzzy rule based classiﬁcation systems perform well in big data applications?”
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems , vol. 10, pp. 1211–1225, 2017.
[63] I. Rodr ´ıguez-Fdez, M. Mucientes, and A. Bugar ´ın, “S-FRULER: Scalable fuzzy rule learning through evolution for regression,” Knowl.-Based Syst. , vol.
110, pp. 255–266, 2016.
[64] A. Ferranti, F. Marcelloni, A. Segatori, M. Antonelli, and P. Ducange, “A distributed approach to multi-objective evolutionary generation of fuzzy
rule-based classiﬁers from big data,” Inform. Sciences , vol. 415-416, pp. 319–340, 2017.
[65] F. Pulgar-Rubio, A. J. Rivera-Rivas, M. D. P ´erez-Godoy, P. Gonz ´alez, C. J. Carmona, and M. J. del Jesus, “MEFASD-BD: Multi-objective evolutionary
fuzzy algorithm for subgroup discovery in big data environments - a MapReduce solution,” Knowl.-Based Syst. , vol. 117, pp. 70–78, 2017.
[66] K. H. Lee, Y . J. Lee, H. Choi, Y . D. Chung, and B. Moon, “Parallel data processing with MapReduce: A survey,” SIGMOD Record , vol. 40, no. 4, pp.
11–20, 2011.
[67] S. Ram ´ırez-Gallego, A. Fern ´andez, S. Garc ´ıa, M. Chen, and F. Herrera, “Big data: Tutorial and guidelines on information and process fusion for analytics
algorithms with MapReduce.” Information Fusion , vol. 42, pp. 51–61, 2018.
[68] M. Hamstra, H. Karau, M. Zaharia, A. Konwinski, and P. Wendell, Learning Spark: Lightning-Fast Big Data Analytics . O’Reilly Media, Incorporated,
2015.
[69] Y . Zhai, Y . S. Ong, and I. W. Tsang, “The emerging “big dimensionality”,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag. , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 14–26, 2014.
[70] S. Ram ´ırez-Gallego, H. Mouri ˜no-Tal ´ın, D. Mart ´ınez-Rego, V . Bol ´on-Canedo, J. M. Ben ´ıtez, A. Alonso-Betanzos, and F. Herrera, “An information theory-
based feature selection framework for big data under apache spark,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1441–1453,
2018.
[71] P. Bonissone, J. M. Cadenas, M. Carmen Garrido, and R. Andr ´es D´ıaz-Valladares, “A fuzzy random forest,” Int. J. Approx. Reason. , vol. 51, no. 7, pp.
729–747, 2010.
[72] K. Trawiski, O. Cord ´on, and A. Quirin, “On designing fuzzy rule-based multiclassiﬁcation systems by combining FURIA with bagging and feature
selection,” International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowlege-Based Systems , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 589–603, 2011.

==== Page 13 ====
13
[73] A. Segatori, F. Marcelloni, and W. Pedrycz, “On distributed fuzzy decision trees for big data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 174–192,
2018.
[74] D. Gunning, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI),” Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, DARPA/I20, 2017.
[75] Y . Lecun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[76] Z. C. P. L. Q. Zhang, L. T. Yang, “A survey on deep learning for big data,” Information Fusion , vol. 42, pp. 146–157, 2018.
[77] J. F ¨urnkranz, D. Gamberger, and N. Lavrac, Foundations of Rule Learning . Springer, 2012.
[78] L. I. Kuncheva, “How good are fuzzy if-then classiﬁers?” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 501–509, 2000.
[79] T. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and S. Wang, “Deep TSK fuzzy classiﬁer with stacked generalization and triplely concise interpretability guarantee for large data,”
IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1207–1221, 2017.
[80] Y . Deng, Z. Ren, Y . Kong, F. Bao, and Q. Dai, “A hierarchical fused fuzzy deep neural network for data classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. , vol. 25,
no. 4, pp. 1006–1012, 2017.
[81] P. Angelov and X. Gu, “A cascade of deep learning fuzzy rule-based image classiﬁer and SVM,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) , 2017, pp. 746–751.

