==== Page 1 ====
PREPRINT 1
Explainability in Graph Neural Networks:
A Taxonomic Survey
Hao Yuan, Haiyang Yu, Shurui Gui, and Shuiwang Ji, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Deep learning methods are achieving ever-increasing performance on many artiﬁcial intelligence tasks. A major limitation of
deep models is that they are not amenable to interpretability. This limitation can be circumvented by developing post hoc techniques to
explain predictions, giving rise to the area of explainability. Recently, explainability of deep models on images and texts has achieved
signiﬁcant progress. In the area of graph data, graph neural networks (GNNs) and their explainability are experiencing rapid
developments. However, there is neither a uniﬁed treatment of GNN explainability methods, nor a standard benchmark and testbed for
evaluations. In this survey, we provide a uniﬁed and taxonomic view of current GNN explainability methods. Our uniﬁed and taxonomic
treatments of this subject shed lights on the commonalities and differences of existing methods and set the stage for further
methodological developments. To facilitate evaluations, we provide a testbed for GNN explainability, including datasets, common
algorithms and evaluation metrics. Furthermore, we conduct comprehensive experiments to compare and analyze the performance of
many techniques. Altogether, this work provides a uniﬁed methodological treatment of GNN explainability and a standardized testbed
for evaluations.
Index Terms —Graph analysis, graph neural networks, explainability, interpretability, taxonomy, evaluation, survey.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
THe developments of deep neural networks have revo-
lutionized the ﬁelds of machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Deep neural networks have achieved promis-
ing performance in many research tasks, such as computer
vision [1], [2], natural language processing [3], and graph
data analysis [4], [5]. These facts motivate us to develop
deep learning methods for real-world applications [6], [7],
[8], [9] in interdisciplinary domains, such as ﬁnance, biol-
ogy, and agriculture etc. However, since most deep models
are developed without interpretability, they are treated as
black-boxes. Without reasoning the underlying mechanisms
behind the predictions, deep models cannot be fully trusted,
which prevents their use in critical applications pertaining
to fairness, privacy, and safety. In order to safely and trust-
fully deploy deep models, it is necessary to provide both
accurate predictions and human-intelligible explanations,
especially for users in interdisciplinary domains. These facts
raise the need of developing explanation techniques to
explain deep neural networks.
The explanation techniques of deep models generally
study the underlying relationships behind the predictions
of deep models. Several techniques are proposed to explain
the deep models for image and text data [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]. These methods can
provide input-dependent explanations, such as studying
the important scores for input features, or a high-level
understanding of the general behaviors of deep models.
For example, by studying the gradients or weights [10],
[11], [18], we can analyze the sensitivity between the in-
put features and the predictions. Existing approaches [12],
[13], [19] map hidden feature maps to the input space
H. Yuan, H. Yu, S. Gui, and S. Ji are with Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843, USA, e-mail: fhao.yuan, haiyang, shurui.gui, sji g@tamu.edu.and highlight the important input features. In addition,
by occluding different input features, we can observe and
monitor the change of predictions to identify important
features [14], [15]. Meanwhile, several studies [10], [16]
focus on providing input-independent explanations, such
as studying the input patterns that maximize the predicted
score of a certain class. Furthermore, the meaning of hidden
neurons is explored to understand the whole prediction
procedures [17], [22]. Recent survey works [23], [24], [25],
[26] provides good systematic reviews and taxonomies of
these methods. However, these surveys only focus on the
explanation methods for image and text domains and ignore
the explainability of deep graph models.
Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have be-
come increasingly popular since many real-world data are
represented as graphs, such as social networks, chemical
molecules, and ﬁnancial data [27], [28], [29]. Several graph-
related tasks are widely studied, such as node classiﬁca-
tion [30], [31], [32], graph classiﬁcation [5], [33], link predic-
tions [34], [35], [36]. In addition, many advanced GNN oper-
ations are proposed to improve the performance, including
graph convolution [4], [37], [38], graph attention [39], [40],
and graph pooling [41], [42], [43]. However, compared with
image and text domains, the explainability of graph models
are less explored, which is critical for understanding deep
graph neural networks. Recently, several approaches are
proposed to explain the predictions of GNNs [44], such
as XGNN [45], GNNExplainer [46], PGExplainer [47], and-
SubgraphX [48], etc. These methods are developed from
different angles and provide different levels of explanations.
In addition, it is still lacking standard datasets and metrics
for evaluating the explanation results. Hence, it raises the
need of a systematic survey covering the methods and
evaluations of GNN explanation techniques.
To this end, this survey provides a systematic study ofarXiv:2012.15445v3  [cs.LG]  1 Jul 2022

==== Page 2 ====
PREPRINT 2
different GNN explanation techniques. We aim at providing
intuitive understanding and high-level insights of different
methods so that researchers can choose proper directions to
explore. The contributions of this work are summarized as
below:
This survey provides a systematic and comprehen-
sive review of existing explanation techniques for
deep graph models. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst and only survey work on such a topic.
We propose a novel taxonomy of existing GNN ex-
planation techniques. We conclude the key idea of
each category and provide insightful analysis.
We introduce each GNN explanation method in de-
tail, including its methodology, advantages, draw-
backs, and difference compared with other methods.
We summarize the commonly employed datasets
and evaluation metrics for GNN explanation tasks.
We discuss their limitations and recommend several
convincing metrics.
We build three human-understandable datasets from
the text domain by converting sentences to graphs.
These datasets are now publicly available and can be
directly used for GNN explanation tasks.
We develop an open-source library for the GNN
explanation research. In this library, we include the
implementations of several existing techniques, com-
monly used datasets, and different evaluation met-
rics. It can be used to reproduce existing methods
and develop new GNN explanation techniques.
We conduct experiments to study and compare sev-
eral explanation techniques. Our analysis can pro-
vide insights for new researchers about the develop-
ment of the research ﬁeld and baseline selections.
Explainability versus Interpretability: Explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence is an emerging area of research, and the use of
terminology is not completely standardized. In particular,
the differences of the terms “explainability” and “inter-
pretability” are not completely deﬁned. In some studies,
these two terms are used interchangeably [26], while in
other studies some subtle differences have been made. In
this work, we argue that these two terms should be dif-
ferentiated. In particular, we follow the existing work [49]
to distinguish these two terms. We consider a model to
be “interpretable” if the model itself can provide humanly
understandable interpretations of its predictions. Note that
such a model is no longer a black box to some extent. For
example, a decision tree model is an “interpretable” one.
Meanwhile, an “explainable” model implies that the model
is still a black box whose predictions could potentially be
understood by post hoc explanation techniques. We articulate
such a difference with the hope that the community could
eventually develop a standardized use of terminology as
this ﬁeld matures.
2 T HECHALLENGES
Explaining deep graph models is an important but challeng-
ing task. In this section, we discuss the common challenges
for explaining GNNs.First, unlike images and texts, graphs are not grid-like
data, which means there is no locality information and each
node has different numbers of neighbors. Instead, graphs
contain important topology information and are represented
as feature matrices and adjacency matrices. To explain fea-
ture importance, we may directly extend the explanation
methods for image data to graph data. However, the ad-
jacency matrices represent the topology information and
only contain discrete values. Then existing methods may
not be suitable for obtaining high-quality explanations for
GNNs. For example, input optimization methods [10], [16]
are popular to explain the general behaviors of image classi-
ﬁers. It treats the input as trainable variables and optimizes
the input via back-propagation to obtain abstract images to
explain the model. However, the discrete adjacency matri-
ces cannot be optimized in the same manner. In addition,
several methods [14], [50] learn soft masks to capture im-
portant image regions. However, applying soft masks to the
adjacency matrices will destroy the discreteness property.
Furthermore, graph nodes and edges contribute together to
the ﬁnal predictions of GNNs and the interactions between
them are also important, which cannot be captured existing
methods from image domain.
In addition, for images and texts, we study the impor-
tance of each pixel or word. However, it is more important
to study the structural information for graph data. First,
the nodes in graphs may be unlabeled and the labels of
the whole graphs are determined by graph structures. Then
studying each node may be meaningless since those un-
labeled nodes contain no semantic meaning. In addition,
for graphs in biochemistry, neurobiology, ecology, and en-
gineering, graph substructures are highly related to their
functionalities [51]. An example is network motifs, which
can be considered as the building blocks of many complex
networks [52], [53]. Then such structural information should
not be ignored in the explanation tasks. However, existing
methods from image domains cannot provide explanations
regarding the structures. Next, for node classiﬁcation tasks,
the prediction of each node is determined by different mes-
sage walks from its neighbors. Investigating such message
walks is meaningful but challenging. None of the existing
methods in the image domain can consider such walk
information, which needs further explorations.
Furthermore, graph data are less intuitive than images
and texts. To understand deep models, domain knowledge
for the datasets is necessary. For images and texts, under-
standing the semantic meaning of input data is simple and
straightforward. For their explanations, humans can easily
understand them even though the explanations are highly
abstract. However, since graphs can represent complex data,
such as molecules, social networks, and citation networks,
it is challenging for humans to understand the meaning
of graphs. In addition, in interdisciplinary areas such as
chemistry and biology, there are many unsolved mysteries
and the domain knowledge is still lacking. Hence, it is
non-trivial to obtain human-understandable explanations
for graph models, thus raising the need of standard datasets
and evaluation metrics for explanation tasks.

==== Page 3 ====
PREPRINT 3
Graph Neural NetwokExplanations
Instance-levelExplanations
Model-levelExplanations
Gradients/Features
Perturbations
Decomposition
Surrogate
Generation
SAGuided BPCAMGrad-CAM
GNNExplainerPGExplainerZORROGraphMaskCausal ScreeningSubgraphX
LRP Excitation BPGNN-LRP
GraphLimeRelExPGM-Explainer
XGNN
Fig. 1. An overview of our proposed taxonomy. We categorize existing GNN explanation approaches into two branches: instance-level methods
and model-level methods. For the instance-level methods, the gradients/features-based methods include SA [54], Guided BP [54], CAM [55], and
Grad-CAM [55]; the perturbation-based methods are GNNExplainer [46], PGExplainer [47], ZORRO [56], GraphMask [57], Causal Screening [58],
and SubgraphX [48]; the decomposition methods contains LRP [54], [59], Excitation BP [55] and GNN-LRP [60]; the surrogate methods include
GraphLime [61], RelEx [62], and PGM-Explainer [63]. For the model-level methods, the only existing approach is XGNN [45].
3 A NOVERVIEW OF THE TAXONOMY
Recently, several approaches are proposed to explain the
predictions of deep graph models. These methods focus on
different aspects of the graph models and provide different
views to understand these models. They generally answer
a few questions; some of those are, which input edges are
more important? which input nodes are more important?
which node features are more important? what graph pat-
terns will maximize the prediction of a certain class? To
better understand these methods, we provide a taxonomy
of different explanation techniques for GNNs. The structure
of our taxonomy is shown in Figure 1. Based on what
types of explanations are provided, different techniques are
categorized into two main classes: instance-level methods
and model-level methods.
First, instance-level methods provide input-dependent
explanations for each input graph. Given an input graph,
these methods explain deep models by identifying impor-
tant input features for its prediction. Based on how the
importance scores are obtained, we categorize the methods
into four different branches: gradients/features-based meth-
ods, perturbation-based methods, decomposition methods,
and surrogate methods. Speciﬁcally, the gradients/features-
based methods employ the gradients or the feature values
to indicate the importance of different input features. In
addition, perturbation-based methods monitor the change
of prediction with respect to different input perturbations to
study input importance scores. The decomposition methods
ﬁrst decompose the prediction scores, such as predicted
probabilities, to the neurons in the last hidden layer. Then
they back propagate such scores layer by layer until the
input space and use such decomposed scores as the im-
portance scores. Meanwhile, for a given input example,
surrogate based methods ﬁrst sample a dataset from the
neighbors of the given example. Next, these methods ﬁt a
simple and interpretable model, such as the decision tree,to the sampled dataset. Then the explanations from the
surrogate model are used to explain the original predic-
tions. Second, model-level methods explain graph neural
networks without respect to any speciﬁc input example. The
input-independent explanations are high-level and explain
general behaviors. Compared with instance-level methods,
this direction is still less explored. The only existing model-
level method is XGNN [45], which is based on graph gener-
ation.
Overall, these two categories of methods explain deep
graph models from different views. Instance-level meth-
ods provide example-speciﬁc explanations while model-
level methods provide high-level insights and a generic
understanding. To verify and trust deep graph models,
it requires human supervision to check the explanations.
For instance-level methods, more human supervisions are
needed since experts need to explore the explanations for
different input graphs. For model-level methods, since the
explanations are high-level, less human supervisions are
involved. Furthermore, the explanations of instance-level
methods are based on real input instances so that they
are easier to understand. However, the explanations for
model-level methods may not be human-intelligible since
the obtained graph patterns may not even exist in the real-
world. Overall, these two types of methods can be combined
together to better understand deep graph models, and hence
it is necessary to investigate both of them.
4 I NSTANCE -LEVEL EXPLANATIONS
We start our explorations by introducing the instance-level
methods for GNN explanations. In this section, we will
discuss the motivations, methodologies, advantages, limi-
tations of each category.

==== Page 4 ====
PREPRINT 4
4.1 Gradients/Features-Based Methods
First, we introduce the gradients/features-based methods
for explaining deep graph models.
4.1.1 A uniﬁed view
Employing gradients or features to explain the deep models
is the most straightforward solution, which is widely used
in image and text tasks. The key idea is to use the gradients
or hidden feature map values as the approximations of input
importance. Speciﬁcally, gradients-based methods [10], [11]
compute the gradients of target prediction with respect to
input features by back-propagation. Meanwhile, features-
based methods [12], [13] map the hidden features to the
input space via interpolation to measure importance scores.
Generally, in such methods, larger gradients or feature val-
ues indicate higher importance. Note that both gradients
and hidden features are highly related to the model pa-
rameters, then such explanations can reﬂect the information
contained in the model. Since these methods are simple
and general, they can be easily extended to the graph
domain. Recently, several methods have been applied to
explain graph neural networks, including SA [54], Guided
BP [54], CAM [55], and Grad-CAM [55]. The key difference
among these methods lies in the procedure of gradient back-
propagation and how different hidden feature maps are
combined.
4.1.2 Methods
SA[54] directly employs the squared values of gradients as
the importance scores of different input features. It can be
directly computed by back-propagation, which is the same
as network training but the target is input features instead
of model parameters. Note that the input features can be
graph nodes, edges, or node features. It assumes that higher
absolute gradient values indicate the corresponding input
features are more important. While it is simple and efﬁcient,
it has several additional limitations. First, SA can only reﬂect
the sensitivity between input and output, which cannot
accurately show the importance. In addition, it also suffers
from saturation problems [64]. In the saturation regions of
the model, where the model output changes minimally with
respect to any input change, the gradients can hardly reﬂect
the contributions of inputs.
Guided BP [54] shares a similar idea with SA but
modiﬁes the procedure of backs propagating gradients.
Since negative gradients are challenging to explain, Guided
BP only back propagates positive gradients while clipping
negative gradients to zeros. Then only positive gradients are
used to measure the importance of different input features.
Note that Guided BP shares the same limitations as SA.
CAM [55] maps the node features in the ﬁnal layer to
the input space to identify important nodes. It requires the
GNN model to employ a global average pooling (GAP)
layer and a fully-connected (FC) layer as the ﬁnal classiﬁer.
Speciﬁcally, CAM takes the ﬁnal node embeddings and
combines different feature maps by weighted summations
to obtain importance scores for input nodes. Note that the
weights are obtained from the ﬁnal fully-connected (FC)
layer connected with the target prediction. This approach
is also very simple but still has several major limitations.First, CAM has special requirements for the GNN structure,
which limits its application and generalization. Second, it
assumes that the ﬁnal node embeddings can reﬂect the
input importance, which is heuristic and may not be true.
Furthermore, it can only explain graph classiﬁcation models
and cannot be directly applied to node classiﬁcation tasks,
since it needs the ﬁnal FC layer to map predictions to
different nodes.
Grad-CAM [55] extends the CAM to general graph
classiﬁcation models by removing the constraint of the GAP
layer. Instead of using the weights between the GAP output
and FC output, it employs gradients as the weights to com-
bine different feature maps. Speciﬁcally, it ﬁrst computes
the gradients of the target prediction with respect to the
ﬁnal node embeddings. Then it averages such gradients to
obtain the weight for each feature map. However, it is also
based on heuristic assumptions and cannot explain node
classiﬁcation models.
4.2 Perturbation-Based Methods
Next, we introduce the perturbation-based methods for
explaining deep graph models.
4.2.1 A uniﬁed view
The perturbation-based methods are widely employed to
explain deep image models [14], [15], [65]. The underlying
motivation is to study the output variations with respect
to different input perturbations. Intuitively, when important
input information is retained, the predictions should be sim-
ilar to the original predictions. Existing methods [14], [15],
[65] learn a generator to generate a mask to select important
input pixels to explain deep image models. However, such
methods cannot be directly applied to graph models. Unlike
images, graphs are represented as nodes and edges, and
they cannot be resized to share the same node and edge
numbers. In addition, different from images, the structural
information is critical for graphs and can determine the
functionalities.
To explain deep graph models, several perturbation-
based methods are proposed, including GNNExplainer [46],
PGExplainer [47], ZORRO [56], GraphMask [57], Causal
Screening [58], and SubgraphX [48]. They share a similar
high-level pipeline as shown in Figure 2. First, given the
input graph, masks are obtained in different ways to indi-
cate important input features. Note that depending on the
explanation tasks, different masks are generated, such as
node masks, edge masks, and node feature masks. Next,
the generated masks are combined with the input graph to
obtain a new graph containing important input information.
Finally, the new graph is fed into the trained GNNs to eval-
uate the masks and update the mask generation algorithms.
Intuitively, the important input features captured by masks
should convey the key semantic meaning and hence lead
to a similar prediction to the original one. The difference
between these methods mainly lies in three aspects: the
mask generation algorithm, the type of masks, and the
objective function.
It is noteworthy that there are three different types of
masks: soft masks, discrete masks, and approximated dis-
crete masks. In Figure 2, we show soft masks for node fea-
tures, discrete masks for edges, and approximated discrete

==== Page 5 ====
PREPRINT 5
1Input graph234  Mask generation algorithm0.90.70.3Feature maskEdge maskNode mask11100.90.90.10.0GNNsPredictionObjective function
Fig. 2. The general pipeline of the perturbation-based methods. They employ different mask generation algorithms to obtain different types of masks.
Note that the mask can correspond to nodes, edges, or node features. In this example, we show a soft mask for node features, a discrete mask
for edges, and an approximated discrete mask for nodes. Then the mask is combined with the input graph to capture important input information.
Finally, the trained GNNs evaluate whether the new prediction is similar to the original prediction and can provide guidance for improving the mask
generation algorithms.
masks for nodes. The soft masks contain continuous values
between [0;1]and the mask generation algorithm can be
directly updated by back-propagation. However, soft masks
are suffered from the “introduced evidence” problem [14]
that any non-zero or non-one value in the mask may in-
troduce new semantic meaning or new noise to the input
graph, thus affecting the explanation results. Meanwhile,
the discrete masks only contain discrete values 0and1,
which can avoid the “introduced evidence” problem since
no new numerical value is introduced. However, discrete
masks always involve non-differentiable operations, such
as sampling. One popular way to solve it is the policy
gradient technique [66]. Furthermore, recent studies [50],
[67], [68] propose to employ reparameterization tricks, such
as Gumbel-Softmax estimation and sparse relaxations, to
approximate the discrete masks. Note that the output mask
is not strictly discrete but provides a good approxima-
tion, which not only enables the back-propagation but also
largely alleviates the “introduced evidence” problem.
4.2.2 Methods
GNNExplainer [46] learns soft masks for edges and node
features to explain the predictions via mask optimization. To
obtain masks, it randomly initializes soft masks and treats
them as trainable variables. Then GNNExplainer combines
the masks with the original graph via element-wise multi-
plications. Next, the masks are optimized by maximizing the
mutual information between the predictions of the original
graph and the predictions of the newly obtained graph.
Even though different regularization terms, such as element-
wise entropy, are employed to encourage optimized masks
to be discrete, the obtained masks are still soft masks so
that GNNExplainer cannot avoid the “introduced evidence”
problem. In addition, the masks are optimized for each
input graph individually and hence the explanations may
lack a global view.
PGExplainer [47] learns approximated discrete masks
for edges to explain the predictions. To obtain edge masks,it trains a parameterized mask predictor to predict edge
masks. Given an input graph, it ﬁrst obtains the embeddings
for each edge by concatenating the corresponding node
embeddings. Then the predictor uses the edge embeddings
to predict the probability of each edge being selected,
which can be treated as the importance score. Next, the
approximated discrete masks are sampled via the reparam-
eterization trick. Finally, the mask predictor is trained by
maximizing the mutual information between the original
predictions and new predictions. Note that even though the
reparameterization trick is employed, the obtained masks
are not strictly discrete but can largely alleviate the “intro-
duced evidence” problem. In addition, since all edges in
the dataset share the same predictor, the explanations can
provide a global understanding of the trained GNNs.
GraphMask [57] is a post-hoc method for explaining
the edge importance in each GNN layer. Similar to the
PGExplainer, it trains a classiﬁer to predict whether an edge
can be dropped without affecting the original predictions.
However, GraphMask obtains an edge mask for each GNN
layer while PGExplainer only focuses the input space. In ad-
dition, to avoiding changing graph structures, the dropped
edges are replaced by learnable baseline connections, which
are vectors with the same dimensions as node embeddings.
Note that binary Concrete distribution [68] and reparame-
terization trick are employed to approximate discrete masks.
In addition, the classiﬁer is trained using the whole dataset
by minimizing a divergence term, which measures the
difference between network predictions. Similar to PGEx-
plainer, it can largely alleviate the “introduced evidence”
problem and provide a global understanding of the trained
GNNs.
ZORRO [56] employs discrete masks to identify impor-
tant input nodes and node features. Given an input graph,
a greedy algorithm is used to select nodes or node features
step by step to obtain discrete masks for nodes and features.
For each step, ZORRO selects one node or one node feature
with the highest ﬁdelity score. Note that the objective func-

==== Page 6 ====
PREPRINT 6
GNNsNew  datasetFit surrogate modelsExplanationsInput dataGNNsSampled dataNode/edge droppingLocal neighbor samplingNode feature perturbationHSIC LassoGCNsBayesian PGMPredictionNew predictions
Fig. 3. The general pipeline of the surrogate methods. Given an input graph and its prediction, they ﬁrst sample a local dataset to represent
the relationships around the target data. Then different surrogate methods are applied to ﬁt the local dataset. Note that surrogate models are
generally simple and interpretable ML models. Finally, the explanations from the surrogate model can be regarded as the explanations of the
original prediction.
tion, ﬁdelity score, measure how the new predictions match
the original predictions of the model by ﬁxing the selected
nodes/features and replacing the others with random noise
values. Since there is no training procedure involved, the
non-differentiable limitation of discrete masks is avoided.
In addition, by using hard masks, ZORRO is not suffered
from the “introduced evidence” problem. However, the
greedy mask selection algorithm may lead to local optimal
explanations. In addition, the explanations may lack a global
understanding since masks are generated for each graph
individually.
Causal Screening [58] studies the causal attribution
of different edges in the input graph as explanations. It
identiﬁes an edge mask for the explanatory subgraph. The
key idea of causal attribution is to study the change of
predictions when adding an edge into the current explana-
tory subgraph, known as the causal effect. To obtain edge
masks for each step, it studies the causal effects of different
edges and selects the edge with the highest causal effect to
add to the explanatory subgraph. Speciﬁcally, it employs
the individual causal effect (ICE) to select edges, which
measures mutual information (between the predictions of
original graphs and the explanatory subgraphs) difference
after adding different edges to the subgraph. Similar to
ZORRO, Causal Screening is a greedy algorithm generating
discrete masks without any training procedure. Hence, it is
not suffered from the “introduced evidence” problem but
may lack a global understanding and stuck in local optimal
explanations.
SubgraphX [48] explores subgraph-level explanations
for deep graph models. It employs the Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) algorithm [69] to efﬁciently explore different
subgraphs via node pruning and select the most important
subgraph from the leaves of the search tree as the expla-
nation of the prediction. In addition, it employs Shapley
value [70] as the reward of MCTS to measure the importance
of subgraphs and proposes an efﬁcient approximation of
Shapley value by only considering the interactions within
message passing range. While SubgraphX is not directly
studying masks, the MCTS algorithm can be understood as
the mask generation algorithm and its node pruning actionscan be regarded as different masks to obtain subgraphs.
In addition, the Shapley values can be treated as the ob-
jective function to update the mask generation algorithm.
Compared with other perturbation-based methods, its ob-
tained subgraphs are more human-intelligible and suitable
for graph data. However, the computational cost is more
expensive since it needs to explore different subgraphs with
the MCTS algorithm.
4.3 Surrogate Methods
In this section, we introduce the surrogate methods for
explaining deep graph models.
4.3.1 A uniﬁed view
Deep models are challenging to explain because of the
complex and non-linear relationships between the input
space and output predictions. A popular way to provide
instance-level explanations for image models is known as
surrogate method. The underlying idea is to employ a sim-
ple and interpretable surrogate model to approximate the
predictions of the complex deep model for the neighboring
areas of the input example. Note that these methods assume
that the relationships in the neighboring areas of the input
example is less complex and can be well captured by a
simpler surrogate model. Then the explanations from the
interpretable surrogate model are used to explain the orig-
inal prediction. Applying surrogate methods to the graph
domain is challenging since graph data are discrete and
contain topology information. Then it is not clear how to
deﬁne the neighboring regions of the input graph and what
interpretable surrogate models are suitable.
Recently, several surrogate methods are proposed to
explain deep graph models, including GraphLime [61],
RelEx [62], and PGM-Explainer [63]. The general pipeline
of these methods is shown in Figure 3. To explain the
prediction of a given input graph, they ﬁrst obtain a local
dataset containing multiple neighboring data objects and
their predictions. Then they ﬁt a interpretable model to
learn the local dataset. Finally, the explanations from the
interpretable model are regarded as the explanations of the

==== Page 7 ====
PREPRINT 7
original model for the input graph. While these methods
share a similar high-level idea, the key difference lies in
two aspects: how to obtain the local dataset and what
interpretable surrogate model to use.
4.3.2 Methods
GraphLime [61] extends the LIME algorithm [71], [72] to
deep graph models and studies the importance of different
node features for node classiﬁcation tasks. Given a target
node in the input graph, GraphLime considers its N-hop
neighboring nodes and their predictions as its local dataset
where a reasonable choice of Nis the number of layers
in the trained GNNs. Then a nonlinear surrogate model,
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) Lasso [73],
is employed to ﬁt the local dataset. Note that HSIC Lasso is
a kernel-based feature selection algorithm. Finally, based on
the weights of different features in HSIC Lasso, it can select
important features to explain the HSIC Lasso predictions.
Those selected features are regarded as the explanations of
the original GNN prediction. However, GraphLime can only
provide explanations for node features but ignore graph
structures, such as nodes and edges, which are more impor-
tant for graph data. In addition, GraphLime is proposed to
explain node classiﬁcation predictions but cannot be directly
applied to graph classiﬁcation models.
RelEx [62] also studies the explainability of node classiﬁ-
cation models by combining the ideas of surrogate methods
and perturbation-based methods. Given a target node and
its computational graph ( N-hop neighbors), it ﬁrst obtains
a local dataset by randomly sampling connected subgraphs
from the computational graph and feeding these subgraphs
to the trained GNNs to obtain their predictions. Speciﬁcally,
starting from the target node, it randomly selects neigh-
boring nodes in a BFS manner. Next, it employs a GCN
model as the surrogate model to ﬁt the local datasets. Note
that different from LIME and GraphLime, the surrogate
model in RelEx is not interpretable. After training, it further
applies the aforementioned perturbation-based methods,
such as generating soft masks or Gumbel-Softmax masks, to
explain the predictions. Compared with GraphLime, it can
provide explanations regarding important nodes. However,
it contains multiple steps of approximations, such as using
the surrogate model to approximate local relationships and
using masks to approximate the edge importance, thus
making the explanations less convincing and trustable. Fur-
thermore, as perturbation-based methods can be directly
employed to explain original deep graph models, then it
is not necessary to build another non-interpretable deep
model as the surrogate model to explain. It is also unknown
how it can be applied for graph classiﬁcation tasks.
PGM-Explainer [63] builds a probabilistic graphical
model to provide instance-level explanations for GNNs.
The local dataset is obtained by random node feature
perturbation. Speciﬁcally, given an input graph, each time
PGM-Explainer randomly perturbs the node features of sev-
eral random nodes within the computational graph. Then
for any node in the computational graph, PGM-Explainer
records a random variable indicating whether its features
are perturbed and its inﬂuence on the GNN predictions. By
repeating such procedures multiple times, a local dataset
is obtained. Note that the local dataset of PGM-Explainercontains node variables instead of different neighboring
graph samples. Then it selects top dependent variables to
reduce the size of the local dataset via the Grow-Shrink (GS)
algorithm [74]. Finally, an interpretable Bayesian network
is employed to ﬁt the local dataset and to explain the
predictions of the original GNN model. PGM-Explainer
can provide explanations regarding graph nodes but ig-
nore graph edges, which contain important graph topology
information. In addition, different from GraphLime and
RelEx, the PGM-Explainer can be used to explain both node
classiﬁcation and graph classiﬁcation tasks.
4.4 Decomposition Methods
Finally, we introduce the decomposition methods for ex-
plaining deep graph models.
4.4.1 A uniﬁed view
Another popular way to explain deep image classiﬁers is
decomposition methods, which measure the importance of
input features by decomposing the original model predic-
tions into several terms. Then those terms are regarded as
the importance scores of the corresponding input features.
These methods directly study the model parameters to
reveal the relationships between the features in the input
space and the output predictions. Note that the conservative
property of these methods requires that the sum of the
decomposed terms is equal to the original prediction score.
However, it is challenging to directly apply such methods
to the graph domain since graphs contain nodes, edges, and
node features. It is non-trivial to distribute scores to differ-
ent edges while graph edges contain important structural
information that cannot be ignored.
Recently, several decomposition methods are proposed
to explain the deep graph neural networks, including Layer-
wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [54], [59], Excitation
BP [55] and GNN-LRP [60]. The intuition of these algo-
rithms is to build score decomposition rules to distribute the
prediction scores to the input space. The general pipeline
of these methods is shown in Figure 4. These methods
distribute the prediction score layer by layer in a back-
propagation manner until the input layer. Starting from the
output layer, the model’s prediction is treated as the initial
target score. Then the score is decomposed and distributed
to the neurons in the previous layer following the decom-
position rules. By repeating such procedures until input
space, they can obtain importance scores for node features,
which can be combined to represent edge importance, node
importance, and walk importance. It is noteworthy that all
of these algorithms ignore the activation functions in deep
graph models. The main difference among these methods is
the score decomposition rules, the view of decomposition,
and the targets of explanations.
4.4.2 Methods
LRP [54], [59] extends the original LRP algorithm [75] to
deep graph models. It decomposes the output prediction
score to different node importance scores. The score decom-
position rule is developed based on the hidden features and
weights. For a target neuron, its score is represented as a
linear approximation of neuron scores from the previous

==== Page 8 ====
PREPRINT 8
Prediction scoreDesigned BPTarget score explanation
0.50.3+···0.1+···0.07+···0.03+···Node explanation
Node explanation
Walk explanation·········0.250.50.150.10.60.30.0750.0250.30.70.30.150.051.0DistributeExplainDistributeLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRP
LRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRPLRPEBGNN-LRP
LRPEBGNN-LRP
Fig. 4. The general pipeline of the decomposition methods. These methods distribute the prediction score to input space to indicate the input
importance. The target score is decomposed layer by layer in a back-propagation manner. Note that the main difference among these methods is
the employed score decomposition rule.
layer. Intuitively, the neuron with a higher contribution of
the target neuron activation receives a larger fraction of
the target neuron score. Speciﬁcally, Baldassarre et al. [54]
applies the -stabilized rule from the original LRP , while
Schwarzenberg et al. [59] employs the z+-rule to perform
decomposition. To satisfy the conservative property, the
adjacency matrix is treated as a part of GNN model in the
post-hoc explanation phase so that it can be ignored during
score distribution; otherwise, the adjacent matrix will also
receive decomposed scores, thus making the conservative
property invalid. Since LRP is directly developed based
on the model parameters, its explanation results are more
trustable. However, it can only study the importance of
different nodes and cannot be applied to graph structures,
such as subgraphs and graph walks, which are more im-
portant for understanding GNNs. In addition, such a algo-
rithm requires a comprehensive understanding of the model
structures, which limits its applications for non-expert users,
such as interdisciplinary researchers.
Excitation BP [55] shares a similar idea as the LRP
algorithm but is developed from the view of the law of total
probability. It deﬁnes that the probability of a neuron in the
current layer is equal to the total probabilities it outputs
to all connected neurons in the next layer. Then the score
decomposition rule can be regarded as decomposing the
target probability into several conditional probability terms.
Note that the computation of Excitation BP is highly similar
to thez+-rule in LRP . Hence, it shares the same advantages
and limitations as the LRP algorithm.
GNN-LRP [60] studies the importance of different graph
walks. It is more coherent to the deep graph neural net-
works since graph walks correspond to message ﬂowswhen performing neighborhood information aggregation. It
treats the GNN model as a function and provides a view
of high-order Taylor decomposition to develop the score
decomposition rule. It is theoretically proven that the Taylor
decomposition (at root zero) only contains T-order terms
whereTis the number of layers in the trained GNNs and
each term corresponds to a T-step graph walk. Then such
terms can be regarded as the importance scores of graph
walks. Since it is not possible to directly compute the high-
order derivatives given by Taylor expansion, GNN-LRP also
follows a back propagation procedure to approximate the T-
order terms. Note that the back propagation computation
in GNN-LRP is similar to the LRP algorithm. However,
instead of distributing scores to nodes or edges, GNN-
LRP distributes scores to different graph walks. It records
the paths of the distribution processes from layer to layer.
Those paths are considered as different walks and the scores
are obtained from their corresponding nodes. While GNN-
LRP has a solid theoretical background, the approximations
in its computations may not be accurate. In addition, the
computational complexity is high since each walk is con-
sidered separately. Furthermore, it is also challenging for
non-experts to use, especially for interdisciplinary domains,
because the back propagation rules need to be derived for
different models and GNN variants.
5 M ODEL -LEVEL EXPLANATIONS
Different from instance-level methods, model-level methods
aim at providing the general insights and high-level under-
standing to explain deep graph models. Speciﬁcally, they
study what input graph patterns can lead to a certain GNN

==== Page 9 ====
PREPRINT 9
TABLE 1
A comprehensive analysis of different explanation methods. Here “Type” indicates what type of explanations are provided, “Learning” denotes
whether learning procedures are involved, “Task” means what tasks each method can be applied to, “Target” indicates the targets of explanations,
“Black-box” means if the trained GNNs are treated as a black-box during the explanation stage, “Flow” denotes the computational ﬂow for
explanations, and “Design” indicates whether an explanation method has speciﬁc designs for graph data. Note that GC denotes graph
classiﬁcation, NC denotes node classiﬁcation, N means nodes, E means edges, NF represents node features, and Walk indicates graph walks.
Method TYPE LEARNING TASK TARGET BLACK -BOX FLOW DESIGN
SA [54], [55] Instance-level 7 GC/NC N/E/NF 7 Backward 7
Guided BP [54] Instance-level 7 GC/NC N/E/NF 7 Backward 7
CAM [55] Instance-level 7 GC N 7 Backward 7
Grad-CAM [55] Instance-level 7 GC N 7 Backward 7
GNNExplainer [46] Instance-level 3 GC/NC E/NF 3 Forward 3
PGExplainer [47] Instance-level 3 GC/NC E 7 Forward 3
GraphMask [57] Instance-level 3 GC/NC E 7 Forward 3
ZORRO [56] Instance-level 7 GC/NC N/NF 3 Forward 3
Causal Screening [58] Instance-level 7 GC/NC E 3 Forward 3
SubgraphX [48] Instance-level 3 GC/NC Subgraph 3 Forward 3
LRP [54], [59] Instance-level 7 GC/NC N 7 Backward 7
Excitation BP [55] Instance-level 7 GC/NC N 7 Backward 7
GNN-LRP [60] Instance-level 7 GC/NC Walk 7 Backward 3
GraphLime [61] Instance-level 3 NC NF 3 Forward 7
RelEx [62] Instance-level 3 NC N/E 3 Forward 3
PGM-Explainer [63] Instance-level 3 GC/NC N 3 Forward 3
XGNN [45] Model-level 3 GC Subgraph 3 Forward 3
behavior, such as maximizing a target prediction. Input op-
timization [16] is a popular direction to obtain model-level
explanations for image classiﬁers. However, it cannot be
directly applied to graph models due to the discrete graph
topology information, thus making explaining GNNs at the
model-level more challenging. Hence, it is still an important
but less studied topic. To the best of our knowledge, the only
existing model-level method for explaining graph neural
networks is XGNN [45].
XGNN proposes to explain GNNs via graph generation.
Instead of directly optimizing the input graph, it trains a
graph generator so that the generated graphs can maximize
a target graph prediction. Then the generated graphs are
regarded as the explanations for the target prediction and
are expected to contain discriminative graph patterns. In
XGNN, the graph generation is formulated as a reinforce-
ment learning problem. For each step, the generator predicts
how to add an edge to the current graph. Then the generated
graphs are fed into the trained GNNs to obtain feedback to
train the generator via policy gradient. In addition, several
graph rules are incorporated to encourage the explanations
to be both valid and human-intelligible. For example, the
rule for chemical data can be deﬁned as the node degree of
an atom should not exceed its maximum chemical valency.
In addition, XGNN can set a upper bond on the size of
generated graphs so that the ﬁnal explanations are succinct.
Note that XGNN is a general framework for generating
model-level explanations so that any suitable graph genera-
tion algorithm can be applied. In addition, the explanations
are general and provide a global understanding of the
trained GNNs. However, the proposed XGNN only demon-
strates its effectiveness in explaining graph classiﬁcation
models and it is unknown whether XGNN can be applied
to node classiﬁcation tasks, which is an important direction
to explore in future studies.6 A C OMPREHENSIVE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide a comprehensive analysis of
different explanation methods. The properties of different
models are concluded in Table 1. Speciﬁcally, for each tech-
nique, we focus on the following aspects.
Type: It indicates the type of explanations provided
by each explanation technique, including instance-
level explanations and model-level explanations.
Instance-level explanations are input-dependent and
more speciﬁc while model-level explanations are
more high-level and general.
Learning : It denotes whether the explanation tech-
nique involves any learning procedure. Generally,
the explanation method with learning procedures
tends to better capture the relationships between
inputs and predictions. However, they become less
trustable when the learning procedures introduce
additional black-boxes. As shown in Table 1, there is
no learning procedure in the feature/gradient-based
methods and decomposition methods.
Task : It indicates what tasks each method can be
applied to. Here we only consider node classiﬁcation
(NC) and graph classiﬁcation (GC) tasks. It demon-
strates the generalizability of different methods.
Target : It shows the target explanation of each
method, such as showing node importance, edge
importance, or graph walk importance. In Table 1,
N denotes nodes, E means edges, NF denotes node
features, and Walk denotes graph walks. For graph
models, it is more important to study the structures
of input graphs, such as edges, graph walks, and
subgraphs.
Black-box : It indicates whether the explanation tech-
nique treats the trained GNNs as a black-box. Sev-
eral methods, including XGNN, GraphLime, PGM-

==== Page 10 ====
PREPRINT 10
Explainer, GNNExplainer, ZORRO, Causal Screen-
ing, and RelEx, only need to access the inputs and
outputs to explain the trained GNNs, which means
the trained GNNs are still treated as a black-box.
For the other methods, they need to access the pa-
rameters or hidden representations of the trained
GNNs. Note that by treating the trained GNNs as
a black-box, the explanation method can be better
generalized to applications where the GNN model is
encapsulated or highly complex.
Flow : It denotes the computational ﬂow for explain-
ing the trained GNNs. Several methods generate
explanations in a backward manner, such as SA,
Guided BP , CAM, Grad-CAM, LRP , Excitation BP ,
and GNN-LRP . The other methods only need the
forward computations of the trained GNNs.
Design : It shows whether an explanation technique
has speciﬁc designs for graph data or is simply
extended from the image domain. Since graph data
are special and their topology/structural information
is important, it is necessary to explicitly consider
such information to provide explanations. For the
methods that do not have speciﬁc designs for graphs,
they cannot consider the topology information and
structures of graph data, which may limit the quality
of their explanations.
7 E VALUATIONS
In this section, we introduce the evaluations of graph model
explanation techniques. Intuitively, good explanation results
should faithfully explain the behaviors of GNN models.
However, evaluating the explanation results is non-trivial
due to the lack of ground truths. Hence, we discuss and
analyze several commonly used datasets and metrics.
7.1 Datasets
First, it is critical to select proper datasets to evaluate
different explanation techniques. Since human evaluations
are necessary, the explanations need to be understandable
by humans. Hence, it is desired that the data are intuitive
and easy to visualize. In addition, good datasets should
contain human-understandable rationales between the data
examples and labels so that experts can verify whether
such rationales are identiﬁed by explanation algorithms. To
evaluate different explanation techniques, several types of
datasets are commonly employed, including synthetic data,
sentiment graph data, and molecular data.
7.1.1 Synthetic data
Recently, several synthetic datasets are built to evaluate
explanation techniques [46], [47]. In such datasets, different
graph motifs are included and can determine the node labels
or graph labels. In addition, the relationships between data
examples and data labels are well deﬁned by humans. Even
though the trained GNNs may not perfectly capture such re-
lationships, the graph motifs can be employed as reasonable
approximations of the ground truths of explanation results.
Here we introduce several common synthetic datasets.TABLE 2
Statistics and properties of our sentiment graph datasets. We report
the prediction accuracies of three GNN models on our datasets. Note
that “BERT accuracy” denotes the ﬁne-tuning results of a pre-trained
twelve-layer base BERT using original sentence data.
Dataset Graph-SST2 Graph-SST5 Graph-Twitter
# of classes 2 5 3
# of features 768 768 768
Avg. # of nodes 10.199 19.849 21.103
# of train graphs 67,349 8,544 4,998
# of val. graphs 872 1,101 1,250
# of test graphs 1,821 2,210 692
GCN accuracy 0.892 0.443 0.614
GAT accuracy 0.901 0.462 0.601
GIN accuracy 0.873 0.463 0.624
BERT accuracy 0.912 0.532 0.736
1) BA-shapes: It is a node classiﬁcation dataset with
4 different node labels. For each graph, it contains
a base graph (300 nodes) and a house-like ﬁve-
node motif. Note that the base graph is obtained
by the Barab´ asi-Albert (BA) model, which can gener-
ate random scale-free networks with a preferential
attachment mechanism [76]. The motif is attached to
the base graph while random edges are added. Each
node is labeled based on whether it belongs to the
base graph or different spatial locations of the motif.
2) BA-Community: It is a node classiﬁcation dataset
with 8 different labels. For each graph, it is obtained
by combining two BA-shapes graphs with randomly
added edges. Node labels are determined by the
memberships of BA-shapes graphs and their struc-
tural locations.
3) Tree-Cycle: It is a node classiﬁcation dataset with
2 different labels. For each graph, it consists of a
base balanced tree graph with the depth equal to 8
and a six-node cycle motif. These two components
are randomly connected. The label for the nodes in
based graphs is 0 otherwise 1.
4) Tree-Grids: It is a node classiﬁcation dataset with
2 different labels. It is the same as the Tree-Cycle
dataset, except that the Tree-Grids dataset employs
nine-node grid motifs instead of cycle motifs.
5) BA-2Motifs: It is a graph classiﬁcation dataset with
2 different graph labels. There are 800 graphs and
each of them is obtained by attaching different mo-
tifs, such as the house-like motif and the ﬁve-node
cycle motif, to the base BA graph. Different graphs
are labeled based on the type of motif.
Note that in these datasets, all node features are initial-
ized as vectors containing all 1s. The trained GNNs models
are expected to capture graph structures to make predic-
tions. Then based on the rules of building each dataset,
we can analyze the explanation results. For example, in
the BA-2Motifs dataset, we can study whether the explana-
tions can capture the motif structures. However, synthetic
datasets only contain simple relationships between graphs
and labels, which may be not enough for comprehensive
evaluations.

==== Page 11 ====
PREPRINT 11
Fig. 5. A data example of our graph sentiment datasets. Each node represents a word while edges indicates the relationship between the words.
Note that edges are directed but their labels are ignored.
7.1.2 Sentiment graph data
Traditional graph datasets are challenging to understand
since humans only have limited domain knowledge. It raises
the need of building human-understandable graph datasets.
Text data can be a proper choice for graph explanation tasks
since they consist of words and phrases with understand-
able semantic meanings. Then the explanation results can
be easily evaluated by humans. Hence, we build three senti-
ment graph datasets based on text sentiment analysis data,
including SST2 [77], SST5 [77], and Twitter [78] datasets.
First, for each text sequence, we convert it to a graph
that each node represents a word while the edges reﬂect
the relationships between different words. Speciﬁcally, we
employ the Biafﬁne parser [79] to extract word dependen-
cies. We show an example of our generated sentiment graph
in Figure 5. Note that the generated graphs are directed
but the edge labels are ignored since most GNNs cannot
capture edge label information. Next, we employ BERT [80]
to obtain the word embeddings and such embeddings are
used as initial embeddings of graph nodes. Speciﬁcally, we
use a pre-trained twelve-layer base BERT model to extract a
768-dimension feature vector for each word.
We build three sentiment graph datasets, known as
Graph-SST2, Graph-SST5, and Graph-Twitter. They are now
publicly available and can be directly used to study dif-
ferent explanation techniques1. The statistics and properties
of these datasets are reported in Table 2. We report the
prediction accuracies of two-layer GNNs on these datasets,
including GCNs, GATs, and GINs. In addition, we also show
the ﬁne-tuned accuracies of a pre-trained twelve-layer base
BERT [80] using the original sentence datasets. Since the
results of BERT are obtained by ﬁnetuning the model and
word embeddings, it is expected to perform better than the
GNN models without ﬁnetuned node embeddings. Notably,
we choose to use the word embeddings as the node embed-
dings without ﬁnetuning because ﬁnetuning may encode
the label information into the word embeddings, which
affect the structural information captured by GNNs and
the ﬁnal explanations. Hence, we believe these datasets are
reasonable choices for building graph models to explain.
Based on the semantic meaning of different words and the
sentiment labels, we can study whether the explanations can
identify the words with key meanings and the relationships
among different words.
7.1.3 Molecule data
Molecular datasets are also widely used in explanation
tasks, such as MUTAG [81], BBBP [82], and Tox21 [83].
1. https://github.com/divelab/DIG/tree/main/dig/xgraph/
datasetsEach graph in such datasets corresponds to a molecule
where nodes represent atoms and edges are the chemical
bonds. The labels of molecular graphs are generally deter-
mined by the chemical functionalities or properties of the
molecules. Employing such datasets for explanation tasks
requires domain knowledge, such as what chemical groups
are discriminative for their functionalities. For example, in
the dataset MUTAG, different graphs are labeled based on
their mutagenic effects on a bacterium. In addition, it is
known that carbon rings and NO 2chemical groups may
lead to mutagenic effects [81]. Then we can study whether
the explanations can identify such patterns for the corre-
sponding class.
7.2 Evaluation Metrics
Even though visualization results can provide an insightful
understanding regarding whether the explanations are rea-
sonable to humans, such evaluations are not fully trustable
due to the lack of ground truths. In addition, to compare
different explanation methods, humans need to study the
results for each input example, which is time-consuming.
Furthermore, human evaluations are highly dependent on
their subjective understanding, which is not fair enough.
Hence, evaluation metrics are crucial for studying explana-
tion methods. Good metrics should evaluate the results from
the model’s perspective, such as whether the explanations
are faithful to the model [84], [85]. In this section, we
introduce several recently proposed evaluation metrics for
explanation tasks.
7.2.1 Fidelity
First, the explanations should be faithful to the model. They
should identify input features that are important for the
model, not our humans. To evaluate this, the Fidelity+ [55]
metric is recently proposed. Intuitively, if important input
features (nodes/edges/node features) identiﬁed by expla-
nation techniques are discriminative to the model, the pre-
dictions should change signiﬁcantly when these features
are removed. Hence, Fidelity+ is deﬁned as the difference
of accuracy (or predicted probability) between the original
predictions and the new predictions after masking out im-
portant input features [55], [86].
Formally, letGidenote the i-th input graph and f()
denote the GNN classiﬁer to be explained. The prediction
result of this graph is represented as ^yi=argmaxf(Gi).
Then its explanations can be considered as a hard impor-
tance mapmiwhere each element is 0 or 1 to indicate if the
corresponding feature is important. Note that for methods
like ZORRO [56] and Causal Screening [58], the generated

==== Page 12 ====
PREPRINT 12
explanations are discrete masks, which can be directly used
as the importance map. In addition, for methods like GN-
NExplainer [46] and GraphLime [61], the importance scores
are continuous values, then the importance map mican
be obtained by normalization and thresholding or ranking.
Finally, the Fidelity+ score of prediction accuracy can be
computed as
Fidelity +acc=1
NNX
i=1( 1(^yi=yi)  1(^y1 mi
i =yi));(1)
whereyiis the original prediction of graph iandNis the
number of graphs. Here 1 mimeans the complementary
mask that removes the important input features and ^y1 mi
i
is the prediction when feeding the new graph into trained
GNNf(). The indicator function 1(^yi=yi)returns 1 if
^yiandyiare equal and returns 0 otherwise. Note that the
Fidelity +accmetric studies the change of prediction accu-
racy. By focusing on the predicted probability, the Fidelity+
of probability can be deﬁned as
Fidelity +prob=1
NNX
i=1(f(Gi)yi f(G1 mi
i)yi);(2)
whereG1 mi
i represents the new graph obtained by keeping
features ofGibased on the complementary mask 1 mi.
Note thatFidelity +probmonitors the change of predicted
probability, which is more sensitive than Fidelity +acc. For
both metrics, higher values indicate better explanation re-
sults and more discriminative features are identiﬁed.
The Fidelity+ metric studies the prediction change by
removing important nodes/edges/node features. In con-
trast, the metric Fidelity- studies prediction change by keep-
ing important input features and removing unimportant
features. Intuitively, important features should contain dis-
criminative information so that they should lead to similar
predictions as the original predictions even unimportant
features are removed. Formally, the metric Fidelity- can be
computed as
Fidelity acc=1
NNX
i=1( 1(^yi=yi)  1(^ymi
i=yi));(3)
Fidelity prob=1
NNX
i=1(f(Gi)yi f(Gmi
i)yi); (4)
whereGm
iis the new graph when keeping important fea-
tures ofGibased on explanation miand^ymi
iis the new pre-
diction. Note that for both Fidelity accandFidelity prob,
lower values indicate less importance information are re-
moved so that the explanations results are better.
7.2.2 Sparsity
Second, good explanations should be sparse, which means
they should capture the most important input features and
ignore the irrelevant ones. The metric Sparsity measures
such a property. Speciﬁcally, it measures the fraction of
features selected as important by explanation methods [55].Formally, give the graph Giand its hard importance map
mi, the Sparsity metric can be computed as
Sparsity =1
NNX
i=1(1 jmij
jMij); (5)
wherejmijdenotes the number of important input features
(nodes/edges/node features) identiﬁed in miandjMij
means the total number of features in Gi. Note that higher
values indicate the explanations are more sparse and tend
to only capture the most important input information.
7.2.3 Stability
In addition, good explanations should be stable. Intuitively,
when small changes are applied to the input without affect-
ing the predictions, the explanations should remain similar.
The recent proposed Stability metric measures whether an
explanation method is stable [87]. Given an input graph Gi,
its explanations miis regarded as the ground truth. Then
the input graphGiis perturbed by small changes, such as
attaching new nodes/edges, to obtain a new graph ^Gi. Note
thatGiand ^Giare required to have the same predictions.
Then the explanations of ^Giis obtained, denoted as ^mi.
By comparing the difference between miand ^mi, we can
compute the Stability score. Note that lower values indicate
the explanation technique is more stable and more robust to
noisy information. In addition, since graph representations
are sensitive, selecting a proper amount of perturbations
may be challenging.
7.2.4 Accuracy
Furthermore, the Accuracy metric is proposed for synthetic
datasets [46], [87]. In synthesis datasets, even though it
is unknown whether the GNNs make predictions in our
expected way, the rules of building these datasets, such as
graph motifs, can be used as reasonable approximations of
the ground truths. Then for any input graph, we can com-
pare its explanations with such ground truths. For example,
when studying important edges, we can study the matching
rate for important edges in explanations compared with
those in the ground truths. The common metrics for such
comparisons include general accuracy, F1 score, ROC-AUC
score. Note that higher values indicate the explanations are
closer to ground truths and can be considered as better
results. In addition, the Accuracy metric cannot be applied
to real-world datasets due to the lack of ground truths.
7.2.5 Discussions
It is noteworthy that different metrics should be combined
to evaluate explanation results. For example, Sparsity and
Fidelity+/Fidelity- are highly correlated. When the expla-
nation results are soft values, the Sparsity is determined
by a threshold value. Intuitively, larger threshold values
tend to identify fewer features as important and hence
increase the Sparsity score and decrease the Fidelity+ score.
Hence, to fairly compare different explanation methods, we
suggest comparing their Fidelity+ scores with the same level
of Sparsity scores. One possible way is to select a ﬁxed
percentage of input features as important, and then compare
their Fidelity+ or Fidelity- scores.

==== Page 13 ====
PREPRINT 13
Fig. 6. The Fidelity+ comparisons between different GNN explanation techniques under different Sparsity levels.
Fig. 7. The Fidelity- comparisons between different GNN explanation techniques under different Sparsity levels.
In addition, there are several other metrics to evaluate
explanation results, such as Contrastivity [55] and Consis-
tency [87]. The Contrastivity score is based on a strong
assumption that the explanations for different classes should
be signiﬁcantly different, which ignores the common pat-
terns among different classes. Meanwhile, the Consistency
metric assumes that high-performing model architectures
should have consistent explanations. However, different
models may capture different relationships even though
they achieve competitive performance, especially for large-
scale and complex datasets. Hence, we believe such metrics
may not be fair enough to evaluate explanation results and
they are not listed as recommended metrics.8 E XPERIMENTAL STUDIES
To better understand different explanation techniques,
we conduct experiments to compare different methods and
study our evaluation metrics. We provide a benchmark
that can be used to reproduce our reported results and
conduct experiments to compare different techniques for
future studies2.
8.1 Method Comparisons with Fidelity
2. https://github.com/divelab/DIG/tree/dig/benchmarks/xgraph

==== Page 14 ====
PREPRINT 14
TABLE 3
The Fidelity+ comparisons between different GNN explanation techniques and the random designation baseline.
Methods Graph-Twitter Graph-SST2 Graph-SST5 BBBP BA-2Motifs BA-Shapes
Sparsity=0.7 Sparsity=0.6
Random 0.1342 0.0915 0.1419 0.1212 0.4903 0.1884
SubgraphX 0.2836 0.3152 0.2351 0.4521 0.8642 0.3171
Grad-CAM 0.2418 0.2414 0.2118 0.2036 0.6112 N/A
GNN-GI 0.2593 0.2571 0.2031 0.3051 0.0466* 0.1723*
GNNExplainer 0.1452 0.0953 0.1441 0.1057* 0.4972 0.2925
PGExplainer 0.1704 0.1889 0.1854 0.1464 0.1126* 0.2015
GNN-LRP 0.1931 0.1363 0.1813 0.0860* 0.5125 0.3386
DeepLift 0.2336 0.2454 0.1924 0.3039 0.2156* 0.0411*
TABLE 4
The Fidelity- comparisons between different GNN explanation techniques and the random designation baseline.
Methods Graph-Twitter Graph-SST2 Graph-SST5 BBBP BA-2Motifs BA-Shapes
Sparsity=0.7 Sparsity=0.6
Random 0.2825 0.2745 0.2961 0.2168 0.5394 0.2567
SubgraphX -0.1085 -0.0288 -0.0298 -0.0169 0.0686 -0.0792
Grad-CAM -0.0245 -0.0069 0.0987 0.0456 0.2529 N/A
GNN-GI -0.0715 0.0147 0.0951 0.0039 0.5193 0.1318
GNNExplainer 0.1848 0.1992 0.2471 0.1647 0.5337 -0.0017
PGExplainer 0.0887 0.0852 0.1543 0.1183 0.0227 0.0658
GNN-LRP 0.2060 0.1919 0.2164 0.1746 0.4314 -0.0026
DeepLift -0.0382 -0.0183 0.0674 -0.0002 0.4179 0.2790*
TABLE 5
The Accuracy and Stability comparisons between different GNN explanation techniques.
Methods BA-shapes BA-Community
Metric Accuracy Stability Accuracy Stability
GNN-GI 0.8369 0.1361 0.8291 0.1723
GNNExplainer 0.8786 0.1721 0.9194 0.1820
PGExplainer 0.7147 0.0522 0.6843 0.1177
GNN-LRP 0.9243 0.1872 0.8357 0.1239
DeepLift 0.5698 0.0432 0.4190 0.0842
We ﬁrst compare several GNN explanation techniques
using the Fidelity and Sparsity metrics. Speciﬁcally, we com-
pare the Fidelity scores under different Sparsity levels. Note
that here we employ the probability version Fidelity +prob
andFidelity probas the example. To provide a compre-
hensive study, we employ six different datasets; these are,
Graph-SST2, Graph-SST5, Graph-Twitter, BBBP , BA-2Motifs,
and BA-Shapes, which include both graph classiﬁcation and
node classiﬁcation tasks, both real-world and synthetic data.
In addition, we use GNNs as the graph model to compare
different techniques. The results are reported in Figure 6
and 7. Note that GNN-GI is a simpliﬁed version of GNN-
LRP , which is developed based on the gradient input rule.
DeepLift [64] is a popular decomposition method in the
computer vision domain and we also extend it to explain
deep graph models. In addition, since Grad-CAM cannot be
directly applied to node classiﬁcation model, we ignore it
for the BA-Shapes dataset.
In Figure 6, we focus on the Fidelity+ metric, which
measures the prediction probability drop when important
features are removed. Higher Fidelity+ scores indicate the
identiﬁed features are more important for the GNN model.
Obviously, SubgraphX outperforms the other methods sig-
niﬁcantly and consistently, showing that subgraph-level ex-
planations are more desired for GNN models. In addition,
the ﬂow-based techniques, GNN-GI and GNN-LRP , gener-ally obtain higher Fideity+ scores than GNNExplainer and
PGExplainer. Based on these facts, we believe the explana-
tions considering structural information are more suitable
for explaining GNN models. An interesting ﬁnding is that
GNNExplainer and PGExplainer perform well on the node
classiﬁcation task (BA-Shapes) but not as expected for the
graph classiﬁcation models. We also observe that the per-
formance of traditional methods, DeepLift and Grad-CAM,
are not very stable across different datasets. We believe the
main reason is that these two methods are directly migrated
from the image domain and lack graph speciﬁc designs.
In Figure 7, we study the Fidelity- metric, which mea-
sures the prediction probability drop when important fea-
tures are kept and unimportant features are removed. Lower
values mean that fewer important features are removed so
that the explanations are better. The observations are similar
to the results of Fidelity+. SubgraphX still obtains stable
and the best results while ﬂow-based techniques, GNN-GI
and GNN-LRP , are performing better than the others. In
addition, GNNExplainer and PGExplainer still only perform
well on the node classiﬁcation task.
From our observations, we believe it is necessary to con-
sider graph structures when developing GNN explanation
techniques. In addition, when selecting baselines for future
studies, we would recommend that select SubgraphX for all
cases, use GNNExplainer and PGExplainer only for node

==== Page 15 ====
PREPRINT 15
Fig. 8. Visualizations of explanations on the BBBP and Graph-SST2 datasets.
classiﬁcation datasets, and choose GNN-GI and GNN-LRP
only for real-world datasets.
8.2 Study of Fidelity
We further study our proposed evaluation metric Fi-
delity with a random designation of feature importance [86].
Speciﬁcally, we assign the random importance scores to
different edges and compare the performance of different
methods to this random baseline. It helps answer two ques-
tions; these are, is a particular GNN explanation method
better than a random guess? and can the evaluation metrics
successfully capture the difference between them? Intu-
itively, good evaluation metrics should demonstrate the per-
formance difference between well-performed models and
the random baseline. The results are reported in Table 3
and 4.
We show the Fidelity scores of different techniques with
Sparsity levels equal to 0.6 and 0.7. Note that the results
that are inferior to the random baseline are denoted with
. We can observe that the Fidelity metrics show that dif-
ferent GNN explanation techniques generally obtain better
results than the random guess. Such results indicate the
correctness of our proposed Fidelity metrics. Meanwhile,
we notice that the results of DeepLift are worse than the
random baseline on BA-Shapes and BA-Motifs datasets.
We believe the reason is that DeepLift does not consider
graph information and hence is not stable across datasets,
which is consistent with our ﬁndings from Figure 6 and 7.
In addition, GNN-GI is also not performing well on these
two datasets. One possible reason is GNN-GI is developed
based on the gradient input rule so its results are highly
depending on the properties of input graphs. Furthermore,
all methods are performing better than the random baseline
for both Fidelity+ and Fidelity- metrics on our proposed
sentiment graph datasets. It indicates that our proposed
datasets are suitable and stable to evaluate different GNN
explanation techniques.
8.3 Method Comparisons with Accuracy
In this section, we further compare different techniques
using the Accuracy metric. Since the Accuracy metric re-
quires the ground truths for GNN explanations, we apply
extensive experiments on synthetic datasets. We evaluate
different methods using the BA-shapes and BA-Community
datasets, which are taken from GNNExplainer [46]. Speciﬁ-
cally, the ground-truth motifs are converted to ground-truth
edge masks and we compute the AUC-ROC score between
the edge importance scores provided by different explana-
tion techniques and the ground-truth edge masks. Note thatSubgraphX provides subgraph-level explanations, which
cannot be converted to soft edge masks. Hence, SubgraphX
is not directly comparable in terms of AUC-ROC score and
is ignored. In addition, since these two datasets are node
classiﬁcation tasks, Grad-CAM is also ignored. The results
are reported in Table 5. We observe that GNN-LRP obtains
the highest Accuracy on the BA-shapes dataset and GNNEx-
plainer performs the best on the BA-Community dataset.
Overall, we believe GNN-LRP , GNNExplainer, and GNN-
GI have competitive performance while PGExplainer is not
performing as promising as its original reported results.
Our ﬁnding regarding PGExplainer is similar to a recent
reproducibility work [88]. In addition, DeepLift performs
the worst on both datasets, which is reasonable because
DeepLift does not consider any graph-speciﬁc information
when providing explanations. Finally, it is noteworthy that
the ground truths in synthetic datasets are only reasonable
approximations of the ground truths instead of real ground
truths.
8.4 Method Comparisons with Stability
We also compare different methods using the Stability
metric. The key idea of Stability is to apply small changes
to the input graph without affecting the predictions and
measure the difference between explanations. We follow an
existing work [87] to set up the experiments on BA-shapes
and BA-Community datasets. Speciﬁcally, for each node,
we randomly attach two noise nodes to its L-hop neighbor
graph while keeping the ground-truth motifs unchanged.
Then we generate 10 input perturbations for each node
and obtain the corresponding explanations. For each pair
of perturbation and explanation, we evaluate it using the
Accuracy metric above. Finally, the Stability score is the
absolute value of the averaged Accuracy score change for
these 10 input perturbations compared to the original graph.
The results are reported in Table 5. Note that since Stability
is developed based on Accuracy and these two datasets are
node classiﬁcation datasets, SubgraphX and Grad-CAM are
not included. We notice that DeepLift has the best Stability
score but its corresponding Accuracy scores are signiﬁcantly
worse. Such results indicate that DeepLift performs not well
consistently and stably. We also observe that the method
with higher Accuracy tends to have a higher Stability score
(note that a lower Stability score means more stable). Then it
is important to analyze the results considering both of them
and a possible way to understand the Stability score is to
consider it as the error bar of the Accuracy score. Hence,
for those three methods with competitive Accuracy scores,
we believe GNN-LRP and GNNExplainer have better per-

==== Page 16 ====
PREPRINT 16
Evaluation MetricsDatasetsAlgorithmsBA-shapesTree-Grids BA-2MotifsBA-CommunityTree-CycleGraph-SST2 Graph-TwitterGraph-SST5MUTAGTox21BBBPGNNExplainer PGExplainerSubgraphX GNN-LRPDeepLIFTGrad-CAMXGNNFidelity+Fidelity-Sparsity
Fig. 9. A overview of our open-source library, which includes uniﬁed implementations of multiple common baseline methods, commonly used
datasets, and three evaluation metrics.
formance than GNN-GI in terms of Accuracy and Stability.
8.5 Dataset Visualizations
In this section, we present the visualized results from
molecular datasets and our proposed graph sentiment
datasets. The results are reported in Figure 8. The left two
examples are the visualized explanations from the BBBP [82]
dataset and both examples are labeled and predicted as
positive. Note that a positive label means the molecule has
the Blood-Brain-Barrier Penetration property. While the CN
chain is identiﬁed in the ﬁrst example and the CN ring
is captured in the second example, it is challenging for
the users to understand the explanations without chemical
domain knowledge. It’s not clear what is the chemical
meaning of these patterns. Hence, we believe such results
are less intuitive and human-intelligible for non-experts.
The third and fourth examples are from the Graph-SST2
dataset and both are correctly predicted. The third one is
negative and the last one is positive. Since each node is
associated with a word or a symbol, users can understand
the sentiment meaning of each node. Then it is easier to
understand the identiﬁed explanations. For example, in the
third example, the phrase “has nothing fresh” has a clearly
negative sentiment. Hence, we believe our proposed graph
sentiment datasets are more suitable for evaluating GNN
explanation techniques.
9 A NOPEN-SOURCE LIBRARY
To facilitate research into graph neural networks, we de-
velop an open-source library to study the explainability
in GNNs. It is developed as a part of our DIG (Dive
into Graphs) library [89], which is a turnkey library for
graph deep learning research and now publicly available3.
3. https://github.com/divelab/DIG/Our library can be directly used to reproduce results of
existing GNN explanation methods, develop new algo-
rithms, and conduct evaluations for explanation results.
First, in this library, we include the implementations of sev-
eral existing methods, such as GNNExplainer [46], PGEx-
plainer [47], DeepLIFT [64], GNN-LRP [60], Grad-CAM [55],
SubgraphX [48], and XGNN [45]. While several methods
provide ofﬁcial implementations, their development envi-
ronments may vary, thus making fair comparisons difﬁcult.
To this end, we implement these methods in the same
development environment that the key dependencies of
our library are PyTorch 1.6.0 [90] and PyTorch Geometric
1.6.1 [91]. With such a uniﬁed environment, new techniques
can be easily and fairly compared with existing methods.
Second, we include several datasets for GNN explanation
tasks in our library. Note that we not only provide the
aforementioned sentiment graph datasets, but also include
several commonly used datasets, such as MUTAG, BBBP ,
BA-shapes, and BA-2Motifs, etc. These datasets include
synthetic data, text data, and molecular data, and cover
both graph classiﬁcation tasks and node classiﬁcation tasks.
Hence, we believe that using such datasets can provide a
comprehensive study of different GNN explanation meth-
ods. In addition, our library provides implementations of
different evaluation metrics, including Fidelity+, Fidelity-,
and Sparsity. These metrics can be directly applied to eval-
uate the explanation results obtained from our framework
and provide comprehensive evaluations from the model’s
perspective.
10 C ONCLUSION
Graph Neural Networks are widely studied recently but
the explainability of graph models is still less explored. To
investigate the underlying mechanisms of these black-boxes,
several explanation methods are proposed to explain graph

==== Page 17 ====
PREPRINT 17
models, including XGNN, GNNExplainer, etc. These meth-
ods explain graph models from different views and motiva-
tions, thus lacking a comprehensive study and analysis of
these methods. In this work, we provide a systematic and
comprehensive survey for these methods. We ﬁrst propose
a novel taxonomy of existing GNN explanation methods
and introduce the key idea behind each category. Then
we discuss each explanation method in detail, including
the methodology, insights, advantages, and drawbacks. In
addition, we provide a comprehensive analysis of differ-
ent explanation methods. Furthermore, we introduce and
analyze the commonly employed datasets and metrics for
evaluating GNN explanation methods. Last but not the
least, we build three graph datasets from text data, which
are human-understandable and can be directly used for
GNN explanation tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by National Science Foun-
dation grants IIS-1955189 and DBI-2028361.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ji, W. Xu, M. Yang, and K. Yu, “3d convolutional neural net-
works for human action recognition,” IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 221–231, 2013.
[2] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional net-
works for large-scale image recognition,” in International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations , 2015.
[3] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017, pp. 5998–
6008.
[4] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with
graph convolutional networks,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2017.
[5] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are
graph neural networks?” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019.
[6] Z. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Luo, Z. Xu, Y. Xie, L. Wang, L. Cai, Q. Qi,
Z. Yuan, T. Yang, and S. Ji, “Advanced graph and sequence neural
networks for molecular property prediction and drug discovery,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01981 , 2020.
[7] H. Mao, X. Liu, N. Dufﬁeld, H. Yuan, S. Ji, and B. Mo-
hanty, “Context-aware deep representation learning for geo-
spatiotemporal analysis,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (ICDM) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 392–401.
[8] H. Yuan, L. Cai, Z. Wang, X. Hu, S. Zhang, and S. Ji, “Compu-
tational modeling of cellular structures using conditional deep
generative networks,” Bioinformatics , vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 2141–2149,
2019.
[9] K. Maruhashi, M. Todoriki, T. Ohwa, K. Goto, Y. Hasegawa, H. In-
akoshi, and H. Anai, “Learning multi-way relations via tensor
decomposition with neural networks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018.
[10] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside con-
volutional networks: Visualising image classiﬁcation models and
saliency maps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034 , 2013.
[11] D. Smilkov, N. Thorat, B. Kim, F. Vi ´egas, and M. Wattenberg,
“Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding noise,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03825 , 2017.
[12] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba,
“Learning deep features for discriminative localization,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2016, pp. 2921–2929.
[13] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 618–626.[14] P . Dabkowski and Y. Gal, “Real time image saliency for black box
classiﬁers,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2017, pp. 6967–6976.
[15] H. Yuan, L. Cai, X. Hu, J. Wang, and S. Ji, “Interpreting image
classiﬁers by generating discrete masks,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2020.
[16] C. Olah, A. Mordvintsev, and L. Schubert, “Feature visualization,”
Distill , 2017, https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization.
[17] C. Olah, A. Satyanarayan, I. Johnson, S. Carter, L. Schubert, K. Ye,
and A. Mordvintsev, “The building blocks of interpretability,”
Distill , 2018, https://distill.pub/2018/building-blocks.
[18] F. Yang, S. K. Pentyala, S. Mohseni, M. Du, H. Yuan, R. Linder, E. D.
Ragan, S. Ji, and X. Hu, “Xfake: explainable fake news detector
with visualizations,” in The World Wide Web Conference , 2019, pp.
3600–3604.
[19] M. Du, N. Liu, Q. Song, and X. Hu, “Towards explanation of dnn-
based prediction with guided feature inversion,” in Proceedings
of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining , 2018, pp. 1358–1367.
[20] Z. Wang, X. Hu, and S. Ji, “iCapsNets: Towards inter-
pretable capsule networks for text classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.00075 , 2020.
[21] M. Du, N. Liu, F. Yang, S. Ji, and X. Hu, “On attribution of
recurrent neural network predictions via additive decomposition,”
inProceedings of the Web Conference , 2019, pp. 383–393.
[22] H. Yuan, Y. Chen, X. Hu, and S. Ji, “Interpreting deep models
for text analysis via optimization and regularization methods,”
inAAAI-19: Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2019.
[23] M. Du, N. Liu, and X. Hu, “Techniques for interpretable machine
learning,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 68–77,
2019.
[24] A. Rai, “Explainable ai: From black box to glass box,” Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science , vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 137–141, 2020.
[25] F. K. Do ˇsilovi ´c, M. Br ˇci´c, and N. Hlupi ´c, “Explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence: A survey,” in 2018 41st International convention on
information and communication technology, electronics and microelec-
tronics (MIPRO) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 0210–0215.
[26] C. Molnar, Interpretable Machine Learning , 2019, https://
christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/.
[27] Y. Ma and J. Tang, Deep Learning on Graphs . Cambridge University
Press, 2020.
[28] W. L. Hamilton, “Graph representation learning,” Synthesis Lec-
tures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning , vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 1–159.
[29] A. Tolmachev, A. Sakai, M. Todoriki, and K. Maruhashi, “Bermuda
triangles: Gnns fail to detect simple topological structures,” in
ICLR 2021 Workshop on Geometrical and Topological Representation
Learning , 2021.
[30] H. Gao and S. Ji, “Graph U-Nets,” in Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019, pp. 2083–2092.
[31] M. Henaff, J. Bruna, and Y. LeCun, “Deep convolutional networks
on graph-structured data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05163 , 2015.
[32] M. Liu, H. Gao, and S. Ji, “Towards deeper graph neural net-
works,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2020, pp. 338–
348.
[33] M. Zhang, Z. Cui, M. Neumann, and Y. Chen, “An end-to-end
deep learning architecture for graph classiﬁcation.” in AAAI ,
vol. 18, 2018, pp. 4438–4445.
[34] M. Zhang and Y. Chen, “Link prediction based on graph neural
networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2018, pp. 5165–5175.
[35] L. Cai and S. Ji, “A multi-scale approach for graph link prediction,”
inProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 34,
no. 04, 2020, pp. 3308–3315.
[36] L. Cai, J. Li, J. Wang, and S. Ji, “Line graph neural networks for
link prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence , 2021.
[37] M. Liu, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Non-local graph neural networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14612 , 2020.
[38] H. Gao, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Large-scale learnable graph con-
volutional networks,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,
2018, pp. 1416–1424.

==== Page 18 ====
PREPRINT 18
[39] P . Veli ˇckovi ´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P . Li `o, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2018.
[40] K. K. Thekumparampil, C. Wang, S. Oh, and L.-J. Li, “Attention-
based graph neural network for semi-supervised learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.03735 , 2018.
[41] H. Yuan and S. Ji, “Structpool: Structured graph pooling via
conditional random ﬁelds,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2020.
[42] Z. Wang and S. Ji, “Second-order pooling for graph neural net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence , 2020.
[43] H. Gao, Y. Liu, and S. Ji, “Topology-aware graph pooling net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence , 2021.
[44] Y. Xie, S. Katariya, X. Tang, E. Huang, N. Rao, K. Subbian,
and S. Ji, “Task-agnostic graph explanations,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.08335 , 2022.
[45] H. Yuan, J. Tang, X. Hu, and S. Ji, “XGNN: Towards model-level
explanations of graph neural networks,” ser. KDD ’20. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 430–438.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403085
[46] Z. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, “Gnnex-
plainer: Generating explanations for graph neural networks,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems , 2019, pp. 9244–
9255.
[47] D. Luo, W. Cheng, D. Xu, W. Yu, B. Zong, H. Chen, and X. Zhang,
“Parameterized explainer for graph neural network,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 19 620–19 631.
[48] H. Yuan, H. Yu, J. Wang, K. Li, and S. Ji, “On explainability of
graph neural networks via subgraph explorations,” in Proceedings
of The 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021, pp.
12 241–12 252.
[49] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models
for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,”
Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 206–215, 2019.
[50] J. Chen, L. Song, M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan, “Learn-
ing to explain: An information-theoretic perspective on model
interpretation,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80. PMLR, 2018,
pp. 882–891.
[51] U. Alon, “Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches,”
Nature Reviews Genetics , vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 450–461, 2007.
[52] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, and
U. Alon, “Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex
networks,” Science , vol. 298, no. 5594, pp. 824–827, 2002.
[53] U. Alon, An introduction to systems biology: design principles of
biological circuits . CRC press, 2019.
[54] F. Baldassarre and H. Azizpour, “Explainability techniques for
graph convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML) Workshops, 2019 Workshop on Learning and
Reasoning with Graph-Structured Representations , 2019.
[55] P . E. Pope, S. Kolouri, M. Rostami, C. E. Martin, and H. Hoff-
mann, “Explainability methods for graph convolutional neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2019, pp. 10 772–10 781.
[56] T. Funke, M. Khosla, and A. Anand, “Hard masking for
explaining graph neural networks,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=uDN8pRAdsoC
[57] M. S. Schlichtkrull, N. D. Cao, and I. Titov, “Interpreting graph
neural networks for fnlpgwith differentiable edge masking,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
[58] X. Wang, Y. Wu, A. Zhang, X. He, and T. seng Chua, “Causal
screening to interpret graph neural networks,” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=nzKv5vxZfge
[59] R. Schwarzenberg, M. H ¨ubner, D. Harbecke, C. Alt, and L. Hennig,
“Layerwise relevance visualization in convolutional text graph
classiﬁers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10911 , 2019.
[60] T. Schnake, O. Eberle, J. Lederer, S. Nakajima, K. T. Schutt, K.-R.
Muller, and G. Montavon, “Higher-order explanations of graph
neural networks via relevant walks.” IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence , vol. PP , 2021.
[61] Q. Huang, M. Yamada, Y. Tian, D. Singh, D. Yin, and Y. Chang,
“Graphlime: Local interpretable model explanations for graph
neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06216 , 2020.[62] Y. Zhang, D. Defazio, and A. Ramesh, “Relex: A model-agnostic
relational model explainer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00305 , 2020.
[63] M. Vu and M. T. Thai, “Pgm-explainer: Probabilistic graphical
model explanations for graph neural networks,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 12 225–12 235.
[64] A. Shrikumar, P . Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important
features through propagating activation differences,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2017, pp. 3145–3153.
[65] J. Chen, L. Song, M. Wainwright, and M. Jordan, “Learning to
explain: An information-theoretic perspective on model interpre-
tation,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Dy and
A. Krause, Eds., vol. 80. Stockholmsm ¨assan, Stockholm Sweden:
PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 883–892.
[66] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy
gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function ap-
proximation,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,
vol. 12, pp. 1057–1063, 1999.
[67] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
gumbel-softmax,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations , 2016.
[68] C. Louizos, M. Welling, and D. P . Kingma, “Learning sparse
neural networks through l0regularization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.01312 , 2017.
[69] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang,
A. Guez, T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton et al. , “Mastering
the game of go without human knowledge,” nature , vol. 550, no.
7676, pp. 354–359, 2017.
[70] H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, Contributions to the Theory of Games .
Princeton University Press, 1953, vol. 2.
[71] M. Todoriki, M. Shingu, S. Yano, A. Tolmachev, T. Komikado, and
K. Maruhashi, “Semi-automatic reliable explanations for predic-
tion in graphs,” in 2021 IEEE 11th Annual Computing and Commu-
nication Workshop and Conference (CCWC) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 0311–
0320.
[72] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “” why should i trust
you?” explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,” in Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining , 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[73] M. Yamada, W. Jitkrittum, L. Sigal, E. P . Xing, and M. Sugiyama,
“High-dimensional feature selection by feature-wise kernelized
lasso,” Neural computation , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 185–207, 2014.
[74] D. Margaritis and S. Thrun, “Bayesian network induction via local
neighborhoods,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,
vol. 12, pp. 505–511, 1999.
[75] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K. M ¨uller, and
W. Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classiﬁer de-
cisions by layer-wise relevance propagation,” PLoS ONE , vol. 10,
no. 7, p. e0130140, 2015.
[76] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab ´asi, “Statistical mechanics of complex
networks,” Reviews of modern physics , vol. 74, no. 1, p. 47, 2002.
[77] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y.
Ng, and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compo-
sitionality over a sentiment treebank,” in Proceedings of the 2013
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , 2013,
pp. 1631–1642.
[78] L. Dong, F. Wei, C. Tan, D. Tang, M. Zhou, and K. Xu, “Adaptive
recursive neural network for target-dependent twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (volume 2: Short papers) , 2014,
pp. 49–54.
[79] M. Gardner, J. Grus, M. Neumann, O. Tafjord, P . Dasigi, N. Liu,
M. Peters, M. Schmitz, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Allennlp: A deep
semantic natural language processing platform,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.07640 , 2018.
[80] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing,” in NAACL , 2019.
[81] A. K. Debnath, R. L. Lopez de Compadre, G. Debnath, A. J.
Shusterman, and C. Hansch, “Structure-activity relationship of
mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic nitro compounds. correla-
tion with molecular orbital energies and hydrophobicity,” Journal
of medicinal chemistry , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 786–797, 1991.
[82] I. F. Martins, A. L. Teixeira, L. Pinheiro, and A. O. Falcao, “A
bayesian approach to in silico blood-brain barrier penetration

==== Page 19 ====
PREPRINT 19
modeling,” Journal of chemical information and modeling , vol. 52,
no. 6, pp. 1686–1697, 2012.
[83] Z. Wu, B. Ramsundar, E. N. Feinberg, J. Gomes, C. Geniesse, A. S.
Pappu, K. Leswing, and V . Pande, “Moleculenet: a benchmark for
molecular machine learning,” Chemical science , vol. 9, no. 2, pp.
513–530, 2018.
[84] A. Jacovi and Y. Goldberg, “Towards faithfully interpretable NLP
systems: How should we deﬁne and evaluate faithfulness?” in
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics . Online: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Jul. 2020, pp. 4198–4205.
[85] S. Wiegreffe and Y. Pinter, “Attention is not not explanation,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . Hong Kong, China:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2019, pp. 11–20.
[86] S. Hooker, D. Erhan, P .-J. Kindermans, and B. Kim, “A benchmark
for interpretability methods in deep neural networks,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019, pp. 9737–9748.
[87] B. Sanchez-Lengeling, J. Wei, B. Lee, E. Reif, P . Wang, W. W. Qian,
K. McCloskey, L. Colwell, and A. Wiltschko, “Evaluating attribu-
tion for graph neural networks,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , vol. 33, 2020.
[88] L. Holdijk, M. Boon, S. Henckens, and L. de Jong, “[re]
parameterized explainer for graph neural network,” in ML
Reproducibility Challenge 2020 , 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=8JHrucviUf
[89] M. Liu, Y. Luo, L. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Yuan, S. Gui, H. Yu, Z. Xu,
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. Yan, H. Liu, C. Fu, B. Oztekin, X. Zhang, and
S. Ji, “DIG: A turnkey library for diving into graph deep learning
research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12608 , 2021.
[90] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison,
A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy,
B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alch ´e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[91] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
PyTorch Geometric,” in ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning
on Graphs and Manifolds , 2019.

