==== Page 1 ====
1
Explanations in Autonomous Driving: A Survey
Daniel Omeiza, Helena Webb, Marina Jirotka, Lars Kunze
Abstract —The automotive industry has witnessed an increasing
level of development in the past decades; from manufacturing
manually operated vehicles to manufacturing vehicles with a high
level of automation. With the recent developments in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI), automotive companies now employ blackbox
AI models to enable vehicles to perceive their environments and
make driving decisions with little or no input from a human. With
the hope to deploy autonomous vehicles (A V) on a commercial
scale, the acceptance of A V by society becomes paramount and
may largely depend on their degree of transparency, trustwor-
thiness, and compliance with regulations. The assessment of the
compliance of A Vs to these acceptance requirements can be facil-
itated through the provision of explanations for A Vs’ behaviour.
Explainability is therefore seen as an important requirement
for A Vs. A Vs should be able to explain what they have ‘seen’,
done, and might do in environments in which they operate. In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of the existing
body of work around explainable autonomous driving. First,
we open with a motivation for explanations by highlighting and
emphasising the importance of transparency, accountability, and
trust in A Vs; and examining existing regulations and standards
related to A Vs. Second, we identify and categorise the different
stakeholders involved in the development, use, and regulation
of A Vs and elicit their explanation requirements for A V . Third,
we provide a rigorous review of previous work on explanations
for the different A V operations (i.e., perception, localisation,
planning, control, and system management). Finally, we identify
pertinent challenges and provide recommendations, such as a
conceptual framework for A V explainability. This survey aims to
provide the fundamental knowledge required of researchers who
are interested in explainability in A Vs.
©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.Index Terms —Explanations, explainable AI, accountability,
trust, autonomous vehicles, robotics, intelligent vehicles, human-
machine interaction, regulations, standards
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE advent of autonomous vehicles (A Vs) is a signiﬁcant
milestone in the automotive industry. The increasing
growth rate in the industry is considered to be a result of the
increasing research knowledge in vehicle dynamics. Moreover,
the enhancements of sensing devices (e.g., LiDAR [1], [2]
and Radar [3], [4]) and the emergence of deep learning algo-
rithms have also contributed to the industry growth. Despite
This work was supported by the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) through the project RoboTIPS: Developing Re-
sponsible Robots for the Digital Economy, grant reference EP/S005099/1.
It was also supported by the Assuring Autonomy International Programme
(Demonstrator project: Sense-Assess-eXplain (SAX)), a partnership between
Lloyd’s Register Foundation and the University of York; the Trustworthy
Autonomous Systems Hub’s project RoAD (Responsible A V Data), grant
reference EP/V00784X/1; and the Responsible Technology Institute, Oxford.
Daniel Omeiza and Marina Jirotka are with the Department of Computer
Science, University of Oxford, UK (e-mail: daniel.omeiza@cs.ox.ac.uk).
Helena Webb is with the School of Computer Science, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK (e-mail: helena.webb@nottingham.ac.uk)
Lars Kunze is with the Oxford Robotics Institute, Department of Engineer-
ing Science, University of Oxford, UK (e-mail: lars@robots.ox.ac.uk)the technological advancements, the successful deployment
of A Vs in the real world may greatly depend on users’
perception of safety, and in turn, trust. Accidents caused by
A V technologies [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10] hamper trust [11].
Thus, effective ways to build conﬁdence and trust in A Vs need
to be investigated. Explanation provision is considered as a
way of building conﬁdence and trust in A V technologies [12],
[13].
People (e.g., developers and regulators) can beneﬁt from
explanations that explain the actions and behaviour of au-
tonomous systems. Consider the Molly problem1described by
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in relation
to A Vs. A young girl called Molly was crossing the road
alone and was hit by an unoccupied self-driving vehicle. There
were no eye-witnesses. Post-hoc explanations containing the
vehicle’s observations, the road rules, and trafﬁc signs it
acted on will serve as clues to the causes of the accident.
These clues will inform the accident investigation process.
Moreover, system auditors can also beneﬁt from an easier
auditing process in the presence of explanations to provide
an assurance of safety.
Further, the general stress on explainable AI (XAI) and
the “right to explanation” as stipulated in the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [14] underscores the essence
of explanations in complex systems, especially when they
are powered by black-box models. Such complex systems,
such as, autonomous vehicles are likely to make decisions
that are strange and confusing to end-users. This is because
AI decisionality is inherently different from human decision-
making processes [15]. This is especially the case for vehicles
with a high level of automation, e.g., vehicles in SAE Level
3 or above—the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
automation categorisation tends to be the predominant cat-
egorisation model used by automotive engineers. This cate-
gorisation model classiﬁes vehicles into ﬁve levels based on
automation [16]. As highly automated vehicles make high-
stake decisions that can signiﬁcantly affect end-users, the
vehicles should explain or justify their decisions to meet set
transparency guidelines.
A large body of literature on explainable AI focuses on
explaining single neurons or a single artiﬁcial neural network
model while only a handful focuses on explaining an entire
goal-based system like autonomous vehicles which possess
unique architecture and various interacting sub-systems. Pro-
viding explanations for the behaviour of such goal-based
systems is therefore essential.
In this paper, we provide a structured and comprehensive
overview of the recent work on explanations in autonomous
driving. Previous literature surveys such as [17], [18], [19]
1https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/ai4ad/Pages/MollyProblem.aspxarXiv:2103.05154v4  [cs.HC]  9 Nov 2021

==== Page 2 ====
2
focused on approaches aimed at ‘opening’ black-box machine
learning mechanisms (data-driven XAI) applied in deep learn-
ing. In contrast, Anjomshoae et al. [20] provided a systematic
literature review generally on explainable agencies (i.e., ex-
plaining the behaviour of goal-driven agents and robots) which
entailed the use of descriptive statistics to show the amount of
research done around explainable agencies with no particular
focus on autonomous driving. Also, Zablocki et al.’s [21]
provided a survey that focused on vision-based autonomous
driving systems.
Our paper aims to ﬁll the gap in the academic literature
by providing a comprehensive survey on explanations for
the behaviour of A Vs at different aspects of operations (i.e.,
perception, localisation, planning, vehicle control, and system
management) with the requirements of different stakeholders
in mind. We also propose recommendations such as a con-
ceptual framework for A V explainability including possible
user interfaces, and some regulatory considerations for A V
explainability. In this paper, a stakeholder is an individual or
an agent whose roles involve interaction with an A V . While
there may be some technology overlap between autonomous
vehicles, uninhabited aerial vehicles (UA V) and autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUV), we will focus on autonomous
vehicles in this survey to enable us to cover enough depth.
We note that there are different deﬁnitions of explanations
in psychology [22], philosophy [23] and AI [24], [25]; we
assume a more general meaning by referring to an explanation
as a piece of information presented in an intelligible way as a
reason or part of a reason for an outcome, event or an effect
in text, speech, or visual forms. We refer to explainability
as the ability of a system to support the provision of this
form of explanations. We refer to interpretable techniques as
techniques that are transparent enough to support meaningful
interpretations to their intended audience (mostly developers).
We do not expect laypeople to be able to easily and quickly
make sense of interpretable models [26]. However, intelligible
explanations (e.g., in natural language) for the outputs of the
interpretable models will be beneﬁcial to laypeople. This type
of explanations are easier to obtain from interpretable models
as shown in [27], [28].
The rest of this paper is organised into 9 sections: Section II
presents the general need for explanations in autonomous
vehicles. Section III presents and discusses the regulations
and standards related to explanations in A Vs. The different
stakeholders who interact with A Vs are identiﬁed and cate-
gorised in Section III-C. The categorisation system deﬁned
in Section III-C is used in the rest of the paper. Section IV
broadly categorises explanations into many dimensions and
provides several literature references for the different cate-
gories. Section V describes the core operations of an A V
and reviews existing work on explanations in relation to
the different core A V operations. These operations include
perception, localisation, planning, and control. Section VI ex-
amines A V system management. System management involves
event data recorders and human-machine interaction which are
crucial in explanations. Section VII discusses challenges in the
explainable A V landscape and provides recommendations for
future work in the ﬁeld. Section VIII concludes the paper witha summary.
II. N EED FOR EXPLANATIONS
The need for explanations in autonomous vehicles stems
from the increasing concerns for transparency and account-
ability of autonomous vehicles. It is believed that explanations
are one way of achieving these goals. In this section, we
discuss the need for explanation in the light of transparency,
accountability, and trust.
A. Transparency and Accountability
One generally agreed upon notion of accountability is
associated with the process of being called ‘to account’ to
some authority for one’s actions [29]. Accountability, in broad
terms, often encompasses closely related concepts, such as
responsibility and liability [30]. Mulgan [31] elucidated that
accountability entails responsibility but, unlike responsibility,
it requires explanations about actions and it cannot be shared.
Meanwhile, liability is a legal or ﬁnancial responsibility [32].
In the human and machine context, Doshi-Velez et al. [33] con-
ceptualise accountability as the ability to determine whether
the decision of a system was made in compliance with
procedural and substantive standards, and importantly, to hold
one responsible when there is a failure to meet the standards.
In autonomous driving, accountability becomes a challenging
issue mainly because of the various operations involved (e.g.,
perception, planning, controls, system management among
others) that demand inputs from multiple stakeholders; this
can result in responsibility gaps.
As identiﬁed by Mulgan [31], achieving accountability
requires social interaction and exchange. At one end, the
requester of an account seeks answers and rectiﬁcation while
at the other end, the respondent or explainer responds and
accepts responsibility if necessary. In the context of this paper,
the A V is being called by a stakeholder to provide an account;
we expect the A V to provide an account in the form of an
explanation that is intelligible to the requester to facilitate
the assignment of responsibilities. There have been debates
on how responsibility should be allocated for certain A V
accidents. Companies have stated the need for clear rules to be
set in advance. For example, Honda has mentioned that it is
necessary to put legal frameworks in place in order to clarify
where the responsibility lies in case of the occurrence of an
accident after the realisation of fully automated driving [34].
Technical solutions are also being put forward. One such
example is the proposal for the use of a ‘blackbox’, similar to
a ﬂight recorder in an aircraft, to facilitate investigations [35].
Shashua and Shalev-Shwartz [36] also advocated for the use
of mathematical models to clarify faults in order to facilitate
a conclusive determination of responsibility.
The social aspect of accountability described by Mul-
gan [31], will demand that the aforementioned recommended
approaches are able to plug into explanation mechanisms
where causes and effects of actions can be communicated
to the relevant stakeholders in intelligible ways. In addition
to accountability for accident cases, which has gained much
attention in the industry reports, actions resulting in undesired,

==== Page 3 ====
3
discriminatory, and inequitable outcomes also need to be
accounted for. This means that stakeholders such as passengers
or auxiliary drivers who may not have direct involvement in
the management of the A Vs should be able to instantaneously
request accounts as intelligible explanations for such undesired
actions when they occur.
B. Trust
Faas et al. [37] argued that research investigating trust in
automation has been around for decades, i.e., since the intro-
duction of interpersonal trust theories into the human-machine
interaction domain by [38], [39], [40], [37]. While various
deﬁnitions of trust in automation have been proposed, the most
commonly adopted deﬁnition is that put forward in [41]. Lee
and See [41] consider trust as a social psychological concept
that is important for understanding automation partnership.
The authors emphasise that trust is the attitude that an agent
or automation will help an individual to achieve their goals
in a situation characterised by uncertainty and vulnerability.
Trust in automation, as made evident in [42], [43], [44],
has signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the acceptance of and reliance
on automated systems. As opposed to a binary categorisation,
trust can be more ﬁnely calibrated so that an individual’s trust
levels on an automated system adequately reﬂects the actual
capabilities and functional scope of an automated system. This
trust calibration is considered to be an important requirement
for safe and efﬁcient human-machine interaction [45], [38].
While calibration is useful, miscalibrated trust is disastrous
as it can lead to distrust or overtrust (i.e., excessive trust).
This will either make the user under-use the system or use
the system beyond the scope of its functionalities [37]. The
process of using available information to assess and learn
about the trustworthiness of a system to adapt trust levels is
referred to as trust calibration [46], [45], [47].
Information about the functioning modes of an A V at the
user’s disposal can help the user create a better understanding
of the A V’s behaviour, eventually adding to the user’s knowl-
edge base [48], and helpful for constructing calibrated trust.
This information could be presented as explanations of the
operational modes and behaviour of a complex system, such
as an A V , especially when it acts outside the expectations of
the user. We note that trust can break down when there are
frequent failures without adequate explanations, and regaining
trust once lost can be challenging [49], [50]. For example,
previous reports on A V accidents may have a negative impact
on calibrated trust in A Vs. According to Hussainet al. [51],
a serious challenge evident in intelligent transport systems
is the lack of trust from the consumer’s perspective. The
public fears that the claims on accidents reduction through the
introduction of A Vs may be misleading as they consider human
drivers to be better than A Vs in handling [51] unforeseen and
uncharacteristic trafﬁc situations. Abraham et al. [52] also
reported that the consumers’ perception of trust is still not
as high as expected in spite of the great potentials promised
by A Vs, claiming that the public is still hesitant about the
technology, and still feel uncomfortable using it. Trust is
therefore imperative for achieving widespread deployment and
use of A Vs.Researchers (e.g., in [53]) suggest that the provision of
meaningful explanations from A Vs to stakeholders (e.g., pas-
sengers, pedestrians and other road participants) is one way to
build the necessary trust in A V technology. Other empirical
studies [13], [12], [54] have shown that the provision of
explanations in A Vs can inﬂuence trust. While it has been
argued (e.g., in [43], [55], [56]) that trust is a substantial
subjective predicting factor for the adoption of automated
driving systems, several studies have shown the importance of
viewing trust formation and calibration in A Vs as a temporal
process inﬂuenced by prior information or background knowl-
edge [57], [58]. Explanation provision in autonomous driving
over time is therefore crucial. In the following section, we will
discuss explanations from the regulatory perspective.
III. R EGULATIONS , STANDARDS ,AND STAKEHOLDERS
A. Explanation and AV Regulations
There are increasing concerns about the collection and use
of personal data in algorithms that make critical decisions
about people in domains like healthcare, ﬁnance, insurance,
and criminal justice. We explore this section mainly from the
GDPR perspective. The European Union GDPR implemented
in 2018 aims to provide more control rights to individuals over
their personal data [59].
The GDPR also sets guidelines related to the explanation
of decisions made based on users’ data. The GDPR guideline
mandates that controllers (entities handling people’s personal
data) provide meaningful information about the logic involved
in the decisions made based on people’s data and what the
likely consequences are for individuals. It also demands the
appropriate use of mathematical or statistical procedures on
such data. This is commonly referred to as the ‘right to
explanation’. In addition, the GDPR Article 12 on transparency
demands that the provision of information/explanation to data
subjects must be done in an intelligible way (i.e., in a clear
and easy to understand manner [60]). These clauses highlight
the user’s right to question the decision of a system and the
demand for explanations, especially when decisions are made
based on their data.
An autonomous vehicle can potentially be used to collect
sensitive information from users either legally or illegally. By
tracking an A V , a passenger’s location is known, a passenger’s
frequent routes can be determined, as can the time of the
day they typically travel. Hence, autonomous vehicles should
not be exempt from the GDPR clause on explanations, espe-
cially when they operate in the regions where this regulation
holds. Consequently, the acceptance and adoption of A Vs
will introduce new regulations and standards challenges for
governments and experts [51]. Many current regulations which
relate to human drivers will need to be revised when a
vehicle drives itself in society [61]. That said, a few guidelines
have been developed recently to govern autonomous driving.
Closely related to A V explainability, the National Transporta-
tion Safety Board (NTSB) made a call for efﬁcient event
data recording in A Vs which could facilitate the provision of
plausible and faithful explanations to ensure correct accident
investigation [7]. More details on event data recording are

==== Page 4 ====
4
provided in Section VI. Countries are also deﬁning new
regulations for autonomous vehicles, for example, the Scottish
Law Commission’s regulation for autonomous vehicles [62].
Unfortunately, these regulations( [62], [63]) do not directly
address the explainability challenge. We further elaborate on
this in Section VII.
Refer to [64] for further details on regulations and ethical
guidelines.
B. AV Standards
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) apply advanced elec-
tronics, information and communications technologies to roads
and automobiles. This is done to collect, store, and pro-
vide trafﬁc information in real-time for convenient and safe
transport; improved reliability, efﬁciency, and quality; and
the reduction in energy consumption [65]. The international
standard organisation technical committee 204 (ISO TC204),
the IEEE, and related standard organisations have set stan-
dards for A Vs and ITS in general. The IEEE Initiatives, in
particular, has a vision for prioritising human well-being with
autonomous and intelligent systems, and the assessment of
gaps in standardisation for safe autonomous driving. These
standards directly or indirectly demonstrate the necessity of
explainability in A Vs. In Table I, we identiﬁed standards that
are related to safety and information/explanation provision in
A Vs. We categorised these standards into two sets: Human
safety-related standards and information or data exchange
related standards. For more details on A V related standards,
refer to the ISO report on intelligent transport systems in [66]
and the Apex.AI document on automated mobility [64]. To
the best of our knowledge, there is currently no explainability
standards for autonomous driving. To address this gap, we
have elaborated in Section VII on how some of the existing A V
regulations and the related standards highlighted in Table I can
be extended to directly support explainability in autonomous
driving.
We now describe different stakeholders involved in A V
explanations in the next section.
C. Stakeholders
Explanation provision in autonomous driving has many
personas due to the different purposes of explanations. The
level of detail (in terms of information) anticipated by the
explanation recipients, the explanation type and the mode of
communication vary with respect to the type of recipient and
purpose for the explanation. This highlights the importance
of explanation personalisation with respect to stakeholders.
Personalisation is seen to be crucial for the generation of intel-
ligible or understandable explanations [67], [68], [69]. While
lay users who lack technical domain expertise may be satisﬁed
with a user-friendly explanation that requires less background
knowledge to interpret, developers and engineers would prefer
a ﬁnely detailed explanation with technical terms that would
support a deeper conception of the internal functioning of a
model [70]. In this light, the consideration of the persona of the
explainee is necessary [71]. Going forward, we refer to anyone
who has to engage with an explanation as a stakeholder.Having identiﬁed the typical personas in the literature, we
divided stakeholders into three broad categories: Class A (all
types of end-users and society), Class B (all technical groups,
e.g. developers), and Class C (all forms of regulatory bodies
including insurers). See the further description:
1)Class A: End-Users
Passenger: this is the in-vehicle agent who may
interact with the explanation agency in the A V but
is not responsible for any driving operation.
Auxiliary Driver: This is a special in-vehicle pas-
senger who may also interact with the explanation
agency in the A V and can also participate in the
driving operations. This kind of participant may
mainly exist in SAE level 3 and 4 vehicles.
Pedestrian: this is the agent outside the A V (external
agent) who may interact with the A V to convey
intentions either through gestures or an external
human-machine interface (eHMI).
Pedestrian with Reduced Mobility (PRM): this is
the agent outside the A V (external agent) who may
interact with the A V to convey intentions either
through gestures or an external human-machine
interface (eHMI) but have reduced mobility capacity
(e.g., pedestrian in a wheelchair).
Other Road Participants: these are other agents
outside the A V (external agent) who may interact
with the A V to convey intentions either through
gestures or an external human-machine interface
(eHMI) (e.g., cyclists, other vehicles).
2)Class B: Developers and Technicians
A V Developer: the agent who develops the automa-
tion software and tools for A Vs.
Automobile Technicians: the agent who repairs and
maintains A Vs.
3)Class C: Regulators and Insurers
System Auditor: the agent who inspects A V design
processes and operations in order to ascertain com-
pliance with regulations and guidelines.
Regulator: the agent who sets guidelines and regu-
lations for the design, use, and maintenance of A Vs.
Accident Investigator: the agent who investigates the
cause of an accident in which an A V was involved.
Insurer: the agent who insures the A V against van-
dalism, damage, theft, and accidents.
In the next section, we provide a categorisation of ex-
planations based on methodologies, and situate the different
stakeholders in the categorisation.
IV. E XPLANATION CATEGORISATIONS
Explanations serve different functions in different con-
texts [70]. Therefore, the methods of generation and evaluation
are context and purpose-dependent [72]. Wang et al. [73] iden-
tiﬁed three approaches that have been adopted in the academic
literature in either developing or evaluating explanations.
First, the authors in [73] highlighted the existence of
unvalidated guidelines for the design and evaluations of

==== Page 5 ====
5
TABLE I
SELECTED STANDARDS FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES . THESE STANDARDS UNDERLINE THE IMPORTANCE OF SAFE ,TRANSPARENT ,AND EXPLAINABLE
AVS.
Aim Standard & Description Stakeholder
ISO 19237:2017 Pedestrian detection and collision mitigation systems
ISO 22078:2020 Bicyclist detection and collision mitigation systems
ISO 26262:2011: Road vehicles – Functional safety. An international standard for
functional safety of electrical and/or electronic (E/E) systems in production automobiles
(2011). It addresses possible hazards caused by the malfunctioning behaviour of E/E
safety-related systems, including the interaction of these systems.
ISO 21448:2019: Safety Of The Intended Functionality (SOTIF). Provides guidance
on design, veriﬁcation and validation measures. Guidelines on data collection (e.g. time
of day, vehicle speed, weather conditions) (2019). (complementary to ISO 26262).Class B and C
A V Developers,
Regulators,
System Auditors,
Accident Investi-
gators,
InsurerUL 4600: Standard for Safety for Evaluation of Autonomous Products. a safety
case approach to ensuring autonomous product safety in general, and self-driving cars
in particular.
Human SafetySaFAD: Safety First for Automated Driving. White paper by eleven companies
from the automotive industry and automated driving sector about frameworks for
development, testing and validation of safe automated passenger vehicles (SAE Level
3/4).
RSS (Intel) / SFF (NVIDIA): Formal Models & Methods to evaluate safety of A V
on top of ISO 26262 and ISO 21448 (proposed by companies).
IEEE Initiatives: “Reliable, Safe, Secure, and Time-Deterministic Intelligent Systems
(2019)”; “A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well-being with Autonomous and Intelligent
Systems” (2019); “Assessment of standardization gaps for safe autonomous driving
(2019)”.
The Autonomous: Global safety reference, created by the community leading automo-
tive industry players, which facilitates the adoption of autonomous mobility on a grand
scale (2019).
ISO/TR 21707:2008: Integrated transport information, management, and control—
Data quality in intelligent transport systems (ITS) . “speciﬁes a set of standard
terminology for deﬁning the quality of data being exchanged between data suppliers
and data consumers in the ITS domain” (2018).Class A and C
Passengers,
Auxiliary
Drivers,
Pedestrians,
Regulators,
System Auditors,
Accident
Investigators
InsurersISO 13111-1:2017: The use of personal ITS station to support ITS service provision
for travellers. “Deﬁnes the general information and use cases of the applications based
on the personal ITS station to provide and maintain ITS services to travellers including
drivers, passengers, and pedestrians” (2017).
Information/Data
ExchangeISO 15075:2003: In-vehicle navigation systems—Communications message set
requirements. “Speciﬁes message content and format utilized by in-vehicle navigation
systems” (2003).
ISO/TR 20545:2017: Vehicle/roadway warning and control systems. “Provides the
results of consideration on potential areas and items of standardization for automated
driving systems” (2017).
ISO 17361:2017: Lane departure warning.
ISO/DIS 23150: Data communication between sensors and data fusion unit for
automated driving functions.
explanations. They claim that these kinds of guidelines are
based on authors’ experiences with no further substantial
justiﬁcation. Hence, explanation generation algorithms that
generate explanations as short rules [74], or those that apply
inﬂuence scores [75] (such as partial dependence plots [76])
without sufﬁcient justiﬁcation for the explanation choices
made are assumed to be based on unvalidated guidelines.
Thus, the explanations generated by these algorithms may
not be appropriate for class A stakeholders due to the low
intelligibility quality of the explanations [70].
Second, researchers suggested (in [77]) that understanding
users’ requirements might be helpful in explainable AI re-
search. It is on this premise that some research on explanation
design approaches have been thought to be empirically de-
rived . This type of research elicits explanation requirements
from user surveys in order to determine the right explanation
for a use-case with explanation interfaces [73]. For instance,
explanation frameworks have been proposed for recommender
systems [78], case-based reasoning [79], intelligent decision
aids [80], and intelligible context-aware systems [81] uponthe elicitation of users’ requirements through surveys and user
studies. Through user studies, Lim and Anind [81] examined
explanations based on intelligibility types. The intelligibility
types used were: ‘why’ (factual), ‘why not’ (contrastive),
‘what if’ and ‘how to’ (counterfactual) explanations which
are considered relevant for ﬁltering causes for an effect. We
interchangeably refer to these intelligibility types as causal
ﬁlters or investigatory queries in this paper.
Third, some explanation design methods are derived from
psychological constructs from formal theories in the aca-
demic literature [73]. Some of these methods (e.g., in [53])
draw on philosophy, cognitive psychology, social science,
and AI theories to inform explanation design for explanation
frameworks. For example, Akula et al. [82] employed the
Theory of Mind (ToM) in the development of an explanation
framework (X-ToM). The authors in [82] claimed that in their
explanation framework, the mental representations in ToM
were incorporated to learn an optimal explanation policy that
took into account human’s perception and beliefs. Simply put,
a policy, as used in this context is an agent’s strategy for

==== Page 6 ====
6
TABLE II
CAUSAL FILTERS AND EXAMPLE INVESTIGATORY QUERIES .
Causal Filter Class Example Query
Why Not (Contrastive) Causal why did you not do Y?
Why (Factual) Causal why did you do X?
What If (Counterfactual) Causal what would you do if Z?
What Non-Causal what are you doing?
achieving a goal [83]. Theory of mind involves explaining
people’s behaviour on the basis of their minds: their knowl-
edge, their beliefs, and their desires [84]. We note that there are
criticisms of the theory of mind and mental models. However,
this is out of the scope of this paper.
We use the three discussed methodologies as one of our cat-
egorisation dimensions. Explanations methods that are mainly
based on the researcher’s experience without further user
studies to justify claims are categorised under unvalidated
guidelines (UG). Those that adopted a user study to elicit
users experience are categorised as empirically derived (ED),
and those that built on psychology theories as are categorised
under psychological constructs from formal theories (PC).
Other dimensions for our categorisation include causal ﬁlter,
explanation style, interactivity, dependence, system, scope,
stakeholders, and operation.
The description of the various dimensions of explanation is
detailed below.
a) Causal Filters: explanations resulting from causal ﬁl-
ters use selected causes relevant to interpreting an observation,
with respect to existing knowledge [73]. The explanations pro-
vided in this category are assumed to be usually generated by
causal ﬁlters or investigatory queries like why, why not, how to,
andwhat if [60]. These causal ﬁlters are assumed to produce
explanations that could be factual (e.g. ‘why’ explanation),
contrastive (‘why not’ explanation), or counterfactual (‘how
to’ and ‘what if’ explanation). See Table II.
b) Explanation Style: explanations are categorised based
on the type of information or elements referenced in the
explanation and the forms they are presented in [72].
Input Inﬂuence: a list of input variables is presented
along with quantitative measures of their inﬂuence (either
positive or negative) on a decision.
Sensitivity: shows what magnitude of change is required
in an input variable in order to change the output class.
Note that this is different from sensitivity used in machine
learning evaluation.
Case-based: picks out a relevant case from the model’s
training data that is most similar to the decision made,
which is then used to explain.
Demographic: explanation provides aggregate statistics of
previous outcomes for people with the same demograph-
ics.
c) Model Dependence: in this context refers to the possi-
bility of having an explanation method that can be used to ex-
plain any type of autonomous driving model (e.g., perception
models and motion planning models). If the possibility exists,
the explanation method is considered to be model agnostic .
Otherwise, it is regarded as model speciﬁc . Two popular
model-agnostic explanation techniques are SHAP [85] andLIME [86]. Although LIME and SHAP explanation techniques
can be useful in autonomous driving, to the best of our
knowledge, only SHAP has been used in the context of
autonomous driving [27].
d) Interactivity: this refers to the possibility of a stake-
holder raising follow-up questions as a way of demanding fur-
ther explanations. The conversational style of explaining [87]
allows for this.
e) System Type: this refers to the nature of the system
that the explanation technique is primarily designed for. It
could be an explanation technique for data-driven systems
(e.g., explaining the output of a machine learning model) or
agoal-driven system (e.g., explaining the behaviour of an
autonomous agent based on plans and goals) [20]. In more
detail, an explanation method that explains a deep learning
model trained on driving scene images or video is data-driven
while one that explains plans (or change in plans) in the
absence of a trained machine learning model is referred to
as goal-driven in this context.
f) Scope: in this context refers to the coverage of the
explanation in terms of the system’s parts. We adapt termi-
nologies from the explainable AI (XAI) domain. While global
explanation explains a model’s decision-making process in
general, a local explanation explains a single prediction in XAI
[88], [89]. The term global explanation in this paper is used to
refer to an explanation that explains the entire behaviour of the
A V . In contrast, a local explanation refers to an explanation that
only explains a subset of the A V’s behaviour. Nahata et al. [27]
proposed a tree explanation technique that can provide both
factual ( why) and counterfactual ( what if ) explanations for an
A V collision risk model. Users can specify simple constraints
for generating counterfactual explanations (e.g., setting the
desired counterfactual output to be explained).
A representative subset of previous works where an expla-
nation technique was primarily discussed or implemented in
the context of autonomous driving are shown in Table III.
Note that [90], [91] are mainly on robot plan explanations
but are applicable to autonomous vehicles. While attention
maps are commonly regarded as explanations in the machine
learning literature, Jain and Wallace [92] argued against this
notion by claiming, based on the outputs of experiments, that
attentions maps are not explanations. Consequently, Wiegreff
and Pinter [93] disproved this claim and argued that such
a claim depends on one’s deﬁnition of explanation and that
prior work against the effectiveness of attention maps for
explanations does not disprove the usefulness of attention
mechanisms for explainability. We agree that attention maps
and heatmaps are not effective in some cases but are however
useful. Therefore, we include relevant works on attention maps
and heatmaps in this survey. See Table III for an overview.
The overview provided in Table III indicates that some types
of explanations (e.g., sensitivity, demographics, contrastive,
counterfactual, model-agnostic, and global explanations) are
rare in the autonomous driving literature. This may be due
to the nascent nature of the explainable autonomous driving
domain.

==== Page 7 ====
7
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF EXPLANATIONS CATEGORIES . THE TABLE INCLUDES A SUBSET OF THE REVIEWED PAPERS WHERE EACH OR A SUBSET OF THE
EXPLANATION CATEGORIES WAS MENTIONED IN THE CONTEXT OF AUTONOMOUS EMBODIED AGENTS .
STAKEHOLDERS :CLASS A—P ASSENGER (PA), P EDESTRIAN (PE), P EDESTRIAN WITH REDUCED MOBILITY (PRM), O THER ROAD PARTICIPANTS
(ORP), A UXILIARY DRIVER (AD). C LASS B—D EVELOPER (DV), A UTO-MECHANIC (AM). C LASS C—S YSTEM AUDITOR (SA), R EGULATOR (RG),
INSURER (IN), A CCIDENT INVESTIGATOR (AI).
METHODS :UNVALIDATED GUIDELINES (UG), E MPIRICALLY DERIVED (ED), P SYCHOLOGICAL CONSTRUCTS FROM FORMAL THEORIES (PC).
OPERATIONS :PERCEPTION (P), L OCALISATION (L), P LANNING (PL), C ONTROL (C), S YSTEM MANAGEMENT (M)
ReferencesCausal Filter Explanation Style Interactivity Dependence System Scope
Method
Stakeholders
(Class)
OperationFactual
Contrastive
Counterfactual
Input Inﬂuence
Sensitivity
Case-based
Demographic
Conversational
Non-conversational
Model Agnostic
Model Speciﬁc
Goal-Driven
Data-Driven
Local
Global
Kim et al. [94] 3 3 3 3 33 UG + ED B, C P, C
Chakraborti et al. [90] 3 3 3 3 3 3 UG B & C PL
Raman et al. [91] 3 3 3 3 3 3 UG B & C PL
Xu et al. [95] 3 3 3 3 3 UG A & C P
Kim & Canny [96] 3 3 3 3 3 33 UG B & A P
Cultrera et al. [97] 3 3 3 3 33 UG B & A P
Schneider et al. [98] 3 3 3 33 ED A & C P
Rahimpour et al. [99] 3 3 3 33 UG B & C P
Shen et al. [100] 3 3 3 3 33 ED B P
Ben-Younes et al. [101] 3 3 3 3 33 UG A & C P
Nahata et al. [27] 3 33 3 3 33 UG B PL
Ha et al. [12] 3 3 3 3 ED + PC A & B P
Koo et al. [13] 3 3 3 3 ED + PC A & B P
Bojarski et al. [102] 3 3 3 3 33 UG B & C P
Mori et al. [103] 3 3 3 3 33 UG B & C P
Liu et al. [104] 3 3 3 3 3 ED A P
Omeiza et al. [54] 3333 3 3 ED A P
Rizzo et al. [105] 3 3 3 3 33 UG B P
Liu et al. [106] 3 3 3 3 33 UG B & C P
Omeiza et al. [107] 3333 3 3 ED A P
Fig. 1. Key operations of an autonomous vehicle [108]. In Section V and
Section VI, we discuss the role of explanations within these key operations.
V. E XPLAINABLE AUTONOMOUS DRIVING OPERATIONS
This section provides a high-level description of the dif-
ferent operations of an A V and a review of previous work
on explanation in each operation. The operations include
perception, localisation, planning, control and navigation, and
system management (which includes event data recorder and
human-machine interaction) [108]; see Figure 1.
Fig. 2. An example of a mobile interface for an A V explainer [98]. This
interface is used for posthoc explanation provision. The app provides a record
of a journey and can provide explanations in three different views at strategic
points of the journey.
A. Perception
In this section, we identify various perception datasets that
have been used and those that can potentially be used for
explanation generation purposes. We also review recent data-
driven explanation methods and previous works that have
applied these explanation methods to the A V perception task.

==== Page 8 ====
8
1) Driving Datasets For Posthoc Explanations: Several
driving datasets have been made available for the purpose
of training machine learning models for autonomous vehi-
cles (See [109]). Some of these datasets have annotations—
e.g., handcrafted explanations [94], [110], vehicle trajectories
[111], human driver behaviour [112], [100] or anomaly identi-
ﬁcation with bounding boxes [95], [110]—that are helpful for
posthoc driving behaviour explanation. We have categorised
the sensors used in collecting the datasets into exteroception
and proprioception types, and the annotations in the datasets
that are useful for developing explainable A Vs. We also
identiﬁed different stakeholders that can potentially beneﬁt
from the explanations. See Table IV). Although the datasets are
helpful for developing explanation methods, it is important to
note the potential challenges associated with the use of these
datasets. Each dataset was collected from one region of the
world, thus, chances are high that they may not generalise,
especially where trafﬁc signs, rules, and road topology are
quite different to that of other regions; this can potentially lead
to biased driving decisions. Also, most of the datasets only
provide a video of the external environment and do not provide
internal A V state data. It is therefore a concern as to whether
the explanation techniques designed with this dataset will be
very faithful to the A V . We further discuss these challenges in
Section VII-C.
2) Vision-Based Explanations for AVs: Various methods
have been proposed to explain neural networks which are
fundamental structures for perception and scene understanding
in A Vs. Some of the prominent methods are gradient-based .
Gradient-based or backpropagation methods are generally used
for explaining convolutional neural network models. The main
logic of these methods is dependent on gradients that are
backpropagated from the output prediction layer of the CNN
back to the input layer [113]. They are often presented in
form of heatmaps (see Figure 3). These methods mainly fall
under the input inﬂuence explanation style in the explanation
categorisation presented in Table III.
We provide some examples of gradient-based methods that
are useful for explanations in A V perception. Refer to [114],
[21] for a survey on vision-based explanation methods.
Class Activation Map (CAM) [115] and its variants
like Gradient Class Activation Map (Grad-CAM) [116],
Guided Grad-CAM [117], Grad-CAM++ [118], Smooth
Grad-CAM++ [119]
Other gradient-based methods include VisualBackProp
[102], Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [120],
[19], DeepLift [121], [122], and Guided-Backpropagation
[123].
Many of the vision-based explanations for A Vs stem from
generic gradient-based methods explained above. For example,
Bojarski et al. [102] proposed VisualBackProp for visualising
super-pixels of an input image that is most inﬂuential to the
predictions made by a CNN model. In [102], VisualBackProp
on an end-to-end learning system for autonomous driving
(PilotNet [124]) was applied to check whether the explanation
method is able to show the parts of a driving scene image that
are necessary for the steering operation of the A V model.
Fig. 3. The vehicle control model predicts commands such as acceleration
and a change of course, the explanation generator model generates natural
language explanations and attention maps [94].
Kim et al. [94] proposed an approach for explanation gen-
eration in autonomous driving. The approach involves training
a convolutional neural network end-to-end from images to the
vehicle control commands (which are acceleration and change
of course). Further, textual explanations of the model actions
are produced through an attention-based video-to-text model
trained on the BDD-X dataset. Explanations were provided in
form of saliency maps and text (see Figure 3). A related work
by Xu et al. [95] focused on scene understanding, highlighting
salient objects in input that can potentially lead to a hazard.
These objects are described as action inducing since their state
can inﬂuence the vehicles’ decisions. Apart from identifying
objects, a sequence of short explanations was generated.
B. Localisation
Localisation in A Vs is the process of determining the pose
(e.g., location and orientation) of the A V relative to a given
information (e.g., map) of the environment. Precise and robust
localisation is critical for A Vs in complex environments and
scenarios [125]. For effective planning and decision making,
the position and orientation information is required to be
precise in all weather and trafﬁc conditions. One of the goals
of a precise and robust localisation is to ensure that the
A V is aware whether it is within its lane [126] for safety
purposes. Safety is often considered the most important design
requirement and it is critical in the derivation of requirements
for A Vs [126]. Hence, communicating position over time
and with justiﬁcations as explanations is crucial to expose
increasing error rates in a timely manner before they cause an
accident. For instance, the position errors can be transmitted
continuously through a wireless channel to an operation centre
from which the A V is managed. An interface that displays this
information (e.g., a special dashboard or mobile application as
shown in [98]) is provided and it is able to trigger an alarm for
immediate action (e.g., safe parking) when the error margin is
exceeded. Although there seems to be less research related to
explainable localisation, intelligible explanations remain key.
They would allow for easy communication of the position of
an A V , including the measurement’s precision and error [126],
of an autonomous vehicle during the localisation process in
the form of clear and intelligible explanations. Explanations
from localisation will be handy for Class B stakeholders (i.e.,

==== Page 9 ====
9
system developers) for debugging A Vs because it can facilitate
positional error correction and provide other stakeholders a
perception of reliability and safety for A Vs. Potentially, it will
inform the development process of more robust localisation
procedures.
C. Planning
Through AI planning and scheduling, the sequence of
actions required for an agent to complete a task are generated.
These action sequences are further utilised in inﬂuencing the
agent’s online decisions or behaviours with respect to the
dynamics of the environment it operates in [128]. The planning
system is an important aspect of autonomous vehicles because
of the complex maneuvers they make in dynamic, complex,
and sometimes less structured or cluttered environments (e.g.,
urban roads, street roads with lots of pedestrians and other
road participants). In fact, trafﬁc elements (e.g., road side
infrastructures, road network, road signs, and road quality) are
dynamic and can change with time; this makes A Vs regularly
update their plans (and even learn sometimes) as they operate.
Often, the amount of data (e.g., descriptions of objects, states,
and locations) that the A V processes per time is larger than
such that a human may be able to process, and continuously
and accurately keep track of. Hence, a stakeholder riding in
an A V may be left in a confused state when the A V updates
its trajectory without providing an explanation.
Explainable planning can play a vital role in supporting
users and improving their experiences when they interact with
autonomous systems in complex decision-making procedures
[129]. According to [130], depending on the stakeholder,
the process may involve the translation of the agent’s plans
into easily understandable forms, and the design of the user
interfaces that facilitate this understanding. Relevant work in-
clude XAI-PLAN [131], WHY-PLAN [132], reﬁnement-based
planning (RBP) [133], plan explicability and predictability
[134], and plan explanation for model reconciliation [90],
[135].
a) XAI-PLAN: is a domain-independent, planning system
agnostic, and an explainable plan model that provides initial
explanations for the decisions made by an agent planner
[131]. The user explores alternative actions in a plan and a
comparison is done with the user’s resulting plan and the plan
that was suggested by the planner. The XAI-PLAN framework
then provides an explanation to justify discrepancies. This
kind of interaction encourages and enhances mixed-initiative
planning which has the potential of improving the ﬁnal plan.
Interestingly, users can pose contrastive forms of queries in the
form ”why does the plan contain action X rather than action
Y?”.
b) Reﬁnement-based Planning (RBP): A related trans-
parent and domain-independent framework called reﬁnement-
based planning (RBP) [133] produces explanations of verbal
plans upon a verbal query from a user. It possesses an
enhanced representation of the search space, providing a 2-
way search (i.e., forward and backwards) capability when
generating plans. This allows for ﬂaw detection and plan
update or optimization. Using states and action primitives,the RBP paradigm integrates partial-order causal-link planning
and hierarchical planning [136] (hybrid planning framework).
c) Why-Plan: Korpan and Epstein [132] also proposed
Why-Plan, an explanation technique in human-machine col-
laborative planning. The method juxtaposes a person’s and
autonomous agent’s objectives in a path planning process and
provides explanations to justify the differences in panning
objectives in a meaningful and human-friendly fashion. It
basically addresses questions like ”why does your plan involve
that action?”
The explainable planning frameworks described above and
the related work by [90], [135], [137], [138] can serve as
basics to build upon for plan explanations in A Vs.
D. Vehicle Control
Control in an A V generally has to do with the manipulations
of vehicle motions such as lane changing, lane-keeping, and
car following. These manipulations are broadly categorised
under longitudinal control (speed regulation with throttle and
brake) and lateral control (i.e., automatic steering to follow
track reference) [139].
ADAS currently works based on the A V’s sensor infor-
mation obtained from observing the environment. Interfaces
that come with ADAS now display rich digital maps [140],
vehicle’s position, and track related attributes ahead or around
the vehicle. Stakeholders may issue investigatory queries when
the A V makes a decision against their expectations. For
instance, the stakeholder may want to ask different questions
based on current contexts (e.g., near-miss, special vehicle case,
or collision). Investigatory queries could be in form of a
‘why’ question (e.g., ‘Why did you turn left?’), ‘why not’
or contrastive question (e.g., ‘why did you switch to the left
lane instead of the right lane’), ‘what if’ or counterfactual
questions (e.g., ‘what if you turned left instead of right?’), or
‘what’ question (e.g., ‘What are you doing?’).
Other than existing in-vehicle visual interfaces, such as
mixed reality (MR) visualization [141], and other ﬂexible
(i.e., highly reconﬁgurable) dashboard panels [142], in-vehicle
interfaces that support the exchange of messages between the
stakeholder and the A V is crucial. The user should be able
to query the interface and receive explanations for navigation
and control decisions in an appropriate form; either through
voice, text, visual, gesture or a combination of any of these
options.
In the next section, we address questions regarding expla-
nation in relation to A V management and interaction with the
respective stakeholders.
VI. S YSTEM MANAGEMENT
In this section, we review works relating to event data
recording (EDR) in A Vs and human-machine interactions
involving in-vehicle interfaces and external human-machine
interfaces (eHMI) that could be potentially used for explana-
tions.

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE IV
DRIVING DATASETS THAT CAN BE USED TO DEVELOP EXPLANATION METHODS FOR AVS AND THE STAKEHOLDERS THAT WOULD POTENTIALLY BENEFIT
FROM SUCH EXPLANATIONS .
Dataset Size Exteroception Proprioception Annotation & Explanation Stakeholders
Sensors (e.g., Cameras) Sensors (e.g., CAN) (see Sec. III-C)
BDD-X [94] 7K40s 3 7Textual Why explanation associated with
videos segments with heatmapsClass A, B, and C
BDD-OIA [95] 23K5s 3 7 Actions and Why explanation Class A, B and C
DoTA [127]4,677 videos
(73,193 s)3 7What explanation (Temporal and spa-
tial anomaly identiﬁcation with bounding
boxes)Class B and C
CTA [110] 1,93517.7s3 7Why explanation for accidents with cause
and effectsClass B and C
HDD [112] 374,400 s 3 3What explanations for
driver actionsClass B
BDD-A Extended [100] 1;10310s3 7Human gaze inciting why and/or what ex-
planation , explanation necessity scoreClass B
Lyft Level5 [111] 360,000 s 3 7 Trajectory annotation Class B
A. Logging and Fault Management: Event Data Recorder
The event data recorder (EDR) serves as a recording device
in automobiles to log information related to vehicle accidents.
Upon a posthoc analysis, a better understanding of how certain
faults or accidents come about is achieved [143].
The installation of EDR in passenger vehicles has been a
mandatory process in the United States since 2014. Recently,
the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) suggested
the need for risk mitigation pertaining to monitoring driver
engagement and the need for better event data recording
requirements for autonomous driving systems after the Tesla
crash case in 2018 [7].
As autonomous vehicles increase in society and gain more
public attention, it is necessary to discriminate human driver
errors and negligence from the A V’s errors (arising from non-
adapted or poor product design or a product defect [144],
[145]) and express these errors in explanations. Martinesco et
al. [146] attributed the existing challenge in ascribing faults to
the appropriate trafﬁc participant to the difﬁculty in identifying
and evaluating the correct cause of an accident.
In line with this, the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety
Administration (NHTSA) calls for the industry and standard
bodies such as SAE and IEEE to develop a uniform approach
to address data recording and sharing2which may, in turn,
be useful for explanations. Pinter et al. [147] deplored the
inability of the existing EDRs to provide sufﬁcient data needed
to reconstruct the behaviour of a vehicle before and after an
accident, and to a degree that the accident could be analysed
from the perspective of liability. As A V functions continue
to increase (eventually leading to full autonomy), the storage
of a satisfactory number of parameters is needed for the
reconstruction of the vehicle’s behaviour and the provision of
2See relevant documents here: https://www.nhtsa.gov/fmvss/event-data-
recorders-edrsexplanations for a reasonable amount of time before and after
the accident becomes crucial.
As an effort towards building more effective EDRs that
can support explanation provision, different approaches, which
include the use of blockchain technologies, and more effective
and robust data models have been proposed. Guo et al. [148]
proposed a blockchain-inspired EDR system for autonomous
vehicles to achieve indisputable accident forensics by pro-
viding trustability and veriﬁability assurance of an event’s
information. With this blockchain approach, the veriﬁcation
and conﬁrmation of a new block of event data are possible with
no central authority involved. In terms of storage mechanisms
and reliability, Yao et al. [149] proposed a Smart Black
Box (SBB) to supplement traditional data recording with
value-driven higher-bandwidth data capture. The SBB uses a
deterministic mealy machine [150] based on data value and
similarity to cache short-term histories of data as buffers. By
optimising value and storage cost trade-offs, the appropriate
compression quality for each data chunk in the driving history
data is determined. Prioritised data recording prevents the
retention of low-value buffers. By discarding them, space is
made available to store new data.
With the EU upcoming legislative rules on EDR beginning
2022 [151] (and a similar one in China [152]), there is
the question as to whether existing data storage facilities
are sufﬁcient for the data needs for accident investigations
involving automated vehicles. For efﬁcient storage space
management, a well deﬁned data package which puts the
data points (with necessary parameters) and the frequency of
measuring and recording that can enable full reconstruction
of A Vs’ regular and irregular movements is necessary for
event explanation purposes. The data model from Pinter et
al. [147] can be used to determine the data content required
in an EDR, sufﬁcient for accident investigations, and suitable
for vehicles at different autonomy levels. Further, Bohm et

==== Page 11 ====
11
al. [153] proposed a broader database in relation to the US
EDR regulation (NHTSA 49 CFR Part 563.7) after carrying
out a study involving the reconstruction of real accidents with
ADAS enabled vehicles to investigate requirements. These
advancements in EDRs are relevant for the development of
explanation techniques for accidents (and other critical events).
It may also draw researchers’ attention to explainable EDR
which is currently very much under-explored. Human-machine
interaction (HMI) is a key aspect of explanation in A Vs. In
the next section, we will discuss the relationship between HMI
and explanations in the autonomous driving context.
B. Human-Machine Interaction
A Vs possess components for sensing, decision making,
and the operation of the vehicles, requiring minimal human
driving [154]. They can operate in complex environments
where the decision set is large [11]. This poses a challenge to
the understandability of their operational modes. A Vs are seen
to have evolved over the years in terms of automation level,
and in-vehicle technologies and interfaces (i.e., technologies
and interfaces within the vehicle). Essentially, vehicles in the
SAE levels 0 to 2 have a low explanation requirement due to
their low complexity. For vehicles in levels 3 and above, the
explanation requirement is high due to their high complexity.
Table V provides a summary based on [155], [156], with SAE
levels and explanation requirements. As shown in Table V,
vehicle instrument (i.e., an instrument that measures some
quantities about the vehicle) interfaces evolved to adaptive
displays where content is presented in a form that enhances
user experience, and with enhanced positioning features, e.g.,
global navigation satellite system (GNSS).
Recent highly automated vehicles are incorporating more
enhanced interaction technologies. Moreover, novel interac-
tion technologies provide the opportunity for the design of
useful and attractive in-vehicle user interfaces that abstract
and explain vehicle automation operations (e.g., perception,
planning, localisation, and control) exist. In the next section,
we will discuss some research on in-vehicle interfaces.
1) Novel Interaction Technologies: The in-vehicle user
interface is essential for efﬁcient explanation provision, and
hence, enhancing the driving experience [157]. There are
studies that suggest that interface design trends impact driving
experience. For example, Jung et al. [158] explored the impact
of the displayed precision of instrumentation estimates of
range and battery state-of-charge on drivers’ driving expe-
rience, and attitude towards varying conditions of resource
availability in an all-electric vehicle. Results from the study
showed that it can be advantageous to display the uncertainty
values associated with a measure rather than concealing it as
participants presented with an ambiguous display of range
measure reported a preserved trust level towards the vehi-
cle. Although presenting users with a single number value
increased reading and apprehension time, the implication of
disguised uncertainty on user experience and behaviour has to
be carefully considered in critical situations.
A related work by Mashko et al. [159] involved the assess-
ment of in-vehicle navigation systems with a visual displaywhere virtual trafﬁc signs were represented on an in-vehicle
display to assist better orient at road sections loaded with
excess information clutter. The use of virtual trafﬁc signs in-
vehicle improved the drivers’ concentration and reaction to
trafﬁc signs on the road. Langois [160] proposed an interface
(Lighting Peripheral Display––LPD) that creates signals that
are able to be handled by peripheral vision (the ability to see
objects and movement outside of the direct line of vision)
while driving in order to enhance the utility of ADAS. The
LPD possessed a box illuminated by light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and reﬂected onto the windscreen. User tests con-
ducted showed that driving performance and comfort were
enhanced by LPDs. Sirkin et al. [161] developed Daze, a
technique for measuring situation awareness through real-time,
in-situ event alerts. The technique is ecologically valid in that
it is very similar in look and feel to the applications used
by people in the actual driving environments, and can be
applied in simulators and also in on-road research settings. The
authors conducted a study that included simulated based and
on-road test deployments in order to provide assurance that
Daze could characterise drivers’ awareness of their immediate
environment and also understand the practicality of its use.
Having examined the existing interaction technologies, it
would be worthwhile to look at what users actually prefer.
2) In-vehicle Interfaces—User Preferences: Learning about
the experiences of in-vehicle participants will help to inform
what users’ preferences are. Mok et al. [162] described a
Wizard of Oz study to get insights into how automated vehicles
ought to interact with human drivers. Design improvisation
sessions were conducted inside a driving simulator with in-
teraction and interface design experts. While the two human
operators (wizards) controlled the audio and driving behaviour
of the car, the participants were driven through a simulated
track with different terrain and road conditions. The study
noted that:
1) instead of taking over full control, participants wanted
to share control with the vehicle;
2) participants like to know exactly when a handover (mode
switch) happens and require a clear alert from the
vehicle to that effect;
3) to the participants, delayed responses and unperformed
requests were acceptable as long as the responses pro-
vided are correct/proper;
4) A Vs have a variety of means to help sustain or improve
participants’ trust in them.
Fu et al. [163] studied the effect of varying sensitivity and
automation levels of in-vehicle collision avoidance systems.
The authors explored this with the automatic emergency
braking (AEB) systems in level 3 autonomous vehicles, for
which the attention of the driver is needed to monitor the
system for failures. Drivers reacted more (in terms of vigilance
and awareness) to the system when it was biased to under-
report hazards. The result also suggested that higher levels
of autonomy in vehicles result in a lower level of driver
vigilance and awareness. This was discovered when the roles
of the driver and the computer were reversed, where the driver
was meant to supervise an imperfect higher-level automated

==== Page 12 ====
12
TABLE V
VEHICLE INSTRUMENT INTERFACE EVOLUTION AND EXPLANATION NEED
# Explanation Interface SAE Automation Level XAI Demand Vehicle Examples
1 Fully analog interface Level 0 Low Old Ford vehicles and similar vehicles back before the
year 1990
2 Partly analog and digital interface (e.g., dig-
ital odometer, analog speed dial)Level 0 Low Older Honda Civics, Citroen C4 Picasso and others mostly
between 1990 and 2000.
3 Mostly digital interface Level 0 and 1 Low BMW 5 Series, Fiat 500, and Jaguar XF and others mostly
between 2010 and 2016
4 Fully digital interface with adaptive display,
GNSS)Level 2 and 3 Moderate Tesla Autopilot, Audi A8 2016 to present
5 Fully digital interface with adaptive display,
Sat Nav)Level 4 High Waymo cars 2016 to present
system; the driver’s reaction performance worsened during a
critical event. Related studies are described in [163], [164].
Park et al. [165] conducted a study in an attempt to under-
stand the extent to which semi-A V decision-making should
account for individual user preference. Having considered
18 different scenarios with tactical driving goals, signiﬁcant
differences were discovered in scenario interpretations, A V
perceptions, and vehicle decision references. The alignment of
individual preference with A V decision yielded more positive
changes in the impression of the vehicle than unaligned
decisions.
Closely related to explanations, Ha et al. [12],
Koo et al. [13], Omeiza et al. [54] investigated the
effect of explanations on trust through empirical user studies.
Ha et al. [12] examined two explanation types, simple and
attributional, as well as perceived risk on trust in A Vs in
four autonomous driving scenarios with varying levels of risk
using a simulation of an in-vehicle experience. Their results
indicated that an explanation type can greatly affect trust in
autonomous vehicles and that under high levels of perceived
risk, attributional explanations lead to the highest trust in
A Vs.
Further, Schneider et al [98] investigated whether the pro-
vision of explanations in simulated driving can enhance the
user experience and increase the subjective feeling of safety
and control. The provision of explanations did not inﬂuence
user experience during and after the ride. See an example of
a basic mobile explanation interface in Figure 2.
These works highlight the importance of the user-centred
approach (which could have a great inﬂuence on the future
of human-machine interaction) in the design and development
of explanation methods for A Vs. In-vehicle user interfaces are
a medium for the provision of visual, text, or voice expla-
nations. However, previous works only focus on providing
information about the vehicle to users without communicating
reasons and/or causal links for decisions. This remains an
open challenge for A V designers and researchers. We now
explore the interaction between an A V and other external
trafﬁc participants.
3) AV and External Agents Interaction: There are different
categories of trafﬁc participants that an A V has to interact
with, and there are many studies focusing on the interactions
between A Vs and other trafﬁc participants [166], [167]. Trafﬁc
participants that A Vs will frequently interact with are: pedes-trians, cyclists and other vehicles.
a) Pedestrians: Pedestrians and human drivers com-
municate intents to each other to inform the next choice
of action [168], [169], [170]. Autonomous vehicles should
also have modalities for communicating intents to pedestri-
ans [171]. Mahadevan et al. [172] conducted a study to get
insights into interface designs that explicitly communicate
autonomous vehicle awareness and intent to pedestrians. Dif-
ferent interface prototypes were developed and deployed in
a study that involved a Segway and a car in a simulation
setting. Results suggest that interfaces communicating vehicle
awareness and intent can assist pedestrians attempting to cross
at crosswalks and can exist in the environment outside of the
vehicle. They suggested a combination of modalities (e.g.,
visual, auditory, and physical) in the interfaces.
Faas et al. [37] investigated pedestrians’ trust and crossing
behaviour in repeated encounters with A Vs in a video-based
laboratory study. The occurrence of A V malfunction and
system transparency with status and intent eHMI were studied.
Their results showed that trust increases with the presence
of status and intent eHMI and decreases when there is a
malfunction in the A V but recovers quickly. Crossing onset
time also decreased with the provision of the eHMI. Crossing
onset time indicates the time in seconds between the vehicle
yielding and the pedestrian stepping off the sidewalk [173]. It
was noted that status eHMI can cause pedestrians to overtrust
A Vs, therefore, intent messages are needed to complement
status eHMIs.
Pedestrians reactions to a ghost driver have also been
investigated in the academic literature. A ghost driver in this
context refers to a driver who pretends to be absent in the car
even when they are in control of the driving operations. Moore
et al. [174] conducted a Wizard-of-Oz driverless vehicle study
aimed to test pedestrians’ reactions to everyday trafﬁc in
the absence of an explicit eHMI. Although some pedestrians
were surprised by the vehicle’s supposed autonomy, others
neither noticed nor paid attention to its autonomous nature.
All the pedestrians crossed in front of the vehicle without
explicit signalling. This suggests that the vehicle’s implicit
eHMI (which is basically its observed motion) may sufﬁce.
Therefore, pedestrians may not need the explicit eHMI in
their interaction routine. A similar study by Moore et al. [175]
indicated that pedestrians crossed in front of a ghost vehicle
with little hesitation even when the vehicle did not give any

==== Page 13 ====
13
signal beyond its motion. However, Li et al. [176] ﬁndings
contradicts this claim by conﬁrming pedestrians behaviours
are different on encountering a vehicle with a hidden driver
based on a study carried out in Europe.
b) Interaction with Pedestrians with Reduced Mobility
(PRM): Pedestrians with reduced mobility might need their
support devices re-engineered to allow for effective interaction
with A Vs [177]. Pasha et al. [177] carried out a design study
to explore interface designs for interaction between A Vs and
PRMs. The results from the analysis disclosed that visual cues
are the most important interface elements, and street infras-
tructures are the most important location for housing cues for
this category of pedestrians. They also found that wheelchairs
might require an interface, and the current wheelchairs would
have to be altered to allow for this interface.
c) Other Road-Participants: Vehicle-cyclist interaction
is an important topic to examine, especially in an environ-
ment where cycling is common. Cyclists and drivers cur-
rently communicate through implicit cues (vehicle motion)
and explicit but imprecise signals such as horns, lights, and
hand gestures [178]. Hou et al. [178] designed a virtual
reality (VR) A V-cyclist immersive simulator and a number
of A V-cyclist interfaces to explore interactions between A Vs
and cyclists. Findings suggest that A V-cyclist interfaces can
improve rider conﬁdence in lane merging scenarios. Future
A Vs could consistently communicate feedback (explanations)
which includes awareness and intent based on their sensor
data [178].
In general, more research is needed to explore how the ﬁnd-
ings from these studies can be utilised to create effective and
efﬁcient interaction interfaces between A Vs and stakeholders
in order to facilitate the provision of explanations. In the next
section, we will present some challenges around explainability
in autonomous driving and suggest future research directions.
VII. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss the challenges related to stan-
dards and regulations, user-centric explanation design and
evaluation, and ethics. We also suggest means to address some
of the key challenges.
A. Standards and Regulations
Some of the standards provided in Table I are very relevant
to explainability in autonomous driving. For example, ISO/TR
21707:2008 which speciﬁes a set of standard terminology
for deﬁning the quality of data being exchanged between
data suppliers and data consumers in the ITS domain is very
relevant to A V explainability although not originally intended
for explainability. While the quality of data is important,
the presentation style and language and the interfaces by
which the data is provided are also critical for explanations
in autonomous driving. We suggest that this standard and
others in Table I be explored for the development of more
A V explainability related ones, and should be made easily
accessible.Regulations regarding the explainability of automated sys-
tems are being set by countries and regions. However, these
regulations seem to be too general and do not directly spec-
ify requirements for speciﬁc technologies and stakeholders,
especially in autonomous driving. For example, the UK’s
ethics, transparency and accountability framework for auto-
mated decision-making [179] states that:
When automated or algorithmic systems assist a
decision made by an accountable ofﬁcer, you should
be able to explain how the system reached that
decision or suggested decision in plain English. The
explanation needs to be appropriate for your audi-
ence, expert or non-expert, and should be scrutinised
and iterated by a multidisciplinary and diverse team
(including end-users) to avoid bias and group speak.
In a preliminary consultation paper on autonomous vehi-
cles [180], the UK law commission states the recommenda-
tion of the National Physical Laboratory on explainability in
autonomous driving:
It is recommended that the autonomous decision-
making systems should be available, and able, to
be interrogated post-incident. Similar to GDPR, de-
cisions by automated systems must be explainable
and key data streams stored in the run-up, during
and after an accident.
Explanations can help in assessing and rationalising the ac-
tions of an A V ( outcome-based ), and in providing information
on the governance of the A V across its design, deployment,
and management ( processed-based ). This is in line with the
information commission ofﬁce (ICO) guidelines [181] for
general AI systems. We suggest that regulatory guidelines
for A V explainability should be set in line with these two
goals. We have carefully adapted the ICO guidelines and the
ITU’s comments on the ‘Consultation Paper 3 A regulatory
framework for automated vehicles’ to provide suggestions that
include a conceptual framework for better explainability in
A Vs.
1) Outcome-based explainability: To be able to ratio-
nalise/explain the outcomes of an A V , explainability at the
perception level (i.e., what the A V ’sees’), decision level (i.e.,
how the A V plans paths and motion) and action or control
level (i.e., how the A V acts on its plan or how it executes
its decisions) must be considered. We use these high-level
terminologies: perception, decision, and actions to describe
how explainability regulations could be made speciﬁcally for
A Vs.
a) Perception: Explanations for a perception system can
come in two forms:
1) An explanation capable of explaining the algorithms or
software processes used to transform sensor data into a
digital representation of the real-world and justiﬁcation
for such algorithms. In line with the Molly problem
earlier mentioned in II, it should be possible to obtain
information on how Molly was represented digitally
(sensor types and data transformations), and informa-
tion about the circumstance, e.g., her location, position

==== Page 14 ====
14
Fig. 4. A conceptual framework for explainable A V following the perception, planning, and control paradigm. The explainer receives data from the perception
and localisation system, planning system, and vehicle control system. This data can either be stored with time stamps and provided all at once as an
explanation log to accident investigators, or each explanation is provided as it is generated. The framework provides a multi-modal interface for interacting
with the explainer.
(maybe coordinates), and the time the representation
occurred.
2) An explanation that provides information on what this
digital representation contains (e.g., pedestrian, vehicles,
road fabric) and the state of these objects (e.g., cross-
ing, heading north, static). For example, if Molly was
detected, it should be possible to receive information
to explain and justify the process (e.g., detection and
tracking algorithm or software) by which Molly was
detected and tracked and the detection and tracking
conﬁdence levels.
In explaining outputs from a perception system, it is sug-
gested that A Vs should be able to provide real-time data access
(both onboard or remotely) to their digital representation of the
3D world (including semantic information) when requested by
authorised entities.
b) Decision: This involves the provision of insights into
the planning operations (behaviour planning and path plan-
ning) of the A V . The decision-making steps involve planning
paths and motion/behaviour based on observations (through
perception) from the environment and its structured knowledge
about the environment. These planning require reasoning and
decision-making under several constraints, e.g, uncertainty
about both the current and future state of the environment.
It also involves the identiﬁcation of potential risks, evaluating
them and ﬁnding measures to mitigate the risks.These uncertainties are associated with the conﬁdence level
in the A V’s predictions. A Vs use prediction algorithms to
predict their trajectory and that of other road participants, and
the risk of collision associated with different plans. In relation
to the Molly Problem, to ascertain whether the A V had a good
awareness of its environment upon which it made a decision,
we must consider whether it was aware of the conﬁdence levels
of the models that detected and tracked Molly. It should be
able to provide information on how conﬁdent it was about the
subsequent steps or actions of Molly e.g., the probability that
Molly will increase her speed in the next seconds. It should
also be able to provide information about the considered plans
(including the chosen ones), and the risk values associated with
the considered plans.
It is suggested that when requested by authorised entities,
A Vs should be able to provide real-time data access (both in-
vehicle or remotely) to the levels of uncertainty associated
with its current and possible future digital representations of
its environment and the uncertainty threshold upon which a
plan or a risk mitigation action was selected.
c) Action: This deals with the provision of information to
provide insight into the execution of the A V’s plans for given
contexts. It is the resulting vehicle dynamics to continuous
control inputs in response to circumstances and situations
observed. They are measurable outputs of the perception
and decision-making steps that provide valuable insights into

==== Page 15 ====
15
driving behaviour and risk. As such, the continual monitoring
of actions can be used for assessing the behaviour of the A V
in given circumstances. We suggest that A Vs should be able
to provide real-time data access (both in-vehicle or remotely
from the vehicle) to the actions of the A V , with respect to
observations and knowledge; and the resultant decisions made,
when requested by authorised entities.
2) Process-based Explainability: Process-based explain-
ability in an A V is concerned with the provision of information
that facilitates the independent assessment of the entire oper-
ations and governance of the A V . Process-based explainability
takes perception, decision, and action data, including the
governance processes of the entire A V operation. This makes
it possible to reconstruct an event or accident immediately
after it happens, signiﬁcantly reducing the time to provide
recommendations for future improvements.
Process explainability can be useful for fairness, safety
and performance assessment, accountability and responsibility,
and impact assessment. For fairness, the explanation outlines
the steps taken across the design and the implementation of
the A V to ensure that its decisions are generally unbiased
and fair and whether someone has been treated equitably.
For example, whether adequate measures were implemented
to provide PRMs more time to cross the road; whether the
pedestrian detection/classiﬁcation system works with the same
accuracy for people of colour; or whether predicted crash
outcomes are representative of all members of the population,
e.g, all body types, not just typical adult males.
For safety and performance evaluation, the explanation
provides information on the steps taken across the design and
implementation of the A V to maximise the accuracy, reliability,
security, and robustness of its decisions and behaviours. For
accountability and responsibility, the explanation provides in-
sight on who is involved in the development and management
of an A V , and who to contact for a human review of a decision.
For impact assessment, the explanation provides information
on the steps taken across the design and implementation of
A V technologies. It considers and monitors the impacts that
the use of the A V and its decisions has or may have on an
individual, and on wider society.
It is suggested that real-time access to perception, decision,
and action data and information about the process manage-
ment (both in-vehicle or remotely from the vehicle) be made
available for independent real-time processing to authorised
authorities. Powers should also be granted to relevant author-
ities to impose sanctions in real-time based upon failure to
meet explainability requirements.
In the next section, we suggest how the different A V
operations ﬁt into the A V explainability recommendations
provided and we also provide a conceptual design to represent
this.
3) Conceptual Framework for Explainable AV: We suggest
a conceptual design of how we envision the core A V operations
and components ﬁtting together for explanation provisions
purposes (see Figure 4). The perception and localisation op-
erations are fused together as both receive input directly from
sensors (LiDAR, radar, GPS, IMU). The perception system
provides a digital 3D representation of the world/environmentincluding information about object detections, detection and
tracking uncertainties, and object location, and passes them
to the behaviour and motion planning system which makes
decisions by estimating risks, ﬁnding mitigation actions, and
producing a trajectory. The output from the behaviour and mo-
tion planning system informs the vehicle control and actuation
system on the kind of inputs to send to the actuators to alter
the vehicle dynamics to achieve some effect (e.g., reacting
to an observation). Each of these operations feed directly
to the explainer and the EDR in the system management
compartment. The EDR organises its data and can provide
its organised/structured data to the explainer. The explainer
can generate explanations from a combination of data it has
from the different operations and the EDR. Explanations can
be requested in bulk in the form of an explanation log by spec-
ifying a time range or they can be requested in a conversational
manner (i.e., one query at a time). The explanation log can
provide process-based information that is useful for accident
investigation and effective A V governance. The conversational
style explanations are useful for outcome-based explanations
as events occur.
B. User-Centric Explanation Design and Evaluation
1) Trust: Many of the existing works examining explana-
tions in the context of autonomous driving do so using the
trust objective. These works involved user studies with either
synthetic laboratory tasks with little or no direct connection
to the real system or used microworlds [41]. A microworld
is a simpliﬁed version of a real system in which the critical
elements are present but with the complexities eliminated to
assist easy control of the experiment [182]. Attributes such as
trust which have been used for explanation assessment in A Vs
[13], [12] should be measured using a progressive experiment
occurring in a real-world setting in order to obtain accurate
results. This recommendation align with the trust node of the
UKRI Trustworthy Autonomous Systems programme3which
stresses the need for extensive human and autonomous systems
interaction studies in relation to trust.
2) Stakeholders’ Consideration: As seen in Table III, re-
search on explanations in A Vs has mainly focused on the the-
ory and implementation of explanations based on perception
data with less user-centric empirical studies. Only a few user
studies were conducted to elicit the requirements (e.g., when
an explanation is needed and the appropriate explanations
for each scenario) of the different stakeholders (e.g., some
vulnerable members in Class A). Thus, the consideration
of stakeholders in terms of explanation utility needs more
attention. Further, most of the explanation methods proposed
do not fulﬁl the properties of the standard causal explanations
(e.g., that explanations should be contrasted with relevant
foils) [87]. We suggest a more interdisciplinary approach to
explanations in autonomous driving, where expert ideas from
behavioural sciences (e.g., conversation theories), human-
computer interaction (e.g., user interface designs), artiﬁcial
intelligence, ethics (e.g., unveiling bias through explanations),
3https://www.ukri.org/news/new-trustworthy-autonomous-systems-projects-
launched/

==== Page 16 ====
16
philosophy (e.g., causal explanation theories) and psychology
(e.g., folk psychology) are harnessed. Further, explanation
techniques developed should be tested either through user
studies, ﬁeld trials, or laboratory studies to ensure that they
fulﬁl requirements for the respective stakeholders they are
designed for.
C. Ethics: AV Operations
1) Faithfulness and Blackboxness: A major limitation in
the existing work is the low assurance of faithfulness of
the explanations generated. Intermediate data or states data
of A V operations are currently missing in nearly all of the
existing autonomous driving datasets. Also, the existing work
on explainability in A Vs are merely explanations provided by
humans trying to rationalise the behaviour of an A V or an
ego vehicle. These explanations obtained from rationalisation
are used to annotate driving datasets which are subsequently
used to train a deep explanation model. The complexity or
blackbox nature of this process makes auditing difﬁcult and
thereby presents a challenge in the evaluation of faithfulness.
Considering faithfulness on a non-binary scale as suggested
in [183], explanations for autonomous driving behaviours
could attain improved faithfulness when considering data
from the different intermediate operations such as planning.
Constructing an A V’s navigation plans and exploring them is
possible when the start and end goals of the A V are known
beforehand. This information can be difﬁcult to assess from
A Vs at present but, as a starting point, driving simulators
and the Lyft Level5 dataset are helpful to create a prototype
at the least. To ensure the intelligibility of explanations, the
representation of these navigation plans need to be clear to
lay users. Interpretable techniques such as navigation graphs
and decision trees could be helpful in this regard. Navigation
graphs and decision trees are inherently transparent, hence,
meaningful interpretations and explanations (e.g., in natural
language) can be easily obtained.
Also, for intelligibility, high-level commands (e.g., turning
right, lane change left, and lead vehicle accelerating, among
others) as used in the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Ad-
ministration (NHTSA) report [184] can be used to represent
transitions between road and lane segments, and interaction
with other road participants.
The Sense Access eXplain (SAX) project4in the Oxford
Robotics Institute (ORI) is currently collecting driving data
which includes some proprioception information from the
CAN bus of a Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) ego vehicle [185].
Some of the relevant CAN bus data include wheel angle,
yaw, acceleration, and braking, among others. The JLR is
also equipped with in-vehicle microphones which record the
spoken thoughts of the driving instructor who drives the
vehicles and the passengers during ﬁeld trials. Using this
data to supplement exteroception data and navigation plans
with interpretable representations and algorithms will help
to enhance the faithfulness of explanations. Moreover, the
recorded spoken thoughts of the JLR driver and passengers
obtained during the trials can be further explored (e.g., through
4https://ori.ox.ac.uk/projects/sense-assess-explain-sax/conversation analysis) to gain insights into how natural lan-
guage explanations should be provided.
2) Explanation Bias: Another serious limitation in current
research is the inherent bias existing in the resulting expla-
nation models built on the perception datasets (presented in
Table IV). The datasets are ﬁnite and are non-representative
as they do not cover all possible driving scenarios in fair ratios.
For instance, some trafﬁc rules and signs differ with regions
or continents. In addition to ﬁnite training data, it can be
argued that the speciﬁcation of the (ﬁnite-complexity) model
(e.g., which variables to include and which to ignore) is still
an open research question. How do we know that the A V’s
model of it environment at a particular time captures all of the
variables that can inﬂuence its actions at that instance? Hence,
the mis-speciﬁcation of the model and the non-representative
nature of driving datasets can introduce biases that propagate
down into explanations. This challenge opens up new research
questions around driving data quality, and the adaptability and
correctness of the A V’s models.
There are hopes that A Vs will bring many beneﬁts to society.
If these hopes must come through, the research community
should take actions toward better research inclusivity (e.g.,
of researchers, regulators, and end-users). A V regulators can
leverage on the suggestions outlined in this paper to develop
more A V explainability related guidelines and regulations to
address the highlighted issues.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We have presented a literature survey on explanations for
autonomous driving. We discussed the need for explanations
in autonomous vehicles, and identiﬁed and categorised differ-
ent autonomous driving stakeholders who would potentially
utilise explanations. We identiﬁed and categorised relevant
regulations and standards that could facilitate explanations.
Having conducted a thorough review of the existing academic
literature on explanations, we provided a categorisation for
explanations and positioned the reviewed academic articles
in the appropriate category. Consequently, we identiﬁed key
challenges around explainability in autonomous driving. Some
of the challenges include the absence of concrete regulations
on A V explainability, the insufﬁcient levels of interdisciplinary
research around A V explainability, and bias and faithfulness
issues potentially arising from the technologies built upon the
current A V datasets. We provided recommendations for the
development of A V-speciﬁc explainability regulations and pro-
posed a conceptual framework for an explainable A V . Finally,
we advocated for more interdisciplinary research around A V
explainability. While uninhabited aerial vehicles (UA V) and
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) were not discussed in
this survey, we note that they can beneﬁt from the provision
of explanations and the recommendations we have provided in
this paper. Hopes are high that A Vs will bring many beneﬁts to
society. For these beneﬁts to be realised, a further look at the
recommendations provided in this paper for implementation
purposes would be helpful.

==== Page 17 ====
17
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ricardo Cannizzaro and
Kala Allen for proof-reading the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] G. C. Walsh and A. Aindow, “Lidar system,” US Patent 8896818,
Nov. 25, 2014.
[2] D. S. Hall, “High deﬁnition lidar system,” US Patent 7969558, Jun. 28,
2011.
[3] D. K. Barton, Modern radar system analysis . Artech House, 1988.
[4] ——, Radar system analysis and modeling . Artech House, 2004.
[5] “Tesla deaths,” TeslaDeaths.com, Accessed: Jul. 24, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.tesladeaths.com/
[6] N. A. Stanton, P. M. Salmon, G. H. Walker, and M. Stanton, “Models
and methods for collision analysis: a comparison study based on the
uber collision with a pedestrian,” Safety Science , vol. 120, pp. 117–128,
2019.
[7] “Collision between a sport utility vehicle operating with partial
driving automation and a crash attenuator mountain view, california,”
NTBS, 2018, Accessed: Oct. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/HAR2001.pdf
[8] D. Lavrinc, “This is how bad self-driving cars suck in rain,” 2016,
Accessed: Jul., 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/20
16/02/googles-self-driving-car-may-caused-ﬁrst-crash/
[9] A. Tilley, “Google’s self-driving car caused its ﬁrst crash,” 2016,
Accessed: Jun. 21, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.forbes.com
/sites/aarontilley/2016/02/29/googles-self-driving-car-caused-its-ﬁrst
-accident/?sh=5ae097b0538d
[10] M. McFarland, “Who’s responsible when an autonomous car
crashes?” ”2016, Accessed: Jul. 24, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//money.cnn.com/2016/07/07/technology/tesla-liabilityrisk/index.html
[11] E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, and K. Takeda, “A survey of
autonomous driving: Common practices and emerging technologies,”
IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 58 443–58 469, 2020.
[12] T. Ha, S. Kim, D. Seo, and S. Lee, “Effects of explanation types
and perceived risk on trust in autonomous vehicles,” Transportation
Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour , vol. 73, pp. 271–
280, 2020.
[13] J. Koo, J. Kwac, W. Ju, M. Steinert, L. Leifer, and C. Nass, “Why did
my car just do that? Explaining semi-autonomous driving actions to
improve driver understanding, trust, and performance,” International
Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM) , vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 269–275, 2015.
[14] P. V oigt and A. V on dem Bussche, “The EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR),” A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer
International Publishing , 2017.
[15] M. Cunneen, M. Mullins, and F. Murphy, “Autonomous vehicles and
embedded artiﬁcial intelligence: The challenges of framing machine
driving decisions,” Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 33, no. 8, pp.
706–731, 2019.
[16] “Taxonomy and deﬁnitions for terms related to driving automation
systems for on-road motor vehicles,” SAE International, (J3016) , 2016.
[17] A. Adadi and M. Berrada, “Peeking inside the black-box: A survey
on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI),” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp.
52 138–52 160, 2018.
[18] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, F. Giannotti, and
D. Pedreschi, “A survey of methods for explaining black box models,”
ACM computing surveys (CSUR) , vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 1–42, 2018.
[19] W. Samek, T. Wiegand, and K.-R. M ¨uller, “Explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence: Understanding, visualizing and interpreting deep learning
models,” 2017.
[20] S. Anjomshoae, A. Najjar, D. Calvaresi, and K. Fr ¨amling, “Explainable
agents and robots: Results from a systematic literature review,” in
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), Montreal, Canada , 2019,
pp. 1078–1088.
[21] ´E. Zablocki, H. Ben-Younes, P. P ´erez, and M. Cord, “Explainability
of vision-based autonomous driving systems: Review and challenges,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05307 , 2021.
[22] P. Dodwell, “Causes of behaviour and explanation in psychology,”
Mind , pp. 1–13, 1960.
[23] E. N. Zalta, U. Nodelman, C. Allen, and J. Perry, “Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy,” 1995.[24] G. Ciatto, M. I. Schumacher, A. Omicini, and D. Calvaresi, “Agent-
based explanations in AI: Towards an abstract framework,” in Interna-
tional Workshop on Explainable, Transparent Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems . Springer, 2020, pp. 3–20.
[25] A. Omicini, “Not Just for Humans: Explanation for Agent-to-Agent
Communication.” in DP@ AI* IA , 2020, pp. 1–11.
[26] F. Poursabzi-Sangdeh, D. G. Goldstein, J. M. Hofman, J. W. Wort-
man Vaughan, and H. Wallach, “Manipulating and measuring model
interpretability,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , 2021, pp. 1–52.
[27] R. Nahata, D. Omeiza, R. Howard, and L. Kunze, “Assessing and
Explaining Collision Risk in Dynamic Environments for Autonomous
Driving Safety,” in 24th International Conference on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITSC) . IEEE, 2021.
[28] I. Stepin, A. Catala, M. Pereira-Fari ˜na, and J. M. Alonso, “Factual
and counterfactual explanation of fuzzy information granules,” Inter-
pretable Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Perspective of Granular Computing ,
vol. 937, p. 153, 2021.
[29] G. W. Jones, “The search for local accountability,” Strengthening local
government in the 1990s , pp. 49–78, 1992.
[30] A. Martinho, N. Herber, M. Kroesen, and C. Chorus, “Ethical issues
in focus by the autonomous vehicles industry,” Transport Reviews , pp.
1–22, 2021.
[31] R. Mulgan, “‘Accountability’: An ever-expanding concept?” Public
administration , vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 555–573, 2000.
[32] L. Collingwood, “Privacy implications and liability issues of au-
tonomous vehicles,” Information & Communications Technology Law ,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 32–45, 2017.
[33] F. Doshi-Velez, M. Kortz, R. Budish, C. Bavitz, S. Gershman,
D. O’Brien, S. Schieber, J. Waldo, D. Weinberger, and A. Wood,
“Accountability of AI under the law: The role of explanation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.01134 , 2017.
[34] “Honda sustainability report (Tech. Rep.),” Honda, Accessed: Jun. 25,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://global.honda/about/sustainability/re
port/pdf-download/2015.html
[35] “Sustainable value report (Tech. Rep.),” BMW, Accessed: Jun. 25,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.bmwgroup.com/content/dam/g
rpw/websites/bmwgroup com/ir/downloads/en/2016/2016-BMW-Gro
up-Sustainable-Value-Report.pdf
[36] A. Shashua and S. Shalev-Shwartz, “A plan to develop safe autonomous
vehicles. and prove it,” Intel Newsroom , p. 8, 2017.
[37] S. M. Faas, J. Kraus, A. Schoenhals, and M. Baumann, “Calibrating
Pedestrians’ Trust in Automated Vehicles: Does an Intent Display in an
External HMI Support Trust Calibration and Safe Crossing Behavior?”
inProceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , 2021, pp. 1–17.
[38] B. M. Muir, “Trust between humans and machines, and the design of
decision aids,” International journal of man-machine studies , vol. 27,
no. 5-6, pp. 527–539, 1987.
[39] ——, “Trust in automation: Part i. theoretical issues in the study of trust
and human intervention in automated systems,” Ergonomics , vol. 37,
no. 11, pp. 1905–1922, 1994.
[40] J. Lee and N. Moray, “Trust, control strategies and allocation of
function in human-machine systems,” Ergonomics , vol. 35, no. 10, pp.
1243–1270, 1992.
[41] J. D. Lee and K. A. See, “Trust in automation: Designing for appro-
priate reliance,” Human factors , vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 50–80, 2004.
[42] D. P. Biros, M. Daly, and G. Gunsch, “The inﬂuence of task load
and automation trust on deception detection,” Group Decision and
Negotiation , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 173–189, 2004.
[43] S. Hergeth, L. Lorenz, R. Vilimek, and J. F. Krems, “Keep your
scanners peeled: Gaze behavior as a measure of automation trust during
highly automated driving,” Human factors , vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 509–519,
2016.
[44] B. M. Muir and N. Moray, “Trust in automation. part ii. experimental
studies of trust and human intervention in a process control simulation,”
Ergonomics , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 429–460, 1996.
[45] J. Kraus, D. Scholz, D. Stiegemeier, and M. Baumann, “The more you
know: trust dynamics and calibration in highly automated driving and
the effects of take-overs, system malfunction, and system transparency,”
Human factors , vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 718–736, 2020.
[46] S. Khastgir, S. Birrell, G. Dhadyalla, and P. Jennings, “Calibrating
trust through knowledge: Introducing the concept of informed safety
for automation in vehicles,” Transportation research part C: emerging
technologies , vol. 96, pp. 290–303, 2018.
[47] J. M. Kraus, “Psychological processes in the formation and calibration
of trust in automation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universit ¨at Ulm, 2020.

==== Page 18 ====
18
[48] R. R. Hoffman, S. T. Mueller, G. Klein, and J. Litman, “Met-
rics for explainable ai: Challenges and prospects,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.04608 , 2018.
[49] M. T. Dzindolet, S. A. Peterson, R. A. Pomranky, L. G. Pierce, and
H. P. Beck, “The role of trust in automation reliance,” International
journal of human-computer studies , vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 697–718, 2003.
[50] P. Madhavan and D. A. Wiegmann, “Effects of information source,
pedigree, and reliability on operator interaction with decision support
systems,” Human Factors , vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 773–785, 2007.
[51] R. Hussain and S. Zeadally, “Autonomous cars: Research results,
issues, and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-
rials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1275–1313, 2018.
[52] H. Abraham, C. Lee, S. Brady, C. Fitzgerald, B. Mehler, B. Reimer, and
J. F. Coughlin, “Autonomous vehicles, trust, and driving alternatives: A
survey of consumer preferences,” Massachusetts Inst. Technol, AgeLab,
Cambridge , vol. 1, p. 16, 2016.
[53] R. R. Hoffman and G. Klein, “Explaining explanation, part 1: Theoret-
ical foundations,” IEEE Intelligent Systems , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 68–73,
2017.
[54] D. Omeiza, K. Kollnig, H. Webb, M. Jirotka, and L. Kunze, “Why not
explain? effects of explanations on human perceptions of autonomous
driving,” in IEEE International Conference on Advanced Robotics and
its Social Impacts . IEEE, 2021.
[55] W. Payre, J. Cestac, and P. Delhomme, “Fully automated driving:
Impact of trust and practice on manual control recovery,” Human
factors , vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 229–241, 2016.
[56] B. Rajaonah, F. Anceaux, and F. Vienne, “Trust and the use of adaptive
cruise control: a study of a cut-in situation,” Cognition, Technology &
Work , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 146–155, 2006.
[57] M. Beggiato and J. F. Krems, “The evolution of mental model, trust and
acceptance of adaptive cruise control in relation to initial information,”
Transportation research part F: trafﬁc psychology and behaviour ,
vol. 18, pp. 47–57, 2013.
[58] J. M. Kraus, Y . Forster, S. Hergeth, and M. Baumann, “Two routes
to trust calibration: effects of reliability and brand information on
trust in automation,” International Journal of Mobile Human Computer
Interaction (IJMHCI) , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1–17, 2019.
[59] “A right to explanation,” The Alan Turing Institute, Accessed: Jul. 24,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.turing.ac.uk/research/impact-s
tories/a-right-to-explanation
[60] B. Y . Lim, A. K. Dey, and D. Avrahami, “Why and why not explana-
tions improve the intelligibility of context-aware intelligent systems,”
inProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , 2009, pp. 2119–2128.
[61] A. M. Khan, A. Bacchus, and S. Erwin, “Policy challenges of increas-
ing automation in driving,” IATSS research , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 79–89,
2012.
[62] Scottish Law Commission, “Automated Vehicles: Consultation Paper
3 - A regulatory framework for automated vehicles,” Accessed: Jun.
11, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.scotlawcom.gov.uk/ﬁles/3
916/0854/6794/A V-CP3-18-12-20.pdf
[63] Dentons, “Global Guide to Autonomous Vehicles,” Accessed: Jun. 11,
2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.businessgoing.digital/wp-conte
nt/uploads/2020/07/Autonomous-Vehicles-Report-2020.pdf
[64] “An overview of taxonomy, legislation, regulations, and standards
for automated mobility,” Apex.AI, 2020, Accessed: Feb. 16, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.apex.ai/post/legislation-standards-tax
onomy-overview
[65] “Intelligent transport systems,” ETSI, 2018, Accessed: Jul. 24, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/images/ﬁles/ETSITechnolog
yLeaﬂets/IntelligentTransportSystems.pdf
[66] “World Report for Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) Standards -
A Joint APEC-International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
Study of Progress to Develop and Deploy ITS Standards (ISO TR
28682),” Asian-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation, Sep. 2017, Accessed:
July 24, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://apec.org/Publications
[67] C. Meske, E. Bunde, J. Schneider, and M. Gersch, “Explainable
artiﬁcial intelligence: objectives, stakeholders, and future research
opportunities,” Information Systems Management , pp. 1–11, 2020.
[68] P. Kouki, J. Schaffer, J. Pujara, J. O’Donovan, and L. Getoor, “Person-
alized explanations for hybrid recommender systems,” in Proceedings
of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ,
2019, pp. 379–390.
[69] D. Shin, “The effects of explainability and causability on perception,
trust, and acceptance: Implications for explainable ai,” International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies , vol. 146, p. 102551, 2021.[70] Y . Zhou and D. Danks, “Different ”intelligibility” for different folks,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society ,
2020, pp. 194–199.
[71] P. Langley, “Varieties of explainable agency,” ICAPS Workshop on
Explainable AI Planning (XAIP) , 2019.
[72] R. Binns, M. Van Kleek, M. Veale, U. Lyngs, J. Zhao, and N. Shadbolt,
“’It’s Reducing a Human Being to a Percentage’ Perceptions of Justice
in Algorithmic Decisions,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2018, pp. 1–14.
[73] D. Wang, Q. Yang, A. Abdul, and B. Y . Lim, “Designing theory-driven
user-centric explainable ai,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2019, pp. 1–15.
[74] H. Lakkaraju, S. H. Bach, and J. Leskovec, “Interpretable decision
sets: A joint framework for description and prediction,” in Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining , 2016, pp. 1675–1684.
[75] A. Bussone, S. Stumpf, and D. O’Sullivan, “The role of explanations
on trust and reliance in clinical decision support systems,” in IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics , 2015, pp. 160–
169.
[76] R. Caruana, Y . Lou, J. Gehrke, P. Koch, M. Sturm, and N. Elhadad,
“Intelligible models for healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and hos-
pital 30-day readmission,” in Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,
2015, pp. 1721–1730.
[77] J. Zhu, A. Liapis, S. Risi, R. Bidarra, and G. M. Youngblood,
“Explainable AI for designers: A human-centered perspective on
mixed-initiative co-creation,” in IEEE Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Games (CIG) , 2018, pp. 1–8.
[78] J. L. Herlocker, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Explaining collaborative
ﬁltering recommendations,” in Proceedings of the ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work , 2000, pp. 241–250.
[79] T. R. Roth-Berghofer, “Explanations and case-based reasoning: Foun-
dational issues,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Case-
Based Reasoning . Springer, 2004, pp. 389–403.
[80] M. S. Silveira, C. S. de Souza, and S. D. Barbosa, “Semiotic engineer-
ing contributions for designing online help systems,” in Proceedings
of the 19th Annual International Conference on Computer Documen-
tation , 2001, pp. 31–38.
[81] B. Y . Lim and A. K. Dey, “Assessing demand for intelligibility in
context-aware applications,” in Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , 2009, pp. 195–204.
[82] A. R. Akula, C. Liu, S. Saba-Sadiya, H. Lu, S. Todorovic, J. Y . Chai,
and S.-C. Zhu, “X-ToM: explaining with theory-of-mind for gaining
justiﬁed human trust,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06907 , 2019.
[83] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction .
MIT Press, 2018.
[84] C. Frith and U. Frith, “Theory of mind,” Current biology , vol. 15,
no. 17, pp. R644–R645, 2005.
[85] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A uniﬁed approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
[86] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “”Why should I trust you?”
Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining , 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[87] T. Miller, “Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insights from the social
sciences,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 267, pp. 1–38, 2019.
[88] S. M. Lundberg, G. Erion, H. Chen, A. DeGrave, J. M. Prutkin,
B. Nair, R. Katz, J. Himmelfarb, N. Bansal, and S.-I. Lee, “From local
explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for trees,”
Nature machine intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 56–67, 2020.
[89] I. van der Linden, H. Haned, and E. Kanoulas, “Global aggrega-
tions of local explanations for black box models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.03039 , 2019.
[90] T. Chakraborti, S. Sreedharan, Y . Zhang, and S. Kambhampati, “Plan
explanations as model reconciliation: Moving beyond explanation as
soliloquy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08317 , 2017.
[91] V . Raman, C. Lignos, C. Finucane, K. C. Lee, M. P. Marcus, and
H. Kress-Gazit, “Sorry Dave, I’m Afraid I Can’t Do That: Explaining
Unachievable Robot Tasks Using Natural Language,” in Robotics:
Science and Systems , vol. 2, no. 1, 2013, pp. 2–1.
[92] S. Jain and B. C. Wallace, “Attention is not explanation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.10186 , 2019.
[93] S. Wiegreffe and Y . Pinter, “Attention is not not explanation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.04626 , 2019.

==== Page 19 ====
19
[94] J. Kim, A. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, J. Canny, and Z. Akata, “Textual
explanations for self-driving vehicles,” in Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision (ECCV) , 2018, pp. 563–578.
[95] Y . Xu, X. Yang, L. Gong, H.-C. Lin, T.-Y . Wu, Y . Li, and N. Vas-
concelos, “Explainable object-induced action decision for autonomous
vehicles,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 9523–9532.
[96] J. Kim and J. Canny, “Interpretable learning for self-driving cars by
visualizing causal attention,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision , 2017, pp. 2942–2950.
[97] L. Cultrera, L. Seidenari, F. Becattini, P. Pala, and A. Del Bimbo, “Ex-
plaining autonomous driving by learning end-to-end visual attention,”
inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2020, pp. 340–341.
[98] T. Schneider, J. Hois, A. Rosenstein, S. Ghellal, D. Theofanou-F ¨ulbier,
and A. R. Gerlicher, “Explain yourself! transparency for positive ux in
autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , 2021, pp. 1–12.
[99] A. Rahimpour, S. Martin, A. Tawari, and H. Qi, “Context aware
road-user importance estimation (icare),” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2019, pp. 2337–2343.
[100] Y . Shen, S. Jiang, Y . Chen, E. Yang, X. Jin, Y . Fan, and K. D. Campbell,
“To explain or not to explain: A study on the necessity of explanations
for autonomous vehicles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11684 , 2020.
[101] H. Ben-Younes, ´E. Zablocki, P. P ´erez, and M. Cord, “Driving behavior
explanation with multi-level fusion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04983 ,
2020.
[102] M. Bojarski, A. Choromanska, K. Choromanski, B. Firner, L. J.
Ackel, U. Muller, P. Yeres, and K. Zieba, “Visualbackprop: Efﬁcient
visualization of CNNs for autonomous driving,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2018, pp. 4701–4708.
[103] K. Mori, H. Fukui, T. Murase, T. Hirakawa, T. Yamashita, and
H. Fujiyoshi, “Visual explanation by attention branch network for
end-to-end learning-based self-driving,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV) , 2019, pp. 1577–1582.
[104] T. Liu, H. Zhou, M. Itoh, and S. Kitazaki, “The impact of explanation
on possibility of hazard detection failure on driver intervention under
partial driving automation,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium
(IV), 2018, pp. 150–155.
[105] S. G. Rizzo, G. Vantini, and S. Chawla, “Reinforcement learning
with explainability for trafﬁc signal control,” in IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC) , 2019, pp. 3567–3572.
[106] Y .-C. Liu, Y .-A. Hsieh, M.-H. Chen, C.-H. H. Yang, J. Tegner, and Y .-
C. J. Tsai, “Interpretable self-attention temporal reasoning for driving
behavior understanding,” in ICASSP IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , 2020, pp. 2338–2342.
[107] D. Omeiza, H. Webb, M. Jirotka, and L. Kunze, “Towards account-
ability: providing intelligible explanations in autonomous driving,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Intelligent Vehicle . IEEE,
2021.
[108] K. Jo, J. Kim, D. Kim, C. Jang, and M. Sunwoo, “Development of
autonomous car—part i: Distributed system architecture and develop-
ment process,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 61,
no. 12, pp. 7131–7140, 2014.
[109] J. Janai, F. G ¨uney, A. Behl, A. Geiger et al. , “Computer vision
for autonomous vehicles: Problems, datasets and state of the art,”
Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision , vol. 12,
no. 1–3, pp. 1–308, 2020.
[110] T. You and B. Han, “Trafﬁc accident benchmark for causality recogni-
tion,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2020,
pp. 540–556.
[111] J. Houston, G. Zuidhof, L. Bergamini, Y . Ye, L. Chen, A. Jain,
S. Omari, V . Iglovikov, and P. Ondruska, “One thousand and
one hours: Self-driving motion prediction dataset,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.14480 , 2020.
[112] V . Ramanishka, Y .-T. Chen, T. Misu, and K. Saenko, “Toward driving
scene understanding: A dataset for learning driver behavior and causal
reasoning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp. 7699–7707.
[113] A. Das and P. Rad, “Opportunities and Challenges in Explainable Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): A Survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11371 ,
2020.
[114] E. Tjoa and C. Guan, “A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
(XAI): towards medical XAI,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07374 , 2019.
[115] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning
deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proceedings of theIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016,
pp. 2921–2929.
[116] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 618–626.
[117] Z. Tang, K. V . Chuang, C. DeCarli, L.-W. Jin, L. Beckett, M. J. Keiser,
and B. N. Dugger, “Interpretable classiﬁcation of alzheimer’s disease
pathologies with a convolutional neural network pipeline,” Nature
communications , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2019.
[118] A. Chattopadhay, A. Sarkar, P. Howlader, and V . N. Balasubrama-
nian, “Grad-CAM++: generalized gradient-based visual explanations
for deep convolutional networks,” in IEEE Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 2018, pp. 839–847.
[119] D. Omeiza, S. Speakman, C. Cintas, and K. Weldermariam, “Smooth
Grad-CAM++: an enhanced inference level visualization technique
for deep convolutional neural network models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.01224 , 2019.
[120] S. Lapuschkin, S. W ¨aldchen, A. Binder, G. Montavon, W. Samek, and
K.-R. M ¨uller, “Unmasking clever hans predictors and assessing what
machines really learn,” Nature communications , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–8,
2019.
[121] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important
features through propagating activation differences,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.02685 , 2017.
[122] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding con-
volutional networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision .
Springer, 2014, pp. 818–833.
[123] J. T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller,
“Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6806 , 2014.
[124] M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp,
P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang et al. , “End to
end learning for self-driving cars,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316 ,
2016.
[125] L. Wang, Y . Zhang, and J. Wang, “Map-based localization method
for autonomous vehicles using 3d-lidar,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 276–281, 2017.
[126] T. G. Reid, S. E. Houts, R. Cammarata, G. Mills, S. Agarwal, A. V ora,
and G. Pandey, “Localization requirements for autonomous vehicles,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01061 , 2019.
[127] Y . Yao, X. Wang, M. Xu, Z. Pu, E. Atkins, and D. Crandall, “When,
where, and what? A new dataset for anomaly detection in driving
videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03044 , 2020.
[128] F. Ingrand and M. Ghallab, “Deliberation for autonomous robots: A
survey,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 247, pp. 10–44, 2017.
[129] T. Chakraborti, S. Sreedharan, and S. Kambhampati, “The emerging
landscape of explainable automated planning & decision making,”
2020.
[130] F. Sado, C. K. Loo, M. Kerzel, and S. Wermter, “Explainable goal-
driven agents and robots–a comprehensive review and new framework,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09705 , 2020.
[131] R. Borgo, M. Cashmore, and D. Magazzeni, “Towards providing ex-
planations for AI planner decisions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.06338 ,
2018.
[132] R. Korpan and S. L. Epstein, “Toward natural explanations for a
robot’s navigation plans,” Notes from the Explainable Robotic Systems
Workshop, Human-Robot Interaction , 2018.
[133] J. Bidot, S. Biundo, T. Heinroth, W. Minker, F. Nothdurft, and
B. Schattenberg, “Verbal plan explanations for hybrid planning.” in
MKWI . Citeseer, 2010, pp. 2309–2320.
[134] Y . Zhang, S. Sreedharan, A. Kulkarni, T. Chakraborti, H. H. Zhuo,
and S. Kambhampati, “Plan explicability and predictability for robot
task planning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , 2017, pp. 1313–1320.
[135] T. Chakraborti, S. Sreedharan, S. Grover, and S. Kambhampati, “Plan
Explanations as Model Reconciliation–An Empirical Study,” in 14th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) , 2019, pp. 258–266.
[136] S. Biundo and B. Schattenberg, “From abstract crisis to concrete
relief—a preliminary report on combining state abstraction and htn
planning,” in Sixth European Conference on Planning , 2014.
[137] B. Hayes and J. A. Shah, “Improving robot controller transparency
through autonomous policy explanation,” in 12th ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI , 2017, pp. 303–
312.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[138] M. A. Neerincx, J. van der Waa, F. Kaptein, and J. van Diggelen,
“Using perceptual and cognitive explanations for enhanced human-
agent team performance,” in International Conference on Engineering
Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics . Springer, 2018, pp. 204–214.
[139] A. Khodayari, A. Ghaffari, S. Ameli, and J. Flahatgar, “A historical
review on lateral and longitudinal control of autonomous vehicle
motions,” in International Conference on Mechanical and Electrical
Technology , 2010, pp. 421–429.
[140] “Tomtom launches map-based adas software platform virtual horizon,”
TomTom, Accessed: Aug. 10, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//safecarnews.com/toyota-launches-map-based-adas-software-platform
-virtual-horizon/
[141] S. Sasai, I. Kitahara, Y . Kameda, Y . Ohta, M. Kanbara, Y . Morales,
N. Ukita, N. Hagita, T. Ikeda, and K. Shinozawa, “MR visualization
of wheel trajectories of driving vehicle by seeing-through dashboard,”
inIEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
Workshops , 2015, pp. 40–46.
[142] L. Marques, V . Vasconcelos, P. Pedreiras, and L. Almeida, “A ﬂexible
dashboard panel for a small electric vehicle,” in 6th Iberian Conference
on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI 2011) . IEEE, 2011,
pp. 1–4.
[143] B.-F. Wu, Y .-H. Chen, and C.-H. Yeh, “Driving behaviour-based event
data recorder,” IET Intelligent Transport Systems , vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
361–367, 2013.
[144] U. Bose, “The black box solution to autonomous liability,” Wash. UL
Rev., vol. 92, p. 1325, 2014.
[145] W. J. Kohler and A. Colbert-Taylor, “Current law and potential legal
issues pertaining to automated, autonomous and connected vehicles,”
Santa Clara Computer & High Tech. LJ , vol. 31, p. 99, 2014.
[146] A. Martinesco, M. Netto, A. M. Neto, and V . H. Etgens, “A note
on accidents involving autonomous vehicles: Interdependence of event
data recorder, human-vehicle cooperation and legal aspects,” IFAC-
PapersOnLine , vol. 51, no. 34, pp. 407–410, 2019.
[147] K. Pinter, Z. Szalay, and G. Vida, “Road accident reconstruction
using on-board data, especially focusing on the applicability in case
of autonomous vehicles,” Periodica Polytechnica Transportation Engi-
neering , 2020.
[148] H. Guo, E. Meamari, and C.-C. Shen, “Blockchain-inspired event
recording system for autonomous vehicles,” in 1st IEEE International
Conference on Hot Information-Centric Networking (HotICN) , 2018,
pp. 218–222.
[149] Y . Yao and E. Atkins, “The smart black box: A value-driven high-
bandwidth automotive event data recorder,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems , 2020.
[150] D. M. Harris and S. L. Harris, “3 - sequential logic design,”
inDigital Design and Computer Architecture (Second Edition) ,
second edition ed., D. M. Harris and S. L. Harris, Eds. Boston:
Morgan Kaufmann, 2013, pp. 108–171. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123944245000033
[151] “TEuropean Commission - Press release: Road safety: Commission
welcomes agreement on new EU rules to help save lives,” 2019,
Accessed: Feb. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/com
mission/presscorner/detail/en/IP 191793
[152] UNECE, “Working Party on Automated/Autonomous and Connected
Vehicles (GRV A): EDR/DSSAD 1st session. EDR-DSSAD-01-06
Overview of EDR,” 2019, Accessed: Feb. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://wiki.unece.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=87621710
[153] K. B ¨ohm, T. Kubjatko, D. Paula, and H.-G. Schweiger, “New develop-
ments on EDR (Event Data Recorder) for automated vehicles,” Open
Engineering , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 140–146, 2020.
[154] B. W. Smith and J. Svensson, “Automated and autonomous driving:
regulation under uncertainty,” 2015.
[155] D. Lavrinc, “Cars with a digital dashboard,” 2018, Accessed: Jul. 24,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.buyacar.co.uk/cars/902/cars-wi
th-a-digital-dashboard
[156] C. Edwards, “Car safety with a digital dashboard,” Engineering &
Technology , vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 60–64, 2014.
[157] A. Schmidt, A. K. Dey, A. L. Kun, and W. Spiessl, “Automotive user
interfaces: human computer interaction in the car,” in CHI’10 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2010, pp. 3177–
3180.
[158] M. F. Jung, D. Sirkin, T. M. G ¨ur, and M. Steinert, “Displayed
uncertainty improves driving experience and behavior: The case of
range anxiety in an electric car,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2015, pp.
2201–2210.[159] A. Mashko, P. Bouchner, D. Rozhdestvenskiy, and S. Novotn `y, “Virtual
trafﬁc signs-assessment of an alternative adas user interface with use
of driving simulator.” Advances in Transportation Studies , no. 1, 2016.
[160] S. Langlois, “Adas hmi using peripheral vision,” in Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications , 2013, pp. 74–81.
[161] D. Sirkin, N. Martelaro, M. Johns, and W. Ju, “Toward measurement
of situation awareness in autonomous vehicles,” in Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2017, pp.
405–415.
[162] B. K.-J. Mok, D. Sirkin, S. Sibi, D. B. Miller, and W. Ju, “Understand-
ing driver-automated vehicle interactions through wizard of oz design
improvisation,” 2015.
[163] E. Fu, M. Johns, D. A. Hyde, S. Sibi, M. Fischer, and D. Sirkin,
“Is Too Much System Caution Counterproductive? Effects of Varying
Sensitivity and Automation Levels in Vehicle Collision Avoidance
Systems,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , 2020, pp. 1–13.
[164] B. Mok, M. Johns, K. J. Lee, D. Miller, D. Sirkin, P. Ive, and
W. Ju, “Emergency, automation off: Unstructured transition timing for
distracted drivers of automated vehicles,” in IEEE 18th international
conference on intelligent transportation systems , 2015, pp. 2458–2464.
[165] S. Y . Park, D. J. Moore, and D. Sirkin, “What a driver wants:
User preferences in semi-autonomous vehicle decision-making,” in
Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , 2020, pp. 1–13.
[166] D. W. Eby, L. J. Molnar, L. Zhang, R. M. S. Louis, N. Zanier,
L. P. Kostyniuk, and S. Stanciu, “Use, perceptions, and beneﬁts of
automotive technologies among aging drivers,” Injury epidemiology ,
vol. 3, no. 1, p. 28, 2016.
[167] J. Yang and J. F. Coughlin, “In-vehicle technology for self-driving cars:
Advantages and challenges for aging drivers,” International Journal of
Automotive Technology , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 333–340, 2014.
[168] M. ˇSucha, “Road users’ strategies and communication: driver-
pedestrian interaction,” Transport Research Arena (TRA) , 2014.
[169] G. S. Wilde, “Immediate and delayed social interaction in road user
behaviour,” Applied Psychology , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 439–460, 1980.
[170] D. Sun, S. Ukkusuri, R. F. Benekohal, and S. T. Waller, “Modeling of
motorist-pedestrian interaction at uncontrolled mid-block crosswalks,”
inTransportation Research Record, TRB Annual Meeting CD-ROM,
Washington, DC , 2003.
[171] A. Rasouli and J. K. Tsotsos, “Autonomous vehicles that interact with
pedestrians: A survey of theory and practice,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 900–918, 2019.
[172] K. Mahadevan, S. Somanath, and E. Sharlin, “Communicating aware-
ness and intent in autonomous vehicle-pedestrian interaction,” in Pro-
ceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , 2018, pp. 1–12.
[173] S. M. Faas, S. Mattes, A. C. Kao, and M. Baumann, “Efﬁcient paradigm
to measure street-crossing onset time of pedestrians in video-based
interactions with vehicles,” Information , vol. 11, no. 7, p. 360, 2020.
[174] D. Moore, R. Currano, G. E. Strack, and D. Sirkin, “The case for
implicit external human-machine interfaces for autonomous vehicles,”
inProceedings of the 11th International Conference on Automotive
User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications , 2019, pp. 295–
307.
[175] D. Moore, G. E. Strack, R. Currano, and D. Sirkin, “Visualizing
implicit eHMI for autonomous vehicles,” in Proceedings of the 11th In-
ternational Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications: Adjunct Proceedings , 2019, pp. 475–477.
[176] J. Li, R. Currano, D. Sirkin, D. Goedicke, H. Tennent, A. Levine,
V . Evers, and W. Ju, “On-road and online studies to investigate beliefs
and behaviors of netherlands, us and mexico pedestrians encountering
hidden-driver vehicles,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , 2020, pp. 141–149.
[177] A. Z. Asha, C. Smith, L. Oehlberg, S. Somanath, and E. Sharlin, “Views
from the wheelchair: Understanding interaction between autonomous
vehicle and pedestrians with reduced mobility,” in Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2020, pp.
1–8.
[178] M. Hou, K. Mahadevan, S. Somanath, E. Sharlin, and L. Oehlberg,
“Autonomous vehicle-cyclist interaction: Peril and promise,” in Pro-
ceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , 2020, pp. 1–12.
[179] GOV .UK, “Ethics, Transparency and Accountability Framework for
Automated Decision-Making.” [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.

==== Page 21 ====
21
uk/government/publications/ethics-transparency-and-accountability-fr
amework-for-automated-decision-making
[180] Law Commission, “Automated Vehicles: Analysis of Responses to
the Preliminary Consultation Paper,” Accessed: July, 5. [Online].
Available: https://www.scotlawcom.gov.uk/ﬁles/2815/6093/3787/Auto
mated Vehicles -Analysis ofResponses tothePreliminary Consu
ltation Paper.pdf
[181] ——, “What goes into an explanation?” Accessed: July, 5. [Online].
Available: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protectio
n/key-data-protection-themes/explaining-decisions-made-with-artiﬁc
ial-intelligence/part-1-the-basics-of-explaining-ai/what-goes-into-an-
explanation/
[182] B. Brehmer and D. D ¨orner, “Experiments with computer-simulated
microworlds: Escaping both the narrow straits of the laboratory and
the deep blue sea of the ﬁeld study,” Computers in human behavior ,
vol. 9, no. 2-3, pp. 171–184, 1993.
[183] A. Jacovi and Y . Goldberg, “Towards Faithfully Interpretable NLP
Systems: How should we deﬁne and evaluate faithfulness?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.03685 , 2020.
[184] W. G. Najm, J. D. Smith, M. Yanagisawa et al. , “Pre-crash scenario ty-
pology for crash avoidance research,” United States. National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[185] M. Gadd, D. De Martini, L. Marchegiani, L. Kunze, and P. Newman,
“Sense–Assess–eXplain (SAX): Building Trust in Autonomous Vehi-
cles in Challenging Real-World Driving Scenarios,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Workshop on Ensuring
and Validating Safety for Automated Vehicles (EVSAV) , 2020, pp. 150–
155.
Daniel Omeiza received a bachelors degree in Com-
puter Science from the University of Ilorin in 2015.
He obtained a masters degree in Information Tech-
nology from Carnegie Mellon University in 2019.
He is currently working towards a DPhil degree
at the University of Oxford. His research interests
primarily lie in explainability in autonomous driving.
He is a student member of the IEEE.
Helena Webb is a Transitional Assistant Professor
in the School of Computer Science at the University
of Nottingham. She is interested in the ways that
users interact with technologies in different kinds
of setting and how social action both shapes and
is shaped by innovation. She works on projects
that seek to identify mechanisms for the improved
design, responsible development and effective reg-
ulation of technology. She has worked on projects
relating to, amongst others, harmful content on
social media, algorithm bias, resource scarcity in
STEM education, human-robot dialogue, and responsible robotics. She is an
interdisciplinary researcher and specialises in the application of qualitative
research methods. She is also very interested in methodological innovation to
combine detailed, granular analysis with larger scale computational work.
Marina Jirotka is Professor of Human-Centred
Computing at the University of Oxford and Gov-
erning Body Fellow at St Cross College. She leads
an interdisciplinary research group developing meth-
ods for building computing systems responsibly to
support human, societal and environmental values.
The team focuses on responsible innovation, in a
range of ICT ﬁelds including robotics, AI, machine
learning, quantum computing, social media and the
digital economy. She is an EPSRC Established Ca-
reer Fellow conducting a ﬁve-year investigation into
Developing Responsible Robotics for the Digital Economy. She is Director
of the newly established Responsible Technology Institute at Oxford, and she
is co-director of the Observatory for Responsible Research and Innovation in
ICT (ORBIT) which provides RI services and training to ICT researchers and
practitioners. She obtained her BSc in Psychology and Social Anthropology
(Hons) from The University of London Goldsmiths College in 1985 and
her Masters in Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence from the University of
South Bank in 1987. Her doctorate in Computer Science, “An Investigation
into Contextual Approaches to Requirements Capture”, was undertaken at the
University of Oxford in 2000.
Lars Kunze is a Departmental Lecturer in Robotics
in the Oxford Robotics Institute (ORI) and the De-
partment of Engineering Science at the University of
Oxford. In the ORI, he leads the Cognitive Robotics
Group (CRG). Dr Kunze is also the Technical Lead
at the Responsible Technology Institute (RTI), an
international centre of excellence focused on re-
sponsible technology at Oxford University; and a
Programme Fellow of the Assuring Autonomy In-
ternational Programme (AAIP). He is a Stipendiary
Lecturer in Computer Science at Christ Church and
an Editor of both the Journal of Responsible Technology and the German
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Before joining Oxford, he was a Research
Fellow in the Intelligent Robotics Lab at Birmingham University. He studied
Cognitive Science (BSc, 2006) and Computer Science (MSc, 2008) at the
University of Osnabr ¨uck, Germany, and partly at the University of Edinburgh,
UK. He received a PhD (Dr. rer. nat.) from the Technical University of Munich
in 2014.

