==== Page 1 ====
Explainable AI Methods - A Brief
Overview
Andreas Holzinger1,2,3(B), Anna Saranti1,2, Christoph Molnar4,
Przemyslaw Biecek5,6, and Wojciech Samek7,8
1Human-Centered AI Lab, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences,
Vienna, Austria
andreas.holzinger@human-centered.ai
2Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria
3xAI Lab, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada
4Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology - BIPS GmbH,
Bremen, Germany
5Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
6University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
7Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute,
Berlin, Germany
8BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Data and Learning,
Berlin, Germany
Abstract. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (xAI) is an established
ﬁeld with a vibrant community that has developed a variety of very
successful approaches to explain and interpret predictions of complex
machine learning models such as deep neural networks. In this article, webrieﬂy introduce a few selected methods and discuss them in a short, clear
and concise way. The goal of this article is to give beginners, especially
application engineers and data scientists, a quick overview of the stateof the art in this current topic. The following 17 methods are covered
in this chapter: LIME, Anchors, GraphLIME, LRP, DTD, PDA, TCAV,
XGNN, SHAP, ASV, Break-Down, Shapley Flow, Textual Explanationsof Visual Models, Integrated Gradients, Causal Models, Meaningful Per-
turbations, and X-NeSyL.
Keywords: Explainable AI
·Methods ·Evaluation
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has a long tradition in computer science. Machine
learning (ML) and particularly the success of “deep learning” in the last decade
made AI extremely popular again [ 15,25,90].
The great success came with additional costs and responsibilities: the most
successful methods are so complex that it is diﬃcult for a human to re-trace,
to understand, and to interpret how a certain result was achieved. Conse-
quently, explainability/interpretability/understandability is motivated by the
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2022
A. Holzinger et al. (Eds.): xxAI 2020, LNAI 13200, pp. 13–38, 2022.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04083-2
_2

==== Page 2 ====
14 A. Holzinger et al.
lack of transparency of these black-box approaches, which do not foster trust
and acceptance of AI in general and ML in particular. Increasing legal anddata protection aspects, e.g., due to the new European General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR, in force since May 2018), complicate the use of black-box
approaches, particularly in domains that aﬀect human life, such as the medicalﬁeld [56,63,73,76].
The term explainable AI (xAI) was coined by DARPA [ 28] and gained mean-
while a lot of popularity. However, xAI is not a new buzzword. It can be seenas a new name for a very old quest in science to help to provide answers to
questions of why [ 66]. The goal is to enable human experts to understand the
underlying explanatory factors of why an AI decision has been made [ 64]. This
is highly relevant for causal understanding and thus enabling ethical responsible
AI and transparent veriﬁable machine learning in decision support [ 74].
The international community has developed a very broad range of diﬀerent
methods and approaches and here we provide a short concise overview to help
engineers but also students to select the best possible method. Figure 1shows
the most popular XAI toolboxes.
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCC
HHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
IIIIIIIIIIII
10100100010000
2016 2018 2020 2022
datestarslibrary
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Islundberg/shap
marcotcr/lime
Trusted-AI/AIX360
ModelOriented/DALEX
albermax/innvestigatemarcotcr/anchor
tensorflow/tcav
nredell/shapFlex
nathanwang000/Shapley-FlowNumber of stars over time
Fig. 1. Number of stars on GitHub for the most popular repositories presented in this
paper. While these repositories focus on the explanation task, the new Quantus toolbox
[30] oﬀers a collection of methods for evaluating and comparing explanations.
In the following we provide a short overview of some of the most popu-
lar methods for explaining complex models. We hope that this list will help
both practitioners in choosing the right method for model explanation and

==== Page 3 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 15
XAI method developers in noting the shortcomings of currently available meth-
ods. Figure 2gives an overview of the chronology of development of successive
explanatory methods. Methods such as LRP and LIME were among the ﬁrst1
generic techniques to explain decisions of complex ML models. In addition tothe overview of explanation techniques, we would also like to hint the inter-ested reader at work that developed methods and oﬀered datasets to objectively
evaluate and systematically compare explanations. To mention here is Quantus
2
[30], a new toolbox oﬀering an exhaustive collection of evaluation methods and
metrics for explanations, and CLEVR-XAI3[8], a benchmark dataset for the
ground truth evaluation of neural network explanations.
2018 2015 2016 2017 2019 2020 2021LIME 
KDDAnchors 
AAAI
Integrated Gradients 
ICMLSHAP 
NIPSASV 
NIPSShapFlow 
AISTATS
XGNN 
KDDGraphLIME 
AAAI
LRP 
PlosONETCAV 
ICMLuse graph-like 
dependency structure 
between variablesuse interpretable 
feature space and local 
approximation with 
sparse K-LASSOadditive, use Shapley 
values (game theory)
unies DeepLIFT, LRP , 
LIMEfor gradient based 
models, use concepts 
learned from 
annotated samples
model agnostic and 
rule based, sparse, 
with interactionsAsymmetric Shapley 
values use variable 
distributions and 
dependency structure
interpretable model 
for graph networks
 from N-hop 
neighbourhood
post-hoc global-level 
explanations for graph 
neural networksaggregates gradients 
through the path 
between baseline and 
observation of interestLayer-wise Relevance 
Propagation 
heatmapping method 
based on Deep Taylor 
Decomposition
Fig. 2. Chronology of the development of successive explanatory methods described in
this paper. Initially, the methods were focused on model analysis based on the model
itself or on sample data. Subsequent methods used more and more information aboutthe structure and relationships between the analysed variables.
2 Explainable AI Methods - Overview
2.1 LIME (Local Interpretable Model Agnostic Explanations)
Idea: By treating the machine learning models as black-box functions, model
agnostic explanation methods typically only have access to the model’s output.The fact that these methods do not require any information about the model’s
internals, e.g., in the case of neural networks the topology, learned parameters
(weights, biases) and activation values, makes them widely applicable and veryﬂexible.
1We are aware that gradient-based sensitivity analysis and occlusion-based techniques
have been proposed even earlier [ 11,62,75,89]. However, theses techniques have var-
ious disadvantages (see [ 61,70]) and are therefore not considered in this paper.
2https://github.com/understandable-machine-intelligence-lab/quantus .
3https://github.com/ahmedmagdiosman/clevr-xai .

==== Page 4 ====
16 A. Holzinger et al.
One prominent representative of this class of explanation techniques is the
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) method [ 67]. The main
idea of LIME is to explain a prediction of a complex model fM, e.g., a deep neural
network, by ﬁtting a local surrogate model fS, whose predictions are easy to
explain. Therefore, LIME is also often referred to as surrogate-based explanationtechnique [ 70]. Technically, LIME generates samples in the neighborhood N
xiof
the input of interest xi, evaluates them using the target model, and subsequently
approximates the target model in this local vicinity by a simple linear function,i.e., a surrogate model which is easy to interpret. Thus, LIME does not directly
explain the prediction of the target model f
M(xi), but rather the predictions
of a surrogate model fS(xi), which locally approximates the target model (i.e.,
fM(x)≈fS(x)f o rx∈N xi).
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/marcotcr
Discussion: There are meanwhile many successful applications of LIME in
diﬀerent application domains which demonstrates the popularity of this model
agnostic method. As a limitation can be seen that LIME only indirectly solves
the explanation problem by relying on a surrogate model. Thus, the quality ofthe explanation largely depends on the quality of the surrogate ﬁt, which itself
may require dense sampling and thus may result in large computational costs.
Furthermore, sampling always introduces uncertainty, which can lead to non-deterministic behaviours and result in variable explanations for the same input
sample.
2.2 Anchors
Idea: The basic idea is that individual predictions of any black-box classiﬁca-
tion model are explained by ﬁnding a decision rule that suﬃciently “anchors”
the prediction - hence the name “anchors” [ 68]. The resulting explanations are
decision rules in the form of IF-THEN statements, which deﬁne regions in thefeature space. In these regions, the predictions are ﬁxed (or “anchored”) to the
class of the data point to be explained. Consequently, the classiﬁcation remains
the same no matter how much the other feature values of the data point that
are not part of the anchor are changed.
Good anchors should have high precision and high coverage. Precision is the
proportion of data points in the region deﬁned by the anchor that have the same
class as the data point being explained. Coverage describes how many data points
an anchor’s decision rule applies to. The more data points an anchor covers, thebetter, because the anchor then covers a larger area of the feature space and thus
represents a more general rule. Anchors is a model-agnostic explanation method,
i.e., it can be applied to any prediction model without requiring knowledge aboutthe internals. Search and construction of decision rules is done by reinforcement
learning (RL) [ 32,81] in combination with a modiﬁed beam search, a heuristic
search algorithm that extends the most promising nodes in a graph. The anchors

==== Page 5 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 17
algorithm cycles through diﬀerent steps: produce candidate anchors, select the
best candidates, then use beam search to extend the anchor rules. To select thebest candidate, it is necessary to call the model many times, which can be seen
as an exploration or multi-armed bandit problem.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/marcotcr/anchor
Discussion: The anchors are model-independent and can be applied to diﬀerent
domains such as tabular data, images and text, depending on the perturbation
strategy. However, in the current Python implementation, anchors only supports
tabular and text data. Compared to LIME, the scope of interpretation is cleareras the anchors specify the boundaries within which they should be interpreted.
The coverage of an anchor decision rule can be used as a measure of the model
ﬁdelity of the anchor. Furthermore, the decision rules are easy to understand, butthere are many hyper-parameters in the calculation of anchors, such as the width
of the beam and the precision threshold, which need to be tuned individually.
The perturbation strategies also need to be carefully selected depending on the
application and model. The calculation of anchors requires many calls to the
prediction function, which makes the anchors computationally intensive. Datainstances that are close to the decision boundary of the model may require more
complex rules with more features and less coverage. Unbalanced classiﬁcation
problems can produce trivial decision rules, such as classifying each data pointas the majority class. A possible remedy is to adapt the perturbation strategy
to a more balanced distribution.
2.3 GraphLIME
Idea: GraphLIME [ 38] is a method that takes the basic idea of LIME (see
Sect.2.1) but is not linear. It is applied to a special type of neural network
architecture, namely graph neural networks (GNN). These models can process
non-Euclidean data as they are organised in a graph structure [ 9]. The main
tasks that GNNs perform are node classiﬁcation, link prediction and graph clas-
siﬁcation. Like LIME, this method tries to ﬁnd an interpretable model, which
in this case is the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) Lasso model,
for explaining a particular node in the input graph. It takes into account the
fact that during the training of the GNN, several nonlinear aggregation andcombination methods use the features of neighbouring nodes to determine the
representative embedding of each node. This embedding is used to distinguish
nodes into diﬀerent classes in the case of node classiﬁcation and to collectivelydistinguish graphs in graph classiﬁcation tasks.
Since for this type of model a linear explanation as LIME would return
unfaithful results, the main idea of GraphLIME is to sample from the N-hopneighbourhood of the node and collect features w.r.t. to the node prediction.
Those are used to train the HSIC Lasso model, which is a kernel method -
thereby interpretable - that can compute on which node features the output

==== Page 6 ====
18 A. Holzinger et al.
prediction depends on. This is similar to the perturbation method that LIME
uses, while the comparison, in this case, is based on HSIC estimation betweenthe random variables representing the features and the prediction distributions.
This method learns correlations between the features of the neighbours which
also underline its explanation capabilities.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/WilliamCCHuang/GraphLIME
Discussion: The developers compared GraphLIME with one of the ﬁrst xAI
methods for GNNs at the time, namely GNNExplainer, w.r.t. three criteria:(1) ability to detect useless features, (2) ability to decide whether the pre-
diction is trustworthy, and (3) ability to identify the better model among two
GNN classiﬁers. They show that for synthetic data and human-labelled anno-
tations, GraphLIME exceeds the GNNExplainer by far in the last two crite-
ria. They arrive at a very interesting insight, namely that models that havefewer untrustworthy features in their explanation have better classiﬁcation per-
formance. Furthermore, GraphLIME is shown to be computationally much more
eﬃcient than GNNExplainer. It would be beneﬁcial - and is considered futurework - if GraphLIME was also trying to ﬁnd important graph substructures
instead of just features, if it was compared with other methods like PGExplainer
[52], PGMExplainer [ 83], GNN-LRP [ 72], and if it were extended to multiple
instance explanations. Finally, it is important to note that GraphLIME is suc-
cessfully used for the investigation of backdoor attacks on GNNs by uncovering
the relevant features of the graph’s nodes [ 86].
2.4 Method: LRP (Layer-wise Relevance Propagation)
Idea: Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [ 10] is a propagation-based
explanation method, i.e., it requires access to the model’s internals (topology,
weights, activations etc.). This additional information about the model, however,
allows LRP to simplify and thus more eﬃciently solve the explanation problem.More precisely, LRP does not explain the prediction of a deep neural network in
one step (as model agnostic methods would do), but exploits the network struc-
ture and redistributes the explanatory factors (called relevance R)l a y e rb yl a y e r ,
starting from the model’s output, onto the input variables (e.g., pixels). Each
redistribution can be seen as the solution of a simple (because only between two
adjacent layers) explanation problem (see interpretation of LRP as Deep TaylorDecomposition in Sect. 2.5).
Thus, the main idea of LRP is to explain by decomposition, i.e., to iteratively
redistribute the total evidence of the prediction f(x), e.g., indicating that there
is a cat in the image, in a conservative manner from the upper to the next lower
layer, i.e.,
/summationdisplay
iR(0)
i=...=/summationdisplay
jR(l)
j=/summationdisplay
kR(l+1)
k=...=f(x). (1)

==== Page 7 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 19
Note that R(0)
idenotes the relevance assigned to the ith input element (e.g.,
pixel), while R(l)
jstands for relevance assigned to the jth neuron at the lth layer.
This conservative redistribution not only ensures that no relevance is added or
lost on the way (analogous to energy conservation principle or Kirchhoﬀ’s lawin physics), but also allows for signed explanations, where positive relevance
values hint at relevant information supporting the prediction and negative rele-
vance values indicate evidence speaking against it. Diﬀerent redistribution rules,adapted to the speciﬁc properties of particular neural network layers, have been
proposed for LRP [ 42,58]. In contrast to other XAI techniques which are purely
based on heuristics, the LRP rules have a clear theoretical foundation, namelythey result from the Deep Taylor Decomposition (DTD) [ 60] of the relevance
function with a particular choice of root point (see Sect. 2.5).
While LRP has been originally developed for convolutional neural networks
and bag-of-words type of models, various extensions have been proposed, making
it a widely applicable XAI techniqe today. For instance, Arras et al. [ 6,7] devel-
oped meaningful LRP redistribution rules for LSTM models. Also LRP variantsfor GNN and Transformer models have been recently proposed [ 3,72]. Finally,
through the “neuralization trick”, i.e., by converting a non-neural network model
into a neural network, various other classical ML algorithms have been made
explainable with LRP, including k-means clustering [ 39], one-class SVM [ 40]a s
well as kernel density estimation [ 59]. Furthermore, meta analysis methods such
as spectral relevance analysis (SpRAy) [ 47] have been proposed to cluster and
systematically analyze sets of explanations computed with LRP (SpRAY is not
restricted to LRP explanations though). These analyses have been shown usefulto detect artifacts in the dataset and uncover so-called “Clever Hans” behaviours
of the model [ 47].
The recently published Zennit toolbox [ 4] implements LRP (and other meth-
ods) in Python, while the CoRelAy
4toolboxi oﬀers a collection of meta analysis
methods. Furthermore, the GitHub library iNNvestigate provides a common
interface and out-of-the-box implementation for many analysis methods, includ-ing LRP [ 2].
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/chr5tphr/zennit
https://github.com/albermax/innvestigate
Discussion: LRP is a very popular explanation method, which has been applied
in a broad range of domains, e.g., computer vision [ 46], natural language pro-
cessing [ 7], EEG analysis [ 78], meteorology [ 54], among others.
The main advantages of LRP are its high computational eﬃciency (in the
order of one backward pass), its theoretical underpinning making it a trustworthyand robust explanation method (see systematic comparison of diﬀerent XAI
methods [ 8]), and its long tradition and high popularity (it is one of the ﬁrst
XAI techniques, diﬀerent highly eﬃcient implementations are available, and it
4https://github.com/virelay/corelay .

==== Page 8 ====
20 A. Holzinger et al.
has been successfully applied to various problems and domains). The price to pay
for the advantages is a restricted ﬂexibility, i.e., a careful adaptation of the usedredistribution rules may be required for novel model architectures. For many
popular layers types recommended redistribution rules are described in [ 42,58].
Finally, various works showed that LRP explanations can be used beyond
sheer visualization purposes. For instance, [ 47] used them to semi-automatically
discover artefacts in large image corpora, while [ 5,79] went one step further and
demonstrated that they can be directly (by augmenting the loss) or indirectly (byadapting training data) used to improve the model. Another line of work [ 14,87]
exploits the fact that LRP computes relevance values not only for the input
variables, but for all elements of the neural network, including weights, biasesand individual neurons, to optimally prune and quantize the neural model. The
idea is simple, since LRP explanations tell us which parts of the neural network
are relevant, we can simply remove the irrelevant elements and thus improve the
coding eﬃciency and speed up the computation.
2.5 Deep Taylor Decomposition (DTD)
Idea: The Deep Taylor Decomposition (DTD) method [ 60] is a propagation-
based explanation technique, which explains decisions of a neural network by
decomposition. It redistributes the function value (i.e., the output of the neural
network) to the input variables in a layer-by-layer fashion, while utilizing the
mathematical tool of (ﬁrst-order) Taylor expansion to determine the proportion
or relevance assigned to the lower layer elements in the redistribution process(i.e., their respective contributions). This approach is closely connected to the
LRP method (see Sect. 2.4). Since most LRP rules can be interpreted as a Taylor
decomposition of the relevance function with a speciﬁc choice of root point, DTDcan be seen as the mathematical framework of LRP.
DTD models the relevance of a neuron kat layer las a simple relevance
function of the lower-layer activations, i.e.,
R
k(a) = max(0 ,/summationdisplay
iaiwik)ck, (2)
where a=[a1...a d] are the activations at layer l−1,wikare the weights
connecting neurons i(at layer l−1) and k(at layer l), and ckis a constant. This
model is certainly valid at the output layer (as Rkis initialized with the network
output f(x)). Through an inductive argument the authors of [ 60] proved that
this model also (approximatively) holds at intermediate layers. By representing
this simple function as Taylor expansion around a root point ˜a, i.e.,
Rk(a)=Rk(˜a)/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
0+/summationdisplay
i(ai−˜ai)·∇[Rk(a)]i
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
redistributed relevance+/epsilon1/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
0, (3)
DTD tells us how to meaningfully redistribute relevance from layer lto layer l−1.
This redistribution process is iterated until the input layer. Diﬀerent choices

==== Page 9 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 21
of root point are recommended for diﬀerent types of layers (conv layer, fully
connected layer, input layer) and lead to diﬀerent LRP redistribution rules [ 58].
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/chr5tphr/zennit
https://github.com/albermax/innvestigate
Discussion: DTD is a theoretically motivated explanation framework, which
redistributes relevance from layer to layer in a meaningful manner by utilizing
the concept of Taylor expansion. The method is highly eﬃcient in terms of com-
putation and can be adapted to the speciﬁc properties of a model and its layers
(e.g., by the choice of root point). As for LRP, it is usually not straight for-ward to adapt DTD to novel model architectures (see e.g. local renormalization
layers [ 18]).
2.6 Prediction Diﬀerence Analysis (PDA)
Idea: At the 2017 ICLR conference, Zintgraf et al. [ 91] presented the Prediction
Diﬀerence Analysis (PDA) method. The method is based on the previous ideapresented by [ 69] where, for a given prediction, each input feature is assigned a
relevance value with respect to a class c. The idea of PDA is that the relevance of
a feature x
ican be estimated by simply measuring how the prediction changes
when the feature is unknown, i.e., the diﬀerence between p(c|x)a n d p(c|x\i),
where x\idenotes the set of all input features except xi. Now to evaluate the
prediction, speciﬁcally to ﬁnd p(c|x\i) there are three possibilities: (1) label the
feature as unknown, (2) re-train the classiﬁer omitting the feature, or (3) simu-
late the absence of a feature by marginalizing the feature. With that a relevancevector (WE
i)i=1...m(whereby mrepresent the number of features) is generated,
that is of the same size as the input and thus reﬂects the relative importance of
all features. A large prediction diﬀerence indicates that the feature contributedsigniﬁcantly to the classiﬁcation, while a small diﬀerence indicates that the fea-
ture was not as important to the decision. So speciﬁcally, a positive value WE
i
means that the feature contributed to the evidence for the class of interest and
much more so that removing the feature would reduce the classiﬁer’s conﬁdence
in the given class. A negative value, on the other hand, means that the feature
provides evidence against the class: Removing the feature also removes poten-tially contradictory or disturbing information, and makes the classiﬁer more
conﬁdent in the class under study.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/lmzintgraf/DeepVis-PredDiﬀ
Discussion: Making neural network decisions interpretable through visualiza-
tion is important both to improve models and to accelerate the adoption of
black-box classiﬁers in application areas such as medicine. In the original paper
the authors illustrate the method in experiments on natural images (ImageNet

==== Page 10 ====
22 A. Holzinger et al.
data), as well as medical images (MRI brain scans). A good discussion can be
found in: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJ5UeU9xx
2.7 TCAV (Testing with Concept Activation Vectors)
Idea: TCAV [ 41] is a concept-based neural network approach that aims to
quantify how strongly a concept, such as colour, inﬂuences classiﬁcation. TCAV
is based on the idea of concept activation vectors (CAV), which describe howneural activations inﬂuence the presence or absence of a user-speciﬁc concept. To
calculate such a CAV, two data sets must ﬁrst be collected and combined: One
dataset containing images representing the concept and one dataset consistingof images in which this concept is not present. Then a logistic regression model
is trained on the combined dataset to classify whether the concept is present
in an image. The activations of the user-deﬁned layer of the neural network
serve as features for the classiﬁcation model. The coeﬃcients of the logistic
regression model are then the CAVs. For example, to investigate how much theconcept “stripped” contributes to the classiﬁcation of an image as “zebra” by
a convolutional neural network, a dataset representing the concept “stripped”
and a random dataset in which the concept “stripped” is not present must beassembled. From the CAVs, the conceptual sensitivity can be calculated, which
is the product of the CAV and the derivative of the classiﬁcation (of the original
network) with respect to the speciﬁed neural network layer and class. Conceptualsensitivity thus indicates how strongly the presence of a concept contributes to
the desired class.
While the CAV is a local explanation as it relates to a single classiﬁcation,
the TCAV combines the CAVs across the data into a global explanation method
and thus answers the question of how much a concept contributed overall to
a given classiﬁcation. First, the CAVs are calculated for the entire dataset forthe selected class, concept and level. Then TCAV calculates the ratio of images
with positive conceptual sensitivity, which indicates for how many images the
concept contributed to the class. This ratio is calculated multiple times, each
time using a diﬀerent “negative” sample where the concept is not present, and a
two-tailed Student t-test [ 77] is applied to test whether the conceptual sensitivity
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero (the test part is where the “T” in TCAV comes
from).
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/tensorﬂow/tcav
Discussion: TCAV can be applied to detect concept sensitivity for image clas-
siﬁers that are gradient-based, such as deep neural networks. TCAV can also
be used to analyze fairness aspects, e.g. whether gender or attributes of pro-
tected groups are used for classiﬁcation. Very positive is that TCAV can beused by users without machine learning expertise, as the most important part
is collecting the concept images, where domain expertise is important. TCAV
allows to test a classiﬁcation model for arbitrary concepts, even if the model

==== Page 11 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 23
was not explicitly trained on them. The technique can be used to study whether
a network learned “ﬂawed” concepts, such as spurious correlations. Detectingﬂawed concepts can help to improve the model. For example, it could be studied
how important the presence of snow was for classifying wolves on images, and
if it turns out to be important, adding images with wolves without snow mightimprove the robustness of the model. One drawback can be seen in the eﬀort for
labeling and collecting new data. Some concepts might also be too abstract to
test, as the collection of a concept dataset might be diﬃcult. How would one,for example, collect a dataset of images representing the concept“happiness”?
Furthermore, TCAV may not work well with shallower neural networks, as only
deeper networks learn more abstract concepts. Also, the technique is also notapplicable to text and tabular data, but mainly to image data
5(last accessed:
21-Feb-2022). A practical example from the medical domain can be found in [ 19].
2.8 XGNN (Explainable Graph Neural Networks)
Idea: The XGNN method [ 88] is a post-hoc method that operates on the model
level, meaning that it does not strive to provide individual example-level expla-nations. RL drives a search to ﬁnd an adequate graph starting by a randomly
chosen node or a relatively small graph, as deﬁned by prior knowledge. The RL
algorithm follows two rewards at the same time: ﬁrst, it tries to increase theperformance of the GNN, but secondly to keep generating valid graphs, depend-
ing on the domain requirements. The action space contains only edge addition
for edges in the existing graph or an enhancement with a new node. In the casewhere the action has a non-desirable contribution, a negative reward is provided.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/divelab/DIG/tree/dig/benchmarks/xgra
ph/supp/XGNN and pseudocode in the paper.
Discussion: This explanation method is invented particularly for the task of
graph classiﬁcations. The returned graphs are the ones that were the most rep-resentative for the GNN decision and usually have a particular property that
is ingrained to make the validation possible. It is worth to mention that this is
the only method that provides mode-level explanations for GNN architectures.The use of RL is justiﬁed by the fact that the search for the explanation graph
is non-diﬀerentiable, since it is not only driven by the performance but also
by the plausibility and validity of the generated graph. Because the training ofGNNs involves aggregations and combinations, this is an eﬃcient way to over-
come the obstacle of non-diﬀerentiation. The provided explanation is considered
to be more eﬀective for big datasets, where humans don’t have the time to checkeach example’s explanation individually. A disadvantage can be seen by the fact
that the research idea is based on the assumption that network motifs that are
the result of this explanation method are the ones on which the GNN is most
5For discussion see: https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1viikbCW .

==== Page 12 ====
24 A. Holzinger et al.
“responsive”; nevertheless, this is not entirely true, since one does not know if
other graph information was also important for the decision of the network. Theresults of the explanations are also non-concrete since in many cases ground
truth is missing. That leads to a rather weak validation that bases on abstract
concepts and properties of the discovered graphs, such as if they contain cyclesor not.
2.9 SHAP (Shapley Values)
Note that the concepts described in this section also apply to the methods pre-
sented in Sects. 2.9–2.12.
Methods in this family are concerned with explanations for the model fat
some individual point x
∗. They are based on a value function eSwhere Sis a
subset of variable indexes S⊆{1,...,p}. Typically, this function is deﬁned as
the expected value for a conditional distribution in which conditioning appliesto all variables in a subset of S
e
S=E[f(x)|xS=x∗
S]. (4)
Expected value is typically used for tabular data. In contrast, for other data
modalities, this function is also often deﬁned as the model prediction at x∗after
zeroing out the values of variables with indices outside S. Whichever deﬁnition
is used, the value of eScan be thought of as the model’s response once the
variables in the subset S are speciﬁed.
The purpose of attribution is to decompose the diﬀerence f(x∗)−e∅into
parts that can be attributed to individual variables (see Fig. 3A).
Idea: Assessing the importance of variable iis based on analysing how adding
variable ito the set Swill aﬀect the value of the function eS. The contribution
of a variable iis denoted by φ(i) and calculated as weighted average over all
possible subsets S
φ(i)=/summationdisplay
S⊆{1,...,p}/{i}|S|!(p−1−|S|)!
p!/parenleftbig
eS∪{i}−eS/parenrightbig
. (5)
This formula is equivalent to
φ(i)=1
|Π|/summationdisplay
π∈Πebefore( π,i)∪{i}−ebefore( π,i), (6)
where Πis a set of all orderings of pvariables and before( π,i) stands for subset of
variables that are before variable iin the ordering π. Each ordering corresponds
to set of values eSthat shift from e∅tof(x∗) (see Fig. 3B).
In summary, the analysis of a single ordering shows how adding consecutive
variables changes the value of the eSfunction as presented in Fig. 3B. SHAP
[51] arises as an averaging of these contributions over all possible orderings. This

==== Page 13 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 25
algorithm is an adaptation of Shapley values to explain individual predictions
of machine learning models. Shapley values were initially proposed to distributepayouts fairly in cooperative games and are the only solution based on axioms
of eﬃciency, symmetry, dummy, and additivity.
Fig. 3. Panel A. The methods presented in Sects. 2.9–2.12explain the diﬀerence in
prediction between a particular observation (x) and a baseline value. Often for the
baseline value is taken the expected value from the model’s prediction distribution.The methods described here distribute this diﬀerence e
∅−f(x∗) among the variables
in the model. Panel B. Attributions are based on the changes in the expected value of
the model prediction due to successive conditioning. For a given sequence of variableorder (here, 1, 2, 3, 4) one can calculate how adding another variable will change the
expected prediction of the model. Panel C. For the SHAP method, the variables have
no structure, so any sequence of variables is treated as equally likely. Panel D. The ASVmethod takes into account a causal graph for variables. Only variable orderings that
are consistent with this dependency graph are considered in the calculation of attri-
butions. Causal graph controls where to assign attributions in the case of dependentvariables. Panel E. The Shapley Flow method also considers a causal graph. It allo-
cates attributions to the edges in this graph, showing how these attributions propagate
through the graph.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/slundberg/shap
Discussion: SHAP values sum up to the model prediction, i.e.
f(x∗)=e∅+/summationdisplay
iφ(i). (7)

==== Page 14 ====
26 A. Holzinger et al.
In some situations, this is a very desirable property, e.g. if a pricing model pre-
dicts the value of a certain product, it is desirable to decompose this predictionadditively into components attributable to individual variables. SHAP draws
from a rich theoretical underpinning in game theory and fulﬁls desirable axioms,
for example, that features that did not contribute to the prediction get an attri-bution of zero. Shapley values can be further combined to global interpretations
of the model, such as feature dependence plots, feature importance and interac-
tion analysis.
One large drawback of Shapley values is their immense computational com-
plexity. For modern models such as deep neural networks and high dimensional
inputs, the exact computation of Shapley values is intractable. However, model-speciﬁc implementations exist for tree-based methods (random forest, xgboost
etc.) or additive models [ 49]. With care, one should use certain estimation ver-
sions of SHAP, such as KernelSHAP, because those are slow to compute. Fur-
thermore, when features are dependent, Shapley values will cause extrapolation
to areas with low data density. Conditional versions exist [ 50] (for tree-based
models only), but the interpretation changes which is a common pitfall [ 57].
SHAP explanations are not sparse since to each feature that changes the predic-
tion, a Shapley value diﬀerent from zero is attributed, no matter how small theinﬂuence. If sparse explanations are required, counterfactual explanations might
be preferable.
2.10 Asymmetric Shapley Values (ASV)
Idea: SHAP values are symmetrical. This means that if two variables have the
same eﬀect on the model’s behaviour, e.g. because they take identical values, they
will receive equal attributions. However, this is not always a desirable property.For example, if we knew that one of the variables has a causal eﬀect on the
other, then it would make more sense to assign the entire attribution to the
source variable.
Asymmetric Shapley values (ASV) [ 22,23] allow the use of additional knowl-
edge about the causal relations between variables in the model explanation pro-cess. A cause-eﬀect relationship described in the form of causal graph allows the
attribution of variables to be redistributed in such a way that the source vari-
ables have a greater attribution, providing eﬀect on both the other dependentvariables and the model predictions (see Fig. 3D). SHAP values are a special case
of ASV values, where the casual graph is reduced to a set of unrelated vertices
(see Fig. 3C).
The ASV values for variable iare also calculated as the average eﬀect of
adding a variable to a coalition of other variables, in the same way as expressed
in Eq. ( 6). The main diﬀerence is that not all possible orders of variables are
considered, but only the orders are consistent with the casual graph. Thus, a
larger eﬀect will be attributed to the source variables.

==== Page 15 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 27
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/nredell/shapFlex
Discussion: In order to use the ASV, a causal graph for the variables is needed.
Such a graph is usually created based on domain knowledge. Examples include
applications in bioinformatics with signalling pathways data for which the under-
lying causal structure is experimentally veriﬁed or application in social sciences,
where sociodemographic data in which the direction of the relationship can bedetermined based on expert knowledge (e.g., age aﬀects income rather than
income aﬀects age).
A particular application of the ASV value is the model fairness analysis. If
a protected attribute, such as age or sex, does not directly aﬀect the model’s
score, its SHAP attribute will be zero. But if the protected attribute is the cause
for other proxy variables, then the ASV values will capture this indirect eﬀecton the model.
2.11 Break-Down
Idea: Variable contribution analysis is based on examining the change in e
S
values along with a growing set of variables described by a speciﬁc order (see
Fig.3B). If the model fhas interactions, diﬀerent orderings of the variables
may lead to diﬀerent contributions. The SHAP values average over all possible
orderings (see Eq. 6), thus leads to additive contributions and neglecting the
interactions.
An alternative is to analyze diﬀerent orderings to detect when one variable
has diﬀerent contributions depending on what other variables precede it. This is
a sign of interaction. The Break-Down method (see [ 16,17]) analyzes the various
orders to identify and visualize interactions in the model. The ﬁnal attributions
are determined based on a single ordering which is chosen based on greedy
heuristics.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ModelOriented/DALEX
Discussion: Techniques such as SHAP generate explanations in the form of
additive contributions. However, these techniques are often used in the analysisof complex models, which are often not additive. [ 26] shows that for many tabular
datasets, an additive explanation may be an oversimpliﬁcation, and it may lead
to a false belief that the model behaves in an additive way.
2.12 Shapley Flow
Idea: Like for Asymmetric Shapley Values (ASV), Shapley Flow [ 84] also allows
the use of the dependency structure between variables in the explanation pro-
cess. As in ASV, the relationship is described by a causal graph. However, unlike
ASV and other methods, attribution is assigned not to the nodes (variables) but

==== Page 16 ====
28 A. Holzinger et al.
the edges (relationships between variables). An edge in a graph is signiﬁcant if its
removal would change the predictions of the model (see Fig. 3E). The edge attri-
bution has the additional property that for each explanation, boundaries hold the
classical Shapley values. The most extreme explanation boundary corresponds
to the ASV method. The Shapley Flow method determines the attributions foreach edge in the causal graph.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/nathanwang000/Shapley-Flow
Discussion: Shapley Flow attribution analysis carries a lot of information about
both the structure of the relationship between variables and its eﬀect of particu-lar groups of variables (explanation boundaries) on the predictions. On the rather
disadvantageous side is that it requires knowledge of the dependency structure
in the form of a directed causal graph, which limits the number of problems inwhich it can be applied. For readability reasons, it is limited to small numbers
of variables. Also it requires deﬁnition of a background case, i.e. reference obser-
vation. Potential explanations may vary depending on the reference observation
chosen.
2.13 Textual Explanations of Visual Models
Idea: The generation of textual descriptions of images is addressed by sev-
eral machine learning models that contain both a part that processes the input
images - typically a convolutional neural network (CNN) - and one that learns
an adequate text sequence, usually a recurrent neural network (RNN). Thosetwo parts cooperate for the production of image descriptive sentences that pre-
supposes that a classiﬁcation task is successfully accomplished. One of the ﬁrst
benchmark datasets that contained image descriptions was already invented in2014, the Microsoft COCO (MS-COCO) [ 48]. The models that achieve a good
performance classiﬁcation, ﬁrst detect components and concepts of the image
and then construct sentences where objects, subjects as well as their character-istics are connected by verbs. The problem of semantic enrichment of images
for language-related tasks is addressed in a number of ways (see, for example,
the Visual Genome project [ 45]); however, in most cases, such descriptions are
not directly tied to visual recognition tasks. Nevertheless, an advantage is that
textual descriptions are easier to analyze and validate than attribution maps.
It is important to note that the mere description of the image’s content is not
equivalent to an explanation of the decision-making process of the neural net-
work model. Unless the produced sentences contain the unique attributes thathelp diﬀerentiate between the images of each class, the content of the words
should not be considered class-relevant content. A solution to this problem is
proposed in [ 31]. This method’s main goal is to do exactly that; to ﬁnd those
characteristics that are discriminative, since they were used by the neural net-
work models to accomplish the task - those exactly need to be present in the
generated text. To achieve this, the training does not just use the relevance

==== Page 17 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 29
loss, which generates descriptions relevant to the predicted class based on con-
text borrowed from a ﬁne-grained image recognition model through conditionalprobabilities. A discriminative loss is invented to generate sentences rich in class-
discriminative features. The introduced weight update procedure consists of two
components, one based on the gradient of relevance loss and the second basedon the gradient of discriminative loss, so that descriptions that are both relevant
to the predicted class and contain words with high discriminative capacity are
rewarded. The reinforcement learning method REINFORCE [ 85] is used for the
backpropagation of the error through sampling during the training process.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/LisaAnne/ECCV2016
Discussion: High METEOR [ 13]a n dC I D E r[ 82] scores for relevant explana-
tions were measured for the generated sentences. It is necessary to compare the
resulting explanations with experts since they only know the diﬀerence betweensentences that correctly describe the visual content and ones that concentrate
on what occurs only in the class the images belong. This is positive and nega-
tive at the same time; unfortunately, there is no way to check how much of thegenerated explanation is consistent without domain knowledge. Furthermore,
data artefacts can also inﬂuence both the performance and explanation quality
negatively. Overall though, even ablation studies where parts of the model were
tested separately, showed that the components individually had a higher per-
formance than when trained alone. That indicates that the common training ofvisual processing and textual explanation generation is beneﬁcial for each part
individually.
2.14 Integrated Gradients
Idea: The Integrated Gradients method [ 80] is based on two fundamental
axioms, sensitivity and implementation invariance. Sensitivity means that non-zero attributions are given to every input and baseline that diﬀer in one fea-
ture but have diﬀerent predictions. Implementation invariance means that if two
models behave identical/are functionally equivalent, then attributions must beidentical. Although these two axioms sound very natural, it turns out that many
attribution methods do not have these properties. In particular, when a model
has ﬂattened predictions for a speciﬁc point of interest, the gradient in the pointof interest zeroes out and does not carry information useful for the explanation.
The approach proposed by the Integrated Gradients method for model f
aggregates the gradients
∂f(x)
∂x icomputed along the path connecting the point of
interest xto the highlighted observation - the baseline x∗(for computer vision
this could be a black image and for text an empty sentence).
More formally, for ith feature, Integrated Gradients are deﬁned as
IntegratedGrads i(x)=(xi−x∗
i)/integraldisplay1
α=0∂f(x∗+α(x−x∗))
∂xidα.

==== Page 18 ====
30 A. Holzinger et al.
The integral can be replaced by a sum over a set of alpha values in the
interval [0,1].
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ankurtaly/Integrated-Gradients
Discussion: Integrated Gradients is a widespread technique for explaining deep
neural networks or other diﬀerentiable models. It is a theoretically sound app-
roach based on two desirable properties: sensitivity and implementation invari-
ance. In addition, it is computationally eﬃcient and uses gradient information
at a few selected points α. The three main drawbacks are: (1) need for the base-
line observation, selection of which signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the attributions, (2)works only for diﬀerentiable models, suitable for neural networks but not, e.g.,
for decision trees, (3) by default, gradients are integrated along the shortest path
between the baseline and the point of interest. Depending on the topology of thedata, this path does not always make sense and cover the data. Furthermore,
deep models usually suﬀer from the gradient shattering problem [ 12], which may
negative aﬀect the explanation (see discussion in [ 70]). Extensions to this method
are proposed to overcome the above drawbacks.
2.15 Causal Models
Description: In the work of Madumal et al. [ 53] a structural causal model
[29] is learned, which can be considered an extension of Bayesian Models [ 44,71]
of the RL environment with the use of counterfactuals. It takes into account
events that would happen or environment states that would be reached under
diﬀerent actions taken by the RL agent. Ultimately, the goal of any RL agentis to maximize a long-term reward; the explanation provides causal chains until
the reward receiving state is reached. The researchers pay attention to keep
the explanations minimally complete, by removing some of the intermediatenodes in the causal chains, to conform to the explanation satisfaction conditions
according to the Likert scale [ 33]. The counterfactual explanation is computed by
comparing causal chain paths of actions not chosen by the agent (according to thetrained policy). To keep the explanation as simple as possible, only the diﬀerences
between the causal chains comprise the returned counterfactual explanation.
GitHub Repo: No Github Repo
Discussion: Model-free reinforcement learning with a relatively small state
and action space has the advantage that we can explain how the RL agent
takes its decisions in a causal way; since neural networks base their decisions on
correlations, this is one of the ﬁrst works towards causal explanations. The userhas the ability to get answers to the questions “why” and “why not” an action
was chosen by the agent. The provided explanations are appropriate according
to satisﬁability, ethics requirements and are personalized to the human mental

==== Page 19 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 31
model by the use of a dedicated user interface. On the rather negative side is
that this explanation method is evaluated on problems with very small stateand action space (9 and 4 correspondingly). Current RL problems have much
larger state and action spaces and the solution can be found with the use of
Deep Reinforcement Learning [ 27,32]. The reason is, that the structural model
of the environment dynamics are not known a priori and must be discovered and
approximated during exploration. Furthermore, this work applies only to the
ﬁnite domain, although the authors note that it will be part of their researchwork to extend it to continuous spaces.
2.16 Meaningful Perturbations
Idea: This approach was proposed by Fong and Vedaldi [ 21] and can be regarded
as model-agnostic, perturbation-based explanation method. Thus, the explana-
tion is computed solely based on the reaction of the model to a perturbed (oroccluded) input sample. For a given sample x, the method aims to synthesize a
sparse occlusion map (i.e., the explanation) that leads to the maximum drop of
the model’s prediction f(x), relative do the original prediction with the unper-
turbed x. Thus, compared to simple occlusion-based techniques which naively
perturb a given sample by sequentially occluding parts of it, the Meaningful Per-
turbation algorithm aims to directly learn the explanation by formulating theexplanation problem as a meta-prediction task and using tools from optimiza-
tion to solve it. Sparsity constraints ensure that the search focuses on ﬁnding the
smallest possible perturbation mask that has the larger eﬀect on the certaintyof the classiﬁcation performance.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ruthcfong/perturb
explanations
Discussion: As other model agnostic approaches, Meaningful Perturbations is
a very ﬂexible method, which can be directly applied to any machine learning
model. The approach can be also interpreted from a rate-distortion perspec-tive [43]. Since the Meaningful Perturbations method involves optimization, it
is computationally much more demanding than propagation-based techniques
such as LRP. Also it is well-known that the perturbation process (occlusion ordeletion can be seen as a particular type of perturbation), moves the sample
out of the manifold of natural images and thus can introduce artifacts. The
use of generative models have been suggested to overcome this out-of-manifoldproblem [ 1].
2.17 EXplainable Neural-Symbolic Learning (X-NeSyL)
Idea: Symbolic AI is an emerging ﬁeld that has been shown to contribute
immensely to Explainable AI. Neuro-Symbolic methods [ 24] incorporate prior
human knowledge for various tasks such as concept learning and at the same time

==== Page 20 ====
32 A. Holzinger et al.
they produce output that is more interpretable, such as mathematical equations
or Domain-Speciﬁc Languages (DSL) [ 55].
A research work that is dedicated to using symbolic knowledge of the domain
experts, expressed as a knowledge graph (KG), to align it with the explanations
of a neural network is the EXplainable Neural-Symbolic Learning (X-NeSyL)[20]. The researchers start with the goal to encourage the neural network that
performs classiﬁcation to assign feature importances to the object’s parts in a
way that corresponds to the compositional way humans classify. After usingstate-of-the-art CNN architectures and applying methods such as SHAP (see
Sect.2.9) to quantify the positive and negative inﬂuence of each detected feature,
a graph is built that encompasses constraints and relations elicited from thecomputed importances. This graph is compared to the KG provided by human
experts. A designated loss that punishes non-overlap between these two has been
shown to boost explainability and in some cases performance.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/JulesSanchez/X-NeSyL ,
https://github.com/JulesSanchez/MonuMAI-AutomaticStyleClassiﬁcation
Discussion: This method can be seen as an explainability-by-design approach.
That means that at each step of the training process, it is made sure that the end
result will be interpretable. This is not an ad-hoc method; the training containsa loss to guide the neural network towards explanations that have a human-
expert like structure. Furthermore, SHAP values provide intermediate feature
relevance results that are straightforward to understand. Disadvantageous is thatthe same thing that fosters explainability, contributes to the negatives of this
approach, namely that it needs domain-speciﬁc knowledge. This is not always
easy to gather, it may be contradicting if several experts are involved and inthat way constraints the network to compute in a speciﬁc way. The researchers
comment on that particular issue and exercise their method with many datasets,
test several CNN architectures and provide performance results with established
as well as newly invented methods to see where and how the human-in-the-loop
[37] works in practice.
3 Conclusion and Future Outlook
In the future, we expect that the newly invented xAI methods will capture causal
dependencies. Therefore, it will be important to measure the quality of explana-
tions so that an xAI method achieves a certain level of causal understanding [ 65]
for a user with eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and satisfaction in a given context of use[34]. Successful xAI models in the future will also require new human-AI inter-
faces [ 36] that enable contextual understanding and allow a domain expert to ask
questions and counterfactuals [ 35] (“what-if” questions). This is where a human-
in-the-loop can (sometimes - not always, of course) bring human experience and
conceptual knowledge to AI processes [ 37]. Such conceptual understanding is

==== Page 21 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 33
something that the best AI algorithms in the world (still) lack, and this is where
the international xAI community will make many valuable contributions in thefuture.
Acknowledgements. The authors declare no conﬂict of interests. This work does not
raise any ethical issues. The content is partly based on the XAI seminar LV 706.315provided by Andreas Holzinger since 2015 at Graz University of Technology. Parts of
this work have been funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), Project: P-32554,
explainable AI, by the German Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF) throughBIFOLD (refs. 01IS18025A and 01IS18037A), by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
programme (grant no. 965221), Project iToBoS, and by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG), Emmy Noether Grant 437611051.
References
1. Agarwal, C., Nguyen, A.: Explaining image classiﬁers by removing input features
using generative models. In: Ishikawa, H., Liu, C.-L., Pajdla, T., Shi, J. (eds.)ACCV 2020. LNCS, vol. 12627, pp. 101–118. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-69544-6
7
2. Alber, M., et al.: iNNvestigate neural networks! J. Mach. Learn. Res. (JMLR)
20(93), 1–8 (2019)
3. Ali, A., Schnake, T., Eberle, O., Montavon, G., M¨ uller, K.R., Wolf, L.: XAI for
transformers: better explanations through conservative propagation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.07304 (2022)
4. Anders, C.J., Neumann, D., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R., Lapuschkin, S.: Software for
dataset-wide XAI: from local explanations to global insights with Zennit, CoRelAy,
and ViRelAy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13200 (2021)
5. Anders, C.J., Weber, L., Neumann, D., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R., Lapuschkin,
S.: Finding and removing clever HANs: using explanation methods to debug and
improve deep models. Inf. Fusion 77, 261–295 (2022)
6. Arras, L., et al.: Explaining and interpreting LSTMs. In: Samek, W., Montavon,
G., Vedaldi, A., Hansen, L.K., M¨ uller, K.-R. (eds.) Explainable AI: Interpreting,
Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 11700, pp. 211–238.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6 11
7. Arras, L., Montavon, G., M¨ uller, K.R., Samek, W.: Explaining recurrent neural net-
work predictions in sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the EMNLP 2017 Work-shop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment & Social Media
Analysis (WASSA), pp. 159–168. Association for Computational Linguistics (2017)
8. Arras, L., Osman, A., Samek, W.: CLEVR-XAI: a benchmark dataset for the
ground truth evaluation of neural network explanations. Inf. Fusion 81, 14–40
(2022)
9. Asif, N.A., et al.: Graph neural network: a comprehensive review on Non-Euclidean
space. IEEE Access 9, 60588–60606 (2021)
10. Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., M¨ uller, K.R., Samek, W.: On
pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions by layer-wise relevance
propagation. PLoS ONE 10(7), e0130140 (2015)
11. Baehrens, D., Schroeter, T., Harmeling, S., Kawanabe, M., Hansen, K., M¨ uller,
K.R.: How to explain individual classiﬁcation decisions. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11,
1803–1831 (2010)

==== Page 22 ====
34 A. Holzinger et al.
12. Balduzzi, D., Frean, M., Leary, L., Lewis, J., Ma, K.W.D., McWilliams, B.: The
shattered gradients problem: if ResNets are the answer, then what is the question?
In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 342–350. PMLR (2017)
13. Banerjee, S., Lavie, A.: Meteor: an automatic metric for MT evaluation with
improved correlation with human judgments. In: Proceedings of the ACL Workshop
on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/orSummarization, pp. 65–72 (2005)
14. Becking, D., Dreyer, M., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K., Lapuschkin, S.: Ecq
x:
explainability-driven quantization for low-bit and sparse DNNs. In: Holzinger, A.,
et al. (eds.) xxAI 2020. LNAI, vol. 13200, pp. 271–296. Springer, Cham (2022)
15. Bengio, Y., Lecun, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning for AI. Commun. ACM 64(7),
58–65 (2021)
16. Biecek, P.: DALEX: explainers for complex predictive models in R. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 19(84), 1–5 (2018). http://jmlr.org/papers/v19/18-416.html
17. Biecek, P., Burzykowski, T.: Explanatory Model Analysis. Chapman and
Hall/CRC, New York (2021). https://pbiecek.github.io/ema/
18. Binder, A., Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., M¨ uller, K.-R., Samek, W.: Layer-wise
relevance propagation for neural networks with local renormalization layers. In:Villa, A.E.P., Masulli, P., Pons Rivero, A.J. (eds.) ICANN 2016. LNCS, vol. 9887,
pp. 63–71. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-44781-0
8
19. Clough, J.R., Oksuz, I., Puyol-Ant´ on, E., Ruijsink, B., King, A.P., Schnabel, J.A.:
Global and local interpretability for cardiac MRI classiﬁcation. In: Shen, D., et al.
(eds.) MICCAI 2019. LNCS, vol. 11767, pp. 656–664. Springer, Cham (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32251-9 72
20. D´ ıaz-Rodr´ ıguez, N., et al.: Explainable neural-symbolic learning (X-NeSyL)
methodology to fuse deep learning representations with expert knowledge graphs:
the MonuMAI cultural heritage use case. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.11914 (2021)
21. Fong, R.C., Vedaldi, A.: Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful
perturbation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 3429–3437 (2017)
22. Frye, C., de Mijolla, D., Cowton, L., Stanley, M., Feige, I.: Shapley-based explain-
ability on the data manifold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01272 (2020)
23. Frye, C., Rowat, C., Feige, I.: Asymmetric shapley values: incorporating causal
knowledge into model-agnostic explainability. In: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Had-
sell, R., Balcan, M.F., Lin, H. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems, vol. 33, pp. 1229–1239 (2020)
24. d’Avila Garcez, A.S., Broda, K.B., Gabbay, D.M.: Neural-Symbolic Learning Sys-
tems: Foundations and Applications. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4471-0211-3
25. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
(2016)
26. Gosiewska, A., Biecek, P.: iBreakDown: Uncertainty of Model Explanations for
Non-additive Predictive Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11420 (2019)
27. Graesser, L., Keng, W.L.: Foundations of Deep Reinforcement Learning: Theory
and Practice in Python. Addison-Wesley Professional (2019)
28. Gunning, D., Aha, D.W.: Darpa’s explainable artiﬁcial intelligence program. AI
Mag. 40(2), 44–58 (2019)
29. Halpern, J.Y., Pearl, J.: Causes and explanations: a structural-model approach.
Part II: Explanations. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 56(4), 889–911 (2005)
30. Hedstr¨ om, A., et al.: Quantus: an explainable AI toolkit for responsible evaluation
of neural network explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06861 (2022)

==== Page 23 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 35
31. Hendricks, L.A., Akata, Z., Rohrbach, M., Donahue, J., Schiele, B., Darrell, T.:
Generating visual explanations. In: Leibe, B., Matas, J., Sebe, N., Welling, M.
(eds.) ECCV 2016. LNCS, vol. 9908, pp. 3–19. Springer, Cham (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0 1
32. Hernandez-Leal, P., Kartal, B., Taylor, M.E.: A survey and critique of multia-
gent deep reinforcement learning. Auton. Agent. Multi-Agent Syst. 33(6), 750–797
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-019-09421-1
33. Hoﬀman, R.R., Mueller, S.T., Klein, G., Litman, J.: Metrics for explainable AI:
challenges and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04608 (2018)
34. Holzinger, A., Carrington, A., Mueller, H.: Measuring the quality of explanations:
the system causability scale (SCS). Comparing human and machine explanations.
KI - K¨ unstliche Intelligenz (German Journal of Artiﬁcial intelligence), Special Issue
on Interactive Machine Learning, Edited by Kristian Kersting, TU Darmstadt34(2), 193–198 (2020)
35. Holzinger, A., Malle, B., Saranti, A., Pfeifer, B.: Towards multi-modal causability
with graph neural networks enabling information fusion for explainable AI. Inf.
Fusion 71(7), 28–37 (2021)
36. Holzinger, A., Mueller, H.: Toward human-AI interfaces to support explainability
and causability in medical AI. IEEE Comput. 54(10), 78–86 (2021)
37. Holzinger, A., et al.: Interactive machine learning: experimental evidence for the
human in the algorithmic loop. Appl. Intell. 49(7), 2401–2414 (2018). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10489-018-1361-5
38. Huang, Q., Yamada, M., Tian, Y., Singh, D., Yin, D., Chang, Y.: GraphLIME:
local interpretable model explanations for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.06216v1 (2020)
39. Kauﬀmann, J., Esders, M., Montavon, G., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.: From cluster-
ing to cluster explanations via neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07633
(2019)
40. Kauﬀmann, J., M¨ uller, K.R., Montavon, G.: Towards explaining anomalies: a deep
Taylor decomposition of one-class models. Pattern Recogn. 101, 107198 (2020)
41. Kim, B., et al.: Interpretability beyond feature attribution: quantitative testing
with concept activation vectors (TCAV). In: International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR (2018)
42. Kohlbrenner, M., Bauer, A., Nakajima, S., Binder, A., Samek, W., Lapuschkin,
S.: Towards best practice in explaining neural network decisions with LRP. In:
2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–7. IEEE(2020)
43. Kole, S., Bruna, J., Kutyniok, G., Levie, R., Nguyen, D.A.: A rate-distortion frame-
work for explaining neural network decisions. In: Holzinger, A., et al. (eds.) xxAI
2020. LNAI, vol. 13200, pp. 91–115. Springer, Cham (2022)
44. Koller, D., Friedman, N.: Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Tech-
niques. MIT Press (2009)
45. Krishna, R., et al.: Visual genome: connecting language and vision using crowd-
sourced dense image annotations. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 123(1), 32–73 (2017)
46. Lapuschkin, S., Binder, A., M¨ uller, K.R., Samek, W.: Understanding and com-
paring deep neural networks for age and gender classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings ofthe IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW), pp.
1629–1638 (2017)
47. Lapuschkin, S., W¨ aldchen, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.:
Unmasking clever HANs predictors and assessing what machines really learn. Nat.
Commun. 10, 1096 (2019)

==== Page 24 ====
36 A. Holzinger et al.
48. Lin, T.-Y., et al.: Microsoft COCO: common objects in context. In: Fleet, D.,
Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., Tuytelaars, T. (eds.) ECCV 2014. LNCS, vol. 8693, pp.
740–755. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10602-1 48
49. Lundberg, S.M., et al.: From local explanations to global understanding with
explainable AI for trees. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2(1), 56–67 (2020)
50. Lundberg, S.M., Erion, G.G., Lee, S.I.: Consistent individualized feature attribu-
tion for tree ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03888 (2018)
51. Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, pp. 4765–4774
(2017)
52. Luo, D., et al.: Parameterized explainer for graph neural network. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 19620–19631 (2020)
53. Madumal, P., Miller, T., Sonenberg, L., Vetere, F.: Explainable reinforcement
learning through a causal lens. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-cial Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 2493–2500 (2020)
54. Mamalakis, A., Ebert-Uphoﬀ, I., Barnes, E.: Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence in
meteorology and climate science: Model ﬁne-tuning, calibrating trust and learningnew science. In: Holzinger, A., et al. (eds.) xxAI 2020. LNAI, vol. 13200, pp. 315–
339. Springer, Cham (2022)
55. Mao, J., Gan, C., Kohli, P., Tenenbaum, J.B., Wu, J.: The neuro-symbolic concept
learner: interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.12584 (2019)
56. Mittelstadt, B.: Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1,
1–7 (2019)
57. Molnar, C., et al.: Pitfalls to avoid when interpreting machine learning models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04131 (2020)
58. Montavon, G., Binder, A., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.-R.: Layer-wise
relevance propagation: an overview. In: Samek, W., Montavon, G., Vedaldi, A.,
Hansen, L.K., M¨ uller, K.-R. (eds.) Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining and
Visualizing Deep Learning. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 11700, pp. 193–209. Springer, Cham
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6
10
59. Montavon, G., Kauﬀmann, J., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.: Explaining the predictions
of unsupervised learning models. In: Holzinger, A., et al. (eds.) xxAI 2020. LNAI,
vol. 13200, pp. 117–138. Springer, Cham (2022)
60. Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., Binder, A., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.: Explaining
nonlinear classiﬁcation decisions with deep Taylor decomposition. Pattern Recogn.
65, 211–222 (2017)
61. Montavon, G., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.: Methods for interpreting and understand-
ing deep neural networks. Digit. Signal Process. 73, 1–15 (2018)
62. Morch, N.J., et al.: Visualization of neural networks using saliency maps. In: Pro-
ceedings of ICNN 1995-International Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4, pp.
2085–2090 (1995)
63. O’Sullivan, S., et al.: Legal, regulatory, and ethical frameworks for development
of standards in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and autonomous robotic surgery. Int. J.
Med. Robot. Comput. Assisted Surg. 15(1), e1968 (2019)
64. Pearl, J.: The limitations of opaque learning machines. In: Brockman, J. (ed.)
Possible Minds: 25 Ways of Looking at AI, pp. 13–19. Penguin, New York (2019)
65. Pearl, J.: The seven tools of causal inference, with reﬂections on machine learning.
Commun. ACM 62(3), 54–60 (2019)
66. Pearl, J., Mackenzie, D.: The Book of Why. Basic Books, New York (2018)

==== Page 25 ====
xAI Methods - Overview 37
67. Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: Why should I trust you?: explaining the
predictions of any classiﬁer. In: 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2016), pp. 1135–1144. ACM (2016)
68. Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: Anchors: high-precision model-agnostic
explanations. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 32, no. 1 (2018)
69. Robnik- ˇSikonja, M., Kononenko, I.: Explaining classiﬁcations for individual
instances. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 20(5), 589–600 (2008)
70. Samek, W., Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., Anders, C.J., M¨ uller, K.R.: Explaining
deep neural networks and beyond: a review of methods and applications. Proc.
IEEE 109(3), 247–278 (2021)
71. Saranti, A., Taraghi, B., Ebner, M., Holzinger, A.: Insights into learning com-
petence through probabilistic graphical models. In: Holzinger, A., Kieseberg, P.,
Tjoa, A.M., Weippl, E. (eds.) CD-MAKE 2019. LNCS, vol. 11713, pp. 250–271.Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29726-8
16
72. Schnake, T., et al.: XAI for graphs: explaining graph neural network predictions
by identifying relevant walks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03589 (2020)
73. Schneeberger, D., St¨ oger, K., Holzinger, A.: The European legal framework for
medical AI. In: Holzinger, A., Kieseberg, P., Tjoa, A.M., Weippl, E. (eds.) CD-
MAKE 2020. LNCS, vol. 12279, pp. 209–226. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-57321-8 12
74. Schoelkopf, B.: Causality for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10500
(2019)
75. Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A.: Deep inside convolutional net-
works: visualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6034 (2013)
76. Stoeger, K., Schneeberger, D., Kieseberg, P., Holzinger, A.: Legal aspects of data
cleansing in medical AI. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 42, 105587 (2021)
77. Student: The probable error of a mean. Biometrika, pp. 1–25 (1908)78. Sturm, I., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., M¨ uller, K.R.: Interpretable deep neural
networks for single-trial EEG classiﬁcation. J. Neurosci. Methods 274, 141–145
(2016)
79. Sun, J., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., Binder, A.: Explain and improve: LRP-
inference ﬁne tuning for image captioning models. Inf. Fusion 77, 233–246 (2022)
80. Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., Yan, Q.: Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In:
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 06–11 August
2017
81. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
Cambridge (2018)
82. Vedantam, R., Lawrence Zitnick, C., Parikh, D.: Cider: consensus-based image
description evaluation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4566–4575 (2015)
83. Vu, M., Thai, M.T.: PGM-explainer: probabilistic graphical model explanations for
graph neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 33, pp. 12225–12235 (2020)
84. Wang, J., Wiens, J., Lundberg, S.: Shapley ﬂow: a graph-based approach to inter-
preting model predictions. In: 24th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Statistics (AISTATS). Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol.130, pp. 721–729. PMLR (2021)

==== Page 26 ====
38 A. Holzinger et al.
85. Williams, R.J.: Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist
reinforcement learning. Mach. Learn. 8(3), 229–256 (1992)
86. Xu, J., Xue, M., Picek, S.: Explainability-based backdoor attacks against graph
neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Wireless Security
and Machine Learning, pp. 31–36 (2021)
87. Yeom, S.K., et al.: Pruning by explaining: a novel criterion for deep neural network
pruning. Pattern Recogn. 115, 107899 (2021)
88. Yuan, H., Tang, J., Hu, X., Ji, S.: XGNN: towards model-level explanations of
graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 430–438 (2020)
89. Zeiler, M.D., Fergus, R.: Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks.
In: Fleet, D., Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., Tuytelaars, T. (eds.) ECCV 2014. LNCS,
vol. 8689, pp. 818–833. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
10590-1 53
90. Zhang, A., Lipton, Z.C., Li, M., Smola, A.J.: Dive into deep learning. Release
0.17.0, Open Source (2021)
91. Zintgraf, L.M., Cohen, T.S., Adel, T., Welling, M.: Visualizing deep neural network
decisions: prediction diﬀerence analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.04595 (2017)
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitteduse, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

