==== Page 1 ====
Exploring the Limitations of Behavior Cloning for Autonomous Driving
Felipe Codevilla∗
Computer Vision Center (CVC)
Campus UAB, Barcelona, Spain
fcodevilla@cvc.uab.esEder Santana
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)
Los Altos, CA, USA.
edercsjr@gmail.com
Antonio M. L ´opez
Computer Vision Center (CVC)
Campus UAB, Barcelona, Spain
antonio@cvc.uab.esAdrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)
Los Altos, CA, USA.
adrien.gaidon@tri.global
Figure 1. Driving scenarios from our new benchmark, based on the CARLA simulator, where the agent needs to react to dynamic changes
in the environment, handle clutter (only part of the environment is causally relevant), and predict complex sensorimotor controls (lateral
and longitudinal). We show that Behavior Cloning yields state-of-the-art policies in these complex scenarios and investigate its limitations.
Abstract
Driving requires reacting to a wide variety of complex
environment conditions and agent behaviors. Explicitly
modeling each possible scenario is unrealistic. In contrast,
imitation learning can, in theory, leverage data from large
ﬂeets of human-driven cars. Behavior cloning in particular
has been successfully used to learn simple visuomotor
policies end-to-end, but scaling to the full spectrum of
driving behaviors remains an unsolved problem. In this
paper, we propose a new benchmark to experimentally
investigate the scalability and limitations of behavior
cloning. We show that behavior cloning leads to state-of-
the-art results, executing complex lateral and longitudinal
maneuvers, even in unseen environments, without being
explicitly programmed to do so. However, we conﬁrm some
limitations of the behavior cloning approach: some well-
known limitations (e.g., dataset bias and overﬁtting), new
generalization issues (e.g., dynamic objects and the lack of
a causal modeling), and training instabilities, all requiring
further research before behavior cloning can graduate to
real-world driving. The code, dataset, benchmark, and
agent studied in this paper can be found at http://
github.com/felipecode/coiltraine/blob/
master/docs/exploring_limitations.md
∗Work done during an internship at TRI.1. Introduction
End-to-end behavior cloning for autonomous driving has
recently attracted renewed interest [ 10,8,12,43,30] as a
simple alternative to traditional modular approaches used
in industry [ 13,24]. In this paradigm, perception and con-
trol are learned simultaneously using a deep neural network.
Explicit sub-tasks are not deﬁned, but may be implicitly
learned from data. These sensorimotor controllers are typ-
ically obtained by imitation learning from human demon-
strations [ 2,33,1,39]. The deep neural network learns,
without being explicitly programmed, to recognize patterns
associating sensory input (e.g., a single RGB image) with a
desired reaction in terms of vehicle control parameters pro-
ducing a target maneuver. Behavior cloning can directly
learn from large ﬂeets of human-driven vehicles without re-
quiring a ﬁxed ontology and extra manually labeled data.
Finally, end-to-end imitation systems can be learned off-
line in a safe way, in contrast to reinforcement learning
approaches that typically require millions of trial and error
runs in the target environment [ 25] or a faithful simulation.
End-to-end imitation systems can suffer a domain shift
between the off-line training experience and the on-line be-
havior [ 35]. This problem, however, can be partially ad-
dressed in practice by data augmentation [ 8,12]. Nonethe-
less, in spite of the early and recent successes of behavior
cloning for end-to-end driving [ 32,23,10,8,12], it has not
9329


==== Page 2 ====
yet proved to scale to the full spectrum of driving behaviors,
such as reacting to multiple dynamic objects.
In this paper, we propose a new benchmark, called
NoCrash , and perform a large scale analysis of end-to-
end behavioral cloning systems in complex driving con-
ditions not studied in this context before. We use a high
ﬁdelity simulated environment based on the open source
CARLA simulator [ 14] to enable reproducible large scale
off-line training and on-line evaluation in over 80 hours
of driving under several different conditions. We describe
a strong Conditional Imitation Learning baseline, derived
from [ 12], that signiﬁcantly improves upon state-of-the-
art modular [ 26], affordance based [ 37], and reinforcement
learning [ 27] approaches, both in terms of generalization
performance in training environments and unseen ones.
Despite its positive performance, we identify limitations
that prevent behavior cloning from successfully graduating
to real-world applications. First, although generalization
performance should scale with training data, generalizing
to complex conditions is still an open problem with a lot
of room for improvement. In particular, we show that no
approach reliably handles dense trafﬁc scenes with many
dynamic agents. Second, we report generalization issues
due to dataset biases and the lack of a causal model. We
indeed observe diminishing returns after a certain amount
of demonstrations, and even characterize a degradation of
performance on unseen environments. Third, we observe a
signiﬁcant variability in generalization performance when
varying the initialization or the training sample order, sim-
ilar to on-policy RL issues [ 19]. We conduct experiments
estimating the impact of ImageNet pre-training and show
that it is not able to fully reduce the variance. This suggests
the order of training samples matters for off-policy Imita-
tion Learning, similar to the on-policy case [ 46].
Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2describes
related work, Section 3our strong behavior cloning base-
line, Section 4our evalution protocol, including our new
NoCrash benchmark, Section 5our experimental results,
and Section 6our conclusion.
2. Related Work
Behavior cloning for driving dates back to the work of
Pomerleau [ 32] on lane following, later followed by other
approaches [ 23], including going beyond driving [ 1,40].
The distributional shift between the training and testing dis-
tributions is the main known limitation of this approach,
which might require on-policy data collection [ 34,35], ob-
tained by the learning agent. Nonetheless, recent works
have proposed effective off-policy solutions, for instance
by expanding the space of image/action pairs either using
noise [ 22,12], extra sensors [ 8], or modularization [ 37,26,
5]. We show, however, that there are other limitations im-
portant to consider in complex driving scenarios, in particu-lar dataset bias and high variance, which both harm scaling
generalization performance with training data.
Dataset bias is a core problem of real-world machine
learning applications [ 42,6] that can have dramatic effects
in a safety-critical application like autonomous driving. Im-
itation learning approaches are particularly sensitive to this
issue, as the learning objective might be dominated by the
main modes in the training data. Going beyond the original
CARLA benchmark [ 14], we use our new NoCrash bench-
mark to quantitatively assess the magnitude of this problem
on generalization performance for more realistic and chal-
lenging driving behaviors.
High variance is a key problem in powerful deep neu-
ral networks, and we show that high performance behavior
cloning models are particularly suffering from this. This
problem is related to sensitivity to both initialization and
sampling order [ 31], reproducibility issues in Reinforce-
ment Learning [ 19,29], and the need to move beyond the
i.i.d. data assumption towards curriculum learning [ 7] for
sensorimotor control [ 46,4].
Driving benchmarks fall in two main categories: off-
line datasets, e.g., [ 15,36,44,18], or on-line environments.
We focus here on on-line benchmarks, as visuomotor mod-
els performing well in dataset-based evaluations do not nec-
essarily translate to good driving policies [ 11]. Driving
is obviously a safety-critical robotic application. Conse-
quently, for safety and to enable reproducibility, researchers
focus on using photo-realistic simulation environments. In
particular, the CARLA open-source driving simulator [ 14]
is emerging as a standard platform for driving research,
used in [ 12,30,37,27,26]. Note, however, that transfer-
ring policies from simulation to the real-world is an open
problem [ 28] out of the scope of this paper, although recent
works have shown encouraging results [ 30,45].
3. A Strong Baseline for Behavior Cloning
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the behavior cloning
framework we use, its limitations, and a robustiﬁed base-
line that tries to tackle these issues.
3.1. Conditional Imitation Learning
Behavior cloning [ 32,38,35,25] is a form of supervised
learning that can learn sensorimotor policies from off-line
collected data. The only requirements are pairs of input
sensory observations associated with expert actions. We use
an expanded formulation for self-driving cars called Condi-
tional Imitation Learning, CIL [ 12]. It uses a high-level nav-
igational command cthat disambiguates imitation around
multiple types of intersections. Given an expert policy
π∗(x)with access to the environment state x, we can exe-
cute this policy to produce a dataset, D={/an}bracketle{toi,ci,ai/an}bracketri}ht}N
i=1,
whereoiare sensor data observations, ciare high-level
commands (e.g., take the next right, left, or stay in lane)
9330


==== Page 3 ====
andai=π∗(xi)are the resulting vehicle actions (low-level
controls). Observations oi={i,vm}contain a single im-
ageiand the ego car speed vm[12] added for the system to
properly react to dynamic objects on the road. Without the
speed context, the model cannot learn if and when it should
accelerate or brake to reach a desired speed or stop.
We want to learn a policy πparametrized by θto produce
similar actions to π∗based only on observations oand high-
level commands c. The best parameters θ∗are obtained by
minimizing an imitation cost ℓ:
θ∗= argmin
θ/summationdisplay
iℓ/parenleftbig
π(oi,ci;θ),ai/parenrightbig
. (1)
In order to evaluate the performance of the learned policy
π(oi,ci;θ)on-line at test time, we assume access to a score
function giving a numeric value expressing the performance
of the policy πon a given benchmark (cf. section 4).
3.2. Limitations
In addition to the distributional shift problem [ 35], be-
havior cloning presents some key limitations.
Bias in Naturalistic Driving Datasets. The appeal of
behavior cloning lies in its simplicity and theoretical scal-
ability, as it can indeed learn by imitation from large off-
line collected demonstrations (e.g., using driving logs from
manually driven production vehicles). It is, however, sus-
ceptible to dataset biases like all learning methods. This
is exacerbated in the case of imitation learning of driving
policies, as most of real-world driving consists in either a
few simple behaviors or a heavy tail of complex reactions
to rare events. Consequently, this can result in performance
degrading as more data is collected, because the diversity of
the dataset does not grow fast enough compared to the main
mode of demonstrations. This phenomenon was not clearly
measured before. Using our new NoCrash benchmark (sec-
tion4), we conﬁrm it may happen in practice.
Causal Confusion. Related to dataset bias, end-to-end
behavior cloning can suffer from causal confusion [ 16]:
spurious correlations cannot be distinguished from true
causes in observed training demonstration patterns unless
an explicit causal model or on-policy demonstrations are
used. Our new NoCrash benchmark conﬁrms the theoretical
observation and toy experiments of [ 16] in realistic driving
conditions. In particular, we identify a typical failure mode
due to a subtle dataset bias: the inertia problem . When the
ego vehicle is stopped (e.g., at a red trafﬁc light), the prob-
ability it stays static is indeed overwhelming in the training
data. This creates a spurious correlation between low speed
and no acceleration, inducing excessive stopping and difﬁ-
cult restarting in the imitative policy. Although mediated
perception approaches that explicitly model causal signals
like trafﬁc lights do not suffer from this theoretical limi-
tation, they still under-perform end-to-end learning in un-
Figure 2. Our proposed network architecture, called CILRS, for
end-to-end urban driving based on CIL [ 12]. A ResNet perception
module processes an input image to a latent space followed by two
prediction heads: one for controls and one for speed.
constrained environments, because not all causes might be
modeled (e.g., some potential obstacles) and errors at the
perception layer (e.g., missed detections) are irrecoverable.
High variance. With a ﬁxed off-policy training dataset,
one would expect CIL to always learn the same policy in
different runs of the training phase. However, the cost func-
tion is optimized via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD),
which assumes the data is independent and identically dis-
tributed [ 9]. When training a reactive policy on snapshots of
longer human demonstrations included in the training data,
the i.i.d. assumption does not hold. Consequently, we might
observe a high sensitivity to the initialization and the order
in which the samples are seen during training. We conﬁrm
this in our experiments, ﬁnding an overall high variance due
to both initialization and sampling order, following the de-
composition in [ 31]:
Var(π) =ED/bracketleftbig
VarI(π|D)/bracketrightbig
+VarD/parenleftbig
EI[π|D]/parenrightbig
,(2)
whereIdenotes the randomness in initialization. Because
the policy πis evaluated on-line in simulated environments,
we evaluate in practice the variance of the score on the test
benchmark, and report results when freezing the initializa-
tion and/or varying the sampling order for different training
datasetsD(including of varying sizes).
3.3. Model
In order to explore the aforementioned limitations of be-
havior cloning, we propose a robustiﬁed CIL model de-
signed to improve on [ 12] while remaining strictly off-
policy. Our network architecture, called CILRS, is shown
in Figure 2. We describe our enhancements below.
Deeper Residual Architecture. We use a ResNet34
architecture [ 17] for the perception backbone P(i). In
the presence of large amounts of data, using deeper ar-
chitectures can be an effective strategy to improve per-
formance [ 17]. In particular, it can reduce both bias
9331


==== Page 4 ====
and variance, maintaining in particular a constant vari-
ance due to training set sampling with both network width
and depth [ 31]. For end-to-end driving, the choice of ar-
chitecture has been mostly limited to small networks so
far [8,12,37] to avoid overﬁtting on limited datasets. In
contrast, we notice that bigger models have better general-
ization performance on learning reactions to dynamic ob-
jects and trafﬁc lights in complex urban environments.
Speed Prediction Regularization. To cope with the
inertia problem without an explicit mapping of potential
causes or on-policy interventions, we jointly train a senso-
rimotor controller with a network that predicts the ego ve-
hicle’s speed. Both neural networks share the same repre-
sentation via our ResNet perception backbone. Intuitively,
what happens is that this joint optimization enforces the
perception module to have speed related features into the
learned representation. This reduces the dependency on in-
put speed as the only way to get dynamics of the scene,
leveraging instead visual cues that are predictive of the car’s
velocity (e.g., free space, curves, trafﬁc light states, etc).
Other changes. We use L1 as loss function ℓinstead
of the mean squared error (MSE), as it is more correlated
to driving performance [ 11]. As our NoCrash benchmark
consists of complex realistic driving conditions in the pres-
ence of dynamic agents, we collect demonstrations from an
expert game AI using privileged information to drive cor-
rectly (i.e. always respecting rules of the road and not crash-
ing into any obstacle). Robustness to heavy noise in the
demonstrations is beyond the scope of our work, as we aim
to explore limitations of behavior cloning methods in spite
ofgood demonstrations. Finally, we pre-trained our percep-
tion backbone on ImageNet to reduce initialization variance
and beneﬁt from generic transfer learning, a standard prac-
tice in deep learning seldom explored for behavior cloning.
4. Evaluation
In this section we discuss the simulated environment we
use, CARLA, and review the original CARLA benchmark.
Due to its limitations, we propose a new benchmark, called
NoCrash , that tries to better evaluate driving controllers re-
action to dynamic objects. This new benchmark, thanks to
its complexity, allows further analysis on limitations of be-
havior cloning and other policy learning methods.
4.1. Simulated Environment
We use the CARLA simulator [ 14] version 0.8.4. The
CARLA environment is divided in two different towns.
Town 01 contains 2.9 km of drivable roads in a suburban
environment. Town 02 is approximately 1.4 km of drivable
roads, also in a suburban environment.
The CARLA environment may contain dynamic obsta-
cles that interact with the ego car. Pedestrians, for instance,might cross the road on random occasions without any ap-
parent previous notice. This action forces the ego car to
promptly react. The CARLA environment also contains a
diversity of car brands that cruise at different speeds. Over-
all it provides a diverse, photo-realistic, and dynamic envi-
ronment with challenging driving conditions (cf. Figure 1).
The original CARLA benchmark [ 14] evaluates driving
controllers on several goal directed tasks of increasing dif-
ﬁculty. Three of the tasks consist of navigation in an empty
town and one of them in a town with a small number of
dynamic objects. Each task is tested in four different condi-
tions increasingly different from the training environment.
The conditions are: same as training, new weather condi-
tions that are derivatives from those seen during training,
and a new town that has different buildings and different
shadow patterns. Note that the biggest generalization test is
the combination of new weather and new town.
The goal directed tasks are evaluated based on success
rate. If the agent reaches the goal regardless of what hap-
pened during the episode, this episode is considered a suc-
cess. The collisions and other infractions are considered
and the average number of kilometers between infractions
is measured. This evaluation induces the benchmark to be
mainly focused on problems of a static nature. These prob-
lems consider the environmental conditions and the static
objects of the world like buildings and trees. Thus, the orig-
inal CARLA benchmark mostly evaluates skills such as lane
keeping and performing 90 degrees turns.
4.2. NoCrash Benchmark
We propose a new larger scale CARLA driving bench-
mark, called NoCrash , designed to test the ability of ego
vehicles to handle complex events caused by changing traf-
ﬁc conditions (e.g., trafﬁc lights) and dynamic agents in the
scene. For this benchmark, we propose different tasks and
metrics than the original CARLA benchmark [ 14] to pre-
cisely measure speciﬁc reaction patterns that we know good
drivers must master in urban conditions.
We propose three different tasks, each one corresponding
to 25 goal directed episodes. In each episode, the agent
starts at a random position and is directed by a high-level
planner into reaching some goal position. The three tasks
have the same set of start and end positions, as well as an
increasing level of difﬁculty as follows:
1. Empty Town: no dynamic objects.
2. Regular Trafﬁc: moderate number of cars and pedes-
trians.
3. Dense Trafﬁc: large number of pedestrians and heavy
trafﬁc (dense urban scenario).
Similar to the CARLA Benchmark, NoCrash has six dif-
ferent weather conditions, where four were seen in train-
9332


==== Page 5 ====
ing and two reserved for testing. It also has two differ-
ent towns, one that is seen during training, and the other
reserved for testing. For more details about the bench-
mark conﬁguration, please refer to the supplementary ma-
terial. As mentioned above, the measure of success of an
episode should be more representative of the agent capa-
bilities to react to dynamic objects. The original CARLA
benchmark [ 14] has a goal conditioned success rate met-
ric that is computed separately from a kilometers between
infractions metric. The latter metric was proposed to be
analogous to the one commonly used by real-world driv-
ing evaluations where the number of human interventions
per kilometer is counted [ 20]. These interventions usually
happen when the safety driver notices some inconsistent be-
havior that would lead the vehicle to a possibly dangerous
state. On a potentially inconsistent behavior, the human in-
tervention will put the vehicle back to a safe state. However,
in the CARLA benchmark analysis, when an infraction is
made, the episode continues after the infraction, leading to
some inaccuracy in infraction counting. An example of in-
accuracy includes whether a crash after leaving the road be
counted as one or two infractions.
InNoCrash , instead of counting the number of infrac-
tions per kilometer, we end the episode as failing when any
collision bigger than a ﬁxed magnitude happens. With this
limitation, we are setting a lower bound and have a guaran-
tee of acceptable behaviors based on the measured percent-
age of success. Furthermore, this makes the evaluation even
more similar to the km/interventions evaluation used in real
world, since a new episode always sends the agent back to
a safe starting state. In summary, we consider an episode
to be successful if the agent reaches a certain goal under a
time limit without colliding with any object. We also care
about the ability of the agent to obey trafﬁc rules. In par-
ticular, we measure and report the percentage of trafﬁc light
violations in Supplementary material. Note that an episode
is not terminated when a trafﬁc light violation occurs unless
they are followed by a collision.
5. Experiments
In this section we detail our protocol for model training
and brieﬂy show that it is competitive with the state of the
art. We also explore several corner cases to explore the lim-
itations of the behavior cloning approach.
5.1. Training Details
First, we collected more than 400 hours of realistic sim-
ulated driving data from a single town of the CARLA en-
vironment using more than 200 GPU-days. We used an ex-
pert driving AI agent that leverages privileged information
about the scene to drive naturally and well in complex con-
ditions. After automatically ﬁltering the data for simulation
failures, duplicates, and edge cases using simple rules, webuilt a dataset of 100 hours of driving, called CARLA100.
To enable running a wide range of experiments, we train
all methods using a subset of 10 hours of expert demon-
strations by default. We also report larger scale training
experiments and scalability analyses in Section 5.3and in
supplementary material. One of the major differences of
the training dataset, when compared to CIL, is that stopping
for red trafﬁc lights is considered on the demonstrator data.
More details about the dataset are given in the supplemen-
tary material.
Training controllers on this dataset, we found that aug-
mentation was not as crucial as reported by previous works
[12,26]. The only regularization we found important for
performance was using a 50% dropout rate [ 41] after the
last convolutional layer. Any larger dropout led us to under-
ﬁtting models. All models were trained using Adam [ 21]
with minibatches of 120samples and an initial learning rate
of0.0002 . At each iteration, a minibatch is sampled ran-
domly from the entire dataset and presented to the network
for training. If we detect that the training error has not de-
creased for over 1,000iterations we divide the learning rate
by 10. We used a 2 hours validation dataset to discover
when to stop the training process. We validate every 20k
iterations and if the validation error increases for three iter-
ations we stop the training process and use this checkpoint
to test on the benchmarks, both CARLA and NoCrash . We
build a validation dataset as described in [ 11].
5.2. Comparison with the state of the art
We compare our results using both the original CARLA
benchmark from [ 14] and our proposed NoCrash bench-
mark. We compare two versions of our method: “CILRS”
(our CIL extension with a ResNet architecture and speed
prediction, as described in section 3), and a version without
the speed prediction branch noted “CILR”. We compare our
method with the original CIL from [ 12] and three state-of-
the-art approaches: CAL [ 37], MT [ 26], and CIRL [ 27]. In
contrast to end-to-end behavior cloning, these methods en-
force some modularization that require extra information at
training time, such as affordances (CAL), semantic segmen-
tation (MT), or extra on-policy interaction with the environ-
ment (CIRL). Our approach only requires a ﬁxed off-policy
dataset of demonstrations.
We show results on the original CARLA benchmark [ 14]
in Table 1and results on our proposed NoCrash benchmark
in Table 2. While most methods perform well in most con-
ditions on the original CARLA benchmark, they all perform
signiﬁcantly worse on NoCrash , especially when trying to
generalize to new conditions. This conﬁrms the usefulness
ofNoCrash in terms of exploring the limitations of driving
policy learning due to its more challenging nature.
In addition, our proposed CILRS model signiﬁcantly im-
proves over the state of the art, e.g., +9% and+26% on
9333


==== Page 6 ====
Training conditions New town & weather
Task CIL[ 12] CIRL[ 27] CAL[ 37] MT[ 26] CILR CILRS CIL[ 12] CIRL[ 27] CAL[ 37] MT[ 26] CILR CILRS
Straight 98 98 100 96 94 96 80 98 94 96 92 96
One Turn 89 97 97 87 92 92 48 80 72 82 92 92
Navigation 86 93 92 81 88 95 44 68 68 78 88 92
Nav. Dynamic 83 82 83 81 85 92 42 62 64 62 82 90
Table 1. Comparison with the state of the art on the original CARLA benchmark. The “CILRS” version corresponds to our CIL-based
ResNet using the speed prediction branch, whereas “CILR” is without this speed prediction. These two models and CIL are the only
ones that do not use any extra supervision or online interaction with the environment during training. The table reports the percentage of
successfully completed episodes in each condition, selecting the best seed out of ﬁve runs.
Training conditions New Town & Weather
Task CIL[ 12] CAL[ 37] MT[ 26] CILR CILRS CIL[ 12] CAL[ 37] MT[ 26] CILR CILRS
Empty 79±1 81 ±1 84±1 92±1 97±2 24 ±1 25 ±3 57±0 66±2 90±2
Regular 60±1 73 ±2 54±2 72±5 83±0 13 ±2 14 ±2 32±2 54±2 56±2
Dense 21±2 42±3 13±4 28±1 42±2 2 ±0 10 ±0 14±2 13±4 24±8
Table 2. Results on our NoCrash benchmark. Mean and standard deviation on three runs, as CARLA 0.8.4 has signiﬁcant non-determinism.
CARLA “Nav. Dynamic” in training and new conditions
respectively, +10% and+24% onNoCrash Regular trafﬁc
in training and new conditions respectively. The signiﬁcant
improvements in generalization conditions, both w.r.t. CIL
and mediated approaches, conﬁrm that our improved end-
to-end behavior cloning architecture can effectively learn
complex general policies from demonstrations alone. Fur-
thermore, our ablative analysis shows that speed prediction
is helpful: CILR can indeed be up to −14% worse than
CILRS on NoCrash .
5.3. Analysis of Limitations
Although clearly above the state of the art, our improved
CILRS architecture nonetheless sees a strong degradation
of performance similar to all other methods in the presence
of challenging driving conditions. We investigate how this
degradation relates to the limitations of behavior cloning
mentioned in Section 3.2by using the NoCrash benchmark,
in particular to better evaluate the interaction of the agents
with dynamic objects.
Generalization in the presence of dynamic objects.
Limited generalization was previously reported for end-to-
end driving approaches [ 14]. In our experiments, we ob-
served additional, and more prominent, generalization is-
sues when the control policies have to deal with dynamic
objects. Table 2indeed shows a large drop in performance
as we change to tasks with more trafﬁc, e.g., −55% and
−66% from Empty to Dense trafﬁc in NoCrash training /
new conditions respectively. In contrast, results in Empty
town only degrade by −7%when changing to a new envi-
ronment and weather. Therefore, the learned policies have
a much harder time dealing robustly with a large number
of vehicles and pedestrians. Furthermore, this impacts allpolicy learning methods, including those using additional
supervision or on-policy demonstrations, often even more
than our proposed CILRS method.
Driving Dataset Biases. Figure 3evaluates the effect of
the amount of training demonstrations on the learned pol-
icy. Here we compare models trained with 2, 10, 50 and 100
hours of demonstrations. The plots show the mean success
rate and standard deviation over four different training cy-
cles with different random seeds. Our best results on most
of the scenarios were obtained by using only 10 hours of
training data, in particular on the “Dense Trafﬁc” tasks and
novel conditions such as New Weather and New Town.
These results quantify a limitation described in Sec-
tion3.2: the risk of overﬁtting to data that lacks diversity.
This is here exacerbated by the limited spatial extent and
visual variety of our environment, including in terms of dy-
namic objects. We indeed observed that some types of vehi-
cles tend to elicit better reactions from the policy than oth-
ers. The more common the vehicle model and color, the
better the trained agent reacts to it. This raises ethical chal-
lenges in automated driving, requiring further research in
fair machine learning for decision-making systems [ 6].
Causal confusion and the inertia problem. The main
problem we observe caused by bias is the inertia problem
stemming from causal confusion, as detailed in Section 3.2.
Figure 4shows the percentage of episodes that failed due to
the agent staying still, without any intention to use the throt-
tle, for at least 8 seconds before the timeout. Our results
show the percentage of episodes failed due to that inertia
problem increases with the amount of data used for train-
ing. We proposed to use a speed prediction branch as part
of our CILRS model (cf. Figure 2) to mitigate this prob-
9334


==== Page 7 ====
Figure 3. Due to biases in the data, the results may get either saturated or worse with increasing amounts of training data.
lem. Figure 5shows the percentage of successes for the
New Weather & Town conditions on different tasks with
and without speed prediction. We observe that the speed
prediction branch can substantially improve the success rate
thanks to its regularization effect. It is, however, not a ﬁnal
solution to this problem, as we still observe instances of the
inertia problem after using this approach.
High Variance. Repeatability of the training process is
crucial for enhancing trust in end-to-end models. Unfortu-
nately, we can still see drastic changes in the learned pol-
icy performance due to the variance caused by initialization
and data sampling (cf. Section 3.2). Figure 6compares the
cause of episode termination for two models where the only
difference is the random seed during training. The Model
S1 has a much higher chance of ending episodes due to ve-
hicle collisions. Qualitatively, it seemed to have learned a
less general braking policy and was more prone to rear-end
collisions with other vehicles. On the other hand, Model S2
is able to complete more episodes and is less likely to fail
due to vehicle crashes. However, we can see that it times
out more, showing a tendency to stop a lot, even in non
threatening situations. This can be seen by analyzing the
histograms of the throttle applied by both models during the
benchmark, as shown in Figure 7. We can see a tendency
for throttles of higher magnitude on Model S1.
As off-policy imitation learning uses a static dataset for
training, this randomness comes from the order in which
training data is sampled and the initialization of the random
weights. This can possibly deﬁne which minima the mod-
els converge to. Table 3quantiﬁes the effect of initialization
on the success rate of driving tasks by computing the vari-
ance expressed in Equation 2. The expected policy score
was computed by averaging twelve different training runs.
We also consider the variance with and without ImageNet
initialization. We can see that the success rate can change
by up to 42% for tasks with dynamic objects. ImageNet
initialization tends to reduce the training variability, mainly
due to smaller randomness on initialization but also due to
a more stable learned policy.Task Variance
CILRSEmpty 23%
Regular 26%
Dense 42%
CILRS (ImageNet)Empty 4%
Regular 12%
Dense 38%
Table 3. Estimated variance of the success rate of CILRS on
NoCrash computed by training 12 times the same model with dif-
ferent random seeds. The variance is reduced by ﬁxing part of the
initial weights with ImageNet pre-training.
6. Conclusion
Our new driving dataset (CARLA100), benchmark
(NoCrash ), and end-to-end sensorimotor architecture
(CILRS) indicate that behavior cloning on large scale off-
policy demonstration datasets can vastly improve over the
state of the art in terms of generalization performance,
including when comparing to mediated perception ap-
proaches with additional supervision. This is thanks to us-
ing a deeper residual architecture with an additional speed
prediction target and good regularization.
Nonetheless, our extensive experimental analysis has
shown that some big challenges remain open. First of all,
the amount of dynamic objects in the scene directly hurts
all policy learning methods, as multi-agent dynamics are
not directly captured. Second, the self-supervised nature
of behavior cloning enables it to scale to large datasets of
demonstrations, but with diminishing returns (or worse) due
to driving-speciﬁc dataset biases that require explicit treat-
ment, in particular biases that create causal confusion (e.g.,
the inertia problem). Existing mitigation strategies cur-
rently need more informative intermediate representations,
either learned [ 3] or using strong domain knowledge [ 5].
Third, the large variance resulting from initialization and
sampling order indicates that multiple runs on the same off-
9335


==== Page 8 ====
Figure 4. The percentage of episodes that failed due to the inertia problem. We can see that by increasing the amount of data, this bias may
further degrade the generalization capabilities of the models.
Figure 5. Comparison between the results with and without the
speed prediction and different amounts of training demonstrations.
We report the results only for the case were highest generalization
is needed (New Weather and Town).
policy data is key to identify the best possible policies. This
is part of the broader deep learning challenges regarding
non-convexity and initialization, curriculum learning, and
training stability.
Acknowledgements. Felipe Codevilla was supported
in part by FI grant 2017FI-B1-00162. Antonio M.
L´opez acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by ICREA un-
der the ICREA Academia Program. Felipe and An-
tonio acknowledge the ﬁnancial support by the Span-
ish TIN2017-88709-R (MINECO/AEI/FEDER, UE). As
CVC/UAB researchers, they also acknowledge the General-
itat de Catalunya CERCA Program and its ACCIO agency.
All authors thank the TRI support in AWS instances to run
the additional experiments after Felipe’s internship. Spe-
cial thanks to CVC’s PhD student Yi Xiao for her help on
making the supplementary video.
Figure 6. Cause of episode termination on NoCrash for two CILRS
models (trained on 10 hours with ImageNet initialization) with
identical parameters but different random seeds. The episodes
were ran under “New Weather & Town” conditions of the “Dense
Trafﬁc” task.
Figure 7. Probability distribution of having certain throttle values
comparing models with two different random seeds but trained
with the same hyper-parameters and data. We can see that S1 (red)
is much more likely to have a higher throttle value.
References
[1] Pieter Abbeel, Adam Coates, Morgan Quigley, and
Andrew Y . Ng. An application of reinforcement learn-
9336


==== Page 9 ====
ing to aerobatic helicopter ﬂight. In NIPS , 2006. 1,2
[2] Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y . Ng. Apprenticeship
learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML ,
2004. 1
[3] Alexander Amini, Wilko Schwarting, Guy Rosman,
Brandon Araki, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus.
Variational autoencoder for end-to-end control of au-
tonomous driving with novelty detection and training
de-biasing. In IROS , 2018. 7
[4] Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas
Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
Grew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech
Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In NIPS , 2017.
2
[5] Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit Ogale.
Chauffeurnet: Learning to drive by imitating the best
and synthesizing the worst. In RSS, 2019. 2,7
[6] Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan.
Fairness in machine learning. 2,6
[7] Yoshua Bengio, J ´erˆome Louradour, Ronan Collobert,
and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In ICML ,
2009. 2
[8] Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa, Daniel
Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Pra-
soon Goyal, Lawrence D. Jackel, Mathew Monfort,
Urs Muller, Jiakai Zhang, Xin Zhang, Jake Zhao, and
Karol Zieba. End to end learning for self-driving cars.
arXiv:1604.07316 , 2016. 1,2,4
[9] L ´eon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of
large scale learning. In NIPS , 2008. 3
[10] Chenyi Chen, Ari Seff, Alain Kornhauser, and Jianx-
iong Xiao. Deepdriving: Learning affordance for di-
rect perception in autonomous driving. In ICCV , 2015.
1
[11] Felipe Codevilla, Antonio M Lopez, Vladlen Koltun,
and Alexey Dosovitskiy. On ofﬂine evaluation of
vision-based driving models. In ECCV , 2018. 2,4,
5
[12] Felipe Codevilla, Matthias M ¨uller, Antonio L ´opez,
Vladlen Koltun, and Alexey Dosovitskiy. End-to-end
driving via conditional imitation learning. In ICRA ,
2018. 1,2,3,4,5,6
[13] Ernst D Dickmanns. The development of machine vi-
sion for road vehicles in the last decade. In Intelli-
gent Vehicle Symposium, 2002. IEEE , volume 1, pages
268–281. IEEE, 2002. 1
[14] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla,
Antonio L ´opez, and Vladlen Koltun. CARLA: An
open urban driving simulator. In CoRL , 2017. 2,4,
5,6[15] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are
we ready for autonomous driving? The KITTI vi-
sion benchmark suite. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , 2012. 2
[16] P. Hamm, D. Jayaraman, and S. Levine. Causal con-
fusion in imitation learning. In ”Neural Information
Processing Systems Imitation Learning and its Chal-
lenges in Robotics Workshop (NeurIPS ILR) , 2018. 3
[17] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
3
[18] Simon Hecker, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. End-
to-end learning of driving models with surround-view
cameras and route planners. In The European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ECCV) , September 2018.
2
[19] Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman,
Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger. Deep
reinforcement learning that matters. In Thirty-Second
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018. 2
[20] Nidhi Kalra and Susan M. Paddock. Driving to safety:
How many miles of driving would it take to demon-
strate autonomous vehicle reliability? Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 94:182 – 193,
2016. 5
[21] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representation (ICLR) , 2015. 5
[22] Michael Laskey, Anca Dragan, Jonathan Lee, Ken
Goldberg, and Roy Fox. Dart: Optimizing noise in-
jection in imitation learning. In Conference on Robot
Learning (CoRL) , 2017. 2
[23] Yann LeCun, Urs Muller, Jan Ben, Eric Cosatto, and
Beat Flepp. Off-road obstacle avoidance through end-
to-end learning. In Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS) , 2005. 1,2
[24] John Leonard, Jonathan How, Seth Teller, Mitch
Berger, Stefan Campbell, Gaston Fiore, Luke Fletcher,
Emilio Frazzoli, Albert Huang, Sertac Karaman, et al.
A perception-driven autonomous urban vehicle. Jour-
nal of Field Robotics , 25(10):727–774, 2008. 1
[25] Sergey Levine, Peter Pastor, Alex Krizhevsky, and
Deirdre Quillen. Learning hand-eye coordination for
robotic grasping with large-scale data collection. In
International Symposium on Experimental Robotics
(ISER) , 2017. 1,2
[26] Zhihao Li, Toshiyuki Motoyoshi, Kazuma Sasaki, Tet-
suya Ogata, and Shigeki Sugano. Rethinking self-
driving: Multi-task knowledge for better generaliza-
9337


==== Page 10 ====
tion and accident explanation ability. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.11100 , 2018. 2,5,6
[27] Xiaodan Liang, Tairui Wang, Luona Yang, and Eric
Xing. Cirl: Controllable imitative reinforcement
learning for vision-based self-driving. In ECCV , 2018.
2,5,6
[28] A.M. Lopez, G. Villalonga, L. Sellart, G. Ros, D.
Vzquez, J. Xu, J. Marin, and A. Mozafari. Training
my car to see using virtual worlds. 2
[29] Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvi-
tie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment:
Evaluation protocols and open problems for general
agents. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research ,
61:523–562, 2018. 2
[30] Matthias M ¨uller, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Bernard
Ghanem, and Vladen Koltun. Driving policy transfer
via modularity and abstraction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.09364 , 2018. 1,2
[31] Brady Neal, Sarthak Mittal, Aristide Baratin, Vinayak
Tantia, Matthew Scicluna, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and
Ioannis Mitliagkas. A modern take on the bias-
variance tradeoff in neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.08591 , 2018. 2,3,4
[32] Dean Pomerleau. ALVINN: An autonomous land ve-
hicle in a neural network. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NIPS) , 1988. 1,2
[33] Nathan D. Ratliff, James A. Bagnell, and Sid-
dhartha S. Srinivasa. Imitation learning for locomo-
tion and manipulation. In International Conference
on Humanoid Robots , 2007. 1
[34] St ´ephane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efﬁcient reductions
for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the thirteenth
international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and
statistics , pages 661–668, 2010. 2
[35] St ´ephane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, and J. Andrew
Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In AIS-
TATS , 2011. 1,2,3
[36] Eder Santana and George Hotz. Learning a driving
simulator. arXiv:1608.01230 , 2016. 2
[37] Axel Sauer, Nikolay Savinov, and Andreas Geiger.
Conditional affordance learning for driving in ur-
ban environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06498 ,
2018. 2,4,5,6
[38] Stefan Schaal, Auke Jan Ijspeert, and Aude Billard.
Computational approaches to motor learning by imita-
tion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B, 358(1431), 2003. 2[39] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur
Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Ju-
lian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneer-
shelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik
Grewe, et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep
neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529(7587),
2016. 1
[40] Sai Prashanth Soundararaj, Arvind K Sujeeth, and
Ashutosh Saxena. Autonomous indoor helicopter
ﬂight using a single onboard camera. In 2009
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems , pages 5307–5314. IEEE, 2009.
2
[41] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout:
a simple way to prevent neural networks from over-
ﬁtting. The Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
15(1):1929–1958, 2014. 5
[42] A Torralba and AA Efros. Unbiased look at dataset
bias. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
1521–1528. IEEE Computer Society, 2011. 2
[43] Q. Wang, L. Chen, and W. Tian. End-to-end
driving simulation via angle branched network.
arXiv:1805.07545 , 2018. 1
[44] Huazhe Xu, Yang Gao, Fisher Yu, and Trevor Darrell.
End-to-end learning of driving models from large-
scale video datasets. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , 2017. 2
[45] Luona Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Tairui Wang, and Eric
Xing. Real-to-virtual domain uniﬁcation for end-to-
end autonomous driving. In The European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) , September 2018. 2
[46] Jiakai Zhang and Kyunghyun Cho. Query-efﬁcient
imitation learning for end-to-end simulated driving. In
AAAI , 2017. 2
9338


