==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Alshboul, O.; Shehadeh, A.;
Almasabha, G.; Almuﬂih, A.S.
Extreme Gradient Boosting-Based
Machine Learning Approach for
Green Building Cost Prediction.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14116651
Academic Editor: Ripon
Kumar Chakrabortty
Received: 30 April 2022
Accepted: 25 May 2022
Published: 29 May 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Extreme Gradient Boosting-Based Machine Learning Approach
for Green Building Cost Prediction
Odey Alshboul1,*, Ali Shehadeh2
, Ghassan Almasabha1
and Ali Saeed Almuﬂih3
1Department of Civil Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, The Hashemite University, P .O. Box 330127,
Zarqa 13133, Jordan; ghassans@hu.edu.jo
2Department of Civil Engineering, Hijjawi Faculty for Engineering Technology, Yarmouk University,
Shaﬁq Irshidatst, Irbid 21163, Jordan; ali.shehadeh@yu.edu.jo
3Department of Industrial Engineering, King Khalid University, King Fahad St., Guraiger,
Abha 62529, Saudi Arabia; asalmuﬂih@kku.edu.sa
*Correspondence: odey.shboul@hu.edu.jo
Abstract: Accurate building construction cost prediction is critical, especially for sustainable projects
(i.e., green buildings). Green building construction contracts are relatively new to the construction
industry, where stakeholders have limited experience in contract cost estimation. Unlike conventional
building construction, green buildings are designed to utilize new technologies to reduce their
operations’ environmental and societal impacts. Consequently, green buildings’ construction bidding
and awarding processes have become more complicated due to difﬁculties forecasting the initial
construction costs and setting integrated selection criteria for the winning bidders. Thus, robust green
building cost prediction modeling is essential to provide stakeholders with an initial construction
cost benchmark to enhance decision-making. The current study presents machine learning-based
algorithms, including extreme gradient boosting (XGBOOST), deep neural network (DNN), and
random forest (RF), to predict green building costs. The proposed models are designed to consider
the inﬂuence of soft and hard cost-related attributes. Evaluation metrics (i.e., MAE, MSE, MAPE, and
R2) are applied to evaluate and compare the developed algorithms’ accuracy. XGBOOST provided
the highest accuracy of 0.96 compared to 0.91 for the DNN, followed by RF with an accuracy of 0.87.
The proposed machine learning models can be utilized as a decision support tool for construction
project managers and practitioners to advance automation as a coherent ﬁeld of research within the
green construction industry.
Keywords: green buildings; cost prediction; machine learning; extreme gradient boosting ( XGBOOST );
deep neural network (DNN); random forest (RF)
1. Introduction
With the growing demand for green buildings worldwide, it has become necessary
to develop a new adequate research ﬁeld to create practical evaluation approaches for
green building bidders to guarantee that the selected bid winner has practical experience
and knowledge of all the required stages, which are vital to ﬁnish such projects with the
required time, cost, quality, safety, and environmental aspects. In addition, inﬂuential
research ensures the ability to successfully leave space for the green construction industry
to cope with emerging technologies [ 1]. Thus, accurate construction cost prediction models
need to consider all inﬂuential attributes. Considering that evaluating the cost of traditional
buildings is utterly different from that of green buildings designed to be environmentally
friendly through the production of zero greenhouse gases, it is necessary to design cost
forecasting models differently and innovatively [ 2–4]. Although the current literature
contains various cost prediction models for traditional buildings, minimal efforts have
been directed toward green building cost estimation modeling. Green construction cost
biddings contain more detailed requirements when compared to traditional ones. Having
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14116651 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 2 of 20
such detailed comprehensiveness makes it complicated for stakeholders to use the rule of
thumb for cost estimation [ 5]. Consequently, various indicators should be considered when
selecting the bid winner, including green building management, environmental aspects,
material use, water use and water protection, land and construction site protection, and
energy use.
The commonly adopted procedure in bid winner selection is the lowest price. Such
an approach may be adopted with minimal adverse impact on traditional building con-
struction, yet it is hazardous to employ such an approach for green building construction
bidding awards. Thus, improving the policy of the public and private sectors for select-
ing bid winners is crucial for maximizing construction quality and the added value [ 6].
Furthermore, adopting robust and accurate cost prediction methodologies is expected to
strengthen the competition between the bidders and enhance the awarding process to
ensure successful green construction. Therefore, effective construction cost forecasting has
positive practical implications on economic, social, and environmental levels.
The inability to appropriately manage the selection of the bid winner results in signif-
icant delays in project delivery; hence, the bid winner must be carefully picked [ 7]. The
current study opens up new possibilities for developing innovative and integrated models
for green building cost prediction that consider various inﬂuencing factors and may be
used in the bidding awarding procedures to reduce the ﬁnancial and legal conﬂicts among
contractual parties for such projects. Construction project delivery techniques are critical
in forecasting bidding costs and, accordingly, in updating the bid winner selection policy
by adhering to regulations, assizes, and guidelines to avoid patronage. Consequently,
in forecasting the total cost of green building construction projects, it is challenging to
establish a suitable balance in the bid cost in anticipation of the actual cost. As a result,
a new method incorporating the primary aspects inﬂuencing the cost of green building
construction should be developed. In this study, a machine learning-based model for
predicting green building construction costs was developed, which is critical for paving the
way to selecting the best bidder to fulﬁll the required conditions, expanding the beneﬁts of
green construction, and accommodating rapid changes along with future change orders.
2. Literature Review
Green buildings are designed to meet current and future generations’ needs in protect-
ing planet Earth. Since the nineteenth century, the demand for such a green construction
approach has become necessary for efﬁcient pollution reduction, dynamic use of materials,
and more social inclusiveness by reducing the ripple effect of the construction process and
maintaining environmentally friendly building operations [ 8]. Several green building de-
sign approaches have been proposed to simplify green building deliveries (e.g., LEED and
the Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method). For instance,
in 2021, LEED -certiﬁed green buildings were up to over 100,000 in the United States and
69,800 in Canada [ 9,10]. Public construction biddings are part of the public procurement
structure that seizes a signiﬁcant portion of the public expense yearly, which is estimated
to be about ten percent of total incomes in most countries in North America [11].
In most traditional bids, the winner is determined based only on the bid price aspect
following the law, which is called the lowest-priced bid. If such a winner cannot perform
the bid, the bid is awarded directly to the second-lowest price [ 12]. This is the second
type of bidding adopted in the market. This approach increases the bid price compared
to the lowest-bid approach [ 13]. These approaches are impractical for the owner as all
bidders try to make their estimate lower than others and lower the actual cost to win the
bid [ 14]. Most private and public ﬁrms adopt such an approach in bidding in the United
States and European countries [ 15,16]. However, applying the lowest price approach
in bidding creates various issues regarding work quality, construction delays, disputes,
and claims [17,18].
Though the lowest price approach is the best for cost reduction purposes and is widely
used in the construction industry, it is a recipe for conﬂict, primarily when intense competi-

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 3 of 20
tion exists [ 19–21]. For instance, in Turkey, most contractors who have won construction
bids via a lower-price approach have faced trouble in the construction project delivery.
In one study, about 430 questionnaires were analyzed after being sent to contractors in
Turkey. The results indicated that such consequences have occurred because contractors
are trying to continue in the market regardless of inaccurate bidding and little experience
in contract pricing [22].
Change order costs also increase when the lowest-price approach is adopted, especially
in green building construction. In addition, the “multiattribute” is used at the best price
in the construction industry to achieve the best value [ 23,24]. Another approach utilized
is the average bid, where the winner is selected by applying a single criterion. First, the
price is compared with the average of all the bidders’ prices and then the one that is closest
to the average bid is adopted [ 25–27]. The Peruvian approach has also been applied to
construction project bids by removing outliers’ bid values that have a price increase or
decrease of 10% of the actual average bid price from the submitted list. The new average
is determined in the next step to choose the bidder that meets both conditions closest to
and below the new average price [ 28]. Bidders are classiﬁed based on several aspects,
such as quality, proﬁtability, leverage, and expertise, to determine who is eligible to win
the bid. A neural network technique was employed in the same vein to decide on such
a concept [ 29]. In addition, several experimental methods have been used for bidding
selection. For instance, the non-competitive method was implemented in construction bids,
and various identiﬁcation strategies were evaluated experimentally [ 30]. Additionally, an
analytical model was developed based on game theory to address construction project
claims and opportunistic bidding [26].
Moreover, risk possibility and competition for projects were measured using a case-
based reasoning method [ 31]. Using general regression and classiﬁcation networks, choos-
ing the ﬁttest bid closest to the actual construction project price was studied [ 15]. The bid
scoring formula is a realistic approach to selecting the winner and is still valid for providing
a promotional result that meets the needs of the owner and contractor [32].
Green building bids are converting from traditional contracts in choosing a winner
to smarter contracts that meet all the sustainability requirement changes in public bid-
ding [ 33,34]. The design-build ( DB) approach has been used in green and traditional
buildings. It maintains a high integration of the design stages for sustainability in green
buildings [ 5].DBis a practical approach to incentivize bidders and make them more famil-
iar with maintaining sustainable goals during the construction and design processes [ 35–37].
The dynamic and practical connection between the contractor and the design group is
a signiﬁcant feature of improving the concept of all aspects of green buildings, such as
quality, cost, and time [ 33,38,39]. Compared to the traditional approach, such as the low-bid
approach to choosing a winner, DBseems to have signiﬁcant advantages for sustainable
green building objectives [ 40,41]. Many approaches have been improved since the 1990s to
ﬁnd a rating approach to handle green buildings properly [ 42]. To achieve a comprehensive
vision of all aspects of the bid details and to meet the required conditions written in the
contract to satisfy all parties, when determining the bid winner, it is vital to consider the
quality, environment, technical aspects, reputation, and price. This approach ensures that
more work and effort is put into enforcing adequate and acceptable criteria for choosing
the winner to attain the optimal advantage [ 16,41,42]. Many factors must be considered for
the conceptual phase in the design and planning stages of the green building to acquire
practical work [ 43]. In addition, effective green building design must employ efﬁcient
natural and ecologic resource management processes [ 44]. To fulﬁll such a need, selecting
the best bidder is required.
3. Methodology
The main aim of this study was to develop a forecast model for providing accurate
green building project costs. Data collection, feature selection, machine learning algorithm

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 4 of 20
formulation, and model evaluation are the four major stages of the suggested methodology.
The methodology ﬂowchart is illustrated in Figure 1.
 
Figure 1. Methodology flowchart for predic ting green building project cos ts. 
 
Figure 1. Methodology ﬂowchart for predicting green building project costs.
3.1. Data Collection
General information on the initial costs of green building construction was gathered
from various sources, including journals, the green building council website, and other
related websites. The original cost data for the 283 LEED-certiﬁed green buildings under
consideration (placed at various locations across North America) were gathered from vari-

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 5 of 20
ous sources and fed into the constructed models. Some of the primary data sources for this
study were the websites of green building councils in the United States and Canada [9,10] .
Such data were captured and exported into MS Excel sheets to prepare for the analytical
procedure. The information was gathered between 2010 and 2020. However, about two
years were required to ensure that the obtained data were enough and usable for the ML
approach. Emphasis was placed on quantifying and comparing the economic performance
of each building in the dataset. The data were modiﬁed depending on location to create
consistent results for comparison. Furthermore, the designs of the erected structures were
compared to make future cost forecasts and comparisons.
3.2. Factor Selection
Hard and soft costs are associated with construction projects [ 44]. Land costs are
expenses associated with land ownership, such as the transfer of ownership, land purchase,
and site clearance. In addition, land costs include the actual and direct costs of building
implementation, such as civil and structural works, architectural work, and other physical
construction activities [ 45]. Soft costs are indirect expenses associated with the non-physical
parts of a building project, such as administration, planning, documentation, and market-
ing [ 46]. Soft expenses are linked with activities outside the scope of building costs and
typically vary from 1 to 5% of the total construction costs [ 47]. In summary, hard costs are
associated with construction, while soft costs are associated with design and certiﬁcation
services. Thus, soft expenses are any costs that are not directly related to the building cost.
Various studies have been conducted to determine if the cost of green projects will
increase or decrease when green elements are introduced to fulﬁll green building standards
compared to regular structures [ 48,49]. Green buildings are estimated to cost 5 to 10% more
than regular structures. According to certain studies, the costs of green buildings increase
by 1 to 2%. However, according to another study, the cost of green buildings is raised by
less than 2% compared to typical structures [ 50,51]. The inconsistent ﬁndings complicate
the investigation into green building costs, and therefore, this matter is a concerning issue.
In conclusion, green building costs can be separated into the main types (i.e., hard and soft
costs). These types have been further divided into categories, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Categories of green building costs.
Green Building CostsCategoriesHard Soft
Architectural designProfessional engagementMaterial and labor
Building servicesProceduresCivil and structural
Plants and equipmentLegal requirementsBuilding requirements
The factors that inﬂuence the cost of green building projects are listed as follows:
people, technical, technological, and speciﬁc requirements, and external support. For more
detail, Table 2 presents a description of these features. All features impact the total building
project cost in terms of hard and soft costs. In addition, Figure 2 is included to provide a
better view of these features that affect the overall cost of green building projects.

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 6 of 20
Table 2. Feature descriptions.
Feature Symbol Deﬁnition
PeoplePeople directly impact the project as they are engaged in its
delivery and set its context, where their primary responsibilities
play a crucial role in planning, design, delivery, and
maintenance [52].
Technical aspectsTechnical aspects are related to the methodological aspects of
green building construction. Technical aspects include process
and procurement issues, regulations and rules, and scarcity of
green building materials and expertise [53].
TechnologyTechnology indicates the utilization of a product during or after
its execution. For example, technology might be used throughout
the execution process or be included as part of the ﬁnal product.
Equipment, materials, and industrial operations are exampled of
technology [54].
Speciﬁc requirementAs there is a need to focus on the green features of the projects,
additional construction specialists, such as green building
facilitators and green building certiﬁers, are expected to be
involved in green building projects. For example, a regular
consultant group will be augmented by one or more green
building consultants [55].
 
Figure 2. Description of green building cost influential factors.  
Figure 2. Description of green building cost inﬂuential factors.
3.3. Data Preprocessing
The use of MLalgorithms requires data preparation. Variable selection selects vari-
ables that will be relevant for predicting green building performance. Outlier cleansing,
data noise reduction, normalization, and standardization are part of pre-processing. The

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 7 of 20
information gathered includes numerical values for all variables. Once the proper vari-
ables have been chosen, pre-processing is necessary, including outlier removal and dataset
normalization. Outliers are removed from the gathered data in this initial data prepara-
tion phase. This study used interquartile ranges to identify extreme and outlier results.
Appropriate graphical methods, such as boxplots for outlier elimination, were also used.
Null indicators were also used to represent and remove missing values from the obtained
data. When data points were missing from the original database, reliability difﬁculties
arose. As a result, missing values in the dataset (values represented by the “Null” or “-”
indicators) were considered. Pre-processing was necessary for a small amount of missing
data (i.e., 9 missing values representing about 3.2% of the original database). These missing
data points were replaced with the average and median values of relevant properties. The
statistical analysis of the utilized datasets is listed in Table 3. In addition, Figure 3 depicts
the data normality presentation for the main features of the green building cost prediction,
which is vital for determining how well the distribution curve ﬁts the collected datasets.
Table 3. Statical analysis of collected data.
FeaturesStatistical Methods
MeanStandard
DeviationMinimum Maximum
People 1,563,257 1,334,043 43,280 4,404,400
Technical 416,644 381,155 11,080 1,258,400
Technology 1,686,579 1,524,620 47,320 5,033,600
Speciﬁc requirement 669,967 571,732 19,120 1,887,600
Green building cost 4,466,449 3,811,552 120,800 12,584,000
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 21  
  
Figure 3. Normality presentation of the features .  
3.4. Machine Learning Algorithm  
Three ML techniques were employed in this study to estimate the green building 
costs. Training and testing processes were also conducted to check the suggested ML al-
gorithm’s efficiency. The training applied  70% of the database to train the proposed 
model, and the testing part applied 30% of the database to carry out the test process. We 
utilized 5-fold cross -validation to ensure the robustness and effectiveness of the suggested 
prediction models.  
This study used three prediction algorithms (i.e., 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑡 , 𝐷𝑁𝑁 , and 𝑅𝐹). These 
are the most contemporary and efficient machine learning -based prediction algorithms 
available. A review was conducted of the many ML prediction algorithms published in 
the li terature . These two methods were chosen for various reasons, including the fact that 
they are scalable, accurate, relatively quick, versatile, and give regularized model formal-
ization to control overfitting [56–58]. 
3.4.1. Extreme Gradient Boosting ( 𝑋𝐺𝐵 𝑂OST) 
𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑡  technology is a scalable tree optimization machine learning technology that 
has recently been widely used in data analysis disciplines.  The 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  technique was 
Figure 3. Normality presentation of the features.

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 8 of 20
3.4. Machine Learning Algorithm
Three ML techniques were employed in this study to estimate the green building costs.
Training and testing processes were also conducted to check the suggested ML algorithm’s
efﬁciency. The training applied 70% of the database to train the proposed model, and the
testing part applied 30% of the database to carry out the test process. We utilized 5-fold
cross-validation to ensure the robustness and effectiveness of the suggested prediction
models.
This study used three prediction algorithms (i.e., XGBoost ,DNN , and RF). These
are the most contemporary and efﬁcient machine learning-based prediction algorithms
available. A review was conducted of the many ML prediction algorithms published in the
literature. These two methods were chosen for various reasons, including the fact that they
are scalable, accurate, relatively quick, versatile, and give regularized model formalization
to control overﬁtting [56–58].
3.4.1. Extreme Gradient Boosting ( XGBOOST )
XGBoost technology is a scalable tree optimization machine learning technology that
has recently been widely used in data analysis disciplines. The XGBOOST technique was
proposed as a one-of-a-kind applied gradient boosting machine, particularly in regression
and classiﬁcation trees. The “boosting” concept is the root of XGBOOST ,which merges
the forecasting of weak learners with additive training methods to develop a strong learner.
In addition, this process helps to avoid overﬁtting and improves mathematical ability. The
XGBOOST architecture is shown in Figure 4, where the objective functions are simpliﬁed
by allowing the prediction and regularization terms to be combined while preserving the
fastest possible processing speed. The general function of the forecasting is set up at step p,
as shown in Equation (1)
f(p)
i=p
å
k=1fk(xi)=f(p 1)
i+fp(xi) (1)
where fp(xi)denotes the learner at step p,f(p)
idenotes the prediction at p,f(p 1)
idenotes
the prediction at p 1, and xidenotes the input features.
To make the overﬁtting reasonable while reducing the model’s mathematical speed,
the analytical formula was created by XGBOOST , as shown in Equation (2), to estimate
the model’s “goodness” for the original function.
Objective(p)=n
å
k=1l(yi,yi)+p
å
k=1s(fi) (2)
where lpresents the loss function, npresents the number of observations utilized, and s
presents the regularization term as represented in Equation (3).
s(f) =UT+0.5lw2(3)
where wexpresses vector scores in leaves, Uexpresses the minimal loss necessary to divide
the leaf node further, and lexpresses the regularization parameters.

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 9 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 21  
 proposed as a one -of-a-kind applied gradient boosting machine, pa rticularly in regression 
and classification trees. The “boosting ” concept is the root of 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 , which merges 
the forecasting of weak learners with additive training methods to develop a strong 
learner. In addition , this process helps to avoid overfitting and improv es mathematical 
ability. The 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  architecture is shown in Figure 4, where the objective functions 
are simplified by allowing the prediction and regularization terms to be combined while 
preserv ing the fastest possible processing speed. The general function of the forecasting 
is set up at step 𝑝, as shown in Eq uation  (1) 
𝑓𝑖(𝑝)= ∑𝑓𝑘𝑝
𝑘=1(𝑥𝑖)=𝑓𝑖(𝑝−1)+𝑓𝑝(𝑥𝑖) (1) 
where 𝑓𝑝(𝑥𝑖) denotes the learner at step 𝑝, 𝑓𝑖(𝑝) denotes the pred iction at 𝑝, 𝑓𝑖(𝑝−1) de-
notes the prediction at 𝑝−1, and 𝑥𝑖 denotes the input features.  
 
Figure 4. 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  structure of the proposed model . 
To make the overfitting reasonable while reducing the model ’s mathematical speed, 
the analytical formula was created  by 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 , as shown in Eq uation  (2), to estimate 
the model ’s “goodness ” for the original function.  
𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒(𝑝)= ∑𝑙(𝑦̅𝑖,𝑦𝑖)+∑𝜎(𝑓𝑖)𝑝
𝑘=1𝑛
𝑘=1 (2) 
where l presents the loss fu nction, n presents the number of observations utilized, and 𝜎 
presents the regularization term as represented in Eq uation  (3).  
𝜎(𝑓)=ϒ𝑇+0.5𝜆‖𝜔‖2 (3) 
where 𝜔 expresses vector scores in leaves, γ expresses the minimal loss necessary to di-
vide the leaf node further, and λ expresses the regularization parameters.  
3.4.2. Deep Neural Network ( 𝐷𝑁𝑁 ) 
Figure 4. XGBOOST structure of the proposed model.
3.4.2. Deep Neural Network ( DNN )
DNN is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi-layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid-
den layers [ 57]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process
sequential data naturally. The DNN technique has two stages: The ﬁrst stage (training) is
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (prediction).
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset.
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer)
were employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 21  
 𝐷𝑁𝑁  is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi -layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction 
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid den 
layers [5 7]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process se-
quential data naturally. The 𝐷𝑁𝑁  technique has two stages: The first stage (training) is 
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (pred iction). 
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset. 
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer) 
were  employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure . 
Unique weight s were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectified lin-
ear unit ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ) [59]. Then , these weights were  associated with the model ’s variables to 
reduce the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers 
were employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representa-
tion, as shown in Eq uation  (4).  
𝑥𝑖+1=𝑓(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖+𝑏𝑖),   𝑖=1,2,..𝐼 (4) 
where 𝑓 denotes the activation function, 𝑤𝑖 denotes the weight matrix, and 𝑏𝑖 denotes 
the bias of  the 𝑖𝑡ℎ hidden layer . The parameters were chosen based on ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ), as pre-
sented in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.  
3.4.3. Random Forest ( 𝑅𝐹) 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure.
Unique weights were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectiﬁed linear
unit ( ReLU ) [59]. Then, these weights were associated with the model’s variables to reduce
the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers were

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 10 of 20
employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representation, as
shown in Equation (4).
xi+1=f(wixi+bi),i=1, 2, . . . I (4)
where fdenotes the activation function, widenotes the weight matrix, and bidenotes the
bias of the ithhidden layer. The parameters were chosen based on ( ReLU ), as presented in
Figure 6.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 21  
 𝐷𝑁𝑁  is a subset of deep learning algorithms that employ multi -layered neural net-
work training and testing to learn complex structures and achieve appropriate abstraction 
levels. The dataset is directed in one direction within the network, passing the four hid den 
layers [5 7]. Such movement improves the memory of the neural network to process se-
quential data naturally. The 𝐷𝑁𝑁  technique has two stages: The first stage (training) is 
applied to optimize the network parameters to complete the expected goal (pred iction). 
The second stage (testing) assesses whether the trained model can process a new dataset. 
The six layers in this study (i.e., the input layer, four hidden layers, and the output layer) 
were  employed to retain the best prediction model accuracy, as presented in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Deep neural network structure . 
Unique weight s were assigned to the inputs by the activation function (rectified lin-
ear unit ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ) [59]. Then , these weights were  associated with the model ’s variables to 
reduce the error between the observed and predicted values. As a result, the hidden layers 
were employed after the prediction was run to extract a new raw descriptor representa-
tion, as shown in Eq uation  (4).  
𝑥𝑖+1=𝑓(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖+𝑏𝑖),   𝑖=1,2,..𝐼 (4) 
where 𝑓 denotes the activation function, 𝑤𝑖 denotes the weight matrix, and 𝑏𝑖 denotes 
the bias of  the 𝑖𝑡ℎ hidden layer . The parameters were chosen based on ( 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 ), as pre-
sented in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.  
3.4.3. Random Forest ( 𝑅𝐹) 
Figure 6. Activation function for DNN.
3.4.3. Random Forest ( RF)
This algorithm has been frequently utilized in data mining applications to cope with
classiﬁcation and regression issues [ 60]. The RFis a classiﬁcation and regression technique
that uses a set of classiﬁcation trees, a bootstrap sample of the data applied to create these
sets. The variables are chosen at random at each split as the candidate set of variables for
tree building. Employing bagging is the second way that can be used to integrate unsteady
learners successfully. The RFis a robust algorithm with several merits, such as forecasting
accuracy, dealing with many features, fast simulation speed, high performance, and free
applications [ 58]. In this study, two primary indicators (i.e., the number of grown trees and
leaf size) determined the accuracy and proﬁciency of the RF. The number of grown trees
and leaf size ranged from 0 to 3000 and 1 to 20, respectively. The model became more stable
with reliable results in the case of 400 grown trees and two leaf sizes. In addition, in this
study, “bootstrap samples” ( S1,S2,. . .Sn)were created from the original dataset, and
then these random samples were used to construct trees ( R1,R2,. . .Rn). Finally, these
trees were combined, as shown in Figure 7.

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 11 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 21  
 This algorithm has been frequently utilized in data mining applications to cope with 
classification and regression issues [ 60]. The 𝑅𝐹 is a classification and regression tech-
nique that uses a set of classification trees, a bootstrap sample of the data applied to create 
these sets. The variables are chosen at random at each split as the candidate set of variables 
for tree building. Employ ing bagging is the second way that can be used to integrate un-
steady learners successfully. The 𝑅𝐹 is a robust  algorithm with several merits, such as 
forecasting accuracy, dealing with many features, fast simulation speed, high perfor-
mance, and free appl ications [ 58]. In this study, two primary  indicators (i.e., the number 
of grown trees and leaf size) determine d the accuracy and proficiency of the RF. The num-
ber of grown trees and leaf size ranged from 0 to 3000 and 1 to 20, respectively. The model 
became more stable with reliable results in the case of 400 grown trees and two leaf sizes. 
In addition , in this study , “bootstrap samples ” (𝑆1,𝑆2,....𝑆𝑛) were created from the orig-
inal dataset, and then these random samples were used to construct trees (𝑅1,𝑅2,…𝑅𝑛). 
Finally, these trees were combined , as shown in Figure 7.  
 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the RF ’s architecture . 
4. 𝑴𝑳 Model Result s 
4.1. Experimental Setup 
The K -fold cross -validation process was applied to develop the model ’s accuracy by 
examining the 𝑀𝐿 algorithm performance on various datasets. In addition, the model 
hyperparameters were tuned using a K -fold cross -validation technique. First, the database 
must be separated into subsets for training and testing the 𝑀𝐿 modeling process. During 
this process, the training dataset is partitioned into multiple ‘k’ smaller portion s. The term 
‘K-fold’ was coined as a result. Then, testing is d one with K -fold, while training is done 
with k -1. Both are also based on a random dataset.  In addition, the model hyperparame-
ters are tuned using a K -fold cross -validation technique. The prediction model is then fit-
ted to the training set using the best po ssible hyperparameter configuration. Conse-
quently, each fold is only utilized as a validation set once. Finally , the accuracy measures 
for each fold may be compared, and if they are similar, the model is likely to generalize 
well , as shown in Figure 8 . 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the RF’s architecture.
4.MLModel Results
4.1. Experimental Setup
The K-fold cross-validation process was applied to develop the model’s accuracy by
examining the MLalgorithm performance on various datasets. In addition, the model
hyperparameters were tuned using a K-fold cross-validation technique. First, the database
must be separated into subsets for training and testing the MLmodeling process. During
this process, the training dataset is partitioned into multiple ‘k’ smaller portions. The term
‘K-fold’ was coined as a result. Then, testing is done with K-fold, while training is done
with k-1. Both are also based on a random dataset. In addition, the model hyperparameters
are tuned using a K-fold cross-validation technique. The prediction model is then ﬁtted to
the training set using the best possible hyperparameter conﬁguration. Consequently, each
fold is only utilized as a validation set once. Finally, the accuracy measures for each fold
may be compared, and if they are similar, the model is likely to generalize well, as shown
in Figure 8.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 21  
  
Figure 8. Five -fold cross -validation technique flowchart . 
4.1.1. Hyperparameter Optimization  
The hyperparameters of the proposed 𝑀𝐿 algorithms used in this study had to be  
tune d, as shown in Table  4 . These hyperparameters were modified depending on the 
actual dataset rather than the manual determinations. Thus, t he investigation was carried 
out with k = 1 to k = 10 for K-fold cross -validation. Each 𝐾 represents the grid search for 
the optimum 𝑀𝐿 model selection and hyperparam eter tuning. As a result, five-fold cross -
validation had the best prediction accuracy , as discussed the in the perform ance evalua-
tion.   
Table 4. Results of hyperparameter optimization for the 𝑀𝐿 models . 
ML Models  Hyperparameters  Optimal Values  
𝑿𝑮𝑩𝑶𝑶𝑺𝑻  Number of trees  1000  
Learning rate  0.08 
Maximum depth  12 
Number of needed lea ves 16 
𝑹𝑭 Number of trees  800 
Learning rate  0.11 
Maximum depth  17 
Number of needed lea ves 20 
𝑫𝑵𝑵  Number of neurons  4 
Learning rate  0.13 
Batch size  10 
Epochs  300 
Number of hidden layers  4 
Activation function  𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈  
4.1.2. Feature Importance Analysis  
Pearson’s correlation process was conducted between the selected features and the 
cost value s of green building project s to assess the influence of these features on each other 
and the observed values, as presented in Figure 9. 
Figure 8. Five-fold cross-validation technique ﬂowchart.

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 12 of 20
4.1.1. Hyperparameter Optimization
The hyperparameters of the proposed MLalgorithms used in this study had to be
tuned, as shown in Table 4. These hyperparameters were modiﬁed depending on the actual
dataset rather than the manual determinations. Thus, the investigation was carried out with
k = 1 to k = 10 for K-fold cross-validation. Each Krepresents the grid search for the optimum
MLmodel selection and hyperparameter tuning. As a result, ﬁve-fold cross-validation had
the best prediction accuracy, as discussed the in the performance evaluation.
Table 4. Results of hyperparameter optimization for the MLmodels.
ML Models Hyperparameters Optimal Values
XGBOOSTNumber of trees 1000
Learning rate 0.08
Maximum depth 12
Number of needed leaves 16
RFNumber of trees 800
Learning rate 0.11
Maximum depth 17
Number of needed leaves 20
DNNNumber of neurons 4
Learning rate 0.13
Batch size 10
Epochs 300
Number of hidden layers 4
Activation function ReLU
4.1.2. Feature Importance Analysis
Pearson’s correlation process was conducted between the selected features and the
cost values of green building projects to assess the inﬂuence of these features on each other
and the observed values, as presented in Figure 9.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 21  
  
Figure 9. Heated correlation matrix analyses.  
Better insight and understanding of the model ’s features help decision -makers plan 
and formulate policies effectively. As a result, a feature importance process was carried 
out using the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑡 , 𝐷𝑁𝑁 , and 𝑅𝐹 techniques to identify the importance degree of 
each feature included in forecasti ng green building cost s. As illustrated in Figure 10, the 
feature scale plot was implemented to calculate a relative score for each variable. In addi-
tion, as presented in Figure 10, the features were ranked in descending order of im-
portance: people, techno logical, technical, and specific requirement s.  
 
Figure 10. Representation of feature importance . 
4.2. Perform ance Evaluation  
After testing the primary model assumptions, it was vital to evaluate the suggested 
models’ usefulness and predictive capability. Thus, the assessment measure ments were 
utilized to evaluate the proposed models ’ proficiency. Four statistical measures (i.e., 
Figure 9. Heated correlation matrix analyses.
Better insight and understanding of the model’s features help decision-makers plan
and formulate policies effectively. As a result, a feature importance process was carried out
using the XGBoost ,DNN , and RFtechniques to identify the importance degree of each

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 13 of 20
feature included in forecasting green building costs. As illustrated in Figure 10, the feature
scale plot was implemented to calculate a relative score for each variable. In addition, as
presented in Figure 10, the features were ranked in descending order of importance: people,
technological, technical, and speciﬁc requirements.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 21  
  
Figure 9. Heated correlation matrix analyses.  
Better insight and understanding of the model ’s features help decision -makers plan 
and formulate policies effectively. As a result, a feature importance process was carried 
out using the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑡 , 𝐷𝑁𝑁 , and 𝑅𝐹 techniques to identify the importance degree of 
each feature included in forecasti ng green building cost s. As illustrated in Figure 10, the 
feature scale plot was implemented to calculate a relative score for each variable. In addi-
tion, as presented in Figure 10, the features were ranked in descending order of im-
portance: people, techno logical, technical, and specific requirement s.  
 
Figure 10. Representation of feature importance . 
4.2. Perform ance Evaluation  
After testing the primary model assumptions, it was vital to evaluate the suggested 
models’ usefulness and predictive capability. Thus, the assessment measure ments were 
utilized to evaluate the proposed models ’ proficiency. Four statistical measures (i.e., 
Figure 10. Representation of feature importance.
4.2. Performance Evaluation
After testing the primary model assumptions, it was vital to evaluate the suggested
models’ usefulness and predictive capability. Thus, the assessment measurements were
utilized to evaluate the proposed models’ proﬁciency. Four statistical measures (i.e., RMSE ,
MAE ,MAPE , and R2) were employed to investigate the efﬁciency of the suggested ML
models, as presented in Equations (5)–(9).
MAE =1
mm
å
i=1Yi Yi (5)
RMSE =s
1
mm
å
i=1 
Yi Yi2(6)
MAPE =1
mm
å
i=1Yi Yi
Yi100 (7)
R2=1 åm
i=1 
Yi Yi2
åm
i=1 
Yi Y2(8)
R2
Adjusted =1 "
åm
i=1 
Yi Yi2
åm
i=1 
Yi Yi2#
(m 1)
(m d 1)
(9)
where Yisymbolizes the actual (measured) values of the overstrength ratio of short links,
Yisymbolizes the forecasted outcome, Ysymbolizes the mean of the Yi,msymbolizes the
number of datasets utilized, and dis an independent variable. The model accuracy is
increased if the R2value approaches 1 and the RMSE ,MAE , and MAPE values approach
0. A set of random, nonoverlapping partitioned folds were used as training and test
datasets for k = 3, k = 5, and k = 7, together with their corresponding performance measures.
Therefore, the effectiveness of the suggested MLmodels was assessed utilizing a stratiﬁed
ﬁve-fold cross-validation technique, as shown in Table 5.

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 14 of 20
Table 5. Performance evaluation for different K-folds.
K-Fold
Cross-ValidationRegression
ModelPerformance Evaluation Metrics
MAE MSE MAPE R2
k=3XGBoost 132.0 152.5 27.9 94.0
DNN 238.0 316.0 51.1 89.0
RF 408.0 527.9 56.9 86.0
k=5XGBoost 92.0 132.5 19.9 96.0
DNN 196.5 284.0 32.4 91.0
RF 378.0 507.9 40.4 87.0
k=7XGBoost 118 141 23.3 95.0
DNN 212.5 301.1 43.8 90.0
RF 389.4 516.6 50.7 86.0
The comparison of the efﬁciency of MLalgorithms (i.e., XGBOOST ,DNN ,and RF)
to predict the cost of the green building projects was implemented for k=5. Accordingly,
the results of the evaluation measures were computed, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Performance measure comparison of MLmodels at k= 5.
Performance MetricsPrediction Models
XGBOOST DNN RF
MAE 92.0 196.5 378.0
RMSE 132.5 284.0 507.9
MAPE 19.9 32.4 40.4
R296.0 91.0 87.0
R2
Adjusted95.9 90.9 86.8
The comparison outcomes show that XGBOOST and DNN had higher R2values
(more than 0.90) and lower MAE ,RMSE ,MAPE values than the RFmodel in predicting
green building costs. All assessment metrics results also revealed that XGBOOST had
excellent prediction capability and had the highest R2value. Furthermore, XGBOOST
had the lower values for the rest of the evaluation metrics (i.e., MAE ,RMSE , and MAPE )
compared to the DNN model, as shown in Figure 11. Moreover, the forecasted outputs of
theXGBOOST model illustrate that its prediction values were very close to the values of
green building project costs. It is worth noting the progress of the R2
Adjustedestimate for
each developed model. The XGBOOST ’s decisive R2value was 0.96, implying that the
XGBOOST model was somewhat mounted to the datasets since it was close to 1. Given
that the forecast R2was considerably superior to the regular R2
Adjusted, this means that the
XGBOOST model did forecast new interpretations and ﬁt the existing dataset. Therefore,
theXGBOOST model had a better ﬁt and slight deviation from the actual values of the
green building costs. Consequently, the XGBOOST was the most effective and competent
model for predicting green building costs.

==== Page 15 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 15 of 20
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 21  
 Table 6. Performance measure comparison of 𝑀𝐿 models  at 𝑘=5. 
Performance Metrics  Prediction Models  
𝑿𝑮𝑩𝑶𝑶𝑺𝑻  𝑫𝑵𝑵  𝑹𝑭 
𝑀𝐴𝐸  92.0 196.5  378.0  
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸  132.5  284.0  507.9  
𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸  19.9 32.4 40.4 
𝑅2 96.0 91.0 87.0 
𝑅𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑2 95.9 90.9 86.8 
The comparison outcomes show that 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇 and 𝐷𝑁𝑁  had higher 𝑅2 value s 
(more than 0.90) and  lower 𝑀𝐴𝐸 , 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 , 𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸  values than the 𝑅𝐹 model in  predict-
ing green building cost s. All assessment metrics results also reveal ed that 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  had 
excellent prediction capability and had the highest 𝑅2 value . Furthermore, 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  
had the lowe r values for the rest of the evaluation metrics (i.e.,  𝑀𝐴𝐸 , 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 , and 𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸 ) 
compared to the 𝐷𝑁𝑁  model , as shown in Figure 11. Moreover, the forecasted outputs 
of the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model illustrate that its prediction values were very close to the values 
of green building project costs. It is worth noting  the progress of the  𝑅Adjusted2 estimate 
for each developed model. The  𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  ‘s decisive 𝑅2 value was 0.96, implying that 
the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model was somewhat mounted to the datasets since it was close to 1.  
Given that the forecast 𝑅2 was considerably superior to th e regular 𝑅Adjusted2, this means 
that the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model did forecast new interpretations and fit the existing dataset.  
Therefore, the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  model ha d a better fit and slight deviation from the actual val-
ues of the green building cost s. Con sequently, the 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  was the most effective and 
competent model for predicting green building cost s. 
 
Figure 11. Evaluation metric comparison between 𝑋𝐺𝐵𝑂𝑂𝑆𝑇  and 𝐷𝑁𝑁 . 
4.3. Experiment al Results  
The current study was designed to expand and augment the literature in forecasting 
green building costs. First, the four main features that affect the cost of green buildings 
were thoroughly investigated and disaggregated into its primary sub -attributes. T hen 
these factors were evaluated according to their acquired data record by developing ma-
chine learning -based prediction models in combination with accuracy evaluation matrices 
Figure 11. Evaluation metric comparison between XGBOOST and DNN .
4.3. Experimental Results
The current study was designed to expand and augment the literature in forecasting
green building costs. First, the four main features that affect the cost of green buildings
were thoroughly investigated and disaggregated into its primary sub-attributes. Then these
factors were evaluated according to their acquired data record by developing machine
learning-based prediction models in combination with accuracy evaluation matrices to
focus on the uncertainty coupled with the cost forecasting. The current research ﬁndings
reveal that people primarily affect green building cost features, followed by technological,
technical, and special requirements, which implies that spreading the “green” culture
amongst involved personnel is critical to minimizing the construction cost. In addition,
green building contractors need to utilize cutting-edge technologies that can facilitate the
deployment of efﬁcient technical approaches necessary for cost objective optimization
purposes, reﬂecting the importance of applying prediction models to produce accurate cost
predictions. In line with the adopted methodology, the results reveal the signiﬁcance of
examined attributes and their sub-categories, such as people, technological, technical, and
other speciﬁc requirements, which demonstrates the consequence of changes in the cost
objective functions of alternatives. For example, the cost function was an average of 88%
compared to the people, technological, technical, and special requirements at 93%, 90%,
96%, and 82%. Furthermore, variation in the cost objective function was analyzed through
various sub-attributes, implying a high dependency and inﬂuencing the proﬁciency of the
decision-making process.
Consequently, the cost prediction models utilize the cost-effective frontline approach
to affect this matter and streamline the proper decision-making process. The established
cost prediction models showed that XGBOOST outperformed the DNN and RFby5%
and 9.4% , respectively. Thus, the XGBOOST prediction model represents the most attrac-
tive alternative for decision-makers from both an economical and sustainable point of
view for the most accurate prediction with the lowest cost objective function and lowest
correlated risk.
5. Discussion
This study’s cost prediction models offer an insightful perception of the correlation
between inﬂuential features and green buildings’ green cost premium. The cost of each

==== Page 16 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 16 of 20
building was forecasted via up-to-date machine learning approaches to reﬂect the cost
function variation based on datasets recovered from 283 green building projects that were
examined in North America. The proposed models can be used by green building vendors,
designers, stakeholders, and decision-makers to predict the green cost objective function
of their new green buildings based on the characteristics of the main inﬂuential factors. It
ought to be stated that the scope of the current research is partial to green buildings in the
United States. It is also limited in the quantity of the collected data and the number of the
main attributes considered. Thus, it is critical to consider the impact of governmental and
non-governmental external support.
It should also be explained that the current research was restricted to economic and
sustainable assessments and did not consider social and environmental dimensions. Addi-
tionally, the emphasis of the current research was on comparing the predicted cost objective
function against the actual construction cost without considering the construction life cycle
cost analysis elements or the reimbursement cycle. Therefore, further research is required to
combine the current research with additional data, more attributes, various green buildings,
and recently LEED -accredited green buildings.
Decision-makers are increasingly relying on technological ﬁndings to upgrade and
build policies. The current study develops a robust machine learning framework for pre-
dicting green building construction costs from recorded datasets, which can be utilized as
a general model to simulate all associated characteristics. This provides a good founda-
tion for investigating how different feature interconnectivity might share insight on green
building construction cost forecasting. Furthermore, as contemporary machine learning
algorithms grow, increasingly sophisticated forecast models provide ways to develop more
valuable and exact modeling for green building construction cost prediction, which many
construction business practitioners may then use. Finally, consistent with what is currently
emerging in the construction engineering and management research ﬁelds, the authors
are conﬁdent in the proposed models’ ability to provide stakeholders with more precise
forecasts to ﬁt accessible datasets as advantageous preceding information to feed machine
learning-based models.
The current research aims to minimize the knowledge gap in predicting green building
costs. Thus, the proposed models were designed after an intensive investigation of the
currently available related models. For example, one of the main gaps is the lack of
an integrated representation of how the main attributes affect the green building cost
interconnectedly. One of the main issues with the already available green building cost
prediction models is that they lack integrity. Not considering all of the inﬂuential features
of green building costs has ripple effects on the developed model’s dependability. For
example, some studies have focused on the features of green building technologies while
relaxing the people, technical, and speciﬁc requirements [ 61]. This has a detrimental impact
on the accuracy of green building cost forecasts since a high level of uncertainty frequently
accompanies the major qualities. In addition, little effort has been put into establishing
analytical or machine learning-based models for green construction cost prediction. Many
existing models use survey and questionnaire methodologies to describe the practice
case for green building costs. There is always a need for more quantitative and objective
techniques for projecting green construction costs [3,61].
Some studies have provided models that partially forecast the cost of only green
building-certiﬁed residences [ 2]. In addition, other research papers have focused on the
green certiﬁcation of ofﬁce buildings and the cost of equity capital of green buildings [ 4,62].
Consequently, a holistic model for green building cost estimation is required to provide
reliable forecasting tools for practitioners.
Furthermore, historical green construction cost data are scarce. The established data
gathering processes and dataset comprehensiveness have also been a significant impedi-
ment for researchers in developing reliable and general prediction models, especially for
large-budget building contracts. As a result, building a prediction model that can be used ef-
fectively and independently of the construction cost value is critical. Several academics have

==== Page 17 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 17 of 20
attempted to anticipate green construction costs; however, their conclusions were limited to
a single location since only a few relevant features were evaluated [ 2,3,63]. Such problems
prove that decision-making tools are in great demand in the construction industry [64–69].
The contradictory ﬁndings hampered the assessment of green construction costs,
making this a worrying problem. Furthermore, to the best of the authors’ knowledge,
no appropriate model for predicting green construction costs is available in the present
literature. As a result, a general and worldwide model for green cost prediction is required.
The created green building cost prediction models have an advantage over comparable
modeling techniques available in the literature because of their different processing chrono-
logical sequence, where forecasts are less impacted by the number of classes and can be
analyzed consistently. The created models produce fewer discriminant nodes, lowering the
number of class dimensions to be evaluated progressively. The generated prediction models
have been discovered to be expert short-running models with high forecast precision and
low memory consumption with superior performance.
Furthermore, it was discovered that generated models might be classiﬁed as realistic
decision support tools in several sectors of the construction business when compared to
other accessible models. The suggested models may be an integrated, general, practical,
and accurate prediction tool. The current study covers several signiﬁcant traits employed
in bidding and awarding procedures to reduce ﬁnancial and legal concerns among con-
tractual parties. As a result, the proposed models are expected to play a critical role in
reducing potential conﬂict among stakeholders in the green building construction industry,
particularly when decision-makers face signiﬁcant challenges and difﬁculties in estimating
acceptable green building costs that all contractual parties can agree on.
6. Conclusions
Will a green building cost more than a traditional building? Are the costs of the peo-
ple, technological, technical, and other speciﬁc requirements quantiﬁable and predictable?
Is this objective cost function affected by sub-attributes? Do the developed prediction
models consider ambiguity in cost function? Do the developed cost forecasting models
empower practitioners to take effective cost-related decisions? These research questions can
be addressed by developing accurate and robust machine learning-based models for cost
prediction to reduce the cost-related risk. The proposed models have been demonstrated to
provide decision-makers with a support decision tool to forecast the green buildings’ con-
struction costs of new green buildings and pave the road towards having green buildings
LEED-certiﬁed based on economic and sustainable aspects. Four primary green build-
ing cost attributes and twenty sub-features were considered, and different feasible green
construction approaches were investigated utilizing thorough cutting-edge forecasting
models for cost prediction and associated risk minimization. ML-based cost prediction
modeling approaches were utilized to improve decision-making superiority amongst the
best practices. XGBOOST ,DNN , and RFprediction models were designed, and they
were evaluated using MAE ,RMSE ,MAPE , and R2. The evaluation results indicate that
theXGBOOST and DNN prediction performance was superior, where low values for all
performance appraisal measures were evaluated, indicating excellent performance. The
RFhad a lower forecast accuracy, but it still had an acceptable level of precision. The
most accurate green building costs can be predicted based on the embraced machine
learning models.
The current study revealed that green building costs could be accurately predicted via
machine learning approaches and smoothly compared with conventional building costs. In
addition, the key attributes that inﬂuence green building costs were considered. Moreover,
the developed cost prediction models are expected to pave the road toward a smoother
LEED certiﬁcation process. Additionally, decision-makers are provided with support
decision tools that can predict green buildings’ total operational and life cycle costs. Future
research efforts should reﬂect the inclusion of more datasets, more accurate collection,
pre-processing and post-processing, and different types of buildings in various locations.

==== Page 18 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 18 of 20
The external support attribute needs to be considered, as it is expected to signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence green building costs. Additionally, in future work, the economic assessment
of the LEED certiﬁcation can be expanded beyond construction costs to incorporate the
inﬂuence on the overall life cycle cost analysis.
Author Contributions: Formal analysis, O.A.; Funding acquisition, A.S.A.; Investigation, O.A. and A.S.;
Methodology, A.S., G.A. and A.S.A.; Software, A.S. and G.A.; Supervision, A.S.A.; Writing—original
draft, O.A. and G.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research at
King Khalid University for funding this work through the Large Groups Project under grant number
(RGP . 2/178/43).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Molenaar, K.R.; Sobin, N.; Antill ón, E.I. A Synthesis of Best-Value Procurement Practices for Sustainable Design-Build Projects in
the Public Sector. J. Green Build. 2010 ,5, 148–157. [CrossRef]
2. Sun, C.-Y.; Chen, Y.-G.; Wang, R.-J.; Lo, S.-C.; Yau, J.-T.; Wu, Y.-W. Construction Cost of Green Building Certiﬁed Residence: A
Case Study in Taiwan. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 2195. [CrossRef]
3. Fan, K.; Chan, E.H.W.; Chau, C.K. Costs and Beneﬁts of Implementing Green Building Economic Incentives: Case Study of a
Gross Floor Area Concession Scheme in Hong Kong. Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2814. [CrossRef]
4. Plebankiewicz, E.; Juszczyk, M.; Kozik, R. Trends, Costs, and Beneﬁts of Green Certiﬁcation of Ofﬁce Buildings: A Polish
Perspective. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 2359. [CrossRef]
5. Xia, B.; Chen, Q.; Xu, Y.; Li, M.; Jin, X. Design-Build Contractor Selection for Public Sustainable Buildings. J. Manag. Eng. 2015 ,31,
04014070. [CrossRef]
6. Montalb án-Domingo, L.; Garc ía-Segura, T.; Sanz, M.A.; Pellicer, E. Social Sustainability in Delivery and Procurement of Public
Construction Contracts. J. Manag. Eng. 2019 ,35, 04018065. [CrossRef]
7. Alhazmi, T.; McCaffer, R. Project Procurement System Selection Model. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2000 ,126, 176–184. [CrossRef]
8. Myers, D. A review of construction companies’ attitudes to sustainability. Constr. Manag. Econ. 2005 ,23, 781–785. [CrossRef]
9. U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC). 2021. Available online: https://www.usgbc.org/ (accessed on 1 January 2022).
10. Canada Green Building Council (CAGBC). 2021. Available online: https://www.cagbc.org/ (accessed on 1 January 2022).
11. Zhu, Q.; Geng, Y.; Sarkis, J. Motivating green public procurement in China: An individual level perspective. J. Environ. Manag.
2013 ,126, 85–95. [CrossRef]
12. Ioannou, P .G.; Leu, S.S. Average-Bid Method—Competitive Bidding Strategy. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 1993 ,119, 131–147. [CrossRef]
13. Drew, D.S.; Skitmore, M. Testing Vickery’s Revenue Equivalence Theory in Construction Auctions. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2006 ,
132, 425–428. [CrossRef]
14. Chaovalitwongse, W.A.; Wang, W.; Williams, T.; Chaovalitwongse, P . Data Mining Framework to Optimize the Bid Selection
Policy for Competitively Bid Highway Construction Projects. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2012 ,138, 277–286. [CrossRef]
15. Alshboul, O.; Shehadeh, A.; Hamedat, O. Governmental Investment Impacts on the Construction Sector Considering the Liquidity
Trap. J. Manag. Eng. 2022 ,38, 04021099. [CrossRef]
16. Bergman, M.A.; Lundberg, S. Tender evaluation and supplier selection methods in public procurement. J. Purch. Supply Manag.
2013 ,19, 73–83. [CrossRef]
17. Lambropoulos, S. The use of time and cost utility for construction contract award under European Union Legislation. Build.
Environ. 2007 ,42, 452–463. [CrossRef]
18. Molenaar, K.R.; Johnson, D.E. Engineering the Procurement Phase to Achieve Best Value. Leadersh. Manag. Eng. 2003 ,3, 137–141.
[CrossRef]
19. Holt, G.D.; Olomolaiye, P .O.; Harris, F.C. Factors inﬂuencing U.K. construction clients’ choice of contractor. Build. Environ. 1994 ,
29, 241–248. [CrossRef]
20. Oviedo-Haito, R.J.; Jim énez, J.; Cardoso, F.F.; Pellicer, E. Survival Factors for Subcontractors in Economic Downturns. J. Constr.
Eng. Manag. 2014 ,140, 04013056. [CrossRef]
21. Williams, T.P . Predicting ﬁnal cost for competitively bid construction projects using regression models. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2003 ,
21, 593–599. [CrossRef]
22. Gunduz, M.; Karacan, V . Damage to Treasury: Abnormally Low Tenders in Public Construction Works. J. Leg. Aff. Disput. Resolut.
Eng. Constr. 2009 ,1, 130–136. [CrossRef]
23. David, E.; Azoulay-Schwartz, R.; Kraus, S. Bidding in sealed-bid and English multi-attribute auctions. Decis. Support Syst. 2006 ,
42, 527–556. [CrossRef]
24. Karakaya, G.; Köksalan, M. An interactive approach for multi-attribute auctions. Decis. Support Syst. 2011 ,51, 299–306. [CrossRef]

==== Page 19 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 19 of 20
25. Chang, W.-S.; Chen, B.; Salmon, T.C. An Investigation of the Average Bid Mechanism for Procurement Auctions. Manag. Sci. 2015 ,
61, 1237–1254. [CrossRef]
26. Ho, S.P .; Liu, L.Y. Analytical Model for Analyzing Construction Claims and Opportunistic Bidding. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2004 ,
130, 94–104. [CrossRef]
27. Liu, S.L.; Lai, K.K.; Wang, S. Multiple criteria models for evaluation of competitive bids. IMA J. Manag. Math. 2000 ,11, 151–160.
[CrossRef]
28. Henriod, E.E.; Lantran, J.-M. Trends in contracting practice for civil works. In Site Resources ; World Bank: New York, NY, USA,
2000; p. 1.
29. Elazouni, A.M. Classifying Construction Contractors Using Unsupervised-Learning Neural Networks. J. Constr. Eng. Manag.
2006 ,132, 1242–1253. [CrossRef]
30. Skitmore, M. Identifying non-competitive bids in construction contract auctions. Omega 2002 ,30, 443–449. [CrossRef]
31. Chua, D.; Li, D.; Chan, W.T. Case-Based Reasoning Approach in Bid Decision Making. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2001 ,127, 35–45.
[CrossRef]
32. Ballesteros-P érez, P .; Skitmore, M.; Pellicer, E.; Zhang, X. Scoring Rules and Competitive Behavior in Best-Value Construction
Auctions. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2016 ,142, 04016035. [CrossRef]
33. Shehadeh, A.; Alshboul, O.; Hamedat, O. Risk Assessment Model for Optimal Gain-Pain Share Ratio in Target Cost Contract for
Construction Projects. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2022 ,148, 04021197. [CrossRef]
34. Mollaoglu-Korkmaz, S.; Swarup, L.; Riley, D. Delivering Sustainable, High-Performance Buildings: Inﬂuence of Project Delivery
Methods on Integration and Project Outcomes. J. Manag. Eng. 2013 ,29, 71–78. [CrossRef]
35. Lapinski, A.R.; Horman, M.J.; Riley, D.R. Lean Processes for Sustainable Project Delivery. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2006 ,132,
1083–1091. [CrossRef]
36. Riley, D.R., II; Pexton, K.; Drilling, J. Procurement of sustainable construction services in the United States: The contractor’s role
in green buildings. Ind. Environ. 2003 ,26, 66–69.
37. Korkmaz, S.; Swarup, L.; Horman, M.; Riley, D.; Molenaar, K.R.; Sobin, N.; Gransberg, D.D. Inﬂuence of Project Delivery Methods
on Achieving Sustainable High Performance Buildings: Report on Case Studies Draft for Panel Review ; Charles Pankow Foundation:
McLean, VA, USA, 2009; Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327976578_Inﬂuence_of_Project_Delivery_
Methods_on_Achieving_Sustainable_High_Performance_Buildings_Report_on_Case_Studies_Draft_for_Panel_Review (accessed
on 12 February 2022).
38. Riley, D.; Sanvido, V .; Horman, M.; McLaughlin, M.; Kerr, D. Lean and Green: The Role of Design-Build Mechanical Competencies
in the Design and Construction of Green Buildings. In Proceedings of the Construction Research Congress 2005, San Diego, CA,
USA, 5–7 April 2005; pp. 1–10. [CrossRef]
39. Alshboul, O.; Alzubaidi, M.A.; Mamlook, R.E.A.; Almasabha, G.; Almuﬂih, A.S.; Shehadeh, A. Forecasting Liquidated Damages
via Machine Learning-Based Modiﬁed Regression Models for Highway Construction Projects. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 5835.
[CrossRef]
40. Korkmaz, S.; Riley, D.; Horman, M. Piloting Evaluation Metrics for Sustainable High-Performance Building Project Delivery. J.
Constr. Eng. Manag. 2010 ,136, 877–885. [CrossRef]
41. Abdelrahman, M.; Zayed, T.; Elyamany, A. Best-Value Model Based on Project Speciﬁc Characteristics. J. Constr. Eng. Manag.
2008 ,134, 179–188. [CrossRef]
42. Ja´ skowski, P .; Czarnigowska, A. Contractor’s bid pricing strategy: A model with correlation among competitors’ prices. Open
Eng. 2019 ,9, 159. [CrossRef]
43. Wang, W.; Zmeureanu, R.; Rivard, H. Applying multi-objective genetic algorithms in green building design optimization. Build.
Environ. 2005 ,40, 1512–1525. [CrossRef]
44. Kubba, S. Handbook of Green Building Design and Construction: LEED, BREEAM, and Green Globes ; Butterworth-Heinemann:
Herndon, VA, USA, 2012.
45. Zahirah, N.; Abidin, N.Z.; Nuruddin, A.R. Soft Cost Elements That Affect Developers Decision to Build Green. J. Civ. Environ.
Eng. 2013 ,7, 768–772. [CrossRef]
46. Klinger, M.; Susong, M. The construction project: Phases, People, Terms, Paperwork, Processes ; American Bar Association: Chicago, IL,
USA, 2006.
47. Consultants, N.E.M. Analyzing the Cost of Obtaining LEED Certiﬁcation ; The American Chemistry Council: Arlington, VA, USA,
2003.
48. Zhang, X.; Platten, A.; Shen, L. Green property development practice in China: Costs and barriers. Build. Environ. 2011 ,46,
2153–2160. [CrossRef]
49. Tatari, O.; Kucukvar, M. Cost premium prediction of certiﬁed green buildings: A neural network approach. Build. Environ. 2011 ,
46, 1081–1086. [CrossRef]
50. Issa, M.; Rankin, J.; Christian, A. Canadian practitioners’ perception of research work investigating the cost premiums, long-term
costs and health and productivity beneﬁts of green buildings. Build. Environ. 2010 ,45, 1698–1711. [CrossRef]
51. Kats, G. Greening America’s Schools. Costs and Beneﬁts. A Capital-E Report. 2006. Available online: https://www.usgbc.org/
sites/default/ﬁles/Greening_Americas_Schools.pdf (accessed on 10 February 2022).

==== Page 20 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 6651 20 of 20
52. Mathur, V .N.; Price, A.D.F.; Austin, S.; Moobela, C. Deﬁning, identifying and mapping stakeholders in the assessment of urban
sustainability. In Proceedings of the SUE-MoT Conference 2007: International Conference on Whole Life Sustainability and its
Assessment, Glasgow, UK, 27–29 June 2007.
53. Häkkinen, T.; Belloni, K. Barriers and drivers for sustainable building. Build. Res. Inf. 2011 ,39, 239–255. [CrossRef]
54. Du Plessis, C. A strategic framework for sustainable construction in developing countries. Constr. Manag. Econ. 2007 ,25, 67–76.
[CrossRef]
55. Azizi, N.Z.M.; Abidin, N.Z.; Raofuddin, A. Identiﬁcation of Soft Cost Elements in Green Projects: Exploring Experts’ Experience.
Procedia—Soc. Behav. Sci. 2015 ,170, 18–26. [CrossRef]
56. Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 13–17 August 2016; Association for Computing
Machinery: San Francisco, CA, USA; pp. 785–794.
57. Vieira, S.; Pinaya, W.; Mechelli, A. Using deep learning to investigate the neuroimaging correlates of psychiatric and neurological
disorders: Methods and applications. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2017 ,74 Pt A , 58–75. [CrossRef]
58. Janitza, S.; Tutz, G.; Boulesteix, A.-L. Random forest for ordinal responses. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 2016 ,96, 57–73. [CrossRef]
59. Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, Y.; Courville, A. Deep Learning ; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016; Volume 1.
60. Liaw, A.; Wiener, M. Classiﬁcation and regression by randomForest. R News 2002 ,2, 18–22.
61. Tran, Q.; Nazir, S.; Nguyen, T.-H.; Ho, N.-K.; Dinh, T.-H.; Nguyen, V .-P .; Nguyen, M.-H.; Phan, Q.-K.; Kieu, T.-S. Empirical
Examination of Factors Inﬂuencing the Adoption of Green Building Technologies: The Perspective of Construction Developers in
Developing Economies. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 8067. [CrossRef]
62. Hsieh, H.-C.; Claresta, V .; Bui, T. Green Building, Cost of Equity Capital and Corporate Governance: Evidence from US Real
Estate Investment Trusts. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 3680. [CrossRef]
63. Najini, H.; Nour, M.; Al-Zuhair, S.; Ghaith, F. Techno-Economic Analysis of Green Building Codes in United Arab Emirates Based
on a Case Study Ofﬁce Building. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 8773. [CrossRef]
64. Alshboul, O.A.; Shehadeh, O.; Tatari, G. Almasabha, and E. Saleh, Multiobjective and multivariable optimization for earthmoving
equipment. J. Facil. Manag. 2022 . [CrossRef]
65. Shehadeh, A.O.; Alshboul, O.; Tatari, M.A.; Alzubaidi, A.; Hamed El-Sayed, S. Selection of heavy machinery for earthwork
activities: A multi-objective optimization approach using a genetic algorithm. Alex. Eng. J. 2022 ,61, 7555–7569. [CrossRef]
66. Shehadeh, A.O.; Alshboul, R.E.; Al Mamlook, O.; Hamedat, O. Machine learning models for predicting the residual value of
heavy construction equipment: An evaluation of modiﬁed decision tree, LightGBM, and XGBoost regression. Autom. Constr.
2021 ,129, 103827. [CrossRef]
67. Alshboul, O.; Shehadeh, A.; Al-Kasasbeh, M.; Al Mamlook, R.E.; Halalsheh, N.; Alkasasbeh, M. Deep and machine learning
approaches for forecasting the residual value of heavy construction equipment: A management decision support model. Eng.
Constr. Archit. Manag. 2021 . [CrossRef]
68. Alshboul, O.; Shehadeh, A.; Hamedat, O. Development of integrated asset management model for highway facilities based on
risk evaluation. Int. J. Constr. Manag. 2021 , 1–10. [CrossRef]
69. Shehadeh, A.; Alshboul, O.; Hamedat, O. A Gaussian mixture model evaluation of construction companies’ business acceptance
capabilities in performing construction and maintenance activities during COVID-19 pandemic. Int. J. Manag. Sci. Eng. Manag.
2021 , 1–11. [CrossRef]

