==== Page 1 ====
Factorizable Graph Convolutional Networks
Yiding Yang
Stevens Institute of Technology
yyang99@stevens.eduZunlei Feng
Zhejiang University
zunleifeng@zju.edu.cnMingli Song
Zhejiang University
brooksong@zju.edu.cn
Xinchao Wang
Stevens Institute of Technology
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu
Abstract
Graphs have been widely adopted to denote structural connections between enti-
ties. The relations are in many cases heterogeneous, but entangled together and
denoted merely as a single edge between a pair of nodes. For example, in a social
network graph, users in different latent relationships like friends and colleagues,
are usually connected via a bare edge that conceals such intrinsic connections. In
this paper, we introduce a novel graph convolutional network (GCN), termed as
factorizable graph convolutional network (FactorGCN), that explicitly disentangles
such intertwined relations encoded in a graph. FactorGCN takes a simple graph as
input, and disentangles it into several factorized graphs, each of which represents
a latent and disentangled relation among nodes. The features of the nodes are
then aggregated separately in each factorized latent space to produce disentangled
features, which further leads to better performances for downstream tasks. We eval-
uate the proposed FactorGCN both qualitatively and quantitatively on the synthetic
and real-world datasets, and demonstrate that it yields truly encouraging results in
terms of both disentangling and feature aggregation. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ihollywhy/FactorGCN.PyTorch .
1 Introduction
Disentangling aims to factorize an entity, like a feature vector, into several interpretable components,
so that the behavior of a learning model can be better understood. In recent years, many approaches
have been proposed towards tackling disentangling in deep neural networks and have achieved promis-
ing results. Most prior efforts, however, have been focused on the disentanglement of convolutional
neural network (CNN) especially the auto-encoder architecture, where disentangling takes place
during the stage of latent feature generation. For example, V AE [ 1] restrains the distribution of the
latent features to Gaussian and generates disentangled representation; -V AE [ 2] further improves the
disentangling by introducing to balance the independence constraints and reconstruction accuracy.
Despite the many prior efforts in CNN disentangling, there are few endeavors toward disentangling
in the irregular structural domain, where graph convolutional network (GCN) models are applied.
Meanwhile, the inherent differences between grid-like data and structural data precludes applying
CNN-based disentangling methods to GCN ones. The works of [ 3,4], as pioneering attempts, focus
on the node-level neighbour partition and ignore the latent multi-relations among nodes.
We introduce in this paper a novel GCN, that aims to explicitly conduct graph-level disentangling,
based on which convolutional features are aggregated. Our approach, termed as factorizable graph
Corresponding author.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
Disentangling stepAggregation stepMerging stepInput GraphFactor Graph 1Factor Graph 2Factor Graph 3: Edges with high attention: Edges with low attention: Computational flowOutput GraphFactorizationGCN
GCN
GCNFigure 1: Illustration of one layer in the proposed FactorGCN. It contains three steps: Disentangling ,
Aggregation , and Merging . In the disentangling step, the input graph is decomposed into several
factor graphs, each of which represents a latent relation among nodes. In the aggregation step, GCNs
are applied separately to the derived factor graphs and produce the latent features. In the merging
step, features from all latent graphs are concatenated to form the ﬁnal features, which are block-wise
interpretable.
convolutional network (FactorGCN), takes as input a simple graph , and decomposes it into several
factor graphs, each of which corresponds to a disentangled and interpretable relation space, as shown
in Fig. 1. Each such graph then undergoes a GCN, tailored to aggregate features only from one
disentangled latent space, followed by a merging operation that concatenates all derived features
from disentangled spaces, so as to produce the ﬁnal block-wise interpretable features. These steps
constitute one layer of the proposed FactorGCN. As the output graph with updated features share the
identical topology as input, nothing prevents us from stacking a number of layers to disentangle the
input data at different levels, yielding a hierarchical disentanglement with various numbers of factor
graph at different levels.
FactorGCN, therefore, potentially ﬁnds application in a wide spectrum of scenarios. In many real-
world graphs, multiple heterogeneous relations between nodes are mixed and collapsed to one single
edge. In the case of social networks, two people may be friends ,colleagues , and living in the
same city simultaneously, but linked via one single edge that omits such interconnections; in the
co-purchasing scenario [ 5], products are bought together for different reasons like promotion , and
functional complementary , but are often ignored in the graph construction. FactorGCN would, in
these cases, deliver a disentangled and interpretable solution towards explaining the underlying
rationale, and provide discriminant learned features for the target task.
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of FactorGCN are summarized as follows.
Graph-level Disentangling . FactorGCN conducts disentangling and produces block-wise
interpretable node features by analyzing the whole graph all at once, during which process
the global-level topological semantics, such as the higher-order relations between edges
and nodes, is explicitly accounted for. The disentangled factor graphs reveal latent-relation
speciﬁc interconnections between the entities of interests, and yield interpretable features
that beneﬁt the downstream tasks. This scheme therefore contrasts to the prior approaches
of [3,4], where the disentanglement takes place only within a local neighborhood, without
accounting for global contexts.
Multi-relation Disentangling . Unlike prior methods that decode only a single attribute
for a neighboring node, FactorGCN enables multi-relation disentangling, meaning that the
center node may aggregate information from a neighbour under multiple types of relations.
This mechanism is crucial since real-world data may contain various relations among the
same pair of entities. In the case of a social network graph, for example, FactorGCN would
2

==== Page 3 ====
produce disentangled results allowing for two users to be both friends andliving in the same
city; such multi-relation disentangling is not supported by prior GCN methods.
Quantitative Evaluation Metric . Existing quantitative evaluation methods [ 6,7] in the grid
domain rely on generative models, like auto-encoder [ 8] or GAN [ 9]. Yet in the irregular
domain, unfortunately, state-of-the-art graph generative models are only applicable for
generating small graphs or larger ones without features. Moreover, these models comprise a
sequential generation step, making it infeasible to be integrated into the graph disentangling
frameworks. To this end, we propose a graph edit-distance based metric, which bypasses the
generation step and estimates the similarity between the factor graphs and the ground truth.
We conducted experiments on ﬁve datasets in various domains, and demonstrate that the proposed
FactorGCN yields state-of-the-art performances for both disentanglement and downstream tasks.
This indicates that, even putting side its disentangling capability, FactorGCN may well serve as a
general GCN framework. Speciﬁcally, on the ZINC dataset [ 10], FactorGCN outperforms other
methods by a large margin, and, without the bond information of the edges, FactorGCN achieves a
performance on par with the state-of-the-art method that explicitly utilizes edge-type information.
2 Related Work
Disentangled representation learning . Learning disentangled representations has recently emerged
as a signiﬁcant task towards interpretable AI [ 11,12]. Unlike earlier attempts that rely on handcrafted
disentangled representations or variables [ 13,14], most of the recent works in disentangled repre-
sentation learning are based on the architecture of auto-encoder [ 2,15,16,7,17,8] or generative
model [ 9,18,19]. One mainstream auto-encoder approach is to constrain the latent feature generated
from the encoder to make it independent in each dimension. For example, V AE [ 1] constrains the
distribution of the latent features to Gaussian; -V AE[ 2] enlarges the weight of the KL divergence
term to balance the independence constraints and reconstruction accuracy; [ 20] disentangles the latent
features by ensuring that each block of latent features cannot be predicted from the rest; DSD [ 15]
swaps some of the latent features twice to achieve semi-supervised disentanglement. For the genera-
tive model, extra information is introduced during the generation. For example, InfoGAN [ 9] adds
the class code to the model and maximizes the mutual information between the generated data and
the class code.
Graph convolutional network . Graph convolutional network (GCN) has shown its potential in
the non-grid domain [ 21–26], achieving promising results on various type of structural data, like
citation graph [ 27], social graph [ 28], and relational graph [ 29]. Besides designing GCN to better
extract information from non-grid data, there are also a couple of works that explore the disentangled
GCNs [ 30,4]. DisenGCN [ 3] adopts neighbour routine to divide the neighbours of the node into
several mutually exclusive parts. IPGDN [ 4] improves DisenGCN by making the different parts of
the embedded feature independent. Despite results of the previous works, there remain still several
problems: the disentanglement is in the node level, which does not consider the information of the
whole graph, and there is no quantitative metrics to evaluate the performance of disentanglement.
3 Method
In this section, we will give a detailed description about the architecture of FactorGCN, whose basic
component is the disentangle layer, as shown in Fig. 1.
3.1 Disentangling Step
The goal of this step is to factorize the input graph into several factor graphs. To this end, we treat
the edges equally across the whole graph. The mechanism we adopt to generate these factorized
coefﬁcient is similar to that of graph attention network [ 27]. We denote the input of the disentangle
layer as h=fh0;h1;:::;h ng;hi2RFande=fe0;e1;:::;e mg;ek= (hi;hj).hdenotes the set of
nodes with feature of Fdimension, and edenotes the set of edges.
The input nodes are transformed to a new space, done by multiplying the features of nodes with a
linear transformation matrix W2RF0F. This is a standard operation in most GCN models, which
3

==== Page 4 ====
increases the capacity of the model. The transformed features are then used to generate the factor
coefﬁcients as follows
Eije= 1=
1 +e 	e(h0
i;h0
j)
;h0=Wh; (1)
where 	eis the function that takes the features of node iand nodejas input and computes the
attention score of the edge for factor graph e, and takes the form of an one-layer MLP in our
implementation; Eijethen can be obtained by normalizing the attention score to [0;1], representing
the coefﬁcient of edge from node ito nodejin the factor graph e;h0is the transformed node feature,
shared across all functions 	. Different from most previous forms of attention-based GCNs that
normalize the attention coefﬁcients among all the neighbours of nodes, our proposed model generates
these coefﬁcients directly as the factor graph.
Once all the coefﬁcients are computed, a factor graph ecan be represented by its own Ee, which
will be used for the next aggregation step. However, without any other constrain, some of the
generated factor graphs may contain a similar structure, degrading the disentanglement performance
and capacity of the model. We therefore introduce an additional head in the disentangle layer, aiming
to avoid the degradation of the generated factor graphs.
The motivation of the additional head is that, a well disentangled factor graph should have enough
information to be distinguished from the rest, only based on its structure. Obtaining the solution that
all the disentangled factor graphs differ from each other to the maximal degree, unfortunately, is not
trivial. We thus approximate the solution by giving unique labels to the factor graphs and optimizing
the factor graphs as a graph classiﬁcation problem. Our additional head will serve as a discriminator,
shown in Eq. 2, to distinguish which label a given graph has:
Ge= Softmax
f
Readout(A(Ee;h0))
: (2)
The discriminator contains a three-layer graph auto-encoder A, which takes the transformed feature
h0and the generated attention coefﬁcients of factor graph Eeas inputs, and generates the new node
features. These features are then readout to generate the representation of the whole factor graph.
Next, the feature vectors will be sent to a classiﬁer with one fully connected layer. Note that all
the factor graphs share the same node features, making sure that the information discovered by the
discriminator only comes from the difference among the structure of the factor graphs. More details
about the discriminator architecture can be found in the supplementary materials.
The loss used to train the discriminator is taken as follows:
Ld= 1
NNX
i NeX
c=11e=clog(Ge
i[c])!
; (3)
whereNis the number of training samples, set to be the number of input graphs multiplies by the
number of factor graphs; Neis the number of factor graphs; Ge
iis the distribution of sample iand
Ge
i[c]represents the probability that the generated factor graph has label c. 1e=cis an indicator
function, taken to be one when the predicted label is correct.
3.2 Aggregation Step
As the factor graphs derived from the disentangling step is optimized to be as diverse as possible, in
the aggregation step, we will use the generated factor graphs to aggregate information in different
structural spaces.
This step is similar as the most GCN models, where the new node feature is generated by taking the
weighted sum of its neighbors. Our aggregation mechanism is based on the simplest one, which is
used in GCN [ 28]. The only difference is that the aggregation will take place independently for each
of the factor graphs.
The aggregation process is formulated as
h(l+1)e
i =(X
j2NiEije=cijh(l)
jW(l));cij= (jNijjNjj)1=2; (4)
whereh(l+1) e
i represents the new feature for node iinl+ 1layer aggregated from the factor graph e;
Nirepresents all the neighbours of node iin the input graph; Eijeis the coefﬁcient of the edge from
4

==== Page 5 ====
nodeito nodejin the factor graph e;cijis the normalization term that is computed according to the
degree of node iand nodej;W(l)is a linear transformation matrix, which is the same as the matrix
used in the disentangling step.
Note that although we use all the neighbours of a node in the input graph to aggregate information,
some of them are making no contribution if the corresponding coefﬁcient in the factor graph is zero.
3.3 Merging Step
Once the aggregation step is complete, different factor graphs will lead to different features of nodes.
We merge these features generated from different factor graphs by applying
h(l+1)
i =jjNe
e=1h(l+1)e
i; (5)
whereh(l+1)
i is the output feature of node i;Neis the number of factor graphs; jjrepresents the
concatenation operation.
3.4 Architecture
We discuss above the design of one disentangle layer, which contains three steps. The FactorGCN
model we used in the experimental section contains several such disentangle layers, increasing the
power of expression. Moreover, by setting different number of factor graphs in different layers, the
proposed model can disentangle the input data in a hierarchical manner.
The total loss to train FactorGCN model is L=Lt+Ld.Ltis the loss of the original task, which
is taken to be a binary cross entropy loss for multi-label classiﬁcation task, cross entropy loss for
multi-class classiﬁcation task, or L1 loss for regression task. Ldis the loss of the discriminator we
mentioned above. is the weight to balance these two losses.
4 Experiments
In this section, we show the effectiveness of the proposed FactorGCN, and provide discussions on its
various components as well as the sensitivity with respect to the key hyper-parameters. More results
can be found in the supplementary materials.
4.1 Experimental setups
Datasets . Here, we use six datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The
ﬁrst one is a synthetic dataset that contains a ﬁxed number of predeﬁned graphs as factor graphs.
The second one is the ZINC dataset [ 31] built from molecular graphs. The third one is Pattern
dataset [ 31], which is a large scale dataset for node classiﬁcation task. The other three are widely
used graph classiﬁcation datasets include social networks (COLLAB,IMDB-B) and bioinformatics
graph (MUTAG) [ 32]. To generate the synthetic dataset that contains Nefactor graphs, we ﬁrst
generateNepredeﬁned graphs, which are the well-known graphs like Turán graph, house-x graph,
and balanced-tree graph. We then choose half of them and pad them with isolated nodes to make
the number of nodes to be 15. The padded graphs will be merged together as a training sample. The
label of the synthetic data is a binary vector, with the dimension Ne. Half of the labels will be set
to one according to the types of graphs that the sample generated from, and the rest are set to zero.
More information about the datasets can be found in the supplemental materials.
Baselines . We adopt several methods, including state-of-the-art ones, as the baselines. Among all,
MLP is the simplest one, which contains multiple fully connected layers. Although this method is
simple, it can in fact perform well when comparing with other methods that consider the structural
information. We use MLP to check whether the other compared methods beneﬁt from using the
structural information as well. GCN aggregates the information in the graph according to the laplacian
matrix of the graph, which can be seen as a ﬁxed weighted sum on the neighbours of a node. GAT [ 27]
extends the idea of GCN by introducing the attention mechanism. The weights when doing the
aggregation is computed dynamically according to all the neighbours. For the ZINC dataset, we
also add MoNet [ 25] and GatedGCN E[31] as baselines. The former one is the state-of-the-art
method that does not use the type information of edges while the latter one is the state-of-the-art
one that uses additional edge information. Random method is also added to provide the result of
5

==== Page 6 ====
Mixed graphGround truth factor graphsDisentangledfactor graphs
Mixed graphGround truth factor graphsDisentangledfactor graphsFigure 2: Examples of the disentangled factor graphs on the synthetic dataset. The isolated nodes are
eliminated for a better visualization.
random guess for reference. For the other three graph datasets, we add non DL-based methods (WL
subtree, PATCHYSAN, AWL) and DL-based methods (GCN, GraphSage [ 33], GIN) as baselines.
DisenGCN [3] and IPDGN [4] are also added.
Hyper-parameters . For the synthetic dataset, Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 0.005,
the number of training epochs is set to 80, the weight decay is set to 5e-5. The row of the adjacent
matrix of the generated synthetic graph is used as the feature of nodes. The negative slope of
LeakyReLU for GAT model is set to 0.2, which is the same as the original setting. The number of
hidden layers for all models is set to two. The dimension of the hidden feature is set to 32 when
the number of factor graphs is no more than four and 64 otherwise. The weight for the loss of
discriminator in FactorGCN is set to 0.5.
For the molecular dataset, the dimension of the hidden feature is set to 144 for all methods and the
number of layers is set to four. Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 0.002. No weight
decay is used. of FactorGCN is set to 0.2. All the methods are trained for 500 epochs. The test
results are obtained using the model with the best performance on validation set. For the other three
datasets, three layers FactorGCN is used.
4.2 Qualitative Evaluation
We ﬁrst provide the qualitative evaluations of disentanglement performance, including the visualiza-
tion of the disentangled factor graphs and the correlation analysis of the latent features.
Visualization of disentangled factor graphs . To give an intuitive understanding of the disentangle-
ment. We provide in Fig. 2 some examples of the generated factor graphs. We remove the isolated
nodes and visualize the best-matched factor graphs with ground truths. More results and analyses can
be found in the supplemental materials.
Correlation of disentangled features . Fig. 3 shows the correlation analysis of the latent features
obtained from several pre-trained models on the synthetic dataset. It can be seen that also GCN and
MLP models can achieve a high performance in the downstream task, and their latent features are
hidden entangled. GAT gives more independent latent features but the performance is degraded in
the original task. FactorGCN is able to extract the highly independent latent features and meanwhile
achieve a better performance in the downstream task.
4.3 Quantitative Evaluation
The quantitative evaluation focuses on two parts, the performance of the downstream tasks and that
of the disentanglement.
Evaluation protocol . For the downstream tasks, we adopt the corresponding metrics to evaluate,
i.e., Micro-F1 for the multi-label classiﬁcation task, mean absolute error (MAE) for the regression
task. We design two new metrics to evaluate the disentanglement performance on the graph data. The
ﬁrst one is graph edit distance on edge (GED E). This metric is inspired by the traditional graph edit
distance (GED). Since the input graph already provides the information about the order of nodes,
the disentanglement of the input data, in reality, only involves the changing of edges. Therefore, we
restrict the GED by only allowing adding and removing the edges, and thus obtain a score of GED E
by Hungarian match between the generated factor graphs and the ground truth.
Speciﬁcally, for each pair of the generated factor graph and the ground truth graph, we ﬁrst convert
the continuous value in the factor graph to 1/0 value by setting the threshold to make the number of
6

==== Page 7 ====
Second Layer of FactorGNN(99.5%)First Layer of FactorGNN(99.5%)
First Layer of GAT (92.3%)First Layer of GCN (94.7%)First Layer of MLP (94.0%)First Layer of DisenGCN(90.4%)Figure 3: Feature correlation analysis. The hidden features are obtained from the test split using
the pre-trained models on the synthetic dataset. It can be seen that the features generated from
FactorGCN present a more block-wise correlation pattern, indicating that the latent features have
indeed been disentangled. We also show the classiﬁcation performance in brackets.
Table 1: Performance on synthetic dataset. The four methods are evaluated in terms of the classiﬁ-
cation and the disentanglement performance. Classiﬁcation performance is evaluated by Micro-F1
and disentanglement performance is measured by GED Eand C-Score. For each method, we run the
experiments ﬁve times and report the mean and std. Random method generates four factor graphs.
GAT_W/Dis represents GAT model with the additional discriminator proposed in this paper.
MLP GCN GAT GAT_W/Dis DisenGCN FactorGCN (Ours) Random
Micro-F1"0.9400.002 0.9470.003 0.9230.009 0.9280.009 0.9040.007 0.9950.004 0.2500.002
GED E# - - 12.59 3.00 12.353.86 10.544.35 10.594.37 32.094.85
C-Score" - - 0.288 0.064 0.2740.065 0.3670.026 0.5320.044 0.3150.002
edges in these two graphs are the same. Then, GED Es can be computed for every such combination.
Finally, Hungarian match is adopted to obtain the best bipartite matching results as the GED Escore.
Besides the GED Escore, we also care about the consistency of the generated factor graph. In
other words, the best-matched pairs between the generated factor graphs and the ground truths,
optimally, should be identical across all samples. We therefore introduce the second metric named as
consistency score (C-Score), related to GED E. C-Score is computed as the average percentage of the
most frequently matched factor graphs. The C-score will be one if the ground truth graphs are always
matched to the ﬁxed factor graphs. A more detailed description of evaluation protocol can be found
in the supplemental materials.
Evaluation on the synthetic dataset . We ﬁrst evaluate the disentanglement performance on a syn-
thetic dataset. The results are shown in Tab. 1. Although MLP and GCN achieve good classiﬁcation
performances, they are not capable of disentanglement. GAT disentangles the input by using multi-
head attention, but the performance of the original task is degraded. Our proposed method, on the
other hand, achieves a much better performance in terms of both disentanglement and the original
task. We also evaluate the compared methods on the synthetic dataset with various numbers of factor
graphs, shown in Tab. 2. As the number of latent factor graphs increase, the performance gain of the
FactorGCN becomes large. However, when the number of factor graphs becomes too large, the task
will be more challenging, yielding lower performance gains.
Evaluation on the ZINC dataset . For this dataset, the type information of edges is hidden during
the training process, and is serve as the ground truth to evaluate the performance of disentanglement.
Tab. 3 shows the results. The proposed method achieves the best performance on both the disentan-
7

==== Page 8 ====
Table 2: Classiﬁcation performance on synthetic graphs with different numbers of factor graphs. We
change the total number of factor graphs and generate ﬁve synthetic datasets. When the number
of factor graphs increases, the performance gain of FactorGCN becomes larger. However, as the
number of factor graphs becomes too large, disentanglement will be more challenging, yielding lower
performance gains.
MethodNumber of factor graphs
2 3 4 5 6
MLP 1.0000.000 0.9850.002 0.9400.002 0.8660.001 0.8090.002
GCN 1.0000.000 0.9840.000 0.9470.003 0.8440.002 0.7650.001
GAT 1.0000.000 0.9750.002 0.9230.009 0.8450.006 0.7910.006
FactorGCN 1.000 0.000 1.0000.000 0.9950.004 0.8930.021 0.8130.049
Table 3: Performance on the ZINC dataset. FactorGCN outperforms the compared methods by a
large margin, with the capability of disentanglement. Note that our proposed method even achieves a
similar performance as GatedGCN E, the state-of-the-art method on ZINC dataset that explicitly uses
additional edge information.
MLP GCN GAT MoNet DisenGCN FactorGCN (Ours) GatedGCN E
MAE# 0.6670.002 0.5030.005 0.4790.010 0.4070.007 0.5380.005 0.3660.014 0.3630.009
GED E# - - 15.46 6.06 - 14.14 6.19 12.725.34 -
C-Score" - - 0.309 0.013 - 0.342 0.034 0.4410.012 -
glement and the downstream task. We also show the state-of-the-art method GatedGCN Eon this
dataset on the right side of Tab. 3, which utilizes the type information of edges during the training
process. Our proposed method, without any additional edge information, achieves truly promising
results that are to that of GatedGCN E, which needs the bond information of edges during training.
Evaluation on more datasets . To provide a thorough understanding of the proposed method, We also
carry out evaluations on three widely used graph classiﬁcation datasets and one node classiﬁcation
dataset to see the performances of FactorGCN as a general GCN framework. The same 10-fold
evaluation protocol as [ 21] is adopted. Since there are no ground truth factor graphs, we only report the
accuracy, shown in Tab. 4 and Tab. 5. Our method achieves consistently the best performance, showing
the potential of the FactorGCN as a general GCN framework, even putting aside its disentangling
capability. More details about the evaluation protocol, the setup of our method, and the statistic
information about these datasets can be found in the supplemental materials.
4.4 Ablation and sensitivity analysis
We show in Fig. 4 the ablation study and sensitivity analysis of the proposed method. When varying
, the number of factors is set to be eight; when varying the number of factors , is set to be 0.2. As
can be seen from the left ﬁgure, the performance of both the disentanglement and the downstream task
will degrade without the discriminator. The right ﬁgure shows the relations between the performance
and the number of factor graphs we used in FactorGCN. Setting the number of factor graphs to be
slightly larger than that of the ground truth, in practice, leads to a better performance.
Table 4: Accuracy (%) on three graph classiﬁcation datasets. FactorGCN performances on par with
or better than the state-of-the-art GCN models. We highlight the best DL-based methods and non
DL-based methods separately. FactorGCN uses the same hyper-parameters for all datasets.
WL subtree PATCHYSAN AWL GCN GraphSage GIN FactorGCN
IMDB-B 73.83.9 71.02.2 74.55.9 74.03.4 72.35.3 75.15.1 75.32.7
COLLAB 78.91.9 72.62.2 73.91.9 79.01.8 63.97.7 80.21.9 81.21.4
MUTAG 90.45.7 92.64.2 87.99.8 85.65.8 77.71.5 89.45.6 89.96.5
8

==== Page 9 ====
Table 5: Accuracy (%) on the Pattern dataset for node-classiﬁcation task. FactorGCN achieves the
best performance, showing its ability to serve as a general GCN framework.
GCN GatedGCN GIN MoNet DisenGCN IPDGN FactorGCN
63.880.07 84.480.12 85.590.01 85.480.04 75.010.15 78.700.11 86.570.02
Figure 4: The inﬂuence of the balanced weight and the number of factor graphs.
5 Conclusion
We propose a novel GCN framework, termed as FactorGCN, which achieves graph convolution
through graph-level disentangling. Given an input graph, FactorGCN decomposes it into several
interpretable factor graphs, each of which denotes an underlying interconnections between entities,
and then carries out topology-aware convolutions on each such factor graph to produce the ﬁnal
node features. The node features, derived under the explicit disentangling, are therefore block-wise
explainable and beneﬁcial to the downstream tasks. Speciﬁcally, FactorGCN enables multi-relation
disentangling, allowing information propagation between two nodes to take places in disjoint spaces.
We also introduce two new metrics to measure the graph disentanglement performance quantitatively.
FactorGCN outperforms other methods on both the disentanglement and the downstream tasks,
indicating the proposed method is ready to serve as a general GCN framework with the capability of
graph-level disentanglement.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the startup funding of Stevens Institute of Technology.
Broader Impact
In this work we introduce a GCN framework, termed as FactorGCN, that explicitly accounts for
disentanglement FactorGCN is applicable to various scenarios, both technical and social. For conven-
tional graph-related tasks, like node classiﬁcation of the social network and graph classiﬁcation of
the molecular graph, our proposed method can serve as a general GCN framework. For disentangling
tasks, our method generates factor graphs that reveal the latent relations among entities, and facili-
tate the further decision making process like recommendation. Furthermore, given sufﬁcient data,
FactorGCN can be used as a tool to analyze social issues like discovering the reasons for the quick
spread of the epidemic disease in some areas. Like all learning-based methods, FactorGCN is not
free of errors. If the produced disentangled factor graphs are incorrect, for example, the subsequent
inference and prediction results will be downgraded, possibly yielding undesirable bias.
9

==== Page 10 ====
References
[1]Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2014.
[2]Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir
Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. -vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational
framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
[3]Jianxin Ma, Peng Cui, Kun Kuang, Xin Wang, and Wenwu Zhu. Disentangled graph convolutional
networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4212–4221, 2019.
[4]Yanbei Liu, Xiao Wang, Shu Wu, and Zhitao Xiao. Independence promoted graph disentangled networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11430 , 2019.
[5]Julian J. McAuley, Christopher Targett, Qinfeng Shi, and Anton van den Hengel. Image-based recom-
mendations on styles and substitutes. In SIGIR , pages 43–52, 2015. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
2766462.2767755 .
[6]Cian Eastwood and Christopher KI Williams. A framework for the quantitative evaluation of disentangled
representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[7]Christopher P Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Desjardins, and
Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in -vae. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03599 , 2018.
[8] Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05983 , 2018.
[9]Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pages 2172–2180, 2016.
[10] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for molecular
graph generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2323–2332, 2018.
[11] Yiding Yang, Jiayan Qiu, Mingli Song, Dacheng Tao, and Xinchao Wang. Learning propagation rules for
attribution map generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 2020.
[12] Jie Song, Yixin Chen, Jingwen Ye, Xinchao Wang, Chengchao Shen, Feng Mao, and Mingli Song.
DEPARA: Deep Attribution Graph for Deep Knowledge Transferability. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020.
[13] Xinchao Wang, Engin Türetken, François Fleuret, and Pascal Fua. Tracking interacting objects optimally
using integer programming. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 17–32, 2014.
[14] Xinchao Wang, Engin Türetken, François Fleuret, and Pascal Fua. Tracking interacting objects using
intertwined ﬂows. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 38(11):2312–2326,
2016.
[15] Zunlei Feng, Xinchao Wang, Chenglong Ke, An-Xiang Zeng, Dacheng Tao, and Mingli Song. Dual swap
disentangling. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 5894–5904, 2018.
[16] Diane Bouchacourt, Ryota Tomioka, and Sebastian Nowozin. Multi-level variational autoencoder: Learning
disentangled representations from grouped observations. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2018.
[17] Chaoyue Wang, Chaohui Wang, Chang Xu, and Dacheng Tao. Tag disentangled generative adversarial
network for object image re-rendering. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
2901–2907, 2017.
[18] Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Learning hierarchical features from deep generative
models. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pages
4091–4099. JMLR. org, 2017.
[19] Narayanaswamy Siddharth, Brooks Paige, Jan-Willem Van de Meent, Alban Desmaison, Noah Goodman,
Pushmeet Kohli, Frank Wood, and Philip Torr. Learning disentangled representations with semi-supervised
deep generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 5925–5935, 2017.
[20] Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning factorial codes by predictability minimization. Neural Computation , 4(6):
863–879, 1992.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[21] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks?
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[22] Jiayan Qiu, Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Hallucinating visual instances in total absentia.
InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision , 2020.
[23] Zhuwen Li, Qifeng Chen, and Vladlen Koltun. Combinatorial optimization with graph convolutional
networks and guided tree search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 539–548,
2018.
[24] Yiding Yang, Jiayan Qiu, Mingli Song, Dacheng Tao, and Xinchao Wang. Distilling knowledge from graph
convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 7074–7083, 2020.
[25] Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M
Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5115–5124, 2017.
[26] Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang, Mingli Song, Junsong Yuan, and Dacheng Tao. Spagan: Shortest path graph
attention network. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4099–4105, 2019.
[27] Petar Veli ˇckovi ´c, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio.
Graph Attention Networks. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=rJXMpikCZ .
[28] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
[29] Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling.
Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In European Semantic Web Conference , pages
593–607. Springer, 2018.
[30] Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou, Peng Cui, Hongxia Yang, and Wenwu Zhu. Learning disentangled representations
for recommendation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 5712–5723, 2019.
[31] Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K Joshi, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier Bresson. Bench-
marking graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00982 , 2020.
[32] Pinar Yanardag and SVN Vishwanathan. Deep graph kernels. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 1365–1374, 2015.
[33] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 1024–1034, 2017.
11

