==== Page 1 ====
Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Luisa Zintgraf1Kyriacos Shiarlis1 2Vitaly Kurin1 2Katja Hofmann3Shimon Whiteson1 2
Abstract
We propose CA VIA for meta-learning, a simple
extension to MAML that is less prone to meta-
overﬁtting, easier to parallelise, and more inter-
pretable. CA VIA partitions the model parame-
ters into two parts: context parameters that serve
as additional input to the model and are adapted
on individual tasks, and shared parameters that
are meta-trained and shared across tasks. At test
time, only the context parameters are updated,
leading to a low-dimensional task representation.
We show empirically that CA VIA outperforms
MAML for regression, classiﬁcation, and rein-
forcement learning. Our experiments also high-
light weaknesses in current benchmarks, in that
the amount of adaptation needed in some cases is
small.
1. Introduction
The challenge of fast adaptation in machine learning is to
learn on previously unseen tasks fastand with little data .
In principle, this can be achieved by leveraging knowledge
obtained in other, related tasks. However, the best way to
do so remains an open question. We are interested in the
meta-learning approach to fast adaptation, i.e., learning how
to learn on unseen problems/datasets within few shots.
One approach for fast adaptation is to use gradient-based
methods: at test time, only one or a few gradient update steps
are performed to solve the new task, using a task-speciﬁc
loss function. Model agnostic meta learning (MAML) (Finn
et al., 2017a) is a general and powerful gradient-based meta-
learning algorithm, which learns a model initialisation that
allows fast adaptation at test time. Given that MAML is
model-agnostic, it can be used with any gradient-based learn-
ing algorithm, and a variety of methods build on it (a.o., Lee
& Choi (2018); Li et al. (2017); Al-Shedivat et al. (2018);
Grant et al. (2018)).
1University of Oxford2Latent Logic3Microsoft Research. Cor-
respondence to: Luisa Zintgraf <luisa.zintgraf@cs.ox.ac.uk >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).MAML is trained with an interleaved training procedure,
comprised of inner loop and outer loop updates that operate
on a batch of related tasks at each iteration. In the inner
loop, MAML learns task-speciﬁc network parameters by
performing one gradient step on a task-speciﬁc loss. Then,
in the outer loop, the model parameters from before the
inner loop update are updated to reduce the loss after the
inner loop update on the individual tasks. Hence, MAML
learns a model initialisation that can generalise to a new task
after only a few gradient updates at test time. One drawback
of MAML is meta-overﬁtting: since the entire network is
updated on just a few data points at test time, it can easily
overﬁt (Mishra et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose an alternative to MAML which
is more interpretable and less prone to overﬁtting, with-
out compromising performance. Our method, fast context
adaptation viameta-learning (CA VIA) learns a single
model that adapts to a new task via gradient descent by
updating only a set of input parameters at test time, instead
of the entire network. These inputs, which we call con-
text parameters (see Figure 1), can be interpreted as a
task embedding that modulates the behaviour of the model.
We conﬁrm empirically that the learned context parame-
ters indeed match the latent task structure. Like MAML,
our method is model-agnostic, i.e., it can be applied to any
model that is trained via gradient descent.
CA VIA is trained with an interleaved training procedure
similar to MAML: in the inner loop only the context pa-
rametersare updated, and in the outer loop the rest of the
model parameters, , are updated (which requires backprop-
agating through the inner-loop update). This allows CA VIA
to explicitly optimise the task-independent parameters 
for good performance across tasks, while ensuring that the
task-speciﬁc parameters can quickly adapt to new tasks at
test time.
The separation of parameters into task-speciﬁc and task-
independent parts has several advantages. First, the size
of both components can be chosen appropriately for the
task. The network parameters can be made expressive
enough without overﬁtting to a single task in the inner loop,
which MAML is prone to. Furthermore, for many practical
problems we have prior knowledge of which aspects vary
across tasks and hence how much capacity should have.

==== Page 2 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Second, CA VIA is signiﬁcantly easier to parallelise com-
pared to MAML: learning task-speciﬁc context parameters
for a batch of tasks can be parallelised in the inner loop.
Other beneﬁts are that parameter copies are not necessary
which saves memory writes; we do not need to manually
access and perform operations on the network weights and
biases to set up the computation graphs; and CA VIA can
help distributed machine learning systems, where the same
model is deployed to different machines and we wish to
learn different contexts concurrently.
CA VIA is conceptually related to embedding-based ap-
proaches for fast adaptation such as conditional neural pro-
cesses (CNPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018) and meta-learning with
latent embedding optimisation (LEO) (Rusu et al., 2019).
These share the beneﬁt of learning a low-dimensional rep-
resentation of the task, which has the potential to lead to
greater interpretability compared to MAML. In contrast to
existing methods, CA VIA uses the same network to learn the
embedding (during a backward pass) and make predictions
(during a forward pass). Therefore CA VIA has fewer pa-
rameters to train, but must compute higher-order gradients
during training.
Our experiments show that CA VIA outperforms MAML
and CNPs on regression problems, can outperform MAML
on a challenging classiﬁcation benchmark by scaling up the
network without overﬁtting, and outperforms MAML in a
reinforcement learning setting while adapting signiﬁcantly
fewer parameters. We also show that CA VIA is robust to hy-
perparameters and demonstrate that the context parameters
represent meaningful embeddings of tasks. Our experiments
also highlight a weakness in current benchmarks in meta-
learning, in that the amount of adaptation needed is small
in some cases, conﬁrming that task inference and multitask
learning are enough to do well.
2. Background
Our goal is to learn models that can quickly adapt to new
tasks with little data. Hence, learning on the new task is
preceded by meta-learning on a set of related tasks.
2.1. Problem Setting
In few-shot learning problems, we are given distributions
over training tasks ptrain(T)and test tasks ptest(T). Training
tasks can be used to learn how to adapt fast to any of the
tasks with little per-task data, and evaluation is then done
on (previously unseen) test tasks. Unless stated otherwise,
we assume that ptrain=ptestand refer to both as p. Tasks in
ptypically share some structure, so that transferring knowl-
edge between tasks can speed up learning. During each
meta-training iteration, a batch of NtasksT=fTigN
i=1is
sampled from p.Supervised Learning. Supervised learning learns a model
f:x7!^ythat maps data points x2X that have a true label
y2Y to predictions ^y2Y. A taskTi= (X;Y;L;q)is a
tuple whereXis the input space, Yis the output space,
L(y;^y)is a task-speciﬁc loss function, and q(x;y)is a
distribution over labelled data points. We assume that all
data points are drawn i.i.d. from q. Different tasks can be
created by changing any element of Ti.
Training in supervised meta-learning proceeds over meta-
training iterations, where for each Ti2T, we sample two
datasetsDtrain
iandDtest
ifromqTi:
Dtrain
i=f(x;y)i;mgMtrain
i
m=1;Dtest
i=f(x;y)i;mgMtest
i
m=1;(1)
where (x;y)qTiandMtrain
iandMtest
iare the number of
training and test datapoints. The training data is used to
updatef, and the test data is then used to evaluate how good
this update was, and adjust for the update rule accordingly.
Reinforcement Learning. Reinforcement learning (RL)
learns a policy that maps states s2S to actionsa2A.
Each task corresponds to a Markov decision process (MDP):
a tupleTi= (S;A;r;q;q 0), whereSis a set of states,
Ais a set of actions, r(st;at;st+1)is a reward function,
q(st+1jst;at)is a transition function, and q0(s0)is an initial
state distribution. The goal is to maximise the expected
cumulative reward Junder,
J() =Eq0;q;"H 1X
t=0tr(st;at;st+1)#
; (2)
whereH2Nis the horizon and 2[0;1]is the discount
factor. During each meta-training iteration, for each Ti2T,
we ﬁrst collect a trajectory
train
i=fs0;a0;r0;s1;a1;r1;:::;
sMtrain
i 1;aMtrain
i 1;rMtrain
i 1;sMtrain
ig;
where the initial state s0is sampled from q0, the actions
are chosen by the current policy , the state transitions
according to q, andMtrain
iis the number of environment
interactions. We unify several episodes in this formulation:
if the horizon His reached within the trajectory, the envi-
ronment is reset using q0. Once the trajectory is collected,
this data is used to update the policy. Another trajectory test
i
is then collected by rolling out the updated policy for Mtest
i
time steps. This test trajectory is used to evaluate the quality
of the update on that task, and to adjust or the update rule
accordingly.
Evaluation for both supervised and reinforcement learning
problems is done on a new (unseen) set of tasks drawn from
p. For each such task, the model is updated using LorJ
and only a few data points ( Dtrainortrain). Performance of
the updated model is reported on Dtestortest.

==== Page 3 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
2.2. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
One method for few-shot learning is model-agnostic meta-
learning (Finn et al., 2017a, MAML). MAML learns an
initialisation for the parameters of a modelfsuch that,
given a new task, a good model for that task can be learned
with only a small number of gradient steps and data points.
In the inner loop, MAML computes new task-speciﬁc pa-
rametersi(starting from ) via one gradient update1,
i= r1
Mi
trainX
(x;y)2Dtrain
iLTi(f(x);y):(3)
For the meta-update in the outer loop, the original model pa-
rametersare then updated with respect to the performance
after the inner-loop update, i.e.,
  r1
NX
Ti2T1
Mi
testX
(x;y)2Dtest
iLTi(fi(x);y):(4)
The result of training is a model initialisation that can
be adapted with just a few gradient steps to any new task
drawn fromp. Since the gradient is taken with respect to the
parametersbefore the inner-loop update (3), the outer-loop
update (4) involves higher order derivatives of .
3. CA VIA
We propose fast context adaptation viameta-learning
(CA VIA), which partitions the model parameters into two
parts: context parameters are adapted in the inner loop for
each task, and parameters are meta-learned in the outer
loop and shared across tasks.
3.1. Supervised Learning
At every meta-training iteration and for the current batch T
of tasks, we use the training data Dtrain
iof each taskTi2T
as follows. Starting from a ﬁxed value 0(we typically
choose0=0; see Section 3.4), we learn task-speciﬁc
parametersivia one gradient update:
i=0 r1
Mtrain
iX
(x;y)2Dtrain
iLTi(f0;(x);y):(5)
While we only take the gradient with respect to , the up-
dated parameter iis also a function of , since during
backpropagation, gradients ﬂow through the model. Given
updated parameters ifor all sampled tasks, we proceed to
the meta-learning step, in which is updated:
  r1
NX
Ti2T1
Mtest
iX
(x;y)2Dtest
iLTi(fi;(x);y):
(6)
1We outline is MAML for one gradient update step and the
supervised learning setting, but it can be used with several gradient
update steps and for reinforcement learning problems as well.This update includes higher order gradients in due to the
dependency on (5). At test time, only the context parameters
are updated using Equation (5), and is held ﬁxed.
3.2. Reinforcement Learning
During each iteration, for a current batch of MDPs T=
fTigN
i=1, we proceed as follows. Given 0, we collect a
rollouttrain
iby executing the policy 0;. We then compute
task-speciﬁc parameters ivia one gradient update:
i=0+r~JTi(train
i;0;); (7)
where ~J(;)is the objective function of any gradient-
based reinforcement learning method that uses trajectories 
produced by a parameterised policy to update that policy’s
parameters. After updating the policy, we collect another
trajectorytest
ito evaluate the updated policy, where actions
are chosen according to the updated policy i;.
After doing this for all tasks in T, the meta-update step
updatesto maximise the average performance across tasks
(after individually updating for them),
 +r1
NX
MDP i2T~JTi(test
i;i;): (8)
This update includes higher order gradients in due to the
dependency on (7).
3.3. Conditioning on Context Parameters
Sinceis independent of the network input, we need to
decide where and how to condition the network on them.
For an output node h(l)
iat a fully connected layer l, we can
for example simply concatenate to the inputs of that layer:
h(l)
i=g0
@JX
j=1(l;h)
j;ih(l 1)
j +KX
k=1(l;)
k;i0;k+b1
A;(9)
wheregis a nonlinear activation function, bis a bias parame-
ter,(l;h)
j;i are the weights associated with layer input h(l 1)
j ,
and(l;)
k;iare the weights associated with the context param-
eter0;k. This is illustrated in Figure 1. In our experiments,
for fully connected networks, we add the context parameter
at the ﬁrst layer, i.e., concatenate them to the input. Other
conditioning methods can be used with CA VIA as well: e.g.,
for convolutional networks, we use feature-wise linear mod-
ulation FiLM (Perez et al., 2017), which performs an afﬁne
transformation on the feature maps. Given context param-
etersand a convolutional layer that outputs Mfeature
mapsfhigM
i=1, FiLM linearly transforms each feature map
FiLM (hi) =ihi+, where;2RMare a function
of the context parameters. We use a fully connected layer
[;] =PK
k=1(l;)
k;i0;k+bwith the identity function at
the output.

==== Page 4 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Figure 1. Context adaptation. A network layer hlis augmented
with additional context parameters (red) initialised to 0before
each adaptation step and updated by gradient descent during each
inner loop and at test time. Network parameters (green) are only
updated in the outer loop and shared across tasks. Hence, they stay
ﬁxed at test time. By initialising to 0, the network parameters
associated with the context parameters (blue) do not affect the
output of the layer before adaptation. After the ﬁrst adaptation step
they modulate the rest of the network to solve the new task.
3.4. Context Parameter Initialisation
When learning a new task, have to be initialised to some
value,0. We argue that, instead of meta-learning this
initialisation as well, a ﬁxed 0is sufﬁcient: in (9), if both
(l;)
j;i and0are meta-learned, the learned initialisation
ofcan be subsumed into the bias parameter b, and0
can be set to a ﬁxed value. Hence, the initialisation of the
context parameters does not have to be meta-learned and
parameter copies are not required during training. In our
implementation we set the initial context parameter to a
vector ﬁlled with zeros, 0=0= [0;:::; 0]>.
Furthermore, not updating the context parameters in the
outer loop allows for a more ﬂexible and expressive gradient
in the inner loop. Consequently, CA VIA is more robust to
the inner loop learning rate, in(5). Before an inner loop
update, the part of the model associated with does not
affect the output (since they are inputs and initialised at 0).
During the inner update, only changes and can affect the
output of the network at test time. Even if this update is
large, the parameters (l;)
k;ithat connect to the rest of the
model (shown in blue in Figure 1), are automatically scaled
during the outer loop. In other words, (l;)
k;icompensates in
the outer loop for any excessively large inner loop update of
. However, doing large gradient updates in every outer loop
update step as well would lead to divergence and numerical
overﬂow. In Section 5.1, we show empirically that the
decoupling of learning andcan indeed make CA VIA
more robust to the initial learning rate compared to also
learning the initialisation of the context parameters.4. Related Work
One general approach to meta-learning is to learn the algo-
rithm or update function itself (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio
et al., 1992; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017). Another approach is gradient-based meta-learning,
which learns a model initialisation such that at test time, a
new task can be learned within a few gradient steps. Ex-
amples are MAML (Finn et al., 2017a) and its probabilistic
variants (Grant et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018; Finn et al.,
2018); REPTILE (Nichol & Schulman, 2018), which does
not require second order gradient computation; and Meta-
SGD (Li et al., 2017), which learns the per-parameter inner
loop learning rate. The main difference to our work is that
CA VIA adapts only a few parameters at test time, and these
parameters determine only input context.
Closely related are MT-Nets (Lee & Choi, 2018), which
learn which parameters to update in MAML. MT-Nets learn:
an M-Net which is a mask indicating which parameters to
update in the inner loop, sampled (from a learned probability
distribution) for each new task; and a T-net which learns
a task-speciﬁc update direction and step size. CA VIA is
a simpler, more interpretable alternative where the task-
speciﬁc and shared parameters are disjoint sets.
Additional input biases to MAML were considered by Finn
et al. (2017b), who show that this improves performance on
a robotic manipulation setting. By contrast, we update only
the context parameters in the inner loop, and initialise them
to0before adaptation to a new task. Rei (2015) propose a
similar approach in the context of neural language models,
where a context vector represents the sentence that is cur-
rently being processed (see also the Appendix of Finn et al.
(2017a)). Unlike CA VIA, this approach updates context
parameters in the outer loop, i.e., it learns the initialisation
of. This coupling of the gradient updates leads to a less
ﬂexible meta-update and is not as robust to the inner loop
learning rate like CA VIA, as we show empirically in 5.1.
Silver et al. (2008) proposed context features as a component
of inductive transfer, using a predeﬁned one-hot encoded
task-specifying context as input to the network. They show
that this works better than learning a shared feature extractor
and having separate heads for all tasks. In this paper, we
instead learn this contextual input from data of a new task.
Such context features can also be learned by a separate
embedding network as in, e.g., Oreshkin et al. (2018) and
Garnelo et al. (2018), who use the task’s training set to
condition the prediction network. CA VIA instead learns the
context parameters via backpropagation through the same
network used to solve the task.
Several methods learn to produce network weights from
task-speciﬁc embeddings or labelled datapoints (Gordon
et al., 2018; Rusu et al., 2019), which then operate on the

==== Page 5 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Number of Additional Input Parameters
Method 0 1 2 3 4 5 50
CA VIA - 0:84(0:06) 0:21(0:02) 0:20(0:02)0:19(0:02)0:19(0:02)0:19(0:02)
MAML 0:33(0:02) 0:29(0:02) 0:24(0:02) 0:24(0:02)0:23(0:02)0:23(0:02)0:23(0:02)
Table 1. Results for the sine curve regression task. Shown is the mean-squared error of CA VIA and MAML for varying number of input
parameters, with 95% conﬁdence intervals in brackets.
(a) Test Performance
 (b) Learning Rates
 (c) Gradient Norms
Figure 2. Analysis of the sine curve experiments. (a) Test performance after several gradient steps (on the same batch) averaged over
1000 unseen tasks. Both CA VIA and MAML continue to learn, but MAML performs worse and is less stable. (b) Test Performance after
training with different inner loop learning rates. (c) CA VIA scales the model weights so that the inner learning rate is compensated by the
context parameters gradients magnitude.
task-speciﬁc inputs. By contrast, we learn an embedding
that modulates a ﬁxed network, and is independent of the
task-speciﬁc inputs during the forward pass. Speciﬁc to few-
shot image classiﬁcation, metric-based approaches learn to
relate (embeddings of) labelled images and new instances
of the same classes (Snell et al., 2017; Sung et al., 2018).
By contrast, CA VIA can be used for regression and rein-
forcement problems as well. Other meta-learning methods
are also motivated by the practical difﬁculties of learning in
high-dimensional parameter spaces, and the relative ease of
fast adaptation in lower dimensional space (e.g., Sæmunds-
son et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2018).
In the context of reinforcement learning, Gupta et al. (2018)
condition the policy on a latent random variable trained sim-
ilarly to CA VIA, together with the reparametrisation trick
(although they do not explicitly interpret these parameters as
task embeddings). This latent variable is sampled once per
episode, and thus allows for structured exploration. Unlike
CA VIA, they adapt the entire network at test time, which
can be prone to overﬁtting.
5. Experiments
In this section, we empirically evaluate CA VIA on regres-
sion, classiﬁcation, and RL tasks. We show that: 1) adapting
a small number of input parameters (instead of the entire
network) is sufﬁcient to yield performance equivalent to
or better than MAML, 2) CA VIA is robust to the task-
speciﬁc learning rate and scales well without overﬁtting,and 3) an embedding of the task emerges in the context
parameters solely via backpropagation. Code is available at
https://github.com/lmzintgraf/cavia .
5.1. Regression
5.1.1. S INECURVES
We start with the regression problem of ﬁtting sine curves
from Finn et al. (2017a). A task is deﬁned by the amplitude
and phase of the sine curve and generated by uniformly
sampling the amplitude from [0:1;0:5]and the phase from
[0;]. For training, ten labelled datapoints (uniformly sam-
pled fromx2[ 5;5]) are given for each task for the inner
loop update, and we optimise a mean-squared error (MSE)
loss. We use a neural network with two hidden layers and
40nodes each. The number of context parameters varies
between 2and50. Per meta-update we use a batch of 25
tasks. During testing we present the model with ten data-
points from 1000 newly sampled tasks and measure MSE
over 100 test points.
To allow a fair comparison, we add additional input biases
to MAML (the same number as context parameters that
CA VIA uses), an extension that was also done by Finn
et al. (2017b). These additional parameters are meta-learned
together with the rest of the network.
Table 1 shows that CA VIA outperforms MAML even when
MAML gets the same number of additional parameters,
despite the fact that CA VIA adapts only 2-5parameters,

==== Page 6 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Figure 3. Visualisation of what the two context parameters learn
on a new task. Shown is the value they take after 5gradient update
steps on a new task. Each dot is one random task; its colour
indicates the amplitude (left) or phase (right) of that task.
instead of around 1600 . CA VIA’s performance on the re-
gression task correlates with how many variables are needed
to encode the tasks. In these experiments, two parameters
vary between tasks, which is exactly the context parameter
dimensionality at which CA VIA starts to perform well (the
optimal encoding is three dimensional, as phase is periodic).
This suggests CA VIA indeed learns task descriptions in the
context parameters via backpropagation at test time. Figure
3 illustrates this by plotting the value of the learned inputs
against the amplitude/phase of the task in the case of two
context parameters. The model learns a smooth embedding
in which interpolation between tasks is possible.
We also test how well CA VIA can continue learning at test
time, when more gradient steps are performed than during
training. Figure 2a shows that CA VIA outperforms MAML
even after taking several gradient update steps and is more
stable, as indicated by the monotonic learning curve.
As described in Section 3.4, CA VIA can scale the gradients
of the context parameters since they are inputs to the model
and trained separately. Figure 2b shows the performance
of CA VIA, MAML, and CA VIA when also learning the
initialisation of (i.e., updating the context parameters in
the outer loop), for a varying learning rate from 10 6to10.
CA VIA is robust to changes in learning rate while MAML
performs well only in a small range. Figure 2c gives insight
into how CA VIA does this: we plot the inner learning rate
against the norm of the gradient of the context parameters
at test time. The weights are adjusted so that lower learning
rates bring about larger context parameter gradients and
vice-versa. MT-Nets (Lee & Choi, 2018), which learn which
subset of parameters to adapt on a new task, are also robust
to the inner-loop learning rate, but in a smaller range than
CA VIA.2Similarly, Li et al. (2017) show that MAML can
be improved by learning a parameter-speciﬁc learning rate,
which, however, introduces a lot of additional parameters.
2We do not show the numbers they report since we outperform
them signiﬁcantly, likely due to a different experimental protocol.
Figure 4. Image completion results on CelebA. Top row: true im-
age on the left, and the training pixels for 10,100, and 1000
training points. Bottom row: prediction of CA VIA when 128
context parameters were updated for 5gradient steps.
Random Pixels Ordered Pixels
10 100 1000 10 100 1000
CNP0.039 0.016 0.009 0.057 0:047 0.021
MAML 0.040 0.017 0:006 0.055 0:047 0.007
CA VIA 0:037 0:014 0:0060:053 0:047 0:006
Table 2. Pixel-wise MSE (for the entire image) for the image com-
pletion task on the CelebA data set. We test different number of
available training points per image (10, 100, 1000). The trainig
pixels are chosen either at random or ordered from the top-left
corner to the bottom-right. (*Results from Garnelo et al. (2018))
5.1.2. I MAGE COMPLETION
To evaluate CA VIA on a more challenging regression task,
we consider image completion (Garnelo et al., 2018). The
task is to predict pixel values from coordinates, i.e., learn
a functionf: [0;1]2![0;1]3(for RGB values) which
maps 2D pixel coordinates x2[0;1]2to pixel intensities
y2[0;1]3. An individual picture is considered a single
task, and we are given a few pixels as a training set Dtrain
and use the entire image as the test set Dtest(including the
training set). We train CA VIA on the CelebA (Liu et al.,
2015) training set, perform model selection on the validation
set, and evaluate on the test set.
Garnelo et al. (2018) use an MLP encoder with three hidden
layers and 128nodes each, a 128-dimensional embedding
size, and a decoder with ﬁve hidden layers with 128nodes
each. To allow a fair comparison, we therefore choose a
context vector of size 128, and use an MLP with ﬁve hidden
layers ( 128nodes each) for the main network. We chose an
inner-learning rate of 1:0without tuning. To train MAML,
we use the same ﬁve-layer MLP network including 128
additional input biases, and an inner-loop learning rate of
0:1(other tested learning rates: 1:0,0:01). Both CA VIA and
MAML were trained with ﬁve inner-loop gradient updates.
Table 2 shows the results in terms of pixel-wise MSE for dif-
ferent numbers of training pixels ( k= 10;100;1000 shot),

==== Page 7 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
5-way accuracy
Method 1-shot 5-shot
Matching Nets (Vinyals et al., 2016) 46:6% 60:0%
Meta LSTM (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) 43:440:77% 60:600:71%
Prototypical Networks (Snell et al., 2017) 46:610:78% 65:770:70%
Meta-SGD (Li et al., 2017) 50:471:87% 64:030:94%
REPTILE (Nichol & Schulman, 2018) 49:970:32% 65:990:58%
MT-NET (Lee & Choi, 2018) 51:701:84% -
VERSA (Gordon et al., 2018) 53:401:82% 67:370:86
MAML (32) (Finn et al., 2017a) 48:071:75% 63:150:91%
MAML (64) 44:701:69% 61:870:93%
CA VIA (32) 47:240:65% 59:050:54%
CA VIA (128) 49:840:68% 64:630:54%
CA VIA (512) 51:820:65% 65:850:55%
CA VIA (512, ﬁrst order) 49:920:68% 63:590:57%
Table 3. Few-shot classiﬁcation results on the Mini-Imagenet test set (average accuracy with 95% conﬁdence intervals on a random set of
1000 tasks). For MAML, we show the results reported by Finn et al. (2017a), and when using a larger network (results obtained with the
author’s open sourced code and unchanged hyperparameters except the number of ﬁlters). These results show that CA VIA is able to scale
to larger networks without overﬁtting, and outperforms MAML by doing so. We also include other CNN-based methods with similar
experimental protocol. Note however that we did not tune CA VIA to compete with these methods, but focus on the comparison to MAML
in this experiment.
and for the case of randomly selected pixels and ordered
pixels (i.e., selecting pixels starting from the top left of the
image). CA VIA outperforms CNPs and MAML in most
settings. Figure 4 shows an example image reconstruction
produced by CA VIA (see Appendix ??for more results).
These results show that it is possible to learn an embedding
only via backpropagation and with far fewer parameters
than when using a separate embedding network.
5.2. Classiﬁcation
To evaluate how well CA VIA can scale to problems that re-
quire larger networks, we test it on the few-shot image clas-
siﬁcation benchmark Mini-Imagenet (Ravi & Larochelle,
2017). InN-wayK-shot classiﬁcation, a task is a random
selection of Nclasses, for each of which the model gets to
seeKexamples. From these it must learn to classify unseen
images from the Nclasses. The Mini-Imagenet dataset con-
sists of 64 training classes, 12 validation classes, and 24 test
classes. During training, we generate a task by selecting N
classes at random from the 64classes and training the model
onKexamples of each, i.e., a batch of NKimages. The
meta-update is done on a set of unseen images of the same
classes.
On this benchmark, MAML uses a network with four convo-
lutional layers with 32ﬁlters each and one fully connected
layer at the output (Finn et al., 2017a). We use the same
network architecture, but between 32and512ﬁlters per
layer. We use 100context parameters and add a FiLM layer
that conditions on these after the third convolutional layer
and whose parameters are meta-learned with the rest of thenetwork, i.e., they are part of . All our models were trained
with two gradient steps in the inner loop and evaluated with
two gradient steps. Following (Finn et al., 2017a), we ran
each experiment for 60;000meta-iterations and selected the
model with the highest validation accuracy for evaluation
on the test set.
Table 3 shows our results on Mini-Imagenet held-out test
data for 5-way 1-shot and 5-shot classiﬁcation. Our small-
est model ( 32ﬁlters) underperforms MAML (within the
conﬁdence intervals), and our largest model ( 512ﬁlters)
clearly outperforms MAML. We also include results for the
ﬁrst order approximation of our largest models, where the
gradient with respect to is not backpropagated through the
inner loop update of the context parameters . As expected,
this results in a lower accuracy (a drop of 2%) , but we still
outperform MAML.
CA VIA beneﬁts from increasing model expressiveness:
since we only adapt the context parameters in the inner
loop per task, we can substantially increase the network
size without overﬁtting during the inner loop update. We
tested scaling up MAML to a larger network size as well
(see Table 3), but found that this hurt accuracy, which was
also observed by Mishra et al. (2018).
Note that we focus on the comparison to MAML in these
experiments, since our goal is to show that CA VIA can scale
to larger networks without overﬁtting compared to MAML,
and can be used out-of-the-box for classiﬁcation problems
as well. We did not tune CA VIA in terms of network archi-
tecture or other hyperparameters, but only varied the number
of ﬁlters at each convolutional layer. The best performing

==== Page 8 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
(a) Direction
(b) Velocity
Figure 5. Performance of CA VIA and MAML on the RL Cheetah experiments. Both agents were trained to perform one gradient update,
but are evaluated for several update steps. Results are averaged over 40randomly selected tasks.
method with similar architecture and experimental protocol
is VERSA (Gordon et al., 2018), which learns to produce
weights of the classiﬁer, instead of modulating the network.
The current state-of-the-art results in Mini-Imagenet is (to
the best of our knowledge) the method LEO Rusu et al.
(2019) who use pre-trained feature representations from a
deep residual network (He et al., 2016) and a different exper-
imental protocol. CA VIA can be used with such embeddings
as well, and we expect an increase in performance.
In conclusion, CA VIA can achieve much higher accura-
cies than MAML by increasing the network size, without
overﬁtting. Our results are obtained by adjusting only 100
parameters at test time (instead of >30;0000 like MAML),
which embed the ﬁve different classes of the current task.
5.3. Reinforcement Learning
To demonstrate the versatility of CA VIA, we also apply it
to two high dimensional reinforcement learning MuJoCo
(Todorov et al., 2012) tasks using the setup of Finn et al.
(2017a). In the ﬁrst experiment, a Cheetah robot must run in
a particular, randomly chosen direction (forward/backward),
and receives as reward its speed in that direction. In the sec-
ond experiment, the Cheetah robot must run at a particular
velocity, chosen uniformly at random between 0:0and2:0.
The agent’s reward is the negative absolute value between
its current and the target velocity. Each rollout has a length
of200, and we use 20rollouts per gradient step during train-
ing, and a meta-batchsize of 40tasks per outer update. As
in Finn et al. (2017a), our agents are trained for one gradient
update, using policy gradient with generalised advantage
estimation (Schulman et al., 2015b) in the inner loop and
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015a) in the outer loop update.
Following the protocol of Finn et al. (2017a), both CA VIA
and MAML were trained for up to 500 meta-iterations, and
the models with the best average return during training were
used for evaluation. For these tasks, we use 50context pa-
rameters for CA VIA and an inner-loop learning rate of 10.
We found that starting with a higher learning rate helps forRL problems, since the policy update in the outer loop has
a stronger signal from the context parameters.
Figure 5 shows the performance of the CA VIA and MAML
agents at test time, after up to three gradient steps (averaged
over 40randomly selected test tasks). Both models keep
learning for several updates, although they were only trained
for one update step. CA VIA outperforms MAML on both
domains after one gradient update step, while updating only
50parameters at test time per task compared to >10;000.
For the Cheetah Velocity experiment, MAML catches up
after three gradient update steps.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
CA VIA is a meta-learning approach that separates the model
into task-speciﬁc context parameters and parameters that are
shared across tasks. We demonstrated experimentally that
CA VIA is robust to the inner loop learning rate and yields
task embeddings in the context parameters. CA VIA out-
performs MAML on challenging regression, classiﬁcation,
and reinforcement learning problems, while adapting fewer
parameters at test time and being less prone to overﬁtting.
We are interested in extending our experimental evaluation
to settings with multi-modal task distributions, as well as
settings where more generalisation beyond task identiﬁca-
tion is necessary at test time. One possible approach here is
to combine CA VIA with MAML-style updates in the future:
i.e., having two separate inner loops (producing iandi),
and one outer loop.
We are interested in extending CA VIA to more challenging
RL problems and exploring its role in allowing for smart
exploration in order to identify the task at hand, for ex-
ample building on the work of Gupta et al. (2018) who
use probabilistic context variables, or Stadie et al. (2018),
who propose E-MAML for RL problems, an extension for
MAML which accounts for the effect of the initial sampling
distribution (policy) before the inner-loop update.

==== Page 9 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Acknowledgements
We thank Wendelin Boehmer, Mark Finean and Joost van
Amersfoort for useful discussions and feedback. We would
also like to thank Chelsea Finn, Jackie Loong and Tristan
Deleu for their open-sourced MAML implementations. The
NVIDIA DGX-1 used for this research was donated by the
NVIDIA corporation. L. Zintgraf is supported by the Mi-
crosoft Research PhD Scholarship Program. Vitaly Kurin is
supported by the Samsung R&D Institute UK studentship.
This project has received funding from the European Re-
search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
number 637713). We thank the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable feedback which helped us improve this paper.
References
Al-Shedivat, M., Bansal, T., Burda, Y ., Sutskever, I., Mor-
datch, I., and Abbeel, P. Continuous adaptation via meta-
learning in nonstationary and competitive environments.
InSixth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR 2018) , 2018.
Andrychowicz, M., Denil, M., Gomez, S., Hoffman, M. W.,
Pfau, D., Schaul, T., Shillingford, B., and De Freitas, N.
Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 3981–3989, 2016.
Bengio, S., Bengio, Y ., Cloutier, J., and Gecsei, J. On the
optimization of a synaptic learning rule. In Preprints Conf.
Optimality in Artiﬁcial and Biological Neural Networks ,
pp. 6–8. Univ. of Texas, 1992.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning-Volume 70 , pp. 1126–1135. JMLR. org, 2017a.
Finn, C., Yu, T., Zhang, T., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. One-
shot visual imitation learning via meta-learning. In Con-
ference on Robot Learning, 2017 , 2017b.
Finn, C., Xu, K., and Levine, S. Probabilistic model-
agnostic meta-learning. In 32nd Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018). , 2018.
Garnelo, M., Rosenbaum, D., Maddison, C. J., Ramalho,
T., Saxton, D., Shanahan, M., Teh, Y . W., Rezende, D. J.,
and Eslami, S. Conditional neural processes. In Proceed-
ings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML 2018). , 2018.
Gordon, J., Bronskill, J., Bauer, M., Nowozin, S., and
Turner, R. Meta-learning probabilistic inference for pre-
diction. In Seventh International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR 2019) , 2018.Grant, E., Finn, C., Levine, S., Darrell, T., and Grifﬁths, T.
Recasting gradient-based meta-learning as hierarchical
bayes. In Sixth International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR 2018) , 2018.
Gupta, A., Mendonca, R., Liu, Y ., Abbeel, P., and Levine,
S. Meta-reinforcement learning of structured exploration
strategies. In 32nd Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018) , 2018.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Delving deep
into rectiﬁers: Surpassing human-level performance on
imagenet classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE inter-
national conference on computer vision , pp. 1026–1034,
2015.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learn-
ing for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 770–778, 2016.
Lee, Y . and Choi, S. Gradient-based meta-learning with
learned layerwise metric and subspace. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2933–2942, 2018.
Li, Z., Zhou, F., Chen, F., and Li, H. Meta-sgd: Learning
to learn quickly for few shot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.09835 , 2017.
Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep learning face
attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2015.
Mishra, N., Rohaninejad, M., Chen, X., and Abbeel, P. A
simple neural attentive meta-learner. In Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR
2018) , 2018.
Nichol, A. and Schulman, J. Reptile: a scalable metalearn-
ing algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999 , 2018.
Oreshkin, B. N., Lacoste, A., and Rodriguez, P. Tadam:
Task dependent adaptive metric for improved few-shot
learning. In 32nd Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018) , 2018.
Perez, E., Strub, F., De Vries, H., Dumoulin, V ., and
Courville, A. Film: Visual reasoning with a general
conditioning layer. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-18) , 2017.
Ravi, S. and Larochelle, H. Optimization as a model for few-
shot learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2017 , 2017.
Rei, M. Online representation learning in recurrent neural
language models. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
2015.

==== Page 10 ====
CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Rusu, A. A., Rao, D., Sygnowski, J., Vinyals, O., Pascanu,
R., Osindero, S., and Hadsell, R. Meta-learning with
latent embedding optimization. In Seventh International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2019) ,
2019.
Sæmundsson, S., Hofmann, K., and Deisenroth, M. P. Meta
reinforcement learning with latent variable gaussian pro-
cesses. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence 2018 , 2018.
Schmidhuber, J. Evolutionary Principles in Self-referential
Learning: On Learning how to Learn: the Meta-meta-
meta...-hook . 1987.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz,
P. Trust region policy optimization. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1889–1897, 2015a.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel,
P. High-dimensional continuous control using generalized
advantage estimation. In Fourth International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR 2016) , 2015b.
Silver, D. L., Poirier, R., and Currie, D. Inductive transfer
with context-sensitive neural networks. Machine Learn-
ing, 73(3):313, 2008.
Snell, J., Swersky, K., and Zemel, R. Prototypical networks
for few-shot learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 4077–4087, 2017.
Stadie, B. C., Yang, G., Houthooft, R., Chen, X., Duan, Y .,
Wu, Y ., Abbeel, P., and Sutskever, I. Some considerations
on learning to explore via meta-reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01118 , 2018.
Sung, F., Yang, Y ., Zhang, L., Xiang, T., Torr, P. H., and
Hospedales, T. M. Learning to compare: Relation net-
work for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pp. 1199–1208, 2018.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y . Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on , pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012.
Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T., Wierstra, D., et al.
Matching networks for one shot learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3630–3638,
2016.
Yoon, J., Kim, T., Dia, O., Kim, S., Bengio, Y ., and Ahn, S.
Bayesian model-agnostic meta-learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 7343–7353,
2018.Zhou, F., Wu, B., and Li, Z. Deep meta-learning: Learn-
ing to learn in the concept space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03596 , 2018.

