==== Page 1 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1861-6
METHOD OpenAccess
Featureselectionanddimension
reductionforsingle-cellRNA-Seqbasedona
multinomialmodel
F.WilliamTownes1,2,StephanieC.Hicks3,MartinJ.Aryee1,4,5,6andRafaelA.Irizarry1,7*
Abstract
Single-cellRNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq)profilesgeneexpressionofindividualcells.RecentscRNA-Seqdatasetshave
incorporateduniquemolecularidentifiers(UMIs).Usingnegativecontrols,weshowUMIcountsfollowmultinomial
samplingwithnozeroinflation.Currentnormalizationproceduressuchaslogofcountspermillionandfeature
selectionbyhighlyvariable genesproducefalsevariabilityindimensionreduction.Weproposesimplemultinomial
methods,includinggeneralizedprincipalcomponentanalysis(GLM-PCA)fornon-normaldistributions,andfeature
selectionusingdeviance.Thesemethodsoutperform thecurrentpracticeinadownstreamclusteringassessment
usinggroundtruthdatasets.
Keywords: Geneexpression,Singlecell,RNA-Seq,Dimensionreduction,Variablegenes,Principalcomponent
analysis,GLM-PCA
Background
Single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) is a powerful tool for
profilinggeneexpressionpatternsinindividualcells,facil-
itating a variety of analyses such as identification of novel
cell types [ 1,2]. In a typical protocol, single cells are iso-
lated in liquid droplets, and messenger RNA (mRNA) is
captured from each cell, converted to cDNA by reverse
transcriptase(RT),thenamplifiedusingpolymerasechain
reaction (PCR) [ 3–5]. Finally, fragments are sequenced,
and expression of a gene in a cell is quantified by the
number of sequencing reads that mapped to that gene
[6]. A crucial difference between scRNA-Seq and tradi-
tionalbulkRNA-SeqisthelowquantityofmRNAisolated
from individual cells, which requires a larger number of
PCR cycles to produce enough material for sequencing
(bulk RNA-Seq comingles thousands of cells per sam-
ple). For example, the popular 10x Genomics protocol
uses 14 cycles [ 5]. Thus, many of the reads counted in
scRNA-Seq are duplicates of a single mRNA molecule in
theoriginalcell[ 7].Full-lengthprotocolssuchasSMART-
Seq2 [8]a n a l y z et h e s e read counts directly, and several
*Correspondence: rafa@ds.dfci.harvard.edu
1DepartmentofBiostatistics,HarvardUniversity,Cambridge,MA,USA
7DepartmentofDataSciences,Dana-FarberCancerInstitute,Boston,MA,USA
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticlemethods have been developed to facilitate this [ 9].
However, in many experiments, it is desirable to ana-
lyze larger numbers of cells than possible with full-length
protocols, and isoform-level inference may be unneces-
sary. Under such conditions, it is advantagous to include
unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) which enable com-
putational removal of PCR duplicates [ 10,11], producing
UMIcounts .AlthoughazeroUMIcountisequivalenttoa
zeroreadcount,nonzeroreadcountsarelargerthantheir
corresponding UMI counts. In general, all scRNA-Seq
data contain large numbers of zero counts (often >90%
of the data).Here, we focus onthe analysis ofscRNA-Seq
datawithUMIcounts.
Starting from raw counts, a scRNA-Seq data analysis
typically includes normalization, feature selection, and
dimensionreductionsteps.Normalizationseekstoadjust
for differences in experimental conditions between sam-
ples (individual cells), so that these do not confound
true biological differences. For example, the efficiency
of mRNA capture and RT is variable between samples
(technicalvariation),causingdifferentcellstohavediffer-
ent total UMI counts, even if the number of molecules
in the original cells is identical. Feature selection refers
to excluding uninformative genes such as those which
©TheAuthor(s).2019 OpenAccess ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0
InternationalLicense( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedyougiveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktothe
CreativeCommonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade. TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomainDedicationwaiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ )appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,unlessotherwisestated.

==== Page 2 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page2of16
exhibit no meaningful biological variation across sam-
ples. Since scRNA-Seq experiments usually examine cells
within a single tissue, only a small fraction of genes are
expected to be informative since many genes are bio-
logically variable only across different tissues. Dimension
reduction aims to embed each cell’s high-dimensional
expression profile into a low-dimensional representation
tofacilitatevisualizationandclustering.
Whileaplethoraofmethods[ 5,12–15]havebeendevel-
oped for each of these steps, here, we describe what is
considered to be the standard pipeline [ 15]. First, raw
counts are normalized by scaling of sample-specific size
factors,followedbylogtransformation,whichattemptsto
reduce skewness. Next, feature selection involves identi-
fying the top 500–2000 genes by computing either their
coefficient of variation (highly variable genes [ 16,17]) or
average expression level (highly expressed genes) across
all cells [ 15]. Alternatively, highly dropout genes may be
retained [ 18]. Principal component analysis (PCA) [ 19]i s
the most popular dimension reduction method (see for
example tutorials for Seurat [ 17] and Cell Ranger [ 5]).
PCA compresses each cell’s 2000-dimensional expression
profileinto,say,a10-dimensionalvectorofprincipalcom-
ponent coordinates or latent factors. Prior to PCA, data
are usually centered and scaled so that each gene has
mean0andstandarddeviation1( z-scoretransformation).
Finally,aclusteringalgorithmcanbeappliedtogroupcells
with similar representations in the low-dimensional PCA
space.
Despite the appealing simplicity of this standard
pipeline, the characteristics of scRNA-Seq UMI counts
present difficulties at each stage. Many normalization
schemesderivedfrombulkRNA-Seqcannotcomputesize
factors stably in the presence of large numbers of zeros
[20]. A numerically stable and popular method is to set
the size factor for each cell as the total counts divided by
106(counts per million , CPM). Note that CPM does not
alter zeros, which dominate scRNA-Seq data. Log trans-
formation is not possible for exact zeros, so it is common
practice to add a small pseudocount such as 1 to all nor-
malizedcountspriortotakingthelog.Thechoiceofpseu-
docountisarbitraryandcanintroducesubtlebiasesinthe
transformed data [ 21]. For a statistical interpretation of
thepseudocount,seethe“ Methods”section.Similarly,the
use of highly variable genes for feature selection is some-
what arbitrary since the observed variability will depend
on the pseudocount: pseudocounts close to zero arbitrar-
ilyincreasethevarianceofgeneswithzerocounts.Finally,
PCA implicitly relies on Euclidean geometry, which may
notbeappropriateforhighlysparse,discrete,andskewed
data,evenafternormalizationsandtransformations[ 22].
Widely used methods for the analysis of scRNA-Seq
lack statistically rigorous justification based on a plau-
sible data generating a mechanism for UMI counts.Instead,itappearsmanyofthetechniqueshavebeenbor-
rowedfromthedataanalysispipelinesdevelopedforread
counts, especially those based on bulk RNA-Seq [ 23]. For
example,modelsbasedonthelognormaldistributioncan-
not account for exact zeros, motivating the development
of zero-inflated lognormal models for scRNA-Seq read
counts [24–27]. Alternatively, ZINB-WAVE uses a zero-
inflatednegativebinomialmodelfordimensionreduction
of read counts [ 28]. However, as shown below, the sam-
pling distribution of UMI counts is not zero inflated [ 29]
and differs markedly from read counts, so application of
readcountmodelstoUMIcountsneedseithertheoretical
orempiricaljustification.
WepresentaunifyingstatisticalfoundationforscRNA-
Seq with UMI counts based on the multinomial dis-
tribution. The multinomial model adequately describes
negative control data, and there is no need to model zero
inflation. We show the mechanism by which PCA on
log-normalized UMI counts can lead to distorted low-
dimensional factors and false discoveries. We identify the
source of the frequently observed and undesirable fact
that the fraction of zeros reported in each cell drives the
first principal component in most experiments [ 30]. To
remove these distortions, we propose the use of GLM-
PCA, a generalization of PCA to exponential family like-
lihoods[31].GLM-PCAoperatesonrawcounts,avoiding
the pitfalls of normalization. We also demonstrate that
applying PCA to deviance or Pearson residuals provides
a useful and fast approximation to GLM-PCA. We pro-
videaclosed-formdeviancestatisticasafeatureselection
method. We systematically compare the performance of
all combinations of methods using ground truth datasets
and assessment procedures from [ 15]. We conclude by
suggestingbestpractices.
Resultsanddiscussion
Datasets
We used 9 public UMI count datasets to benchmark our
methods (Table 1). The first dataset was a highly con-
trolledexperimentspecificallydesignedtounderstandthe
technical variability. No actual cells were used to gener-
ate this dataset. Instead, each droplet received the same
ratio of 92 synthetic spike-in RNA molecules from Exter-
nal RNA Controls Consortium (ERCC). We refer to this
datasetasthe technicalreplicatesnegativecontrol asthere
is no biological variability whatsoever, and in principle,
eachexpressionprofileshouldbethesame.
The second and third datasets contained cells from
homogeneous populations purified using fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS). We refer to these datasets
asbiological replicates negative controls .B e c a u s et h e s e
cells were all the same type, we did not expect
to observe any significant differences in unsupervised
analysis. The 10 ×Zheng monocytes data had low total

==== Page 3 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page3of16
Table1SinglecellRNA-Seqdatasetsused
Number Author Tissue Cells MTU Notes
1 Zheng[ 5] ERCC 1015 11,125 Spike-inonly;technicalnegativecontrol
2 Zheng[ 5] Monocytes 2612 782 1celltype;biologicalnegativecontrol
3T u n g [ 32] iPSCs 57 24,170 1celltype;biologicalnegativecontrol
4 Duo[ 15] PBMCs 3994 1215 4equalclustersofFACS-purifiedcells
5 Duo[ 15] PBMCs 3994 1298 8equalclustersofFACS-purifiedcells
6H a b e r [ 33] Intestine 533 3755 Authorscomputationallyidentified12types
7M u r a r o [ 34] Pancreas 2282 18,795 Authorscomputationallyidentified9types
8 Zheng[ 5] PBMCs 68,579 1292 Benchmarkingcomputationalspeed
Species:all H.sapiens exceptHaber( M.musculus ).Protocols:all10 ×exceptMuraro(CEL-Seq2)andTung(SMARTer). MTUmediantotalUMIcount. iPSCsinducedpluripotent
stemcells
UMI counts, while the SMARTer Tung data had high
counts.
T h ef o u r t ha n df i f t hd a t a s e t sw e r ec r e a t e db y[ 15].
The authors allocated FACS-purified peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 10 ×data [5] equally
into four (Zheng 4eq dataset) and eight (Zheng 8eq
dataset) clusters, respectively. In these positive control
datasets,theclusteridentityofallcellswasassignedinde-
pendentlyofgeneexpression(usingFACS),sotheyserved
asthegroundtruthlabels.
Thesixthandseventhdatasetscontainedawidervariety
of cell types. However, the cluster identities were deter-
mined computationally by the original authors’ unsuper-
vised analyses and could not serve as a ground truth. The
10×Haber intestinal dataset had low total UMI counts,
while the CEL-Seq2 Muraro pancreas dataset had high
counts.
The final Zheng dataset consisted of a larger number
of unsorted PBMCs and was used to compare computa-
tional speed of different dimension reduction algorithms.
WerefertoitasthePBMC68Kdataset.
UMIcountdistributiondiffersfromreads
To illustrate the marked difference between UMI count
distributions and read count distributions, we created
histograms from individual genes and spike-ins of the
negative control data. Here, the UMI counts are the com-
putationally de-duplicated versions of the read counts;
both measurements are from the same experiment,
so no differences are due to technical or biological
variation. The results suggest that while read counts
appear zero-inflated and multimodal, UMI counts fol-
low a discrete distribution with no zero inflation
(Additional file 1: Figure S1). The apparent zero inflation
inreadcountsisaresultofPCRduplicates.
MultinomialsamplingdistributionforUMIcounts
Consider a single cell icontaining titotal mRNA tran-
scripts. Let nibe the total number of UMIs for the samecell. When the cell is processed by a scRNA-Seq proto-
col, it is lysed, then some fraction of the transcripts are
captured by beads within the droplets. A series of com-
plexbiochemicalreactionsoccur,includingattachmentof
barcodes and UMIs, and reverse transcription of the cap-
tured mRNA to a cDNA molecule. Finally, the cDNA is
sequenced, and PCR duplicates are removed to generate
the UMI counts [ 5]. In each of these stages, some frac-
tion of the molecules from the previous stage are lost
[5,7,32]. In particular, reverse transcriptase is an ineffi-
cientanderror-proneenzyme[ 35].Therefore,thenumber
of UMI counts representing the cell is much less than
the number of transcripts in the original cell ( ni/lessmuchti).
Specifically, nitypically ranges from 1000 −10,000 while
tiis estimated to be approximately 200,000 for a typical
mammalian cell [ 36]. Furthermore, which molecules are
selected and successfully become UMIs is a random pro-
cess. Let xijb et h et r u en u m b e ro fm R N At r a n s c r i p t so f
genejin celli,a n dyijbe the UMI count for the same
gene and cell. We define the relative abundance πijasthe
true number of mRNA transcripts represented by gene j
in cellidivided by the total number of mRNA transcripts
in celli.R e l a t i v ea b u n d a n c ei sg i v e nb y πij=xij/tiwhere
total transcripts ti=/summationtext
jxij.S i n c eni/lessmuchti,t h e r ei sa
“competitiontobecounted”[ 37];geneswithlargerelative
abundance πijin the original cell are more likely to have
nonzero UMI counts, but genes with small relative abun-
dances may be observed with UMI counts of exact zeros.
The UMI counts yijare a multinomial sample of the true
biological counts xij, containing only relative information
aboutexpressionpatternsinthecell[ 37,38].
The multinomial distribution can be approximated
by independent Poisson distributions and overdispersed
(Dirichlet) multinomials by independent negative bino-
mial distributions. These approximations are useful for
computational tractability. Details are provided in the
“Methods”section.
The multinomial model makes two predictions which
we verified using negative control data. First, the fraction

==== Page 4 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page4of16
of zeros in a sample (cell or droplet) is inversely related
to the total number of UMIs in that sample. Second,
the probability of an endogenous gene or ERCC spike-in
having zero counts is a decreasing function of its mean
expression(equationsprovidedinthe“ Methods”section).
Both of these predictions were validated by the negative
control data (Fig. 1). In particular, the empirical probabil-
ityofagenebeingzeroacrossdropletswaswellcalibrated
to the theoretical prediction based on the multinomial
model. This also demonstrates that UMI counts are not
zeroinflated,consistentwith[ 29].
To further validate the multinomial model, we assessed
goodness-of-fit of seven possible null distributions to
both the Tung and Zheng monocytes negative control
datasets (Additional file 1: Figure S2). When applied to
UMIcounts,themultinomial,Dirichlet-multinomial,and
Poisson (as approximation to multinomial) distributionsfit best. When applied to read counts, the zero-inflated
lognormalwasthebestfittingdistributionfollowedbythe
Dirichlet-multinomial.
Theseresultsareconsistentwith[ 39],whichalsofound
thattherelationshipbetweenaverageexpressionandzero
probability follows the theoretical curve predicted by a
Poissonmodelusingnegativecontroldataprocessedwith
Indrop [4]a n dD r o p s e q[ 3] protocols. These are droplet
protocols with typically low counts. It has been argued
thatthePoissonmodelisinsufficienttodescribethesam-
pling distribution of genes with high counts and the neg-
ative binomial model is more appropriate [ 11]. The Tung
datasetcontainedhighcounts,andweneverthelessfound
the Poisson gave a better fit than the negative binomial.
However, the difference was not dramatic, so our results
do not preclude the negative binomial as a reasonable
sampling distribution for UMI counts. Taken together,
Fig.1Multinomialmodeladequatelycharacterizessamplingdistributionsoftechnicalandbiologicalreplicatesnegativecontroldata. aFractionof
zerosisplottedagainstthetotalnumberofUMIineachdropletforthetechnicalreplicates. bAsabutforcellsinthebiologicalreplicates
(monocytes). cAfterdown-samplingreplicatesto10,000UMIsperdroplettoremovevariabilityduetothedifferencesinsequencingdepth,the
fractionofzerosiscomputedforeachgeneandplottedagainstthelogofexpressionacrossallsamplesforthetechnicalreplicatesdata.Thesolid
curveistheoreticalprobabilityofobservingazeroasafunctionoftheexpectedcountsderivedfromthemultinomialmodel(blue)anditsPoisson
approximation(green). dAscbutforthebiologicalreplicates(monocytes)datasetandafterdown-samplingto575UMIspercell.Here,wealsoadd
thetheoreticalprobabilityderivedfromanegativebinomialmodel(red)

==== Page 5 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page5of16
theseresultssuggestourdata-generatingmechanismisan
accuratemodeloftechnicalnoiseinrealdata.
NormalizationandlogtransformationdistortsUMIdata
Standard scRNA-Seq analysis involves normalizing raw
counts using size factors, applying a log transformation
with a pseudocount, and then centering and scaling each
gene before dimension reduction. The most popular nor-
malization is counts per million (CPM). The CPM are
definedas (yij/ni)×106(i.e.,thesizefactoris ni/106).This
isequivalenttothemaximumlikelihoodestimator(MLE)
forrelativeabundance ˆπijmultipliedby106.Thelog-CPM
are then log2(c+ˆπij106)=log2(˜πij)+C,w h e r e ˜πijis
a maximum a posteriori estimator (MAP) for πij(math-
ematical justification and interpretation of this approach
providedinthe“ Methods”section).Theadditiveconstant
Cis irrelevant if data are centered for each gene after log
transformation, as is common practice. Thus, normaliza-
tion of raw counts is equivalent to using MLEs or MAP
estimatorsoftherelativeabundances.
Log transformation of MLEs is not possible for UMI
counts due to exact zeros, while log transformation of
MAP estimators of πijsystematically distorts the differ-
ences between zero and nonzero UMI counts, depending
on the arbitrary pseudocount c(derivations provided in
the “Methods” section). To illustrate this phenomenon,
we examined the distribution of an illustrative gene
before and after the log transform with varying normal-
izations using the biological replicates negative control
data (Fig. 2). Consistent with our theoretical predictions,
this artificially caused the distribution to appear zero
inflated and exaggerated differences between cells based
onwhetherthecountwaszeroornonzero.
Focusing on the entire negative control datasets, we
applied PCA to log-CPM values. We observed a strong
correlation ( r=0.8 for technical and r=0.98 for
monocytes biological replicates) between the first princi-
pal component (PC) and the fraction of zeros, consistentwith [30]. Application of PCA to CPM values without log
transform reduced this correlation to r=0.1 for tech-
nical and r=0.7 for monocytes biological replicates.
Additionally, the first PC of log-CPM correlated with the
logoftotalUMI,whichisconsistentwiththemultinomial
model(Fig. 3).Notethatindatasetswithstrongbiological
variability, the nuisance variation from zero fraction and
total counts could appear in secondary PCs rather than
thefirstPC,butitwouldstillconfounddownstreamanal-
yses.Basedontheseresults, the logtransformation is not
necessary and in fact detrimental for the analysis of UMI
counts.Thebenefitsofavoidingnormalizationbyinstead
directly modeling raw counts have been demonstrated in
thecontextofdifferentialexpression[ 40].Wherenormal-
izationisunavoidable,weproposetheuseofapproximate
multinomial deviance residuals (defined in the “ Residuals
andz-scores”section)insteadoflog-transformedCPM.
Zeroinflationisanartifactoflognormalization
To see how normalization and log transformation intro-
ducetheappearanceofzeroinflation,considerthefollow-
ingexample.Let yijbetheobservedUMIcountsfollowing
a multinomial distribution with size nifor each cell and
relative abundance πjforeachgene,constantacrosscells.
Focusing on a single gene j,yijfollows a binomial distri-
bution with parameters niandpj. Assume πj=10−4and
thenirange from 1000 −3000, which is consistent with
the biological replicates negative control data (Fig. 1and
Additional file 1: Figure S1). Under this assumption, we
expect to see about 74–90% zeros, 22–30% ones, and less
than4%valuesaboveone.However,noticethatafternor-
malization to CPM and log transformation, all the zeros
remain log2 (1+0)=0, yet the ones turn into values
ranging from log2(1+1/3000×106)=log2(334)≈8.4
to log2(1001)≈10. The few values that are 2 will have
values ranging from log2(668)≈9.4 to log2(2001)≈11.
The large, artificial gap between zero and nonzero val-
ues makes the log-normalized data appear zero-inflated
Fig.2Exampleofhowcurrentapproachestonormalizationandtransformationartificiallydistortdifferencesbetweenzeroandnonzerocounts.
aUMIcountdistributionforgeneENSG00000114391inthemonocytesbiologicalreplicatesnegativecontroldataset. bCountspermillion(CPM)
distributionfortheexactsamecountdata. cDistributionof log2(1+CPM)valuesfortheexactsamecountdata

==== Page 6 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page6of16
Fig.3Currentapproachestonormalizationandtransformationinducevariabilityinthefractionofzerosacrosscellstobecomethelargestsourceof
variabilitywhichinturnbiasesclusteringalgorithmstoproducefalse-positiveresultsbasedondistortedlatentfactors. aFirstprincipalcomponent
(PC)fromthetechnicalreplicatesdatasetplottedagainstfractionofzerosforeachcell.AredtobluecolorscalerepresentstotalUMIspercell. bAsa
butforthemonocytesbiologicalreplicatesdata. cUsingthetechnicalreplicates,weappliedt-distributedstochasticneighborembedding(tSNE)
withperplexity30tothetop50PCscomputedfromlog-CPM.Thefirst2tSNEdimensionsareshownwithabluetoredcolorscalerepresentingthe
fractionofzeros. dAscbutforthebiologicalreplicatesdata.Here,wedonotexpecttofinddifferences,yetweseedistortedlatentfactorsbeing
drivenbythetotalUMIs.PCAwasappliedto5000randomgenes
(Fig.2). The variability in CPM values across cells is
almostcompletelydrivenbythevariabilityin ni.Indeed,it
shows up as the primary source of variation in PCA plots
(Fig.3).
GeneralizedPCAfordimensionreductionofsparsecounts
WhilePCAisapopulardimensionreductionmethod,itis
implicitlybasedonEuclideandistance,whichcorresponds
to maximizing a Gaussian likelihood. Since UMI counts
are not normally distributed, even when normalized and
logtransformed,thisdistancemetricisinappropriate[ 41],
causing PCA to produce distorted latent factors (Fig. 3).
WeproposetheuseofPCAforgeneralizedlinearmodels
(GLMs)[ 31]orGLM-PCAasamoreappropriatealterna-
tive. The GLM-PCA framework allows for a wide varietyof likelihoods suitable for data types such as counts and
binary values. While the multinomial likelihood is ideal
for modeling technical variability in scRNA-Seq UMI
counts (Fig. 1), in many cases, there may be excess bio-
logical variability present as well. For example, if we wish
tocapturevariabilityduetoclustersofdifferentcelltypes
in a dimension reduction, we may wish to exclude bio-
logical variability due to cell cycle. Biological variability
not accounted for by the sampling distribution may be
accomodatedbyusingaDirichlet-multinomiallikelihood,
which is overdispersed relative to the multinomial. In
practice,boththemultinomialandDirichlet-multinomial
arecomputationallyintractableandmaybeapproximated
by the Poisson and negative binomial likelihoods, respec-
tively (detailed derivations provided in the “ Methods”

==== Page 7 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page7of16
section). We implemented both negative binomial and
PoissonGLM-PCA,butwefocusedprimarilyonthelatter
inourassessmentsforsimplicityofexposition.Intuitively,
using Poisson instead of negative binomial implies, we
assume the biological variability is captured by the fac-
tormodel andtheunwanted biologicalvariabilityissmall
relative to the sampling variability. Our implementation
also allows the user to adjust for gene-specific or cell-
specific covariates (such as batch labels) as part of the
overallmodel.
We ran Poisson GLM-PCA on the technical and bio-
logical (monocytes) replicates negative control datasets
and found it removed the spurious correlation between
the first dimension and the total UMIs and fraction of
zeros (Fig. 4). To examine GLM-PCA as a visualization
tool, we ran Poisson and negative binomial GLM-PCAalong with competing methods on the 2 ground truth
datasets (Additional file 1: Figure S3). For the Zheng 4eq
dataset, we directly reduced to 2 dimensions. For the
Zheng 8eq dataset, we reduced to 15 dimensions then
applied UMAP [ 42]. While all methods effectively sep-
arated T cells from other PBMCs, GLM-PCA methods
alsoseparatedmemoryandnaivecytotoxiccellsfromthe
other subtypes of T cells. This separation was not visible
withPCAonlog-CPM.Computationalspeedisdiscussed
in the “Computational efficiency of multinomial models ”
section.
DevianceresidualsprovidefastapproximationtoGLM-PCA
One disadvantage of GLM-PCA is it depends on an iter-
ative algorithm to obtain estimates for the latent factors
and is at least ten times slower than PCA. We therefore
Fig.4GLM-PCAdimensionreductionisnotaffectedbyunwantedfractionofzerosvariabilityandavoidsfalse-positiveresults. aFirstGLM-PCA
dimension(analogoustothefirstprincipalcomponent)plottedagainstthefractionofzerosforthetechnicalreplicateswithcolorsrepresenting the
totalUMIs. bAsabutusingmonocytesbiologicalreplicates. cUsingthetechnicalreplicates,weappliedt-distributedstochasticneighbor
embedding(tSNE)withperplexity30tothetop50GLM-PCAdimensions.Thefirst2tSNEdimensionsareshownwithabluetoredcolorscale
representingthefractionofzeros. dAscbutforthebiologicalreplicatesdata.GLM-PCAusingthePoissonapproximationtothemultinomialwas
appliedtothesame5000randomgenesasinFig. 3

==== Page 8 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page8of16
propose a fast approximation to GLM-PCA. When using
PCA a common first step is to center and scale the data
for each gene as z-scores. This is equivalent to the fol-
lowing procedure. First, specify a null model of constant
gene expression across cells, assuming a normal distri-
bution. Next, find the MLEs of its parameters for each
gene (the mean and variance). Finally, compute the resid-
uals of the model as the z-scores (derivation provided in
the “Methods” section). The fact that scRNA-Seq data
are skewed, discrete, and possessing many zeros suggests
the normality assumption may be inappropriate. Further,
usingz-scores does not account for variability in total
UMIsacrosscells.Instead,weproposetoreplacethenor-
mal null model with a multinomial null model as a better
match to the data-generating mechanism. The analogs to
z-scores under this model are called deviance and Pear-
son residuals. Mathematical formulae are presented in
the “Methods” section. The use of multinomial residu-
als enables a fast transformation similar to z-scores that
avoidsdifficultiesofnormalizationandlogtransformation
bydirectlymodelingcounts.Additionally,thisframework
allows straightforward adjustment for covariates such as
cellcyclesignaturesorbatchlabels.Inanillustrativesim-
ulation (details in the “ Residuals and z-scores”s e c t i o n ) ,
residualapproximationstoGLM-PCAlostaccuracyinthe
presence of strong batch effects, but still outperformed
thetraditionalPCA(Additionalfile 1:F igureS4).S ystem-
aticcomparisonsongroundtruthdataareprovidedinthe
“Multinomial models improve unsupervised clustering ”
section.
Computationalefficiencyofmultinomialmodels
We measured time to convergence for reduction to two
latent dimensions of GLM-PCA, ZINB-WAVE, PCA on
log-CPM, PCA on deviance residuals, and PCA on Pear-
son residuals. Using the top 600 informative genes, we
subsampled the PBMC 68K dataset to 680, 6800, and
68,000 cells. All methods scaled approximately linearly
with increasing the numbers of cells, but GLM-PCA was
23–63 times faster than ZINB-WAVE across sample sizes
(Additionalfile 1:FigureS5).Specifically,GLM-PCApro-
cessed 68,000 cells in less than 7 min. The deviance and
Pearson residuals methods exhibited speeds compara-
ble to PCA: 9–26 times faster than GLM-PCA. We also
timeddimensionreductionofthe8eqdataset(3994cells)
from 1500 informative genes to 10 latent dimensions.
PCA (with either log-CPM, deviance, or Pearson residu-
als) took 7 s, GLM-PCA took 4.7 min, and ZINB-WAVE
took86.6min.
Featureselectionusingdeviance
Feature selection, or identification of informative genes,
maybeaccomplishedbyrankinggenesusingthe deviance,
which quantifies how well each gene fits a null modelof constant expression across cells. Unlike the competing
highlyvariableorhighlyexpressedgenesmethods,which
are sensitive to normalization, ranking genes by deviance
operates on raw UMI counts. An approximate multino-
mial deviance statistic can be computed in closed form
(formulaprovidedinthe“ Methods”section).
We compared gene ranks for all three feature selection
methods (deviance, highly expressed, and highly variable
genes) on the 8eq dataset (Table 1). We found a strong
concordance between highly deviant genes and highly
expressedgenes(Spearman’srankcorrelation r=0.9987),
while highly variable genes correlated weakly with both
highexpression( r=0.3835)anddeviance( r=0.3738).
Choosing informative genes by high expression alone
would be ineffective if a gene had high but constant
expression across cells. To ensure the deviance criterion
did not identify such genes, we created a simulation with
three types of genes: lowly expressed, high but constantly
expressed, and high and variably expressed. Deviance
preferentially selected high and variably expressed genes
while filtering by highly expressed genes identified the
constantly expressed genes before the variably expressed
(Additional file 1: Figure S6, Table S1). Furthermore, an
examination of the top 1000 genes by each criteria on
theMurarodatasetshowedthatdeviancedidnotidentify
the same set of genes as highly expressed genes (Addi-
tional file 1: Figure S7, Table S2). Empirically, deviance
seems to select genes that are both highly expressed and
highlyvariable,whichprovidesarigorousjustificationfor
acommonpractice.
Multinomialmodelsimproveunsupervisedclustering
DimensionreductionwithGLM-PCAoritsfastmultino-
mialresidualsapproximationimprovedclusteringperfor-
manceovercompetingmethods(Fig. 5a,Additionalfile 1:
Figure S8a). Feature selection by multinomial deviance
wassuperiortohighlyvariablegenes(Fig. 5b).
Using the two ground truth datasets described under
the “Datasets” section, we systematically compared the
clustering performance of all combinations of previously
described methods for normalization, feature selection,
and dimension reduction. In addition, we compared
against ZINB-WAVE since it also avoids requiring the
user to pre-process and normalize the UMI count data
(e.g., log transformation of CPM) and accounts for vary-
ing total UMIs across cells [ 28]. After obtaining latent
factors, we used Seurat’s Louvain implementation and k-
meanstoinferclusters,andcomparedthesetotheknown
cell identities using adjusted Rand index (ARI, [ 43]). This
quantified accuracy. We assessedcluster separationusing
the silhouette coefficient. We varied the number of latent
dimensions and number of clusters to assess robust-
ness. Where possible, we used the same combinations
of hyperparameters as [ 15] to facilitate comparisons to

==== Page 9 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page9of16
Fig.5DimensionreductionwithGLM-PCAandfeatureselectionusingdevianceimprovesSeuratclusteringperformance.Eachcolumnrepresentsa
differentgroundtruthdatasetfrom[ 15].aComparisonofdimensionreductionmethodsbasedonthetop1500informativegenesidentifiedby
approximatemultinomialdeviance.ThePoissonapproximationtothemultinomialwasusedforGLM-PCA.Dev.resid.PCA,PCAonapproximate
multinomialdevianceresiduals. bComparisonoffeatureselectionmethods.Thetop1500genesidentifiedbydevianceandhighlyvariablegenes
werepassedto2differentdimensionreductionmethods:GLM-PCAandPCAonlog-transformedCPM.Onlytheresultswiththenumberofclusters
within25%ofthetruenumberarepresented
their extensive benchmarking (details are provided in the
“Methods”section).
We compared the Seurat clustering performance of
GLM-PCA (with Poisson approximation to multinomial)
torunningPCAondevianceresiduals,whichadheremore
closely to the normal distribution than log-CPM. We
found both of these approximate multinomial methods
gave similar results on the 4eq dataset and outperformed
PCA on log-CPM z-scores. However, GLM-PCA outper-
formed the residuals method on the 8eq dataset. Also,
performance on ZINB-WAVE factors degraded when
the number of latent dimensions increased from 10 to30, whereas GLM-PCA and its fast approximation with
deviance residuals were robust to this change (Fig. 5a).
GLM-PCA and its residual approximations produced
better cluster separation than PCA or ZINB-WAVE,
even in scenarios where all methods had similar accu-
racy (Additional file 1: Figure S8a). The performance of
Pearsonresidualswassimilartothatofdevianceresiduals
(Additionalfile 1:FigureS9,S10).
Focusing on feature selection methods, deviance
had higher accuracy than highly variable genes
across both datasets and across dimension reduction
methods (Fig. 5b). Filtering by highly expressed genes

==== Page 10 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page10of16
led to similar clustering performance as deviance
(Additional file 1: Figure S9), because both criteria
identified strongly overlapping gene lists for these data.
The combination of feature selection with deviance and
dimension reduction with GLM-PCA also improved
clustering performance when k-means was used in place
of Seurat (Additional file 1: Figure S11). A complete table
of results is publicly available (see the “Availability of data
andmaterials”section).
Finally, we examined the clustering performance of
competing dimension reduction methods on two pub-
lic datasets with more complex subtypes (Table 1). The
10×Haber dataset [ 33]w a sa n n o t a t e dw i t h1 2t y p e s
of enteroendocrine cells from the intestine. The CEL-
Seq2 Muraro dataset [ 34] was annotated with 9 types
of pancreatic cells. Since these cluster labels were com-
putationally derived, they did not constitute a ground
truth comparison. Nevertheless, GLM-PCA had the clos-
est concordance with the original authors’ annotation in
bothdatasets(Additionalfile 1:T ablesS3,S4).
Conclusions
We have outlined a statistical framework for analysis of
scRNA-Seq data with UMI counts based on a multino-
mial model, providing effective and simple to compute
methods for feature selection and dimension reduction.
WefoundthatUMIcountdistributionsdifferdramatically
from read counts, are well-described by a multinomial
distribution, and are not zero inflated. Log transforma-
tion of normalized UMI counts is detrimental, because
it artificially exaggerates the differences between zeros
and all other values. For feature selection, or identifica-
tion of informative genes, deviance is a more effective
criterionthanhighlyvariablegenes.Dimensionreduction
via GLM-PCA, or its fast approximation using residu-
als from a multinomial model, leads to better clustering
performancethanPCAon z-scoresoflog-CPM.
Although our methods were inspired by scRNA-Seq
UMI counts, they may be useful for a wider array of
datasources.Anyhighdimensional,sparsedatasetwhere
samples contain only relative information in the form of
counts may conceivably be modeled by the multinomial
distribution.Undersuchscenarios,ourmethodsarelikely
tobemoreeffectivethanapplyinglogtransformationsand
standardPCA.Apossibleexampleismicrobiomedata.
We have not addressed major topics in the scRNA-Seq
literature such as pseudotime inference [ 44], differential
expression[ 45],andspatialanalysis[ 46].However,thesta-
tistical ideas outlined here can also be used to improve
methodsinthesemorespecializedtypesofanalyses.
Our results have focused on (generalized) linear mod-
els for simplicity of exposition. Recently, several promis-
ing nonlinear dimension reductions for scRNA-Seq have
beenproposed.Thevariationalautoencoder(VAE,atypeof neural network) method scVI [ 47] utilizes a negative
binomial likelihood in the decoder, while the encoder
reliesonlog-normalizedinputdatafornumericalstability.
The Gaussian process method tGPLVM [ 48]m o d e l sl o g -
transformed counts. In both cases, we suggest replac-
ing log-transformed values with deviance residuals to
improve performance. Nonlinear dimension reduction
methods may also depend on feature selection to reduce
memory consumption and speed computation; here, our
deviancemethodmaybeutilizedasanalternativetohigh
variabilityforscreeninginformativegenes.
Methods
MultinomialmodelforscRNA-Seq
LetyijbetheobservedUMIcountsforcellordroplet iand
geneorspike-in j.Letni=/summationtext
jyijbethetotalUMIsinthe
sample,and πijbetheunknowntruerelativeabundanceof
genejincelli.Therandomvector /vectoryi=(yi1,...,yiJ)/latticetopwith
constraint/summationtext
jyij=nifollows a multinomial distribution
withdensitfunction:
f(/vectoryi)=/parenleftbiggni
yi1,...,yiJ/parenrightbigg/productdisplay
jπyij
ij
F o c u s i n go nas i n g l eg e n e ja tat i m e ,t h em a r g i n a ld i s -
tribution of yijis binomial with parameters niandπij.
The marginal mean is E[ yij]=niπij=μij, the marginal
variance is var[ yij]=niπij(1−πij)=μij−1
niμ2
ij,a n d
the marginal probability of a zero count is (1−πij)ni=/parenleftBig
1−μij
ni/parenrightBigni.Thecorrelationbetweentwogenes j,kis:
cor[yij,yik]=−√πijπik/radicalbig(1−πij)(1−πik)
The correlation is induced by the sum to niconstraint.
As an extreme example, if there are only two genes ( J=
2), increasing the count of the first gene automatically
reducesthecountofthesecondgenesincetheymustadd
up toniunder multinomial sampling. This means when
J=2,thereisaperfectanti-correlationbetweenthegene
counts which has nothing to do with biology. More gen-
erally, when either Jorniis small, gene counts will be
negativelycorrelatedindependentofbiologicalgene-gene
correlations,anditisnotpossibletoanalyzethedataona
gene-by-gene basis (for example, by ranking and filtering
genes for feature selection). Rather, comparisons are only
possiblebetweenpairwiseratiosofgeneexpressionvalues
[49]. Yet, this type of analysis is difficult to interpret and
computationallyexpensiveforlargenumbersofgenes(i.e.,
in high dimensions). Fortunately, under certain assump-
tions, more tractable approximations may be substituted
forthetruemultinomialdistribution.
First,notethatifcorrelationisignored,themultinomial
may be approximated by J-independent binomial distri-
butions.Intuitively,thisapproximationwillbereasonable

==== Page 11 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page11of16
if allπijare very small, which is likely to be satisfied for
scRNA-Seq if the number of genes Jis large, and no sin-
gle gene constitutes the majority of mRNAs in the cell.
Ifniis large and πijis small, each binomial distribu-
tioncanbefurtherapproximatedbyaPoissonwithmean
niπij. Alternatively, the multinomial can be constructed
by drawing J-independent Poisson random variables and
conditioningontheirsum.If Jandniarelarge,thediffer-
ence between the conditional, multinomial distribution,
and the independent Poissons becomes negligible. Since
in practice niis large, the Poisson approximation to the
multinomialmaybereasonable[ 50–53].
The multinomial model does not account for biologi-
calvariability.As aresult,anoverdispersedversionofthe
multinomialmodelmaybenecessary.Thiscanbeaccom-
modated with the Dirichlet-multinomial distribution. Let
/vectoryibe distributed as a multinomial conditional on the rel-
ative abundance parameter vector /vectorπi=(πi1,...,πiJ)/latticetop.
If/vectorπiis itself a random variable with symmetric Dirich-
let distribution having shape parameter α, the marginal
distribution of /vectoryiis Dirichlet-multinomial. This distribu-
tion can itself be approximated by independent negative
binomials. First, note that a symmetric Dirichlet ran-
domvectorcanbeconstructedbydrawing J-independent
gamma variates with shape parameter αand dividing by
their sum. Suppose (as above) we approximate the condi-
tional multinomial distribution of /vectoryisuch that yijfollows
an approximate Poisson distribution with mean niπij.L e t
λijbe a collection of non-negative random variables such
thatπij=λij/summationtext
jλij. We require that /vectorπifollows a symmet-
ric Dirichlet, which is accomplished by having λijfollow
independentgammadistributionswithshape αandmean
ni/J.T h i si m p l i e s/summationtext
jλijfollows a gamma with shape Jα
and mean ni.A sJ→∞, this distribution converges to
ap o i n tm a s sa t ni,s of o rl a r g e J(satisfied by scRNA-
Seq),/summationtext
jλij≈ni.T h i si m p l i e st h a t yijapproximately
follows a conditional Poisson distribution with mean λij,
where λijis itself a gamma random variable with mean
ni/Jand shape α.I fw et h e ni n t e g r a t eo u t λijwe obtain
the marginal distribution of yijas negative binomial with
shape αand mean ni/J.Hence anegativebinomialmodel
forcountdatamayberegardedasanapproximationtoan
overdispersedDirichlet-multinomialmodel.
Parameter estimation with multinomial models (and
their binomial or Poisson approximations) is straight-
forward. First, suppose we observe replicate samples /vectoryi,
i=1,...,Ifrom the same underlying population of
molecules, where the relative abundance of gene jisπj.
This is a null model because it assumes each gene has a
constantexpectedexpressionlevel,andthereisnobiolog-
ical variation across samples. Regardless of whether one
assumes a multinomial, binomial, or Poisson model, the
maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of πjisˆπj=/summationtext
iyij/summationtext
iniwhereniis the total count of sample i. In the more real-
isticcasethatrelativeabundances πijofgenesvaryacross
samples,theMLEis ˆπij=yij
ni.
An alternative to the MLE is the maximum a posteri-
ori(MAP)estimator.SupposeasymmetricDirichletprior
with concentration parameter αiis combined with the
multinomial likelihood for cell i. The MAP estimator for
πijisgivenby:
˜πij=αi+yij
Jαi+ni=wi1
J+(1−wi)ˆπij
wherewi=Jαi/(Jαi+ni), showing that the MAP is
a weighted average of the prior mean that all genes are
equally expressed (1 /J)a n dt h eM L E( ˆπij). Compared to
the MLE, the MAP biases the estimate toward the prior
whereallgeneshavethesameexpression.Largervaluesof
αiintroduce more bias, while αi→0 leads to the MLE.
Ifαi>0, the smallest possible value of ˜πijisαi/(Jαi+
ni)rather than zero for the MLE. When there are many
zeros in the data, MAP can stabilize relative abundance
estimatesatthecostofintroducingbias.
Mathematicsofdistortionfromlog-normalizingUMIs
Suppose the true counts in cell iare given by xijfor genes
j=1,...,J. Some of these may be zero, if a gene is not
turned on in the cell. Knowing xijis equivalent to know-
ing the total number of transcripts ti=/summationtext
jxijand the
relative proportionsofeachgene πij,sinc exij=tiπij.T he
total number of UMI counts ni=/summationtext
jyijdoes not esti-
mateti. However, under multinomial sampling, the UMI
relative abundances ˆπij=yij
niare MLEs for the true pro-
portions πij. Note that it is possible that ˆπij=0e v e n
though πij>0. Because/summationtext
jˆπij=1r e g a r d l e s so f ni,t h e
use of multinomial MLEs is equivalent to the widespread
practice of normalizing each cell by the total counts.
Furthermore, the use of size factors si=ni/mleads to
ˆπij×m(ifm=106,thisisCPM).
Traditional bulk RNA-Seq experiments measured gene
expression in read counts of many cells per sample rather
than UMI counts of single cells. Gene counts from bulk
RNA-Seq could thus range over several orders of mag-
nitude. To facilitate comparison of these large numbers,
many bulk RNA-Seq methods have relied on a logarithm
transformation. This enables interpretation of differences
in normalized counts as fold changes on a relative scale.
Also,forcountdata,thevarianceofeachgeneisafunction
of its mean, and log transformation can help to prevent
highlyexpressedoutliergenesfromoverwhelmingdown-
stream analyses. Prior to the use of UMIs, scRNA-Seq
experimentsalsoproducedreadcountswithwideranging
values,andalogtransformwasagainemployed.However,
with single cell data, more than 90% of the genes might
be observed as exact zeros, and log (0)=− ∞which is
not useful for data analysis. UMI data also contain large

==== Page 12 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page12of16
numbers of zeros, but do not contain very large counts
since PCR duplicates have been removed. Nevertheless,
log transformation has been commonly used with UMI
dataaswell.
The current standard is to transform the UMI counts
as log2(c+ˆπij×m)wherecis a pseudocount to avoid
taking the log of zero, and typically c=1. As before, m
is some constant such as 106for CPM (see also [ 54]f o r
analternative).Finally,thedataarecenteredandscaledso
that the mean of each gene across cells is 0, and the stan-
darddeviationis1.Thisstandardizationofthedatacauses
any subsequent computation of distances or dimension
reduction to be invariant to constant additive or multi-
plicativescaling.Forexample,underManhattandistance,
d(x+c,y+c)=|x+c−(y+c)|=|x−y|=d(x,y).I n
particular, using size factors such as CPM instead of rel-
ative abundances leads to a rescaling of the pseudocount,
and use of any pseudocountis equivalent to replacing the
MLE with the MAP estimator. Let k=c/mandαi=
kni. Then, the weight term in the MAP formula becomes
wi=Jk/(1+Jk)=wwhich is constant across all cells i.
Furthermore Jk=w/(1−w),showingthat:
log2(c+ˆπij×m)=log2(k+ˆπij)+log2(m)
=log2/parenleftbiggw
1−w1
J+ˆπij/parenrightbigg
+log2(m)
=log2/parenleftbigg
w1
J+(1−w)ˆπij/parenrightbigg
−log2(1−w)+log2(m)
=log2(˜πij)+C
WhereCis a global constant that does not vary across
cellsorgenes.Forillustration,if c=1andm=106,thisis
equivalenttoassumingapriorwhereallgenesareequally
expressedandforcell i,aweightof w=J/(106+J)isgiven
tothepriorrelativetotheMLE.Sincethenumberofgenes
Jisontheorderof104,wehave w≈.01.Thepriorsample
size for cell iisJαi=10−6Jni≈.01×niwhereniis the
datasamplesize.Thestandardtransformationistherefore
equivalenttousingaweakpriortoobtainaMAPestimate
of the relative abundances, then log transforming before
dimensionreduction.
InmostscRNA-Seqdatasets,thetotalnumberofUMIs
nifor some cells may be significantly less than the con-
stantm. For these cells, the size factors si=ni/mare less
than 1. Therefore, after normalization (dividing by size
factor), the counts are scaled up to match the target size
ofm. Due to the discreteness of counts, this introduces a
bias after log transformation, if the pseudocount is small
(or equivalently, if mis large). For example, let c=1a n d
m=106(CPM). If ni=104for a particular cell, we have
si=.01. A raw count of yij=1 for this cell is normalized
to 1/.01=100 and transformed to log2(1+100)=6.7.
For this cell, on the log scale, there cannot be any values
between 0 and 6.7 because fractional UMI counts cannot
be observed and log2(1+0)=0. Small pseudocountsand small size factors combined with log transform arbi-
trarilyexaggeratethedifferencebetweenazerocountand
a small nonzero count. As previously shown, this sce-
nario is equivalent to using MAP estimation of πijwith
a weak prior. To combat this distortion, one may attempt
to strengthen the prior to regularize ˜πijestimation at the
cost of additional bias, as advocated by [ 21]. An extreme
case occurs when c=1a n dm=1. Here, the prior sam-
ple size is Jni, so almost all the weight is on the prior. The
transformisthenlog2(1+ˆπij).Butthisfunctionisapprox-
imately linear on the domain 0 ≤ˆπij≤1. After centering
andscaling,alineartransformationisvacuous.
To summarize, log transformation with a weak prior
(small size factor, such as CPM) introduces strong arti-
ficial distortion between zeros and nonzeros, while log
tranformation with a strong prior (large size factor) is
roughlyequivalenttonotlogtransformingthedata.
GeneralizedPCA
PCA minimizes the mean squared error (MSE) between
thedataandalow-rankrepresentation,orembedding.Let
yijbetherawcountsand zijbe the normalized and trans-
formedversionof yijsuchascenteredandscaledlog-CPM
(z-scores).ThePCAobjectivefunctionis:
min
u,v/summationdisplay
i,j(zij−/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj)2
where /vectorui,/vectorvj∈RLfori=1,...,I,j=1,...,J.T h e
/vectoruiare called factors or principal components, and the /vectorvj
are called loadings. The number of latent dimensions L
controls the complexity of the model. Minimization of
the MSE is equivalent to minimizing the Euclidean dis-
tance metric between the embedding and the data. It is
alsoequivalenttomaximizingthelikelihoodofaGaussian
model:
zij∼N/parenleftbig
/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj,σ2/parenrightbig
If we replace the Gaussian model with a Poisson, which
approximates the multinomial, we can directly model the
UMIcountsas:
yij∼Poi/parenleftbig
niexp{/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj}/parenrightbig
or alternatively, in the case of overdispersion, we may
approximate the Dirichlet-multinomial using a negative
binomiallikelihood:
yij∼NB/parenleftbig
niexp{/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj};φj/parenrightbig
We define the linear predictor asηij=logni+/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj.
It is clear that the mean μij=eη
ijappears in both the
Poissonandnegativebinomialmodelstatements,showing
that the latent factors interact with the data only through
the mean. We may then estimate /vectoruiand/vectorvj(andφj)b y
maximizing the likelihood (in practice, adding a small

==== Page 13 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page13of16
L2 penalty to large parameter values improves numeri-
cal stability). A link function must be used since /vectoruiand
/vectorvjare real valued whereas the mean of a Poisson or nega-
tive binomial must be positive. The total UMIs niterm is
used as an offset since no normalization has taken place;
alternative size factors sisuch as those from scran [ 20]
could be used in place of ni.I ft h ef i r s te l e m e n to fe a c h
/vectoruiis constrained to equal 1, this induces a gene-specific
intercept term in the first position of each /vectorvj, which is
analogoustocentering.Otherwise,themodelisverysim-
ilar to that of PCA; it is simply optimizing a different
objectivefunction.Unfortunately,MLEsfor /vectoruiand/vectorvjcan-
not be expressed in closed form, so an iterative Fisher
scoring procedure is necessary. We refer to this model as
GLM-PCA [ 55]. Just as PCA minimizes MSE, GLM-PCA
minimizes a generalization of MSE called the deviance
[56]. While generalized PCA was originally proposed by
[31]( s e ea l s o[ 57]a n d[58]), our implementation is novel
in that it allows for intercept terms, offsets, overdisper-
sion, and non-canonical link functions. We also use a
blockwise update for optimization which we found to be
more numerically stable than that of [ 31]; we iterate over
latent dimensions lrather than rows or columns. This
techniqueisinspiredbynon-negativematrixfactorization
algorithms such as hierarchical alternating least squares
andrank-oneresidueiteration,see[ 59]forareview .
Asanillustration,considerGLM-PCAwiththePoisson
approximation to a multinomial likelihood. The objective
functiontobeminimizedissimplytheoveralldeviance:
D=/summationdisplay
i,jyijlog/parenleftbiggyij
μij/parenrightbigg
−(yij−μij)
logμij=ηij=logsi+/vectoru/prime
i/vectorvj=logsi+vj1+L/summationdisplay
l=2uilvjl
wheresiis a fixed size factor such as the total number of
UMIs (ni). The optimization proceeds by taking deriva-
tives with respect to the unknown parameters: vj1is a
gene-specificinterceptterm,andtheremaining uilandvjl
arethelatentfactors.
TheGLM-PCAmethodismostconcordanttothedata-
generatingmechanismsinceallaspectsofthepipelineare
integrated into a coherent model rather than being dealt
with through sequential normalizations and transforma-
tions. The interpretation of the /vectoruiand/vectorvjvectors is the
same as in PCA. For example, suppose we set the num-
ber of latent dimensions to 2 (i.e., L=3 to account for
the intercept). We can plot ui2on the horizontal axis and
ui3on the vertical axis for each cell ito visualize the rela-
tionships between cells such as gradients or clusters. In
thisway,the /vectoruiand/vectorvjcapturebiologicalvariabilitysuchas
differentiallyexpressedgenes.Residualsand z-scores
Just as mean squared error can be computed by taking
thesumofsquaredresidualsunderaGaussianlikelihood,
thedevianceisequaltothesumofsquared devianceresid-
uals[56]. Since deviance residuals are not well-defined
for the multinomial distribution, we adopt the binomial
approximation.Thedevianceresidualforgene jincelliis
givenby:
r(d)
ij=sign(yij−ˆμij)/radicalBigg
2yijlogyij
ˆμij+2(ni−yij)logni−yij
ni−ˆμij
where under the null model of constant gene expression
across cells, ˆμij=niˆπj. The deviance residuals are the
resultofregressingawaythisnullmodel.Analternativeto
deviance residuals is the Pearson residual, which is sim-
ply the difference in observed and expected values scaled
byanestimateofthestandarddeviation.Forthebinomial,
thisis:
r(p)
ij=yij−ˆμij/radicalBig
ˆμij−1
niˆμ2
ij
According to the theory of generalized linear models
(GLM), both types of residuals follow approximately a
normal distribution with mean zero if the null model is
correct[56].Devianceresidualstendtobemoresymmet-
ric than Pearson residuals. In practice, the residuals may
not have mean exactly equal to zero, and may be stan-
dardizedbyscalingtheirgene-specificstandarddeviation
just as in the Gaussian case. Recently, Pearson residuals
based on a negative binomial null model have also been
independentlyproposedasthesctransformmethod[ 60].
Thez-score is simply the Pearson residual where we
replace the multinomial likelihood with a Gaussian (nor-
mal) likelihood and use normalized values instead of raw
UMI counts. Let qijbe the normalized (possibly log-
transformed)expressionofgene jincelliwithoutcenter-
ing and scaling. The null model is that the expression of
thegeneisconstantacrossallcells:
qij∼N/parenleftBig
μj,σ2
j/parenrightBig
The MLEs are ˆμj=1
I/summationtext
iqij,ˆσ2
j=1
I/summationtext
i(qij−ˆμj)2,a n d
thez-scoresequalthePearsonresiduals zij=(qij−ˆμj)/ˆσj.
We compared the accuracy of the residuals approxi-
mations by simulating 150 cells in 3 clusters of 50 cells
each with 5000 genes, of which 500 were differentially
expressedacrossclusters(informativegenes).Wealsocre-
ated 2 batches, batch 1 with total counts of 1000 and
batch 2 with total counts of 2000. Each cluster had an
equalnumberofcellsinthe2batches.WethenranGLM-
PCA on the raw counts, PCA on log2(1+CPM),P C A
ondevianceresiduals,andPCAonPearsonresidualswith
L=2dimensions.

==== Page 14 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page14of16
Featureselectionusingdeviance
Geneswithconstantexpressionacrosscellsarenotinfor-
mative. Such genes may be described by the multinomial
null model where πij=πj. Goodness of fit to a multino-
mial distribution can be quantified using deviance, which
is twice the difference in log-likelihoods comparing a sat-
uratedmodeltoafittedmodel.Themultinomialdeviance
is a joint deviance across all genes,and for this reason is
not helpful for screening informative genes. Instead, one
mayusethebinomialdevianceasanapproximation:
Dj=2/summationdisplay
i/bracketleftbigg
yijlogyij
niˆπj+(ni−yij)log(ni−yij)
ni(1−ˆπj)/bracketrightbigg
A large deviance value indicates the model in question
provides a poor fit. Those genes with biological variation
across cells will be poorly fit by the null model and will
have the largest deviances. By ranking genes according to
theirdeviances,onemaythusobtainhighlydeviantgenes
as an alternative to highly variable or highly expressed
genes.
Systematiccomparisonofmethods
We considered combinations of the following methods
and parameter settings, following [ 15]. Italics indicate
methods proposed in this manuscript. Feature selec-
tion: highly expressed genes, highly variable genes, and
highly deviant genes . We did not compare against highly
dropout genes because [ 15] found this method to have
poordownstreamclusteringperformanceforUMIcounts
and it is not as widely used in the literature. The num-
bers of genes are 60, 300, 1500. Normalization, trans-
formation, and dimension reduction: PCA on log-CPM
z-scores, ZINB-WAVE [ 28],PCA on deviance residu-
als,PCA on Pearson residuals ,a n dGLM-PCA .T h e
numbers of latent dimensions are 10 and 30. Cluster-
ing algorithms are k-means [ 61]a n dS e u r a t[ 17]. The
number of clusters is all values from 2 to 10, inclu-
sive. Seurat resolutions are 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1, 1.2,
1.5,and2.
Supplementaryinformation
Supplementaryinformation accompaniesthispaperat
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1861-6 .
Additionalfile1: ContainssupplementaryfiguresS1–S11andtables
S1–S4.
Additionalfile2: Reviewhistory.
Acknowledgements
TheauthorsthankKeeganKorthauer,JeffMiller,LinglinHuang,Alejandro
Reyes,YeredPita-Juarez,MikeLove,ZiyiLi,andKellyStreetforthevaluable
suggestions.
Reviewhistory
ThereviewhistoryisavailableasAdditionalfile 2.Peerreviewinformation
BarbaraCheifetwastheprimaryeditorofthisarticleandmanageditspeer
reviewincollaborationwiththerestoftheeditorialteam.
Authors’contributions
SCH,MJA,andRAIidentifiedtheproblem.FWTproposed,derived,and
implementedtheGLM-PCAmodel,itsfastapproximationusingresiduals,and
featureselectionusingdeviance.SCH,MJA,andRAIprovidedguidanceon
refiningthemethodsandevaluationstrategies.FWTandRAIwrotethedraft
manuscript,andrevisionsweresuggestedbySCHandMJA.Allauthors
approvedthefinalmanuscript.
Funding
FWTwassupportedbyNIHgrantT32CA009337,SCHwassupportedbyNIH
grantR00HG009007,MJAwassupportedbyanMGHPathologyDepartment
startupfund,andRAIwassupportedbyChan-ZuckerbergInitiativegrantCZI
2018-183142andNIHgrantsR01HG005220,R01GM083084,andP41HG004059.
Availabilityofdataandmaterials
Allmethodsandassessmentsdescribedinthismanuscriptarepublicly
availableat https://github.com/willtownes/scrna2019 [62].GLM-PCAis
availableasanRpackagefromCRAN( https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/glmpca/index.html ).ThesourcecodeislicensedunderLGPL-3.
Alldatasetsusedinthestudywereobtainedfrompublicsources(Table 1).The
threeZhengdatasets(ERCCs,monocytes,and68KPBMCs)[ 5]were
downloadedfrom https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-
expression/datasets .TheDuodatasetswereobtainedthroughthe
bioconductorpackageDuoClustering2018[ 15].Theremainingthreedatasets
hadGEOaccessionnumbersGSE77288(Tung)[ 32],GSE92332(Haber)[ 33],
andGSE85241(Muraro)[ 34].
Ethicsapprovalandconsenttoparticipate
Notapplicable.
Consentforpublication
Notapplicable.
Competinginterests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
Authordetails
1DepartmentofBiostatistics,HarvardUniversity,Cambridge,MA,USA.
2PresentAddress:DepartmentofComputerScience,PrincetonUniversity,
Princeton,NJ,USA.3DepartmentofBiostatistics,JohnsHopkinsUniversity,
Baltimore,MD,USA.4MolecularPathologyUnit,MassachusettsGeneral
Hospital,Charlestown,MA,USA.5CenterforCancerResearch,Massachusetts
GeneralHospital,Charlestown,MA,USA.6DepartmentofPathology,Harvard
MedicalSchool,Boston,MA,USA.7DepartmentofDataSciences,Dana-Farber
CancerInstitute,Boston,MA,USA.
Received:12March2019 Accepted:15October2019
References
1. KaliskyT, OrielS, Bar-LevTH, Ben-HaimN, TrinkA, WinebergY, KanterI,
GiladS, PyneS.Abriefreviewofsingle-celltranscriptomictechnologies.
BriefFunctGenom.2018;17(1):64–76. https://doi.org/10.1093/bfgp/
elx019.
2. SvenssonV, Vento-TormoR, TeichmannSA.Exponentialscalingof
single-cellRNA-seqinthepastdecade.NatProtoc.2018;13(4):599–604.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2017.149 .
3. MacoskoEZ, BasuA, SatijaR, NemeshJ, ShekharK, GoldmanM, Tirosh
I, BialasA.R, KamitakiN, MartersteckEM, TrombettaJJ, WeitzDA, Sanes
JR, ShalekAK, RegevA, McCarrollSA.Highlyparallelgenome-wide
expressionprofilingofindividualcellsUsingnanoliterdroplets.Cell.
2015;161(5):1202–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002 .
4. KleinAM, MazutisL, AkartunaI, TallapragadaN, VeresA, LiV, PeshkinL,
WeitzDA, KirschnerMW.Dropletaarcodingforsingle-cell
transcriptomicsappliedtoembryonicstemcells.Cell.2015;161(5):
1187–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.044 .

==== Page 15 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page15of16
5. ZhengGXY, TerryJM, BelgraderP, RyvkinP, BentZW, WilsonR, Ziraldo
SB, WheelerTD, McDermottGP, ZhuJ, GregoryMT, ShugaJ,
MontesclarosL, UnderwoodJG, MasquelierDA, NishimuraSY,
Schnall-LevinM, WyattPW, HindsonCM, BharadwajR, WongA, Ness
KD, BeppuLW, DeegHJ, McFarlandC, LoebKR, ValenteWJ, EricsonNG,
StevensEA, RadichJP, MikkelsenTS, HindsonBJ, BielasJH.Massively
paralleldigitaltranscriptionalprofilingofsinglecells.NatCommun.
2017;8:14049. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14049 .
6. DalMolinA, DiCamilloB.Howtodesignasingle-cellRNA-sequencing
experiment:pitfalls,challengesandperspectives.BriefBioinform.2018.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bby007 .
7. QiuX, HillA, PackerJ, LinD, MaY-A, TrapnellC.Single-cellmRNA
quantificationanddifferentialanalysiswithCensus.NatMethods.
2017;14(3):309–15. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4150 .
8. PicelliS, BjörklundÅK, FaridaniOR, SagasserS, WinbergG, SandbergR.
Smart-seq2forsensitivefull-lengthtranscriptomeprofilinginsinglecells.
NatMethods.2013;10(11):1096–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2639 .
9. KolodziejczykAA, KimJK, SvenssonV, MarioniJC, TeichmannSA.The
technologyandbiologyofsingle-cellRNAsequencing.MolCell.
2015;58(4):610–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.005 .
10. IslamS, ZeiselA, JoostS, LaMannoG, ZajacP, KasperM, LönnerbergP,
LinnarssonS.Quantitativesingle-cellRNA-seqwithuniquemolecular
identifiers.NatMethods.2014;11(2):163–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.2772 .
11. GrünD, KesterL, vanOudenaardenA.Validationofnoisemodelsfor
single-celltranscriptomics.NatMethods.2014;11(6):637–40. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nmeth.2930 .
12. LunATL, McCarthyDJ, MarioniJC.Astep-by-stepworkflowforlow-level
analysisofsingle-cellRNA-seqdatawithBioconductor.F1000Research.
2016;5:2122. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9501.2 .
13. McCarthyDJ, CampbellKR, LunATL, WillsQF.Scater:pre-processing,
qualitycontrol,normalizationandvisualizationofsingle-cellRNA-seq
datainR.Bioinformatics.2017;33(8):1179–86. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btw777 .
14. AndrewsTS, HembergM.IdentifyingcellpopulationswithscRNASeq.
MolAspMed.2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2017.07.002 .
15. DuòA, RobinsonMD, SonesonC.Asystematicperformanceevaluation
ofclusteringmethodsforsingle-cellRNA-seqdata.F1000Research.
2018;7:1141. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.15666.1 .
16. BrenneckeP, AndersS, KimJK, KołodziejczykAA, ZhangX, ProserpioV,
BayingB, BenesV, TeichmannSA, MarioniJC, HeislerMG.Accounting
fortechnicalnoiseinsingle-cellRNA-seqexperiments.NatMethods.
2013;10(11):1093–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2645 .
17. ButlerA, HoffmanP, SmibertP, PapalexiE, SatijaR.Integrating
single-celltranscriptomicdataacrossdifferentconditions,technologies,
andspecies.NatBiotechnol.2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4096 .
18. AndrewsTS, HembergM.M3Drop:Dropout-basedfeatureselectionfor
scRNASeq.Bioinformatics.2019;35(16):2865–7. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty1044 .
19. HotellingH.Analysisofacomplexofstatisticalvariablesintoprincipal
components.JEducPsychol.1933;24(6):417–41. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0071325 .
20. LunAT, BachK, MarioniJC.Poolingacrosscellstonormalizesingle-cell
RNAsequencingdatawithmanyzerocounts.GenomeBiol.2016;17:75.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0947-7 .
21. LunA.Overcomingsystematicerrorscausedbylog-transformationof
normalizedsingle-cellRNAsequencingdata.bioRxiv.2018404962.
https://doi.org/10.1101/404962 .
22. WartonDI.Whyyoucannottransformyourwayoutoftroubleforsmall
counts.Biometrics.2018;74(1):362–8. https://doi.org/10.1111/biom.
12728.
23. VallejosCA, RissoD, ScialdoneA, DudoitS, MarioniJC.Normalizing
single-cellRNAsequencingdata:challengesandopportunities.Nat
Methods.2017;14(6):565–71. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4292 .
24. FinakG, McDavidA, YajimaM, DengJ, GersukV, ShalekAK, SlichterCK,
MillerHW, McElrathMJ, PrlicM, LinsleyPS, GottardoR.MAST:aflexible
statisticalframeworkforassessingtranscriptionalchangesand
characterizingheterogeneityinsingle-cellRNAsequencingdata.
GenomeBiol.2015;16:278. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0844-5 .25. PiersonE, YauC.ZIFA:Dimensionalityreductionforzero-inflated
single-cellgeneexpressionanalysis.GenomeBiol.2015;16:241. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0805-z .
26. LiuS, TrapnellC.Single-celltranscriptomesequencing:recentadvances
andremainingchallenges.F1000Research.2016;5:182. https://doi.org/10.
12688/f1000research.7223.1 .
27. LinP, TroupM, HoJWK.CIDR:ultrafastandaccurateclusteringthrough
imputationforsingle-cellRNA-seqdata.GenomeBiol.2017;18:59. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13059-017-1188-0 .
28. RissoD, PerraudeauF, GribkovaS, DudoitS, VertJ-P.Ageneraland
flexiblemethodforsignalextractionfromsingle-cellRNA-seqdata.Nat
Commun.2018;9(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02554-5 .
29. SvenssonV.DropletscRNA-seqisnotzero-inflated.bioRxiv.2019582064.
https://doi.org/10.1101/582064 .
30. HicksSC, TownesFW, TengM, IrizarryRA.Missingdataandtechnical
variabilityinsingle-cellRNA-sequencingexperiments.Biostatistics.
2018;19(4):562–78. https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxx053 .
31. CollinsM, DasguptaS, SchapireRE.Ageneralizationofprincipal
componentsanalysistotheexponentialfamily.In: DietterichTG, Becker
S, GhahramaniZ,editors.AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessing
Systems14.Cambridge:MITPress;2002. p.617–24.
32. TungP-Y, BlischakJD, HsiaoCJ, KnowlesDA, BurnettJE, PritchardJK,
GiladY.Batcheffectsandtheeffectivedesignofsingle-cellgene
expressionstudies.SciRep.2017;7:39921. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep39921 .
33. HaberAL, BitonM, RogelN, HerbstRH, ShekharK, SmillieC, BurginG,
DeloreyTM, HowittMR, KatzY, TiroshI, BeyazS, DionneD, ZhangM,
RaychowdhuryR, GarrettWS, Rozenblatt-RosenO, ShiHN, YilmazO,
XavierRJ, RegevA.Asingle-cellsurveyofthesmallintestinalepithelium.
Nature.2017;551(7680):333–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24489 .
34. MuraroMJ, DharmadhikariG, GrünD, GroenN, DielenT, JansenE, van
GurpL, EngelseMA, CarlottiF, deKoningEJP, vanOudenaardenA.A
single-celltranscriptomeatlasofthehumanpancreas.CellSyst.2016;3(4):
385–3943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2016.09.002 .
35. EllefsonJW, GolliharJ, ShroffR, ShivramH, IyerVR, EllingtonAD.
Syntheticevolutionaryoriginofaproofreadingreversetranscriptase.
Science.2016;352(6293):1590–3. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5409 .
36. ShapiroE, BiezunerT, LinnarssonS.Single-cellsequencing-based
technologieswillrevolutionizewhole-organismscience.NatRevGenet.
2013;14(9):618–30. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3542 .
37. SilvermanJD, RocheK, MukherjeeS, DavidLA.Naughtallzerosin
sequencecountdataarethesame.bioRxiv.2018477794. https://doi.org/
10.1101/477794 .
38. PachterL.ModelsfortranscriptquantificationfromRNA-Seq.
arXiv:1104.3889[q-bio,stat].2011. http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.3889 .
39. WagnerF, YanY, YanaiI.K-nearestneighborsmoothingfor
high-throughputsingle-cellRNA-Seqdata.bioRxiv.2018217737. https://
doi.org/10.1101/217737 .
40. VandenBergeK, PerraudeauF, SonesonC, LoveMI, RissoD, VertJ-P,
RobinsonMD, DudoitS, ClementL.Observationweightsunlockbulk
RNA-seqtoolsforzeroinflationandsingle-cellapplications.GenomeBiol.
2018;19:24. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-018-1406-4 .
41. WittenDM.Classificationandclusteringofsequencingdatausinga
Poissonmodel.AnnApplStat.2011;5(4):2493–518. https://doi.org/10.
1214/11-AOAS493 .
42. McInnesL, HealyJ, MelvilleJ.UMAP:uniformmanifoldapproximation
andprojectionfordimensionreduction.arXiv:1802.03426[cs,stat].2018.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426 .
43. HubertL, ArabieP.Comparingpartitions.JClassif.1985;2(1):193–218.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01908075 .
44. TrapnellC, CacchiarelliD, GrimsbyJ, PokharelP, LiS, MorseM, Lennon
NJ, LivakKJ, MikkelsenTS, RinnJL.Thedynamicsandregulatorsofcell
fatedecisionsarerevealedbypseudotemporalorderingofsinglecells.
NatBiotechnol.2014;32(4):381–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2859 .
45. SonesonC, RobinsonMD.Bias,robustnessandscalabilityinsingle-cell
differentialexpressionanalysis.NatMethods.2018;15(4):255–61. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4612 .
46. SvenssonV, TeichmannSA, StegleO.SpatialDE:identificationofspatially
variablegenes.NatMethods.2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4636 .
47. LopezR, RegierJ, ColeMB, JordanMI, YosefN.Deepgenerative
modelingforsingle-celltranscriptomics.NatMethods.2018;15(12):
1053–8.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0229-2 .

==== Page 16 ====
TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page16of16
48. VermaA, EngelhardtB.Arobustnonlinearlow-dimensionalmanifoldfor
singlecellRNA-seqdata.bioRxiv.2018443044. https://doi.org/10.1101/
443044.
49. EgozcueJJ, Pawlowsky-GlahnV, Mateu-FiguerasG, Barceló-VidalC.
Isometriclogratiotransformationsforcompositionaldataanalysis.Math
Geol.2003;35(3):279–300. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023818214614 .
50. McDonaldDR.Onthepoissonapproximationtothemultinomial
distribution.CanJStat/LaRevCanStat.1980;8(1):115–8. https://doi.org/
10.2307/3314676 .
51. BakerSG.TheMultinomial-Poissontransformation.JRStatSocSerD
(Stat).1994;43(4):495–504. https://doi.org/10.2307/2348134 .
52. GopalanP, HofmanJM, BleiDM.ScalablerecommendationwithPoisson
factorization.arXiv:1311.1704[cs,stat].2013. http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.
1704.
53. TaddyM.Distributedmultinomialregression.AnnApplStat.2015;9(3):
1394–414. https://doi.org/10.1214/15-AOAS831 .
54. BiswasS.Thelatentlogarithm.arXiv:1605.06064[stat].2016. http://arxiv.
org/abs/1605.06064 .
55. TownesFW.Generalizedprincipalcomponentanalysis.arXiv:1907.02647
[cs,stat].2019. http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02647 .
56. AgrestiA.Foundationsoflinearandgeneralizedlinearmodels.Hoboken:
Wiley;2015.
57. LandgrafAJ.Generalizedprincipalcomponentanalysis:dimensionality
reductionthroughtheprojectionofnaturalparameters.2015.PhDthesis,
TheOhioStateUniversity.
58. LiG, GaynanovaI.Ageneralframeworkforassociationanalysisof
heterogeneousdata.AnnApplStat.2018;12(3):1700–26. https://doi.org/
10.1214/17-AOAS1127 .
59. KimJ, HeY, ParkH.Algorithmsfornonnegativematrixandtensor
factorizations:aunifiedviewbasedonblockcoordinatedescent
framework.JGlobOptim.2014;58(2):285–319. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10898-013-0035-4 .
60. HafemeisterC, SatijaR.Normalizationandvariancestabilizationof
single-cellRNA-seqdatausingregularizednegativebinomialregression.
bioRxiv.2019576827. https://doi.org/10.1101/576827 .
61. HartiganJA, WongMA.JRStatSocSerC(ApplStat).1979;28(1):100–8.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2346830 .
62. TownesW, Pita-JuarezY.Willtownes/Scrna2019:GenomeBiology
Publication.Zenodo.2019. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3475535 .
Publisher’sNote
SpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaimsin
publishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.

