==== Page 1 ====
Feature Importance Estimation with Self-Attention
Networks
BlaˇzˇSkrlj1and Saˇso D ˇzeroski1and Nada Lavra ˇc1and Matej Petkovi ´c1
Abstract. Black-box neural network models are widely used in in-
dustry and science, yet are hard to understand and interpret. Recently,
the attention mechanism was introduced, offering insights into the in-ner workings of neural language models. This paper explores the useof attention-based neural networks mechanism for estimating featureimportance, as means for explaining the models learned from propo-
sitional (tabular) data. Feature importance estimates, assessed by
the proposed Self-Attention Network (SAN) architecture, are com-
pared with the established ReliefF, Mutual Information and Random
Forest-based estimates, which are widely used in practice for model
interpretation. For the ﬁrst time we conduct scale-free comparisons
of feature importance estimates across algorithms on ten real andsynthetic data sets to study the similarities and differences of theresulting feature importance estimates, showing that SANs identifysimilar high-ranked features as the other methods. We demonstratethat SANs identify feature interactions which in some cases yieldbetter predictive performance than the baselines, suggesting that at-tention extends beyond interactions of just a few key features and de-tects larger feature subsets relevant for the considered learning task.
1 Introduction
Deep neural networks have been successfully applied to text, graphand image-based classiﬁcation tasks, as well as to learning accurateclassiﬁers from propositional (tabular) data [10, 13, 20]. However,with increasing number of parameters, neural networks are becom-
ing less human-understandable. The currently adopted paradigm to
tackle this problem involves using post hoc explanation tools, such
as SHAP and LIME [23]. Such approaches operate by approximating
the outputs of a given black-box model via some tractable scheme,
such as efﬁcient computation of Shapley values or local approxima-
tion via a linear model. Such methods do not take into account the
inner structure of a given (deep) neural network, and treat it as a blackbox, only considering its inputs and outputs.
Recent advances in the area of language processing, however, of-
fer the opportunity to link parts of a given neural network with the
input space directly, via the attention mechanism [33]. Achieving
super-human performance on many language understanding tasks,
attention-based models are becoming widely adopted throughout sci-entiﬁc and industrial environments [34]. Models, such as BERT [11]and XLNet [37], exploit this learnable lookup to capture relations be-
tween words (or tokens). The attention layers, when inspected, canbe seen to map real values to parts of the human-understandable inputspace (e.g., sentences). Exploration of the potential of the attention
mechanism is becoming a lively research area on its own [7, 21]. We
1Joˇzef Stefan Institute and International Postgraduate School Jo ˇzef Stefan,
Slovenija, matej.petkovic@ijs.sibelieve similar ideas can be investigated in the context of proposi-
tional (tabular) data (where every row represents an individual data
instance) that remain one of the most widely used data formats in
academia and industry.
In this work, we propose the concept of Self-Attention Networks
(SANs) and explore, whether the representations they learn can beused for feature importance assessment, comparable to feature im-portance estimates returned by the established feature ranking ap-proaches ReliefF [27], Mutual Information and Genie3 [16, 24]. Themain contributions of this work are:
1. The Self-Attention Network (SAN) architecture, a novel neural
network architecture capable of assessing feature importance di-rectly, along with three ways of obtaining such importance esti-mates.
2. Extensive empirical evaluation of SANs against ReliefF, Mutual
Information and Genie3 feature ranking approaches, demonstrat-ing comparable performance to the SAN architecture. The mostimportant features according to SAN are shown to be in agree-
ment with the ones detected by the established approaches used in
the comparison.
3. Direct comparison of feature importance estimates, highlighting
similarities between the considered algorithms’ outputs.
4. A theoretical study of SAN’s properties, considering its space and
time complexity.
In the remainder of this paper we ﬁrst discuss the related work, fol-
lowed by the formulation and empirical evaluation of SANs.
2 Related work
In this section we present selected feature ranking approaches and
brieﬂy survey the approaches to learning from propositional data,followed by a presentation of neural attention mechanisms.
2.1 Feature ranking
Feature importance estimation refers to the process of discovering
parts of the input feature space, relevant for a given predictive mod-eling problem, i.e. identifying the (most) important features to beused in model construction.
The simplest task of estimating feature importance is partition-
ing the features into groups of irrelevant and relevant ones, which isequivalent to assigning every feature either importance 1(feature is
relevant) or 0(feature is irrelevant). This task is referred to as fea-
ture selection. Here, one can only partially order the features. In amore general case, when every feature is assigned an arbitrary im-
portance score, one can sort the features with respect to these scoresECAI 2020
G.D. Giacomo et al. (Eds.)© 2020 The authors and IOS Press.This article is published online with Open Access by IOS Press and distributed under the termsof the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC 4.0).
doi:10.3233/FAIA2002561491

==== Page 2 ====
and obtain feature ranking. In this case, the features can be totally
ordered. Given a feature ranking, one can partition the features into
relevant and irrelevant ones by thresholding, i.e., proclaiming rele-vant the features whose importance is higher than some threshold.
The main motivation for performing feature ranking (or selection)
is that an appropriately chosen subset of features may reduce thecomputational complexity of learning, while potentially increasingthe learner’s performance. Moreover, the learned models that use a
smaller number of features are easier to explain.
In this work we consider a feature space Fwith a correspond-
ing class label set C. We focus on feature ranking algorithms, but
use thresholding (for many different values of the threshold) at the
ranking-evaluation stage, i.e., we measure the quality of the rankingas the predictive performance of the models that are built from setsof top-ranked features.
In this work we consider two types of feature ranking algorithms:
Wrappers. A feature ranking algorithm of this family comes to-
gether with a supervised learner. Once trained on the training data,the learner is, apart from prediction, also capable of estimatinghow relevant is each of the features for the task at hand. An impor-tant member of this family is Genie3 feature ranking, computeddirectly from Random Forest [4].
Filters. Algorithms such as the Relief family or Mutual Informa-
tion do not need a predictive model to obtain feature rankings.Since they are model-agnostic, the corresponding feature rankings
are typically computed very efﬁciently, e.g., Mutual Information.
However, the computational efﬁciency often comes at the cost ofmyopia, i.e., they ignore possible feature interactions.
Recent advances in deep learning mostly address model-based rank-ing, where methodology, such as e.g., SHAP is used for post-hoc
analysis of a trained model. Note that such a methodology can alsobe model-agnostic, yet it needs a model to compute feature impor-
tance.
2.2 Propositional learning and neural networks
In this work we focus on learning from (propositional) data tables,where columns represent features (attributes) and rows correspondto individual data instances. Despite its simplicity, training neuralnetwork architectures on this type of data might be non-trivial in thecases of small data sets, noisy feature spaces, spurious correlations,etc. Further, recurrent or convolutional neural architectures are not
that useful for tabular data as there is frequently no spatial or tempo-
ral information present in the data. Methods, such as Extreme Gra-
dient Boosting [5] and similar, e.g., tree-based ensemble algorithms
often dominate competitive shared tasks on such input spaces.
Neural network approaches recently used in modeling proposi-
tional data are discussed next. The approach by Sakakibara [28] ad-
dresses learning of context-free grammars based on tabular (propo-sitional) representations. Further, multilayer perceptrons have beenwidely used, already in the previous century [18]. The recently intro-duced Regularization Learning Networks (RLNs) represent one of
the most recent attempts at training deep neural networks on propo-
sitional data sets [31]; the paper shows that correctly regularized neu-ral networks perform on par with e.g., gradient boosting machines,demonstrating competitive performance on multiple data sets. Fur-ther, the authors also explored the information content of the featurespace, showing that RLNs detect highly informative features. The
attention-based propositional neural networks were also consideredin the recently introduced TabNet [2]. Finally, ensemble-based learn-
ers were also successfully applied to propositional data, includingtime series modeling [26].
2.3 Attention-based neural network architectures
The area of deep learning has witnessed many novel ideas in recentyears. The notion of attention has emerged recently for language
model learning [11, 33], as well as geometric deep learning [36].
In short, the attention mechanism enables a neural architecture to
pinpoint parts of the feature space that are especially relevant, andﬁlter out the remainder. The attention mechanism effectively sparsi-ﬁes the input space, emphasizing only the elements relevant for the
task at hand (e.g., language understanding). This way, the attention
mechanism is commonly used to e.g., better learn the relations be-
tween words. Even though this mechanism has been widely adopted
to text-based and graph-based tasks, less attention has been devotedto its application to propositional learning from tabular data.
3 Self-Attention Networks
This section presents the proposed Self-Attention Network (SAN)approach, illustrated in Figure 1. We begin by a formal descriptionof the architecture, followed by feature importance computation.
3.1 Propositional Self-Attention Networks
This section sources some of the ideas from the seminal works onthe attention mechanism [6, 33]. We refer the interested reader to
the aforementioned publications for a detailed description and ex-
plain here only the essential ideas implemented as part of SANs ina propositional learning setting. The neural network architecture thatimplements the attention mechanism can be stated as:
l
2=σ(W2·(a(W|F|·Ω(X)+b l1))+ bl2).
The ﬁrst neural network layer Ωis designed speciﬁcally to maintain
the connection with the input features F. We deﬁne it as:
Ω(X)=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
X⊗softmax(Wk
lattX+bk
latt)/bracketrightbigg
.
Input vectors Xare ﬁrst used as input to a softmax-activated layer
containing the number of neurons equal to the number of features
|F|, where the softmax function applied to the ji-th element of a
weight vector vis deﬁned as:
softmax( vji)=exp(v ji)/summationtext|F|
j=1exp( vj),
wherev∈R|F|. Note that krepresents the number of attention
heads—distinct matrices representing relations between the input
features. The ⊗sign corresponds to the Hadamard product and the
⊕refers to the Hadamard summation across individual heads. Ωthus
represents the ﬁrst layer of a SAN, its output is of dimensionality |F|.
acorresponds to the activation function SELU [19], deﬁned as:
SELU(x)=λ/braceleftBigg
x ifx>0
α(exp(x)−1) ifx≤0.
whereλandαare hyperparameters. The proposed architecture en-
ables self-attention at the feature level, intuitively understood as fol-
lows. As Ωmaintains a bijection between the set of features FandB.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1492

==== Page 3 ====
Feature importanceDimension = 
Prediction
Figure 1 : Overview of Self-Attention Networks. lattcorresponds to the attention layer, where the element-wise product with the input space is
computed on each forward pass. l1andl2correspond to two dense layers, yielding a prediction ˆy. The1
k⊕box represents element-wise means
across the attention heads (k ). Note that, if extracted, the attention vectors from lattcan be used to compute the feature importance estimates.
the set of weights in individual heads Wk
latt, the weights in the
|F|×|F|weight matrix can be understood as relations between
features. Finally, SANs are additionally regularized using Dropout
[32]2. In this work, we are interested exclusively in self-attention—
the relation of a given feature with itself. We posit that such self-
relations correspond to features’ importance. Once a SAN is trained,we next discuss the ways of computing feature importance.
3.2 Computing feature importance with SANs
Let us show how the considered architecture can be used to obtainreal values which we argue represent feature importance. We explore
the procedures for obtaining the ﬁnal vector, as a mapping from the
feature space to the space of non-negative real values, i.e. functionf:F→R
+
0.
Instance-level aggregations (attention). Let(xi,yi),1≤i≤n,
be the instances. Let SAN(x i) represent the attention output of
thei-th instance, deﬁned as
SAN(xi)=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
softmax(Wk
lattxi+blatt)/bracketrightbigg
.
The ﬁrst option for computing feature importance performs the
following operation, where the outputs are averaged on-instance
basis.
RI=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1SAN(xi).
Counting only correctly predicted instances (attentionPositive).
The second variant of the mechanism operates under the hy-
pothesis, that only correctly predicted instances should be taken
into account, as they offer extraction of representative attentionvectors with less noise. Such scenarios are suitable when the
number of instances based on which features’ importance are
to be computed is low, and the classiﬁcation performance is notoptimal. Let ˆy
irepresent the ﬁnal prediction of an architecture
(not only attention vectors). This version of the approach assessesfeature importance R
c
I(cstands for clean) as follows:
Rc
I=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1SAN(xi)[ˆyi=yi].
2For readability purposes, we omit the deﬁnition of this well known regular-
ization method.Global attention layer (attentionGlobal). The previous two ap-
proaches construct the global feature importance vector incremen-tally, by aggregating the attention vectors based on individual in-stances used for training. However, such schemes can depend onthe aggregation scheme used. The proposed global attention ap-proach is more natural, as it omits the aggregation: once trained,
we simply activate the attention layer’s weights by using softmax.
This scenario assumes, that the weight vector itself contains the in-
formation on feature importance, and can be inspected directly
3.
Global attention is deﬁned as follows:
RG=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
softmax(diag(Wk
latt))/bracketrightbigg
;Wk
latt∈R|F|×|F |.
4 Theoretical considerations
In this section we discuss the relevant theoretical aspects of the con-
sidered neural network architecture, starting with SAN’s space andtime complexity, and followed by an overview of the computationalcomplexity of the considered methods.
4.1 Space and time complexity of SANs
We ﬁrst discuss the space complexity with respect to the number ofparameters, as we believe this determines the usefulness of SANs inpractice. Assuming the number of features to be |F|, the most com-
putationally expensive part of SANs is the computation of the atten-tion vector. The attention, as formulated in this work, operates in thespace of the same dimensionality as the input space; the number ofparameters is O(|F|
2). This complexity holds if a single attention
layer is considered. As theoretically, there can be multiple such map-pings to the input space in a single attention block, the space com-
plexity in such case rises to O(|F|
2·k), wherekis the number of
considered attention weight matrices (heads). In practice, however,
even very high dimensional data sets with, e.g., more than 60,000
features can be processed, which we prove in the empirical section.
Note that (6·104)2=3.6·109(≈11GB if stored as ﬂoating points),
which is the scale at which language models such as RoBERTa [22]and similar operate, thus the complexity does not prohibit the use onhigh dimensional data that of practical relevance. We believe, how-ever, that sparsity at the input level could signiﬁcantly reduce thecomplexity, which we leave for further exploration.
3In Appendix A we discuss another way how global attention can be ob-
tained, yet do not consider it in this work.B.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1493

==== Page 4 ====
We ﬁnally discuss the time complexity of computing feature im-
portance for a single instance, as well as for a set of instances. In
Section 3.2 we introduced three different implementations of SANsconsidered in this work: two instance-based, where attention is com-
puted for each instance and aggregated afterwards, as well as global,
where after training, the attention vector is simply extracted and usedto represent features’ importances. The ﬁrst situation, where predic-
tions up to the end of the second layer need to be conducted (up to the
activated attention vector), is of linear complexity with respect to the
number of test instances, across which the ﬁnal importances shall be
aggregated. On the other hand, if the attention vector is activated di-
rectly after the training phase, the computational complexity reducesto the computation of the softmax, and is in fact O(1)w.r.t. the num-
ber of test instances. Note that such computation is fundamentally
faster and scales to massive production environments seamlessly.
4.2 Overview of computational complexity
To contextualize the computational complexity of SANs, we com-
pare it with some of the established feature ranking algorithms thatwill offer the reader insights into possible beneﬁts, as well as draw-
backs of individual methods considered in this work.
In Tables 1 and 2, tdenotes the number of trees in the Random For-
est, while kdenotes the number of attention matrices (heads) used.
Table 1 : Computational complexity of feature importance estimation:
The learning stage.
Algorithm time complexity space complexity
ReliefF O(|F|·|I|2) O(|F|)
Random Forest O(t|F||I|log2|I|) O(|I|+|F|)
Mutual Information O(|F|·|I|) O(|I|)
SAN O(|F|2·|I|) O(k·|F|2)
Table 2 : Computational complexity of feature importance estimation:
The post-learning stage. NA (not applicable) denotes the cases where
feature importance is obtained directly from the learning stage.
Algorithm time complexity space complexity
ReliefF NA NA
Random Forest O(t|I|) O(|I|)
Mutual Information NA NA
SAN O(1)orO(|I|) O(k·|F|2)
In Table 1, we compare the computational complexity of the learn-ing process: this refers to either building a predictive model (RandomForest, SAN) or computing the feature importances from the trainingdata (ReliefF, Mutual Information). Further, in Table 2, we discussthe complexity of obtaining feature importances after the learningstage. Note that ﬁlter methods, such as the ReliefF and Mutual Infor-
mation only require the ﬁrst step of the computation, whereas SANand Random Forest require an additional computational step that ex-
tracts feature importances based on the trained model.
5 Experimantal setting
In this section we discuss the empirical evaluation setting used in
this work. The evaluation is split into two parts: measuring the fea-
ture ranking similarity and feature ranking quality. When measuringfeature ranking similarity, we compare pairs of the rankings via FUJI
score. When measuring feature ranking quality, we explore how a se-ries of classiﬁers behave, when top nfeatures are considered for the
task of classiﬁcation.5.1 Pairwise comparisons with FUJI
The output of a feature ranking can be deﬁned as a real-valued list,whosej-th element is the estimated feature importance of the j-th
feature. A typical approach for comparing such lists is to compute theJaccard indices [17] between the sets of top-ranked features. How-ever, this score takes into account feature importances only implic-itly (via the order of the features) and is consequently unstable and
often too pessimistic. Thus, we use its fuzzy version FUJI (the Fuzzy
Jaccard Index) [25].
Even though FUJI takes importances directly into account, it is
still scale-free and thus appropriate for comparing the outputs of dif-
ferent feature ranking algorithms. Given a pair of feature rankings,e.g., Mutual Information and Attention, FUJI is computed for differ-
ent sizes of top-ranked feature sets that belong to the two rankings.The obtained values are then plotted as a single curve, as shown inFigure 2. Such a comparison is very informative, since one can ob-
serve how the similarity of the two rankings changes when the num-
ber of features considered grows, but aggregation of a curve into asingle scalar may sometimes be preferred. We do so by computingthe area under the FUJI curve. Either trapezoidal or Simpson’s rule
can be employed; in this work we use the latter
4.
In the experiments, we obtain feature rankings for similarity com-
parison as follows. The model-based ranking algorithms (SANs andRandom Forests) were trained by ﬁrst selecting optimal model basedon ten fold stratiﬁed cross validation. This step is skipped in the caseof ReliefF and Mutual Information algorithms. In the second step,
we use the whole data set to estimate feature importances (either di-
rectly or using the chosen model). The whole data set can be usedsince these feature rankings are only used in the similarity compu-tation (and not for predicting the target values), and should be used
since the feature rankings are expected to be better when computed
from more data.
5.2 Classiﬁcation performance evaluation
In the second set of the experiments, we investigate how the top n
features assessed by a given method inﬂuence the performance ofthe Logistic Regression (LR) classiﬁer, for different values of n.W e
selected this learner for the following reasons. As evaluation of in-dividual values of nrequires hundreds (or thousands) of models to
be built, LR is fast enough to be used in such setting. Next, it is
sensitive to completely non-informative features. Should a given fea-
ture importance assessment method prioritize completely irrelevantfeatures, the classiﬁer will not perform well. In terms of hyperparam-eters, we use the same parametrization of SANs across all data sets.
The rationale for this decision is that neural networks can easily over-
ﬁt a given data set. We decided to use the same set of hyperparame-ters to showcase the overall adequate performance of SANs. The l
1
dimension was set to 128, the network was trained for 32epochs,
with the batch size of 5. The learning rate for the Adam optimizer
was set to 0.001, and the dropout, which we used for regularization,
was set to 20%. We used stratiﬁed 10fold cross validation where a
feature ranking is computed from the training set and evaluated onthe testing set. A single attention head was used ( k=1). We report
the average Logistic Regression performance for each n.
4This implicitly assumes the FUJI curve is a spline of quadratic polynomials.
We average the normalized areas across all data sets to obtain a single scalar
representing the relation between two methods.B.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1494

==== Page 5 ====
5.3 Experimental data sets
We conducted the experiments on the following data sets.
DLBCL [3]. A series of translocations specify a distinct gene ex-
pression proﬁle that distinguishes a unique leukemia. The data set
consists of 7,070 features and 77 instances.
Genes [35]. The cancer genome atlas pan-cancer analysis project.
The data set consists of 20,531 features and 801 instances. Fea-tures correspond to gene expression vectors.
p53 [9]. Predicting Positive p53 Cancer Rescue Regions Using
Most Informative Positive (MIP) Active Learning. The data setconsists of 5,409 features and 16,772 instances.
Chess [30] (King-Rook vs. King-Pawn). The data set describes var-
ious endgames, and consists of 3,196 instances and 36 features.
pd-speech [29]. Collection and Analysis of a Parkinson Speech
data set with Multiple Types of Sound Recordings. The data setconsists of 26 features and 1,040 instances.
aps-failure [8]. IDA 2016 Industrial Challenge: Using Machine
Learning for Predicting Failures. The data set consists of 171 fea-tures and 60,000 instances.
biodeg [12]. Biodegradability of commercial compounds. the data
set consists of 62 features and 328 instances.
optdigits [1]. Optical Recognition of Handwritten Digits. The data
set consists of 64 features and 5,620 instances.
madelon [15]. This is a synthetic data set published at NIPS 2003,
aimed to test feature selection capabilities of various algorithms.The data set consists of 500 features and 4,400 instances.
The selected data sets span across multiple topics, and were selectedto provide insights into the quality of feature importance assessmentmethods. Finally, we also evaluated the difference in the attentionacross relevant and irrelevant features based on the algorithm pro-posed by Guyon et al. [14]
5. For the purpose of this synthetic ex-
periment, we generated a binary classiﬁcation problem data set com-prised of 100 features, where only 50 were deemed relevant, with1,000 samples of the data used for training SANs. The experimentwas conducted via three repetitions of three-fold cross validation. We
aggregated the attention values separately for the positive, as well as
the negative class if the classiﬁcation accuracy for a given fold wasmore than 50%. The attentions were aggregated only if a given pre-diction was correct—this step was considered to reduce the effectof the neural network’s performance on the attention vectors’ prop-erties, as we only attempted to extract the attention relevant for the
discrimination between the classes.
6 Results of experiments
In this section, we present the results of the empirical evaluation. For
improved readability, the results are presented graphically.
6.1 Differences in attention vectors
We ﬁrst visualize the distributions of attention with respect to bothpositive and negative instances in Figure 2.
It can be observed that the attention is on average observably
higher when positive instances are considered. As the neural networkis trained to recognize such examples, such outcome indicates the at-tention mechanism potentially detects the relevant signal. Note that
5Implemented in https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.make_
classification.htmlFigure 2 : Differences in attention, aggregated w.r.t. correctly pre-
dicted positive and negative examples.
Figure 2 shows attention, aggregated only on the features that were
assessed as important (half of the features).
6.2 Importance similarities
We next discuss the similarities between the considered feature im-portance approaches. The results are presented as FUJI curves,
where we omit the space of all possible (pairwise) comparisons tothe ones, that are compared with the proposed SANs. The results are
shown in Figure 3.
The considered visualizations depict at least two general patterns.
First, the attentionClean and attention-based importances are indeed
very similar. We remind the reader that the difference between the
two is that attentionClean only takes into account the correctly classi-
ﬁed instances. Next, we can observe that ReliefF and Random Forest-
based importances are different. Further, the global attention appearsthe most similar to Random Forest importances. Overall areas below
FUJI curves are shown in Figure 4.
6.3 Classiﬁcation performance
We next discuss the classiﬁcation performance results. Let us remindthe reader that the results show how the logistic regression (C = 1, L2normalization) classiﬁer performs when parts of the feature space arepruned according to a given feature importance vector. The resultsare shown in Figure 5.
The ﬁrst observation—to our knowledge not known to the
community—is that SANs indeed perform competitively. Especially
on data sets with a large number of features, such as the p53, genes
and dlbcl (all biological ones), the attention mechanism detects larger
subsets of features that can improve the performance of the logistic
regression classiﬁer, in e.g., dlbcl even outperforming all other ap-
proaches by a margin of more than 15%. On smaller data sets, SANsperform competitively (e.g., madelon, optdigits, chess), or do not per-form that well (biodeg-p2-discrete). Overall, worse performance ofSANs coincides with smaller data sets, indicating that not enoughdata was present for SANs to distill the relevant parts of the featurespace. Further, it can be observed that ReliefF on data sets such aspd-speech and madelon outperforms all other approaches, indicatingthis state-of-the-art approach is suitable for low-resource situations.
7 Discussion and conclusions
Operating on propositional data, SANs have some inherent bene-ﬁts, as well as drawbacks. The most apparent drawback is the ar-chitecture’s space complexity, as with more attention heads, it couldincrease greatly for the data sets with a large number of features.In comparison, language models are maintaining a ﬁxed sequenceB.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1495

==== Page 6 ====
attentionGlobal vs. attentionPositive
attentionGlobal vs. attention
attentionGlobal vs. MutualInformationattentionGlobal vs. RandomForests
attentionGlobal vs. ReliefF
attentionPositive vs. attentionattentionPositive vs. MutualInformation
attentionPositive vs. RandomForests
attentionPositive vs. ReliefFattention vs. MutualInformation
attention vs. RandomForests
attention vs. ReliefF
Figure 3 : Results of FUJI -based ranking comparison. Higher values imply the pair of algorithms is more similar when a certain number of
features (x-axis) is considered.
MutualInformation
RandomForests
ReliefF
attention
attentionGlobal
attentionPositiveMutualInformation
RandomForests
ReliefF
attention
attentionGlobal
attentionPositive0.7
0.67 0.69
0.65 0.71 0.72
0.7 0.76 0.77 0.8
0.67 0.72 0.8 0.94 0.85 0.560.640.720.800.88
Figure 4 : Similarities of considered feature importance assessment
approaches. The attention-based importances are the most similar to
each other, as well as to the ReliefF algorithm.
length during training, which is commonly below e.g., 1,024, and
can thus afford multiple attention heads more easily.
Another key difference is the mapping to the input space. As with
text, each input instance consists of potentially different tokens, at-tention matrices represent different parts of the vocabulary for eache.g., sentence. In contrast, the proposed SANs exhibit a consistentmapping between the input space and the meaning of individual fea-tures, making possible the aggregation schemes considered in thiswork.
In terms of general performance, this paper proves empirically that
SANs can emit attention vectors that offer similar feature rankingsrelevant for an external classiﬁer (e.g., Logistic Regression). As thepurpose of this work was not excessive grid search across possiblearchitectures, which we leave for further work. We believe SANs’sperformance could be notably improved by improving the underlyingneural network’s performance, as well as by using other types andvariations of the attention mechanism. Further, the proposed SANsshall be compared to the recently introduced TabNet [2], an approachthat also attempts to unveil the feature importance landscape via se-quential attention mechanism.
An additional contribution of this work is the FUJI score based
comparison, where we uncover similarities between allconsidered
approaches. The SANs are similar to the Genie3 and ReliefF, indi-cating the importance computation is possibly non-myopic (as MI),yet we leave validation of this claim for further work.
8 Availability
The code to reproduce the results is freely accessible for academicusers at: https://gitlab.com/skblaz/attentionrank.B. Škrlj et al. / Feature Importance Estimation with Self-Attention Networks 1496

==== Page 7 ====
MutualInformation RandomForests ReliefF attention attentionGlobal attentionPositive
Figure 5 : Feature ranking performance for different classiﬁers across different data sets. We report the relative F1 score, i.e., performance with
respect the setting where all features are used as inputs to the logistic regression classiﬁer.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Slovenian Research
Agency through core research program P2-0103, and project Seman-
tic Data Mining for Linked Open Data (ﬁnanced under the ERC
Complementary Scheme, N2-0078). The authors have received fund-ing also from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-novation program under grant agreement No 825153 (EMBEDDIA).The work of the ﬁrst and the last author was funded by the SlovenianResearch Agency through a young researcher grant.
A Obtaining attention via feature-level activation
We deﬁned global attention as:
Rg=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
softmax(diag(Wk
latt))/bracketrightbigg
;Wk
latt∈R|F|×|F |.
One could consider a similar scheme, with the difference that thesoftmax could be applied for each feature w.r.t. the remainder of thefeatures, and simply extracted as the main diagonal of the obtainedmatrix. Let RWS be deﬁned as:
RWS=concatByRows( softmax(W
latt(i)));ii sar o w.WhereWlatt(i)corresponds to the i-th row of the weight matrix.
Thus, the global attention can be computed as:
Rg=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
diag(RWS(Wk
latt))/bracketrightbigg
.
REFERENCES
[1] Ethem Alpaydin and Cenk Kaynak, ‘Cascading classiﬁers’, Ky-
bernetika, 34(4), 369–374, (1998).
[2] Sercan O Arik and Tomas Pﬁster, ‘Tabnet: Attentive inter-
pretable tabular learning’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07442,
(2019).
[3] Scott A Armstrong, Jane E Staunton, Lewis B Silverman, Rob
Pieters, Monique L den Boer, Mark D Minden, Stephen E Sal-lan, Eric S Lander, Todd R Golub, and Stanley J Korsmeyer,‘Mll translocations specify a distinct gene expression proﬁlethat distinguishes a unique leukemia’, Nature genetics, 30(1),
41–47, (2002).
[4] Leo Breiman, ‘Random forests’, Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–
32, (2001).
[5] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin, ‘Xgboost: A scalable tree
boosting system’, in Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd inter-
national conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,pp. 785–794. ACM, (2016).B. Škrlj et al. / Feature Importance Estimation with Self-Attention Networks 1497

==== Page 8 ====
[6] Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio, ‘Attention-based mod-
els for speech recognition’, in Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 577–585, (2015).
[7] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christo-
pher D Manning, ‘What does bert look at? an analysis of bert’sattention’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341, (2019).
[8] Camila Ferreira Costa and Mario A Nascimento, ‘Ida 2016 in-
dustrial challenge: Using machine learning for predicting fail-ures’, in International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis,
pp. 381–386. Springer, (2016).
[9] Samuel A Danziger, Roberta Baronio, Lydia Ho, Linda Hall,
Kirsty Salmon, G Wesley Hatﬁeld, Peter Kaiser, and Richard HLathrop, ‘Predicting positive p53 cancer rescue regions using
most informative positive (mip) active learning’, PLoS compu-
tational biology, 5(9), e1000498, (2009).
[10] Li Deng, Dong Yu, et al., ‘Deep learning: methods and applica-
tions’, Foundations and Trends
R/circlecopyrtin Signal Processing, 7(3–4),
197–387, (2014).
[11] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova, ‘Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, (2018).
[12] Sa ˇso D ˇzeroski, Hendrik Blockeel, Boris Kompare, Stefan
Kramer, Bernhard Pfahringer, and Wim Van Laer, ‘Experi-ments in predicting biodegradability’, in International Confer-
ence on Inductive Logic Programming, pp. 80–91. Springer,
(1999).
[13] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville, Deep
learning, MIT press, 2016.
[14] Isabelle Guyon, ‘Design of experiments of the nips 2003 vari-
able selection benchmark’, in NIPS 2003 workshop on feature
extraction and feature selection, (2003).
[15] Isabelle Guyon, Steve Gunn, Asa Ben-Hur, and Gideon Dror,
‘Result analysis of the nips 2003 feature selection challenge’,
inAdvances in neural information processing systems, pp. 545–
552, (2005).
[16] V ˆan Anh Huynh-Thu, Alexandre Irrthum, Louis Wehenkel, and
Pierre Geurts, ‘Inferring regulatory networks from expression
data using tree-based methods’, PLoS One, 5(9), 1–10, (2010).
[17] Paul Jaccard, ‘Etude de la distribution ﬂorale dans une portion
des alpes et du jura’, Bulletin de la Societe V audoise des Sci-
ences Naturelles, 37, 547–579, (1901).
[18] David H Kemsley, Tony R Martinez, and D Campbell, ‘A sur-
vey of neural network research and ﬁelded applications’, Inter-
national journal of neural networks, 2, 123–123, (1992).
[19] G ¨unter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and
Sepp Hochreiter, ‘Self-normalizing neural networks’, in Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, pp. 971–980,(2017).
[20] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton, ‘Deep
learning’, nature, 521(7553), 436–444, (2015).
[21] Yongjie Lin, Yi Chern Tan, and Robert Frank, ‘Open sesame:
Getting inside bert’s linguistic knowledge’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01698, (2019).
[22] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi,
Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, andVeselin Stoyanov, ‘Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretrain-ing approach’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, (2019).
[23] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee, ‘A uniﬁed approach to inter-
preting model predictions’, in Advances in Neural InformationProcessing Systems, pp. 4765–4774, (2017).
[24] Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding, ‘Feature selec-
tion based on mutual information: criteria of max-dependency,
max-relevance, and min-redundancy’, IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, (8), 1226–1238,
(2005).
[25] Matej Petkovi ´c, Luke Lucas, Dragi Kocev, Sa ˇso D ˇzeroski, Re-
douane Boumghar, and Nikola Simidjievski, ‘Quantifying theeffects of gyroless ﬂying of the mars express spacecraft withmachine learning’, in 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Space Mission Challenges for Information Technology (SMC-IT), pp. 9–16, (July 2019).
[26] Xueheng Qiu, Le Zhang, Ye Ren, Ponnuthurai N Suganthan,
and Gehan Amaratunga, ‘Ensemble deep learning for regres-sion and time series forecasting’, in 2014 IEEE symposium on
computational intelligence in ensemble learning (CIEL), pp. 1–6. IEEE, (2014).
[27] Marko Robnik- ˇSikonja and Igor Kononenko, ‘Theoretical and
empirical analysis of relieff and rrelieff’, Machine learning,
53(1-2), 23–69, (2003).
[28] Yasubumi Sakakibara, ‘Learning context-free grammars us-
ing tabular representations’, Pattern Recognition, 38(9), 1372–
1383, (2005).
[29] Betul Erdogdu Sakar, M Erdem Isenkul, C Okan Sakar, Ah-
met Sertbas, Fikret Gurgen, Sakir Delil, Hulya Apaydin, andOlcay Kursun, ‘Collection and analysis of a parkinson speechdataset with multiple types of sound recordings’, IEEE Journal
of Biomedical and Health Informatics ,17(4), 828–834, (2013).
[30] Alen David Shapiro, ‘The role of structured induction in expert
systems’, (1984).
[31] Ira Shavitt and Eran Segal, ‘Regularization learning networks:
Deep learning for tabular datasets’, in Proceedings of the 32Nd
International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 1386–1396, USA, (2018). Curran As-
sociates Inc.
[32] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, ‘Dropout: a simple wayto prevent neural networks from overﬁtting’, The journal of ma-
chine learning research, 15(1), 1929–1958, (2014).
[33] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit,
Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polo-sukhin, ‘Attention is all you need’, in Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, (2017).
[34] Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet
Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel RBowman, ‘Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language understanding systems’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.00537, (2019).
[35] John N Weinstein, Eric A Collisson, Gordon B Mills, Kenna
R Mills Shaw, Brad A Ozenberger, Kyle Ellrott, Ilya Shmule-vich, Chris Sander, Joshua M Stuart, Cancer Genome Atlas Re-search Network, et al., ‘The cancer genome atlas pan-canceranalysis project’, Nature genetics, 45(10), 1113, (2013).
[36] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long,
Chengqi Zhang, and Philip S Yu, ‘A comprehensive surveyon graph neural networks’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00596,
(2019).
[37] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Rus-
lan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le, ‘Xlnet: Generalized au-toregressive pretraining for language understanding’, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.08237, (2019).B.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1498

