==== Page 1 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 1
Feature Extraction for Hyperspectral Imagery:
The Evolution from Shallow to Deep (Overview
and Toolbox)
Behnood Rasti, Senior Member, IEEE, Danfeng Hong, Member, IEEE, Renlong Hang, Member, IEEE,
Pedram Ghamisi, Senior Member, IEEE, Xudong Kang, Senior Member, IEEE, Jocelyn Chanussot, Fellow, IEEE,
and Jon Atli Benediktsson, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —The ﬁnal version of the paper can be found in
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine. Hyperspectral
images provide detailed spectral information through hundreds
of (narrow) spectral channels (also known as dimensionality
or bands) with continuous spectral information that can ac-
curately classify diverse materials of interest. The increased
dimensionality of such data makes it possible to signiﬁcantly
improve data information content but provides a challenge to the
conventional techniques (the so-called curse of dimensionality)
for accurate analysis of hyperspectral images. Feature extraction,
as a vibrant ﬁeld of research in the hyperspectral community,
evolved through decades of research to address this issue and
extract informative features suitable for data representation and
classiﬁcation. The advances in feature extraction have been
inspired by two ﬁelds of research, including the popularization of
image and signal processing as well as machine (deep) learning,
leading to two types of feature extraction approaches named
shallow and deep techniques. This article outlines the advances
in feature extraction approaches for hyperspectral imagery by
providing a technical overview of the state-of-the-art techniques,
providing useful entry points for researchers at different levels,
including students, researchers, and senior researchers, willing
to explore novel investigations on this challenging topic. In more
detail, this paper provides a bird’s eye view over shallow (both
supervised and unsupervised) and deep feature extraction ap-
proaches speciﬁcally dedicated to the topic of hyperspectral fea-
ture extraction and its application on hyperspectral image classiﬁ-
cation. Additionally, this paper compares 15 advanced techniques
with an emphasis on their methodological foundations in terms
This work is partially supported by Alexander von Humboldt (AvH)
research grant.
B. Rasti is with the Machine Learning Group, Exploration Division,
Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology, Helmholtz-
Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, 09599 Freiberg, Germany (e-mail:
behnood.rasti@gmail.com).
D. Hong is with Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab,
38000 Grenoble, France. (e-mail: hongdanfeng1989@gmail.com)
R. Hang is with the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis
Technology, School of Automation, Nanjing University of Information Science
and Technology, Nanjing 210044, China (e-mail:renlong hang@163.com)
P. Ghamisi is with the Machine Learning Group, Exploration Division,
Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology, Helmholtz-
Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, 09599 Freiberg, Germany. (e-mail:
p.ghamisi@gmail.com)
X. Kang is with the College of Electrical and Information Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the Key Laboratory
of Visual Perception and Artiﬁcial Intelligence of Hunan Province, Changsha
410082, China (e-mail: xudong kang@163.com).
J. Chanussot is with the Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble
INP, LJK, F-38000 Grenoble, France, also with the Faculty of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (e-mail:
jocelyn@hi.is)
J. A. Benediktsson is with the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, University of Iceland, 107 Reykjavik, Iceland (e-mail: benedikt@hi.is).of classiﬁcation accuracies. Furthermore, to push this vibrant
ﬁeld of research forward an impressive amount of codes and
libraries is shared at: https://github.com/BehnoodRasti/HyFTech-
Hyperspectral-Shallow-Deep-Feature-Extraction-Toolbox.
Index Terms —Classiﬁcation, deep feature extraction, deep
learning, dimensionality reduction, feature extraction, hyperspec-
tral image, machine learning, shallow feature extraction, signal
processing.
I. I NTRODUCTION
HYPERSPECTRAL imaging technology provides de-
tailed spectral information by sampling the reﬂective
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum covering a wide range
from the visible region (0.4-0.7 m) to the short-wave infrared
(SWIR) region (almost 2.4 m). Hyperspecral sensors can also
characterize the emissive properties of objects by acquiring
data in the range of the mid-wave and long-wave infrared
regions, in hundreds of narrow contiguous spectral channels.
Detailed spectral information provided by hyperspectral sen-
sors present both challenges and opportunities. For instance,
hyperspectral images can be used to differentiate between
different classes of interest with slightly different spectral char-
acteristics [1]. However, most of the commonly used methods
utilized for the analysis of gray scale, color, or multispectral
images cannot be extended to analyse hyperspectral images
due to several reasons, which will be detailed later in Section
I.A.
The limited availability of training samples (which is a
common issue in remote sensing) dramatically impacts the
performances of supervised classiﬁcation approaches due to
the high dimensionality of hyperspectral images, which poses
a problem for designing robust statistical estimations. Feature
extraction can be used as a solution to address the afore-
mentioned issue, which can be described as ﬁnding a set
of vectors that represents an observation while reducing the
dimensionality by transforming the input data linearly or non-
linearly to another domain and extract informative features in
the new domain. The use of feature extraction techniques can
be advantageous for a number of reasons which is illustrated
in Fig. 1 and described in the following subsections.arXiv:2003.02822v4  [cs.CV]  29 Jul 2020

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 2
Saving timeAccurate 
classificationSaving storage 
space and faster 
transmission
Feature Extraction
Input Data Extracted Features Possible Advantages
Fig. 1. Feature extraction and its advantages for hyperspectral image analysis.
A. Unique Geometrical and Statistical Properties of High
Dimensional Data and the Need for Feature Extraction
Several studies (e.g., [2]–[4]) have demonstrated the unique
geometrical, statistical, and asymptotical properties of high-
dimensional data compared to RGB and multispectral images.
These properties, which have been shown through some ex-
perimental and theoretical examples, clearly justify the reasons
why most of the analytical approaches that are developed for
RGB and multispectral images are not applicable to hyper-
spectral images [5]. Among those experimental examples, we
can recall that (1) as dimensionality increases, the volume of
a hypercube concentrates in corners, or (2) as dimensionality
increases, the volume of a hypersphere concentrates in an
outside shell. With respect to these examples, the following
conclusions have been drawn:
A high-dimensional feature space is almost empty, which
indicates that multivariate data in Rp(prepresents the
number of bands, spectral channels, or dimensions) can
usually be represented in a lower dimensional space
(referred to as subspace) without loosing considerable
information in terms of class separability [5].
Since the high-dimensional feature space is almost empty
(i.e., Gaussian distributed data have a tendency to con-
centrate in the tails while uniformly distributed data have
a tendency to be concentrated in the corners), the density
estimation of hyperspectral data for both Gaussian and
uniform distributions become extremely challenging.
Fukunaga [6] claimed that there is a relation between the
type of the classiﬁer, the required number of training samples,
and the number of input dimensions. As reported in [6], the
required number of training samples is linearly related to the
dimensionality for linear classiﬁers and to the square of the di-
mensionality for quadratic classiﬁers (e.g., the Gaussian max-
imum likelihood classiﬁer [6]), and for nonparametric classi-
ﬁers, the number of required samples exponentially increases
as the dimensionality increases. Landgrebe showed a ground-
breaking fact that too many spectral bands might have negative
impacts in terms of expected classiﬁcation performance [7].
When dimensionality increases, with a constant and limited
number of training samples, a higher amount of statistics must
be estimated. Thus, the accuracy of the statistical estimationdecreases although higher spectral dimensions increase the
separability between the classes. This leads to a decrease in
classiﬁcation accuracies beyond an unknown number of bands.
These problems are related to the curse of dimensionality , also
known as Hughes phenomenon [8]. This ﬁnding was against
the general understanding of hyperspectral data where it was
wrongly believed that full dimensionality is always better than
subspace in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies.
The unique characteristics of high-dimensional data, as dis-
cussed above, have a pronounced impact on the performances
of supervised classiﬁers [9], as they demand an adequate
number of training samples, which is almost impossible to
obtain in practice since the collection of such training samples
is either expensive or time demanding. To address this issue,
feature extraction-based dimensionality reduction is found to
be effective.
B. Storage Systems and Processing Times
We are now in the era of massive data acquisitions. Statistics
demonstrate that the cumulative volume of existing big data
has been tremendously increased from 4.4 ZB to 44 ZB
from 2013 to 20201. The EO community has also faced a
similar trend because of the enormous volume and variety of
data being generated by EO missions. For example, EnMAP
(Environmental Monitoring and Analysis Program), which
is a hyperspectral satellite mission, is planning to capture
hyperspectral data with a maximum ground coverage of 5000
km30 km per day and the target revisit time of 4 days
(30) with 512 Gbit onboard mass memory [10].
Feature extraction-based dimensionality reduction helps in
data compression, which leads to the reduced storage space,
faster transmission time, removing redundant features, reduc-
ing the storage space required, and fasten the required time
for performing the same computations.
C. An Ever-Growing Relation between Machine learning and
Feature Extraction
Fig. 2 illustrates the basic idea of a machine learning ap-
proach, which consists of feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
1https://www.emc.com/leadership/digital-universe/2014iview/executive-
summary.htm

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 3
In machine learning, users are requested to provide some
guidelines for the machine (algorithm). These guidelines are
usually provided by applying hand-crafted feature extraction
approaches to provide informative features for the subsequent
classiﬁer. At the very beginning, each image pixel is regarded
as a pattern, and its spectrum (i.e., a vector of different values
of a pixel in different spectral channels) is considered as
the initial set of features. This set of features, which are
also known as spectral features, suffers from two important
downsides: (1) These features are often redundant and (2) they
do not consider the spatial dependencies of the adjacent pixels.
To address the ﬁrst issue, a feature reduction (through
feature extraction or selection) step can be applied, aiming
at reducing the dimensionality of the input data (from p1
dimensions in the original data to p2dimensions in a new
feature space p2< p 1). This step can also be known as
spectral feature extraction , which tries to preserve the key
spectral information of the data by reducing the dimensionality
and maximizing separability between classes. It is interesting
to note that the second issue can also be addressed using
feature extraction approaches. Please note that here the feature
extraction step, which is also known as spatial feature extrac-
tion, is not aiming at reducing the dimensionality and instead
is trying to model (extract) spatial contextual information
suitable for the subsequent classiﬁcation or object detection
step and usually leads to an increase in the number of features.
The simultaneous use of spectral and spatial features for
hyperspectral data classiﬁcation were studied in numerous
works such as [5], [11]–[13].
Deep learning (as shown in Fig. 2), which is regarded as
a subset of machine learning, tries to automatize the build-
ing blocks of the machine learning approaches (i.e., feature
extraction and classiﬁcation) by developing an end-to-end
framework, which takes the input, performs automatic feature
extraction and classiﬁcation by considering the unique nature
of the input data (instead of those hand-crafted feature extrac-
tion designs in machine learning), and outputs classiﬁcation
maps. It turns out that if an adequate amount of training data
is supplied, deep learning approaches can outperform any other
shallow machine learning approaches in terms of accuracies.
Here, a question arises: Due to the fact that the number of
available training data is often limited in the remote sensing
community, would advanced deep learning-based approaches
outperform their shallow alternatives in terms of accuracies?
This question will be addressed in this paper.
Based on the above-mentioned descriptions, feature ex-
traction is a key step in both machine learning and deep
learning, whose concept has been evolved signiﬁcantly through
time from unsupervised to (semi-)supervised, from spectral or
spatial to spectral-and-spatial, from manual to automatic, from
hand-crafted to end-to-end, and from shallow to deep.
D. Contributions
This article provides a detailed and organized overview of
hyperspectral feature extraction techniques, categorized into
two general sections: shallow feature extraction techniques
(further categorized into supervised and unsupervised) and
Fig. 2. Feature extraction via machine learning and deep learning.
deep feature extraction techniques. Each section provides
a critical overview of the state of the art that is mainly
rooted in the signal and image processing, statistical in-
ference, and machine (deep) learning ﬁelds. Then, a few
representative and advanced feature extraction approaches
are chosen from each of the above-mentioned categories for
further analysis and comparisons (mostly in terms of useful-
ness for classiﬁcation). This article will, therefore, contribute
to answering the following questions: When it comes to
hyperspectral data in Earth observation, are deep learning-
based feature extraction approaches better alternatives than
their conventional (yet advanced) shallow feature extraction
techniques? Which factors should be considered to design
robust shallow and deep feature extraction techniques? In
addition, to further promote this ﬁeld of research, this paper is
accompanied with a signiﬁcant amount of codes and libraries
for hyperspectral feature extraction, which is made pub-
licly available at https://github.com/BehnoodRasti/HyFTech-
Hyperspectral-Shallow-Deep-Feature-Extraction-Toolbox. Fi-
nally, several possible future directions are highlighted. To
make the contribution of this paper clearer compared to the
existing papers in the literature, here we provide a brief
discussion. The work of [14] is dedicated to the evolution of
discriminant analysis-based feature extraction models, which
is a speciﬁc type of dimensionality reduction approaches. The
work of [15] reviewed feature extraction and data mining
works, which had been published mostly until 2012. Since
2012, however, many deep and shallow feature extraction
approaches have been developed, which are critically reviewed
and compared against each other in this work. The work
of [16] focuses only on feature selection approaches while
our proposed paper covers feature extraction techniques, and
therefore, they complement each other.
II. D ATASETS AND NOTATIONS
A. Datasets
1) Indian Pines 2010: This dataset (Fig. 3) is a very
high resolution hyperspectral image (VHR HS) acquired by
the ProSpecTIR system over near Purdue University, Indiana,
between 24-25th of May 2010. In this paper, we use a subset

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 4
Fig. 3. Indian Pines 2010 datasets, from left to right, RGB composition,
Training set, and Test set.
of 445750 pixels with 360 spectral bands. The dataset has
the spatial resolution of 2 m and spectral width of 5 nm.
The dataset contains 16 land cover classes shown in Fig. 3.
The training and test sets used in this study have also been
demonstrated in Fig. 3. Table I gives the number of samples,
including training and test samples used in the experimental
section.
TABLE I
INDIAN PINES 2010: T HE NUMBER OF TRAINING SAMPLES ,TEST
SAMPLES ,AND THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SAMPLES PER CLASS .
Class No. Class Name Training Samples Test Samples Samples
1 Corn-high 726 2661 3387
2 Corn-mid 465 1275 1740
3 Corn-low 66 290 356
4 Soy-bean-high 324 1041 1365
5 Soy-bean-mid 2548 35317 37865
6 Soy-bean-low 1428 27782 29210
7 Residues 368 5427 5795
8 Wheat 182 3205 3387
9 Hay 1938 48107 50045
10 Grass/Pasture 496 5048 5544
11 Cover crop 1 400 2346 2746
12 Cover crop 2 176 1988 2164
13 Woodlands 1640 46919 48559
14 Highway 105 4758 4863
15 Local road 52 450 502
16 Buildings 40 506 546
Total 10954 187120 198074
2) Houston University 2013: This dataset was acquired
on June 23, 2012, by the Compact Airborne Spectrographic
Imager (CASI) over the campus of the University of Houston
and the neighboring urban area. The average height of the
sensor was 5500ft. The data contain 349 1905 pixels with
the spatial resolution of 2.5 m and 144 spectral bands ranging
0.38-1.05m. The dataset includes 15 classes of interests
shown in Fig. 4. A color composite representation of the
data and the corresponding training and test samples used
in this study are shown in Fig. 4. The number of training
Fig. 4. Houston University 2013 datasets, from top to bottom, RGB
composition, Training set, and Test set.
and test samples for different classes of interests used in the
experiments are given in Table II.
TABLE II
HOUSTON UNIVERSITY 2013: T HE NUMBER OF TRAINING SAMPLES ,TEST
SAMPLES ,AND THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SAMPLES PER CLASS .
Class No. Class Name Training Samples Test Samples Samples
1 Grass Healthy 198 1053 1251
2 Grass Stressed 190 1064 1254
3 Grass Synthetic 192 505 697
4 Tree 188 1056 1244
5 Soil 186 1056 1242
6 Water 182 143 325
7 Residential 196 1072 1268
8 Commercial 191 1053 1244
9 Road 193 1059 1252
10 Highway 191 1036 1227
11 Railway 181 1054 1235
12 Parking Lot 1 192 1041 1233
13 Parking Lot 2 184 285 469
14 Tennis Court 181 247 428
15 Running Track 187 473 660
Total 2832 12197 15029
3) Houston University 2018: This dataset was acquired on
Feb. 16, 2017 by the hyperspectral imager CASI 1500 over
the area of the University of Houston. The data covers the
spectral range 380-1050 nm with 48 bands with the ground
sampling distance of 1 m. In this article, we utilized the
training portion of the whole data set, which was distributed
by the Image Analysis and Data Fusion Technical Committee
of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society (GRSS)
and the University of Houston for the 2018 data fusion contest.
It contains 6012384 pixels and 20 land cover classes of
interest shown in Fig.5. The VHR RGB image is downsampled
and shown in Fig.5 together with the corresponding training
and test samples used in this study. The number of training
and test samples for different classes of interest used in the
experiments are given in Table III.

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 5
Fig. 5. Houston University 2018 datasets, from top to bottom, The VHR
RGB Image (downsampled), Training set, and Test set.
TABLE III
HOUSTON UNIVERSITY 2018: T HE NUMBER OF TRAINING SAMPLES ,TEST
SAMPLES ,AND THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SAMPLES PER CLASS .
Class No. Class Name Training Test Sample
1 Healthy grass 1458 8341 9799
2 Stressed grass 4316 28186 32502
3 Synthetic grass 331 353 684
4 Evergreen Trees 2005 11583 13588
5 Deciduous Trees 676 4372 5048
6 Soil 1757 2759 4516
7 Water 147 119 266
8 Residential 3809 35953 39762
9 Commercial 2789 220895 223684
10 Road 3188 42622 45810
11 Sidewalk 2699 31303 34002
12 Crosswalk 225 1291 1516
13 Major Thoroughfares 5193 41165 46358
14 Highway 700 9149 9849
15 Railway 1224 5713 6937
16 Paved Parking Lot 1179 10296 11475
17 Gravel Parking Lot 127 22 149
18 Cars 848 5730 6578
19 Trains 493 4872 5365
20 Seats 1313 5511 6824
Total 34477 470235 504712B. Notations
The observed HSI is denoted by X2Rpnwherepand
nare the number of spectral bands and pixels in each band,
respectively. dindicates the dimension of the feature space
(the subspace). Xm2Rpmwherem<n denotes the matrix
which contains the training samples. ym2R1mdenotes the
vector which contains the class labels where yi2f1;2;:::;kg
andkdenotes the number of classes. Iis the identity matrix
and ^Xis the estimate of matrix X. The Frobenius norm is
denoted byk:kF. tr(X)denotes the trace of matrix X. The
deﬁnitions of the symbols used in the paper are given in Table
IV.
III. S HALLOW FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES
A. Unsupervised Feature Extraction Techniques
Unsupervised feature extraction (UFE) often refers to the
FE techniques which do not incorporate the knowledge of the
ground (ground reference or labeled samples) to extract fea-
tures. UFE techniques often rely on intrinsic characteristic of
the HSI data such as geometric, spatial or spectral information
to extract the features. Arguably, the main advantage of UFE
compared with the other FE techniques is the lack of need
for the training samples, which is of great importance in the
case of remote sensing datasets. In this paper, four major UFE
groups widely-used for HSI analysis are studied, which are
categorized in the following subsections. Fig. 6 illustrates the
graphical abstracts of those groups. Before explaining the UFE
techniques in more details, we brieﬂy refer to three groups of
widely-used FE techniques which could also be assumed as
UFE, however, will not be studied in details in this paper
due to their speciﬁc applications. The ﬁrst group includes a
range of approaches such as normalized differential vegetation
index (NDVI) and normalized differential water index (NDWI)
which often rely on the knowledge of the characteristics of
the sensors. The second group includes unmixing techniques,
which could also be assumed as UFE techniques. They of-
ten exploit optimization techniques to show the fractions of
materials existing in pixels based on some assumptions on
the spectral signatures of the materials. Therefore, the ﬁnal
features extracted represent different materials in the scene at
the sub-pixel level [17]. The third group includes an impressive
number of approaches based on mathematical morphology,
which hierarchically extract spatial and contextual information
from the input image and usually leads to a signiﬁcant increase
in the number of features [18].
1) Conventional Data Projection/Transformation Tech-
niques: Numerous UFE techniques fall into this category. The
conventional techniques categorized in this group are often
designed to linearly project or transform the data, X, in a lower
dimensional feature space (also called subspace) exploiting
different non-local intrinsic characteristics of the hyperspectral
dataset. The transformation can be given by
Z=VTX (1)
where Zis the projected data in the lower dimensional space
andVis the transformation matrix or the bases for the sub-
space. Arguably, principal component analysis (PCA) [19] can

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 6
TABLE IV
THE DIFFERENT SYMBOLS USED IN THIS PAPER AND THEIR DEFINITION
Symbols Deﬁnition
xi theith entry of the vector x.
Xij the(i; j)th entry of the matrix X.
xi theith column of the matrix X.
x(j) thejth row of the matrix X.
kxk0l0-norm of the vector xi.e. the number of nonzero entries.
kxk1l1-norm of the vector x, obtained byP
ijxij.
kxk2l2-norm of the vector x, obtained bypP
ix2
i.
kXk1l1-norm of the matrix X, obtained byP
i;jjXijj.
kXkFFrobenius-norm of the matrix X, obtained byqP
i;jX2
ij.
^X the estimate of the matrix X.
tr(X) the trace of the matrix X.
kXkTVtotal variation norm of the matrix Xis obtained byP
iTV 
x(i)
be considered as the most conventional UFE technique which
has been widely used for hyperspectral analysis [20]. PCA
captures the maximum variance of the signal by projecting
the signal on the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix ( C)
using
max
VVTCV
VTV: (2)
A widely used HSI UFE technique is the maximum noise
fraction (MNF) [21] or noise adjusted principal components
(NAPC) [22] which seek a projection in which the signal
to noise ratio (SNR) is maximized. MNF uses the following
optimization
max
VVTCV
VTCnV; (3)
where Cnis the noise covariance matrix. Another conventional
technique is independent component analysis (ICA) [23].
ICA assumes a linear mixture model of the non-Gaussian
independent source signals and the mixing matrix which both
are simultaneously estimated and therefore ICA is referred to
as blind source separation. ICA has been also widely used for
hyperspectral image analysis [24].
To cope with the nonlinearity of the HSI data, the kernel
(nonlinear) versions of the aforementioned techniques i.e.,
kernel MNF [25], kernel ICA (KICA) [26], and kernel PCA
(KPCA) [27] have been also proposed. By using the kernel
trick the data are projected into a feature space where the inner
product are deﬁned using a kernel function. KICA and KPCA
have been used as UFE techniques for change detection and
classiﬁcation in [28] and [29], respectively. In [30], discrete
wavelet transformation (DWT) has been used for hyperspectral
feature extraction. Since, DWT does not reduce the dimension,
in [30], linear discriminant analysis (LDA) has been exploited
to reduce the dimension.
2) Band Clustering/Splitting and Merging-based Tech-
niques: The top right sub-ﬁgure from Fig. 6 shows the basic
steps of band clustering and merging-based feature extraction
methods. As shown in this ﬁgure, the core idea behind this
group of methods is to split the spectral bands into several
groups in which the spectral bands have very high correla-
tion. Hence, the proposed techniques often use similarity and
dissimilarity criteria to split the spectral bands into severalnon-overlapping groups. By selecting or fusing the bands of
each group, some representative bands or features of different
groups are obtained. Furthermore, followed by the merging
step, some band ﬁltering and processing operations can be
also used to further improve the discrimination of the resulting
features. This group of techniques is often computationally
cheap, and thus has been widely used in real applications. On
the other hand, spectral information is often neglected by the
methods in this category.
For the band clustering and merging two algorithms are
proposed in [31]. The ﬁrst algorithm selects discriminative
bases by considering all the classes simultaneously, however,
the second algorithm selects the best bases for a pair of classes
at a time. In [32], a hierarchical clustering algorithm was
introduced to split and cluster the hyperspectral bands where
the representative band for each cluster is selected based on
both a mutual information criterion and a divergence-based
criterion. Another band clustering technique was proposed
in [33] where the splitting is done by minimizing a mutual
information criterion applied on averaged bands iteratively.
Iterative algorithms were proposed in [34], for both splitting
and merging the bands. The splitting procedure is done using
the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between adjacent bands.
Then, the merging is applied by averaging over the splited
bands.
Besides splitting/clustering and merging hyperspectral
bands, another operation is to further improve the feature
discrimination by band ﬁltering or processing. For example,
a hyperspectral feature extraction using image fusion and
recursive ﬁltering was given in [35] where the adjacent bands
are fused by averaging and then recursive ﬁltering was used
for extracting spatial information. In [36], the intrinsic image
decomposition is applied for processing the merged bands,
which can effectively remove information that is not related to
the material of different objects. After that, multiple improved
versions of intrinsic decomposition-based band processing
methods are developed [37], [38]. In [39], a relative total
variation-based structure extraction method is applied for band
processing, so as to construct multi-scale structural features
which are robust to image noise.
3) Low-Rank Reconstruction-based Techniques: Low-rank
reconstruction-based feature extraction techniques proposed

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 7
by Rasti et al. [40]–[43] are based on ﬁnding an orthogonal
subspace by minimizing a constrained cost function. They ex-
ploit low-rank models and reconstruction-based optimization
frameworks to extract features. The optimization frameworks
take into account the prior knowledge of the data using
different types of penalties. Due to the noise assumption in the
low-rank model used, this group of FE techniques is robust to
noise. They are often computationally expensive compared to
groups 1 and 2 due to the iterative algorithms used to solve
the (non-convex) optimization problem.
Wavelet-based sparse reduced rank regression (WSRRR)
[41] applies the sparsity prior on the wavelet coefﬁcients
considering that the projected data on wavelet bases are sparse.
WSRRR uses the model
X=VTQD 2+N; (4)
where D2represents 2D wavelet bases, Xis the observed HSI,
Vcontains the orthogonal subspace bases, and Nis the noise
and model error. WSRRR simultaneously estimates the low-
rank projection matrix and the wavelet coefﬁcients Wwhich
minimizes
(^V;^Q) = arg min
Q;V1
2X VTQD 22
F+dX
j=1jqT
(j)
1
s.t.VTV=I:
(5)
Note that the extracted features are given by ^F=^QD 2.
To capture the spatial (neighboring) information, orthog-
onal total variation component analysis (OTVCA) has been
proposed in [42] where the HSI is modeled as
X=VTF+N; (6)
where matrix Fcontains the unknown features. OTVCA
assumes that the hyperspectral features are spatially piece-wise
smooth and, therefore, exploits the total variation (TV) penalty
and simultaneously estimates FandVusing
^F= arg min
F1
2X VTF2
F+dX
j=1TV
fT
(j)
;(7)
where
TV(x) =p
(Dh(x))2+ (Dv(x))2
1
andDvandDhare the matrix operators to calculate the
ﬁrst order vertical and horizontal differences, respectively, of
a vectorized image. Recently, sparse and smooth low-rank
analysis (SSLRA) was proposed in [43] which models the
HSI based on a combination of sparse and smooth features
X=VT(F+S) +N; (8)
where FandScontain smooth and sparse features, respec-
tively. SSLRA extracts simultaneously the sparse features, S,
and the smooth ones, F, by taking into account both sparsity
and TV penalties
(^F;^S;^V) =1
2X VT(F+S)2
F+1kFkTV+2kSk1
s.t.VTV=I:(9)4) Graph Embedding and/or Manifold Learning Tech-
niques: Considering the nonlinear characteristic of HSIs, this
group of FE techniques aims to capture the data manifold
through local geometric structure of neighboring pixels in the
feature space. Fig. 6 (bottom right) demonstrates the concept
of manifold learning FE techniques applied on the Swiss roll
dataset. The pink line in the left ﬁgure shows the Euclidean
distance between two data points in 3D space. It is clear that
this line is not an effective metric to measure the similarity of
the two points selected in the Swiss roll dataset. On the other
hand, after unfolding the dataset which can be represented in
2D space, in the right ﬁgure, the Euclidean distance between
two data points shown by the pink line is a better representative
of the similarity of the two point in the dataset. The FE
techniques categorized in this group are indeed designed to
capture such a manifold while representing the data in a lower
dimensional feature space.
Graph embedding or manifold learning FE techniques often
include three main steps, 1) neighborhood pixel selection 2)
weight selection, and 3) embedding construction. Isometric
mapping (ISOMAP) [44], [45] is a global geometric nonlinear
feature extraction. ISOMAP searches for geodesic distances
between data points. It includes three main steps; 1) Construct-
ing a neighborhood graph of the data points. 2) Computing
the shortest path distances between all data points in the
neighborhood graph. 3) constructing the lower dimensional
embedding vectors which preserves the path distances in the
neighborhood graph. Locally linear embedding (LLE) [46],
Laplacian eigenmaps (LE) [47], and locality preserving projec-
tion (LPP) [48] are also geometric nonlinear feature extraction
based on graph embedding. LLE constructs the embedding
graph in three steps; 1) Selecting the neighbors for data points
using theKnearest neighbors. 2) Compute the weights Ai;j
that linearly reconstruct the data points using their neighbors
by minimizing the following constrained least-squares
min
AnX
i=1xi X
j2iAijxj2
2s:t:X
j2iAij=1;(10)
wherei(xi)contains the neighborhood pixels selected for xi.
We should note that the constrained weights estimated from
(10) for every data point are invariant to rotations, rescalings,
and translations of that data point and its neighbors and
therefore they characterize the intrinsic geometric properties
of each neighborhood. 3) Constructing the lower dimensional
embedding vectors yby minimizing
min
znX
i=1zi X
j2iAijzj2
2s:t:nX
i=1zi=0;
1
nnX
i=1zizT
i=I: (11)
We should note that the reconstruction weights Aijare ﬁxed
in minimization (11) and therefore the intrinsic geometric
properties of the data with dimension pare invariant to such
a transformation into a lower dimension d.

==== Page 8 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 8
Fig. 6. Four major categories of unsupervised feature extraction methods.
In [49], a general frame-work for graph embedding is given
by
min
zX
i;j2ikzi zjk2
2Wijs:t:ZBZT=I; (12)
or equivalently
min
Ztr(Z(D W)ZT) = min
Ztr(ZLZT)
s:t:ZBZT=I; (13)
where L=D Wdenotes the Laplacian matrix of the
undirected weighted graph G=fX;Wg(where Xis the
vertex set and W2Rnnis the similarity matrix), Dis a
diagonal matrix where its entries are given by
Dii=X
j6=iWij;8i: (14)
The diagonal matrix Bis for the scale normalization and
might also be the Laplacian matrix of a penalty graph such as
Gp=fX;Wpg. We should note that the vertices of GpandG
(i.e.,X) are the same while the similarity matrix ( Wp) corre-
sponds to the similarity characteristics suppressed in the lower
dimensional feature space ( B=Lp=Dp Wp, see [49]).
LLE can be reformulated using graph embedding mentioned
above with similarity matrix Wij=Aij+AT
ij AT
ijAijif
j2iotherwise Wij= 0 andB=I[49]. ISOMAP, LE,
and LPP can be also formulated using graph embedding [49].
In the viewpoint of graph embedding the main differences
between these FE techniques are the selection of the matrices
WandB. For instance, LE and LPP use the Gaussian function
with the standard deviation to choose the similarity matrix
as
Wij=(
exp jjxi xjjj2
2
22;8i;j2i(xi)
0; otherwise.(15)
We should note that the techniques categorized in this group
are assumed as supervised FE methods when they are applied
only on the training samples. This is common in the case ofHSI due to the large volume of the image which makes the
algorithm computationally very expensive. In the following
section we will discuss how the ground reference (training
samples) can be used to construct the edge matrix, W, and
therefore those techniques are considered as SFE.
B. Supervised Feature Extraction Techniques
Unlike unsupervised FE techniques that rely on modeling
various prior assumptions of hyperspectral data, supervised
methods are capable of extracting class-separable features
more effectively, owing to the use of label information. Over
the past few decades, some seminal models have been widely
developed and applied to perform supervised feature extraction
on HSIs, which can be roughly categorized into two streams:
Subspace learning (SL)-based andband selection (BS)-based
approaches.
Different from the hand-crafted features [50], the SL-based
approaches learn to extract the low-dimensional representation
from the data by formulating different supervised rules in
view of label information. There are some typical methods
in SL, including linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [51],
matrix discriminant analysis (MDA) [52], decision boundary
FE (DBFE) [53], etc. While the latter, BS, which aims
at screening out the representative and informative spectral
bands, is unfolded with mutual information-based BS [54],
rough set, and fuzzy C-means [55], to name a few. To further
enhance the class separability, a large number of extended
methods have been successfully proposed in recent years,
which are subspace LDA (SLDA) [56], regularized LDA [57],
local ﬁsher’s discriminant analysis (LFDA) [58], feature space
discriminative analysis (FSDA) [59], rough-set-based BS [60],
and FE with local spatial modeling [61].
According to the powerful learning ability of SL methods
compared to that of BS-based strategies, we rather focus on
reviewing the SL-related FE techniques, in which two main
streams – discriminant analysis FE (DAFE) and regression-
induced representation learning (RIRL) – are emphatically

==== Page 9 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 9
Labeled HSI (X) 
Subspace Features (Z) 
Labels (Y) {     đ     đ   } C1 Ck…… 
Labeled HSI (X) 
Subspace Features (Z) 
Affinity Matrix (W) Graph Embedding-based Discriminant Analysis 
 LSDR 
Labeled HSI (X) 
Class Separation Rule Subspace Features (Z) LDA CGDA 
Joint & Progressive Learning Strategy (J-Play) 
1
0
0
00
0
0
10
1
0
0
Labeled HSI (X) Subspace Features (Z) One-Hot Encoded Labels (      ) lY...... ...... Regression-based Representation Learning Class Separation-based Discriminant Analysis 
Fig. 7. The illustration for supervised FE with four different categories. The obvious differences lie in the use form of label information and learning strategies,
i.e., LDA: Fishers rule, CGDA: Afﬁnity matrix, LSDR: Labels, JPlay: Joint use of afﬁnity matrix and one-hot encoded labels.
investigated and compared by clarifying their similarities and
differences as well as pros and cons, as brieﬂy illustrated in
Fig. 7.
1) Discriminant Analysis Feature Extraction (DAFE): Gen-
erally speaking, DAFE seeks to ﬁnd an optimal projection or
transformation matrix P2Rpd(dis the dimension of the
to-be-estimated subspace) by optimizing certain class-relevant
separation criterion associated with the label information. In
this process, the estimated subspace Z2Rdnthat consists of
a series of vector zican be obtained by projecting the samples
Xm=fxigm
i=12Rpmonto a decision boundary, which can
be generally expressed as Z=PTX. Each vector ziinZ
can be collected by PTxi. Depending on the different types
of label embedding, DAFE can be subdivided into LDA and
its variants, graph-based discriminant analysis (GDA) and its
extensions, and kernelized discriminant analysis (KDA).
.LDA and Its Variants: The traditional LDA linearly
transforms the original data into a discriminative subspace
by maximizing the Fisher’s ratio in the form of generalized
Rayleigh quotient, that is, minimizing the intra-class scatter
and maximizing inter-class scatter simultaneously. Given a
pair-wise training set f(x1;y1);:::; (xi;yi);:::; (xm;ym)g,
the objective function of multi-class LDA to estimate the linear
projection matrix Pcan be written as follows:
max
Ptr(PTSbP)
tr(PTSwP); (16)
where SwandSbare deﬁned as the within-class scatter matrix
and the between-class scatter matrix, respectively. With the
constraint of PTSwP=I, the optimization problem in (16)
can be equivalently converted to one of SbP=SwPby
introducing the Lagrange multiplier . The close-form solution
to the simpliﬁed optimization problem can be deduced by a
generalized eigenvalues decomposition (GED).Due to the sensitivity to complex high-dimensional noises
caused by the environmental and instrumental factors and the
availability of labeled samples, the original LDA inevitably
suffers from an ill-posed statistical degradation, especially
in the case of small-scale samples. The degraded reasons
mainly lie in the singularity of the two scatter metrics ( Sw
andSb), thereby easily leading to the overﬁtting problem. To
improve the stability and generalization, the regularized LDA
was proposed by additionally adding a l2-norm constraint on
Swparameterized by asSreg
w=Sw+I. By replacing Swin
(16) with the regularized Sreg
w, the solution in the regularized
LDA can be still obtained by the GED solver.
Considering the local neighborhood relations between sam-
ples in the process of model learning, LFDA breaks through
the bottleneck of those LDA-based methods by assuming
that the data are distributed in the nonlinear manifolds rather
than a homogeneous Gaussian space. For this purpose, LFDA
is capable of effectively excavating the locally underlying
structure of the data that lies in the real world. Essentially,
LFDA can be regarded as a weighted LDA by locally weighing
SwandSbmatrices. Therefore, the two modiﬁed scatter
matrices, denoted as eSwandeSb, can be formulated as
eSw=1
2mX
i=1mX
j=1Ww
ij(xi xj)(xi xj)T;
eSb=1
2mX
i=1mX
j=1Wb
ij(xi xj)(xi xj)T;(17)
where the two weights ( WwandWb) denote the sample-wise
similarities. There are several widely-used strategies in calcu-
lating such a similarity matrix symbolized by W. A simple
yet effective one is given by Wij= 1, ifxj2k(xi), where
k(xi)represents the k-nearest-neighbor of xi; otherwise,

==== Page 10 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 10
Wij= 0. Another commonly-used one was constructed based
on the radial basis function (RBF) with a standard derivation
of, as deﬁned in (15). Please refer to [62]–[64] that might
be useful for those who are interested in more types of W.
Similar to SLDA that ﬁrst projects the original data into
a subspace and then LDA is performed in the transformed
subspace, FSDA starts with maximizing the between-spectral
scatter matrix ( Sf) to enhance the differences along the
spectral dimension, and similarly, the LDA is further used for
extracting the representations of class separability from the
feature domain. In the ﬁrst step, let i;jbe the average value
of thej-th class and the i-th spectral band, then we have the
deﬁnition of Sfas follows:
Sf=1
2pX
i=1(hi h)(hi h)T; (18)
where hi= [i;1;i;2;:::;i;k]is the spectral representation in
the feature space and h=1
pPp
i=1hi. The primary transfor-
mation ( Pf) that aims at improving the spectral discriminant
can be estimated with maximizing the trace term of Sfas
max
Pftr(PT
fSfPf): (19)
Using the obtained Pf, the latent representation in the feature
space gi=PT
fhi; i= 1;2;:::;p can be further fed into the
next-step LDA.
.GDA and Its Extensions: Before revisiting the GDA
methods, we ﬁrst introduce and formulate the general graph
embedding (GGE) framework presented in [49] with Eq. (12).
Obviously, the extracted features Zin the GGE framework
are determined by the construction of Wto a great extent.
Thus, we will highlight several kinds of representative afﬁn-
ity matrices corresponding to the different graph embedding
approaches, i.e. LDA, LE [47] and its linearized LPP [48],
LLE [46], sparse GDA (SGDA) [65], and collaborative GDA
(CGDA) [66]. Fig. 8 visualizes the afﬁnity matrices given
by ﬁve different strategies in a four-class case selected from
Houston 2013 dataset.
LDA-like afﬁnity matrix: In essence, LDA is vested in
a special case of GGE framework with D(LDA)=I, whose
afﬁnity matrix can be represented as
W(LDA)
ij =(
1=Nk;ifxiandxj2Ck;
0;otherwise,(20)
whereNkis the number of samples belonging to k-th class.
LPP or LE-based afﬁnity matrix: One is to be constructed
in kernel space with a higher dimension via similarity mea-
surement, i.e. extensively using (15).
LLE-based afﬁnity matrix: Different from the hand-
crafted graph, LLE reconstructs each given sample with its
k-nearest neighbors by exploiting the linear regression tech-
niques [67], [68]. As a result, the reconstruction coefﬁcients
(A) can be obtained by solving the optimization problem of
(10). With the known A, it is straightforward to derive the
needful afﬁnity matrix, denoted as W(LLE),
W(LLE)
ij =(
Aij+AT
ij AijAT
ij;ifxj2k(xi);
0; otherwise,
(21)thereby inducing the Laplacian matrix as L(LLE)=D(LLE) 
W(LLE)= (I A)T(I A).
SGDA and CGDA-guided afﬁnity matrix: Similarly to
LLE, the afﬁnity matrix can be estimated using the data-driven
representation learning, i.e., sparse and collaborative represen-
tations [69]–[71]. Accordingly, the two learning strategies can
be equivalent to respectively solving the constrained l1-norm
optimization problem:
min
WkWk1s:t:kXmW Xmk2
F; (22)
and thel2-norm optimization problem:
min
WkWk2
Fs:t:kXmW Xmk2
F: (23)
The aforementioned afﬁnity matrices can be uniﬁed to the
GGE framework of (12).
In addition to SGDA and CGDA (the two baselines), Huang
et al. [72] learned a set of sparse coefﬁcients on manifolds and
then preserved the sparse manifold structure in the embedded
space. The work in [73] extended the existing SGDA to
the spatial-spectral graph embedding to address the issues of
the spatial variability and spectral multimodality. With the
embedding of the intrinsic geometric structure of the data,
a Laplacian regularizer CGDA [74] was developed to further
improve the graph’s conﬁdence. Li et al. [75] simultaneously
integrated the sparsity and low-rankness into the graph for
capturing a more robust structure of the data locally and
globally. Furthermore, Pan et al. [76] further improved the
above work by unfolding the HSI data with the form of a
tensor.
.KDA: In reality, the HSI usually exhibits a highly non-
linear data distribution, which may result in difﬁculties to
effectively identify the materials. The solution to this issue
is making use of a so-called kernel trick [77] that can map the
data of the input space into a new Hilbert space with a higher
feature dimension. In the kernel-induced space, the complex
nonlinearity of the HSI can be well analyzed in a linearized
system. Comparatively, the input to KDA is an inner product
of original data pairs, deﬁned as k(xi;xj)which can be
given by (15). By introducing the kernel Gram matrix Kwith
Ki;j=(xi)T(xj) =k(xi;xj), most of previous LDA-
based methods can be simply extended to the corresponding
kernelized versions, i.e. KLDA and KLFDA can calculate their
projections Pby solving a GED problem of
KLKP =(KBK +I)P: (24)
Note that B=Iin KLDA, while L=LwandB=Lb
are computed by Dw WwandDb Wbin the kernel
space, respectively, for KLFDA. Furthermore, for KSGDA and
KCGDA, the main difference lies in the computation of the
adjacency matrix, which can be performed in the kernel space
by solving the general kernel coding problem as follows:
min
W
(W) s:t:k(Xm)W (Xm)k2
F; (25)
where 
(W)can be selected to be either sparsity-prompting
termkWk1of KSGDA or dense (or collaborative) term
kWk2
Fof KCGDA. In [78] and [74], the solutions in (25) have
been theoretically guaranteed in the same way by solving the

==== Page 11 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 11
00.5 1.0 
LDA LPP LLE SGDA CGDA 
Fig. 8. A four-class showcase for afﬁnity matrices ( W) with respect to ﬁve different approaches, where the connectivity (or edge) of Wis computed within
each class.
problems (22) and (23) using the alternating direction method
of multiplier (ADMM) [79] and least-square regression with
Tikhonov regularization [80], respectively.
2) Regression-induced Representation Learning (RIRL):
RIRL provides a new insight from the regression’s point
of view to model the FE behavior by bridging the training
samples with the corresponding labels rather than indirectly
using the label information in the form of graph or afﬁnity
matrix in DAFE-based methods.
.Least-Squares Dimension Reduction (LSDR): We begin
with sliced inverse regression (SIR) [81], which is a landmark
in supervised FE techniques. It assumes that the pair-wise
dataf(xi;yi)gm
i=1are conditionally independent on the to-
be-estimated subspace features fzigm
i=1, formulated as (X?
Y)jZ. Following this rule, the LSDR proposed by Suzuki and
Sugiyama [82] attempts to ﬁnd a maximizer of the squared-
loss mutual information (SMI) to satisfy the previously men-
tioned independence assumption. The projections Pfor LSDR
can be searched by optimizing the following maximization
problem:
max
PSMI(Z;Y) s:t:PPT=I; (26)
and the SMI to measure a statistical dependence between two
discrete variables is deﬁned as
SMI(Z;Y) =X
z2ZX
y2Yp(z)p(y)p(z;y)
p(z)p(y) 12
;(27)
wherep()is the probability distribution function.
.Least-Squares Quadratic Mutual Information (LSQMI):
Limited by the sensitivity of MI to outliers, authors of [83]
designed a more robust LSQMI with the basis of QMI crite-
rion, hence let us deﬁne the QMI as
QMI( Z;Y) =X
z2ZX
y2Y(p(z;y) p(z)p(y))2:(28)
Similarly, we solve (26)-like optimization problem by replac-
ing SMI with QMI.
.Least-Squares QMI Derivative (LSQMID): Due to the
difﬁculty in accurately computing the derivative of QMI
estimator, LSQMI was further extended to a computationally
effective LSQMID by estimating the derivative of QMI instead
of QMI itself [84]. In this work, authors have demonstrated a
more accurate and efﬁcient derivative computation of QMI.
.Joint & Progressive Learning Strategy (JPlay): Another
MI-free estimation group is latent subspace learning (LSL).One representative LSL performs FE and classiﬁcation simul-
taneously in joint learning (JL) fashion [85]. With an expected
output Xm, the process can be modeled as
min
Pk;kYl PkXmk2
F+
2kPkk2
Fs:t:T=I;(29)
where Yl2Rkmand2Rdpare deﬁned as the one-hot
encoded label matrices and the latent subspace projections,
respectively. Pk2Rkddenotes the regression matrix that
connects the learned subspace and the label information. Yl
can be formulated as
Yl=2
66666666641 0::: 0::: 0
0 1::: 0::: 0
::: ::: :::
0 0::: 1::: 0
::: ::: :::
0 0::: 0::: 13
77777777751
2
:::
j
:::
k: (30)
In [85], the model’s solution has been proven to be a closed-
form. Moreover, the work in [86] explored a LDA-like graph
as a regularizer to learn a spectrally discriminative feature
representation, thus (29) becomes
min
Pk;kYl PkXmk2
F+
2kPkk2
F+
2tr(XmLXT
mT)
s:t:T=I:
(31)
Beyond the JL-based models, Hong et al. [87] established
a novel multi-layered regression framework by following a
joint and progressive learning strategy (JPlay). With the layer-
wise auto-reconstruction mechanism effectively against spec-
tral variabilities caused by complex noises and atmospheric
effects, the linearized JPlay breaks through the performance
bottleneck of traditional linear methods. More speciﬁcally, we
have the resulting model in the following
min
Pk;flgq
l=1kYl Pkq:::1Xmk2
F+
2kPkk2
F
+
2qX
l=1tr(lXl 1LXT
l 1T
l)
+
2qX
l=1Xl 1 T
llXl 12
F;
s:t:Xl=lXl 1;Xl0;kxik21;(32)

==== Page 12 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 12
where the soft constraint kxik21can be used to relax the
orthogonality. It is worth noting that such JL-based strategy
can clearly tell the model which features are positive to clas-
siﬁcation task, owing to the joint strategy of feature extraction
and classiﬁcation.
IV. D EEPFEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES
Shallow feature extraction techniques often require care-
ful engineering and domain knowledge of experts, which
limit their applications. Different from them, deep learning
techniques aim at automatically learning high-level features
from raw data in a hierarchical fashion. These features are
more discriminative, abstract, and robust than shallow ones.
Due to their powerful feature representation ability, deep
learning techniques have been widely used to extract features
from hyperspectral images in recent years [88], [89]. Among
various deep learning models, autoencoders (AEs), convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs), and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), shown in Fig. 9, are the most popular ones. In this
section, we will present these models and their applications to
hyperspectral feature extraction.
A. AEs
As demonstrated in Fig. 9, AE is mainly comprised of two
modules: Encoder and decoder. Encoder maps the input vector
xinto a hidden space h, while decoder aims at getting a
reconstruction result ^xof the original input from h. These
processes can be formulated as
h=f(W1x+b1);
^x=f(W2h+b2);(33)
where W1andW2denote the weights connecting the input
layer to the hidden layer and the hidden layer to the output
layer, respectively, b1andb2represent the biases of the
hidden units and the output units, respectively, and fis
a nonlinear activation function. The training of AE is to
minimize the residual between xand^x. Once trained, the
decoder is deleted and the hidden layer his considered as a
feature representation of x. In order to extract deep features,
several AEs are often stacked together, generating a stacked
AE (SAE) model. For SAE, the hidden layer in the preceding
AE will be used as the input of the subsequent AE.
SAE is perhaps the earliest deep model used to extract
features of hyperspectral images [90]. One typical beneﬁt of
SAEs is that each AE inside the network can be pre-trained
using both labeled and unlabeled samples, thus providing
better initial values for network parameters compared to the
random initialization. After layer-wise pre-training, the ﬁne-
tuning of only a few layers can acquire satisfactory discrim-
inant features. This training method is capable of alleviating
overﬁtting problem when there only exist small numbers of
training samples in hyperspectral images. In [91], the spectral
information for each pixel was considered as a vector, and fed
into an SAE model to extract deep features. These features
extracted by SAEs can also be generalized from one image to
another image, which was validated in [92] and [93].In order to extract spatial features of each pixel, one often
needs to select a local patch or cube centered at the pixel, and
then input it into a feature extraction model. Since the inputs
of SAEs are vectors, it is difﬁcult to directly process patches or
cubes. In [91] and [92], the local cubes from the ﬁrst principal
components of hyperspectral images were ﬁrstly reshaped into
vectors, and then fed into SAEs to extract spatial features.
In [94] and [95], Gabor features and extended morphological
attribute proﬁles (i.e., the joint use of shallow and deep feature
extraction methods) were used as the inputs of SAEs, making
the network easier to extract high-level spatial features. After
the extraction of spectral and spatial features, they can be
easily concatenated together to generate a spectral-spatial joint
feature [91], [92]. Compared to the concatenation method, the
authors in [94] and [95] proposed to use another SAEs for
fusing the spectral and spatial features, which may further
enhance the discriminative ability of spectral-spatial features.
Similar to the traditional feature extraction methods, one can
also embed some prior or expected information into SAEs.
Based upon the assumption that neighboring samples in the
input space should have similar hidden representations, graph
regularization was added to SAE for preserving such property
[96], [97]. In [98], Zhou et al. imposed a local regularization
via Fisher discriminant analysis on hidden layers to make the
extracted features of samples from the same category close to
each other while from different categories as far as possible,
thus improving the discriminative ability of SAE. Meanwhile,
they also added a diversity regularization term to make SAE
extract compact features.
B. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
CNNs are the most popularly adopted deep model for
hyperspectral feature extraction. As shown in Fig. 9, the basic
components of a CNN model include convolutional layers,
pooling layers, and fully connected layers. The convolutional
layers are used to extract features with convolutional kernels
(ﬁlters), which can be formulated as:
Xl=f(Xl 1Wl+bl); (34)
where Xlis thelth feature maps, Wlandbldenote the ﬁlters
and biases of the lth layer, respectively, and ‘ ’ represents
the convolutional operation. After the convolutional layer, the
pooling layer is often adopted for reducing the size of the
generated feature maps and producing more robust features.
On the top of a CNN model, there often exist some fully
connected layers, aiming at learning high-level features and
outputting the ﬁnal results of the network.
For hyperspectral images, CNNs can be used for extracting
spectral features [99] or spatial features [100]–[102], depend-
ing on the inputs of networks. In [99], Hu et al. designed
a 1-D CNN model to extract spectral features of each pixel.
Compared to the traditional fully-connected networks, CNNs
have weight-sharing and local-connection characteristics, mak-
ing their training processes more efﬁcient and effective. In
[100], 2-D CNN was explored to extract spatial features from
a local cube. Different from SAEs, CNNs do not need to
reshape the cube into a vector, thus preserving as much spatial

==== Page 13 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 13
Splito
h
xUV Wo
h
xUVt- 1
t- 1
t- 1Wo
h
xUVt
t
tWo
h
xUVt+1
t+1
t+1W WHSI Ground Truth HSI Reconstructed HSI 
HSI 
o
h
xUVt- 1
t- 1
t- 1Wo
h
xUVt
t
tWo
h
xUVt+1
t+1
t+1W WExtracted Features 
HSI AE-based DL Model CNN-based DL Model
RNN-based DL Model Integrated DL Model
Fig. 9. Four major categories of deep learning models.
information as possible. However, to make full use of the
representation ability of CNNs, two important issues need to
be considered. The ﬁrst issue is the small number of training
samples but high-dimensional spectral information, which will
easily lead to the overﬁtting problem. The second issue is the
extraction of spectral-spatial joint features, which can improve
the classiﬁcation performance in comparison with using the
spectral or spatial feature only.
For the ﬁrst issue, many widely used strategies in the ﬁeld of
natural image classiﬁcation, such as dropout and weight decay,
can be naturally adopted. In addition, a lot of promising meth-
ods have been proposed in the past few years. These methods
can be divided into four different classes. The ﬁrst class of
methods is dimensionality reduction. In [100], [101], [103],
PCA was employed to extract the ﬁrst principal components of
hyperspectral images as inputs of CNNs, thus simplifying the
network structures. Similarly, a similarity-based band selection
method was used in [104]. However, these dimensionality
reduction methods are independent from the following CNNs,
which may lose some useful information. Different from them,
Ghamisi et al. proposed a novel method to adaptively select
the most informative bands suitable for the CNN model [105].
The second class of methods is data augmentation. In [101],
two methods were proposed to generate virtual samples. One
is to multiply a random factor and add a random noise to
training samples, while the other one is to combine two given
samples from the same class with proper ratios. In [106],
a data augmentation method based on distance density was
proposed. Recently, Kong et al. proposed a random zero
setting method to generate new samples [107]. The third class
of methods is transfer learning. In [108] and [109], the authors
found that CNNs trained by one hyperspectral data can be
transferred to another data acquired by the same sensor, and
ﬁne-tuning only a few top layers achieves satisfying results.
More interestingly, the works in [110]–[112] indicated that
CNNs pretrained by natural images can be directly applied to
extract spatial features of hyperspectral images. The fourth
class of methods is semi-supervised or even unsupervised
learning. For examples, Wu and Prasad attempted to use a
clustering model to obtain pseudo labels of unlabeled samples,
and then combine the training samples and unlabeled samples(with their pseudo labels) together to train their network [113].
In terms of the second issue, one popularly used method
is feeding a local cube, directly cropped from the original
hyperspectral image, into a CNN with 3-D convolution kernels
for processing the spectral and spatial information simultane-
ously. The number of channels in the 3-D convolutional kernel
is smaller than or equal to that of its input layer. However,
the former one dramatically increases the computational com-
plexity due to the simultaneous convolution operators in both
spectral domain and spatial domain, while the latter one heav-
ily increases the number of parameters to optimize. Another
candidate method is to decouple the task of spectral-spatial
feature extraction into two parts: Spectral feature extraction
and spatial feature extraction. In [108] and [114], a parallel
structure was employed to extract spectral-spatial features.
Speciﬁcally, 1-D CNN and 2-D CNN were designed to extract
spectral features and spatial features,respectively; these two
features were then concatenated together and fused via a few
fully-connected layers. Since 2-D CNN focuses on extracting
spatial features, some redundant spectral information can be
preprocessed to reduce the computational complexity. In [115],
a serial structure was also used to extract spectral-spatial
features. It ﬁrstly applied several 11convolutions to extract
spectral features and then fed the extracted features into several
3-D convolutions to extract spatial features.
C. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
RNNs have been popularly employed to sequential data
analysis, such as machine translation and speech recognition.
Different from the feedforward neural network, RNN takes
advantage of a recurrent edge for connecting the neuron to
itself across time. Therefore, it is able to model the probability
distribution of sequence data. To make this subsection easier
to follow, we ﬁrst provide a brief and general discussion on
RNN. Then, we brieﬂy describe how to use RNN speciﬁcally
for the classiﬁcation of hyperspectral images.
Fig. 9 shows an example of RNN. Given a sequence
x= (x1;x2;;xT), where xt;t2f1;2;;Tggenerally

==== Page 14 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 14
denotes the information at the time t, the output of the hidden
layer at the tth time step is:
ht=f(Uxt+Wht 1+bh); (35)
where UandWrepresent weight matrices from the current
input layer to the hidden layer and the preceding hidden layer
to the current hidden layer, respectively, ht 1is the output
of the hidden layer at the preceding time, and bhis a bias
vector. According to this equation, it can be observed that the
contextual relationships in the time domain are constructed
via a recurrent connection. Ideally, hTwill capture most of
the information, and can be considered as the ﬁnal feature of
the sequence data. In terms of classiﬁcation tasks, one often
inputs htinto an output layer ot, which can be described as:
ot=f(Vht+bo); (36)
where Vis the weight matrix from the hidden layer to the
output layer, and bois a bias vector.
In recent years, RNNs have attracted more and more atten-
tion in the ﬁeld of hyperspectral image feature extraction. To
make full use of RNNs, one needs to ﬁrst ask the following
question: How to construct the sequence? An intuitive method
is regarding the whole spectral bands as a sequence [116],
[117]. For each pixel, its spectral values are fed into RNN
from the ﬁrst band to the last band, and the output of the
hidden layer at the last band is the extracted spectral feature.
Different from the traditional sequences in speech recognition
or machine translation tasks, the succeeding bands do not
depend on the preceding ones. Thus, Liu et al. also fed the
spectral sequence from the last band to the ﬁrst band to
construct a bidirectional RNN model [116]. Another method is
using a local patch or cube to construct the sequence [117]–
[119]. For examples, Zhou et al. regarded the rows of each
local patch, cropped from the ﬁrst principal component of
hyperspectral images, as a sequence, and fed them into RNN
one by one to extract spatial features [117]; Zhang et al.
adopted each pixel and its neighboring pixels in the cube
to form a sequence [118]. These pixels were ﬁrstly sorted
according to their similarities to the center pixel, and then fed
into RNN sequentially to extract locally spatial features.
In real applications, the constructed sequence may be
very long. Take the widely used Indian Pines data as an
example, the length of the sequence is 200 (the number
of spectral bands) if we use the ﬁrst method mentioned
above to construct the sequence. This sequence will increase
the training difﬁculty, because of the gradients tending to
either vanish or explode. In order to deal with this issue,
long short-term memory (LSTM) was employed as a more
sophisticated recurrent unit [116], [117], [120], [121]. The core
components of LSTM are three gates: an input gate, a forget
gate, and an output gate. These gates together control the
ﬂow of information in the network. Similarly, gated recurrent
unit (GRU) was also employed, which has only two gates
(i.e., an update gate and a reset gate). Compared to LSTM
units, GRUs have less numbers of parameters, which may
be more suitable for hyperspectral image feature extraction
since it usually has a limited number of training samples.
Another candidate scheme to address the issue is to divide thelong-term sequence into shorter sequences [121], [122]. For
example, in [122], Hang et al. proposed to group the adjacent
bands of hyperspectral images into subsequences, and then use
RNNs to extract features from them. Since nonadjacent bands
have some complementarity, they also used another RNN to
fuse the extracted features.
D. Integrated Networks
In general, AEs and RNNs are good at processing vectorized
inputs, thus achieving promising results in terms of spectral
feature extraction. However, both of them need to reshape
the input patches or cubes into vectors during spatial feature
extraction, which may destroy some spatial information. In
contrast, CNNs are able to directly deal with image patches
and cubes, resulting in more powerful spatial features than
AEs and RNNs. It is natural to think whether we can integrate
these networks together to make full use of their respective
advantages. In the past few years, numerous works have been
proposed in this direction.
One kind of integration method is to use each network
independently, and then combining their results together [119],
[121]–[123]. In [123], a parallel framework was proposed
to extract spectral-spatial joint features from hyperspectral
images. In this framework, SAE was employed to extract
spectral features of each pixel, and CNN was used to extract
spatial features from the corresponding image patch. These
two results were fused by a fully connected layer. Similar to
this work, Xu et al. also adopted the parallel framework but
used LSTM to extract the spectral features [121]. Different
from them, Hang et al. proposed a serial framework to fuse
CNNs and RNNs [122]. Speciﬁcally, they used CNN to extract
the spatial features from each band of hyperspectral images,
and then used RNN to fuse the extracted spatial features.
In [119], Shi and Pun also employed a serial framework to
integrate CNN and RNN for spectral-spatial feature extraction.
Another kind of integration method is embedding the core
component (i.e., convolutional operators) of CNNs into AEs
or RNNs [93], [116]. In [93], an unsupervised spectral-spatial
feature extraction network was proposed. The whole frame-
work was similar to AEs, which also adopted the so-called
encoder-decoder paradigm. However, the fully-connected op-
erators in AEs were replaced by convolutional operators, so
that the network can directly extract spectral-spatial joint
features from cubes. In [116], Liu et al. proposed a spectral-
spatial feature extraction method based on a convolutional
LSTM network. Instead of fully connected operators, they
also used convolutional operators in LSTM units. For a given
cube, each band was fed into the convolutional LSTM unit se-
quentially. The convolutional operators can extract the spatial
features while the recurrent operators can extract the spectral
features. The whole network was optimized in an end-to-end
way, thus achieving satisfactory performance.
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate the performance of different FE techniques, we
selected four techniques from the UFE category (i.e., PCA
[19], MSTV [39], OTVCA [42], LPP [48]), four techniques

==== Page 15 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 15
from the SFE category (i.e., LDA [51], CGDA [74], LSDR
[82], and JPlay [87]), and ﬁve techniques from the deep FE
category (i.e., SAE [124], RNN [122], CNN [125], CAE [126],
and CRNN [116]). Here, we set the tuning parameters for those
algorithms before representing the experimental results.
A. Algorithm Setup
The parameter setting usually plays a crucial role in assess-
ing the performance of FE algorithms. Subspace dimension
(or number of features, d) is a common parameter for all
compared algorithms. Selection of the number of features is
a hard task for hyperspectral image analysis. The endmem-
ber selection/extraction, subspace identiﬁcation, and/or rank
selection are all refer to this issue [127]–[129]. For a fair and
simpliﬁed comparison, the parameter dis uniﬁedly assigned
to the same value, which is equal to the number of classes ( k).
We should note that din LDA is automatically determined as
k 1, due to the class separability (ﬁsher’s criterion).
1) Unsupervised FE:
PCA: This method is a parameter free technique.
MSTV: In [39], all parameters are adjusted using a trial
and error approach. The multi-scale parameters adjusting
the degree of smoothness (as suggested in [39]) are set to
0.003, 0.02, and 0.01. The spatial scale for the structure
extraction in three levels (as suggested in [39]) is set to
2, 1, and 3.
OTVCA: This method is initialized as recommended in
[42]. The tuning parameter which controls the level of
smoothness applied on the features is set to one percent
of the maximum intensity range of the datatsets.
LPP: The number of neighbors is set to 12. The band-
width of the Gaussian kernel is set to 1.
2) Supervised FE: A common strategy for a model se-
lection is to run cross-validation (CV) on the training set,
since the labeled samples are available in SFE. Therefore, we
used the CV strategy on the following studied algorithms for
parameter selection.
LDA: This method can be viewed as a baseline for SFE.
There is no additional parameter in LDA.
CGDA: The Eq. (23) can be tuned to a regularized
optimization problem, where one extra parameter – reg-
ularizedl2-norm – needs to be set in advance in the
process of graph construction, which can be searched in
the range off10 4;10 3;10 2;:::; 101;102gby CV . In
the experiments, 0:1is used for all three datasets.
LSDR: Two parameters are involved in LSDR; The
standard deviation for the Gaussian function and the reg-
ularization parameter which are selected in the range of
f0:05;0:1;:::; 0:95;1gandf10 2;10 1:::;101;102g,
respectively, using CV . Finally, andare both set to 1
in our experiments.
JPlay: There are three regularization parameters ( ,,
and) that need to be set in the JPlay model (32). With
the CV conducted on the training set of three different
datasets, the regularization parameters are selected in the
ranges off10 2;10 1:::;101;102g, yielding the ﬁnal
setting of (;; ) = (0:1;1;1)for the ﬁrst dataset,(;; ) = (0:1;0:1;1)for the second dataset, and
(;; ) = (0:1;1;1)for the last dataset.
3) Deep FE:
SAE: The input of SAE is the original spectral infor-
mation of each pixel. Three hidden layers are used. The
numbers of neurons from the ﬁrst to the third hidden layer
are set to 32, 64, and 128, respectively. ReLU is adopted
as the activation function for each hidden layer.
CNN: The input of CNN is a small cube with a size of
1616p, whereprepresents the number of spectral
bands for each data. Three convolutional layers are used.
Each convolutional layer is sequentially followed by a
batch normalization layer, a ReLU activation function,
and a max-pooling layer. Note that the last pooling layer
is an adaptive max-pooling layer, making the output size
equals to 11for any input sizes. The kernel size for
each convolution is 33, and the numbers of kernels from
the ﬁrst to the third convolutions are set to 32, 64, and
128, respectively. Padding operators are used to preserve
the spatial size after each convolutional operator.
PCNN: PCA is applied prior to CNN to reduce the
spectral dimension of the HSI. The number of reduced
dimension by PCA is set to the number of classes ( k).
The input cube for CNN is of size 1616k.
RNN: The input of RNN is the same as the input of
SAE. Two recurrent layers with GRU are employed. The
number of neurons in each recurrent layer is set to 128.
Integrated Networks: Convolutional AE (CAE) and con-
volutional RNN (CRNN) are selected as two representa-
tive integrated networks. The input for them is the same
as that for the CNN. For CAE, three convolutional layers
and three de-convolutional layers are adopted. All of them
use33kernels. The numbers of kernels from the ﬁrst to
the third convolutional layers are set to 32, 64, and 128,
respectively. In contrast, the numbers of kernels from the
ﬁrst and the third de-convolutional layers are set to 64,
32, andp, respectively. Similar to [116], CRNN adopts
two recurrent layers with convolutional LSTM units. For
both recurrent layers, 33convolutional kernels are
applied. The numbers of kernels for the ﬁrst and the
second recurrent layers are set to 32 and 64, respectively.
All of the above deep learning related models are imple-
mented in the PyTorch framework. In order to optimize them,
we use the Adam algorithm with default parameters. The batch
size, the learning rate, and the number of training epochs are
set to 128, 0.001, and 200, respectively. To reduce the effects
of random initialization, all of the deep learning models are
repeated 5 times, and the mean values are reported.
4) Random Forest Classiﬁer: Apart from the deep FE
technqiues, all the other FE techniques use random forest (RF)
to perform the classiﬁcation task. The number of trees selected
for RF is set to 200. We approximately set the number of the
prediction variable to the square root of the number of input
bands.
B. Performance of the FE techniques on three HSIs
We have applied the FE techniques on the three hyper-
spectral datasets, i.e., Indian Pinse 2010, Houston 2013, and

==== Page 16 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 16
(a) HSI (b) LPP (c) JPlay (d) CNN (e) PCNN (f) Ground Reference
Fig. 10. Classiﬁcation maps obtained on the extracted features from Indian Pines 2010 data. From each category the method with highest OA is shown for
the demonstration along with the one obtained from the spectral bands.
(a) HSI (b) OTVCA
(c) JPlay (d) CNN
(e) PCNN (f) Ground Reference
Fig. 11. Classiﬁcation maps obtained on the extracted features from Houston University 2013 data. From each category the method with highest OA is shown
for the demonstration along with the one obtained from the spectral bands.
(a) HSI (b) OTVCA
(c) JPlay (d) CNN
(e) PCNN (f) Ground Reference
Fig. 12. Classiﬁcation maps obtained on the extracted features from Houston University 2018 data. From each category the method with highest OA is shown
for the demonstration along with the one obtained from the spectral bands.

==== Page 17 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 17
TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES OBTAINED ON FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM THE INDIAN PINES 2010 DATASET USING DIFFERENT SHALLOW AND DEEP
FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES .
Indian Pines 2010
Shallow FE Deep FE
UFE SFE SFE
Spectral PCA MSTV OTVCA LPP LDA CGDA LSDR JPlay SAE RNN CNN CAE CRNN PCNN
1 0.9260 0.9064 0.9992 0.9260 0.8850 0.9628 0.8144 0.8459 0.9230 0.9327 0.8829 0.9275 0.9432 0.9590 0.9397
2 0.8769 0.9976 1.0000 1.0000 0.9976 1.0000 0.9961 0.8933 0.9984 0.9573 0.9178 0.9544 0.9961 0.8596 0.9998
3 0.8862 0.9724 0.9724 0.9897 0.9724 0.9724 0.9759 0.9655 0.9862 0.9683 0.9405 0.9890 0.9986 0.8241 0.9938
4 0.6888 0.7762 1.0000 0.8953 0.8742 0.9270 0.7474 0.8194 0.8300 0.7508 0.7621 0.8840 0.8822 0.8569 0.8930
5 0.8058 0.8855 0.8039 0.8151 0.8682 0.8802 0.8096 0.8394 0.8665 0.8488 0.8474 0.8692 0.8570 0.8638 0.8706
6 0.8172 0.8797 0.9946 0.7094 0.9739 0.7883 0.8284 0.9397 0.9418 0.9013 0.9204 0.9268 0.9167 0.6975 0.9127
7 0.4170 0.5954 0.6792 0.7166 0.6985 0.7166 0.6845 0.7030 0.6958 0.6265 0.5795 0.6507 0.6818 0.6348 0.7103
8 0.2530 0.2583 0.2599 0.2768 0.2961 0.2955 0.2431 0.2952 0.2758 0.5349 0.2840 0.8776 0.6776 0.9934 0.4725
9 0.6545 0.7498 0.7048 0.7943 0.8913 0.8452 0.7971 0.8419 0.8142 0.8732 0.8533 0.8302 0.8336 0.8194 0.8621
10 0.8229 0.9406 0.9594 0.9368 0.9019 0.9804 0.8514 0.7761 0.9663 0.9015 0.8096 0.8368 0.8752 0.7946 0.9289
11 0.6658 0.8402 0.9224 0.9945 0.8943 0.9288 0.7195 0.7651 0.8052 0.8121 0.7414 0.7440 0.7633 0.6492 0.9165
12 0.9985 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9995 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9998 0.9765 0.9945 0.9838 0.9748 0.9991
13 0.9468 0.9962 0.9879 0.9888 0.9925 0.9830 0.9580 0.9738 0.9819 0.9621 0.9427 0.9925 0.9930 0.9892 0.9959
14 0.8783 0.9000 0.9615 0.9145 0.9344 0.9174 0.8756 0.8628 0.8953 0.9094 0.9030 0.9984 0.9985 0.8981 0.9993
15 0.9333 0.9667 0.9511 0.9933 0.9489 0.9756 0.9333 0.9311 0.9600 0.9307 0.8119 0.9947 0.9942 0.7556 0.9978
16 0.3735 0.2036 0.2885 0.1601 0.5217 0.1719 0.3439 0.4901 0.4466 0.2053 0.2060 0.0980 0.1700 0.6028 0.1051
AA 0.7465 0.8043 0.8428 0.8194 0.8532 0.8341 0.7861 0.8089 0.8367 0.8197 0.7737 0.8480 0.8478 0.8233 0.8498
OA 0.7866 0.8598 0.8561 0.8378 0.9112 0.8748 0.8370 0.8748 0.8829 0.8836 0.8655 0.8945 0.8911 0.8525 0.9018
 0.7390 0.8297 0.8247 0.8054 0.8909 0.8481 0.8010 0.8466 0.8571 0.8580 0.8355 0.8716 0.8673 0.8213 0.8802
TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES OBTAINED ON FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM THE HOUSTON UNIVERSITY 2013 DATASET USING DIFFERENT SHALLOW
AND DEEP FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES .
Houston 2013
Shallow FE Deep FE
UFE SFE SFE
Spectral PCA MSTV OTVCA LPP LDA CGDA LSDR JPlay SAE RNN CNN CAE CRNN PCNN
1 0.8262 0.8272 0.8025 0.8205 0.8110 0.8177 0.8139 0.8120 0.7768 0.8217 0.8182 0.8104 0.8154 0.8245 0.8089
2 0.8318 0.8393 0.8412 0.8515 0.8214 0.8355 0.8327 0.8553 0.9662 0.8274 0.8153 0.8425 0.8167 0.8412 0.8293
3 0.9782 1.0000 0.9822 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9980 0.9895 0.9939 0.8594 0.7731 0.9156 0.8432
4 0.9138 0.9081 0.7633 0.8873 0.9479 0.8920 0.9053 0.8864 0.9564 0.9773 0.9040 0.9170 0.9153 0.9129 0.9159
5 0.9659 0.9886 0.9915 0.9991 0.9867 0.9384 0.9915 0.9688 0.9782 0.9438 0.9389 0.9699 0.9585 0.9881 0.9824
6 0.9930 0.9930 0.9580 0.9580 0.9790 1.0000 0.8741 0.9860 0.9930 0.9874 0.9678 0.8769 0.9776 0.9483 0.9497
7 0.7463 0.8927 0.6362 0.7090 0.9123 0.7901 0.8535 0.8526 0.7817 0.7293 0.7392 0.8802 0.8694 0.8642 0.8627
8 0.3305 0.4606 0.5992 0.6724 0.4311 0.7379 0.4302 0.4710 0.7806 0.3792 0.4153 0.6344 0.6762 0.5305 0.8351
9 0.6771 0.7885 0.8706 0.9008 0.7413 0.6449 0.7186 0.6752 0.7592 0.7145 0.7367 0.8595 0.8540 0.8404 0.8691
10 0.4295 0.4749 0.6612 0.8398 0.4595 0.4662 0.4826 0.5792 0.6014 0.5556 0.5373 0.5674 0.5782 0.4514 0.6168
11 0.7011 0.7268 0.9820 0.9924 0.7306 0.7239 0.7287 0.5806 0.6983 0.6231 0.7250 0.7417 0.7292 0.6186 0.7913
12 0.5485 0.9145 0.7349 0.9625 0.7560 0.6513 0.7656 0.5687 0.7858 0.6305 0.7606 0.9379 0.9402 0.8440 0.9593
13 0.6140 0.7754 0.6982 0.7789 0.8105 0.6105 0.7719 0.6702 0.7509 0.4516 0.6656 0.8835 0.8968 0.8414 0.8765
14 0.9838 0.9919 1.0000 1.0000 0.9960 0.9919 0.9879 0.9595 0.9879 0.9692 0.9850 0.9943 0.9773 0.9603 0.9968
15 0.9789 0.9746 1.0000 0.9789 0.9746 0.9831 0.9852 0.9514 0.9831 0.9732 0.9607 0.8072 0.7471 0.9345 0.8592
AA 0.7679 0.8371 0.8347 0.8901 0.8239 0.8056 0.8094 0.7878 0.8532 0.7716 0.7976 0.8388 0.8350 0.8210 0.8664
OA 0.7278 0.8058 0.8088 0.8753 0.7874 0.7745 0.7789 0.7524 0.8280 0.7436 0.7646 0.8239 0.8184 0.7921 0.8526
 0.7076 0.7895 0.7923 0.8648 0.7700 0.7552 0.7604 0.7315 0.8134 0.7235 0.7469 0.8096 0.8036 0.7761 0.8404
Houston 2018, and the classiﬁcation accuracies including class
accuracies, AA, OA, and coefﬁcient are all shown in Tables
V, VI, and VII, respectively. The results are ﬁrst discussed
within the categories and then between different categories.
We should note that the results and discussions are in terms
of classiﬁcation accuracies obtained from the classiﬁcation of
the HSIs.
1) Unsupervised FE:
.PCA demonstrates the poorest performance compared
with the other techniques, however, it considerably im-
proves the classiﬁcation accuracies compared with theresults obtained by applying the RF on the spectral
bands. One of the main disadvantages of the PCA is that,
it does not take into account the noise and, therefore,
the extracted features with having lower variance are
often degraded by different types of noise existing in
the hyperspectral image [130]. Additionally, PCA only
takes into account the spectral correlation and it entirely
neglects the spatial (neighboring) information.
.LPP considerably outperforms the other UFE techniques
for the Indian Pines dataset. However, in the case of
Houston datasets, it provides very poor results. LPP

==== Page 18 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 18
TABLE VII
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES OBTAINED ON FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM THE HOUSTON UNIVERSITY 2018 DATASET USING DIFFERENT SHALLOW
AND DEEP FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES .
Houston 2018
Shallow FE Deep FE
UFE SFE SFE
Spectral PCA MSTV OTVCA LPP LDA CGDA LSDR JPlay SAE RNN CNN CAE CRNN PCNN
1 0.3088 0.8781 0.0536 0.6842 0.6618 0.6256 0.7575 0.7969 0.5991 0.7940 0.5702 0.7516 0.4428 0.6338 0.6638
2 0.7603 0.8396 0.7046 0.6376 0.8122 0.8474 0.8076 0.7747 0.8347 0.7893 0.6975 0.8173 0.8849 0.8707 0.8376
3 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9972 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9972 0.7739 0.8482 0.9924 0.8045
4 0.9134 0.9494 0.6238 0.6775 0.9453 0.9059 0.9265 0.9276 0.9298 0.9221 0.8613 0.9444 0.9362 0.9439 0.9595
5 0.4119 0.4668 0.2676 0.1679 0.4728 0.5258 0.4661 0.4289 0.3971 0.4982 0.4040 0.4330 0.5396 0.5404 0.4800
6 0.2570 0.2990 0.3835 0.3164 0.3008 0.2910 0.2776 0.2726 0.2780 0.2585 0.2537 0.3050 0.3080 0.2902 0.3377
7 0.3025 0.3025 0.3025 0.3025 0.3025 0.3025 0.3109 0.3025 0.2857 0.3025 0.3025 0.2908 0.2723 0.2997 0.3176
8 0.7657 0.7675 0.7599 0.7417 0.7785 0.7849 0.7544 0.7518 0.7771 0.7216 0.7356 0.8538 0.8583 0.8092 0.8677
9 0.3849 0.3877 0.5767 0.5990 0.4887 0.3917 0.3672 0.5255 0.5877 0.6302 0.4186 0.7970 0.7371 0.3717 0.8659
10 0.3603 0.4360 0.3747 0.4491 0.4230 0.4086 0.3790 0.3497 0.4010 0.3819 0.3465 0.5902 0.4957 0.5484 0.5778
11 0.4162 0.4792 0.7862 0.7596 0.5085 0.4667 0.4266 0.4422 0.5359 0.4143 0.4699 0.5456 0.5781 0.6048 0.5948
12 0.0132 0.0046 0.0093 0.0077 0.0070 0.0023 0.0170 0.0000 0.0302 0.0152 0.0697 0.0511 0.0477 0.0927 0.0579
13 0.4525 0.5556 0.4238 0.4090 0.5442 0.5164 0.5707 0.5603 0.5324 0.4523 0.4789 0.5148 0.5619 0.4246 0.5811
14 0.3019 0.2629 0.5460 0.4665 0.3651 0.4152 0.2294 0.2073 0.3212 0.3789 0.3309 0.5289 0.6763 0.3375 0.5705
15 0.6303 0.4721 0.4457 0.4887 0.4602 0.5549 0.4180 0.5234 0.5944 0.5197 0.5289 0.6277 0.6476 0.6447 0.6591
16 0.6412 0.7611 0.6220 0.7648 0.7559 0.5888 0.7374 0.6403 0.6688 0.7457 0.7086 0.8498 0.7594 0.7173 0.8572
17 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9545 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9545 0.8909 1.0000 1.0000
18 0.4983 0.6885 0.6576 0.5197 0.7140 0.6581 0.6625 0.5686 0.7366 0.5346 0.6080 0.6365 0.5981 0.7692 0.7020
19 0.5265 0.6363 0.9060 0.8777 0.7323 0.6989 0.6100 0.6266 0.6771 0.6569 0.6545 0.9102 0.8960 0.8006 0.9476
20 0.4444 0.8904 0.9706 0.5253 0.8479 0.9189 0.6797 0.5955 0.5393 0.5388 0.4801 0.6246 0.5566 0.4879 0.6519
AA 0.5195 0.6039 0.5707 0.5696 0.6060 0.5952 0.5676 0.5647 0.5863 0.5777 0.5458 0.6400 0.6268 0.6090 0.6667
OA 0.4634 0.5101 0.5750 0.5899 0.5552 0.5027 0.4825 0.5492 0.5944 0.5938 0.4851 0.7278 0.6969 0.5116 0.7728
 0.3732 0.4317 0.4833 0.4974 0.4714 0.4231 0.4018 0.4560 0.5037 0.4948 0.3936 0.6474 0.6124 0.4372 0.7011
incorporates the spatial information using the manifold
learning process and by constructing the neighboring
graph [48].
.OTVCA outperforms the other UFE technqiues for Hous-
ton datasets. In the case of Houston 2013, the improve-
ments are very considerable. OTVCA is robust to noise
due to the signal model which takes into account the noise
and model’s errors. Additionally, OTVCA exploits the
spatial correlation by incorporating the TV penalty and,
therefore, the extracted features are piece-wise smooth
and have high SNR [42]. Overall, it can be observed
that OTVCA, which is a candidate from the low-rank
reconstruction techniques, generally provides better clas-
siﬁcation accuracies than other the UFE techniques.
2) Supervised FE:
.LDA versus Spectral Classiﬁer (RF): With the embed-
ding of supervised information, LDA obviously per-
forms better than the situation where RF is directly
applied to the spectral signatures in terms of the overall
performance and individual accuracies for most materi-
als. This indicates the effectiveness of SFE to a great
extent.
.LDA versus CGDA: Although the classiﬁcation perfor-
mance of CGDA is inferior to that of LDA from the
whole perspective, yet the advantage of CGDA mainly
lies in its automation in computing the similarity (or
connectivity) between samples. This could lead to a
relatively stable FE, particularly in large-scale and more
complex hyperspectral scenes. Due to the data-driven
graph embedding, CGDA yields a lower running speed
than LDA in the process of model training..LDA versus LSDR: Intuitively, LSDR provides com-
petitive classiﬁcation performance with LDA. However,
LSDR is time consuming due to the distribution match-
ing between input samples and labels. The requirement
to estimate the statistical distribution also limits the
LSDR’s stability, especially when the training set is
available on a small scale (e.g., for the Indian Pines
2010 and Houston 2013 datasets).
.LDA versus JPlay: Unlike the conventional regression
techniques, JPlay is capable of extracting semantically
meaningful and robust features, due to the multi-layered
structure and the self-reconstruction constraint (32).
Quantitatively speaking, JPlay outperforms the other
SFE methods. The CV provides a feasible solution to
automatically determine the parameter combination in
JPlay. Despite the ADMM solver designed for speeding
up the optimization process such a multi-layered param-
eter update inevitably suffers from high computational
cost.
3) Deep FE:
.Spectral versus Spectral-Spatial models: Most of the
spectral-spatial models (i.e., CNN, PCNN, CAE, and
CRNN) achieve superior performance than spectral
models (i.e., SAE and RNN) in terms of AA, OA,
and Kappa due to the joint use of spectral and spatial
information. This indicates that, besides the rich spectral
information, spatial information is also important for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation.
.PCNN and CNN versus CAE and CRNN: Similar to
SAE, CAE focuses on image reconstruction rather than
classiﬁcation. In contrast, PCNN and CNN are exclu-

==== Page 19 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 19
sively designed for the classiﬁcation task, so they are
able to learn more discriminative features than CAE,
leading to better classiﬁcation performance especially on
the Houston 2018 dataset. Although CRNN also focuses
on the classiﬁcation task, it has a higher number of
parameters to train. Using the same number of training
samples and epochs, PCNN and CNN can achieve better
results than CRNN in terms of AA, OA, and Kappa.
.PCNN versus CNN: PCNN outperforms CNN in terms
of the classiﬁcation accuracies for all three datasets. We
should note that the improvements are substantial in the
case of the Houston 2013 and 2018 datasets. Due to the
use of PCA, most of the redundant spectral information
is reduced. Therefore, the number of trainable parame-
ters in PCNN is smaller than that of CNN, making it
easier to learn under the same condition.
4) Shallow UFE Versus Shallow SFE: For all three datasets
used in the experiments, the UFE techniques provide better
classiﬁcation accuracies than the SFE techniques. Unlike the
SFE, the UFE tends to pay more attentions on spatial-spectral
information extraction, owing to fully considering all samples
of HSI as the model input. Conversely, the performance of SFE
is, to a great extent, limited by the ability to largely gather HSI
ground sampling. A direct evident is given in Tables V, VI,
and VII. For the Indian Pines 2010 and Houston 2018 datasets
where more training samples are available, SFE-based methods
hold the competitive results with UFE-based ones, while for
the Houston 2013 dataset, the classiﬁcation performance of
SFE is relatively inferior to that of UFE, due to the small-
scale training set. Considering the low number of ground
samples often available in HSI applications the experimental
results conﬁrm the advantage of UFE over SFE for HSI feature
extraction.
5) Shallow FE versus Deep FE: At the ﬁrst glance, the
shallow FE approaches slightly outperform the deep FE tech-
niques for the two datasets, i.e., Indian Pines 2010 and Hous-
ton 2013. However, a deep comparison reveals that some deep
FE techniques, such as CNN-based FE, provide consistency
and good performance over all three datasets. Additionally,
when the dimension-reduced step (e.g., using PCA) is applied
prior to the CNN technique, the resulting PCNN yields by
far the second highest accuracies in the case of Indian Pines
2010 and Houston 2013 datasets (only moderately lower than
LPP or OTVCA, respectively), and simultaneously obtains
the best performance on the Houston 2018 dataset. It is
worth mentioning that CNN-based FE methods obtain at least
10% increase over the shallow ones in the case of Houston
2018. This could be due to the high nonlinear behaviour of
this dataset which contains 20 land cover classes. The main
factors for CNN-based FE methods to obtain around 20% of
improvement over those shallow FE methods on the Houston
2018 dataset are the availability of the sufﬁcient training
samples and modeling the spatial information of HSI well.
6) Comparisons of the Land Cover Maps: Figs. 10, 11, and
12 compare the classiﬁcation maps for Indian Pines, Houston
University 2013, and Houston University 2018, respectively.
The ﬁgures compare the maps obtained from methods which
provide the highest OA from each category (i.e., Shallow UFE,shallow SFE, and deep FE) along with the map obtained from
the spectral classiﬁer (HSI). Additionally, we depicted the
maps obtained by CNN for all three datasets since it provides
the highest OA among the deep FE techniques which do not
exploit a reduction step.
Overall, the classiﬁcation maps of either unsupervised or su-
pervised FE-based approaches (e.g., LPP, JPlay, CNN, PCNN)
are smoother compared to the results only using HSI that
tends to generate sparse mislabeled pixels. More speciﬁcally,
the classiﬁcation maps generated by spectral-spatial FE-based
methods, e.g., OTVCA, CNN, and PCNN, are usually a bit
over-smoothed, leading to the creation of fake structures, es-
pecially for the Indian Pines 2010 and Houston 2018 datasets.
In the case of OTVCA, the over smoothing can be avoided
by decreasing the tuning parameter. In contrast, JPlay obtains
relatively desirable classiﬁcation maps, despite the lack of
spatial information modeling. It is worth mentioning that the
JPlay algorithm can maintain the structural information for
Houston 2013 in the shadow covered region where pixels
at some bands are considerably attenuated. This is due to
the elimination of the spectral variability using the self-
reconstruction regularization (the third term in (32)) and the
multi-layered linearized regression technique.
C. Performance with respect to the Number of Training Sam-
ples
In this subsection, we investigate the performance of the FE
techniques in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies with respect
to the number of training samples. As we have already
stated, this analysis is of great interest due to two main
reasons; ﬁrst, ground sample acquisition and measurements
are often cumbersome and could be impossible in cases
for which the target area is not reachable. Additionally, the
limited number of samples not only affects the performance
of the supervised classiﬁers but also the supervised features
extraction techniques since they are highly reliable on the
number of training samples. Therefore, in this experiment,
we perform an analysis on the Houston University dataset
2018 by comparing the performances of the feature extraction
techniques by selecting 10, 25, 50, and 100 training samples
randomly. Fig 13 compares the OAs obtained by applying RF
on the spectral bands (labeled by HSI), the features extracted
by OTVCA, and JPlay along with the OAs obtained by CNN,
and PCNN. The results are mean values over 10 experiments
by selecting the samples randomly (the standard deviations are
shown by the error bars). The outcomes of the experiment can
be summarized as follows:
.The SFE technique (i.e., JPlay) improves the OAs com-
pared to the spectral classiﬁer. However, it provides much
lower OA compared with the UFE and deep FE for all
cases. Two aspects might explain this point. One is that
JPlay fails to model spatial and contextual information,
and another is that although JPlay attempts to enhance
the reorientation ability of the features via multi-layered
linear mapping, yet it is still incomparable to the non-
linear deep FE-based techniques, particularly when the
number of samples are increased.

==== Page 20 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 20
0 20 40 60 80 100
Number of Training Samples0.30.40.50.60.70.80.9OAHSI
OTVCA
JPlay
CNN
PCNN
Fig. 13. The classiﬁcation accuracies w.r.t. the number of the training samples
on Houston University 2018 data. The results shown are means over 10
experiments and the standard deviations are shown by the error bars.
.In this experiment, the UFE technique (i.e. OTVCA)
and the deep FE one, CNN, are performed similarly
in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies. Compared with the
results given in Table VII, it can be observed that the
random selection of the training samples over the entire
class regions from the ground reference considerably
improves the performance of RF applied on the features
extracted by OTVCA. This is often due to the lack of
a parameter selection technique to select the optimum
parameter for the OTVCA algorithm which could lead to
over-smoothing on the features.
.The deep learning technique (i.e., PCNN) after using the
reduction (i.e., PCA) provides very high OA for all the
cases. Comparing the results with CNN (i.e., without
using the PCA reduction) conﬁrms the advantage of using
the reduction stage prior to deep learning techniques.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND SUMMERY
In the past decade, hyperspectral image FE has considerably
evolved leading to three main research lines (i.e., shallow
unsupervised, shallow supervised, and deep feature extraction
approaches) that include the majority of feature extraction
techniques, which were studied in this paper. The paper has
systematically provided a technical overview of the state-of-
the-art techniques proposed in the literature by categorizing
the aforementioned three focuses into subcategories. In order
to make this research paper easy-to-follow for researchers
at different levels (i.e., students, researchers, and senior re-
searchers), we aimed at showing the evolution of each cate-
gory over the decades rather than including many techniques
with an exhaustive reference list. The experimental section
was designed in a way to compare the performances of the
techniques in two ways: (1) between all the categories (i.e.,
shallow unsupervised, shallow supervised, and deep feature
extraction approaches) and (2) within each category by an-
alyzing the corresponding subcategories. In this manner, a
variety of subcategories is investigated detailing the evolu-
tion of shallow unsupervised approaches (i.e., conventional
data projection schemes, band clustering/splitting techniques,
low-rank reconstruction techniques, and manifold learningtechniques), shallow supervised approaches (i.e., class sep-
aration discriminant analysis, graph embedding discriminant
analysis, regression-based representation learning, and joint
& progressive learning strategy), and deep approaches (i.e.,
AE, CNN, RNN, and integrative approaches). Three recent
hyperspectral datasets have been studied in this paper and
the results are evaluated in terms of classiﬁcation accuracies
and the quality of the classiﬁcation maps. The experiments
carried out in this study showed that in terms of classiﬁcation
accuracies; 1) deep learning FE techniques (i.e., CNN and
PCNN) can outperform the shallow ones in particular when
a sufﬁcient amount of training data is available 2) applying a
dimensionality reduction step (such as PCA) prior to the deep
learning technqiues considerably improves their performances
3) shallow UFE techniques not only outperform the SFE ones
but also are very competitive compared with deep FE ones.
However, we should mention that the conclusions are limited
by the experiments carried out on the three HSI datasets. In
addition, this paper provides an impressive amount of codes
and libraries mostly written in Python and Matlab to ease out
the task of researchers in this very vibrant ﬁeld of research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Prof. Melba Crawford for providing
the Indian Pines 2010 Data and the National Center for
Airborne Laser Mapping, the Hyperspectral Image Analysis
Laboratory at the University of Houston, and the IEEE GRSS
Image Analysis and Data Fusion Technical Committee. This
work is partially supported by an Alexander von Humboldt
research grant. We also would like to thank the AXA Research
Fund for supporting the work of Prof. Jocelyn Chanussot. The
corresponding author of this paper is Dr. Danfeng Hong.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ghamisi, J. Plaza, Y . Chen, J. Li, and A. J. Plaza, “Advanced spectral
classiﬁers for hyperspectral images: A review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Mag. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 8–32, March 2017.
[2] D. W. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation , John Wiley & Sons, New
York, NY , 1992.
[3] E. J. Wegman, “Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordi-
nates,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc. , vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 664–675, 1990.
[4] L. Jimenez and D. Landgrebe, “Supervised classiﬁcation in high-
dimensional space: geometrical, statistical, and asymptotical properties
of multivariate data,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C: Appl. Rev. ,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 39–54, 1998.
[5] J. A. Benediktsson and P. Ghamisi, Spectral-Spatial Classiﬁcation of
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Images . Artech House Publishers, INC,
Boston, USA, 2015.
[6] K. Fukunaga, Introduction to Statistical Pattern Recognition. , 2nd ed.
Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA, 1990.
[7] D. A. Landgrebe, Signal Theory Methods in Multispectral Remote
Sensing . John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2003.
[8] G. Hughes, “On the mean accuracy of statistical pattern recognizers,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 14, pp. 55 – 63, 1968.
[9] Y . Qian, F. Yao, and S. Jia, “Band selection for hyperspectral imagery
using afﬁnity propagation,” IET Comput. Vis. , vol. 3, no. 4, p. 213,
2009.
[10] L. Guanter and et. al., “The EnMAP spaceborne imaging spectroscopy
mission for earth observation,” Remote Sens. , vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 8830–
8857, July 2015.

==== Page 21 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 21
[11] P. Ghamisi, E. Maggiori, S. Li, R. Souza, Y . Tarablaka, G. Moser,
A. De Giorgi, L. Fang, Y . Chen, M. Chi, S. B. Serpico, and J. A.
Benediktsson, “New frontiers in spectral-spatial hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation: The latest advances based on mathematical morphology,
markov random ﬁelds, segmentation, sparse representation, and deep
learning,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 10–43,
Sep. 2018.
[12] L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, B. Du, X. Huang, Y . Y . Tang, and D. Tao,
“Simultaneous spectral-spatial feature selection and extraction for hy-
perspectral images,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 48, no. 1,
pp. 16–28, Jan 2018.
[13] M. Fauvel, Y . Tarabalka, J. A. Benediktsson, J. Chanussot, and J. C.
Tilton, “Advances in spectral-spatial classiﬁcation of hyperspectral
images,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 652–675, 2013.
[14] W. Li, F. Feng, H. Li, and Q. Du, “Discriminant analysis-based
dimension reduction for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: A survey of
the most recent advances and an experimental comparison of different
techniques,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 15–34,
March 2018.
[15] X. Jia, B.-C. Kuo, and M. Crawford, “Feature mining for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 676–697, March
2013.
[16] W. Sun and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral band selection: A review,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 118–139, June 2019.
[17] J. M. Bioucas-Dias, A. Plaza, N. Dobigeon, M. Parente, Q. Du,
P. Gader, and J. Chanussot, “Hyperspectral unmixing overview: Ge-
ometrical, statistical, and sparse regression-based approaches,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
354–379, April 2012.
[18] P. Ghamisi, M. Dalla Mura, and J. A. Benediktsson, “A survey on
spectralspatial classiﬁcation techniques based on attribute proﬁles,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 2335–2353,
May 2015.
[19] I. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis . Springer Verlag, 1986.
[20] J. Senthilnath, S. N. Omkar, V . Mani, N. Karnwal, and S. P. B.,
“Crop stage classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data using unsupervised
techniques,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. App. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 861–866, April 2013.
[21] A. Green, M. Berman, P. Switzer, and M. Craig, “A transformation for
ordering multispectral data in terms of image quality with implications
for noise removal,” IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 26, no. 1,
pp. 65–74, 1988.
[22] J. Lee, A. Woodyatt, and M. Berman, “Enhancement of high spectral
resolution remote-sensing data by a noise-adjusted principal compo-
nents transform,” IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 28, no. 3, pp.
295–304, 1990.
[23] A. Hyv ¨arinen, J. Karhunen, and E. Oja, Independent Component
Analysis , ser. Adaptive and Learning Systems for Signal Processing,
Communications and Control Series. Wiley, 2001.
[24] A. Villa, J. Chanussot, C. Jutten, J. Benediktsson, and S. Moussaoui,
“On the use of ICA for hyperspectral image analysis,” in Proc. IGARSS ,
vol. 4, July 2009, pp. IV–97–IV–100.
[25] A. A. Nielsen, “Kernel maximum autocorrelation factor and minimum
noise fraction transformations,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. , vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 612–624, Mar 2011.
[26] F. Mei, C. Zhao, L. Wang, and H. Huo, “Anomaly detection
in hyperspectral imagery based on kernel ICA feature extraction,”
inProceedings of the 2008 Second International Symposium on
Intelligent Information Technology Application - Volume 01 , ser. IITA
’08. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp.
869–873. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IITA.2008.98
[27] B. Sch ¨olkopf, A. J. Smola, and K.-R. M ¨uller, “Advances in kernel
methods,” pp. 327–352, 1999.
[28] S. Marchesi and L. Bruzzone, “ICA and kernel ICA for change
detection in multispectral remote sensing images,” in Proc. IGARSS ,
vol. 2, July 2009, pp. II–980–II–983.
[29] M. Fauvel, J. Chanussot, and J. Benediktsson, “Kernel principal com-
ponent analysis for the classiﬁcation of hyperspectral remote sensing
data over urban areas,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. , vol. 2009,
no. 1, p. 783194, 2009.
[30] L. M. Bruce and C. H. K. and, “Dimensionality reduction of hyper-
spectral data using discrete wavelet transform feature extraction,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 2331–2338, Oct 2002.
[31] S. Kumar, J. Ghosh, and M. M. Crawford, “Best-bases feature extrac-
tion algorithms for classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1368–1379, July 2001.[32] A. Martnez-UsMartinez-Uso, F. Pla, J. M. Sotoca, and P. Garca-Sevilla,
“Clustering-based hyperspectral band selection using information mea-
sures,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 4158–
4171, Dec 2007.
[33] C. Cariou, K. Chehdi, and S. Le Moan, “Bandclust: An unsupervised
band reduction method for hyperspectral remote sensing,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 565–569, May 2011.
[34] S. Rashwan and N. Dobigeon, “A split-and-merge approach for hy-
perspectral band selection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 14,
no. 8, pp. 1378–1382, Aug 2017.
[35] X. Kang, S. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Feature extraction of hyper-
spectral images with image fusion and recursive ﬁltering,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 3742–3752, June 2014.
[36] X. Kang, S. Li, L. Fang, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Intrinsic image
decomposition for feature extraction of hyperspectral images,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2241–2253, April
2015.
[37] X. Jin, Y . Gu, and T. Liu, “Intrinsic image recovery from remote
sensing hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 224–238, Jan. 2019.
[38] X. Jin and Y . Gu, “Superpixel-based intrinsic image decomposition
of hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55,
no. 8, pp. 4285–4295, Aug. 2017.
[39] P. Duan, X. Kang, S. Li, and P. Ghamisi, “Noise-robust hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation via multi-scale total variation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1948–1962, 2019.
[40] B. Rasti, “Sparse Hyperspectral Image Modeling and Restoration,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Iceland, Dec. 2014.
[41] B. Rasti, J. Sveinsson, and M. Ulfarsson, “Wavelet-based sparse
reduced-rank regression for hyperspectral image restoration,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 6688–6698, Oct 2014.
[42] B. Rasti, M. O. Ulfarsson, and J. R. Sveinsson, “Hyperspectral feature
extraction using total variation component analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 6976–6985, Dec 2016.
[43] B. Rasti, P. Ghamisi, and M. O. Ulfarsson, “Hyperspectral
feature extraction using sparse and smooth low-rank analysis,”
Remote Sens. , vol. 11, no. 2, p. 121, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11020121
[44] J. B. Tenenbaum, V . de Silva, and J. C. Langford, “A global geometric
framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” Science , vol. 290,
no. 5500, p. 2319, 2000.
[45] C. M. Bachmann, T. L. Ainsworth, and R. A. Fusina, “Exploiting
manifold geometry in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens. , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 441–454, March 2005.
[46] S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul, “Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by
locally linear embedding,” Science , vol. 290, pp. 2323–2326, 2000.
[47] M. Belkin and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques
for embedding and clustering,” in Proc. NIPS . MIT Press, 2002, pp.
585–591.
[48] X. He and P. Niyogi, “Locality Preserving Projections,” in Proc. NIPS ,
S. Thrun, L. Saul, and B. Scholkopf, Eds. MIT Press, 2003.
[49] S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, Q. Yang, and S. Lin, “Graph
embedding and extensions: A general framework for dimensionality
reduction,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 29, no. 1, pp.
40–51, Jan 2007.
[50] X. Wu, D. Hong, J. Tian, J. Chanussot, W. Li, and R. Tao, “Orsim
detector: A novel object detection framework in optical remote sensing
imagery using spatial-frequency channel features,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 5146–5158, 2019.
[51] R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern classiﬁcation and scene analysis .
Wiley New York, 1973, vol. 3.
[52] R. Hang, Q. Liu, H. Song, and Y . Sun, “Matrix-based discriminant
subspace ensemble for hyperspectral image spatial–spectral feature
fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 783–794,
2016.
[53] C. Lee and D. Landgrebe, “Feature extraction based on decision
boundaries,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. 388–400, 1993.
[54] B. Guo, S. R. Gunn, R. I. Damper, and J. D. Nelson, “Band selection
for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation using mutual information,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Let. , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 522–526, 2006.
[55] H. Shi, Y . Shen, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspectral bands reduction based
on rough sets and fuzzy c-means clustering,” in IEEE Instrumentation
Technology Conference (IMTC) , vol. 2. IEEE, 2003, pp. 1053–1056.
[56] J. Yang and J. Yang, “Why can lda be performed in pca transformed
space?” Pattern Recog. , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 563–566, 2003.

==== Page 22 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 22
[57] T. V . Bandos, L. Bruzzone, and G. Camps-Valls, “Classiﬁcation of
hyperspectral images with regularized linear discriminant analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 862–873, 2009.
[58] M. Sugiyama, “Dimensionality reduction of multimodal labeled data
by local ﬁsher discriminant analysis,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 8, no.
May, pp. 1027–1061, 2007.
[59] M. Imani and H. Ghassemian, “Feature space discriminant analysis for
hyperspectral data feature reduction,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote.
Sens. , vol. 102, pp. 1–13, 2015.
[60] S. Patra, P. Modi, and L. Bruzzone, “Hyperspectral band selection
based on rough set,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 53, no. 10,
pp. 5495–5503, 2015.
[61] X. Cao, T. Xiong, and L. Jiao, “Supervised band selection using local
spatial information for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett. , vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 329–333, 2016.
[62] M. Belkin and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian eigenmaps for dimensionality
reduction and data representation,” Neural Comput. , vol. 15, no. 6, pp.
1373–1396, 2003.
[63] X. He and P. Niyogi, “Locality preserving projections,” in Proc. NIPS ,
2004, pp. 153–160.
[64] L. Zelnik-Manor and P. Perona, “Self-tuning spectral clustering,” in
Proc. NIPS , 2005, pp. 1601–1608.
[65] N. H. Ly, Q. Du, and J. E. Fowler, “Sparse graph-based discriminant
analysis for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 3872–3884, 2014.
[66] N. H. Ly, Q. Du, and J. E. Fowler, “Collaborative graph-based
discriminant analysis for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2688–2696, 2014.
[67] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, and X. X. Zhu, “Learning a robust local manifold
representation for hyperspectral dimensionality reduction,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 2960–2975,
2017.
[68] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, J. Chanussot, J. Xu, and X. X. Zhu, “Learning to
propagate labels on graphs: An iterative multitask regression framework
for semi-supervised hyperspectral dimensionality reduction,” ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote. Sens. , vol. 158, pp. 35–49, 2019.
[69] L. Zhang, M. Yang, and X. Feng, “Sparse representation or collabo-
rative representation: Which helps face recognition?” in Proc. ICCV .
IEEE, 2011, pp. 471–478.
[70] D. Hong and X. X. Zhu, “SULoRA: Subspace unmixing with low-
rank attribute embedding for hyperspectral data analysis,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process. , vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1351–1363, 2018.
[71] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, J. Chanussot, and X. X. Zhu, “An augmented
linear mixing model to address spectral variability for hyperspectral
unmixing,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1923–1938,
2019.
[72] H. Huang, F. Luo, J. Liu, and Y . Yang, “Dimensionality reduction of hy-
perspectral images based on sparse discriminant manifold embedding,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote. Sens. , vol. 106, pp. 42–54, 2015.
[73] Z. Xue, P. Du, J. Li, and H. Su, “Simultaneous sparse graph embedding
for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens. , vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 6114–6133, 2015.
[74] W. Li and Q. Du, “Laplacian regularized collaborative graph for
discriminant analysis of hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens. , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7066–7076, 2016.
[75] W. Li, J. Liu, and Q. Du, “Sparse and low-rank graph for discriminant
analysis of hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 4094–4105, 2016.
[76] L. Pan, H.-C. Li, Y .-J. Deng, F. Zhang, X.-D. Chen, and Q. Du,
“Hyperspectral dimensionality reduction by tensor sparse and low-rank
graph-based discriminant analysis,” Remote Sens. , vol. 9, no. 5, p. 452,
2017.
[77] K.-R. M ¨uller, S. Mika, G. R ¨atsch, K. Tsuda, and B. Sch ¨olkopf, “An
introduction to kernel-based learning algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. , vol. 12, no. 2, 2001.
[78] S. Gao, I. W.-H. Tsang, and L.-T. Chia, “Kernel sparse representa-
tion for image classiﬁcation and face recognition,” in Proc. ECCV .
Springer, 2010, pp. 1–14.
[79] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed
optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method
of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn. , vol. 3, no. 1, p. 1122,
Jan. 2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000016
[80] G. H. Golub, P. C. Hansen, and D. P. O’Leary, “Tikhonov
regularization and total least squares,” SIAM Journal on Matrix
Analysis and Applications , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 185–194, 1999.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/S0895479897326432[81] K.-C. Li, “Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction,” J. Am.
Stat. Assoc. , vol. 86, no. 414, pp. 316–327, 1991.
[82] T. Suzuki and M. Sugiyama, “Sufﬁcient dimension reduction via
squared-loss mutual information estimation,” Neural Comput. , vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 725–758, 2013.
[83] J. Sainui and M. Sugiyama, “Direct approximation of quadratic mutual
information and its application to dependence-maximization cluster-
ing,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. , vol. 96, no. 10, pp. 2282–2285, 2013.
[84] V . Tangkaratt, H. Sasaki, and M. Sugiyama, “Direct estimation of
the derivative of quadratic mutual information with application in
supervised dimension reduction,” Neural Comput. , vol. 29, no. 8, pp.
2076–2122, 2017.
[85] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, J. Chanussot, and X. X. Zhu, “Cospace: Common
subspace learning from hyperspectral-multispectral correspondences,”
IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4349–4359, 2019.
[86] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, N. Ge, J. Chanussot, and X. X. Zhu, “Learnable
manifold alignment (LeMA): A semi-supervised cross-modality learn-
ing framework for land cover and land use classiﬁcation,” ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote. Sens. , vol. 147, pp. 193–205, 2019.
[87] D. Hong, N. Yokoya, J. Xu, and X. Zhu, “Joint & progressive learning
from high-dimensional data for multi-label classiﬁcation,” in Proc.
ECCV , 2018, pp. 469–484.
[88] L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Du, “Deep learning for remote sensing
data: A technical tutorial on the state of the art,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Mag. , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 22–40, 2016.
[89] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y . Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709, Sep.
2019.
[90] G. Licciardi and J. Chanussot, “Spectral transformation based on
nonlinear principal component analysis for dimensionality reduction
of hyperspectral images,” Eur. J. Remote Sens. , vol. 51, no. 1, pp.
375–390, 2018.
[91] Y . Chen, Z. Lin, X. Zhao, G. Wang, and Y . Gu, “Deep learning-based
classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2094–2107, 2014.
[92] C. Tao, H. Pan, Y . Li, and Z. Zou, “Unsupervised spectral–spatial
feature learning with stacked sparse autoencoder for hyperspectral
imagery classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 12,
no. 12, pp. 2438–2442, 2015.
[93] R. Kemker and C. Kanan, “Self-taught feature learning for hyperspec-
tral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 2693–2705, 2017.
[94] X. Kang, C. Li, S. Li, and H. Lin, “Classiﬁcation of hyperspectral
images by gabor ﬁltering based deep network,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1166–1178, 2018.
[95] C. Deng, Y . Xue, X. Liu, C. Li, and D. Tao, “Active transfer learning
network: A uniﬁed deep joint spectral–spatial feature learning model
for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens. , vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1741–1754, 2019.
[96] X. Ma, H. Wang, and J. Geng, “Spectral–spatial classiﬁcation of
hyperspectral image based on deep auto-encoder,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 4073–4085, 2016.
[97] X. Sun, F. Zhou, J. Dong, F. Gao, Q. Mu, and X. Wang, “Encod-
ing spectral and spatial context information for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 14, no. 12, pp.
2250–2254, 2017.
[98] P. Zhou, J. Han, G. Cheng, and B. Zhang, “Learning compact and dis-
criminative stacked autoencoder for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , 2019.
[99] W. Hu, Y . Huang, L. Wei, F. Zhang, and H. Li, “Deep convolutional
neural networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” Sensors , vol.
2015, 2015.
[100] W. Zhao and S. Du, “Spectral–spatial feature extraction for hyper-
spectral image classiﬁcation: A dimension reduction and deep learning
approach,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 4544–
4554, 2016.
[101] Y . Chen, H. Jiang, C. Li, X. Jia, and P. Ghamisi, “Deep feature extrac-
tion and classiﬁcation of hyperspectral images based on convolutional
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 6232–6251, 2016.
[102] X. Liu, C. Deng, J. Chanussot, D. Hong, and B. Zhao, “Stfnet: A two-
stream convolutional neural network for spatiotemporal image fusion,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6552–6564, 2019.
[103] W. Song, S. Li, L. Fang, and T. Lu, “Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation
with deep feature fusion network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 3173–3184, 2018.

==== Page 23 ====
IEEE GRSM DRAFT 2020 23
[104] X. Ma, A. Fu, J. Wang, H. Wang, and B. Yin, “Hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation based on deep deconvolution network with skip
architecture,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 8, pp.
4781–4791, 2018.
[105] P. Ghamisi, Y . Chen, and X. X. Zhu, “A self-improving convolution
neural network for the classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 1537–1541, Oct 2016.
[106] Y . Zhan, D. Hu, H. Xing, and X. Yu, “Hyperspectral band selection
based on deep convolutional neural network and distance density,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2365–2369, Dec
2017.
[107] Y . Kong, X. Wang, and Y . Cheng, “Spectral-spatial feature extraction
for hsi classiﬁcation based on supervised hypergraph and sample
expanded cnn,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 4128–4140, Nov 2018.
[108] J. Yang, Y . Zhao, and J. C. Chan, “Learning and transferring deep joint
spectralcspatial features for hyperspectral classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 4729–4742, Aug 2017.
[109] S. Mei, J. Ji, J. Hou, X. Li, and Q. Du, “Learning sensor-speciﬁc
spatial-spectral features of hyperspectral images via convolutional
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55, no. 8,
pp. 4520–4533, Aug 2017.
[110] L. Jiao, M. Liang, H. Chen, S. Yang, H. Liu, and X. Cao, “Deep
fully convolutional network-based spatial distribution prediction for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5585–5599, Oct 2017.
[111] G. Cheng, Z. Li, J. Han, X. Yao, and L. Guo, “Exploring hierarchical
convolutional features for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 6712–6722, Nov
2018.
[112] M. Liang, L. Jiao, S. Yang, F. Liu, B. Hou, and H. Chen, “Deep
multiscale spectral-spatial feature fusion for hyperspectral images clas-
siﬁcation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. ,
vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 2911–2924, Aug 2018.
[113] H. Wu and S. Prasad, “Semi-supervised deep learning using pseudo
labels for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process. , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1259–1270, 2018.
[114] X. Xu, W. Li, Q. Ran, Q. Du, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Multisource
remote sensing data classiﬁcation based on convolutional neural net-
work,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 937–949,
2018.
[115] Z. Zhong, J. Li, Z. Luo, and M. Chapman, “Spectral–spatial residual
network for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: A 3-d deep learning
framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 2, pp.
847–858, 2018.
[116] Q. Liu, F. Zhou, R. Hang, and X. Yuan, “Bidirectional-convolutional
lstm based spectral-spatial feature learning for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” Remote Sens. , vol. 9, no. 12, p. 1330, 2017.
[117] F. Zhou, R. Hang, Q. Liu, and X. Yuan, “Hyperspectral image clas-
siﬁcation using spectral-spatial lstms,” Neurocomputing , vol. 328, pp.
39–47, 2019.
[118] X. Zhang, Y . Sun, K. Jiang, C. Li, L. Jiao, and H. Zhou, “Spatial
sequential recurrent neural network for hyperspectral image classiﬁca-
tion,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , no. 99,
pp. 1–15, 2018.
[119] C. Shi and C.-M. Pun, “Multi-scale hierarchical recurrent neural
networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” Neurocomputing , vol.
294, pp. 82–93, 2018.
[120] A. Ma, A. M. Filippi, Z. Wang, and Z. Yin, “Hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation using similarity measurements-based deep recurrent neu-
ral networks,” Remote Sens. , vol. 11, no. 2, p. 194, 2019.
[121] Y . Xu, L. Zhang, B. Du, and F. Zhang, “Spectral-spatial uniﬁed
networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5893–5909, 2018.
[122] R. Hang, Q. Liu, D. Hong, and P. Ghamisi, “Cascaded recurrent neural
networks for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 5384–5394, 2019.
[123] S. Hao, W. Wang, Y . Ye, T. Nie, and L. Bruzzone, “Two-stream
deep architecture for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2349–2361, 2018.
[124] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y . Bengio, and P. Manzagol,
“Stacked denoising autoencoders,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 3371–3408, 2010.
[125] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. NIPS , Lake Tahoe,
Nevada, USA, 2012, pp. 1527–1554.[126] R. Kemker and C. Kanan, “Self-taught feature learning for hyperspec-
tral image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 2693–2705, 2017.
[127] P. Ghamisi, N. Yokoya, J. Li, W. Liao, S. Liu, J. Plaza, B. Rasti, and
A. Plaza, “Advances in hyperspectral image and signal processing: A
comprehensive overview of the state of the art,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Mag. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 37–78, Dec 2017.
[128] B. Rasti, M. Ulfarsson, and J. Sveinsson, “Hyperspectral subspace
identiﬁcation using SURE,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Let. , vol. 12,
no. 12, pp. 2481–2485, Dec. 2015.
[129] J. Bioucas-Dias and J. Nascimento, “Hyperspectral subspace identiﬁca-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Geos. Remote Sens. , vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 2435–2445,
2008.
[130] B. Rasti, P. Scheunders, P. Ghamisi, G. Licciardi, and J. Chanussot,
“Noise reduction in hyperspectral imagery: Overview and application,”
Remote Sens. , vol. 10, no. 3, p. 482, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/10/3/482

