==== Page 1 ====
Federated Learning:
Challenges, Methods, and Future Directions
Tian Li Anit Kumar Sahu
Carnegie Mellon University Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
tianli@cmu.edu anit.sahu@gmail.com
Ameet Talwalkar Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University & Determined AI Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu smithv@cmu.edu
Abstract
Federated learning involves training statistical models over remote devices or siloed data centers, such
as mobile phones or hospitals, while keeping data localized. Training in heterogeneous and potentially
massive networks introduces novel challenges that require a fundamental departure from standard
approaches for large-scale machine learning, distributed optimization, and privacy-preserving data
analysis. In this article, we discuss the unique characteristics and challenges of federated learning, provide
a broad overview of current approaches, and outline several directions of future work that are relevant to
a wide range of research communities.
1 Introduction
Mobile phones, wearable devices, and autonomous vehicles are just a few of the modern distributed
networks generating a wealth of data each day. Due to the growing computational power of these devices—
coupled with concerns over transmitting private information—it is increasingly attractive to store data
locally and push network computation to the edge.
The concept of edge computing is not a new one. Indeed, computing simple queries across distributed,
low-powered devices is a decades-long area of research that has been explored under the purview of query
processing in sensor networks, computing at the edge, and fog computing [ 12,29,40,49,74]. Recent works
have also considered training machine learning models centrally but serving and storing them locally; for
example, this is a common approach in mobile user modeling and personalization [60, 90].
However, as the storage and computational capabilities of the devices within distributed networks grow, it is
possible to leverage enhanced local resources on each device. This has led to a growing interest in federated
learning [75], which explores training statistical models directly on remote devices1. As we discuss in this
article, learning in such a setting differs signiﬁcantly from traditional distributed environments—requiring
1We use the term ‘device’ throughout the article to describe entities in the network, such as nodes, clients, sensors, or organizations.
1arXiv:1908.07873v1  [cs.LG]  21 Aug 2019

==== Page 2 ====
local updateslocal updatesnew globalmodel
local datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal datalocal data
local data
learnt model:next-word prediction
Figure 1: An example application of federated learning for the task of next-word prediction on mobile
phones. To preserve the privacy of the text data and to reduce strain on the network, we seek to train a
predictor in a distributed fashion, rather than sending the raw data to a central server. In this setup, remote
devices communicate with a central server periodically to learn a global model. At each communication
round, a subset of selected phones performs local training on their non-identically-distributed user data,
and sends these local updates to the server. After incorporating the updates, the server then sends back the
new global model to another subset of devices. This iterative training process continues across the network
until convergence is reached or some stopping criterion is met.
fundamental advances in areas such as privacy, large-scale machine learning, and distributed optimization,
and raising new questions at the intersection of diverse ﬁelds, such as machine learning and systems [ 91].
Federated learning methods have been deployed by major service providers [ 11,124], and play a critical
role in supporting privacy-sensitive applications where the training data are distributed at the edge [e.g.,
5,46,51,89,105,127,139]. Examples of potential applications include: learning sentiment, semantic
location, or activities of mobile phone users; adapting to pedestrian behavior in autonomous vehicles;
and predicting health events like heart attack risk from wearable devices [ 6,52,84]. We discuss several
canonical applications of federated learning below:
Smart phones. By jointly learning user behavior across a large pool of mobile phones, statistical models
can power applications such as next-word prediction, face detection, and voice recognition [ 46,89].
However, users may not be willing to share their data in order to protect their personal privacy or
to save the limited bandwidth/battery power of their phone. Federated learning has the potential
to enable predictive features on smart phones without diminishing the user experience or leaking
private information. Figure 1 depicts one such application in which we aim to learn a next-word
predictor in a large-scale mobile phone network based on users’ historical text data [46].
Organizations. Organizations or institutions can also be viewed as ‘devices’ in the context of federated
learning. For example, hospitals are organizations that contain a multitude of patient data for
predictive healthcare. However, hospitals operate under strict privacy practices, and may face legal,
administrative, or ethical constraints that require data to remain local. Federated learning is a
promising solution for these applications [ 52], as it can reduce strain on the network and enable
private learning between various devices/organizations.
Internet of things. Modern IoT networks, such as wearable devices, autonomous vehicles, or smart
homes, may contain numerous sensors that allow them to collect, react, and adapt to incoming data
in real-time. For example, a ﬂeet of autonomous vehicles may require an up-to-date model of trafﬁc,
2

==== Page 3 ====
construction, or pedestrian behavior to safely operate. However, building aggregate models in these
scenarios may be difﬁcult due to the private nature of the data and the limited connectivity of each
device. Federated learning methods can help to train models that efﬁciently adapt to changes in these
systems while maintaining user privacy [84, 98].
1.1 Problem Formulation
The canonical federated learning problem involves learning a single, global statistical model from data stored
on tens to potentially millions of remote devices. We aim to learn this model under the constraint that
device-generated data is stored and processed locally, with only intermediate updates being communicated
periodically with a central server. In particular, the goal is typically to minimize the following objective
function:
minwF(w), where F(w):=m
å
k=1pkFk(w). (1)
Here, mis the total number of devices, pk0andåkpk=1, and Fkis the local objective function for
thekth device. The local objective function is often deﬁned as the empirical risk over local data, i.e.,
Fk(w) =1
nkånk
jk=1fjk(w;xjk,yjk), where nkis the number of samples available locally. The user-deﬁned term
pkspeciﬁes the relative impact of each device, with two natural settings being pk=1
norpk=nk
n, where
n=åknkis the total number of samples. We will reference problem (1)throughout the article, but, as
discussed below, we note that other objectives or modeling approaches may be appropriate depending on
the application of interest.
1.2 Core Challenges
We next describe four of the core challenges associated with solving the distributed optimization problem
posed in (1). These challenges make the federated setting distinct from other classical problems, such as
distributed learning in data center settings or traditional private data analyses.
Challenge 1: Expensive Communication. Communication is a critical bottleneck in federated networks,
which, coupled with privacy concerns over sending raw data, necessitates that data generated on each
device remain local. Indeed, federated networks are potentially comprised of a massive number of devices,
e.g., millions of smart phones, and communication in the network can be slower than local computation by
many orders of magnitude [ 50,115]. In order to ﬁt a model to data generated by the devices in the federated
network, it is therefore necessary to develop communication-efﬁcient methods that iteratively send small
messages or model updates as part of the training process, as opposed to sending the entire dataset over the
network. To further reduce communication in such a setting, two key aspects to consider are: (i) reducing
the total number of communication rounds, or (ii) reducing the size of transmitted messages at each round.
Challenge 2: Systems Heterogeneity. The storage, computational, and communication capabilities of
each device in federated networks may differ due to variability in hardware (CPU, memory), network
connectivity (3G, 4G, 5G, wiﬁ), and power (battery level). Additionally, the network size and systems-related
constraints on each device typically result in only a small fraction of the devices being active at once, e.g.,
hundreds of active devices in a million-device network [ 11]. Each device may also be unreliable, and it is
not uncommon for an active device to drop out at a given iteration due to connectivity or energy constraints.
3

==== Page 4 ====
These system-level characteristics dramatically exacerbate challenges such as straggler mitigation and fault
tolerance. Federated learning methods that are developed and analyzed must therefore: (i) anticipate a low
amount of participation, (ii) tolerate heterogeneous hardware, and (iii) be robust to dropped devices in the
network.
Challenge 3: Statistical Heterogeneity. Devices frequently generate and collect data in a non-identically
distributed manner across the network, e.g., mobile phone users have varied use of language in the context
of a next word prediction task. Moreover, the number of data points across devices may vary signiﬁcantly,
and there may be an underlying structure present that captures the relationship amongst devices and
their associated distributions. This data generation paradigm violates frequently-used independent and
identically distributed (I.I.D.) assumptions in distributed optimization, increases the likelihood of stragglers,
and may add complexity in terms of modeling, analysis, and evaluation. Indeed, although the canonical
federated learning problem of (1)aims to learn a single global model, there exist other alternatives such as
simultaneously learning distinct local models via multi-task learning frameworks [cf. 106]. There is also a
close connection in this regard between leading approaches for federated learning and meta-learning [ 64].
Both the multi-task and meta-learning perspectives enable personalized ordevice-speciﬁc modeling, which is
often a more natural approach to handle the statistical heterogeneity of the data.
Challenge 4: Privacy Concerns. Finally, privacy is often a major concern in federated learning applications.
Federated learning makes a step towards protecting data generated on each device by sharing model
updates, e.g., gradient information, instead of the raw data [ 17,31,33]. However, communicating model
updates throughout the training process can nonetheless reveal sensitive information, either to a third-party,
or to the central server [ 76]. While recent methods aim to enhance the privacy of federated learning
using tools such as secure multiparty computation or differential privacy, these approaches often provide
privacy at the cost of reduced model performance or system efﬁciency. Understanding and balancing these
trade-offs, both theoretically and empirically, is a considerable challenge in realizing private federated
learning systems.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce previous and current works
that aim to address the four discussed challenges of federated learning. In Section 3, we outline several
promising directions of future research.
2 Survey of Related and Current Work
The challenges in federated learning at ﬁrst glance resemble classical problems in areas such as privacy,
large-scale machine learning, and distributed optimization. For instance, numerous methods have been
proposed to tackle expensive communication in the machine learning, optimization, and signal processing
communities. However, these methods are typically unable to fully handle the scale of federated networks,
much less the challenges of systems and statistical heterogeneity. Similarly, while privacy is an important
aspect for many machine learning applications, privacy-preserving methods for federated learning can be
challenging to rigorously assert due to the statistical variation in the data, and may be even more difﬁcult
to implement due to systems constraints on each device and across the potentially massive network. In this
section, we explore in more detail the challenges presented in Section 1, including a discussion of classical
results as well as more recent work focused speciﬁcally on federated learning.
4

==== Page 5 ====
mini-batch datacomputation
communication
apply updates locallyFigure 2: Left: Distributed (mini-batch) SGD. Each device, k, locally computes gradients from a mini-batch
of data points to approximate rFk(w), and the aggregated mini-batch updates are applied on the server.
Right: Local updating schemes. Each device immediately applies local updates, e.g., gradients, after they
are computed and a server performs a global aggregation after a variable number of local updates.
Local-updating schemes can reduce communication by performing additional work locally.
2.1 Communication-efﬁciency
Communication is a key bottleneck to consider when developing methods for federated networks. While it
is beyond the scope of this article to provide a self-contained review of communication-efﬁcient distributed
learning methods, we point out several general directions, which we group into (1) local updating methods,
(2) compression schemes, and (3) decentralized training.
2.1.1 Local Updating
Mini-batch optimization methods, which involve extending classical stochastic methods to process multiple
data points at a time, have emerged as a popular paradigm for distributed machine learning in data center
environments [ 28,88,96,102,103]. In practice, however, they have been shown to have limited ﬂexibility to
adapt to communication-computation trade-offs that would maximally leverage distributed data process-
ing [ 107,108]. In response, several recent methods have been proposed to improve communication-efﬁciency
in distributed settings by allowing for a variable number of local updates to be applied on each machine
in parallel at each communication round, making the amount of computation versus communication
substantially more ﬂexible. For convex objectives, distributed local-updating primal-dual methods have
emerged as a popular way to tackle such a problem [ 54,62,72,107,128]. These approaches leverage
duality structure to effectively decompose the global objective into subproblems that can be solved in
parallel at each communication round. Several distributed local-updating primal methods have also been
proposed, which have the added beneﬁt of being applicable to non-convex objectives [ 93,136]. These
methods drastically improve performance in practice, and have been shown to achieve orders-of-magnitude
speedups over traditional mini-batch methods or distributed approaches like ADMM [ 14] in real-world
data center environments. We provide an intuitive illustration of local updating methods in Figure 2.
In federated settings, optimization methods that allow for ﬂexible local updating and low client participation
have become the de facto solvers [ 65,75,106]. The most commonly used method for federated learning
is Federated Averaging ( FedAvg ) [75], a method based on averaging local stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) updates for the primal problem. FedAvg has been shown to work well empirically, particularly for
non-convex problems, but comes without convergence guarantees and can diverge in practical settings
when data are heterogeneous [ 65]. We discuss methods to handle such statistical heterogeneity in more
detail in Section 2.3.2.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Figure 3: Centralized vs. decentralized topologies. In the typical federated learning setting and as a focus of
this article, we assume a star network (left) where a server connects with all remote devices. Decentralized
topologies (right) are a potential alternative when communication to the server becomes a bottleneck.
2.1.2 Compression Schemes
While local updating methods can reduce the total number of communication rounds , model compression
schemes such as sparsiﬁcation, subsampling, and quantization can signiﬁcantly reduce the size of messages
communicated at each round. These methods have been extensively studied, both empirically and
theoretically, in previous literature for distributed training in data center environments; we defer the
readers to [ 119,135] for a more complete review. In federated environments, the low participation of
devices, non-identically distributed local data, and local updating schemes pose novel challenges to
these model compression approaches. For instance, the commonly-used error compensation techniques
in classical distributed learning [ 101] cannot be directly extended to federated settings as the errors
accumulated locally may be stale if the devices are not frequently sampled. Nevertheless, several works
have provided practical strategies in federated settings, such as forcing the updating models to be sparse
and low-rank; performing quantization with structured random rotations [ 59]; using lossy compression
and dropout to reduce server-to-device communication [ 15]; and applying Golomb lossless encoding [ 99].
From a theoretical perspective, while prior work has explored convergence guarantees with low-precision
training in the presence of non-identically distributed data [e.g., 111], the assumptions made do not take
into consideration common characteristics of the federated setting, such as low device participation or
locally-updating optimization methods.
2.1.3 Decentralized Training
In federated learning, a star network (where a central server is connected to a network of devices, as
in the left panel of Figure 3) is the predominant communication topology; we therefore focus on the
star-network setting in this article. However, we brieﬂy discuss decentralized topologies (where devices
only communicate with their neighbors, e.g., the right panel of Figure 3) as a potential alternative. In data
center environments, decentralized training has been demonstrated to be faster than centralized training
when operating on networks with low bandwidth or high latency; we defer readers to [ 47,67] for a more
comprehensive review. Similarly, in federated learning, decentralized algorithms can in theory reduce the
high communication cost on the central server. Some recent works [ 47,61] have investigated decentralized
training over heterogeneous data with local updating schemes. However, they are either restricted to linear
models [ 47] or assume full device participation [ 61]. Finally, hierarchical communication patterns have also
been proposed [ 68,70] to further ease the burden on the central server, by ﬁrst leveraging edge servers to
aggregate the updates from edge devices and then relying on a cloud server to aggregate updates from edge
servers. While this is a promising approach to reduce communication, it is not applicable to all networks,
as this type of physical hierarchy may not exist or be known a priori.
6

==== Page 7 ====
4Gtrainingtrainingsubsample devicessubsample devicestrainingtrainingsend theglobal modelsend the global modelsend modelupdatesdevice failure
Figure 4: Systems heterogeneity in federated learning. Devices may vary in terms of network connection,
power, and hardware. Moreover, some of the devices may drop at any time during training. Therefore,
federated training methods must tolerate heterogeneous systems environments and low participation of
devices, i.e., they must allow for only a small subset of devices to be active at each round.
2.2 Systems Heterogeneity
In federated settings, there is signiﬁcant variability in the systems characteristics across the network, as
devices may differ in terms of hardware, network connectivity, and battery power. As depicted in Figure 4,
these systems characteristics make issues such as stragglers signiﬁcantly more prevalent than in typical
data center environments. We roughly group several key directions to handle systems heterogeneity into:
(i) asynchronous communication, (ii) active device sampling, and (ii) fault tolerance. As mentioned in
Section 2.1.3, we assume a star topology in our following discussions.
2.2.1 Asynchronous Communication
In traditional data center settings, synchronous and asynchronous schemes are both commonly used to
parallelize iterative optimization algorithms, with each approach having pros and cons. Synchronous
schemes are simple and guarantee a serial-equivalent computational model, but they are also more
susceptible to stragglers in the face of device variability. Asynchronous schemes are an attractive approach
to mitigate stragglers in heterogeneous environments, particularly in shared-memory systems [ 27,30,48,92,
141]. However, they typically rely on bounded-delay assumptions to control the degree of staleness, which
for device kdepends on the number of other devices that have updated since device kpulled from the
central server. While asynchronous parameter servers have been successful in distributed data centers [e.g.,
27,48,141], classical bounded-delay assumptions can be unrealistic in federated settings, where the delay
may be on the order of hours to days, or completely unbounded.
2.2.2 Active Sampling
In federated networks, typically only a small subset of devices participate at each round of training.
However, the vast majority of federated methods, e.g. those described in [ 11,47,65,75,106], are passive
in that they do not aim to inﬂuence which devices participate. An alternative approach involves actively
selecting participating devices at each round. For example, Nishio and Yonetani [83] explore novel device
sampling policies based on systems resources, with the aim being for the server to aggregate as many
device updates as possible within a pre-deﬁned time window. Similarly, Kang et al. [57] take into account
7

==== Page 8 ====
systems overheads incurred on each device when designing incentive mechanisms to encourage devices
with higher-quality data to participate in the learning process. However, these methods assume a static
model of the systems characteristics of the network; it remains open how to extend these approaches to
handle real-time , device-speciﬁc ﬂuctuations in computation and communication delays. Moreover, while
these methods primarily focus on systems variability to perform active sampling, we note that it is also
worth considering actively sampling a set of small but sufﬁciently representative devices based on the
underlying statistical structure.
2.2.3 Fault Tolerance
Fault tolerance has been extensively studied in the systems community and is a fundamental consideration
of classical distributed systems [ 19,71,110]. Recent works have also investigated fault tolerance speciﬁcally
for machine learning workloads in data center environments [e.g., 87,112]. When learning over remote
devices, however, fault tolerance becomes more critical as it is common for some participating devices to
drop out at some point before the completion of the given training iteration [ 11]. One practical strategy is
to simply ignore such device failure [ 11], which may introduce bias into the device sampling scheme if the
failed devices have speciﬁc data characteristics. For instance, devices from remote areas may be more likely
to drop due to poor network connections and thus the trained federated model will be biased towards
devices with favorable network conditions. Theoretically, while several recent works have investigated
convergence guarantees of variants of federated learning methods [ 56,123,131,132], few analyses allow
for low participation [e.g., 65, 106], or study directly the effect of dropped devices.
Coded computation is another option to tolerate device failures by introducing algorithmic redundancy. Recent
works have explored using codes to speed up distributed machine learning training [e.g., 20,21,63,94,109].
For instance, in the presence of stragglers, gradient coding and its variants [ 20,21,109] carefully replicate
data blocks (as well as the gradient computation on those data blocks) across computing nodes to obtain
either exact or inexact recovery of the true gradients. While this is a seemingly promising approach
for the federated setting, these methods face fundamental challenges in federated networks as sharing
data/replication across devices is often infeasible due to privacy constraints and the scale of the network.
2.3 Statistical Heterogeneity
Challenges arise when training federated models from data that is not identically distributed across devices,
both in terms of modeling the data (as depicted in Figure 5), and in terms of analyzing the convergence
behavior of associated training procedures. We discuss related work in these directions below.
2.3.1 Modeling Heterogeneous Data
There exists a large body of literature in machine learning that has modeled statistical heterogeneity
via methods such as meta-learning [ 114] and multi-task learning [ 18,37]; these ideas have been recently
extended to the federated setting [ 24,26,35,58,106,138]. For instance, MOCHA [106], an optimization
framework designed for the federated setting, can allow for personalization by learning separate but related
models for each device while leveraging a shared representation via multi-task learning. This method has
provable theoretical convergence guarantees for the considered objectives, but is limited in its ability to
8

==== Page 9 ====
(a) Learn personalized
models for each device; do
not learn from peers.
(b) Learn a global model;
learn from peers.
(c) Learn personalized
models for each device;
learn from peers.
Figure 5: Different modeling approaches in federated networks. Depending on properties of the data,
network, and application of interest, one may choose to (a) learn separate models for each device, (b) ﬁt a
single global model to all devices, or (c) learn related but distinct models in the network.
scale to massive networks and is restricted to convex objectives. Another approach [ 26] models the star
topology as a Bayesian network and performs variational inference during learning. Although this method
can handle non-convex models, it is expensive to generalize to large federated networks. Khodak et al. [58]
provably meta-learn a within-task learning rate using multi-task information (where each task corresponds
to a device) and have demonstrated improved empirical performance over vanilla FedAvg . Eichner et al.
[35] investigate a pluralistic solution (adaptively choosing between a global model and device-speciﬁc
models) to address the cyclic patterns in data samples during federated training. Zhao et al. [138] explore
transfer learning for personalization by running FedAvg after training a global model centrally on some
shared proxy data. Despite these recent advances, key challenges still remain in making methods for
heterogeneous modeling that are robust, scalable, and automated in federated settings.
When modeling federated data, it may also be important to consider issues beyond accuracy, such as
fairness . In particular, naively solving an aggregate loss function such as in (1)may implicitly advantage
or disadvantage some of the devices, as the learned model may become biased towards devices with
larger amounts of data, or (if weighting devices equally), to commonly occurring groups of devices.
Recent works have proposed modiﬁed modeling approaches that aim to reduce the variance of the model
performance across devices. Some heuristics simply perform a varied number of local updates based
on local loss [ 52]. Other more principled approaches include Agnostic Federated Learning [ 80], which
optimizes the centralized model for any target distribution formed by a mixture of the client distributions
via a minimax optimization scheme. Another more general approach is taken by Li et al. [66], which
proposes an objective called q-FFL in which devices with higher loss are given higher relative weight to
encourage less variance in the ﬁnal accuracy distribution. Beyond issues of fairness, we note that aspects
such as accountability and interpretability in federated learning are additionally worth exploring, but may
be challenging due to the scale and heterogeneity of the network.
2.3.2 Convergence Guarantees for Non-IID Data
Statistical heterogeneity also presents novel challenges in terms of analyzing the convergence behavior
in federated settings—even when learning a single global model. Indeed, when data is not identically
distributed across devices in the network, methods such as FedAvg have been shown to diverge in
practice [ 65,75]. Parallel SGD and related variants, which make local updates similar to FedAvg , have been
9

==== Page 10 ====
analyzed in the I.I.D. setting [ 68,93,104,108,120,121,122,125,136,140]. However, the results rely on
the premise that each local solver is a copy of the same stochastic process (due to the I.I.D. assumption),
which is not the case in typical federated settings. To understand the performance of FedAvg in statistically
heterogeneous settings, FedProx [65] has recently been proposed. FedProx makes a small modiﬁcation
to the FedAvg method to help ensure convergence, both theoretically and in practice. FedProx can also
be interpreted as a generalized, reparameterized version of FedAvg that has practical ramiﬁcations in the
context of accounting for systems heterogeneity across devices. Several other works [ 56,123,131,132] have
also explored convergence guarantees in the presence of heterogeneous data with different assumptions, e.g.,
convexity [ 123] or uniformly bounded gradients [ 131]. There are also heuristic approaches that aim to tackle
statistical heterogeneity, either by sharing local device data or some server-side proxy data [ 52,55,138].
However, these methods may be unrealistic: in addition to imposing burdens on network bandwidth,
sending local data to the server [ 55] violates the key privacy assumption of federated learning, and sending
globally-shared proxy data to all devices [ 52,138] requires effort to carefully generate or collect such
auxiliary data.
2.4 Privacy
Privacy concerns often motivate the need to keep raw data on each device local in federated settings.
However, sharing other information such as model updates as part of the training process can also leak
sensitive user information [ 8,17,39,78]. For instance, Carlini et al. [17] demonstrate that one can extract
sensitive text patterns, e.g., a speciﬁc credit card number, from a recurrent neural network trained on users’
language data. Given increasing interest in privacy-preserving learning approaches, in Section 2.4.1, we ﬁrst
brieﬂy revisit prior work on enhancing privacy in the general (distributed) machine learning setting. We
then review recent privacy-preserving methods speciﬁcally designed for federated settings in Section 2.4.2.
2.4.1 Privacy in Machine Learning
Privacy-preserving learning has been extensively studied by the machine learning [e.g., 76], systems [e.g.,
4,11], and theory [e.g., 38,69] communities. Three main strategies, each of which we will brieﬂy review,
include differential privacy to communicate noisy data sketches, homomorphic encryption to operate on
encrypted data, and secure function evaluation or multiparty computation.
Among these various privacy approaches, differential privacy [32,33,34] is most widely used due to its strong
information theoretic guarantees, algorithmic simplicity, and relatively small systems overhead. Simply
put, a randomized mechanism is differentially private if the change of one input element will not result in
too much difference in the output distribution; this means that one cannot draw any conclusions about
whether or not a speciﬁc sample is used in the learning process. Such sample-level privacy can be achieved
in many learning tasks [ 2,7,22,53,85,86]. For gradient-based learning methods, a popular approach is to
apply differential privacy by randomly perturbing the intermediate output at each iteration [e.g., 2,7,126].
Before applying the perturbation, e.g., via Gaussian noise [ 2], Laplacian noise [ 77], or Binomial noise [ 3], it
is common to clip the gradients in order to bound the inﬂuence of each example on the overall update.
There exists an inherent trade-off between differential privacy and model accuracy, as adding more noise
results in greater privacy, but may compromise accuracy signiﬁcantly. Despite the fact that differential
privacy is the de facto metric for privacy in machine learning, there are many other privacy deﬁnitions,
such as k-anonymity [ 36],d-presence [ 81] and distance correlation [ 117], that may be applicable to different
learning problems [118].
10

==== Page 11 ====
serverdevices(a) Federated learning with-
out additional privacy protection
mechanisms.
serverdevices
(b) Global privacy, where a trusted
server is assumed.
serverdevices
(c) Local privacy, where the central server
might be malicious.
Figure 6: An illustration of different privacy-enhancing mechanisms in one round of federated learning. M
denotes a randomized mechanism used to privatize the data. With global privacy (b), the model updates
are private to all third parties other than a single trusted party (the central server). With local privacy (c),
the individual model updates are also private to the server.
Beyond differential privacy, homomorphic encryption can be used to secure the learning process by
computing on encrypted data, although it has currently been applied in limited settings, e.g., training
linear models [ 82] or involving only a few entities [ 133]. When the sensitive datasets are distributed
across different data owners, another natural option is to perform privacy-preserving learning via secure
function evaluation (SFE) or secure multiparty computation (SMC). The resulting protocols can enable
multiple parties to collaboratively compute an agreed-upon function without leaking input information
from any party except for what can be inferred from the output [e.g., 23,43,95]. Thus, while SMC cannot
guarantee protection from information leakage, it can be combined with differential privacy to achieve
stronger privacy guarantees. However, approaches along these lines may not be applicable to large-scale
machine learning scenarios as they incur substantial additional communication and computation costs.
Moreover, SMC protocols need to be carefully designed and implemented for each operation in the targeted
learning algorithm [ 25,79]. We defer interested readers to [ 13,97] for a more comprehensive review of the
approaches based on homomorphic encryption and SMC.
2.4.2 Privacy in Federated Learning
The federated setting poses novel challenges to existing privacy-preserving algorithms. Beyond pro-
viding rigorous privacy guarantees, it is necessary to develop methods that are computationally cheap,
communication-efﬁcient, and tolerant to dropped devices—all without overly compromising accuracy.
Although there are a variety of privacy deﬁnitions in federated learning [ 8,17,41,64,76,113], typically
they can be classiﬁed into two categories: global privacy and local privacy . As demonstrated in Figure 6,
global privacy requires that the model updates generated at each round are private to all untrusted third
parties other than the central server, while local privacy further requires that the updates are also private to
the server.
Current works that aim to improve the privacy of federated learning typically build upon previous classical
cryptographic protocols such as SMC [ 10,42] and differential privacy [ 3,8,41,76]. Bonawitz et al. [10]
introduce an SMC protocol to protect individual model updates. The central server is not able to see any
local updates, but can still observe the exact aggregated results at each round. SMC is a lossless method, and
can retain the original accuracy with a very high privacy guarantee. However, the resulting method incurs
signiﬁcant extra communication cost. Other works [ 41,76] apply differential privacy to federated learning
11

==== Page 12 ====
and offer global differential privacy. These approaches have a number of hyperparameters that affect
communication and accuracy that must be carefully chosen, though follow up work [ 113] proposes adaptive
gradient clipping strategies to help alleviate this issue. In the case where stronger privacy guarantees are
required, Bhowmick et al. [8]introduce a relaxed version of local privacy by limiting the power of potential
adversaries. It affords stronger privacy guarantees than global privacy, and has better model performance
than strict local privacy. Li et al. [64] propose locally differentially-private algorithms in the context of
meta-learning, which can be applied to federated learning with personalization, while also providing
provable learning guarantees in convex settings. In addition, differential privacy can be combined with
model compression techniques to reduce communication and obtain privacy beneﬁts simultaneously [3].
3 Future Directions
Federated learning is an active and ongoing area of research. Although recent work has begun to
address the challenges discussed in Section 2, there are a number of critical open directions yet to be
explored. In this section, we brieﬂy outline a few promising research directions surrounding the previously
discussed challenges (expensive communication, systems heterogeneity, statistical heterogeneity, and
privacy concerns), and introduce additional challenges regarding issues such as productionizing and
benchmarking in federated settings.
Extreme communication schemes. It remains to be seen how much communication is necessary
in federated learning. Indeed, it is well-known that optimization methods for machine learning
can tolerate a lack of precision; this error can in fact help with generalization [ 129]. While one-
shot or divide-and-conquer communication schemes have been explored in traditional data center
settings [ 73,137], the behavior of these methods is not well-understood in massive or statistical
heterogeneous networks. Similarly, one-shot/few-shot heuristics [ 44,45,134] have recently been
proposed for the federated setting, but have yet to be theoretically analyzed or evaluated at scale.
Communication reduction and the Pareto frontier. We discussed several ways to reduce commu-
nication in federated training, such as local updating and model compression. In order to create a
realistic system for federated learning, it is important to understand how these techniques compose
with one another, and to systematically analyze the trade-off between accuracy and communication for
each approach. In particular, the most useful techniques will demonstrate improvements at the Pareto
frontier—achieving an accuracy greater than any other approach under the same communication
budget, and ideally, across a wide range of communication/accuracy proﬁles. Similar comprehensive
analyses have been performed for efﬁcient neural network inference [e.g., 9], and are necessary in
order to compare communication-reduction techniques for federated learning in a meaningful way.
Novel models of asynchrony. As discussed in Section 2.2.1, two communication schemes most
commonly studied in distributed optimization are bulk synchronous approaches and asynchronous
approaches (where it is assumed that the delay is bounded). These schemes are more realistic in data
center settings—where worker nodes are typically dedicated to the workload, i.e., they are ready to
‘pull’ their next job from the central node immediately after they ‘push’ the results of their previous
job. In contrast, in federated networks, each device is often undedicated to the task at hand and most
devices are not active on any given iteration. Therefore, it is worth studying the effects of this more
realistic device-centric communication scheme—in which each device can decide when to ‘wake up’
and interact with the central server in an event-triggered manner.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Heterogeneity diagnostics. Recent works have aimed to quantify statistical heterogeneity through
metrics such as local dissimilarity (as deﬁned in the context of federated learning in [ 65] and used for
other purposes in works such as [ 100,116,130]) and earth mover’s distance [ 138]. However, these
metrics cannot be easily calculated over the federated network before training occurs. The importance
of these metrics motivates the following open questions: (i) Do simple diagnostics exist to quickly
determine the level of heterogeneity in federated networks a priori ? (ii) Can analogous diagnostics be
developed to quantify the amount of systems-related heterogeneity? (iii) Can current or new deﬁnitions
of heterogeneity be exploited to further improve the convergence of federated optimization methods?
Granular privacy constraints. The deﬁnitions of privacy outlined in Section 2.4.2 cover privacy
at a local or global level with respect to all devices in the network. However, in practice, it may
be necessary to deﬁne privacy on a more granular level, as privacy constraints may differ across
devices or even across data points on a single device. For instance, Li et al. [64] recently proposed
sample-speciﬁc (as opposed to user-speciﬁc) privacy guarantees, thus providing a weaker form of
privacy in exchange for more accurate models. Developing methods to handle mixed (device-speciﬁc
or sample-speciﬁc) privacy restrictions is an interesting and ongoing direction of future work.
Beyond supervised learning. It is important to note that the methods discussed thus far have been
developed with the task of supervised learning in mind, i.e., they assume that labels exist for all of
the data in the federated network. In practice, much of the data generated in realistic federated
networks may be unlabeled or weakly labeled. Furthermore, the problem at hand may not be to ﬁt a
model to data as presented in (1), but instead to perform some exploratory data analysis, determine
aggregate statistics, or run a more complex task such as reinforcement learning. Tackling problems
beyond supervised learning in federated networks will likely require addressing similar challenges of
scalability, heterogeneity, and privacy.
Productionizing federated learning. Beyond the major challenges discussed in this article, there
are a number of practical concerns that arise when running federated learning in production. In
particular, issues such as concept drift (when the underlying data-generation model changes over
time); diurnal variations (when the devices exhibit different behavior at different times of the day or
week) [ 35]; and cold start problems (when new devices enter the network) must be handled with care.
We defer the readers to [ 11], which discusses some of the practical systems-related issues that exist in
production federated learning systems.
Benchmarks. Finally, as federated learning is a nascent ﬁeld, we are at a pivotal time to shape
the developments made in this area and ensure that they are grounded in real-world settings,
assumptions, and datasets. It is critical for the broader research communities to further build upon
existing implementations and benchmarking tools, such as LEAF [ 16] and TensorFlow Federated [ 1],
to facilitate both the reproducibility of empirical results and the dissemination of new solutions for
federated learning.
4 Conclusion
In this article, we have provided an overview of federated learning, a learning paradigm where statistical
models are trained at the edge in distributed networks. We have discussed the unique properties and
associated challenges of federated learning compared with traditional distributed data center computing
and classical privacy-preserving learning. We provided an extensive survey on classical results as well as
more recent work speciﬁcally focused on federated settings. Finally, we have outlined out a handful of open
13

==== Page 14 ====
problems worth future research effort. Providing solutions to these problems will require interdisciplinary
effort from a broad set of research communities.
Acknowledgement. We thank Jeffrey Li and Mikhail Khodak for helpful discussions and comments. This
work was supported in part by DARPA FA875017C0141, the National Science Foundation grants IIS1705121
and IIS1838017, an Okawa Grant, a Google Faculty Award, an Amazon Web Services Award, a JP Morgan
A.I. Research Faculty Award, a Carnegie Bosch Institute Research Award and the CONIX Research Center,
one of six centers in JUMP , a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of DARPA, the National Science Foundation, or any other
funding agency.
References
[1]Tensorﬂow federated: Machine learning on decentralized data. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/federated .
[2]M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. Deep learning with
differential privacy. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2016.
[3]N. Agarwal, A. T. Suresh, F. X. X. Yu, S. Kumar, and B. McMahan. cpSGD: Communication-efﬁcient and
differentially-private distributed sgd. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[4]R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Privacy-preserving data mining. In International Conference on Management of Data ,
2000.
[5]M. Ammad-ud din, E. Ivannikova, S. A. Khan, W. Oyomno, Q. Fu, K. E. Tan, and A. Flanagan. Federated collab-
orative ﬁltering for privacy-preserving personalized recommendation system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09888 ,
2019.
[6]D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. Parra, and J. L. Reyes-Ortiz. A public domain dataset for human activity
recognition using smartphones. In European Symposium on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and
Machine Learning , 2013.
[7]R. Bassily, A. Smith, and A. Thakurta. Private empirical risk minimization: Efﬁcient algorithms and tight error
bounds. In Foundations of Computer Science , 2014.
[8]A. Bhowmick, J. Duchi, J. Freudiger, G. Kapoor, and R. Rogers. Protection against reconstruction and its
applications in private federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00984 , 2018.
[9]T. Bolukbasi, J. Wang, O. Dekel, and V . Saligrama. Adaptive neural networks for efﬁcient inference. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , 2017.
[10] K. Bonawitz, V . Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth. Prac-
tical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning. In Conference on Computer and Communications
Security , 2017.
[11] K. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp, D. Huba, A. Ingerman, V . Ivanov, C. Kiddon, J. Konecny, S. Mazzocchi,
H. B. McMahan, T. V . Overveldt, D. Petrou, D. Ramage, and J. Roselander. Towards federated learning at scale:
system design. In Conference on Systems and Machine Learning , 2019.
[12] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli. Fog computing and its role in the internet of things. In SIGCOMM
Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing , 2012.
14

==== Page 15 ====
[13] R. Bost, R. A. Popa, S. Tu, and S. Goldwasser. Machine learning classiﬁcation over encrypted data. In Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium , 2015.
[14] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein. Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the
alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and Trends Rin Machine Learning , 3:1–122, 2011.
[15] S. Caldas, J. Koneˇ cny, H. B. McMahan, and A. Talwalkar. Expanding the reach of federated learning by reducing
client resource requirements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07210 , 2018.
[16] S. Caldas, P . Wu, T. Li, J. Koneˇ cn `y, H. B. McMahan, V . Smith, and A. Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated
settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01097 , 2018.
[17] N. Carlini, C. Liu, J. Kos, Ú. Erlingsson, and D. Song. The secret sharer: Measuring unintended neural network
memorization & extracting secrets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08232 , 2018.
[18] R. Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine Learning , 28:41–75, 1997.
[19] M. Castro, B. Liskov, et al. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In Operating Systems Design and Implementation ,
1999.
[20] Z. Charles and D. Papailiopoulos. Gradient coding using the stochastic block model. In International Symposium
on Information Theory , 2018.
[21] Z. B. Charles, D. S. Papailiopoulos, and J. Ellenberg. Approximate gradient coding via sparse random graphs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.0677 , 2017.
[22] K. Chaudhuri, C. Monteleoni, and A. D. Sarwate. Differentially private empirical risk minimization. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 12:1069–1109, 2011.
[23] D. Chaum. The dining cryptographers problem: Unconditional sender and recipient untraceability. Journal of
Cryptology , 1:65–75, 1988.
[24] F. Chen, Z. Dong, Z. Li, and X. He. Federated meta-learning for recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07876 ,
2018.
[25] V . Chen, V . Pastro, and M. Raykova. Secure computation for machine learning with spdz. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.00329 , 2019.
[26] L. Corinzia and J. M. Buhmann. Variational federated multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06268 , 2019.
[27] W. Dai, A. Kumar, J. Wei, Q. Ho, G. Gibson, and E. P . Xing. High-performance distributed ML at scale through
parameter server consistency models. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2015.
[28] O. Dekel, R. Gilad-Bachrach, O. Shamir, and L. Xiao. Optimal distributed online prediction using mini-batches.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13:165–202, 2012.
[29] A. Deshpande, C. Guestrin, S. R. Madden, J. M. Hellerstein, and W. Hong. Model-based approximate querying
in sensor networks. The VLDB Journal , 14:417–443, 2005.
[30] J. Duchi, M. I. Jordan, and B. McMahan. Estimation, optimization, and parallelism when data is sparse. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2013.
[31] J. C. Duchi, M. I. Jordan, and M. J. Wainwright. Privacy aware learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2012.
[32] C. Dwork. A ﬁrm foundation for private data analysis. Communications of the ACM , 54:86–95, 2011.
[33] C. Dwork and A. Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical
Computer Science , 9:211–407, 2014.
15

==== Page 16 ====
[34] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In
Theory of Cryptography Conference , 2006.
[35] H. Eichner, T. Koren, H. B. McMahan, N. Srebro, and K. Talwar. Semi-cyclic stochastic gradient descent. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[36] K. El Emam and F. K. Dankar. Protecting privacy using k-anonymity. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association , 15:627–637, 2008.
[37] T. Evgeniou and M. Pontil. Regularized multi–task learning. In Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining , 2004.
[38] V . Feldman, I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and A. Thakurta. Privacy ampliﬁcation by iteration. In Foundations of Computer
Science , 2018.
[39] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart. Model inversion attacks that exploit conﬁdence information and basic
countermeasures. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2015.
[40] P . Garcia Lopez, A. Montresor, D. Epema, A. Datta, T. Higashino, A. Iamnitchi, M. Barcellos, P . Felber, and
E. Riviere. Edge-centric computing: Vision and challenges. SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , 45:37–42,
2015.
[41] R. C. Geyer, T. Klein, and M. Nabi. Differentially private federated learning: A client level perspective. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.07557 , 2017.
[42] B. Ghazi, R. Pagh, and A. Velingker. Scalable and differentially private distributed aggregation in the shufﬂed
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08320 , 2019.
[43] S. Goryczka and L. Xiong. A comprehensive comparison of multiparty secure additions with differential privacy.
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , 14:463–477, 2015.
[44] N. Guha and V . Smith. Model aggregation via good-enough model spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07782 , 2018.
[45] N. Guha, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith. One-shot federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.11175 , 2019.
[46] A. Hard, K. Rao, R. Mathews, F. Beaufays, S. Augenstein, H. Eichner, C. Kiddon, and D. Ramage. Federated
learning for mobile keyboard prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03604 , 2018.
[47] L. He, A. Bian, and M. Jaggi. Cola: Decentralized linear learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 2018.
[48] Q. Ho, J. Cipar, H. Cui, S. Lee, J. K. Kim, P . B. Gibbons, G. A. Gibson, G. Ganger, and E. P . Xing. More effective
distributed ML via a stale synchronous parallel parameter server. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 2013.
[49] K. Hong, D. Lillethun, U. Ramachandran, B. Ottenwälder, and B. Koldehofe. Mobile fog: A programming model
for large-scale applications on the internet of things. In SIGCOMM Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing , 2013.
[50] J. Huang, F. Qian, Y. Guo, Y. Zhou, Q. Xu, Z. M. Mao, S. Sen, and O. Spatscheck. An in-depth study of lte: effect
of network protocol and application behavior on performance. SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , 43:
363–374, 2013.
[51] L. Huang and D. Liu. Patient clustering improves efﬁciency of federated machine learning to predict mortality
and hospital stay time using distributed electronic medical records. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.09296 , 2019.
[52] L. Huang, Y. Yin, Z. Fu, S. Zhang, H. Deng, and D. Liu. Loadaboost: Loss-based adaboost federated machine
learning on medical data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12629 , 2018.
[53] R. Iyengar, J. P . Near, D. Song, O. Thakkar, A. Thakurta, and L. Wang. Towards practical differentially private
convex optimization. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2019.
16

==== Page 17 ====
[54] M. Jaggi, V . Smith, M. Takác, J. Terhorst, S. Krishnan, T. Hofmann, and M. I. Jordan. Communication-efﬁcient
distributed dual coordinate ascent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2014.
[55] E. Jeong, S. Oh, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim. Communication-efﬁcient on-device machine learning:
Federated distillation and augmentation under non-iid private data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11479 , 2018.
[56] P . Jiang and G. Agrawal. A linear speedup analysis of distributed deep learning with sparse and quantized
communication. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[57] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, H. Yu, Y.-C. Liang, and D. I. Kim. Incentive design for efﬁcient federated learning
in mobile networks: A contract theory approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07479 , 2019.
[58] M. Khodak, M.-F. Balcan, and A. Talwalkar. Adaptive gradient-based meta-learning methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.02717 , 2019.
[59] J. Koneˇ cn `y, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P . Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and D. Bacon. Federated learning: strategies for
improving communication efﬁciency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492 , 2016.
[60] T. Kuﬂik, J. Kay, and B. Kummerfeld. Challenges and solutions of ubiquitous user modeling. In Ubiquitous
Display Environments . 2012.
[61] A. Lalitha, X. Wang, O. Kilinc, Y. Lu, T. Javidi, and F. Koushanfar. Decentralized bayesian learning over graphs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10466 , 2019.
[62] C.-P . Lee and D. Roth. Distributed box-constrained quadratic optimization for dual linear svm. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , 2015.
[63] K. Lee, M. Lam, R. Pedarsani, D. Papailiopoulos, and K. Ramchandran. Speeding up distributed machine
learning using codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 64:1514–1529, 2017.
[64] J. Li, M. Khodak, S. Caldas, and A. Talwalkar. Differentially-private gradient-based meta-learning. Technical
Report , 2019.
[65] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Sanjabi, M. Zaheer, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith. Federated optimization for heterogeneous
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06127 , 2018.
[66] T. Li, M. Sanjabi, and V . Smith. Fair resource allocation in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10497 ,
2019.
[67] X. Lian, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, C.-J. Hsieh, W. Zhang, and J. Liu. Can decentralized algorithms outperform
centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[68] T. Lin, S. U. Stich, and M. Jaggi. Don’t use large mini-batches, use local sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07217 , 2018.
[69] Y. Lindell and B. Pinkas. Privacy preserving data mining. In Advances in Cryptology , 2000.
[70] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief. Edge-assisted hierarchical federated learning with non-iid data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.06641 , 2019.
[71] Y. Liu, J. K. Muppala, M. Veeraraghavan, D. Lin, and M. Hamdi. Data center networks: Topologies, architectures and
fault-tolerance characteristics . Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[72] C. Ma, V . Smith, M. Jaggi, M. I. Jordan, P . Richtárik, and M. Takáˇ c. Adding vs. averaging in distributed
primal-dual optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015.
[73] L. W. Mackey, M. I. Jordan, and A. Talwalkar. Divide-and-conquer matrix factorization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2011.
[74] S. R. Madden, M. J. Franklin, J. M. Hellerstein, and W. Hong. Tinydb: an acquisitional query processing system
for sensor networks. Transactions on Database Systems , 30:122–173, 2005.
17

==== Page 18 ====
[75] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas. Communication-efﬁcient learning of
deep networks from decentralized data. In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2017.
[76] H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. Learning differentially private recurrent language models.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[77] L. Melis, G. Danezis, and E. D. Cristofaro. Efﬁcient private statistics with succinct sketches. In Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium , 2016.
[78] L. Melis, C. Song, E. De Cristofaro, and V . Shmatikov. Exploiting unintended feature leakage in collaborative
learning. In IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy , 2019.
[79] P . Mohassel and P . Rindal. Aby 3: a mixed protocol framework for machine learning. In Conference on Computer
and Communications Security , 2018.
[80] M. Mohri, G. Sivek, and A. T. Suresh. Agnostic federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
2019.
[81] M. E. Nergiz and C. Clifton. d-presence without complete world knowledge. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering , 22:868–883, 2010.
[82] V . Nikolaenko, U. Weinsberg, S. Ioannidis, M. Joye, D. Boneh, and N. Taft. Privacy-preserving ridge regression
on hundreds of millions of records. In Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2013.
[83] T. Nishio and R. Yonetani. Client selection for federated learning with heterogeneous resources in mobile edge.
InInternational Conference on Communications , 2019.
[84] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis. A survey on wearable sensor-based systems for health monitoring and
prognosis. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , 40:1–12, 2010.
[85] N. Papernot, M. Abadi, U. Erlingsson, I. Goodfellow, and K. Talwar. Semi-supervised knowledge transfer for
deep learning from private training data. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
[86] N. Papernot, S. Song, I. Mironov, A. Raghunathan, K. Talwar, and Ú. Erlingsson. Scalable private learning with
pate. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[87] A. Qiao, B. Aragam, B. Zhang, and E. Xing. Fault tolerance in iterative-convergent machine learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[88] Z. Qu, P . Richtárik, and T. Zhang. Quartz: Randomized dual coordinate ascent with arbitrary sampling. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015.
[89] S. Ramaswamy, R. Mathews, K. Rao, and F. Beaufays. Federated learning for emoji prediction in a mobile
keyboard. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04329 , 2019.
[90] M. Rastegari, V . Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi. Xnor-net: Imagenet classiﬁcation using binary convolutional
neural networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 2016.
[91] A. Ratner et al. SysML: The new frontier of machine learning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03257 , 2019.
[92] B. Recht, C. Re, S. Wright, and F. Niu. Hogwild: A lock-free approach to parallelizing stochastic gradient descent.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2011.
[93] S. J. Reddi, J. Koneˇ cn `y, P . Richtárik, B. Póczós, and A. Smola. Aide: Fast and communication efﬁcient distributed
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.06879 , 2016.
[94] A. Reisizadeh, S. Prakash, R. Pedarsani, and A. S. Avestimehr. Coded computation over heterogeneous clusters.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 65:4227–4242, 2019.
18

==== Page 19 ====
[95] M. S. Riazi, C. Weinert, O. Tkachenko, E. M. Songhori, T. Schneider, and F. Koushanfar. Chameleon: A
hybrid secure computation framework for machine learning applications. In Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , 2018.
[96] P . Richtárik and M. Takáˇ c. Distributed coordinate descent method for learning with big data. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 17:2657–2681, 2016.
[97] B. D. Rouhani, M. S. Riazi, and F. Koushanfar. Deepsecure: Scalable provably-secure deep learning. In Design
Automation Conference , 2018.
[98] S. Samarakoon, M. Bennis, W. Saad, and M. Debbah. Federated learning for ultra-reliable low-latency v2v
communications. In Global Communications Conference , 2018.
[99] F. Sattler, S. Wiedemann, K.-R. Müller, and W. Samek. Robust and communication-efﬁcient federated learning
from non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02891 , 2019.
[100] M. Schmidt and N. L. Roux. Fast convergence of stochastic gradient descent under a strong growth condition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.6370 , 2013.
[101] F. Seide, H. Fu, J. Droppo, G. Li, and D. Yu. 1-bit stochastic gradient descent and its application to data-parallel
distributed training of speech dnns. In International Speech Communication Association , 2014.
[102] S. Shalev-Shwartz and T. Zhang. Accelerated mini-batch stochastic dual coordinate ascent. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2013.
[103] O. Shamir and N. Srebro. Distributed stochastic optimization and learning. In Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control, and Computing , 2014.
[104] O. Shamir, N. Srebro, and T. Zhang. Communication-efﬁcient distributed optimization using an approximate
newton-type method. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2014.
[105] S. Silva, B. Gutman, E. Romero, P . M. Thompson, A. Altmann, and M. Lorenzi. Federated learning in distributed
medical databases: Meta-analysis of large-scale subcortical brain data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08553 , 2018.
[106] V . Smith, C.-K. Chiang, M. Sanjabi, and A. Talwalkar. Federated multi-task learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[107] V . Smith, S. Forte, C. Ma, M. Takac, M. I. Jordan, and M. Jaggi. Cocoa: a general framework for communication-
efﬁcient distributed optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18:1–47, 2018.
[108] S. U. Stich. Local sgd converges fast and communicates little. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2019.
[109] R. Tandon, Q. Lei, A. G. Dimakis, and N. Karampatziakis. Gradient coding: Avoiding stragglers in distributed
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2017.
[110] A. S. Tanenbaum and M. Van Steen. Distributed systems: principles and paradigms . Prentice-Hall, 2007.
[111] H. Tang, S. Gan, C. Zhang, T. Zhang, and J. Liu. Communication compression for decentralized training. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[112] H. Tang, C. Yu, C. Renggli, S. Kassing, A. Singla, D. Alistarh, J. Liu, and C. Zhang. Distributed learning over
unreliable networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[113] O. Thakkar, G. Andrew, and H. B. McMahan. Differentially private learning with adaptive clipping. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.03871 , 2019.
[114] S. Thrun and L. Pratt. Learning to learn . Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[115] C. Van Berkel. Multi-core for mobile phones. In Conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe , 2009.
19

==== Page 20 ====
[116] S. Vaswani, F. Bach, and M. Schmidt. Fast and faster convergence of sgd for over-parameterized models (and an
accelerated perceptron). In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2019.
[117] P . Vepakomma, O. Gupta, A. Dubey, and R. Raskar. Reducing leakage in distributed deep learning for sensitive
health data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00564 , 2019.
[118] I. Wagner and D. Eckhoff. Technical privacy metrics: a systematic survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 51:57, 2018.
[119] H. Wang, S. Sievert, S. Liu, Z. Charles, D. Papailiopoulos, and S. Wright. Atomo: Communication-efﬁcient
learning via atomic sparsiﬁcation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[120] J. Wang and G. Joshi. Cooperative sgd: A uniﬁed framework for the design and analysis of communication-
efﬁcient sgd algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07576 , 2018.
[121] J. Wang and G. Joshi. Adaptive communication strategies to achieve the best error-runtime trade-off in local-
update sgd. In Conference on Systems and Machine Learning , 2019.
[122] S. Wang, F. Roosta-Khorasani, P . Xu, and M. W. Mahoney. Giant: Globally improved approximate newton method
for distributed optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[123] S. Wang, T. Tuor, T. Salonidis, K. K. Leung, C. Makaya, T. He, and K. Chan. Adaptive federated learning in
resource constrained edge computing systems. Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , 37:1205–1221, 2019.
[124] WeBank AI Group. Federated learning white paper v1.0. 2018.
[125] B. Woodworth, J. Wang, A. Smith, B. McMahan, and N. Srebro. Graph oracle models, lower bounds, and gaps for
parallel stochastic optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[126] X. Wu, F. Li, A. Kumar, K. Chaudhuri, S. Jha, and J. Naughton. Bolt-on differential privacy for scalable stochastic
gradient descent-based analytics. In International Conference on Management of Data , 2017.
[127] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong. Federated machine learning: Concept and applications. ACM Transactions
on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 10:12, 2019.
[128] T. Yang. Trading computation for communication: Distributed stochastic dual coordinate ascent. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2013.
[129] Y. Yao, L. Rosasco, and A. Caponnetto. On early stopping in gradient descent learning. Constructive Approximation ,
26:289–315, 2007.
[130] D. Yin, A. Pananjady, M. Lam, D. Papailiopoulos, K. Ramchandran, and P . Bartlett. Gradient diversity: a key
ingredient for scalable distributed learning. In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1998–2007,
2018.
[131] H. Yu, S. Yang, and S. Zhu. Parallel restarted sgd for non-convex optimization with faster convergence and less
communication. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[132] H. Yu, R. Jin, and S. Yang. On the linear speedup analysis of communication efﬁcient momentum sgd for
distributed non-convex optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[133] J. Yuan and S. Yu. Privacy preserving back-propagation neural network learning made practical with cloud
computing. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 25:212–221, 2013.
[134] M. Yurochkin, M. Agarwal, S. Ghosh, K. Greenewald, T. N. Hoang, and Y. Khazaeni. Bayesian nonparametric
federated learning of neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
[135] H. Zhang, J. Li, K. Kara, D. Alistarh, J. Liu, and C. Zhang. ZipML: Training linear models with end-to-end low
precision, and a little bit of deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2017.
[136] S. Zhang, A. E. Choromanska, and Y. LeCun. Deep learning with elastic averaging sgd. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2015.
20

==== Page 21 ====
[137] Y. Zhang, J. Duchi, and M. Wainwright. Divide and conquer kernel ridge regression: A distributed algorithm
with minimax optimal rates. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 16:3299–3340, 2015.
[138] Y. Zhao, M. Li, L. Lai, N. Suda, D. Civin, and V . Chandra. Federated learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.00582 , 2018.
[139] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, and D. Niyato. Mobile edge computing, blockchain and reputation-based
crowdsourcing iot federated learning: A secure, decentralized and privacy-preserving system. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.10893 , 2019.
[140] F. Zhou and G. Cong. On the convergence properties of a k-step averaging stochastic gradient descent algorithm
for nonconvex optimization. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[141] M. Zinkevich, M. Weimer, L. Li, and A. J. Smola. Parallelized stochastic gradient descent. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2010.
21

