==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2005.05265v2  [cs.IT]  12 May 20201
Federated Learning and Wireless Communications
Zhijin Qin, Geoffrey Ye Li, and Hao Ye
Abstract —Federated learning becomes increasingly attractive
in the areas of wireless communications and machine learnin g
due to its powerful functions and potential applications. I n
contrast to other machine learning tools that require no com mu-
nication resources, federated learning exploits communic ations
between the central server and the distributed local client s to
train and optimize a machine learning model. Therefore, how
to efﬁciently assign limited communication resources to tr ain
a federated learning model becomes critical to performance
optimization. On the other hand, federated learning, as a br and
new tool, can potentially enhance the intelligence of wirel ess
networks. In this article, we provide a comprehensive overv iew
on the relationship between federated learning and wireles s
communications, including basic principle of federated le arning,
efﬁcient communications for training a federated learning model,
and federated learning for intelligent wireless applicati ons. We
also identify some future research challenges and directio ns at
the end of this article.
Index Terms —Communication-efﬁcient learning, federated
learning, gradient compression, over-the-air computatio n.
I. I NTRODUCTION
With successes of machine learning (ML), especially deep
learning (DL), in the areas, such as image recognition and
natural language processing, researchers in the communica -
tions community have also applied DL to improve the perfor-
mance of communications or make networks more intelligent
recently. DL can improve signal processing performance of
communications systems [1]. Traditionally, a communicati on
system consists of several modules, such as coding and
decoding, modulation and demodulation, channel estimatio n
and signal detection. An intuitive approach is to use a deep
neural network (DNN) to represent one or more modules.
The whole transmitter or receiver can be even represented by
a DNN, which is emerging as end-to-end communications.
Of course, we can exploit expert knowledge in the area
of telecommunications accumulated in the past century to
simplify the structure of the DL model and speed up its
convergence, which is model-driven DL for physical layer
communications.
DL can be also applied in resource allocation in communi-
cation networks. Judicious resource allocation can signiﬁ cantly
improve the performance of a communication network. Tradi-
tionally, resource allocation is formulated as an optimiza tion
problem and then a resource allocation approach can be
obtained by solving the corresponding optimization proble m.
Usually, the optimization problems formulated for wireles s re-
source allocation are non-deterministic polynomial-time (NP)
hard and therefore are quite complicated, if not impossible ,
Zhijin Qin is with Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS,
UK (e-mail: z.qin@qmul.ac.uk)
Geoffrey Ye Li and Hao Ye are with Georgia Institute of Techno logy,
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: liye@ece.gatech.edu; yehao @gatech.edu).to obtain the optimal solutions. As indicated in [2], DL can
reduce the complexity and improve the performance on solvin g
the optimization problem. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
can be directly exploited in resource allocation, where the
environment contains channel quality, interference level , etc.,
the action space includes spectrum access, power allocatio n,
spatial resources, etc., and the reward could be composed
of latency, data rate, etc. Through DRL, a good policy for
resource allocation can be obtained to maximize the designe d
reward. More applications of ML in future wireless networks
can be found in [3].
Note that most works on ML for communications are based
on centralized learning. Recently, federated learning [4] , [5]
has been proposed to perform model training distributively
at multiple participating clients, each with a part of train ing
data, and coordinated by a central server. By doing so, the
computation is ofﬂoaded from the central server to the local
clients. Moreover, in federated learning, the participati ng local
clients communicate with the central server only on the
model parameters learnt locally rather than the raw data,
which preserves privacy in addition to signiﬁcant reductio n
on communication overhead. Therefore, federated learning is
desired in many privacy-sensitive applications, such as tr aining
an imagine classiﬁcation model based on the photos stored at
different mobile devices.
In brief, federated leaning is enabled by communications
between the local clients and the central server and can also
be used as a tool to improve the performance of wireless
systems. This article discusses the relationship between f eder-
ated learning and wireless communications. After introduc ing
the basis of federated learning in Section II, we present
efﬁcient communications for federated learning in Section III
and federated learning for wireless applications in Sectio n IV .
Then, we conclude our article by identifying some research
challenges and directions in Section V .
II. F EDERATED LEANING
Even if lots of related work had been done before, the
name of federated learning was ﬁrst used in [4] in 2016
for collaborative learning in wireless networks, where com -
munication resources, such as bandwidth and transmission
power, are limited and the privacy of local clients needs to
be preserved. As shown in Figure 1, we aim to train a global
model at the central server with parameters wby the whole
datasetD=∪K
k=1Dk, whereDkis the raw data stored at
clientk. A straightforward way is to let distributed local
clients send their data to the central server and then train t he
model as in centralized leaning. However, local clients may be
unwilling to share their raw data with others in some privacy -
sensitive applications even if they are willing to particip ate

==== Page 2 ====
2
Client K Local Data 
Client k Local Data Client 1 Local Data 
Local Update Global Aggregation Content Server 
()tw ()tw
()tw( ) ktw1( ) tw( ) Ktw
( ) ( 1) ( ( 1)) k k t t F t µ = − − ∇ − w w w 
123
442
42
Fig. 1. Basic principles of federated learning.
in collaborative model training. Moreover, sending raw dat a
to the central server also consumes signiﬁcant communicati on
resources, especially when the data size is huge and the num-
ber of participating local clients is large. Federated lear ning
can be adopted to address the above issues.
A. Basic Principles
Following the broad deﬁnition in [5], federated learning
is a machine learning setting where multiple local clients
collaborate in training a model under the coordination of a
central server while the raw data is kept at the local clients
and the local clients and the central server only communicat e
on the model parameters. As shown in Figure 1, federated
learning include four steps:
1)Local update : Each client updates the learning model
locally and in parallel according to its raw data;
2)Weights upload : Each local client sends its intermediate
results, i.e., the updated parameters of the trained model
wk(t), to the central server;
3)Global aggregation : The central server calculates the
average weights, w(t), based on parameters received
from local clients;
4)Weights feedback : The server broadcasts the updated
parameters to each local client for the next iteration.
Without requiring the transmission of raw data, federated
learning addresses the privacy issue, reduces the communic a-
tion overhead, and ofﬂoads the computation from the central
server to the local clients. In the following, we introduce t he
details involved in the aforementioned four steps.
1) Loss Function: The empirical loss function depends on
both model parameters and raw data. Therefore, for raw data,
Dk, stored at different local clients, the corresponding loss
functions is usually different even for the learning model
with the same parameter set, w. Denote Fk(w)as the loss
function corresponding to client kwith raw data Dkand model
parameter set w. Then the global loss function corresponding
to the whole dataset, D=∪K
k=1Dk, can be expressed as
F(w) =/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|Fk(w)
/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|, (1)t-1 t t+1 
Loss Value 
Fig. 2. Parameter aggregation and gradient descent optimiz ation.
where|Dk|denotes the number of elements in Dkat the client
k, and|D|=/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|.
The model is trained to minimize loss function F(w),
for example using the gradient descent approach, to ﬁnd the
optimal parameter set, wo= argmin F(w). Since raw data
is distributed at different clients, we cannot directly ﬁnd the
gradient at the central server as in centralized learning.
2) Model Weights: If using the gradient descent approach
to minimize the global loss function, then we have
w(t) :=w(t−1)−µ∇F(w(t−1)) =/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|wk(t)
/summationtextK
k=1|Dk|,(2)
whereµ, a small positive number, is the step size, ∇F(∗)
represents the gradient of function F(∗),w(t)is the global
aggregated parameter set at the central server at time t,wk(t)
is the local parameter set of client kat timet, which can be
expressed as
wk(t) =w(t−1)−µ∇Fk(w(t−1)). (3)
Afterwards, the central server can calculate w(t)as long as
the local gradient, ∇Fk(w(t−1)), is obtained. Therefore, only
the local gradients need to be sent to the central server, whi ch
can save communication resource, especially when gradient
compression is used as we will discuss in Section III.A.
However, we still have to feed the locally updated parameter
set,wk(t), to the central server if the relationship between
the updated local parameter set, wk(t), and the previous global
parameter set, w(t−1), is nonlinear. In this case, the parameter
aggregation could be a more complicated function of wk(t)
fork= 1,···,Kother than that in (2).
It should be emphasized that (2) ensures that the gradient
descent optimization can be performed at the central server
through aggregating the gradients of the local loss functio ns at
the distributed clients. Figure 2 demonstrates a simple exa mple
for the case with two local clients containing data of the sam e
size. Denote the two local loss functions as F1(∗)andF2(∗)
and the global loss function as F(∗) =1
2(F1(∗)+F2(∗)).
With gradient descent iteration as in (2), F(w(t))decreases
astincreases, that is, F(w(t−1))> F(w(t))> F(w(t+1)) .
Moreover, the updated local parameter set, wk(t), is obtained

==== Page 3 ====
3
through the gradient descent approach corresponding to the
local loss function, Fk(∗), based on the previous global
parameter set, w(t−1); therefore, Fk(w(t−1))> Fk(wk(t))
fork= 1,2. Local parameter sets are then send to the central
server for aggregation by w(t) =1
2(w1(t)+w2(t)), which
takes the gradients of both local clients into consideratio n. It is
obvious that Fk(w(t))> Fk(wk(t))sincewk(t)is obtained
based on the gradient descent for the local loss function whi le
w(t)is based gradient descent for the global loss function as
indicated by (2).
B. Practical Issues
So far, we have just introduced the basic principle of
federated learning. In the following, we identify some issu es
that cannot be neglected in the design and application of
federated learning.
1) Stochastic Gradient Descent: Since loss function
Fk(w(t))is determined by the raw data at the local client
k, there is no closed-form expression usually. Therefore, it is
impossible to analytically ﬁnd the gradients, ∇Fk(w(t)), that
is, we cannot carry out one step update as in (3). Usually,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is used to ﬁnd the gradient
iteratively at the local clients for each iteration between the
central server and local clients. Readers can refer to [4], [ 6]
for more details.
2) Robust Aggregation: For the parameter aggregation in
(2), weighted average is used, which only considers the size s
of the raw data and is optimal only if the central server
receives local parameter sets accurately andsimultaneously . In
reality, it is difﬁcult to transmit parameter sets in full-p recision.
Nevertheless, there also exist corruption and noise during
parameter exchanges between the central server and the loca l
clients. Robust aggregation in [7] can address corrupted lo cal
parameter sets. As a result of heterogeneous computational
capabilities and communication links for different local c lients,
there may be some local clients, called stragglers , that deliver
their updated local parameter sets later than others and aff ect
timely model parameter updates. The coded federated learni ng
method in [8] may deal with stragglers and speed up the con-
vergence of model training. The broadband analog aggregati on
method in [9] considers signal distortion and interference
during parameter transmission and results in lowered laten cy.
3) Upload Frequency: In the above discussion, we assume
that all local clients participate in parameter update at ev ery
iteration, which is sometimes inefﬁcient. For example, if t he
corresponding local parameters update is negligible, then its
impact on the aggregation can be ignored. In wireless edge
learning, even if the local parameters are non-trivial, the
corresponding channel condition could be quite poor. As a
result, large amounts of wireless resources, e.g. transmis sion
power and bandwidth, are required to compensate for channel
distortion. In this situation, we should jointly consider t he
occupied communication resources and its contribution to
the performance improvement to optimize the whole learning
process [10].
4) Privacy Leakage: In federated learning, the local clients
communicate with the central server on the model parameters ,rather than the raw data, to preserve privacy. However, it ha s
been found recently that at least partial privacy informati on can
be recovered from the gradients, which implies that federat ed
learning cannot completely guarantee the privacy of client s.
5) Interplay of Federated Learning and Wireless Commu-
nications: Federated learning depends on wireless commu-
nications between the central server and the local clients.
Therefore, it is important to efﬁciently exploit limited wi reless
resources [11], [12], which will be discussed in Section III .
Even if originally proposed to address the concerns on
privacy, device computation and storage, and communicatio n
bandwidth, federated learning has already had many wireles s
applications [13], [14], [15], such as wireless resource al loca-
tion and localization, as we can see from Section IV .
C. Federated Learning vs Distributed Learning
Depending on applications and settings, federated learnin g
has different variants, such as cross-device and cross-silo
federated learning [5]. Even if not unanimously agreed, som e
researchers regard federated learning as a kind of distribu ted
learning. Nevertheless, the following prominent characte ris-
tics [5] distinguish federated learning from traditional d is-
tributed learning:
•Data is generated locally and remains descentralized at
different local clients;
•The central server conducts model training, but can never
see the raw data at the the local clients;
•The local clients only communicate (usually through
wireless links) with the central server to update the model
parameters.
In addition to the above, federated learning also has the
following characteristics, for instance, the central serv er has
no control over the local clients and each client can decide
whether participating in the collaboration or not; the loca l
clients can be different categories of devices with differe nt
distributions on the corresponding data.
In contrast to federated learning, communication capabili ty
in traditional distributed learning is not a bottleneck sin ce the
central server and the local clients are usually connected t o
each other using wirelines or optical ﬁbers, rather than thr ough
wireless channels. Most traditional distributed learning ap-
proaches have been developed in order to ofﬂoad computation
to the local clients, rather than addressing the privacy or
communications issues. Therefore, the whole dataset may be
stored at the central server, there could be raw data exchang e
between the central server and the local clients and among th e
local clients, or the whole dataset can be even re-partition ed if
required. In terms of the distribution scales, there are usu ally
up to 1,000 clients in distributed learning while it could be as
large as1010clients for federated learning.
Nevertheless, we have only noticed the strict deﬁnition of
federated learning in [5] so far. To the best of our knowledge ,
there are no unanimous deﬁnitions on distributed learning,
descentralized learning, or collaborative learning.
III. C OMMUNICATIONS IN FEDERATED LEARNING
In federated learning, the central server and the local clie nts
keep on exchanging the updated model parameter sets during

==== Page 4 ====
4
the training process, which still consumes signiﬁcant amou nts
of communication resources, especially when the distribut ed
local clients are wireless connected devices and with a huge
number, such as in Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. To
address the issue, we can compress the information to be
transmitted and/or allocate limited communication resour ce ef-
ﬁciently. Many data compression and communication resourc e
management techniques developed for general purposes can
be used in federated learning. Furthermore, if the learning
model is a neural network, then we can perform neural
network pruning and parameter pruning. In this section, we
introduce gradient compression, over-the-air computatio n, and
join optimization techniques, which especially ﬁts federa ted
learning well.
A. Gradient Compression
It has been reported in [6] that redundancy in the stochastic
gradient could be as large as 99% in certain situations.
Therefore, spectrum bandwidth can be signiﬁcantly saved if
the stochastic gradient is compressed properly. In additio n to
those general data compression techniques, especially com -
pressive sensing, to address the issue, gradient compressi on
in [6] exploits the sparsity of stochastic gradient and has b een
designed speciﬁcally for federated learning.
Gradient compression includes quantization and sparsiﬁca -
tion. Gradient quantization converts gradient elements, w hich
are usually continuous, into (low-precision) discrete val ues to
facilitate digital transmission. A simple way is to quantif y
the original stochastic gradient into binary. Improved ver -
sions include three-level and four-level quantization. Gr adient
sparsiﬁcation refers to removing the gradient elements wit h
small amplitudes. An intuitive way is to turn the elements
with amplitudes below a threshold into zero. However, it is
sometimes hard to choose the threshold. Another way is to
turn off a certain number of elements with small amplitudes
into zero. It has been demonstrated that, by properly combin -
ing gradient quantization and sparsiﬁcation, the compress ion
ratio can reach as small as 2.5%in certain situations while
reasonable convergence performance of model training is st ill
maintained.
Deep gradient compression (DGC) proposed in [6] further
improves the performance of compression by the following
four steps: momentum correction, local gradient clipping,
momentum factor masking, and warm-up training. DGC can
achieve a compression radio of 0.17% in certain situations.
We should emphasize that the gradient compression perfor-
mance strongly depends on the learning models. Most models
currently studied are for image recognition and language
processing. Therefore, it is not clear whether these result s still
hold for wireless applications.
B. Over-the-Air Computation
If the multiple local clients transmit their updated local
parameter sets through the same wireless channel simulta-
neously, the received signal at the central server will be th e
superposition of all the local parameter sets. Surprisingl y, the
addition or weighted average is computed over the air. On the
( )i
i k k k 
kPw = + x h n 
m
kh lh
()i
l lPw ()i
k k P w 
...( )i H H H 
i i k k k 
ky Pw = = + m x m h m n 
Fig. 3. Parameter aggregation through over-the-air comput ation and exploiting
spatial freedom.
other hand, the aggregated global parameter set depends onl y
on the weighted average of the local parameter sets as in (2).
Inspired by this observation, a group of works exploit the over-
the-air computation property of the wireless multiple-access
channel to obtain the weighted average, that is, to perform
aggregation, directly at the central server, without requi ring
the individual local parameter set. In that case, signiﬁcan t
communication bandwidth can be saved, especially when ther e
are a massive number of local clients, as in IoT applications .
If there are multiple antennas at the receiver of the central
server, there will be more freedom to assign spatial resourc e
and optimize federated learning. Figure 3 demonstrates the
principle of the method in [10]. The local clients simultane -
ously send their i-th elements of the local parameter sets with
proper power scales,√pkw(i)
kfork= 1,···K, through the
wireless channel. Then the received signal vector at the cen tral
server will be xi=/summationtext
khk√pkw(i)
k+n, wherehkandnare
the channel gain vector corresponding to local client kand the
noise vector, respectively. After combining with beamform ing
vectorm, we have yi=mTxi=/summationtext
kmThk√pkw(i)
k+mTn.
The beamforming vector here provides freedom for efﬁcient
transmission. If there were no noise or maximum power
constraint for each local client, then mandpkshould be
selected such that mThk√pk=|Dk|/summationtext
l|Dl|for perfect aggre-
gation according to equation (2). With channel distortion a nd
a maximum transmission power constraint for each local clie nt
in reality, there may be no enough freedom for perfect aggre-
gation, especially when there are extensive number of local
clients. In [10], a sparse and low-rank optimization proble m is
formulated to address the issue. The effective approach in [ 10]
selects a subset of local clients with proper transmission p ower
and carefully adjusts the beamforming vector to optimize th e
statistical performance of federated learning.
C. Joint Local Compression and Global Aggregation
In [11], all local clients compress their gradients by com-
pressive sensing and then send to the central server through
the same wireless channel simultaneously, the central serv er
then reconstructs and aggregates the gradient information from
the noisy observation, which combines gradient compressio n
and over-the-air computation. The CSOverAir in [11] sparsiﬁes
the gradients by a compression ratio of 1% at each local
client. Figure 4 compares the communication gain of the over-
the-air computation approach (OverAir) and the CSOverAir,

==== Page 5 ====
5
Fig. 4. Communication budget gain of the over-the-air compu tation with
parameter compression at the local clients and recovery/ag gregation at the
central server.
where the communication gain is measured as the ratio of
the communication overhead of the scheme without over-
the-air computation or gradients compression and that of th e
OverAir and CSOverAir. From the ﬁgure, the communication
overhead is reduced signiﬁcantly by over-the-air computat ion
as multiple clients could transmit their parameters to the c enter
server simultaneously by using the same channel. It is also
noted that the communication overhead can be reduced greatl y
by compressing the gradients at each local client. However, the
minimal compression ratio in the CSOverAir approach [11]
is heavily dependent on the compressive sensing techniques ,
which fails to consider the features of chanenl fading durin g
the recovery at the central server.
The frequency of global parameter aggregation is linked to
the communication overhead and the convergence speed of
model training. In [12], the convergence of gradient-desce nt
based federated learning is analyzed and a convergence boun d
is obtained. Then, a control algorithm is developed based
on the convergence bound. After learning data distribution ,
system dynamics, and model characteristics, the control al go-
rithm adjusts the frequency of aggregation to minimize the
global loss function with given communication resources. T o
efﬁciently exploit limited communication resources, join t op-
timization of parameter compression, communication resou rce
allocation, and model training/aggregation can be perform ed,
which is also a promising direction for further research.
IV. F EDERATED LEARNING FOR WIRELESS APPLICATIONS
In the above, we have introduced the principle of federated
learning and efﬁcient communication for distributed model
training. Federated learning also has many wireless applic a-
tions. In this section, we will provide three examples: vehi cular
communications [13], unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V) online
path control [14], and localization [15].
A. Distribution Estimation for Vehicular Communications
Vehicular communications will make our daily vehicular
operation safer, greener, and more efﬁcient and it also pave s
 
FPK 
 
HJB 
Federated 
Learning 
 
FPK 
 
HJB 
Source Destination 
Fig. 5. Massive UA V control based on mean-ﬁeld game and feder ated
learning.
the path to intelligent deriving. In addition to communicat e
with the infrastructure (V2X), vehicles also need to exchan ge
critical information, such as safety related messages, wit h
their surrounding vehicles (V2V) with ultra reliability an d
low latency, which is referred to as ultra-reliable low-latency
communication (URLLC).
To ensure URLLC by optimally allocate limited communi-
cation resources, i.e., frequency bands and transmission p ower,
we have to model and capture extremely low probability
events, such as the probability of the queue length over a
threshold or extreme high reliability of a wireless link, an d ﬁnd
their relationship with the assigned communication resour ces.
Considering high dynamics and high mobility of vehicular
networks, it is often impossible to ﬁnd an exact or closed-
form expression. Fortunately, extreme value theory (EVT) can
address the issue [13], which models a rare event by the
generalized Pareto distribution determined by several cri tical
parameters and converts to the issue into estimating these
critical parameters.
Federated learning has been used in [13] to estimate these
critical parameters and catch the relationship between ass igned
resources, link reliability, and transmission latency. Di fferent
from the classical maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) that
needs to transmit data from different vehicle users to the
roadside unite, the critical parameters can be obtained usi ng
federated learning based MLE, which can save communication
resources for data transmission and avoid privacy issues. I t
has been demonstrated in [13] that the federated learning
based estimation can save up to 79% data exchange but with
estimation accuracy similar to the central solution.
B. Massive UAV Online Path Control
Sometimes, a large population of UA Vs may ﬂy from a
source to a destination for mission-critical tasks, such as
helping ﬁreﬁghting or covering disaster areas as temporal
access points. Due to wind and other random factors, massive
UA V control becomes very challenging in order to avoid
collisions and reach the destination quickly as in Figure 5
from [14]. To limit inter-communications among UA Vs, mean-
ﬁeld game (MFG) is used for massive UA V control by solving

==== Page 6 ====
6
a pair of coupled stochastic differential equations: the Fokker-
Plank-Kolmogorov (FPK) equation to estimate the population
distribution and the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equa-
tion to control the UA V ﬂight, i.e., direction, speed, and
acceleration [14]. As shown in Figure 5, two DNNs at each
UA V are used to approximate the solutions of the FPK and
HJB equations. To ensure the convergence and accelerate the
DNN training, federated learning is leveraged by periodica lly
exchanging the parameters sets of the DNNs for solving the
FPK and the HJB equations. From [14], MFG control based
on federated learning can shorten the traveling distance an d
reduce the probability of collision both by 50%.
C. Distributed Localization
For a given environment, radio features of a mobile device
can uniquely determine its location, which makes it possibl e
to perform localization based on radio features. However, t he
relationship between the mobile location and the correspon d-
ing radio features is usually very complicated. A deep learn ing
model can be used to map the radio features into a speciﬁc
location. To train the deep learning model, a huge training
data on radio features corresponding to different location s
is required, which is sometimes challenging. One way is to
collect the data on radio features and mobile locations from all
mobiles in a certain area and then use them to train the deep
learning model for localization, which, however, will caus e
privacy issues and huge communication overhead. Therefore ,
federated learning is used in [15] to training machine learn ing
models for localization, which is called federated localization
(FEDLOC).
The framework of FEDLOC is similar to generic federated
learning in Figure 1. Each mobile, as a local client, collect s
local data on radio features and locations, update the model
parameter set locally, and send it to the central server. The base
station or just a fusion center, as the central server, aggre gates
the received local parameter sets to obtain the global one. A fter
comparing the two machine learning models for localization ,
it is found in [15] that the Gaussian processes model with
maximum likelihood loss function is better than the DNN
model with least-square loss function based on the testing b y
real data.
V. C ONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this article, we have presented the principle and efﬁcien t
communications of federated learning. We have also discuss ed
some wireless application examples, which reﬂect the power of
federated learning for future wireless systems. However, m any
issues and challenges remain unexplored. Here we identify
some of them.
•Over-the-air computation : It has been proposed for joint
uplink communication and aggregation [10], [11], where
perfect synchronization and accurate channel state in-
formation are assumed. In reality, exact synchronization
is impossible. Furthermore, wireless channel may have
multi-path delay spread. It is desired to address these
deployment imperfections on over-the-air computation
for model parameter aggregation.•Local update and global aggregation : Instead of sharing
all the weights with the server, each local client can keep
its own model parameters, which are close to but not
the same with the weights of the global model at the
server. Models at local clients can be tailored for their
own purposes. Therefore, a key problem is how to update
the local models with the broadcast information from the
server and how to process and transmit the gradients of
the local model to help the training of the global model at
the server. One possible solution is using a meta-learner
for learning the gradients for local and global models.
•Privacy : The privacy of federated learning has been
improved signiﬁcantly comparing with sending the raw
data to the central server straightforwardly, there is stil l
partial privacy leakage as we have indicated in Section
II.B. It is still desired to further improve the privacy in
federated learning.
•New wireless applications : A wireless network can be
regarded as a distributed learning system, which ﬁts in
with applications of federated learning well. In addition
to distributed localization [15], more wireless applicati ons
are expected, such as mobile edge caching and resource
allocation in vehicular networks.
REFERENCES
[1] Z.-J. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y . Li, and B.-H. Juang, Deep learning i n physical
layer communications, IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 93-99,
Apr. 2019.
[2] L. Liang, H. Ye, G.-D. Yu, and G. Y . Li, Deep learning based wireless
resource allocation with application in vehicular network s,Proc. IEEE
vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 341 - 356, Feb. 2020.
[3] C.-X. Jiang, H.-J. Zhang, Y . Ren, Z. Han, K.-C. Chen, and L . Hanzo,
Machine learning paradigms for next-generation wireless n etworks, IEEE
Wireless Commun. , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 98-105, Apr. 2017.
[4] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Ar cas,
Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from des centralized
data, at https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629v3, Feb. 2017.
[5] P. Kairouz, etc., Advances and open problem in federated learning, at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04977v1, Dec. 2019.
[6] Y .-J. Lin, S. Han, H.-Z. Mao, Y . Wang, and W. J. Dally, Deep gradi-
ent compression: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed
training, in Proc. ICLR 2018.
[7] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, ”Robust aggr egation for
federated learning,” https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.13445 v1, Feb. 2020.
[8] S. Dhakal, S. Prakash, Y . Yona, S. Talwar, and N. Himayat, Coded
federated learning, at https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.0957 4v1, Feb. 2020.
[9] G.-X. Zhu, Y . Wang, and K.-B. Huang, ”Broadband analog ag gregation
for low-latency federated edge learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. ,
vol. 19, no. 1, Jan. 2020.
[10] K. Yang, T. Jiang, Y .-M. Shi, and Z. Ding, Federated lear ning via over-
the-air computation, at https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.117 50v3, Feb. 2019.
[11] M. Mohammadi and D. G¨ und¨ uz, Machine learning at the wi re-
less edge: distributed stochastic gradient descent over-t he-air, at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00844v2, Feb. 2019.
[12] S.-Q. Wang, T. Tuor, T. Salonidis, K. K. Leung, C. Makaya , T. He,
and K. Chan, Adaptive federated learning in resource constr ained edge
computing systems, IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun. , vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1205-1221, Jun. 2019.
[13] S. Samarakoon, M. Bennis, W. Saad, and M. Debbah, ”Distr ibuted fed-
erated learning for ultra-reliable low-latency vehicular communications,”
IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 1146-1159, Feb. 2020.
[14] H. Shiri, J.-H. Park and M. Bennis, ”Communication-efﬁ cient massive
UA V online path control: federated learning meets mean-ﬁel d game
theory,” at https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.04451v1, Mar. 20 20.
[15] F. Yin, Z.-D. Lin, Y . Xu, Q.-L. Kong, D. S. Li, S. Theodori dis, and S.-G.
R. Cui, ”FEDLOC: Federated learning framework for cooperat ive localiza-
tion and location data processing,” at https://arxiv.org/ abs/2003.03697v1,
Mar. 2020.

