==== Page 1 ====
Federated Learning: Opportunities and Challenges
Priyanka Mary Mammen
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
pmammen@cs.umass.edu
ABSTRACT
Federated Learning (FL) is a concept first introduced by Google in
2016, in which multiple devices collaboratively learn a machine
learning model without sharing their private data under the super-
vision of a central server. This offers ample opportunities in critical
domains such as healthcare, finance etc, where it is risky to share
private user information to other organisations or devices. While
FL appears to be a promising Machine Learning (ML) technique
to keep the local data private, it is also vulnerable to attacks like
other ML models. Given the growing interest in the FL domain,
this report discusses the opportunities and challenges in federated
learning.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Machine learning .
KEYWORDS
Federated Learning, Distributed Systems
ACM Reference Format:
Priyanka Mary Mammen. 2021. Federated Learning: Opportunities and
Challenges. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) started getting
popular in the last few 4-5 years when AI beat humans in a board
game named Alpha-Go[ 28]. Availability of Big-data and power-
ful computing units further accelerated the adoption of Machine
Learning technologies in domains such as finance, healthcare, trans-
portation, customer services, e-commerce, smart home applications
etc. With this widespread adoption of ML techniques, it is therefore
important to ensure the security and privacy of the techniques. In
most of the machine learning applications, data from various orga-
nizations or devices are aggregated in a central server or a cloud
platform for training the model. This is a key limitation especially
when the training data set contains sensitive information and there-
fore, poses security threats. For example, to develop a breast cancer
detection model from MRI scans, different hospitals can share their
data to develop a collaborated ML model. Whereas, sharing private
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnnpatient information to a central server can reveal sensitive infor-
mation to the public with several repercussions. In such scenarios,
Federated Learning can be better option.Federated Learning is a col-
laborative learning technique among devices/organizations, where
the model parameters from local models are shared and aggregated
instead of sharing their local data.
The notion of Federated Learning is introduced by Google in
2016, where they first applied in google keyboard to collabora-
tively learn from several android phones [ 24]. Given that FL can
be applied to any edge device, it has the potential to revolutionize
critical domains such as healthcare, transportation, finance, smart
home etc. The most prominent example is when the researchers
and medical practitioners from different parts of the world collabo-
ratively developed an AI pandemic engine for COVID-19 diagnosis
from chest scans [ 1]. Another interesting application would be in
transportation networks, for training the vehicles for autonomous
driving and city route planning. Similarly for smart-home applica-
tions, edge devices in different homes can collaboratively learn on
context aware policies using a federated learning framework [38].
While the applications are many, there are several challenges
associated with federated learning. The challenges can be broadly
classified into two: training-related challenges and security chal-
lenges. Training related challenges encompass the communication
overhead during multiple training iterations, heterogeneity of the
devices participating in the learning and heterogeneity of data used
for training .Whereas security challenges include the privacy and
security threats due to the presence of adversaries ranging from
malicious clients in the local device to a malicious user who has
only a black-box access to the model. In FL, although the private
data does not leave the device, it might be still possible for an
adversary or a curious observer to learn the presence of a data
point used for training in the local models. In order to overcome
this attack, some kind of cryptographic technique is required to
keep the information differentially private [ 10]. Whereas security
attacks can be mostly induced by the presence of malicious clients
in the learning, and they can be either targeted or non-targeted.
In targeted attacks, the adversary wants to manipulate the labels
on specific tasks. Whereas in non-targeted attacks, the motivation
of the adversary is just to compromise the accuracy of the global
model. The defense mechanisms require to detect malicious devices
and remove them from further learning or nullify the effect on the
global model induced by the malicious devices [8].
Numerous research efforts have been undertaken in the last few
years to fortify the Federated Learning domain and it has some
effect on the performance parameters like accuracy, computational
costs etc. Being a distributed system,its difficult to identify mali-
cious participants in FL. FL domain has grown so far from being
a small application introduced by Google. Researchers have intro-
duced various FL architectures, incentive mechanisms to foster user
participation, cloud services for FL etc. Motivated by this growingarXiv:2101.05428v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2021

==== Page 2 ====
Figure 1: Overview of Federated Learning across devices.
Figure 2: Overview of Federated Learning across organisa-
tions
interest in the Federated Learning domain, we present this survey
paper. The recent works [ 2,14,26,36] are focused either on dif-
ferent federated learning architecture or on different challenges in
FL domain. Whereas so many interesting advancements are taking
place beyond applying it to new application domains and foster-
ing the security aspects Therefore, in this survey we also try to
cover the recent developments along with providing give a general
overview on Federated Learning applications and security concerns
in the domain.
2 OVERVIEW OF FEDERATED LEARNING
A simple representation of Federated Learning is shown in fig. 1
and fig. 2. Federated Learning has primarily four main steps:
•Client Selection/Sampling : Server either randomly picks
desired participants from a pool of devices or use some algo-
rithm for client selection. [ 16,37,39] talk about some client
selection techniques for FL.
•Parameter Broadcasting: Server broadcasts the global model
parameters to the selected clients
•Local Model Training: The clients will parallelly retrain the
models using their local data.
•Model Aggregation: Clients will send back their local model
parameters to the server and model parameters will be ag-
gregated towards the global model.The above steps will be repeated in an iterative manner for n times
as desired.
3 TYPES OF FEDERATED LEARNING
In this section, we introduce different types of Federated Learning
frameworks.
•Vertical Federated Learning -Vertical Federated Learning is
used for cases in which each device contains dataset with
different features but from sample instances. For instance,
two organisations have data about the same group of people
with different feature set can use Vertical FL to build a shared
ML model.
•Horizontal Federated Learning - Horizontal Federated Learn-
ing is used for cases in which each device contains dataset
with the same feature space but with different sample in-
stances. The first use case of FL- Google keyboard uses this
type of learning in which the participating mobile phones
have different training data with same features.
•Federated Transfer Learning - Federated Transfer learning
is similar to the traditional Machine Learning, where we
want to add a new feature on a pre-trained model. The best
example would be for giving an extension to the vertical
federated learning - If we want to extend the ML to more
number of sample instances which are not present in all of
the collaborating organisations.
•Cross-Silo Federated Learning - Cross- Silo Federated Learn-
ing is used when the participating devices are less in number
and available for all rounds. The training data can be in hor-
izontal or vertical FL format. Mostly cross-silo is used for
cases with organisations. Works such as [ 40] use cross-silo
FL to develop their model.
•Cross-Device Federated Learning - Scenarios with a large
number of participating devices use Cross-device Feder-
ated Learning. Client-selection and incentive designs[ 37]
are some notable techniques needed to facilitate this type of
FL.
4 APPLICATIONS
4.1 Healthcare
Electronic Health Records (EHR) is considered as the main source of
healthcare data for machine learning applications [ 11]. If ML models
are trained only using the limited data available in a single hospital,
it might introduce some amount of bias in the predictions. Thus, to
make the models more generalizable, it requires training with more
data, which can be realized by sharing data among organizations.
Given the sensitive nature of the healthcare data, it might not be
feasible to share the electronic health records of patients among
hospitals. In such situations, federated learning can serve as an
option for building a collaborative learning model for healthcare
data.
4.2 Transportation
With the increase in the ubiquity of sensors in vehicular networks,
it is feasible to capture more data and train ML models. Machine
2

==== Page 3 ====
Learning based models are generally applied to both vehicle man-
agement and traffic management [ 32]. The current autonomous
driving decisions are limited by the dynamic nature of the sur-
roundings as the training is carried out offline. FL can rescue such
situations by online training vehicles from different geographical
locations which can facilitate accurate labelling of the features.
Similarly for traffic flow prediction techniques, a large amount of
data is required, but most of the data is divided among various
organizations and cannot be exchanged to protect the privacy [ 21].
To address such situations also, we can deploy FL methods.
4.3 Finance
One best use of federated learning in finance is in the banking
sector, for loan risk assessment [ 6]. Normally banks use white-
listing techniques to rule out the customers using their credit card
reports from the central banks. Factors such as taxation, reputation
etc can also be utilized for risk management by collaborating with
other finance institutions and e-commerce companies. As it is risky
to share private information of customers among organizations,
they can make use of FL to build a risk assessment ML model.
4.4 Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is one of the most common
applications which is built on machine learning models. It helps us
understand human language semantics in a better way. However,
it requires huge amount of data to train highly accurate language
models. This data can be easily gathered from mobile phones, tablets
etc. Again, privacy comes as a bottleneck here for centralized lan-
guage learning models, as the textual information from each edge
device contains user information. In [ 9], the authors have shown
that it is feasible to build NLP models using a FL framework.
5 TRAINING BOTTLENECKS
Being a distributed system, Federated Learning faces several chal-
lenges during the training time.
5.1 Communication Overheads
Communication overheads is one of the major bottlenecks in fed-
erated learning. Existing works try to solve this by either data
compression [ 17] or by allowing only the relevant outputs by the
clients[13, 22] to be sent back to the central server.
5.2 Systems and Data Heterogeneity
The heterogeneity of the systems in the network as well as the
non-identically distributed data from the devices affect the perfor-
mance of the FL model [ 20,23]. Although, FedAvg is introduced as
a method to tackle the heterogeneity, it is still not robust enough
to systems heterogeneity. Works such as [ 5,21] try to address this
problem by modifying the model aggregation methods.
6 PRIVACY AND SECURITY CONCERNS
Like any machine learning model, Federated Learning models are
also prone to attacks. The attacks can be introduced by a compro-
mised central server or compromised local devices in the learning
framework or by any participant in the FL workflow. Attacks in the
context of FL will be discussed in this section.6.1 Membership Inference Attacks
Although the raw user data does not leave the local device, there
are still many ways to infer the training data used in FL. For in-
stance, in some scenarios, it is possible to infer the information
about the training data from the model updates during the learn-
ing process. The defense measure looks for mechanism offering a
differential privacy guarantee. The most common techniques are
secure computation, differential privacy schemes and running in a
trusted execution environment.
6.1.1 Defense Mechanism 1: Secure Computation. Two main tech-
niques come under Secure Computation: Secure Multiparty Compu-
tation (SMC) and Homomorphic Encryption. In SMC, two or more
parties agree to perform the inputs provided by the participants and
reveal the outputs only to a subset of participants. Whereas in ho-
momorphic encryption, computations are performed on encrypted
inputs without decrypting first.
6.1.2 Defense Mechanism 2: Differential Privacy (DP). In differential
privacy schemes, the contribution of a user is masked by adding
noise to the clipped model parameters before model aggregation
[10]. Some amount of model accuracy will be lost by adding noise
to the parameters.
6.1.3 Defense Mechanism 3:Trusted Execution Environment. Trusted
Execution Environment(TEE) provides a secure platform to run the
federated learning process with low computational overhead when
compared to secure computation techniques [ 25]. The current TEE
environment is suitable only to CPU devices.
6.2 Data Poisoning Attacks
Data Poisoning Attacks are the most common attacks against ML
models. In order to launch a data poisoning attack in FL model,
adversary poison the training data in a certain number of devices
participating in the learning process so that the global model accu-
racy is compromised. The adversary can poison the data either by
directly injecting poisoned data to the targeted device or injecting
poisoned data through other devices [ 30]. Such attacks can be ei-
ther targeted or non-targeted. By targeted it means, the adversaries
want to influence on the prediction of a subset of classes while
deteriorating the global model accuracy[33].
6.2.1 Defense Mechanisms. The defense mechanism against such
attacks is to identify the malicious participants based on their model
updates before model averaging in each round of learning.
6.3 Model Poisoning Attacks
Model Poisoning attacks are similar to data poisoning attacks,
where the adversary tries to poison the local models instead of
the local data. The major motivation behind the model poisoning
attack is to introduce errors in the global model. The adversary
launches a model poisoning attack by compromising some of the de-
vices and modifying it’s local model parameters so that the accuracy
of the global model is affected.
6.3.1 Defense Mechanisms. The defenses against model poisoning
attacks are similar to data poisoning attacks. The most common de-
fense measures are rejections based on Error rate and Loss function
3

==== Page 4 ====
[8]. In error rate based rejections, the models with significant im-
pact on the error rate on the global model will be rejected. Whereas
in loss function based rejections, the models will be rejected based
on their impact on loss function of the global model. In some cases,
rejections can be made by combining both error based rejections
and loss function based rejections.
6.4 Backdoor Attacks
Secure averaging in federated learning lets the devices to be anony-
mous during the model updating process. Using the same func-
tionality, a device or a group of devices can introduce a backdoor
functionality in the global model of federated learning [ 3]. Using a
backdoor, an adversary can mislabel certain tasks without affecting
the accuracy of the global model. For instance, an attacker can
choose a specific label for a data instance with specific character-
istics. Backdoor attacks are also known as targeted attacks. The
Intensity of such attacks depends on the proportion of the com-
promised devices present and model capacity of federated learning
[31] .
6.4.1 Defense Mechanisms. : The defense against backdoor attacks
is either weak differential privacy or norm thresholding of updates.
Participant level differential privacy can serve as a form of defense
against such attacks but at the cost of performance of the global
model [ 10]. Whereas norm thresholding can be applied to remove
models with boosted model parameters. Even with this defense
measures, it is hard to find the malicious participants owing to the
secure aggregation techniques and capacity of the deep learning
model. Also FL framework being a distributed system, it might be
even harder to manage the randomly misbehaving devices.
7 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN FL
7.1 One-shot federated Learning
In most of the federated learning frameworks, there will be multiple
rounds of communication between devices and the central server,
which increases the communication overheads. Recently, there is
a growing interest in one-shot federated learning which is first
introduced by [ 12], where the global model is learned in a single
round of communication. In order to overcome communication
overheads of sending bulky gradients, [ 41] proposes a distilled one-
shot federated learning, where each device distills their data and
send the fabricated data to the central server. The server then learns
the global model by training over the combined data from all the
devices.
7.2 Incentive Mechanisms
Current FL approaches work under the assumption that devices
will cooperate in the learning process whenever required without
considering the rewards. Whereas in actual practice, devices or
clients must be economically compensated for their participation.
To encourage/improve device participation in FL, works such as
[15,16,37,39] propose a reputation based incentive mechanism i.e,
devices get rewards based on their model accuracy, data reliability
and contribution to the global model. However, these works did
not talk about how to model convergence and additional communi-
cation overheads induced into the framework.
Figure 3: A sample architecture for federated learning over
blockchain.
7.3 Federated Learning as a Service
Machine Learning as a Service is getting popular these days and
most of them offer only centralized services. In order to offer Fed-
erated Learning as a cloud service, it should consider collaboration
among third party applications. A recent work [ 18] tried to develop
a FL framework (as a service) which allows applications of third
parties to contribute and collaborate on a ML model. The frame-
work is claimed to be suitable for any operation environment as
well.
7.4 Asynchronous Federated Learning
Most of the current FL aggregation techniques are designed for
devices working in a synchronized manner. However, due to sys-
tems and data heterogeneity, training and model transfer occur in
a asynchronized manner. Therefore it might not be feasible to scale
federated optimization in an synchronized manner [ 35]. Works
such as [ 29,34,35] talks about carrying out federated learning in
an asynchronous environment. Compared to FedAvg (working in
a synchronized manner), asynchronous Federated averaging tech-
niques can handle more devices and allows updates to come at a
time.
7.5 Blockchain in FL
An aggregator is necessary to update the global model managing
the asynchronous arrival of parameters from the devices. This can
be a constraint for the widespread adoption for the FL models. As
blockchain is a decentralized network, devices can collaboratively
learn without the central aggregator. Works such as [ 4,7,19,27]
propose Federated Learning in a block-chain framework. A sample
architecture [7] is shown in fig 3.
8 FINAL REMARKS
Federated Learning offers a secure collaborative machine learning
framework for different devices without sharing their private data.
4

==== Page 5 ====
This attracted a lot of researchers and there is extensive research
happening in this domain. Federated Learning has been applied in
several domains such as healthcare, transportation etc. Although FL
frameworks offer a better privacy guarantee than other ML frame-
works, it is still prone to several attacks. The distributed nature of
the framework makes it even harder to deploy defense measures.
For instance,the gaussian noise added to the local models (for DP)
can confuse the aggregation schemes and may result in leaving out
the benign participants (while applying model poisoning defense
measures). So therefore an interesting research question to pursue
will be: Is it possible to develop a byzantine tolerant FL model while
ensuring user privacy using schemes with low computational cost?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my course advisor, Dr. Amir Houmansadr for
his invaluable guidance and support.
REFERENCES
[1]2020. AI pandemic engine . https://hai.stanford.edu/blog/pandemic-ai-engine-
without-borders.
[2]Mohammed Aledhari, Rehma Razzak, Reza M Parizi, and Fahad Saeed. 2020. Fed-
erated learning: A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications.
IEEE Access 8 (2020), 140699–140725.
[3]Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. 2020. How to backdoor federated learning. In International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 2938–2948.
[4]Xianglin Bao, Cheng Su, Yan Xiong, Wenchao Huang, and Yifei Hu. 2019. Flchain:
A blockchain for auditable federated learning with trust and incentive. In 2019 5th
International Conference on Big Data Computing and Communications (BIGCOM) .
IEEE, 151–159.
[5]Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex
Ingerman, Vladimir Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub Konečn `y, Stefano Mazzocchi,
H Brendan McMahan, et al .2019. Towards federated learning at scale: System
design. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01046 (2019).
[6]Yong Cheng, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2020. Federated learning
for privacy-preserving AI. Commun. ACM 63, 12 (2020), 33–36.
[7]Harsh Bimal Desai, Mustafa Safa Ozdayi, and Murat Kantarcioglu. 2020. BlockFLA:
Accountable Federated Learning via Hybrid Blockchain Architecture. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.07427 (2020).
[8]Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Gong. 2020. Local model
poisoning attacks to Byzantine-robust federated learning. In 29th{USENIX}
Security Symposium ( {USENIX}Security 20) . 1605–1622.
[9]Daniel Garcia Bernal. 2020. Decentralizing Large-Scale Natural Language Pro-
cessing with Federated Learning.
[10] Robin C Geyer, Tassilo Klein, and Moin Nabi. 2017. Differentially private federated
learning: A client level perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07557 (2017).
[11] Marzyeh Ghassemi, Tristan Naumann, Peter Schulam, Andrew L Beam, Irene Y
Chen, and Rajesh Ranganath. 2020. A Review of Challenges and Opportunities in
Machine Learning for Health. AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings
2020 (2020), 191.
[12] Neel Guha, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. 2019. One-shot federated
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.11175 (2019).
[13] Kevin Hsieh, Aaron Harlap, Nandita Vijaykumar, Dimitris Konomis, Gregory R
Ganger, Phillip B Gibbons, and Onur Mutlu. 2017. Gaia: Geo-distributed machine
learning approaching {LAN}speeds. In 14th{USENIX}Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation ( {NSDI}17). 629–647.
[14] Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi
Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Keith Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode,
Rachel Cummings, et al .2019. Advances and open problems in federated learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977 (2019).
[15] Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato, Han Yu, Ying-Chang Liang, and Dong In
Kim. 2019. Incentive design for efficient federated learning in mobile networks: A
contract theory approach. In 2019 IEEE VTS Asia Pacific Wireless Communications
Symposium (APWCS) . IEEE, 1–5.
[16] Latif U Khan, Shashi Raj Pandey, Nguyen H Tran, Walid Saad, Zhu Han, Minh NH
Nguyen, and Choong Seon Hong. 2020. Federated learning for edge networks:
Resource optimization and incentive mechanism. IEEE Communications Magazine
58, 10 (2020), 88–93.
[17] Jakub Konečn `y, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik,
Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Dave Bacon. 2016. Federated learning: Strategies
for improving communication efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492 (2016).[18] Nicolas Kourtellis, Kleomenis Katevas, and Diego Perino. 2020. FLaaS: Federated
Learning as a Service. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09359 (2020).
[19] Rajesh Kumar, Abdullah Aman Khan, Sinmin Zhang, WenYong Wang, Yousif
Abuidris, Waqas Amin, and Jay Kumar. 2020. Blockchain-federated-learning and
deep learning models for covid-19 detection using ct imaging. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.06537 (2020).
[20] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. 2020. Federated
learning: Challenges, methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine 37, 3 (2020), 50–60.
[21] Yi Liu, JQ James, Jiawen Kang, Dusit Niyato, and Shuyu Zhang. 2020. Privacy-
preserving Traffic Flow Prediction: A Federated Learning Approach. IEEE Internet
of Things Journal (2020).
[22] WANG Luping, WANG Wei, and LI Bo. 2019. Cmfl: Mitigating communication
overhead for federated learning. In 2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) . IEEE, 954–964.
[23] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and
Blaise Aguera y Arcas. 2017. Communication-efficient learning of deep net-
works from decentralized data. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR,
1273–1282.
[24] Brendan McMahan and Daniel Ramage. 2017. Federated learning: Collaborative
machine learning without centralized training data. Google Research Blog 3
(2017).
[25] Fan Mo and Hamed Haddadi. 2019. Efficient and private federated learning using
tee. In EuroSys .
[26] Viraaji Mothukuri, Reza M Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Yan Huang, Ali De-
hghantanha, and Gautam Srivastava. 2020. A survey on security and privacy of
federated learning. Future Generation Computer Systems 115 (2020), 619–640.
[27] Paritosh Ramanan, Kiyoshi Nakayama, and Ratnesh Sharma. 2019. BAF-
FLE: Blockchain based aggregator free federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.07452 (2019).
[28] David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja
Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton,
et al.2017. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. nature 550,
7676 (2017), 354–359.
[29] Michael R Sprague, Amir Jalalirad, Marco Scavuzzo, Catalin Capota, Moritz
Neun, Lyman Do, and Michael Kopp. 2018. Asynchronous federated learning for
geospatial applications. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases . Springer, 21–28.
[30] Gan Sun, Yang Cong, Jiahua Dong, Qiang Wang, and Ji Liu. 2020. Data Poisoning
Attacks on Federated Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10020 (2020).
[31] Ziteng Sun, Peter Kairouz, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and H Brendan McMahan.
2019. Can you really backdoor federated learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07963
(2019).
[32] Kang Tan, Duncan Bremner, Julien Le Kernec, and Muhammad Imran. 2020.
Federated Machine Learning in Vehicular Networks: A summary of Recent Ap-
plications. In 2020 International Conference on UK-China Emerging Technologies
(UCET) . IEEE, 1–4.
[33] Vale Tolpegin, Stacey Truex, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, and Ling Liu. 2020. Data
Poisoning Attacks Against Federated Learning Systems. In European Symposium
on Research in Computer Security . Springer, 480–501.
[34] Marten van Dijk, Nhuong V Nguyen, Toan N Nguyen, Lam M Nguyen, Quoc Tran-
Dinh, and Phuong Ha Nguyen. 2020. Asynchronous Federated Learning with
Reduced Number of Rounds and with Differential Privacy from Less Aggregated
Gaussian Noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09208 (2020).
[35] Cong Xie, Sanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. 2019. Asynchronous federated
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03934 (2019).
[36] Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. 2019. Federated machine
learning: Concept and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology (TIST) 10, 2 (2019), 1–19.
[37] Han Yu, Zelei Liu, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Mingshu Cong, Xi Weng, Dusit
Niyato, and Qiang Yang. 2020. A Sustainable Incentive Scheme for Federated
Learning. IEEE Intelligent Systems (2020).
[38] Tianlong Yu, Tian Li, Yuqiong Sun, Susanta Nanda, Virginia Smith, Vyas Sekar,
and Srinivasan Seshan. 2020. Learning Context-Aware Policies from Multiple
Smart Homes via Federated Multi-Task Learning. In 2020 IEEE/ACM Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI) . IEEE,
104–115.
[39] Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Zhihao Qu, Deze Zeng, and Song Guo. 2020. A learning-
based incentive mechanism for federated learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal
(2020).
[40] Chengliang Zhang, Suyi Li, Junzhe Xia, Wei Wang, Feng Yan, and Yang Liu. 2020.
Batchcrypt: Efficient homomorphic encryption for cross-silo federated learning.
In2020{USENIX}Annual Technical Conference ( {USENIX}{ATC}20). 493–506.
[41] Yanlin Zhou, George Pu, Xiyao Ma, Xiaolin Li, and Dapeng Wu. 2020. Distilled
One-Shot Federated Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07999 (2020).
5

