==== Page 1 ====
1
Federated Deep Learning Meets
Autonomous Vehicle Perception: Design and Veriﬁcation
Shuai Wang, Chengyang Li, Derrick Wing Kwan Ng, Fellow, IEEE , Yonina C. Eldar, Fellow, IEEE ,
H. Vincent Poor, Life Fellow, IEEE , Qi Hao, and Chengzhong Xu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Realizing human-like perception is a challenge in
open driving scenarios due to corner cases and visual occlusions.
To gather knowledge of rare and occluded instances, federated
learning assisted connected autonomous vehicle (FLCA V) has
been proposed, which leverages vehicular networks to establish
federated deep neural networks (DNNs) from distributed data
captured by vehicles and road sensors. Without the need of
data aggregation, FLCA V preserves privacy while reducing
communication costs compared with conventional centralized
learning. However, it is challenging to determine the network
resources and road sensor placements for multi-stage training
with multi-modal datasets in multi-variant scenarios. This article
presents networking and training frameworks for FLCA V per-
ception. Multi-layer graph resource allocation and vehicle-road
contrastive sensor placement are proposed to address the network
management and sensor deployment problems, respectively. We
also develop CarlaFLCA V , a software platform that implements
the above system and methods. Experimental results conﬁrm the
superiority of the proposed techniques compared with various
benchmarks.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Perception determines the way a connected autonomous
vehicle (CA V) understands the world by transforming envi-
ronments into digits via sensors, signal processors, and deep
neural networks (DNNs) [1]. Conventionally, DNN training
is based on centralized learning, which collects the datasets
from CA Vs, trains the DNNs at the cloud, and deploys
trained DNNs on CA Vs for inference. This paradigm is
effective in closed driving areas where the owner of data-
collection vehicles is also the DNN provider. However, future
CA V systems must cope with multi-variate open scenarios,
which involves corner cases due to inﬁnite scenario space
and visual occlusions due to high scenario complexity [1].
CA V companies, e.g., Tesla, Waymo, Baidu, suggested that
these challenges be tackled via lifelong multi-stage training
that updates the DNN parameters whenever rare or occluded
objects are detected (e.g., Tesla Autopilot and over-the-air
updates solution https://karpathy.ai/). In this case, sensor data
is inherently distributed at customers’ vehicles and contains
high-resolution human-related private information, leading to
the potential of sensitive information leakage [2].
Shuai Wang is with Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences.
Chengyang Li is with Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
Derrick Wing Kwan Ng is with University of New South Wales.
Yonina C. Eldar is with Weizmann Institute of Science.
H. Vincent Poor is with Princeton University.
Qi Hao is with Southern University of Science and Technology and Shenzhen Research
Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems.
Chengzhong Xu is with IOTSC, University of Macau.
: Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Qi Hao and Chengzhong Xu.Federated (deep) learning assisted CA V (FLCA V) is an
emerging paradigm to overcome the privacy issue by training
DNNs via parameter and output aggregation instead of dataset
aggregation [2]–[7]: parameter aggregation leverages vehicular
networks to migrate knowledge among different vehicles [4],
[5]; output aggregation leverages road sensors’ perception
results to annotate occluded objects for local parameter up-
dates [6], [7]. The performance of FLCA V highly depends on
the associated network resources and road sensor placements.
Existing works on FLCA V design these factors from either a
driving (e.g., [2], [3]) or networking (e.g., [4], [5]) perspective,
which ignores the interdependency between driving tasks (i.e.,
data consumer) and vehicular networks (i.e., data provider).
This research gap has been identiﬁed as the core issue in CA V
systems [8]. Yet, how to close this gap for FLCA V is still an
open issue.
This article integrates driving and networking features for
system-level FLCA V perception under practical network re-
source constraints. Frameworks of vehicle-edge-cloud net-
working, multi-stage DNN training, and multi-task gener-
ation, are presented. On top of these frameworks, multi-
layer graph resource allocation (MLGRA) and vehicle-road
contrastive sensor placement (VRCSP) are proposed. The
MLGRA jointly allocates the limited network resources across
different stages, tasks, and modalities to minimize perception
errors. The VRCSP automatically reduces (increases) the
number of sensors in low (high) complexity scenarios. To
verify the above methods, it is necessary to implement a
simulator with high-ﬁdelity rendering qualities, driving be-
haviors, and software interfaces [9], as FLCA V needs long-
term training that cannot be quickly tested in reality. However,
currently there is no such close-to-reality FLCA V simula-
tor. We thus develop CarlaFLCA V (https://github.com/SIAT-
INVS/CarlaFLCA V), an open-source software platform for
design and veriﬁcation of FLCA V systems. The platform
contains dataset generation, perception tasks, FL frameworks,
and optimization modules, and aims to provide a concrete step
towards FLCA V in the real world.
II. FL M EETS CAV
A. CAV Perception: Concept, Challenges, and Trends
1) CAV Perception: As shown in Fig. 1a, a CA V perception
system is an ensemble of the following functionalities [1]: 1)
semantic perception, e.g., recognition of lanes, road arrows,
and trafﬁc signs, which outputs semantics for rule understand-
ing; 2) geometry perception, e.g., road edge detection and ob-
ject detection, which outputs poses (including positions, sizes,arXiv:2206.01748v2  [cs.RO]  5 Dec 2022

==== Page 2 ====
2
Building
RoadLightsCarSemantic Perception
• Sign Recognition
• Weather Classification
Geometry Perception
Motion PerceptionSignWeather Behavior Planning
• Rule Understanding
• Driver Mode Selection
Interaction
• Multi -Agent Cooperation
• Multi -Agent GamesMotion Planning
• Dijkstra , A*, RRT
• Collision Avoidance
Semantics Poses Kinematic Data• Object Detection
• Road Edge Detection
• Velocity Estimation
• Object Tracking
Extended PerceptionFuture States
• Trajectory Prediction
• Intention PredictionLook -Ahead Policy
• Scene Understanding
• Predictive Strategy 
(a)
Trajectory PredictionSECONDYolov5Camera Image
LiDAR Point CloudCamera Image
LeNet -5
Fields of Views 
Camera
Short Range 
RadarLong Range Radar
LiDARWeather Classification
3D Object DetectionSign Detection
Pose OutputsSemantic Outputs
Bird’s Eye View LSTM
Signal Processors
Convolution
LayerConnected
LayerOutput Input
Backbone PredictionInput Output
Neck
…Classification
Regression
Orientation
Feature
ExtractionSparse
ConvRegion
ProposalHeader
Network
Feature
ExtractionHeader 
NetworkInput Output
LSTM Layer
(b)
Fig. 1: a) Categories of CA V perception. b) Multi-task multi-modal deep learning for CA V perception. From top to bottom: 1)
weather classiﬁcation (task 1); 2) sign recognition (task 2); 3) object detection (task 3); 4) trajectory prediction (task 4). From
left to right: 1) sensors map the environment into digits (raw data) using active or passive electromagnetic waves; 2) signal
processors clean, rotate, crop, or complete the raw data; 3) DNNs extract features and generate semantic, geometry, motion,
and prediction outputs. All datasets are generated by the CarlaFLCA V platform.
and orientations) for collision-avoidance motion planning; 3)
motion perception, e.g., object tracking, which outputs kine-
matic data (velocities) for multi-agent interaction. 4) extended
perception, e.g., trajectory prediction, which outputs future
states of agents for look-ahead decision making. As shown
in Fig. 1b, each functionality is decomposed into a set of
heterogenous tasks, calling for multi-modal sensors such as
RGB/infrared camera, LiDAR, radar, GPS and IMU to exploit
their complementary features, e.g., ﬁeld of views (FoVs). Each
task is accomplished by sensors, processors, and DNNs. Forinstance, in trajectory prediction, images generated by multi-
view cameras are fed to vision transformers, generating bird’s-
eye-view data sequences that are fed to the long short-term
memory (LSTM) module to forecast what the observed trafﬁc
agents shall do. By observing the past coordinates of a vehicle
(marked in red box), this pipeline successfully predicts future
coordinates of a vehicle moving through the cross-road.
2) Perception Challenges: Major challenges of CA V per-
ception in multi-variate open scenarios are summarized below.
Corner Case . Scenario space in open areas grows expo-

==== Page 3 ====
3
nentially, making it impossible to enumerate all the pos-
sible cases during the training stage [1]. In other words,
there always exists new data outside the distribution of
training datasets, which are corner case instances.
Visual Occlusion . In complex urban scenarios (e.g.,
cross-road, T-junction, roundabout), an object can be oc-
cluded by another in the FoV , which leads to incomplete
data and perception errors [6].
Veriﬁcation Cost . Releasing new DNNs requires rig-
orous veriﬁcation. The cost of real-word testing is not
acceptable due to the long-term training required by
FLCA V and difﬁculties of testing in dangerous scenarios
(e.g., crashes, overtaking, bad weather) [10].
3) Research Trends: Possible solutions to address the above
challenges are as follows.
Lifelong multi-stage training , which updates the param-
eters whenever a corner case is detected, is a promising
solution to address the ﬁrst challenge [3]. The update is
executed on DNN copies, making sure that the inference
DNNs are ﬁxed during the training process. Releasing
new-version DNNs requires the acknowledgement of
DNN providers and customers.
As for the occlusion issue, the solution is cooperative
perception with road sensors . Practical road sensors are
authoritative, having absolute positions, broader FoVs,
and highly-optimized hardware units [6]. Furthermore,
the probability of a target object being occluded in FoVs
of all road sensors is signiﬁcantly smaller than that in
the FoV of a CA V . As such, the perception error due to
occlusions is signiﬁcantly mitigated.
To reduce the high veriﬁcation cost in reality, CA V
simulation becomes a necessity [9]. Various CA V simu-
lators have been released, e.g., Intel Car-Learning-to-Act
(CARLA), Nvidia DRIVE, Microsoft Aerial-Informatics-
and-Robotics-Simulation (AirSim), LG Silicon-Valley-
Lab (LGSVL), Baidu Augmented-Autonomous-Driving-
Simulation (AADS), UCLA OpenCDA, SJTU V2X-Sim
[7], [9], [10].
B. Paradigm Shift: From Centralized to Federated Learning
1) Federated Learning: The need for multi-stage training
results in the shift of learning paradigms. In one-stage train-
ing, the owner of data-collection vehicles is also the DNN
provider and the aggregated datasets can be directly fed to
DNN training pipelines. However, for multi-stage training,
the abnormal data is distributed at customers’ vehicles and
contains human-related private information. As a consequence,
conventional centralized learning is no longer applicable. To
this end, FLCA V emerges, which trains the DNNs from dis-
tributed datasets via parameter aggregation, thus conveying the
knowledge of corner cases to other vehicles and remote servers
while preserving data privacy [2]. In addition, communication
costs are reduced, since the size of a DNN is signiﬁcantly
smaller than that of a data sequence, e.g., the size of a 1-minute
point-cloud sequence is 1000 MB while that of a standard
object detection DNN is 60MB [1] (FL takes multiple roundsof communication; but with proper pre-training, only a few
rounds are needed).
2) Federated Distillation: FL can be integrated with coop-
erative perception, giving rise to the federated distillation (FD)
technique [7]. In the FDCA V framework, all road sensors and
CA Vs upload their bounding boxes and perception uncertain-
ties to a road server. The server computes the weighted average
of these outputs and this road-average output is downloaded to
surrounding vehicles. Each vehicle updates its local parameters
by minimizing the contrastive loss between its bounding
boxes and the road-average boxes [7]. Note that there exist
non-negligible computation and communication delays during
the vehicle-to-infrastructure output fusion progress. However,
FDCA V is a long-term DNN-update framework rather than
a real-time detection method for collision avoidance. There-
fore, it is possible to associate data from the roadside in-
frastructure with that from CA Vs by fusing a sequence of
data frames via pose graph optimization, which removes the
effects of random errors by extracting multi-frame spatial-
temporal patterns. FDCA V can also adopt spatial contexts of
road maps for generating ground-truth semantics and training
associated DNNs. For instance, the Road Experience Man-
agement (REM) of Mobileye (https://www.mobileye.com/our-
technology/rem/) adopts road sensors and maps to realize
automated road semantic identiﬁcation and annotation.
C. Related Work on FLCAV
1) Limitations of Existing Work: Current literature on
FLCA V can be categorized into two types: 1) network-layer
designs (e.g., FL resource allocation), and 2) application-
layer designs (e.g., FL perception and planning). Speciﬁcally,
network-layer designs, e.g., [4], [5], [11], aim to improve
FL performance by controlling the communication-related
variables such as topology, throughput, latency, and device
scheduling. These works address the challenges of FL from the
network perspective while taking the high mobility of vehicles
into account. However, they fail in matching FL to domain-
speciﬁc CA V scenarios, tasks, datasets, and DNNs. On the
other hand, application-layer designs, e.g., [2], [3], [6], [7],
improve the safety and efﬁcacy of CA V systems by designing
DNN structures and associated information fusion methods.
These works provide solutions to CA V issues such as train-
ing, inference, synchronization, calibration, and simulation.
Nonetheless, communications among CA Vs, edge servers, and
cloud servers therein are assumed to be perfect, which does
not hold for practical CA V systems with limited resources.
2) Research Opportunities: Since both types of designs
have different pros and cons, it is necessary to integrate them
to achieve lower detection/classiﬁcation/tracking errors under
network resource and sensor implementation constraints. This
leads to new technical problems, which cannot be tackled by
conventional methods.
Opportunity 1 (Network Resource Allocation) : How
can we effectively distribute the network resources across
different stages, tasks, and modalities to minimize the
perception errors of ﬁnal-stage DNNs while satisfy-
ing the stringent wireless and wireline communication

==== Page 4 ====
4
Semantic Information
Geometry Information
Motion InformationConnected Autonomous Vehicle V2X
Perception
Pose
 Raw Data
 Parameter
Task & Resource 
Management
DNN Pretraining 
& Verification
Key Generation 
& Certification
Road Side Infrastructure
Camera
Pole
CameraDSRC
RSULTE
RSURadar5G and GPS
Station
WIFI
Access PointEdge Server
• Computing
• Storage
• Routing
• Map Management
Vehicle OBULiDAR
SwitchServer Storag e
Global Route Planning
Obstacle Avoidance
Vehicle ControlPlanning
Pose
 PriceRoad 
SensorsEdge 
ServersCommun. 
Units
Quantity
InternetCloud Server
Dataset Annotation & 
Simulation
Functionalities
HD Map
Geometry
Semantics
(a)
Upload the 
data from 
CAVsTrain DNNs 
at the cloud 
serversDownload 
trained DNNs 
to CAVsUpdate DNNs 
at the CAVsAggregate 
DNNs at the 
edge serverReceive 
labels from 
the RSI
Next round edge federated learningIterate ?Update edge DNNs 
by executing Stage IIUpdate cloud 
DNNs with 
personalizationIterate ?
YesNoEdge
DNNs
Vehicle 1
Vehicle 2
Vehicle K   Road 
Commun . 
Units
Cloud
Server
Raw Data
Raw DataNoCloud
DNNs
Vehicle 1
Vehicle 2
Vehicle L   Road 
Commun . 
Units
Road 
Sensors
Edge
Servers
Parameters
 Labels
Parameters
 Data /LabelsRaw Data
Road side Infrastructure (RSI)
Vehicle DNN 1
Vehicle DNN 2
Vehicle DNN L
Next round cloud federated learningCloud  DNNs
Edge
Server 1
Cloud
ServerEdge
Server 2
Edge
Server M
   
Parameters
Edge DNN 1
Edge DNN 2
Edge DNN M
Personalized DNN 1
Personalized DNN M
Global DNN
   Stage I 
Cloud PretrainingStage II
Edge Federated LearningStage III
Cloud Federated Learning
Initial DNNsPretrained DNNsEdge DNNs
(b)
Fig. 2: a) Network architecture of FLCA V with vehicle, road, and cloud components and their associated V2X and the Internet
links; b) Multi-stage training pipeline of FLCA V with intra-stage and inter-stage network ﬂows.
constraints? Existing literature does not analyze CA V-
domain-speciﬁc datasets and ignores the interdependency
across different stages.
Opportunity 2 (Sensor Placement) : How can we ef-
ﬁciently place the road sensors to detect and annotate
more occluded objects under the implementation cost
constraint? Conventional approaches adopt integer pro-
gramming (IP) solvers or heuristic methods to maximize
the coverage with a ﬁxed number of sensors, which
ignores the learning requirements for FLCA V .
Opportunity 3 (Software Engineering) : How can we
implement a high-ﬁdelity FLCA V simulator that is close
to reality? Existing methods of network-layer designs
are tested in simple classiﬁcation tasks (e.g., recognition
of handwritten digits). Emerging autonomous driving
simulators do not support FL and associated optimization
functionalities.III. S YSTEM -LEVEL DESIGN FOR FLCAV P ERCEPTION
A. Network Architecture
As shown in Fig. 2a, FLCA V consists of CA V , road,
and cloud components, forming a wide-range cyber-physical
system. CA Vs are integrated systems equipped with multi-
modal sensors, mobile computing platforms, and advanced
communication units that 1) connect the vehicle sensors,
computers, and bases via controller area network (CAN), and
2) connect the vehicles with the cloud and road via vehicle-
to-everything (V2X) technology [13]. CA V is a server within
its CAN and a client within its V2X network.
Roadside infrastructure can be categorized into road sen-
sors, road communication units, and road computing servers
[8]. First, the pose of a road sensor includes position and
yaw/roll/pitch angle, which directly determines the coverage of
the environment and objects therein. Second, road communica-
tion units adopt the V2X to link surrounding vehicles, forming

==== Page 5 ====
5
a vehicular edge network. Finally, road servers are parameter
servers for edge FL and process real-time tasks, e.g., feeding
the data of road sensors into road DNNs, merging the multi-
sensor data using fusion techniques (e.g., iterative closest point
(ICP)).
A cloud server differs from a road (edge) server since the
Internet is a part of the end-to-end communication. Therefore,
cloud servers execute long-term tasks, e.g., dataset annotation,
DNN training, simulation, and resource management. Note
that to prevent potential cyber attacks, any vehicle joining
FLCA V should be registered with a unique identiﬁer allocated
by authorities. The cloud server is responsible for maintaining
the identiﬁer and also executes security key generation and
certiﬁcation [8].
B. Training Pipeline
Training FLCA V perception systems in Fig. 2b consists of
cloud pretraining, edge FL, and cloud FL stages. Speciﬁcally,
cloud pretraining adopts annotated datasets on the cloud to
transform initial DNNs into pretrained DNNs that are released
to all CA Vs. Then, an FL request is generated at the CA V
upon a false detection event (e.g., due to occlusions or corner
cases). The FL request is sent to the edge parameter sever,
who calls for roadside infrastructures and other vehicles to
join the edge FL group via V2X. This helps the CA V ﬁx
the bug residing in its local DNN, as the knowledge migrates
from other agents to it and vice versa. With a few rounds
of output and parameter exchange, the edge parameter server
can form edge DNNs that serve as good representations of the
local region. Finally, the FL group can be enlarged by cloud
FL, which aggregates the edge DNNs from remote areas via
the Internet. To improve robustness, the cloud FL stage may
adopt personalization such that each edge client trains its own
regional DNNs while contributing to the global cloud DNNs
[12].
From the application perspective, FLCA V needs to train
a set (let Ndenote its cardinality) of DNNs for associated
perception tasks in 3 (or more) consecutive stages. From
the network perspective, FLCA V involves two types of com-
munications, i.e., wireless and wireline communication, and
their transmission capacities are ﬁnite. Combining both, the
summation of wireless/wireline throughput (in MBytes) over
Ntasks and 3 stages should be smaller than the network
throughput budget, and there exists a tradeoff among different
tasks and stages. Here we consider the uplink transmission
in Fig. 2b, as the downlink counterpart is usually not the
bottleneck in practice.
1) For Stage I, data samples should be uploaded from
vehicles to the edge and then to the cloud. The product of
the number of samples and the data size of each sample
should not exceed the minimum throughput of wireless
and wireline communication allocated to Stage I.
2) For Stage II, parameters are exchanged between the edge
server and vehicles through wireless communication. The
product of the number of edge FL rounds, the number of
vehicles in each FL group, and the data size of DNNs
should not exceed the wireless throughput allocated to
Stage II.3) For Stage III, parameters are exchanged between the edge
and cloud servers through wireline communication. The
product of the number of cloud FL rounds, the number
of edge servers, and the data size of DNNs should not
exceed the wireline throughput allocated to Stage III.
Note that perception outputs (e.g., bounding boxes) are also
shared among nodes, but the associated communication over-
head is negligible compared with those of samples and DNNs.
C. Task Generation
Tasks should match scenarios [14] and their construction
shown in Fig. 3a consists of the following 4 steps.
1)Operational Design Domain (ODD) Speciﬁcation .
Given the target ODD, e.g., urban (focus of this paper),
rural, campus, mine, port, or parking-lot, we deﬁne the
key parameters including trafﬁc density, speed limits,
rules, and FoV requirements [15].
2)Scenario Sampling . Scenarios are sampled inside the
ODD according to industrial standards such as ISO and
SAE [15]. Learning and optimization based methods can
also be adopted for scenario space exploration. Car-
laFLCA V provides straight-road, cross-road, T-road, and
roundabout scenarios.
3)Task Generation . Scenario-speciﬁc tasks are generated,
where each task is deﬁned as a set of data, labels and
DNNs [14]. We construct fewer tasks for low-complexity
scenarios to save computational costs and redundant tasks
for high-complexity scenarios to guarantee driving safety.
4)Task Evaluation . Perception tasks are categorized into
different priorities via a task importance evaluator, which
removes a task from the task list and observes the
associated performance loss. A task is deemed important
if the performance loss is signiﬁcant [14].
IV. R ESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR FLCAV P ERCEPTION
A. Multi-Modal Resource Allocation
1) Motivation: Intuitively, more resources should be al-
located to perception tasks accomplished by deeper neural
networks. Consider training a convolution neural network
(CNN) for weather classiﬁcation and a sparsely embedded
convolutional detection (SECOND) network for object detec-
tion. Due to larger number of parameters ( 5 millions) in
SECOND, the FLCA V network should allocate more com-
munication resources to vehicles that upload point clouds for
pretraining SECOND in Stage I, and call for more vehicles
and FL rounds for sharing SECOND parameters in Stages II
and III. In current vehicular networks, the purpose of resource
optimization is to improve key communication metrics, which
treats data equally and violates the above intuition.
2) Method: Since communication (i.e., a data pipeline)
becomes a sub-task in the FLCA V paradigm, we need to
directly minimize the perception error instead of maximizing
the communication throughput. The problem becomes how
to model the relation between perception errors and network
ﬂows. Here we present a multi-layer graph resource allocation
(MLGRA) approach shown in Fig. 3a. For layer 1, vertex

==== Page 6 ====
6
DNN -Modality 
GraphODD Specification
Modality -CAV 
Graph1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Q
Task
Perception
DNN 1……  Task Generation
Point Cloud RGB Image Radar Data
1 2 3 L 4 5CAV……  
DNN
DataPerception
DNN 2Perception
DNN N
Train ing 
params 2Train ing 
params 1Train ing 
params N
……  ……  
L-1
Task -DNN 
Graph
Scenario Sampling Task Evaluation
Task    
Clustering
Performance 
Predictor
Throughput 
Maximization
(a)
31 2
56
7
89Bird’s Eye View of the Global Map FoV of Road Sensor 3 FoV of CAV 1
CAV 1CAV 3CAV 4
CAV 2
FoV of CAV 2 FoV of Road Sensor 8 Sensor Pose Optimization With 9 Candidates (Red Boxes) Data Aggregation of CAV 2 and Road Sensor 8Data Aggregation of CAV 1 and Road Sensor 3
Small Difference
Max Pose Difference3 4Large Difference
Zoom in
Zoom in
Vehicle -Road Contrastive PrincipleInaccurate CAV detection
(b)
Fig. 3: a) Illustration of the MLGRA method and the good ﬁtness of the performance predictor to the experimental data
generated by CarlaFLCA V; b) Illustration of the road-assisted FD and the VRCSP. The black box is the ground truth; the blue
box is from the CA Vs; the red box is from the road sensors.
represents task or DNN, while edge represents training weight;
for layer 2, vertex represents DNN or data modality, while
edge represents training parameters (e.g., number of training
samples, number of FL rounds); for layer 3, vertex represents
data or CA V , while edge represents vehicle throughput.
Task-DNN Graph . Tasks are clustered into groups such
that similar tasks share the same DNN and annotated
dataset. For example, the tasks of box regression (i.e.,
determining the poses of objects), object classiﬁcation
(e.g., determining if the object is a car or a truck),
and orientation classiﬁcation (e.g., determining the front
side) can be accomplished by one DNN with a common
feature extractor and 3 separate headers. The training loss
function is the weighted sum of three metrics.DNN-Modality Graph . Different DNNs may be trained
with different data modalities, and their connections
form a DNN-modality graph. The required resource for
a DNN-modality pair can be obtained by ﬁtting per-
formance predictors to historical datasets. For instance,
inverse-power models are adopted to predict perception
accuracies of 3 DNN-modality pairs (i.e., CNN-Image,
YOLOV5-Image, SECOND-PointCloud) under different
communication resources in Fig. 3a. The predictions
match the experiment data very well for all DNNs.
Modality-Vehicle Graph . For each data modality (e.g.,
point cloud data), the associated data samples may come
from multiple CA Vs. If the data is independent and
identically distributed (IID) among different vehicles, we

==== Page 7 ====
7
Position 1Position 4
Position 8
Fig. 4: Illustration of multi-modal multi-view sensor fusion
at the roadside infrastructure.
can maximize the total throughout via some optimization
algorithm. If the data is non-IID due to different FoVs,
it is necessary to evaluate the quality of vehicles’ data.
B. Road Sensor Placement
1) Motivation: For FLCA V , the key is to upgrade the
onboard DNNs instead of monitoring the environment. There-
fore, in contrast to conventional methods that maximize the
number of visible objects [6], we place sensors at critical
scenarios that contain adversarial objects that can defeat the
DNNs. To illustrate their difference, we adopt CarlaFLCA V
to generate an urban trafﬁc map with straight-road and cross-
road scenarios, where 9 possible sensor locations are marked
as red boxes in the middle of Fig. 3b.
Conventional methods [6] place the road sensor suite (i.e.,
consisting of a 360-degree LiDAR and an RGB-camera)
at location 8, as we set its nearby trafﬁc density to the
highest value. However, the vehicle DNN would not learn
any new knowledge, as the bounding boxes generated by
the vehicle (e.g., CA V 2) and the road sensor 8 are similar.
Our method places the road sensor suite at location 3,
despite the fact that its nearby trafﬁc density is low.
Here, the CA V could change its local parameters to the
maximum extent with the road’s outputs. This is because
the bounding boxes generated by the vehicle and road
sensor 3 are very different. For example, CA V 1 misses
two objects since its FoV is occluded by its front car.
2) Method: To ﬁnd the critical scenarios, our VRCSP
minimizes the pose similarity between the detected objects
at the CA V and those at the road sensor. In particular, we
deploy the pretrained DNN on a CA V and test the vehicle
in a target map containing multiple scenarios, each speciﬁed
with zone limits. If the CA V fails to detect an object or
generates a false positive in its FoV , the 3D position of this
object (false positive) eis registered into a database. Let
the setE=fe1;e2;g denote all registered error items
after sufﬁcient simulation time, and scenarios containing false
detections are deemed important. The cardinality of the setfe2E :ke xkrgrepresents the expected number of
false detections that could be calibrated by the road sensor,
which is to be maximized, where xandrare the position
and accurate-detection range of the road sensor. The problem
of optimizing xis a discrete optimization problem where a
ﬁnite set of possible locations is available, as sensors can only
be attached to utility poles. In addition, ris a monotonically
increasing function of the infrastructure cost. For example, in
object detection task, rincreases with the number of laser
channels, but this will also increase the LiDAR price. The
VRCSP method can be adopted to determine the positions of
multiple sensor suites (x1;x2;). The associated result is
shown in Fig. 4, where we have placed 2 road sensor suites
at the cross-road (i.e., positions 1 and 4) and 1 sensor suite at
the straight-road (i.e., position 8). The perception range of the
roadside infrastructure is signiﬁcantly improved by adopting
the multi-modal multi-view sensor fusion techniques. The road
sensors are connected via optical ﬁber so that the associated
transmission delay can be ignored.
V. I MPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTS
A. Software Architecture
CarlaFLCA V (shown in Fig. 5a) is an open-source FLCA V
simulation platform that supports: (1) multi-modal dataset
generation, including point-cloud, image, radar data with asso-
ciated calibration, synchronization, and annotation; (2) training
and inference examples for CA V perception, including weather
classiﬁcation, trafﬁc sign detection, object detection, and tra-
jectory prediction; (3) various FL frameworks, including Fe-
dAvg, device selection, noisy aggregation, parameter selection,
distillation, and personalization; and (4) optimization mod-
ules, including network resource and road sensor placement
optimization. The implementation of (2) is based on LeNet-5,
Yolov5, OpenPCDet, LSTM, with the associated results shown
in Fig. 1b. The implementation of (4) is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Below we focus on (1) and (3).
Speciﬁcally, raw sensory data is recorded using CARLA
[10], which adopts Unreal Engine 4 for state-of-the-art visual
rendering and physics simulation. Then, calibration represents
sensed information in a common coordinate system via ro-
tation and transition matrices. CarlaFLCA V assumes perfect
calibration, but practical systems may involve errors since
sensors’ intrinsic (e.g., shape of the camera lens) and extrinsic
(i.e., pose) parameters need to be estimated. Time stamping
adopts LiDAR as a reference, i.e., each laser spin is a frame.
Synchronization among different sensors can be realized via
hardware or software trigger, and the worst-case time differ-
ence is at the millisecond level. Finally, data annotation tracks
the categories, poses, and occlusions of objects via CARLA
APIs (https://carla.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
For wireline FL, the DNN parameter exchange can be
implemented based on the Robot Operating System (ROS)
communication, which offers inter-process communication
among distributed nodes by publishing/subscribing topics. For
wireless FL, due to limited capacity of wireless channels, only
a subset of CA Vs can be selected to convey their parameter
updates at each FL round. Thus, CarlaFLCA V implements

==== Page 8 ====
8
GPU CUDA Ubuntu ROS DockerCARLAOpenPCDet YOLO
Pytorch CVXPY OpenCV SUMOLSTM
Hardware & OSSimulation & AI ToolsAutonomous Driving Perception Tools CNNPoint -CloudTraffic Sign DetectionCAV Perception Tasks FL Frameworks
Federated Distillation
Device Selection
Dataset Annotation, Calibration, 
SynchronizationPerception DNN 
Performance Predictor
Weather Classification
……  Noisy  Aggregation ， 
Personalization, ……  CarlaFLCAV Simulator
Optimization 
Modules
Multi -Stage Lifelong FL
RGB ImageDataset Generation
Straight -road Cross -road
T-road Roundabout3D Object Detection
Trajectory PredictionMulti -Layer Graph 
Resource AllocationVehicle -Road Contrastive 
Sensor Placement
(a)
Testing in Real World Training in CarlaFLCAV Simulator
Simulation to Real World
 (b)
Fig. 5: a) Software architecture and supported functionalities of CarlaFLCA V; b) Training DNNs in the CarlaFLCA V simulator
and testing with real world datasets. The DNN trained with CarlaFLCA V successfully detects all objects in the real world.
importance-aware device selection, where vehicles with larger
gradient norms are assigned a higher probability to be sched-
uled. Besides, CarlaFLCA V includes noisy aggregation, which
injects random noises into the DNN parameters as a mask
to protect the data privacy against model inversion attacks.
DNN frozen is optional, which ﬁxes partial layer parameters
to reduce the communication cost.
B. Experimental Validation
First, to evaluate how close CarlaFLCA V is to real-life
conditions, we train the SECOND (in Fig. 1b) with 3000 point
cloud samples generated by CarlaFLCA V for 60 epochs and
test the trained SECOND on a real-world dataset KITTI. The
mean average precision (mAP) at IoU = 0:5is58% for object
detection. Qualitative results are shown in Fig. 5b, where the
DNN trained with CarlaFLCA V detects all objects in real data.
Next, to verify the effectiveness of the multi-stage FLCA V ,
we consider the single-task case (i.e., task 3 in Fig. 1b) and
compare the mAP of ﬁnal DNNs for different schemes, under
the same wireless and wireline uplink resource budgets (i.e.,
4GB). The settings and results are shown in Fig. 6a. Our
ﬁndings are summarized below.
(i) All FL schemes achieve higher mAPs than centralized
learning. This demonstrates the necessity of exploiting
domain-information of Town05.
(ii) With cloud FL, the mAP is improved, since the CA Vs in
Town03 provide new knowledge about corner-case and
occluded objects.
(iii) With equal resources in different stages, the VRCSP plac-
ing the road sensor at position 3 signiﬁcantly improves
the mAP compared with the conventional method placing
the sensor at position 8.
(iv) By jointly optimizing the network resources across three
stages, the mAP is further increased to 84.58, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of MLGRA. Our resultimplies that more wireless (wireline) resources should be
allocated to the edge (cloud) FL stage.
(v) Under the same VRCSP and MLGRA methods, the mAP
score with device selection is slightly higher than direct
FL, as the stragglers are removed from FL groups.
Finally, we simulate the multi-task multi-modal perception,
including tasks 1–3 in Fig. 1b. The settings and results are
shown in Fig. 6b. Our ﬁndings are summarized below.
(i) Since our goal is to maximize the perception accuracy of
all tasks, a larger area indicates better performance. The
baseline scheme (i.e., blue dotted-line) has the smallest
area, which can be treated as a worst-case performance
bound.
(ii) Leveraging the performance predictor in Fig. 3a, the equal
MLGRA method (i.e., red dashed-line) achieves a larger
triangle area than that of the baseline. This is because it
automatically allocates more resources to object detection
and sign recognition as shown in Fig. 6b, which are
harder tasks.
(iii) With joint resource allocation across different stages and
tasks, the proposed MLGRA method (i.e., black solid-
line) achieves the largest triangle in Fig. 6b. The per-
ception accuracies are 99:0;88:8;78:16for tasks 1;2;3,
respectively.
(iv) For task 2, the proposed MLGRA successfully detects
the STOP sign in cloudy days, while other methods
misclassify the STOP sign as a trafﬁc light. For task 3,
the proposed MLGRA successfully detects all the objects
at the cross-road, while other methods involve inaccurate
detections and false positives.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article has reviewed the integration of FL and CA V for
overcoming perception challenges in open driving scenarios.
The multi-tier networking, multi-stage training, and multi-task

==== Page 9 ====
9
FLCA V, multi-stage resomce allocation, device selection, road sensor at position 3 
FLCA V, multi-stage resomce allocation, road sensor at position 3 
FLCA V, equal 比somcesin different stages, road sensor at position 3 
FLCA V, equal 比somcesin different stages, road sensor at position 8 
FLCA V, equal resomces in different stages, no cloud FL, road sensor at position 8 
CentJ.·alized leaining CAV -10.0 5 86.76 
84.58 
79.19 
71.16 
62.99 
。10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
5000 
4000 
3000 
::: :II『111ll1n11 11「111
Stage I Wireless Stage I Wireli ne Stage II Wireless Network Resources in Different Stages (Unit: MB) 
•Centralized learning CAV
•FLCAV, equal resources in different stages, no cloud FL, road sensor at position 8
•FLCAV, equal resources in different stages, road sensor at position 8
•FLCAV, equal resources in different stages, road sensor at position 3
•FLCAV, multi-stage resource allocation, road sensor at position 3
•FLCAV, multi-stage resource allocation, with device selection, road sensor at position 3
l1n11 
Stage II Wireline 11 Ill
Stage Ill Wireless 1n11 
Stage Ill Wireline 
(a)
Missing Detection
Inaccurate
Box
False PositiveAccurate DetectionGround Truth
Proposed MLGRA
Equal MLGRA
BaselineGround Truth
Proposed MLGRA Equal MLGRA BaselineSTOP Sign
5060708090100Accuracy of Task 1
mAP of Task 2 mAP of Task 3Baseline: Equal resources in different tasks and stages
Equal MLGRA: MLGRA with equal resources in different stages
Proposed MLGRA across different tasks and stages
0100020003000
Task 1 Wireless Task 1 Wireline Task 2 Wireless Task 2 Wireline Task 3 Wireless Task 3 WirelineNetwork Resources for Different Tasks (Unit: MB)
Baseline Equal MLGRA Proposed MLGRACAV Task 2 CAV Task 1 CAV Task 3
(b)
Fig. 6: a) Comparison among different schemes for single-task perception. Dataset: 5000 point-cloud samples in Town02 for
pretraining; 4 CA Vs (each with 500 samples) in Town05 for edge FL; 3 CA Vs (each with 500 samples) in Town03 for cloud
FL; 2432 samples in Town05 for testing. b) Comparison among different schemes for multi-task perception. Task-1 dataset:
4000 RGB images in Town02 for pretraining dataset; 4 CA Vs (each with 100 images) in Town05 for edge FL; 3 CA Vs (each
with 100 images) in Town03 for cloud FL; 2000 images in Town02 for testing. Task-2 dataset: 2500 RGB images in Town02
for pretraining; 4 CA Vs (each with 1000 images) in Town05 for edge FL; 3 CA Vs (each with 1000 images) in Town03 for
cloud FL; 3279 images in Town05 for testing. Task-3 dataset: same as Fig. 6a with road sensor placed at position 3.
generation frameworks of FLCA V were presented. The ML-
GRA and VRCSP methods were proposed to solve the network
management and sensor placement problems, respectively. The
frameworks and methods were veriﬁed in a software platform
CarlaFLCA V . Future directions are listed below.
Simulation-to-reality transfer . Real-world CA V datasets
involve far more physical mechanisms (e.g., illuminations)
and interactive behaviors (e.g., competitions) than simulation
datasets. Hence, there exists a non-negligible gap between the
simulation and the reality, making transfer learning and real-
world testing indispensable for FLCA V .
Autonomous driving under perception uncertainties .
Perception uncertainties will propagate to the subsequent
planning system. Hence, scientiﬁc approaches for computing
the perception uncertainties and adjusting the safety distance
in collision avoidance constraints are needed. End-to-end au-tonomous driving that directly maps sensor inputs into vehicle
actions is also a promising solution to address the uncertainty
propagation issue.
VII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by Science and Technology
Development Fund of Macao S.A.R (FDCT) (No.
0015/2019/AKP), National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 62001203), Shenzhen Science and
Technology Program (No. RCB20200714114956153,
JCYJ20200109141622964), Intel ICRI-IACV Research Fund
(CG#52514373), and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic
Research Project (No. 2021B1515120067). This work was
also supported by Australian Research Council’s Discovery
Project (DP210102169).

==== Page 10 ====
10
REFERENCES
[1] D. Feng et al., “Deep multi-modal object detection and semantic segmen-
tation for autonomous driving: Datasets, methods, and challenges,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1341–1360, Mar. 2021.
[2] S. Savazzi, M. Nicoli, M. Bennis, S. Kianoush, and L. Barbieri, “Oppor-
tunities of federated learning in connected, cooperative and automated
industrial systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 16–21,
Feb. 2021.
[3] B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Liu, and C. Xu, “Federated imitation learning: A
novel framework for cloud robotic systems with heterogeneous sensor
data,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3509–3516, Apr. 2020.
[4] J. Posner, L. Tseng, M. Aloqaily, and Y . Jararweh, “Federated learning
in vehicular networks: Opportunities and solutions,” IEEE Netw. , vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 152–159, Mar./Apr. 2021.
[5] J. Zhang and K. B. Letaief, “Mobile edge intelligence and computing
for the Internet of vehicles,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 246–261,
Feb. 2020.
[6] E. Arnold, M. Dianati, R. de Temple, and S. Fallah, “Cooperative per-
ception for 3D object detection in driving scenarios using infrastructure
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1852–1864,
Mar. 2022.
[7] Y . Li, S. Ren, P. Wu, S. Chen, C. Feng, and W. Zhang, “Learning
distilled collaboration graph for multi-agent perception,” Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. , virtual, Dec. 2021, pp. 1–12.
[8] I. Yaqoob, L. U. Khan, S. M. A. Kazmi, M. Imran, N. Guizani, and
C. S. Hong, “Autonomous driving cars in smart cities: Recent advances,
requirements, and challenges,” IEEE Netw. , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 174–181,
Jan./Feb. 2020.
[9] W. Li et al., “AADS: Augmented autonomous driving simulation using
data-driven algorithms,” Sci. Robot. , vol. 14, no. 28, pp. 1–12, Mar.
2019.
[10] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V . Koltun,
“CARLA: An open urban driving simulator,” in CoRL , 2017, pp. 1–
16.
[11] M. Chen, D. G ¨und¨uz, K. Huang, W. Saad, M. Bennis, A. V . Feljan, and
H. V . Poor, “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent progress
and future challenges,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 39, no. 12,
pp. 3579–3605, Dec. 2021.
[12] Q. Wu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, and J. Zhang, “FedHome: Cloud-edge based
personalized federated learning for in-home health monitoring,” IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. , vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 2818–2832, Aug. 2022.
[13] A. Eskandarian, C. Wu, and C. Sun, “Research advances and challenges
of autonomous and connected ground vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 683–711, Feb. 2021.
[14] Z. Zheng, Q. Chen, C. Hu, D. Wang, and F. Liu, “On-edge multi-task
transfer learning: Model and practice with data-driven task allocation,”
IEEE Tran. Parall. Distr. , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1357–1371, Jun. 2020.
[15] X. Zhang et al., “Finding critical scenarios for automated driving
systems: A systematic mapping study,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , early
access, 2022. DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2022.3170122.
BIOGRAPHY
Shuai Wang [M’19] (s.wang@siat.ac.cn) received the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Hong Kong in 2018. He is
currently an Associate Professor at the Shenzhen Institute of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
research interests include autonomous systems and commu-
nications. He received the Best Paper Awards from IEEE ICC
in 2020 and IEEE SPCC in 2021.
Chengyang Li [S’22] (cli386@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn) re-
ceived a bachelor’s degree in computer science from the
Southern University of Science and Technology. He is cur-
rently a Master of Philosophy (M.Phil.) student at the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
His research interest includes robot localization, mapping, and
motion planning.
Derrick Wing Kwan Ng [F’21] (w.k.ng@unsw.edu.au)
received a bachelor’s degree with ﬁrst-class honors and a Mas-ter of Philosophy (M.Phil.) degree in electronic engineering
from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(HKUST) in 2006 and 2008, respectively. He received his
Ph.D. degree from the University of British Columbia (UBC)
in Nov. 2012. He was a senior postdoctoral fellow at the
Institute for Digital Communications, Friedrich-Alexander-
University Erlangen-N ¨urnberg (FAU), Germany. He is now
working as a Scientia Associate Professor at the University
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. His research in-
terests include global optimization, physical layer security,
IRS-assisted communication, UA V-assisted communication,
wireless information and power transfer, and green (energy-
efﬁcient) wireless communications.
Yonina C. Eldar [F’12] (yonina.eldar@weizmann.ac.il) is a
professor in the Department of Math and Computer Science,
Weizmann Institute of Science, where she heads the Center
for Biomedical Engineering and Signal Processing. She is a
fellow of IEEE, a fellow of EURASIP, and a member of the
Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
H. Vincent Poor [F’87] (poor@princeton.edu) is the
Michael Henry Strater University Professor at Princeton Uni-
versity, where his interests include wireless networks, energy
systems and related ﬁelds. Among his publications is the
recent book Machine Learning and Wireless Communications
(Cambridge University Press, 2022). He received the IEEE
Alexander Graham Bell Medal in 2017.
Qi Hao [M’05] (hao.q@sustech.edu.cn) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from Duke
University in 2006. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech),
Shenzhen 518055, China. He is also with Shenzhen Research
Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems.
Chengzhong Xu [F’16] (czxu@um.edu.mo) is currently a
Chair Professor of Computer Science in University of Macau.
His research interests are in cloud and distributed computing,
systems support for AI, smart city and autonomous driving.
He published two research monographs and more than 400
journal and conference papers. Dr. Xu was the Chair of IEEE
Technical Committee on Distributed Processing from 2015
to 2020. He was a recipient of the Faculty Research Award,
Career Development Chair Award, and the President’s Award
for Excellence in Teaching of WSU. He was also a recipient
of the “Outstanding Oversea Scholar” award of NSFC.

