==== Page 1 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for
Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Rafael Valle1Kevin Shih1Ryan Prenger1Bryan Catanzaro1
Abstract
In this paper we propose Flowtron: an autore-
gressive ﬂow-based generative network for text-
to-speech synthesis with control over speech vari-
ation and style transfer. Flowtron borrows in-
sights from IAF and revamps Tacotron in or-
der to provide high-quality and expressive mel-
spectrogram synthesis. Flowtron is optimized
by maximizing the likelihood of the training
data, which makes training simple and stable.
Flowtron learns an invertible mapping of data to
a latent space that can be manipulated to control
many aspects of speech synthesis (pitch, tone,
speech rate, cadence, accent). Our mean opin-
ion scores (MOS) show that Flowtron matches
state-of-the-art TTS models in terms of speech
quality. In addition, we provide results on con-
trol of speech variation, interpolation between
samples and style transfer between speakers seen
and unseen during training. Code and pre-
trained models will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/NVIDIA/ﬂowtron.
1. Introduction
Current speech synthesis methods do not give the user
enough control over how speech actually sounds. Auto-
matically converting text to audio that successfully commu-
nicates the text was achieved a long time ago (Umeda et al.,
1968; Badham et al., 1983). However, communicating only
the text information leaves out all of the acoustic properties
of the voice that convey much of the meaning and human
expressiveness. Nearly all the research into speech synthe-
sis since the 1960s has focused on adding that non-textual
information to synthesized speech. But in spite of this, the
typical speech synthesis problem is formulated as a text to
speech problem in which the user inputs only text.
Taming the non-textual information in speech is difﬁcult
1NVIDIA Applied Deep Learning Research (ADLR). Corre-
spondence to: Rafael Valle <rafaelvalle@nvidia.com >.because the non-textual is unlabeled. A voice actor may
speak the same text with different emphasis or emotion
based on context, but it is unclear how to label a particular
reading. Without labels for the non-textual information,
models have fallen back to unsupervised learning. Recent
models have achieved nearly human-level quality, despite
treating the non-textual information as a black box. The
model’s only goal is to match the patterns in the training
data (Shen et al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al.,
2017). Despite these models’ excellent ability to recreate
the non-textual information in the training set, the user has
no insight into or control over the non-textual information.
It is possible to formulate an unsupervised learning problem
in such a way that the user can gain insights into the structure
of a data set. One way is to formulate the problem such that
the data is assumed to have a representation in some latent
space, and have the model learn that representation. This
latent space can then be investigated and manipulated to give
the user more control over the generative model’s output.
Such approaches have been popular in image generation
for some time now, allowing users to interpolate smoothly
between images and to identify portions of the latent space
that correlate with various features (Radford et al., 2015;
Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018).
In audio, however, approaches have focused on embeddings
that remove a large amount of information and are obtained
from assumptions about what is interesting. Recent ap-
proaches that utilize deep learning for expressive speech
synthesis combine text and a learned latent embedding for
prosody or global style (Wang et al., 2018; Skerry-Ryan
et al., 2018). A variation of this approach is proposed
by (Hsu et al., 2018), wherein a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) encoding the audio is added to Tacotron to learn
a latent embedding. These approaches control the non-
textual information by learning a bank of embeddings or
by providing the target output as an input to the model and
compressing it. However, these approaches require making
assumptions about the dimensionality of the embeddings
before hand and are not guaranteed to contain all the non-
textual information it takes to reconstruct speech, includ-
ing the risk of having dummy dimensions or not enough
capacity, as the appendix sections in (Wang et al., 2018;arXiv:2005.05957v3  [cs.SD]  16 Jul 2020

==== Page 2 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2018) conﬁrm. They
also require ﬁnding an encoder and embedding that prevents
the model from simply learning a complex identity function
that ignores other inputs. Furthermore, these approaches
focus on ﬁxed-length embeddings under the assumption
that variable-length embeddings are not robust to text and
speaker perturbations. Finally, most of these approaches do
not give the user control over the degree of variability in the
synthesized speech.
In this paper we propose Flowtron: an autoregressive ﬂow-
based generative network for mel-spectrogram synthesis
with control over acoustics and speech. Flowtron learns
an invertible function that maps a distribution over mel-
spectrograms to a latent zspace parameterized by a spheri-
cal Gaussian. With this formalization, we can generate sam-
ples containing speciﬁc speech charateristics manifested in
mel-space by ﬁnding and sampling the corresponding region
inz-space. In the basic approach, we generate samples by
sampling a zero mean spherical Gaussian prior and control
the amount of variation by adjusting its variance. Despite its
simplicity, this approach offers more speech variation and
control than Tacotron.
In Flowtron, we can access speciﬁc regions of mel-
spectrogram space by sampling a posterior distribution con-
ditioned on prior evidence from existing samples (Kingma
& Dhariwal, 2018; Gambardella et al., 2019). This approach
allows us to make a monotonous speaker more expressive by
computing the region in z-space associated with expressive
speech as it is manifested in the prior evidence. Finally,
our formulation also allows us to impose a structure to the
z-space and parametrize it with a Gaussian mixture, for ex-
ample. In this approach related to (Hsu et al., 2018), speech
charateristics in mel-spectrogram space can be associated
with individual components. Hence, it is possible to gener-
ate samples with speciﬁc speech characteristics by selecting
a component or a mixture thereof1.
Although V AEs and GANs (Hsu et al., 2018; Bi ´nkowski
et al., 2019; Akuzawa et al., 2018) based models also
provide a latent prior that can be easily manipulated, in
Flowtron this comes at no cost in speech quality nor opti-
mization challenges.
We ﬁnd that Flowtron is able to generalize and produce sharp
mel-spectrograms by simply maximizing the likelihood of
the data while not requiring any additional Prenet or Postnet
layer (Wang et al., 2017), nor compound loss functions
required by most state of the art models like (Shen et al.,
2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al., 2017; Skerry-Ryan
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Bi ´nkowski et al., 2019).
Flowtron is optimized by maximizing the likelihood of the
training data, which makes training simple and stable. It
1What is relevant statistically might not be perceptually.learns an invertible mapping of the a latent space that can
be manipulated to control many aspects of speech synthe-
sis. Our mean opinion scores (MOS) show that Flowtron
matches state-of-the-art TTS models in terms of speech
quality. In addition, we provide results on control of speech
variation, interpolation between samples, and style transfer
between seen and unseen speakers with similar and different
sentences. To our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to show
evidence that normalizing ﬂow models can also be used for
text-to-speech synthesis. We hope this will further stimulate
developments in normalizing ﬂows.
2. Related Work
Earlier approaches to text-to-speech synthesis that achieve
human like results focus on synthesizing acoustic features
from text, treating the non-textual information as a black
box. (Shen et al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al.,
2017). Approaches like (Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al.,
2017) require adding a critical Prenet layer to help with
convergence and improve generalization (Wang et al., 2017).
Furthermore, such models require an additional Postnet
residual layer and modiﬁed loss to produce ” better resolved
harmonics and high frequency formant structures, which
reduces synthesis artifacts .”
One approach to dealing with this lack of labels for underly-
ing non-textual information is to look for hand engineered
statistics based on the audio that we believe are correlated
with this underlying information.
This is the approach taken by models like (Nishimura et al.,
2016; Lee et al., 2019), wherein utterances are conditioned
on audio statistics that can be calculated directly from the
training data such as F0(fundamental frequency). However,
in order to use such models, the statistics we hope to approx-
imate must be decided upon a-priori, and the target value of
these statistics must be determined before synthesis.
Another approach to dealing with the issue of unlabeled
non-textual information is to learn a latent embedding for
prosody or global style. This is the approach taken by
models like (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018),
wherein in a bank of embeddings or a latent embedding
space of prosody is learned from unlabelled data. While
these approaches have shown promise, manipulating such
latent variables only offers a coarse control over expressive
characteristics of speech.
A mixed approach consists of combining engineered statis-
tics with latent embeddings learned in an unsupervised fash-
ion. This is the approach taken by models like Mellotron
(Valle et al., 2019b). In Mellotron, utterances are condi-
tioned on both audio statistics and a latent embedding of
acoustic features derived from a reference acoustic represen-
tation. Despite its advantages, this approach still requires

==== Page 3 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
determining these statistics before synthesis.
3. Flowtron
Flowtron is an autoregressive generative model that gen-
erates a sequence of mel spectrogram frames p(x)by pro-
ducing each mel-spectrogram frame based on previous mel-
spectrogram frames p(x) =Qp(xtjx1:t 1). Our setup
uses a neural network as a generative model by sampling
from a simple distribution p(z). We consider two simple
distributions with the same number of dimensions as our
desired mel-spectrogram: a zero-mean spherical Gaussian
and a mixture of spherical Gaussians with ﬁxed or learnable
parameters.
zN(z; 0;I) (1)
zX
k^kN(z;^k;^k) (2)
These samples are put through a series of invertible,
parametrized transformations f, in our case afﬁne trans-
formations that transform p(z)intop(x).
x=f0f1:::fk(z) (3)
As it is illustrated in (Kingma et al., 2016), in autoregres-
sive normalizing ﬂows the t-th variablez0
tonly depends on
previous timesteps z1:t 1:
z0
t=fk(z1:t 1) (4)
By using parametrized afﬁne transformations for fand due
to the autoregressive structure, the Jacobian determinant
of each of the transformations fis lower triangular, hence
easy to compute. With this setup we can train Flowtron by
maximizing the log-likelihood of the data, which can be
done using the change of variables:
logp(x) = logp(z) +kX
i=1logjdet(J(f 1
i(x)))j(5)
z=f 1
kf 1
k 1:::f 1
0(x) (6)
For the forward pass through the network, we take the mel-
spectrograms as vectors and process them through several
“steps of ﬂow conditioned on the text and speaker ids. A step
of ﬂow here consists of an afﬁne coupling layer, described
below.
3.1. Afﬁne Coupling Layer
Invertible neural networks are typically constructed us-
ing coupling layers (Dinh et al., 2014; 2016; Kingma &Dhariwal, 2018). In our case, we use an afﬁne coupling
layer (Dinh et al., 2016). Every input xt 1produces scale
and bias terms, sandbrespectively, that afﬁne-transform
the succeeding input xt:
(logst;bt) =NN(x1:t 1;text;speaker ) (7)
x0
t=stxt+bt (8)
HereNN()can be any autoregressive causal transformation.
This can be achieved by time-wise concatenation of a 0-
valued vector to the input provided to NN(). The afﬁne
coupling layer preserves invertibility for the overall network,
even though NN()does not need to be invertible. This
follows because the ﬁrst input of NN()is a constant and
due to the autoregressive nature of the model the scaling
and translation terms standbtonly depend on x1:t 1and
the ﬁxedtext andspeaker vectors. Accordingly, when
inverting the network, we can compute standbtfrom the
preceding input x1:t 1, and then invert x0
tto computext,
by simply recomputing NN(x1:t 1;text;speaker ).
With an afﬁne coupling layer, only the stterm changes the
volume of the mapping and adds a change of variables term
to the loss. This term also serves to penalize the model for
non-invertible afﬁne mappings.
logjdet(J(f 1
coupling (x)))j= logjsj (9)
With this setup, it is also possible to revert the ordering of
the inputxwithout loss of generality. Hence, we choose to
revert the order of the input at every even step of ﬂow and
to maintain the original order on odd steps of ﬂow. This
allows the model to learn dependencies both forward and
backwards in time while remaining causal and invertible.
3.2. Model architecture
Our text encoder modiﬁes Tacotron’s by replacing batch-
norm with instance-norm. Our decoder and NN architec-
ture, depicted in Figure 1, removes the essential Prenet and
Postnet layers from Tacotron. We use the content-based
tanh attention described in (Vinyals et al., 2015). We use the
Mel Encoder described in (Hsu et al., 2018) for Flowtron
models that predict the parameters of the Gaussian mixture.
Unlike (Ping et al., 2017; Gibiansky et al., 2017), where
site speciﬁc speaker embeddings are used, we use a single
speaker embedding that is channel-wise concatenated with
the encoder outputs at every token. We use a ﬁxed dummy
speaker embedding for models not conditioned on speaker
id. Finally, we add a dense layer with a sigmoid output the
ﬂow step closest to z. This provides the model with a gating
mechanism as early as possible during inference to avoid
extra computation.

==== Page 4 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Figure 1: Flowtron network. Text and speaker embeddings
are channel-wise concatenated. A 0-valued vector is con-
catenated with xin the time dimension.
3.3. Inference
Once the network is trained, doing inference is simply a
matter of randomly sampling zvalues from a spherical
Gaussian, or Gaussian Mixture, and running them through
the network, reverting the order of the input when necessary.
During training we used 2= 1. The parameters of the
Gaussian mixture are either ﬁxed or predicted by Flowtron.
In section 4.3 we explore the effects of different values for
2. In general, we found that sampling zvalues from a
Gaussian with a lower standard deviation from that assumed
during training resulted in mel-spectrograms that sounded
better, as found in (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), and earlier
work on likelihood-based generative models (Parmar et al.,
2018). During inference we sampled zvalues from a Gaus-
sian with2= 0:5, unless otherwise speciﬁed. The text and
speaker embeddings are included at each of the coupling
layers as before, but now the afﬁne transforms are inverted
in time, and these inverses are also guaranteed by the loss.
4. Experiments
This section describes our training setup and provides quan-
titative and qualitative results. Our quantitative results show
that Flowtron has mean opinion scores (MOS) that are com-
parable to that of state of the art models for text to mel-
spectrogram synthesis such as Tacotron 2. Our qualitative
results display many features that are not possible or not
efﬁcient with Tacotron and Tacotron 2 GST. These features
include control of the amount of variation in speech, inter-
polation between samples and style transfer between seen
and unseen speakers during training.
We decode all mel-spectrograms into waveforms by using a
single pre-trained WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019) model
trained on a single speaker and available on github (Valle
et al., 2019a). During inference we used 2= 0:7. In
consonance with (Valle et al., 2019b), our results suggests
that WaveGlow can be used as an universal decoder.Although we provide images to illustrate our results, they
can best be appreciated by listening. Hence, we ask the
readers to visit our website2to listen to Flowtron samples.
4.1. Training setup
We train our Flowtron, Tacotron 2 and Tacotron 2 GST
models using a dataset that combines the LJSpeech (LJS)
dataset (Ito et al., 2017) with two proprietary single speaker
datasets with 20 and 10 hours each (Sally and Helen). We
will refer to this combined dataset as LSH. We also train a
Flowtron model on the train-clean-100 subset of LibriTTS
(Zen et al., 2019) with 123 speakers and 25 minutes on
average per speaker. Speakers with less than 5 minutes of
data and ﬁles that are larger than 10 seconds are ﬁltered
out. For each dataset we use at least 180 randomly chosen
samples for the validation set and the remainder for the
training set.
The models are trained on uniformly sampled normalized
text and ARPAbet encodings obtained from the CMU Pro-
nouncing Dictionary (Weide, 1998). We do not perform
any data augmentation. We adapt the public Tacotron 2 and
Tacotron 2 GST repos to include speaker embeddings as
described in Section 3.
We use a sampling rate of 22050 Hz and mel-spectrograms
with 80 bins using librosa mel ﬁlter defaults. We apply
the STFT with a FFT size of 1024, window size of 1024
samples and hop size of 256 samples ( 12ms).
We use the ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with
default parameters, 1e-4 learning rate and 1e-6 weight de-
cay for Flowtron and 1e-3 learning rate and 1e-5 weight
decay for the other models, following guidelines in (Wang
et al., 2017). We anneal the learning rate once the general-
ization error starts to plateau and stop training once the the
generalization error stops signiﬁcantly decreasing or starts
increasing. The Flowtron models with 2 steps of ﬂow were
trained on the LSH dataset for approximately 1000 epochs
and then ﬁne-tuned on LibriTTS for 500 epochs. Tacotron
2 and Tacotron 2 GST are trained for approximately 500
epochs. Each model is trained on a single NVIDIA DGX-1
with 8 GPUs.
We ﬁnd it faster to ﬁrst learn to attend on a Flowtron model
with a single step of ﬂow and large amounts of data than
multiple steps of ﬂow and less data. After the model has
learned to attend, we transfer its parameters to models with
more steps of ﬂow and speakers with less data. Thus, we
ﬁrst train Flowtron model with a single step of ﬂow on the
LSH dataset with many hours per speaker. Then we ﬁne
tune this model to Flowtron models with more steps of ﬂow.
Finally, these models are ﬁne tuned on LibriTTS with an
optional new speaker embedding.
2https://nv-adlr.github.io/Flowtron

==== Page 5 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
4.2. Mean Opinion Score comparison
We provide results that compare mean opinion scores
(MOS) from real data from the LJS dataset, samples from
a Flowtron with 2 steps of ﬂow and samples from our im-
plementation of Tacotron 2, both trained on LSH. Although
the models evaluated are multi-speaker, we only compute
mean opinion scores on LJS. In addition, we use the mean
opinion scores provided in (Prenger et al., 2019) for ground
truth data from the LJS dataset.
We crowd-sourced mean opinion score (MOS) tests on Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. Raters ﬁrst had to pass a hearing test
to be eligible. Then they listened to an utterance, after which
they rated pleasantness on a ﬁve-point scale. We used 30
volume normalized utterances from all speakers disjoint
from the training set for evaluation, and randomly chose the
utterances for each subject.
The mean opinion scores are shown in Table 1 with 95% con-
ﬁdence intervals computed over approximately 250 scores
per source. The results roughly match our subjective qual-
itative assessment. The larger advantage of Flowtron is in
the control over the amount of speech variation and the
manipulation of the latent space.
Source Flows Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
Real - 4.2740.1340
Flowtron 3 3.6650.1634
Tacotron 2 - 3.5210.1721
Table 1: Mean Opinion Score (MOS) evaluations with 95%
conﬁdence intervals for various sources.
4.3. Sampling the prior
The simplest approach to generate samples with Flowtron
is to sample from a prior distribution zN (0;2)and
adjust2to control amount of variation. Whereas 2= 0
completely removes variation and produces outputs based
on the model bias, increasing the value of 2will increase
the amount of variation in speech.
4.3.1. S PEECH VARIATION
To showcase the amount of variation and control thereof in
Flowtron, we synthesize 10 mel-spectrograms and sample
the Gaussian prior with 22f0:0;0:5;1:0g. All samples
are generated conditioned on a ﬁxed speaker Sally and text
“How much variation is there? ” to illustrate the relationship
between2and variability.
Our results show that despite all the variability added by
increasing2, all the samples synthesized with Flowtron
still produce high quality speech.
Figure 2 also shows that unlike most SOTA models (Shenet al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al., 2017; Skerry-
Ryan et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Bi ´nkowski et al., 2019),
Flowtron generates sharp harmonics and well resolved for-
mants without a compound loss nor Prenet or Postnet layers.
(a)2= 0
(b)2= 0:5
(c)2= 1
Figure 2: Mel-spectrograms generated with Flowtron using
different2. This parameter can be adjusted to control
mel-spectrogram variability during inference.
Now we show that adjusting 2is a simple and valuable
approach that provides more variation and control than
Tacotron, without sacriﬁcing speech quality. For this, we
synthesize 10 samples with Tacotron 2 using different val-
ues for the Prenet dropout probability p2f0:45;0:5;0:55g.
We scale the outputs of the dropout output such that the
mean of the output remains equal to the mean with p= 0:5,

==== Page 6 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
the value used during training. Although we also provide
samples computed on values of p2[0;1]in our supplemen-
tal material, we do not include them in our results because
they are unintelligible.
In Figure 3 below we provide scatter plots from sample
duration in seconds. Our results show that whereas 2= 0
produces samples with no variation in duration, larger values
of2produces samples with more variation in duration.
Humans manipulate word and sentence length to express
themselves, hence this is valuable.
Figure 3: Sample duration in seconds given parameters 2
andp. These results show that Flowtron provides more
variation in sample duration than Tacotron 2.
In Figure 4 we provide scatter plots of F0contours extracted
with the YIN algorithm (De Cheveign ´e & Kawahara, 2002),
with minimum F0, maximumF0and harmonicity threshold
equal to 80 Hz, 400 Hz and 0.3 respectively. Our results
show a behavior similar to the previous sample duration
analysis. As expected, 2= 0provides no variation in F0
contour3, while increasing the value of 2will increase the
amount of variation in F0contours.
Our results in Figure 4 also show that the samples produced
with Flowtron are considerably less monotonous than the
samples produced with Tacotron 2. Whereas increasing 2
considerably increases variation in F0, modifying pbarely
produces any variation. This is valuable because expressive
speech is associated with non-monotonic F0contours.
4.3.2. I NTERPOLATION BETWEEN SAMPLES
With Flowtron we can perform interpolation in z-space to
achieve interpolation in mel-spectrogram space. For this
experiment we evaluate Flowtron models with and with-
out speaker embeddings. For the experiment with speaker
embeddings we choose the Sally speaker and the phrase
“It is well known that deep generative models have a rich
latent space. ”. We generate mel-spectrograms by sampling
zN(0;0:8)twice and interpolating between them over
100 steps.
3Variations in 2= 0are due to different zfor WaveGlow.
(a) Flowtron 2= 0
(b) Flowtron 2= 0:5
(c) Flowtron 2= 1
(d) Tacotron 2 p2 f0:45;0:5;0:55g
Figure 4:F0contours obtained from samples generated by
Flowtron and Tacotron 2 with different values for 2andp.
Flowtron provides more expressivity than Tacotron 2.
For the experiment without speaker embeddings we inter-
polate between Sally and Helen using the phrase “ We are
testing this model. ”. First, we perform inference by sam-
plingzN (0;0:5)until we ﬁnd two zvalues,zhand
zs, that produce mel-spectrograms with Helen’s and Sally’s
voice respectively. We then generate samples by performing
inference while linearly interpolating between zhandzs.
Our same speaker interpolation samples show that Flowtron
is able to interpolate between multiple samples while pro-
ducing correct alignment maps. In addition, our different
speaker interpolation samples show that Flowtron is able
to blurry the boundaries between two speakers, creating a
speaker that combines the characteristics of both.
4.4. Sampling the posterior
In this approach we generate samples with Flowtron by sam-
pling a posterior distribution conditioned on prior evidence
containing speech characteristics of interest, as described in
(Gambardella et al., 2019; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018). In
this experiment, we collect prior evidence zeby perform-
ing a forward pass with the speaker id to be used during

==== Page 7 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
inference4, observed mel-spectrogram and text from a set
of samples with characteristics of interest. If necessary,
we time-concatenate each zewith itself to fulﬁll minimum
length requirements deﬁned according to the text length to
be said during inference.
Tacotron 2 GST (Wang et al., 2018) has an equivalent pos-
terior sampling approach, in which during inference the
model is conditioned on a weighted sum of global style
tokens (posterior) queried through an embedding of existing
audio samples (prior). For Tacotron 2 GST, we evaluate two
approaches: in one we use a single sample to query a style
token in the other we use an average style token computed
over multiple samples.
4.4.1. S EEN SPEAKER WITHOUT ALIGNMENTS
In this experiment we compare Sally samples from Flowtron
and Tacotron 2 GST generated by conditioning on the pos-
terior computed over 30 Helen samples with the highest
variance in fundamental frequency. The goal is to make a
monotonic speaker sound expressive. Our experiments show
that by sampling from the posterior or interpolating between
the posterior and a standard Gaussian prior, Flowtron is
able to make a monotonic speaker gradually sound more
expressive. On the other hand, Tacotron 2 GST is barely
able to alter characteristics of the monotonic speaker.
4.4.2. S EEN SPEAKER WITH ALIGNMENTS
We use a Flowtron model with speaker embeddings to illus-
trate Flowtron’s ability to learn and transfer acoustic char-
acteristics that are hard to express algorithmically but easy
to perceive acoustically, we select a female speaker from
LibriTTS with a distinguished nasal voice and oscillation
inF0as our source speaker and transfer her style to a male
speaker, also from LibriTTS, with acoustic characteristics
that sound different from the female speaker. Unlike the
previous experiment, this time the text and the alignment
maps are transferred from the female to the male speaker.
Figure 5 is an attempt to visualize the transfer of these
acoustic qualities we described. It shows that after the
transfer, the lower partials of the male speaker oscillate
more and become more similar to the female speaker.
4.4.3. U NSEEN SPEAKER STYLE
We compare samples generated with Flowtron and Tacotron
2 GST with speaker embeddings in which we modify a
speaker’s style by using data from the same speaker but from
a style not seen during training. Whereas Sally’s data used
during training consists of news article readings, the evalu-
ation samples contain Sally’s interpretation of the somber
and vampiresque novel Born of Darkness.
4To remove this speaker’s information from ze
(a) Female
(b) Transfer
(c) Male
Figure 5: Mel-spectrograms from a female speaker, male
speaker and a sample where we transfer the acoustic char-
acteristics from the female speaker to the male speaker. It
shows that the transferred sample is more similar to the
female speaker than the male speaker.
Our samples show that Tacotron 2 GST fails to emulate the
somber style from Born of Darkness’s data. We show that
Flowtron succeeds in transferring not only to the somber
style in the evaluation data, but also the long pauses associ-
ated with the narrative style.
4.4.4. U NSEEN SPEAKER
In this experiment we compare Flowtron and Tacotron 2
GST samples in which we transfer the speaking style of a
speaker not seen during training. Both models use speaker
embeddings.
For these experiments, we consider two speakers. The ﬁrst
comes from speaker ID 03 from RA VDESS, a dataset with
emotion labels. We focus on the label “surprised”. The
second speaker is Richard Feynman, using a set of 10 audio
samples collected from the web.

==== Page 8 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
For each experiment, we use the Sally speaker and the sen-
tences “ Humans are walking on the street? ” and “ Surely
you are joking mister Feynman. ”, which do not exist in
RA VDESS nor in the audio samples from Richard Feyn-
man.
The samples generated with Tacotron 2 GST are not able to
emulate the surprised style from RA VDESS nor Feynman’s
prosody and acoustic characteristics. Flowtron, on the other
hand, is able to make Sally sound surprised, which is dras-
tically different from the monotonous baseline. Likewise,
Flowtron is able to pick up on the prosody and articulation
details particular to Feynman’s speaking style, and transfer
them to Sally.
4.5. Sampling the Gaussian Mixture
In this last section we showcase visualizations and samples
from Flowtron Gaussian Mixture (GM). First we investi-
gate how different mixture components and speakers are
correlated. Then we provide sound examples in which we
modulate speech characteristics by translating one of the the
dimensions of an individual component.
4.5.1. V ISUALIZING ASSIGNMENTS
For the ﬁrst experiment, we train a Flowtrom Gaussian
Mixture on LSH with 2 steps of ﬂow, speaker embeddings
and ﬁxed mean and covariance (Flowtron GM-A). We ob-
tain mixture component assignments per mel-spectrogram
by performing a forward pass and averaging the compo-
nent assignment over time and samples. Figure 6 shows
that whereas most speakers are equally assigned to all com-
ponents, component 7 is almost exclusively assigned to
Helen’s data.
Figure 6: Component assignments for Flowtron GM-A.
Unlike LJS and Sally, Helen is almost exclusively assigned
to component 7.
In the second experiment, we train a Flowtron Gaussian
Mixture on LibriTTS with 1 step of ﬂow, without speaker
embeddings and predicted mean and covariance (Flowtron
GM-B). Figure 7 shows that Flowtron GM assigns more
probability to component 7 when the speaker is male than
when it’s female. Conversely, the model assigns more proba-
bility to component 6 when the speaker is female than when
it’s male.
Figure 7: Component assignments for Flowtron GM-B.
Components 7 and 8 are assigned different probabilities
according to gender, suggesting that the information stored
in the components is gender dependent.
4.5.2. T RANSLATING DIMENSIONS
In this subsection, we use the model Flowtron GM-A de-
scribed previously. We focus on selecting a single mixture
component and translating one of its dimensions by adding
an offset.
The samples in our supplementary material show that we
are able to modulate speciﬁc speech characteristics like
pitch and word duration. Although the samples generated
by translating one the dimensions associated with pitch
height have different pitch contours, they have the same
duration. Similarly, our samples show that translating the
dimension associated with length of the ﬁrst word does not
modulate the pitch of the ﬁrst word. This provides evidence
that we can modulate these attributes by manipulating these
dimensions and that the model is able to learn a disentangled
representation of these speech attributes.
5. Discussion
In this paper we propose a new text to mel-spectrogram
synthesis model based on autoregressive ﬂows that is opti-
mized by maximizing the likelihood and allows for control
of speech variation and style transfer. Our results show that
samples generated with FlowTron achieve mean opinion
scores that are similar to samples generated with state-of-
the-art text-to-speech synthesis models. In addition, we
demonstrate that at no extra cost and without a compound
loss term, our model learns a latent space that stores non-
textual information. Our experiments show that FlowTron
gives the user the possibility to transfer charactersitics from
a source sample or speaker to a target speaker, for example
making a monotonic speaker sound more expressive.
Our results show that despite all the variability added by
increasing2, the samples synthesized with FlowTron
still produce high quality speech. Our results show that
FlowTron learns a latent space over non-textual features that
can be investigated and manipulated to give the user more
control over the generative models output. We provide many
examples that showcase this including increasing variation
in mel-spectrograms in a controllable manner, transferring

==== Page 9 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
the style from speakers seen and unseen during training to
another speaker using sentences with similar or different
text, and making a monotonic speaker sound more expres-
sive.
Flowtron produces expressive speech without labeled data
or ever seeing expressive data. It pushes text-to-speech syn-
thesis beyond the expressive limits of personal assistants. It
opens new avenues for speech synthesis in human-computer
interaction and the arts, where realism and expressivity are
of utmost importance. To our knowledge, this work is the
ﬁrst to demonstrate the advantages of using normalizing
ﬂow models in text to mel-spectrogram synthesis.References
Akuzawa, K., Iwasawa, Y ., and Matsuo, Y . Expressive
speech synthesis via modeling expressions with varia-
tional autoencoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02135 ,
2018.
Arik, S., Diamos, G., Gibiansky, A., Miller, J., Peng,
K., Ping, W., Raiman, J., and Zhou, Y . Deep voice
2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.08947 , 2017a.
Arik, S. O., Chrzanowski, M., Coates, A., Diamos, G., Gib-
iansky, A., Kang, Y ., Li, X., Miller, J., Ng, A., Raiman, J.,
et al. Deep voice: Real-time neural text-to-speech. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1702.07825 , 2017b.
Badham, J., Lasker, L., Parkes, W. F., Rubinstein, A. B.,
Broderick, M., Coleman, D., and Wood, J. Wargames,
1983.
Bi´nkowski, M., Donahue, J., Dieleman, S., Clark, A., Elsen,
E., Casagrande, N., Cobo, L. C., and Simonyan, K. High
ﬁdelity speech synthesis with adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.11646 , 2019.
De Cheveign ´e, A. and Kawahara, H. Yin, a fundamental
frequency estimator for speech and music. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America , 111(4):1917–1930,
2002.
Dinh, L., Krueger, D., and Bengio, Y . Nice: Non-linear
independent components estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.8516 , 2014.
Dinh, L., Sohl-Dickstein, J., and Bengio, S. Density esti-
mation using real nvp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803 ,
2016.
Gambardella, A., Baydin, A. G., and Torr, P. H. Transﬂow
learning: Repurposing ﬂow models without retraining.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.13270 , 2019.
Gibiansky, A., Arik, S., Diamos, G., Miller, J., Peng, K.,
Ping, W., Raiman, J., and Zhou, Y . Deep voice 2: Multi-
speaker neural text-to-speech. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pp. 2962–2970, 2017.
Hsu, W.-N., Zhang, Y ., Weiss, R. J., Zen, H., Wu, Y ., Wang,
Y ., Cao, Y ., Jia, Y ., Chen, Z., Shen, J., et al. Hierarchical
generative modeling for controllable speech synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07217 , 2018.
Ito, K. et al. The LJ speech dataset, 2017.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.

==== Page 10 ====
Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Kingma, D. P. and Dhariwal, P. Glow: Generative
ﬂow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.03039 , 2018.
Kingma, D. P., Salimans, T., Jozefowicz, R., Chen, X.,
Sutskever, I., and Welling, M. Improved variational in-
ference with inverse autoregressive ﬂow. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 4743–4751,
2016.
Lee, J., Choi, H.-S., Jeon, C.-B., Koo, J., and Lee, K. Adver-
sarially trained end-to-end korean singing voice synthesis
system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.01919 , 2019.
Nishimura, M., Hashimoto, K., Oura, K., Nankaku,
Y ., and Tokuda, K. Singing voice synthesis
based on deep neural networks. In Interspeech
2016 , pp. 2478–2482, 2016. doi: 10.21437/
Interspeech.2016-1027. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.21437/Interspeech.2016-1027 .
Parmar, N., Vaswani, A., Uszkoreit, J., Kaiser, Ł., Shazeer,
N., Ku, A., and Tran, D. Image transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05751 , 2018.
Ping, W., Peng, K., Gibiansky, A., Arik, S. O., Kannan,
A., Narang, S., Raiman, J., and Miller, J. Deep voice
3: 2000-speaker neural text-to-speech. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.07654 , 2017.
Prenger, R., Valle, R., and Catanzaro, B. Waveglow: A
ﬂow-based generative network for speech synthesis. In
ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pp.
3617–3621. IEEE, 2019.
Radford, A., Metz, L., and Chintala, S. Unsupervised rep-
resentation learning with deep convolutional generative
adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434 ,
2015.
Shen, J., Pang, R., Weiss, R. J., Schuster, M., Jaitly,
N., Yang, Z., Chen, Z., Zhang, Y ., Wang, Y ., Skerry-
Ryan, R., et al. Natural tts synthesis by conditioning
wavenet on mel spectrogram predictions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.05884 , 2017.
Skerry-Ryan, R., Battenberg, E., Xiao, Y ., Wang, Y ., Stan-
ton, D., Shor, J., Weiss, R. J., Clark, R., and Saurous,
R. A. Towards end-to-end prosody transfer for expres-
sive speech synthesis with tacotron. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09047 , 2018.
Umeda, N., Matsui, E., Suzuki, T., and Omura, H. Synthesis
of fairy tales using an analog vocal tract. In Proceedings
of 6th International Congress on Acoustics , pp. B159–
162, 1968.Valle, R., Li, J., Prenger, R., and Catanzaro, B. Mellotron
github repo, 2019a. URL https://github.com/
NVIDIA/mellotron.
Valle, R., Li, J., Prenger, R., and Catanzaro, B. Mellotron:
Multispeaker expressive voice synthesis by conditioning
on rhythm, pitch and global style tokens. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.11997 , 2019b.
Vinyals, O., Kaiser, Ł., Koo, T., Petrov, S., Sutskever, I., and
Hinton, G. Grammar as a foreign language. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 2773–2781,
2015.
Wang, Y ., Skerry-Ryan, R., Stanton, D., Wu, Y ., Weiss, R. J.,
Jaitly, N., Yang, Z., Xiao, Y ., Chen, Z., Bengio, S., et al.
Tacotron: A fully end-to-end text-to-speech synthesis
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10135 , 2017.
Wang, Y ., Stanton, D., Zhang, Y ., Skerry-Ryan, R., Batten-
berg, E., Shor, J., Xiao, Y ., Ren, F., Jia, Y ., and Saurous,
R. A. Style tokens: Unsupervised style modeling, con-
trol and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.09017 , 2018.
Weide, R. L. The cmu pronouncing dictionary. URL:
http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict , 1998.
Zen, H., Dang, V ., Clark, R., Zhang, Y ., Weiss, R. J.,
Jia, Y ., Chen, Z., and Wu, Y . Libritts: A corpus de-
rived from librispeech for text-to-speech. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.02882 , 2019.

