==== Page 1 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-020-00247-z
SURVEY AND STATE OF THE ART
From federated learning to federated neural architecture search: a
survey
Hangyu Zhu1·Haoyu Zhang2,3·Yaochu Jin1,3
Received: 11 September 2020 / Accepted: 1 December 2020 / Published online: 4 January 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Federated learning is a recently proposed distributed machine learning paradigm for privacy preservation, which has found
a wide range of applications where data privacy is of primary concern. Meanwhile, neural architecture search has become
very popular in deep learning for automatically tuning the architecture and hyperparameters of deep neural networks. Whileboth federated learning and neural architecture search are faced with many open challenges, searching for optimized neural
architectures in the federated learning framework is particularly demanding. This survey paper starts with a brief introduction
to federated learning, including both horizontal, vertical, and hybrid federated learning. Then neural architecture searchapproaches based on reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms and gradient-based are presented. This is followed by
a description of federated neural architecture search that has recently been proposed, which is categorized into online and
ofﬂine implementations, and single- and multi-objective search approaches. Finally, remaining open research questions areoutlined and promising research topics are suggested.
Keywords Federated learning ·Deep learning ·Privacy preservation ·Neural architecture search ·Reinforcement learning ·
Evolutionary algorithm ·Real-time optimization
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made great success
in the ﬁelds of image classiﬁcation, natural language pro-
cessing, autonomous driving systems, and many others.
However, designing DNNs with high-quality architecturesusually requires to manually try a large number of different
hyperparameters, which is always a tedious task requiring
broad expertise in both machine learning and the applica-tion area. Therefore, neural architecture search (NAS) has
B Yaochu Jin
yaochu.jin@surrey.ac.uk
Hangyu Zhu
hangyu.zhu@surrey.ac.uk
Haoyu Zhang
zhy920816@sina.cn
1Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey,Guildford GU2 7XH, UK
2Engineering Research Center of Digitized Textile & Apparel
Technology, Ministry of Education, Shanghai 201620, China
3College of Information Science and Technology, Donghua
University, Shanghai 201620, Chinabecome increasingly popular in recent years [ 1], which aims
to automatically search for good neural architectures.
Conventional centralized learning systems, however,
require that all training data generated on different devices
be uploaded to a server or cloud for training a global model,
which may give rise to serious privacy concerns. To addressthis concern, federated learning [ 2] has been proposed to
protect user’s data privacy by communicating the model
parameters or other model information instead of the rawdata between the server and local devices. Naturally, per-
forming NAS in a federated learning environment becomes
of particular importance, although it is still in its infant stage.
This survey aims to provide an overview of research work
both on federated learning and neural architecture search,
focusing, however, on the emerging area of federated neu-
ral architecture search. We categorize federated learningsystems into ofﬂine and online approaches, where online fed-
erated neural architecture search is more challenging due to
additional requirements on the performance of the networksduring the search process and stronger constraints on the
computational resources. In addition, we brieﬂy discuss the
differences between single- and multi-objective search neu-ral architecture search methods to highlight different ways
123

==== Page 2 ====
640 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
of handling multiple objectives in federated learning, such as
accuracy, communication costs, model complexity and mem-ory requirements on the local devices. Finally, we outline the
main remaining challenges in federated neural architecture
search.
Federated learning
Federated learning [ 3] distinguishes itself from distributed
learning in three aspects. First, the main purpose of federated
learning is to protect user’s private information while dis-
tributed learning aims to accelerate training speed. Second,federated learning cannot determine the data distribution ofany client devices. By contrast, distributed learning is able to
arbitrarily allocate subsets of the whole learning data. Finally,
federated learning faces a more challenging training environ-ment as it may contain millions of unbalanced participating
clients whose connections to the server are probably unstable.
For example, edge devices like mobile phones are frequentlyofﬂine.
Federated learning is often categorized based on the distri-
bution characteristics of the data [ 2] which is originally used
in distributed learning. Strictly speaking, federated learningdoes not have the concept of ’the whole dataset’; therefore,
it is hard to accurately describe the federated data distribu-
tion to some extent as deﬁned in distribute learning. In thefollowing, we will discuss the data distributions in federated
learning in greater detail.
Horizontal federated learning
Horizontal federated learning is proposed for the scenarios inwhich datasets on the participating clients share the same fea-
ture space but have different samples. The name ’horizontal’originates from instance distributed learning [ 4]a ss h o w ni n
Fig. 1a, where the whole dataset is horizontally partitioned
over data samples and allocated to two clients. Similarly, asindicated by the part surrounded by the two dashed lines in
Fig. 1b, the data can be considered as horizontally partitioned
in federated learning, when different data are generated ondifferent clients that have the same attributes (features). For
instance, two hospitals in different regions may have differ-ent patients, although they performed the same tests for each
patients and collected the same personal information such as
the name, age, gender and address.
There are three main differences between instance dis-
tributed learning and horizontal federated learning. First, data
are typically independent and identically distributed (IID) in
distributed learning but may be non-IID in horizontal fed-erated learning. As mentioned before, distributed learning
is mainly designed for reducing the training time; there-
fore, designers can manually allocate every subsets of theclient data to be IID to enhance the convergence. However,
in horizontal federated learning, the central server has no
access to any raw data, which are usually non-IID on dif-ferent clients. Second, horizontal federated learning alwayscontains massive connected clients, but instance distributed
learning often does not have a very large number of workers,
because too many workers will worsen the performance ofdistributed training, when the total amount of data is ﬁxed
[5]. Finally, global model update mechanisms are slightly
different. In instance distributed learning, such as multi-GPU training (GPUs are always embedded inside a server,
communication effects can thus be ignored), a deep neural
network tends to synchronously update the global model oncethe local gradients of the mini-batch data are calculated, toensure the correct distributed model learning direction. This
global model updating approach is intrinsically not suited for
horizontal federated learning because frequent upload anddownload of data are not desirable due to the constraints on
the communication costs.
Typical horizontal federated learning (Fig. 2) algorithms,
such as the FedAvg proposed in [ 3], consist of the following
main steps.
1. Initialize the global model parameters on the server and
download the global model to every participating (con-
nected) clients.
2. Every connected clients learn the downloaded global
model on its own data for several training epochs. Once
completed, the updated model parameters or gradients
Fig. 1 Instance distributed
learning ( a) and horizontal
federated learning ( b)
123

==== Page 3 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 641
Fig. 2 Flowchart of federated learning. θis the global model parame-
ters, nkis the data size of client k,Kis the total number of clients and
tis the communication round in federated learning. We just initialize
global model parameters randomly at the beginning of the communica-tion round and use updated model parameters afterwards
(gradients here means the difference between the down-
loaded model and updated model) would be sent to the
server. Note that the clients may have different amountsof training data and unbalanced computational resources.As a result, the server is not able to receive the uploads
from different clients at the same time.
3. The server aggregates the received uploads (synchronously
or asynchronously) to update the global model.
4. Repeat the above two steps until convergence.
From the above steps, we can ﬁnd that the central server can
only receive model weights or gradients of the participating
clients and has no access to any local raw data. Therefore,users’ privacy is immensely protected in horizontal federated
learning.
The above steps of the horizontal federated learning algo-
rithm appear to be very similar to those in synchronous dis-
tributed systems. However, these two schemes have different
learning environments and purposes. Horizontal federatedlearning is performed in a more complex environment sincethe connected edge devices like mobile phones may become
frequently ofﬂine and the global learning performance cannot
be guaranteed. In contrast to federated learning, distributedlearning systems are often designed and run in a more stable
environment to ensure a good learning performance. Apart
from that, the purpose of federated learning is to protectlocal user’s private data, while distributed learning is mainly
designed to accelerate the learning speed.
Horizontal federated learning has three additional main
challenges compared to the traditional centralized learning:(1) it must reduce the communication resources as much as
possible, (2) it needs to improve the convergence speed, and(3) it must make sure that no private information is leaked
in passing the model information. Much research work has
focused on reducing communication costs, such as clientupdates sub-sampling [ 6–8] and model quantization [ 9,10].
More recently, Chen et al. [ 11] propose a layer-wise asyn-
chronous update algorithm to reduce the communication
costs by decreasing the update frequency of the deep lay-ers in the neural network. In addition, Zhu et al. [ 12]u s ea
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) to simulta-
neously enhance the model performance and communicationefﬁciency. Learning a good model in horizontal federated
learning is not an easy task since the training data on different
clients are usually non-IID, leading to possible model diver-gence. To solve this issue, Zhao et al. [ 13] empirically explore
the effect of non-IID data and provide a statistical analysis
of divergence. Li et al. [ 14] propose a FedProx algorithm to
alleviate negative impacts of the system’s heterogeneity byinjecting a proximal term into the original loss on each client.
Apart from it, an attentive aggregation method [ 15]i su s e d
to minimize the weighted distance between the server modeland client models on non-IID datasets.
The central server is often regarded as honest but curi-
ous (follow federated learning protocol but try to infer clientdata information) in horizontal federated learning, and therevealed gradients of each client may potentially leak the
data information [ 6]. For this reason, Phong et al. [ 16] math-
ematically prove that model gradients (especially the ﬁrsthidden weights) are proportional to the original data and
adopt additive homomorphic encryption [ 17] to encrypt and
protect model gradients. In their method, the secret key iskept conﬁdential to the server but known to all participating
clients and the central server can easily get the plain model
gradients as long as one of connected clients uploads its secretkey. In order to mitigate this issue, secure multiparty compu-tation (SMC) [ 18,19] is proposed to partition an intact secret
key into several key shards and each client can just hold one
shard. As a result, the server must get at least tshards ( tis
the threshold value) for decryption. Consequently, privacy
preserving is signiﬁcantly improved.
However, homomorphic encryption will increase the com-
putation load, and SMC consumes much more communica-
tion resources, since encrypted model weights need to be
downloaded and uploaded between the server and at least t
clients for partial decryption. Therefore, a more light-weightprivacy-preserving technique called differential privacy [ 20]
can also be used in horizontal federated learning. Such as
the methods used in [ 6,21], a Gaussian or Laplacian noise is
added to the gradients of each client before sending them to
the central server. Note, however, that the learning process
may be interrupted if the accountant [ 22] exceeds a pre-
deﬁned threshold value. Most recently, Truex et al. suggest a
123

==== Page 4 ====
642 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
hybrid approach that combines differential privacy together
with homomorphic encryption.
Vertical federated learning
In contrast to horizontal federated learning, vertical feder-
ated learning is applicable to the situations where the datasets
share the same sample space but have different feature space,as shown by part of surrounded by the dashed lines in Fig.3b. For example, two different ﬁnancial agents may have
the same customers but provide different services. Different
from horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learn-ing is similar to feature distributed learning [ 4] to some extent
which ’vertically’ partitions the training data, as shown in
Fig. 3a upon the feature space. Moreover, the central server
is often called a coordinator [ 23] in feature distributed learn-
ing or vertical federated learning since its main task is to
calculate the total loss rather than aggregating the uploadedweights.
V ertical federated learning is ﬁrst introduced in [ 23], in
which the overall framework contains one trusted coordinator
and two parties, where each party represents one client. Thecoordinator computes the training loss and generates encryp-
tion key pairs. Homomorphic encryption is adopted for the
privacy-preserving purpose and the effect of entity resolu-tion is also discussed. More recently, a two-party architecture
[24,25] is proposed by removing the trusted coordinator
which greatly reduces the complexity of the system. A typi-cal two-party framework of vertical federated learning usinga simple logistic regression model includes the following
steps:
1. Assume Party A contains the data labels. Party A creates
a homomorphic encryption key pair and sends the publickey to Party B. Both parties initialize their local modelparameters according to their feature dimensions of local
training data.
2. Both parties compute their local inner products of data
and the model. Then Party B sends its results to Party A.
3. Party A sums two inner products and calculates the loss
function by data labels. The loss is encrypted with a publickey and is sent to Party B. The model gradients of Party
A are also calculated.
4. Party B calculates the encrypted model gradients from the
received loss and encrypt. In addition, a random number
is encrypted and added to the encrypted gradients. Thesummation should be sent to Party A for decryption.
5. Party A uses a secret key to decrypt the summation value
and sends it to Party B.
6. Update both model parameters of the two parties.7. Repeat Step 2 to Step 6 until convergence.
In Step 3, the training loss is encrypted before being sent
to Party B, because it contains the information of the data
labels in Party A which cannot be revealed to Party B. As aresult, Party B needs to calculate its local model gradients onthe encrypted loss and a Taylor approximation is commonly
used [ 23,25] for simplifying this computation.
From the above discussions, we can see that vertical
federated learning is dramatically different from horizontal
federated learning. The central server in horizontal federated
learning is used for model aggregation, while in vertical fed-erated learning the server plays the role of calculating the loss
or collecting features. In addition, the server can be removed
in vertical federated learning, e.g., summing the training losswithin one of participating parties (clients). Apart from theabove, we often assume that not all parties contain the data
labels in vertical federated learning, e.g., only Client B con-
tains data labels in Fig. 3b and those parties with no data
labels are not able to update their models locally. Therefore,
we call the server ’coordinator’ that coordinates the feature
predictions from all parties for calculating the training lossin vertical federated learning.
Most studies of vertical federated learning only support
two parties (with or without a central coordinator) usinga simple binary logistic regression model. Feng et al. [ 26]
adopt the idea of multi-view learning to extend the previous
scheme into a multi-participant multi-class vertical federated
learning framework. Besides, Liu et al. introduce a federatedstochastic block coordinate descent algorithm, where all par-
ticipating parties update their local models for multiple times
to reduce the total number of communication rounds. In addi-
Fig. 3 Feature distributed
learning ( a) and vertical
federated learning ( b)
123

==== Page 5 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 643
Fig. 4 aSymmetric federated
learning, and basymmetric
federated learning
tion, Chen et al. propose an asynchronous vertical federated
learning method and differential privacy is also used for pri-vacy protection.
Hybrid federated learning
Hybrid federated learning is more realistic in the real worldand it assumes that datasets on different clients not onlyhave different sample spaces but also different feature spaces.
Therefore, in this scenario, different parties need to share the
data identity (ID) information to ﬁnd the intersection partfor distributed training, which is a threat to local clients’ pri-vacy. Since participants in hybrid federated learning are often
asymmetric [ 27], for instance, some participants are small
companies always requiring to protect their ID information,while some participants are large companies that have no
concern about the ID privacy. Symmetric federated learning
and asymmetric federated learning are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Secure ID alignment protocol is signiﬁcant for hybrid
federated learning, such as the commonly used Private Set
Intersection (PSI) protocol. In standard PSI, all participantswant to collaboratively ﬁnd the intersection (the part indi-cated by the dashed lines in Fig. 4) and keep unintersected
parts private. The PSI protocols can be implemented by a
classical public-key cryptosystem [ 28,29] or other similar
techniques.
Federated model training is similar to vertical federated
learning; however, for asymmetric federated learning, Gen-uine with Dummy (GWD) approach [ 27] is used to ensure
the correctness of computation results.
Neural architecture search
Since the quality of deep neural networks (DNNs) heav-ily depends on their architecture, increasing research efforts
have been committed to design of novel structures in thedeep learning community. However, manually designing
deep neural networks requires considerable expertise in the
ﬁeld of deep learning and the investigated problem, which isunrealistic for many interested users. Not until recently hasautomated machine learning (Auto ML), in particular neu-
ral architecture search (NAS) become very popular to allowinterested users without adequate domain knowledge to proﬁtfrom the success of deep neural networks. The framework of
NAS methods involves three dimensions [ 1], namely search
space, search strategies, and performance estimation strate-gies.
The search space is a collection of network architec-
tures, which has a major inﬂuence on the performance ofthe generated networks and search efﬁciency. The search
strategy deﬁnes the method used to automatically design the
optimal network architecture. To be speciﬁc, these searchstrategies can be divided into at least three categories: rein-forcement learning (RL), evolutionary algorithms (EAs), and
gradient-based (GD) methods. In addition, a few additional
methods, such as random search [ 30,31], Bayesian optimiza-
tion [ 32,33] and multinomial distribution learning [ 34], fall
outside of the above categories. The search strategy aims
at ﬁnding architectures that can obtain high performance onthe test dataset. To guide searches effectively, these strategies
utilize a performance estimation strategy to evaluate the qual-
ity of candidate architectures. Early work uses a simple wayof performance estimation, for example, by iteratively train-ing a candidate architecture on the training dataset with the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [ 35] and evaluating its per-
formance on the validation data [ 36–41]. Such an evaluation
strategy typically results in a prohibitively high computa-
tional cost. For example, to design a good performance of
neural network, the automatic evolving convolutional neuralnetwork (AE-CNN) [ 40] algorithm consumes 27 GPU-days
and the neural architecture search approach [ 36] consumes
22400 GPU-days on the CIFAR10 dataset. Because inefﬁ-cient search strategies require a large number of GPUs, manyNAS methods cannot be implemented given limited compu-
tational resources. To address these challenges, much recent
work dedicates to developing effective methods which canreduce the computational costs of performance evaluation,
e.g., surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs)
[33,42,43], information reuse [ 44,45], one-shot neural archi-
tecture search [ 46–50], among many others.
123

==== Page 6 ====
644 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
NAS based on reinforcement learning
Early work on NAS depends on RL to search for high-
performance neural architectures [ 36–38]. The design of a
network model is considered as an agent’s action, which spec-iﬁes the architecture of the network (i.e., a child model). Thenetwork is then trained and its performance on the validation
data is returned as the agent’s reward.
A policy gradient method has attempted to approximate
some nondifferentiable reward function to train a model
which needs parameter gradients. Zoph et al. [ 36,38]ﬁ r s t
adopt this algorithm in NAS to train a recurrent neural net-work (RNN) model that generates architectures. As is shown
in Fig. 6, the controller as a navigating tool to ﬁnd more
promising architectures in the search space. The originalmethod in [ 36] uses a macro-search space that generates the
entire network at once. As is shown in Fig. 5, the whole archi-
tecture consists of nsequential layers where the dashed lines
indicate skip connections. Hence, the macro-search spaceaims to design the entire CNN architecture in terms of the
number of hidden layers n, operations types (e.g. convo-
lution), network hyper parameters (e.g., the convolutionalkernel size), and the link methods (e.g. skip connections).
However, this method is expensive when the data set is large.
To reduce the computational cost, Zoph et al. [ 38] propose
a more structured search space, called micro-search space.The micro-search space only covers repeated smaller mod-
ules, called normal cell and reduction cell, and then connects
them together to form an entire network. As shown in Fig.5, these cells are built in complex multi-branch operations
(e.g. convolution). Each cell structure contains two inputsh[i−1]and h[i−2]coming from two previous layers.
Hence, the micro-search space aims to design structures ofthese two types of cells. In addition, the cell structures should
have a good capability of generalizing to other related tasks.
For example, the proposed method searches for optimal cellstructures on the CIFAR10 data set and transfers them to theImageNet data set by stacking together multiple copies of
this cell. After that, the NASNet [ 38] method is extended
to a multi-objective optimization variant to simultaneouslyoptimize the classiﬁcation performance and computational
cost using different scalarization parameters.
Q-learning [ 51], as a class of popular RL methods, has
been widely used for NAS. Baker et al. [ 52]e m p l o ya n /epsilon1-
greedy Q-learning strategy to train a policy that sequentially
chooses a type of layers (e.g. convolutional layer, poolinglayer, and fully connected layer) and their correspondinghyperparameters. Zhong et al. [ 53] extend this method to
a block-wise network generation approach, which designs
blocks with the same Q-learning paradigm. After that, theoptimal blocks are repeated and stacked to construct the
entire network architecture. To accelerate the search pro-
cess, a distributed asynchronous strategy and an early-stopapproach are adopted.
Parameter sharing introduced in efﬁcient NAS (ENAS)
[46] is a promising approach for speeding up the search pro-
cess for RL-based NAS methods, which treats architecturesas different sub-graphs (sub-net) of a larger graph (super-net)
and forces all sub-graphs to share a common set of weights
that have edges of this larger graph in common. Pasunuruet al. [ 54] propose a multi-task architecture search (MAS)
approach based on ENAS [ 46] for ﬁnding a cell structure that
Fig. 5 Illustration of the marco-
and micro-search spaces
123

==== Page 7 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 645
Fig. 6 An overview of
RL-based NAS method
performs well across multiple tasks. Hence, the cell struc-
ture generated by NAS can transfer to a new task. Bender
et al. [ 55] propose a thorough comparison between random
search NAS methods and ENAS [ 46] on a larger search
spaces for image detection and classiﬁcation tasks, respec-
tively. In addition, a new reward function is suggested, which
can effectively improve the quality of the generated networksand reduce the difﬁculty for manual hyperparameter tun-ing. Liu et al. [ 56] present a novel knowledge distillation
[57] approach to NAS, called architecture-aware knowledge
distillation (AKD), which ﬁnds student models (compressedteacher models) that are best for distilling the given teacher
model. The authors employ a RL-based NAS method with
a KD-guided reward function to search for the best studentmodel based on a given teacher model.
NAS based on EAs
EAs are a class of population-based, gradient-free heuristicsearch paradigms, which have been widely used in solving
various complex optimization problems [ 12,58–60]. His-
torically, EAs have already been used for simultaneousoptimization of the topology, weights of the connections
and hyperparameters of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
[61,62,62–64]. The neuroevolution with augmenting typolo-
gies (NEA T) algorithm [ 65] is one of the popular early
methods that have shown powerful performance. However,
the traditional approaches are not well suited for optimizingDNNs due to the complex network architectures and largequantities of connection weights. EA-based NAS approaches
to optimizing deep network architectures have started gain-
ing momentum again recently [ 66,67], mainly because they
can simultaneously explore multiple areas of the search space
and their relative insensitiveness to a local minimum [ 68,69].
Figure 7shows a generic framework of EA-based NAS algo-
rithms. Broadly speaking, the whole process of an EA-based
NAS algorithm follows the procedure of an EA contain-
ing at least four-steps: population initialization, offspringgeneration, ﬁtness evaluation, and environmental selection.Generally, each neural network in the search space is encoded
as a chromosome, and crossover and mutation operations
of the chromosomes are performed in the exploration. Then
each chromosomes is transformed into a corresponding neu-ral network, and iteratively trained on the training dataset.
The trained network is evaluated on the validation dataset to
get their ﬁtness value.
Xie et al. proposed a genetic CNN [ 39] method that
is one of the early studies using an EA for optimizing
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The genetic CNN
algorithm searches over the entire architecture space andemploys a ﬁxed-length binary string to represent the connec-
tion between a number of ordered nodes (e.g. a convolutional
operation). Although this early algorithm has some limita-tions, including a limited number of nodes as well as limited
sizes and operations of convolutional ﬁlters, the generated
structures have not only achieved competitive results on theCIFAR and SVHN datasets, but also shown excellent trans-ferability to the ImageNet dataset [ 70].
Miikkulainen et al. [ 71] propose a coevolution DeepNEA T
(CoDeepNEA T) method by extending the NEA T algorithm[65] to DNNs. In CoDeepNEA T, each neural network is
assembled by modules and blueprints. A coevolutionary
method is adopted that evolves two populations of modulesand blueprints separately, in which each module chromo-
some represents a small DNN. The blueprints chromosome
represents a graph where each node contains a pointer toa particular module species. The assembled networks aretrained and evaluated in an ordinary way of NAS. The ﬁtness
of the network is the average ﬁtness of the entire candidate
models containing the blueprints or modules. In addition,Liang et al. found that the CoDeepNEA T also achieves
promising performance in the Omniglot multi-task learning
domain [ 72].
In fact, the length of a chromosome usually represents
the depth of the corresponding neural network and a ﬁxed
encoding scheme may limit the performance of the optimizednetwork. To address this issue, some recent NAS algorithmshave attempted to use a variable-length encoding scheme.
123

==== Page 8 ====
646 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
Fig. 7 A generic EA-based
NAS framework
Real et al. [ 73] propose a large-scale evolutionary NAS
method, which utilizes a variable-length encoding method
in which the network architectures can adaptively changetheir depths. Sun et al. [ 40] propose an AE-CNN algorithm
that can fully automatically design CNN architectures, with-
out requiring any pre-processing or post-processing. Inspiredby the ResNet [ 74] and DenseNet [ 75], AE-CNN’s search
space is deﬁned by some predetermined building blocks,
including ResNet block and DenseNet block, max pool-ing layer and mean pooling layer. Then, the authors designan EA-based NAS framework, including the variable-length
encoding and a novel crossover and mutation operators based
on the variable-length encoding, as the search strategy tosearch the optimal depth of the CNN. Given the nature of
the variable-length encoding strategy, the algorithm employs
a repair mechanism that avoids to produce invalid CNNs.Inspired by directed acyclic graph (DAG), William et al.
[76] introduce a DAG-based encoding strategy, which can
represent CNNs of an arbitrary connection structure and anunlimited depth.
Suganuma et al. [ 77] propose a CGP-CNN algorithm to
design CNN architectures using genetic programming. The
search space of CGP-CNN is represented by a DAG, wherethe nodes represent either convolutional blocks or concatena-
tion operations. Then CGP-CNN uses the Cartesian genetic
programming (CGP) [ 78,79] encoding scheme to represent
network architectures and their connectivity. This encoding
scheme can represent variable-length network architectures
and skip connections.Most EA-based NAS methods aim at ﬁnding better topolo-
gies for DNNs while leaving the learning of weights to SGD.
It is known that the SGD optimizer heavily relies on the ini-tial values of the weights. To alleviate this problem, Sun et
al. [80] propose an EA-based NAS method, named Evolving
Deep CNNs (EvoCNN), to automatically design CNN archi-tectures and corresponding connection weight initialization
values without manual intervention. To reduce the search
space, two statistical measures, including the mean and stan-dard deviation of the connection weights, are encoded in thechromosome to represent tremendous numbers of the con-
nection weights. In addition, the incomplete training scheme
is employed to accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation. Accordingto the Occam’s razor theory [ 81], the number of connection
weights is also considered as an indicator to scale the quality
of candidate networks.
Sun et al. [ 41] use a genetic algorithm (GA) to design CNN
architectures (CNN-GA). In CNN-GA, the standard convo-
lutional layer is replaced by a novel building block, calledthe skip layer. The skip layer consists of two convolutionallayers and one skip connection. Hence, the genotype encodes
information of the skip layers and pooling layers. The fully
connected layers are discarded, mainly because they easilyresult in the overﬁtting [ 82].
Rather than generating the entire CNNs, the micro-search
space [ 46] has also been successfully employed by many
recent EA-based NAS algorithms [ 83–87]. Real et al. [ 85]
propose an extension of the large-scale evolution [ 73], called
AmoebaNet, which has achieved better results on ImageNetcompared with hand-designed methods for the ﬁrst time.
123

==== Page 9 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 647
Since EAs are a class of population-based search meth-
ods, the main computational bottleneck of EA-based NASapproaches lies in evaluating the ﬁtness of the individuals
by invoking the lower-level weight optimization. One such
evaluation typically takes several hours to days if the net-work is large and if the training dataset is huge. For instance,on the CIFAR10 datasets, the AE-CNN [ 40] consumed 27
GPU days, CNN-GA [ 41] consumed 35 GPU days, and the
large-scale evolutionary algorithm [ 73] consumed 2750 GPU
days, AmoebaNet [ 85] consumed 3150 GPU days. This seri-
ously limits the practical usability of most evolutionary NAS
methods under a constrained search budget.
Therefore, various techniques have been suggested to
accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation, such as information reuse
[44,47] and SAEAs [ 88]. SAEAs have been popular to solve
computationally expensive optimization problems, whichuse cheap classiﬁcation and regression models, e.g., radial
basis function networks (RBFNs) [ 89,90] and Gaussian pro-
cess (GP) models [ 91,92], to replace the expensive ﬁtness
evaluation [ 93]. Generally, the candidate networks are trained
from a few number of expensive ﬁtness evaluations, and then
the trained networks are used to build a ﬁtness predictors toreduce the cost of ﬁtness evaluations. In the area of evolution-
ary NAS, Swersky et al. [ 33] adopt Bayesian optimization
[94] to speed up evolutionary optimization, which is called
freeze–thaw Bayesian optimization. Unfortunately, this algo-rithm is based on Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling and
also suffers from high computational complexity. Sun et al.
proposed a performance predictor termed E2EPP , which isbased on a class of SAEAs method [ 43] meant for ofﬂine
data-driven evolutionary optimization of expensive engineer-
ing problems. Speciﬁcally, E2EPP builds a surrogate thatcan predict the quality of a candidate CNN, thereby avoid-
ing the training of a large number of neural networks during
the search process. Compared with AE-CNN, a variant ofAE-CNN assisted by E2EPP (called AE-CNN+E2EPP) canachieve a 2.3x and 2.1x reduction in GPU days on CIFAR100
and CIFAR10, respectively. Lu et al. [ 95] adopt two surro-
gates to address the bi-level NAS problem. On the one hand, aﬁne-tuning method is adopted at the weight level to improve
the efﬁciency of SGD training. On the other hand, an online
learning method is used to improve the sample efﬁciency forthe search space at the neural architecture level.
Knowledge inheritance [ 44,47] is another promising
approach to accelerate ﬁtness evaluations. Zhang et al. [ 44]
propose an EA based on asexual reproduction to ﬁnd bet-ter typologies for deep CNNs and knowledge inheritance to
reduce the computation cost. Once the topology of an off-
spring individual is generated by its parent, the weights ofoffspring networks are directly copied from its parents. For
edges that do not appear in its parent network, the weights
are randomly initialized.To reduce the computational burden for ﬁtness evalua-
tions, another widely adopted approaches are to train andevaluate individuals using proxy metrics [ 85–87]. The per-
formance of the proxy models is used as the surrogate
measurements to guide the evolutionary search. Such proxymetrics include reducing the width (the number of channels)and the depth (number of layers) for the intended network
architecture to create a small-scale network, shortening the
training time, reducing the resolution of input images, andtraining on a subset of the full training dataset. However,
these simple proxy model constructing methods may result
in a low correlation in prediction mainly because they mayintroduce biases in ﬁtness estimation. Zhou et al. [ 86]h a v e
conducted extensive experiments on different combinations
of proxy metrics to investigate their behaviors in maintainingthe rank consistency in NAS, based on which a reliable hierar-chical proxy strategy is proposed to accomplish economical
neural architecture search (EcoNAS). The hierarchical proxy
strategy aims at discarding less promising candidate individ-uals earlier with a fast proxy and estimates more promising
individuals with a more expensive proxy. Hence, the EcoNAS
method is able to achieve a 400 ×reduced search time in
comparison to AmoebaNet [ 85] without sacriﬁcing the per-
formance. Lu et al. [ 87] empirically establish the trade-off
between the correlation of proxy performance to true perfor-mance and the speed-up in estimation.
Evolutionary multi-objective NAS methods considering
multiple conﬂicting objectives have been reported. One of
the earliest evolutionary multi-objective methods to designCNNs is NEMO [ 96], which simultaneously optimizes clas-
siﬁcation performance and inference time of a network based
on NSGA-II [ 97]. Inspired by NEMO, Lu et al. [ 84] con-
sider classiﬁcation error and computational complexity as
the two objectives. In addition, they empirically test multiple
computational complexity metrics to measure the inferencetime of a network containing the number of active layers, thenumber of activating connections between layers, and the
number of ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs). And then, the
FLOPs are used as a second conﬂicting objective for opti-mization. Moreover, a Bayesian network (BN) is adopted to
learn the knowledge about promising architectures present
in the search history and then guide the future exploitation ingenerating new architectures. Subsequently, Lu et al. suggest
NSGANet-v2 [ 87], an extension of NSGANet [ 84], where a
comprehensive search space including more layer operationsand one more option that controls the width of the model isintroduced. Dong et al. [ 98] present a DPP-Net on the basis of
[99] that optimizes both GPU memory usage and the model
performance. Elsken et al. [ 100] proposed the LEMON-
ADE method, which formulates the NAS as a bi-objective
optimization problem that maximizes the performance and
minimizes the required computational resources. Inspiredby [101], LEMONADE reduces computational cost through
123

==== Page 10 ====
648 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
Fig. 8 A generic pipeline GD-based NAS method
a custom-designed approximate network morphisms, which
makes offspring individuals to share weights with their fore-runners, avoiding training new networks from scratch. Note
that evolutionary multi-objective structure optimization of
shallow networks can be traced back to a decade ago [ 102].
Lu et al. [ 103] proposed a method that integrates multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm and online transfer learning
for designing task-dependent network architectures trading-off model performance and computational complexity. The
authors ﬁrst train a task-speciﬁc one-shot model covering the
search space once, then specialized sub-models can be sam-pled from the search space without additional training. Andthen they adopt an online regressor as a surrogate model to
predict the performance of sub-models in the one-shot model.
NAS based on GD
Compared with the above gradient-free optimization meth-
ods, the GD-based methods (Fig. 8) have become increas-
ingly popular recently, mainly because their search speed
is much faster than RL-based and EA-based methods.Early GD-based methods [ 104–107] implement this idea for
optimizing layer hyperparameters or connectivity patterns,
respectively. Lorraine et al. [ 108] introduce an algorithm for
inexpensive GD-based hyperparameter optimization. Liu et
al. [109] employ GD in the DARTS algorithm, which opti-
mizes both the network weights and the architecture. Theauthors use relaxation tricks to make a weighted sum ofcandidate operations differentiable, and then apply the gra-
dient descent method to directly train the weights. Inspired
by DARTS [ 109], Dong et al. [ 110] introduce gradient-
based search using the differentiable architecture sampler
(GDAS) method. The authors develop a differentiable archi-
tecture sampler which samples individual architectures in adifferentiable way to accelerate the architecture search proce-
dure. Stochastic NAS (SNAS) [ 111] optimizes a probability
distribution of the connections between different candidateoperations. Li et al. [ 112] observe that models with a higherperformance during the search phase may perform worse in
the evaluation. Hence, they divided the search process intosub-problems and proposed sequential greedy architecture
search (SGAS) based on DARTS, which chooses and prunes
candidate operations (e.g. convolutional layers) greedily. Theauthors apply SGAS for CNNs and graph convolutional net-
works (GCNs) and have achieved competitive performance.
Xu et al. [ 113] present Partially-Connected DARTS (PC-
DARTS), which samples a small part of super-network to
reduce the redundancy in exploring the network space. Com-
pared with DARTS, PC-DARTS not only enjoys both fasterspeed and higher training stability but also a highly com-petitive learning performance. Gao et al. [ 114] propose the
ﬁrst GD-based NAS method in generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), called adversarial neural architecture search(AdversarialNAS), which can search the architectures of gen-
erator and discriminator simultaneously in a differentiable
manner.
One bottleneck of the above GD-based NAS methods (e.g.
DARTs) is that it requires excessive GPU memory during
search in that all candidate network layers must be explicitlyinstantiated in the GPU memory. As a result, the size of thesearch space is constrained. To address this issue, Wan et
al. [ 115] propose DMaskingNAS, a memory and computa-
tionally efﬁcient DARTS variant. DMaskingNAS employs amasking mechanism for feature map reuse. Hence, although
the search space of DMaskingNAS is expanded up to 10
14×
over conventional DARTS, memory and computational costsstay nearly constant.
Another way to address the above problem is to utilize
proxy tasks, e.g., learning with only a small number of build-ing blocks or training for a small number of epochs [ 109,111].
However, these approaches cannot guarantee to be optimal on
the target task due to the restricted block diversity [ 107]. Cai
et al. [ 107] proposed ProxylessNAS method, which directly
designs the networks based on the target task and hardware
instead of with proxy. Meanwhile, the authors used path bina-
rization to reduced the computational cost (GPU-hours and
123

==== Page 11 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 649
GPU memory) of NAS to the same level of normal train-
ing. Hence, ProxylessNAS algorithm can generate networkarchitectures on the ImageNet dataset without any proxy.
Most recently GD-based NAS methods are formulated
as bilevel optimization problems, However, He et al. [ 116]
observe that bilevel optimization in the current methods issolved based on a heuristic. For instance, solution of the
problem needs to get an approximation of the second-order
methods [ 109,110]. He et al. [ 116] demonstrate that the
approximation has a superposition inﬂuence mainly because
it is based on a one-step approximation of the network
weights. As a result, gradient errors may cause the algorithmto fail to converge to a (locally) optimal solution. Hence, the
authors propose mixed-level reformulation NAS (MiLeNAS)
that uses a ﬁrst-order method on the mixed-level formula-tion. Experimental results show that MiLeNAS has achievedhigher classiﬁcation accuracies than those achieved by the
original bilevel optimization methods.
Federated neural architecture search
Federated NAS aims to optimize the architecture of neu-
ral network models in the federated learning environment.
As discussed in section “Federated Learning”, distributed
model training is intrinsically more difﬁcult than central-ized training, and it becomes even more challenging for
NAS problems. In this section, we would like to introduce
the current research on federated NAS and discuss themfrom two perspectives: online and ofﬂine optimization, and
single- and multi-objective optimization. It should be noticed
that research on federated NAS work is presently limited tohorizontal federated learning and federated NAS in verticalfederated learning has not been reported so far.
Offline and online federated neural architecture
search
Most NAS methods include two steps, i.e., search the archi-
tecture of the neural network model, and training the weights
of the found neural network model afterwards. And most
importantly, only the ﬁnal performance matters. We deﬁnethese approaches as ofﬂine NAS, because the search andtraining steps are typically separate and only an optimized
network will be used. By contrast, online NAS requires that
the architecture optimization and weight training be done atthe same time, and some of the models must be used dur-
ing the search process. As a result, the performance of the
models during the optimization must be acceptable.
This concept can be easily extended to federated learning.
In other words, federated NAS systems in which neural archi-
tecture search and weight training of the global model mustbe performed simultaneously are called online or real-timefederated NAS, whilst federated NAS in which neural archi-
tecture search can be conducted at ﬁrst and then the weightsof the found models are trained are ofﬂine. Similarly, online
federated NAS requires that the neural network models can
be used during the optimization process.
For example, the method proposed in [ 12] is a typical
ofﬂine federated NAS framework using a multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm. An ofﬂine evolutionary federated
NAS algorithm can be summarized as follows:
1. Initialize parents with a population size Nand each indi-
vidual represents one architecture of the neural network.
Construct and train Nneural network models in federated
learning with all participating clients to achieve the ﬁtnessvalues (e.g., validation accuracy) of the parents.
2. Generate Noffspring individuals by applying genetic
operators on the parents. Construct and train all the gener-ated offspring models for ﬁtness evaluations in federated
learning.
3. Combine the parent and offspring populations into one
population and perform environmental selection. Select
the best Nindividual from the combined population as
the new parents.
4. Repeat the above two steps until the evolutionary algo-
rithm converges.
5. Train the weights of the optimized neural network models
in federated learning.
It can be seen that all participating clients are used for
federated model training, i.e., at each generation, all partici-
pating clients must train each of the Nindividuals for certain
rounds for ﬁtness evaluations, which signiﬁcantly increasesboth computation and communication costs. Client sampling
can be used to alleviate this issue, in which only subsets
of participating clients contribute to one individual’s modeltraining. For example in [ 117], all the connected clients are
divided into different groups and each sampled model use
one group of clients for local training. The overall process ofthis approach is summarized as follows:
1. Initialize the global model and a list of resource budgets
in the server.
2. Generate a list of simpliﬁed global models by model
pruning [ 118] based on the current global model. And
then these global models are distributed to different group
clients.
3. For each communication round, every group of clients
train their allocated group models for a number of pre-
deﬁned epochs and calculate the test accuracies on thevalidation datasets. Then both local test accuracies and
validation data sizes are uploaded to the server. The server
aggregates the uploaded local models and calculates aweighted accuracy for each group model. Remove α%
123

==== Page 12 ====
650 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
of global models with the worst test accuracies (removed
global models that will not be trained and updated fromthe next communication round). The remaining groups
of clients upload their calculated model gradients to the
server for aggregation.
4. Repeat the above step for a number of pre-deﬁned com-
munication rounds.
5. Replace and store the global model with the ﬁrst model
in the global model list.
6. Repeat the above four steps until convergence.
7. Perform federated training on any stored global model.
Although the above procedure uses different architecture
generation methods (model pruning) and search space com-
pared to the evolutionary approach, it is clearly a populationbased ofﬂine federated NAS framework (weight training and
architecture search are separate). In addition to client sam-
pling, the authors also remove subsets of global models tofurther reduce the communication costs. However, the test
accuracies of each global model in the list is calculated before
model aggregation, which sometimes cannot represent thereal test accuracies, especially for the cases when the clients’data are particularly non-IID.
The overall framework of Ofﬂine federated NAS is shown
in Fig. 9and it has two main difﬁculties: (1) the number
of communication rounds for federated model training of
each individual is hard to determine. Setting a small number
of communication rounds may make the individual’s modelunder-trained and bias the ﬁtness evaluations. On the other
hand, setting a very large number of communication rounds
consumes too many communication resources. (2) Train-ing the candidate neural network models consume additionalcommunication resources, which should be avoided in fed-
erated learning. For the above reasons, online federated NASframeworks need to be developed to solve the above issues.
Online federated NAS trains the model and does the archi-
tecture optimization simultaneously (shown in Fig. 10). To
the best of our knowledge, there are currently two approachesto online federated NAS. One is gradient-based method
proposed in [ 119], and the other is an EA-based method
proposed in [ 120]. The gradient-based method adopts the
idea of DARTS [ 109], which is implemented in the feder-
ated environment. The global model here is called supernet
which consists of repeated directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)and each DAG contains all candidate operations. And relax-
ation tricks [ 121] are used to make a weighted sum of the
candidate operations differentiable so that the architectureparameters can be directly updated by the gradient descentalgorithm. A brief description of this method is given below.
1. The server initializes the supernet and its architecture
parameters.
2. All connected clients download the supernet and its archi-
tecture parameters from the server.
3. Each client trains and updates the supernet with ﬁxed
architecture parameters on mini-batch training data at
ﬁrst. Then update the architecture parameters with ﬁxedmodel parameters on mini-batch validation data. These
two procedures are performed alternately within one local
training epoch.
4. After local training for several epochs, all participating
clients upload both model and architecture parameters to
the server. The server performs weighted averaging uponthe supernet and architect parameters.
Fig. 9 Overall framework of
ofﬂine federated NAS
123

==== Page 13 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 651
Fig. 10 Overall framework of online federated NAS. Client sampling
are often used to ensure all offspring models are evaluated within onecommunication round
5. Repeat from step 2 to step 4 until convergence.
Unlike aforementioned two ofﬂine federated NAS frame-
work, this scheme is not population based since all candidate
operations are jointly optimized. In addition, architecturesearch and weight training of the supernet model areconducted alternately during the period of federated train-
ing. Therefore, no additional communication resources are
required for training the candidate models. However, jointlyoptimizing the supernet on local clients requires much more
computation and memory resources, which is not well suited
for the edge devices like mobile phones.
To reduce the memory usage of local devices, a more
light-weighted real-time evolutionary NAS framework (RT-
FedEvoNAS) is proposed in [ 120]. Different from the previ-
ous gradient-based approach, RT-FedEvoNAS adopts modelsampling technique [ 47,122] in federated learning, where
only one path of repeated cells in the global model is sam-
pled and downloaded to local clients. As a result, both localcomputation and uploading costs are signiﬁcantly reduced.
The overall process is described as follows:
1. Initialize the supernet in the server. Generate the parent
population containing Nindividuals, each representing a
one-path subnet sampled from the supernet using a choicekey. Do client sampling to allocate Lclients evenly into
Ngroups.
2. Download the subnet of each parent individual to each
group of clients for training. Once the training is com-pleted, upload the Llocal subnets to the server for
aggregation to update the supernet model.
3. Generate Noffspring individuals using crossover and
mutation. Similarly, generate a choice key for each off-
spring individual to sample a one-path subnet from thesupernet. And then use client sampling technique to down-load sampled subnets (download the choice keys from the
second generation) for training and uploading the trained
subnets to the server for aggregation.
4. Download the supernet together with the choice keys of
all parent and offspring individuals to all participating
clients to evaluate the objectives. Upload all the objectivevalues to the server and calculate the weighted average of
the validation errors for each individual.
5. Combine the parent and offspring individuals into a whole
population. Perform environmental selection to select N
new parents.
6. Repeat Step 3 to Step 4 until the generation number
reaches the pre-deﬁne maximum value.
Since only one path of the supernet needs to be trained on
each client, this sampling approach can signiﬁcantly reduceboth upload and local computation costs. There is a smalldetail in Step 4 that downloads all the supernet model to every
client to calculate the validation accuracies; thus, only choice
keys are downloaded in the next generation since the wholesupernet has been already downloaded in the last generation.
Online methods enable federated NAS systems to perform
architecture search and train the model simultaneously. Bothﬁtness evaluation thresholds, e.g. the number of communi-
cation rounds in federated learning and extra communication
resources for training the searched models are not requiredusing online approaches, which are highly desired for feder-ated learning. However, the search space of online federated
NAS is fairly limited, which affects the diversity of the archi-
tecture search.
Single- and multi-objective search
The aforementioned gradient-based federated NAS frame-
work only considers and optimizes the model performances,
which is usually not enough for federated learning, becausefederated NAS is naturally a multi-objective optimizationproblem. In addition to the maximization of the model perfor-
mance, the payload (communication costs) to be transferred
between the server and clients should be minimized. Single-objective optimization often aggregates conﬂict objectives
into one objective using hyperparameters, while Pareto
approaches aim to obtain a set of models presenting trade-offrelationships between the conﬂicting objectives.
For example in RT-FedEvoNAS, the validation accuracy,
model size and model ﬂoating point operations per second(FLOPs) of the sampled subnets are considered as the objec-
123

==== Page 14 ====
652 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
tives need to be optimized and NSGA-II [ 97]i su s e da st h e
basic search algorithm. Finally, after several generations ofevolutionary optimization, multiple well trained subnets can
be obtained chosen from the trade-off solutions based on the
user’s preferences.
Open challenges
Currently, research on federated NAS is still very preliminaryand several challenges remain to be solved.
Horizontally partitioned data
There is no general solution that can well solve the non-IIDlearning degradation problems in horizontal federated learn-
ing, let alone in federated NAS. The earliest work to explore
non-IID data effect is proposed in [ 13]. The authors analyze
the possible reasons for divergence in global model training
on non-IID data and propose a strategy to mitigate this inﬂu-
ence by globally sharing a small part of the data across allconnected clients. However, this kind of data sharing intrin-sically violate the scope of privacy-preserving scheme.
The federated distillation approaches [ 123,124]a l s oh a v e
the potential risk of local data leakage. For the distillation, theteacher models are evaluated on mini-batches of unlabeled
data on the server and their logits for mini-batch are used to
train the student model on the server. The server can get alot of local data information even on fake mini-batch data
generated by local GAN generators [ 125].
Some statistical aggregation methods [ 14,126] are pro-
posed to replace the original federated averaging algorithm(FedAvg). Both mathematical and experimental results prove
that the proposed aggregation algorithms outperform the
FedAvg on non-IID data. However, these approaches areoften limited to some speciﬁc models and datasets, and it
is unclear if they can show better performance for federated
NAS frameworks. Hsieh et al. discuss the effect of non-IIDdata for DNNs in detail and different federated optimization
methods are used upon different DNNs, such as GoogleNet
[127],and ResNet [ 74]. Experiment results show that batch
normalization [ 128] performs really poorly on non-IID data,
but batch renormalization [ 129] and group normalization
[130] are much more robust for non-IID data, which are
much more suited for federated learning. Most recently, itis shown in [ 10] that ternary quantization is helpful in alle-
viating model divergence in federated learning, although its
effectiveness remains to be validated on federated NAS.
Vertically partitioned data
Current federated NAS methods are all based on horizontalfederated learning. Unlike horizontal federated learning, itis really hard to determine whether the data are IID or non-
IID in vertical federated learning since they are ’partitioned’towards the feature space.
Most existing vertical federated learning frameworks are
built on two-party systems using simple linear models. Sinceonly one party can hold the labels, the loss needs to be calcu-lated on ciphertext; otherwise, the label information will be
revealed. Then the gradients are very hard to calculate since
the total loss is encrypted. Some approximation techniqueslike Taylor expansions [ 23,25] are often used to simplify the
gradient calculations, which, however, may introduce strong
biases for complex models like DNNs.
Overall, vertical federated NAS is totally different from
horizontal federated NAS, which is in general still an unex-
plored research area.
Adversarial federated neural architecture search
Adversarial federated learning has two purposes: (1) infer-ence of the client data information; (2) attack the global
model to conduct backdoor [ 131] elements or even let the
model unusable. And the adversary in federated learning canbe one of participating clients or the central server, sincewe often assume the server is honest-but-curious. Thus, the
server should also be considered as a potential risk.
Federated learning is still fragile to white box attacks since
the model gradients and parameters still contain local data
information. Geiping et al. [ 132] showed that local images
can be reconstructed from the knowledge of model param-eters (or gradients) by inverting gradients techniques. In
addition, an adversarial GAN [ 125] generator can be devel-
oped on either the server [ 133] or the client side [ 134]. The
adversary can reconstruct other participating clients’ privatedata even if it has no knowledge of the label information.
Enthoven and Al-Ars [ 135] summarize most defence
strategies used in federated learning, which can be cate-gorized into three types: (1) subsample or compress the
communicated gradients [ 6,7,136]; (2) differential privacy
and SMC [ 19], and (3) robustness aggregation [ 137] using,
e.g., the Byzantine resilient aggregation rule [ 138,139].
In general, ﬁnding robust model architectures in federated
learning to defend against the adversarial attacks is still a hardtask.
Encrypted federated neural architecture search
Homomorphic encryption technologies are often applied to
prevent privacy leakage from the gradient information sent
to the server. However, using homomorphic encryption infederated NAS system has two main difﬁculties.
First, homomorphic encryption, including encoding and
encryption, is computationally expensive in federated learn-ing. At ﬁrst, all communicated model parameters need to
123

==== Page 15 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 653
be encoded into large inter numbers, because homomor-
phic encryption does not work on real numbers. Then theencoded parameters need to do modulus calculations with
large prime numbers one by one. Unfortunately, modern
deep neural network models contain millions of parameters,making the encryption process computationally extremelyintensive. Therefore, developing a light weighted encryption
method is an important yet challenging task for federated
learning, let alone for federated NAS.
Second, the original federated encryption is introduced
in which the server holds the public key and clients hold
the private key. This framework is unsafe, because only oneof clients uploads its secret key to the server. Therefore, a
more advanced SMC approach is adopted that divides the
whole secret key into several shards, and the server can-not decrypt the gradients unless it collected t(secret key
recover threshold) key shards. Unfortunately, the encrypted
gradients must be frequently transferred between the server
and clients, which signiﬁcantly increases the communica-tion costs, since the local clients can only partially decrypt
the gradients through their key shards. This is a big burden
to the communication resources, which needs to be solved inthe future.
Conclusion
In this survey paper, a brief overview of federated learningand NAS is provided, and a combination of both tech-niques, i.e., federated NAS is introduced. Given several
remaining challenges in both federated learning and NAS,
federated NAS becomes extremely challenging since manytechniques developed in centralized NAS are no longer suitedfor federated NAS, and NAS will be subject to more con-
straints introduced by the federated learning environment.
Two approaches to federated NAS are discussed, one isofﬂine optimization and the other is online optimization.
It is noted that ofﬂine evolutionary NAS methods are not
applicable for many real-world scenarios, mainly becausethe ofﬂine approach performs architecture search and weight
training separately and requires a large amount of communi-
cation costs. In addition, the performance of neural networkunder optimization must be acceptable for application andserious performance drop is not allowed. RT-FedEvoNAS
[120] offers a solution to the above challenges, although its
search space is highly constrained.
Despite that many grand challenges remain to be solved,
federated NAS is of paramount practical signiﬁcance for
many real-world problems, where handcrafted deep neuralnetworks may fail to work properly. We hope that this survey
will help understand the promises and challenges in federated
NAS, thereby triggering more research interests in devel-oping new theories and algorithms, thereby promoting theapplication of AI techniques to a wider range of ﬁelds where
data privacy and security is a primary concern.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Elsken T, Metzen JH, Hutter F (2018) Neural architecture search:
a survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05377
2. Yang Q, Liu Y , Chen T, Tong Y (2019) Federated machine learn-
ing: concept and applications. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol(TIST) 10(2):1–19
3. McMahan B, Moore E, Ramage D, Hampson S, Arcas BAy (2017)
Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decen-tralized data. Artif Intell Stat1273–1282
4. Zhang G-D, Zhao S-Y , Gao H, Li W-J (2018) Feature-distributed
svrg for high-dimensional linear classiﬁcation, arXiv preprintarXiv:1802.03604
5. McDonald R, Hall K, Mann G (2010) Distributed training
strategies for the structured perceptron. In: Human language tech-nologies: The 2010 annual conference of the North Americanchapter of the association for computational linguistics, 456–464
6. Shokri R, Shmatikov V (2015) Privacy-preserving deep learning.
In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC conference on com-puter and communications security, 1310–1321
7. Koneˇ cn`y J, McMahan HB, Y u FX, Richtárik P , Suresh A T, Bacon
D (2016) Federated learning: Strategies for improving communi-cation efﬁciency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492
8. Caldas S, Koneˇ cny J, McMahan HB, Talwalkar A (2018) Expand-
ing the reach of federated learning by reducing client resourcerequirements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07210
9. Han S, Mao H, Dally WJ (2016) Deep compression: Compress-
ing deep neural network with pruning, trained quantization andhuffman coding. In: 4th International Conference on LearningRepresentations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4,2016, Conference Track Proceedings, Y Bengio and Y LeCun,Eds., [Online]. arXiv:1510.00149
10. Xu J, Du W, Jin Y , He W, Cheng R (2020) Ternary compression for
communication-efﬁcient federated learning. IEEE Trans NeuralNetw Learn Syst
11. Chen Y , Sun X, Jin Y (2019) Communication-efﬁcient feder-
ated deep learning with layerwise asynchronous model updateand temporally weighted aggregation. IEEE Trans Neural NetwLearn Syst
123

==== Page 16 ====
654 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
12. Zhu H, Jin Y (2020) Multi-objective evolutionary federated learn-
ing. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 31(4):1310–1322
13. Zhao Y , Li M, Lai L, Suda N, Civin D, Chandra V (2018) Federated
learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582
14. Li T, Sahu AK, Zaheer M, Sanjabi M, Talwalkar A, Smith V
(2018) Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. arXivpreprint arXiv:1812.06127
15. Ji S, Pan S, Long G, Li X, Jiang J, Huang Z (2019) Learning
private neural language modeling with attentive aggregation. In:2019 International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN).IEEE, 1–8
16. Phong LT, Aono Y , Hayashi T, Wang L, Moriai S (2018) Privacy-
preserving deep learning via additively homomorphic encryption.IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 13(5):1333–1345
17. Armknecht F, Boyd C, Carr C, Gjøsteen K, Jäschke A, Reuter
CA, Strand M (2015) A guide to fully homomorphic encryption.Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/1192, https://eprint.iacr.
org/2015/1192
18. Lindell Y (2005) Secure multiparty computation for privacy pre-
serving data mining. In: Encyclopedia of Data Warehousing andMining. IGI Global, 1005–1009
19. Bonawitz K, Ivanov V , Kreuter B, Marcedone A, McMahan HB,
Patel S, Ramage D, Segal A, Seth K (2017) Practical secure aggre-
gation for privacy preserving machine learning. Cryptology ePrintArchive, Report 2017/281, https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/281
20. Dwork C (2008) Differential privacy: a survey of results. In:
International conference on theory and applications of modelsof computation. Springer, 1–19
21. Geyer RC, Klein T, Nabi M (2017) Differentially private
federated learning: a client level perspective. arXiv preprintarXiv:1712.07557
22. Abadi M, Chu A, Goodfellow I, McMahan HB, Mironov I, Talwar
K, Zhang L (2016) Deep learning with differential privacy. In:Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computerand Communications Security, 308–318
23. Hardy S, Henecka W, Ivey-Law H, Nock R, Patrini G, Smith
G, Thorne B (2017) Private federated learning on vertically par-titioned data via entity resolution and additively homomorphicencryption. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10677
24. Yang S, Ren B, Zhou X, Liu L (2019) Parallel distributed logis-
tic regression for vertical federated learning without third-partycoordinator. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09824
25. Liu Y , Kang Y , Xing C, Chen T, Yang Q (2020) A secure federated
transfer learning framework. IEEE Intell Syst
26. Feng S, Y u H (2020) Multi-participant multi-class vertical feder-
ated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.11154
27. Liu Y , Zhang X, Wang L (2020) Asymmetrically vertical federated
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07427
28. Freedman MJ, Nissim K, Pinkas B (2004) Efﬁcient private match-
ing and set intersection. In: Cachin C, Camenisch JL (eds)Advances in cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2004. Springer, BerlinHeidelberg, pp 1–19
29. Liang G, Chawathe SS (2004) Privacy-preserving inter-database
operations. In: Chen H, Moore R, Zeng DD, Leavitt J (eds) Intel-ligence and Security Informatics. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp66–82
30. Bergstra J, Bengio Y (2012) Random search for hyper-parameter
optimization. J Mach Learn Res 13(1):281–305
31. Li L, Talwalkar A (2020) Random search and reproducibility for
neural architecture search. In: Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelli-gence. PMLR, 367–377
32. Rasmussen CE (2003) Gaussian processes in machine learning.
Summer School on Machine Learning. Springer, New Y ork, pp63–71
33. Swersky K, Snoek J, Adams RP (2014) Freeze-thaw bayesian
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.389634. Zheng X, Ji R, Tang L, Zhang B, Liu J, Tian Q (2019) Multinomial
distribution learning for effective neural architecture search. In:Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on ComputerVision, 1304–1313
35. Bottou L (2012) Stochastic gradient descent tricks. Neu-
ral networks: tricks of the trade. Springer, New Y ork,pp 421–436
36. Zoph B, Le QV (2017) Neural architecture search with reinforce-
ment learning
37. Zoph B, Y uret D, May J, Knight K (2016) Transfer learn-
ing for low-resource neural machine translation. arXiv preprintarXiv:1604.02201
38. Zoph B, V asudevan V , Shlens J, Le QV (2018) Learning transfer-
able architectures for scalable image recognition. In: Proceedingsof the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, 8697–8710
39. Xie L, Y uille A (2017) Genetic cnn. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, 1379–1388
40. Sun Y , Xue B, Zhang M, Yen GG (2019) Completely automated
cnn architecture design based on blocks. IEEE Trans Neural NetwLearn Syst 31(4):1242–1254
41. Sun Y , Xue B, Zhang M, Yen GG, Lv J (2020) Automatically
designing cnn architectures using the genetic algorithm for image
classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Cybern
42. Zela A, Klein A, Falkner S, Hutter F (2018) Towards automated
deep learning: Efﬁcient joint neural architecture and hyperparam-eter search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06906
43. Sun Y , Wang H, Xue B, Jin Y , Yen GG, Zhang M (2019) Surrogate-
assisted evolutionary deep learning using an end-to-end randomforest-based performance predictor. IEEE Trans Evol Comput24(2):350–364
44. Zhang H, Kiranyaz S, Gabbouj M (2018) Finding better topolo-
gies for deep convolutional neural networks by evolution. arXivpreprint arXiv:1809.03242
45. Jin H, Song Q, Hu X (2018) Efﬁcient neural architecture search
with network morphism, vol. 9. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10282
46. Pham H, Guan MY , Zoph B, Le QV , Dean J (2018) Efﬁcient
neural architecture search via parameter sharing. arXiv preprintarXiv:1802.03268
47. Guo Z, Zhang X, Mu H, Heng W, Liu Z, Wei Y , Sun J (2020) Single
path one-shot neural architecture search with uniform sampling.In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision(ECCV)
48. Dong X, Yang Y (2019) One-shot neural architecture search via
self-evaluated template network. In: Proceedings of the IEEEInternational Conference on Computer Vision, 3681–3690
49. Li X, Lin C, Li C, Sun M, Wu W, Yan J, Ouyang W (2020)
Improving one-shot NAS by suppressing the posterior fading.
Proc IEEE/CVF Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 13(836–13):845
50. Y ou S, Huang T, Yang M, Wang F, Qian C, Zhang C (2020) Gree-
dyNAS: Towards fast one-shot NAS with greedy supernet. In:Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Visionand Pattern Recognition, 1999–2008
51. Watkins CJCH (1989) Learning from delayed rewards52. Baker B, Gupta O, Naik N, Raskar R (2016) Designing neural net-
work architectures using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprintarXiv:1611.02167
53. Zhong Z, Yang Z, Deng B, Yan J, Wu W, Shao J, Liu C-L (2020)
Blockqnn: Efﬁcient block-wise neural network architecture gen-eration. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and MachineIntelligence
54. Pasunuru R, Bansal M (2019) Continual and multi-task architec-
ture search. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of theAssociation for Computational Linguistics, 1911–1922
123

==== Page 17 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 655
55. Bender G, Liu H, Chen B, Chu G, Cheng S, Kindermans P-J,
Le QV (2020) Can weight sharing outperform random architec-ture search? an investigation with TuNAS. Proc IEEE/CVF ConfComput Vis Pattern Recognit 14(323–14):332
56. Liu Y , Jia X, Tan M, V emulapalli R, Zhu Y , Green B, Wang X
(2020) Search to distill: Pearls are everywhere but not the eyes.In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Visionand Pattern Recognition, 7539–7548
57. Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J (2015) Distilling the knowledge in
a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531
58. Back T (1996) Evolutionary algorithms in theory and practice:
evolution strategies, evolutionary programming, genetic algo-rithms. Oxford University Press, Oxford
59. Banzhaf W, Nordin P , Keller RE, Francone FD (1998) Genetic
programming—an introduction: On the automatic evolution ofcomputer programs and its applications, dpunkt. verlag and mor-gan kaufmann publishers Inc., San Francisco, California
60. Schmitt LM (2001) Theory of genetic algorithms. Theoret Com-
put Sci 259(1–2):1–61
61. Yao X (1999) Evolving artiﬁcial neural networks. Proc IEEE
87(9):1423–1447
62. Floreano D, Dürr P , Mattiussi C (2008) Neuroevolution: from
architectures to learning. Evol Intel 1(1):47–62
63. Stanley KO, D’Ambrosio DB, Gauci J (2009) A hypercube-
based encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks. Artiflife 15(2):185–212
64. Jozefowicz R, Zaremba W, Sutskever I (2015) An empirical
exploration of recurrent network architectures. In: Internationalconference on machine learning, 2342–2350
65. Stanley KO, Miikkulainen R (2002) Evolving neural networks
through augmenting topologies. Evol Comput 10(2):99–127
66. Galván E, Mooney P (2020) Neuroevolution in deep neural
networks: Current trends and future challenges. arXiv preprintarXiv:2006.05415
67. Darwish A, Hassanien AE, Das S (2020) A survey of swarm and
evolutionary computing approaches for deep learning. Artif IntellRev 53(3):1767–1812
68. Wang H, Jiao L, Yao X (2014) Two_arch2: an improved two-
archive algorithm for many-objective optimization. IEEE TransEvol Comput 19(4):524–541
69. Sun Y , Yen GG, Yi Z (2018) Igd indicator-based evolutionary
algorithm for many-objective optimization problems. IEEE TransEvol Comput 23(2):173–187
70. Russakovsky O, Deng J, Su H, Krause J, Satheesh S, Ma S, Huang
Z, Karpathy A, Khosla A, Bernstein M et al (2015) Imagenet largescale visual recognition challenge. Int J Comput Vis 115(3):211–252
71. Miikkulainen R, Liang J, Meyerson E, Rawal A, Fink D, Fran-
con O, Raju B, Shahrzad H, Navruzyan A, Duffy N et al (2019)Evolving deep neural networks. In: Artiﬁcial Intelligence in theAge of Neural Networks and Brain Computing. Elsevier 293–312
72. Liang J, Meyerson E, Miikkulainen R (2018) Evolutionary archi-
tecture search for deep multitask networks. In: Proceedings of theGenetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 466–473
73. Real E, Moore S, Selle A, Saxena S, Suematsu YL, Tan J, Le QV ,
Kurakin A (2017) Large-scale evolution of image classiﬁers. In:International Conference on Machine Learning, 2902–2911
74. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition, 770–778
75. Huang G, Liu Z, V an Der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ (2017)
Densely connected convolutional networks. In: Proceedings ofthe IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,4700–4708
76. Irwin-Harris W, Sun Y , Xue B, Zhang M (2019) A graph-
based encoding for evolutionary convolutional neural networkarchitecture design. In: 2019 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation (CEC). IEEE, 546–553
77. Suganuma M, Shirakawa S, Nagao T (2017) A genetic pro-
gramming approach to designing convolutional neural networkarchitectures. In: Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionarycomputation conference, 497–504
78. Harding S (2008) Evolution of image ﬁlters on graphics proces-
sor units using cartesian genetic programming. In: 2008 IEEECongress on Evolutionary Computation (IEEE World Congresson Computational Intelligence). IEEE, 1921–1928
79. Miller JF, Smith SL (2006) Redundancy and computational
efﬁciency in cartesian genetic programming. IEEE Trans EvolComput 10(2):167–174
80. Sun Y , Xue B, Zhang M, Yen GG (2019) Evolving deep convolu-
tional neural networks for image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans EvolComput 24(2):394–407
81. Rasmussen CE, Ghahramani Z (2001) Occam’s razor. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems, 294–300
82. Hawkins DM (2004) The problem of overﬁtting. J Chem Inf Com-
put Sci 44(1):1–12
83. Liu H, Simonyan K, Vinyals O, Fernando C, Kavukcuoglu
K (2018) Hierarchical representations for efﬁcient architecture
search. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
84. Lu Z, Whalen I, Boddeti V , Dhebar Y , Deb K, Goodman E,
Banzhaf W (2019) Nsga-net: neural architecture search usingmulti-objective genetic algorithm. In: Proceedings of the Geneticand Evolutionary Computation Conference, 419–427
85. E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y . Huang, and Q. V . Le, Regularized evo-
lution for image classiﬁer architecture search. In: Proceedings ofthe aaai conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 33, 2019, pp.4780–4789
86. Zhou D, Zhou X, Zhang W, Loy CC, Yi S, Zhang X, Ouyang W
(2020) EcoNAS: Finding proxies for economical neural architec-ture search. Proc IEEE/CVF Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit11(396–11):404
87. Lu Z, Whalen I, Dhebar Y , Deb K, Goodman E, Banzhaf W,
Boddeti VN (2019) Multi-criterion evolutionary design of deepconvolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01369
88. Jin Y (2011) Surrogate-assisted evolutionary computation: recent
advances and future challenges. Swarm Evol Comput 1(2):61–70
89. Broomhead DS, Lowe D (1988) Radial basis functions, multi-
variable functional interpolation and adaptive networks. RoyalSignals and Radar Establishment Malvern (United Kingdom).Tech. Rep
90. Baker B, Gupta O, Raskar R, Naik N (2017) Accelerating neural
architecture search using performance prediction. arXiv preprintarXiv:1705.10823
91. Jeong S, Murayama M, Yamamoto K (2005) Efﬁcient optimiza-
tion design method using kriging model. J Aircr 42(2):413–420
92. Dai X, Zhang P , Wu B, Yin H, Sun F, Wang Y , Dukhan M, Hu
Y , Wu Y , Jia Y et al (2019) Chamnet: Towards efﬁcient networkdesign through platform-aware model adaptation, 11 398–11 407
93. Wang H, Jin Y , Doherty J (2017) Committee-based active learning
for surrogate-assisted particle swarm optimization of expensiveproblems. IEEE Trans Cybern 47(9):2664–2677
94. Shahriari B, Swersky K, Wang Z, Adams RP , De Freitas N (2015)
Taking the human out of the loop: a review of bayesian optimiza-tion. Proc IEEE 104(1):148–175
95. Lu Z, Deb K, Goodman E, Banzhaf W, Boddeti VN (2020)
Nsganetv2: Evolutionary multi-objective surrogate-assisted neu-ral architecture search. In: Proceedings of the European Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ECCV)
96. Kim Y -H, Reddy B, Y un S, Seo C (2017) Nemo: Neuro-evolution
with multiobjective optimization of deep neural network for speedand accuracy. In: ICML 2017 AutoML Workshop
123

==== Page 18 ====
656 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
97. Deb K, Pratap A, Agarwal S, Meyarivan T (2002) A fast and
elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE Trans EvolComput 6(2):182–197
98. Dong J-D, Cheng A-C, Juan D-C, Wei W, Sun M (2018) Dpp-
net: Device-aware progressive search for pareto-optimal neuralarchitectures. In: Proceedings of the European Conference onComputer Vision (ECCV), 517–531
99. Liu C, Zoph B, Neumann M, Shlens J, Hua W, Li L-J, Fei-Fei
L, Y uille A, Huang J, Murphy K (2018) Progressive neural archi-tecture search. In: Proceedings of the European Conference onComputer Vision (ECCV), 19–34
100. Elsken T, Metzen JH, Hutter F (2018) Efﬁcient multi-objective
neural architecture search via lamarckian evolution. arXiv preprintarXiv:1804.09081
101. Wei T, Wang C, Rui Y , Chen CW (2016) Network morphism. In:
International Conference on Machine Learning, 564–572
102. Jin Y , Sendhoff B (2008) Pareto-based multiobjective machine
learning: an overview and case studies. IEEE Trans Syst ManCybern Part C (Applications and Reviews) 38(3):397–415
103. Lu Z, Sreekumar G, Goodman E, Banzhaf W, Deb K, Bod-
deti VN (2020) Neural architecture transfer. arXiv preprintarXiv:2005.05859
104. Shin R, Packer C, Song D (2018) Differentiable neural network
architecture search
105. Ahmed K, Torresani L (2018) askconnect: Connectivity learning
by gradient descent. In: Proceedings of the European Conferenceon Computer Vision (ECCV), 349–365
106. Fang J, Sun Y , Zhang Q, Li Y , Liu W, Wang X (2020) Densely con-
nected search space for more ﬂexible neural architecture search.In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Visionand Pattern Recognition, pp. 10 628–10 637
107. Cai H, Zhu L, Han S (2018) ProxylessNAS: Direct neural archi-
tecture search on target task and hardware. In: InternationalConference on Learning Representations
108. Lorraine J, Vicol P , Duvenaud D (2020) Optimizing millions of
hyperparameters by implicit differentiation. In: International Con-ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 1540–1552
109. Liu H, Simonyan K, Yang Y (2018) Darts: Differentiable archi-
tecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055
110. Dong X, Yang Y (2019) Searching for a robust neural architecture
in four gpu hours. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition, 1761–1770
111. Xie S, Zheng H, Liu C, Lin L (2018) SNAS: stochastic neu-
ral architecture search. In: International Conference on LearningRepresentations
112. Li G, Qian G, Delgadillo IC, Muller M, Thabet A, Ghanem
B (2020) Sgas: Sequential greedy architecture search. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 1620–1630
113. Xu Y , Xie L, Zhang X, Chen X, Qi G-J, Tian Q, Xiong H
(2019) Pc-darts: Partial channel connections for memory-efﬁcientarchitecture search. In: International Conference on LearningRepresentations
114. Gao C, Chen Y , Liu S, Tan Z, Yan S (2020) AdversarialNas:
Adversarial neural architecture search for GANs. In: Proceedingsof the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and PatternRecognition, 5680–5689
115. Wan A, Dai X, Zhang P , He Z, Tian Y , Xie S, Wu B, Y u M, Xu
T, Chen K et al (2020) Fbnetv2: differentiable neural architecturesearch for spatial and channel dimensions. Proc IEEE/CVF ConfComput Vis Pattern Recognit 12(965–12):974116. He C, Ye H, Shen L, Zhang T (2020) Milenas: efﬁcient
neural architecture search via mixed-level reformulation. ProcIEEE/CVF Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 11(993–12):002
117. Xu M, Zhao Y , Bian K, Huang G, Mei Q, Liu X (2020) Neu-
ral architecture search over decentralized data. arXiv preprintarXiv:2002.06352
118. Luo J-H, Wu J, Lin W (2017) Thinet: A ﬁlter level pruning method
for deep neural network compression. In: Proceedings of the IEEEinternational conference on computer vision, 5058–5066
119. He C, Annavaram M, Avestimehr S (2020) Fednas: Feder-
ated deep learning via neural architecture search. arXiv preprintarXiv:2004.08546
120. Zhu H, Jin Y (2020) Real-time federated evolutionary neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02793
121. Trick MA (1992) A linear relaxation heuristic for the generalized
assignment problem. Naval Res Logist (NRL) 39(2):137–151
122. Bender G, Kindermans P-J, Zoph B, V asudevan V , Le Q (2018)
Understanding and simplifying one-shot architecture search. In:International Conference on Machine Learning, 550–559
123. Jeong E, Oh S, Kim H, Park J, Bennis M, Kim S-L (2018)
Communication-efﬁcient on-device machine learning: Federateddistillation and augmentation under non-iid private data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.11479
124. Lin T, Kong L, Stich SU, Jaggi M (2020) Ensemble distilla-
tion for robust model fusion in federated learning. arXiv preprintarXiv:2006.07242
125. Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley
D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) Generative adversar-ial nets. In: Advances in neural information processing systems,2672–2680
126. Mohri M, Sivek G, Suresh A T (2019) Agnostic federated learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00146
127. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y , Sermanet P , Reed S, Anguelov D, Erhan
D, V anhoucke V , Rabinovich A (2015) Going deeper with con-volutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computervision and pattern recognition, 1–9
128. Ioffe S, Szegedy C (2015) Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. arXivpreprint arXiv:1502.03167
129. Ioffe S (2017) Batch renormalization: Towards reducing mini-
batch dependence in batch-normalized models. In: Advances inneural information processing systems, 1945–1953
130. Wu Y , He K (2018) Group normalization. In: Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 3–19
131. Bagdasaryan E, V eit A, Hua Y , Estrin D, Shmatikov V (2020)
How to backdoor federated learning, ser. Proceedings of MachineLearning Research, S. Chiappa and R. Calandra, Eds., vol. 108.
Online: PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020, pp. 2938–2948. [Online]. http://
proceedings.mlr.press/v108/bagdasaryan20a.html
132. Geiping J, Bauermeister H, Dröge H, Moeller M (2020) Inverting
gradients–how easy is it to break privacy in federated learning?arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14053
133. Wang Z, Song M, Zhang Z, Song Y , Wang Q, Qi H (2019) Beyond
inferring class representatives: User-level privacy leakage fromfederated learning. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conferenceon Computer Communications. IEEE, 2512–2520
134. Hitaj B, Ateniese G, Perez-Cruz F (2017) Deep models under the
gan: information leakage from collaborative deep learning. In:Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computerand Communications Security, 603–618
135. Enthoven D, Al-Ars Z (2020) An overview of federated deep
learning privacy attacks and defensive strategies. arXiv preprintarXiv:2004.04676
123

==== Page 19 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 657
136. Y oon J, Jeong W, Lee G, Yang E, Hwang SJ (2020) Federated
continual learning with adaptive parameter communication. arXivpreprint arXiv:2003.03196
137. Pillutla K, Kakade SM, Harchaoui Z (2019) Robust aggregation
for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13445
138. Lamport L, Shostak R, Pease M (2019) The byzantine generals
problem. In: Concurrency: the Works of Leslie Lamport, 203–226139. Mhamdi EME, Guerraoui R, Rouault S (2018) The hidden vul-
nerability of distributed learning in byzantium. arXiv preprintarXiv:1802.07927
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123

