==== Page 1 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-023-00982-6
governance of robotics and AI. A prominent example in this 
context is the European Union (EU), where the anticipatory 
governance of robotics and AI has been on the agenda for 
almost a decade. In recent years, the European Commission 
has expressed its aspirations to maintain a strong empha -
sis on ethical approaches in its policy-making and strategy 
development around robotics and AI technologies. The 
EU’s stance is currently characterized by an emphasis on the 
need to build trust in autonomous systems while promoting 
a human-centred technology development trajectory that is 
grounded in ethical reasoning. As such, the EU has gener -
ally occupied a leading role in the worldwide discussion on 
the governance of autonomous systems in general [ 1].
The aim of this paper is to provide critical but construc -
tive insight into the current discursive frame within which 
EU robotics and AI policy-making plays out in terms of this 
ethics narrative. While scrutinizing how this narrative has 
emerged in EU robotics and AI policy-making, the paper 
looks critically at the ways in which the EU’s policy plans 1 Introduction
Autonomous systems with interactive capabilities are cur -
rently encountering a wide range of expectations regard -
ing their anticipated future impact. Examples can be found 
in expressions of both excitement and fear about these 
systems’ autonomy, their potentially deceptive anthropo -
morphism, their impact on privacy and so on. As a result 
of these expectations, there are currently many concerns 
about the potential socially disruptive impacts of increas -
ing interaction between humans and autonomous systems. 
In order to mitigate these concerns, there have been grow -
ing deliberations on the use of ethical approaches in the 
 Jesse de Pagter
jesse.de.pagter@tuwien.ac.at
1 Institute for Management Science, TU Wien, 
Theresianumgasse 27, Vienna, AustriaAbstract
In recent years, the European Union has made considerable efforts to develop dedicated strategies and policies for the 
governance of robotics and AI. An important component of the EU’s approach is its emphasis on the need to mitigate the 
potential societal impacts of the expected rise in the interactive capacities of autonomous systems. In the quest to define 
and implement new policies addressing this issue, ethical notions have taken an increasingly central position. This paper 
presents a concise overview of the integration of this ethics narrative in the EU’s policy plans. It demonstrates how the 
ethics narrative aids the definition of policy issues and the establishment of new policy ideas. Crucially, in this context, 
robotics and AI are explicitly understood as emerging technologies. This implies many ambiguities about their actual 
future impact, which in turn results in uncertainty regarding effective implementation of policies that draw on the ethics 
narrative. In an effort to develop clearer pathways towards the further development of ethical notions in AI and robotics 
governance, this paper understands human-robot interaction (HRI) research as a field that can play an important role in 
the implementation of ethics. Four different complementary pathways towards ethics integration in (HRI) research are 
proposed, namely: providing insights for the improvement of ethical assessment, further research into the moral compe -
tence of artificial agents, engage in value-based design and implementation of robots, and participation in discussions on 
building ethical sociotechnical systems around robots.
Keywords  European Union · Human-Robot Interaction · Robot and AI Ethics · Robotics and AI Governance · Trust in 
RobotsAccepted: 15 February 2023 / Published online: 7 March 2023
© The Author(s) 2023From EU Robotics and AI Governance to HRI Research: Implementing 
the Ethics Narrative
Jesse de Pagter1
1 3

==== Page 2 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295can become manifested in research and development. Spe -
cifically, I focus on human-robot interaction (HRI) research, 
as a crucial field for studying interactions with embodied 
autonomous systems. In short, the main point of the paper 
is that on the one hand, policy-making narratives can be 
instrumental for achieving systemic changes towards build -
ing more inclusive, trustworthy technologies. However, on 
the other hand, in order to achieve this change there is a 
clear need to invest in further ethics implementation in HRI 
and social robotics research. In this way, the ethics narrative 
can both be deepened and broadened. By developing this 
argument, the paper focuses on the interface between robot 
ethics, robotics governance and HRI research. As such, the 
main underlying challenge of this paper is to draw connec -
tions between two different components: on the one hand, 
the portrayal and understanding of robotics and AI technol -
ogies as (future) objects of EU ethical governance, and on 
the other hand, the implementation of ethical deliberations 
in HRI research.
The outline of the paper is as follows: Sect. 2 provides a 
short overview of current developments regarding the role 
of the ethics narrative in the EU robotics and AI strategy. 
This is done by providing insight into the main themes from 
a range of different policy documents published by the EU 
in recent years. Section 3 provides a critical reflection by 
questioning the ethics narrative’s uptake in policy-making 
discourse, while providing more context regarding its his -
tory in the anticipatory governance of emerging technolo -
gies. Based on that, the main argument of this section is 
developed, namely that it is important to see the ethics nar -
rative as a shared effort between policy-makers and tech -
nical experts (e.g. HRI researchers). Departing from that 
argument, Sect. 4 provides four different pathways that can 
help to establish further ethics implementation in robotics 
and HRI research. To wrap up, the conclusion provides final 
remarks about the further development of ethical approaches 
and their role in shaping the future of a society with interac -
tive autonomous systems.
2 The Ethics Narrative in EU Robotics & AI 
Policy-Making
As indicated above, this paper analyzes the rise of ethics 
in EU policy-making using a narrative approach. First of 
all, this type of analysis posits that these policy-making 
processes develop against a background of ongoing nego -
tiations and disputes [ 2]. In this setting, narratives can be 
considered a driving factor behind the arguments and jus -
tifications used to establish newly developed policy plans. 
Tracing the emergence of a narrative framework is a com -
mon method of analysis in theories of policy change in fields such as political science, public administration and 
governance studies [ 3–5]. As such, it provides insight into 
the way something emerges on the agenda as a distinguish -
able policy problem that can be monitored and controlled 
via policy-making efforts [ 6]. Thus, the conceptualization of 
policy discourses as narratives and their subsequent analy -
sis helps to describe how policy-making on a specific topic 
develops over time, which is also the goal of this section.
Narratives that drive the definition of new policy ideas 
can evolve considerably, especially when policy plans 
develop quickly. In terms of empirical access to these narra -
tives, this can sometimes be a rather fuzzy process charac -
terized by a state of continuous development. Particularly, 
important to consider in this regard is that the directions in 
which the definitions of policy problems and policy ideas 
evolve can be very much influenced by stakeholders in 
the policy-making process, such as lobbyists, (academic) 
experts and so on [ 7, 8]. In other words, EU robotics and 
AI governance in its current state is still in a process of 
configuration. Among other things, this means that many 
specificities of the policies are explicitly understood as not 
yet fully developed. Furthermore, it also means that during 
this process of configuration, certain (potential) characteris -
tics and impacts of current and future autonomous systems 
are becoming defined as specific policy problems. Look -
ing at policy-making in such a manner has consequences 
for this paper: rather than taking statements about ethics at 
face value and analyzing what their consequences are, the 
very notion and use of ethics itself is explicitly analyzed as 
a policy-making narrative that is under development.
The present section provides insight into the rise of ethi -
cal notions in EU robotics and AI policy through a narra -
tive analysis of policy documents, including both foresight 
reports from expert bodies as well as documents that define 
official EU policy and legislation. Whereas the former are 
usually based on expert statements and do not represent an 
official policy position of the European Parliament or Euro -
pean Commission, they have nevertheless been included 
since they provide important insights into the underlying 
argumentation behind the EU’s policy narratives. For the 
first two subsections below, these documents were selected 
by going through the EU document databases using robo* as 
the main search term, while also selectively going through 
results based on the search term automat* in order to make 
sure documents that have a close relation to the topic of 
robotization were not excluded. For the latter two subsec -
tions, it is important to note that policy-making itself shifted 
towards paying increased attention to the impact of large-
scale autonomous systems. An important consequence of 
this was that the EU’s governance plans were increasingly 
defined based on large-scale AI strategy plans. From this 
period, all documents from the European Commission and 
1 31282

==== Page 3 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295European Parliament defining or altering this strategy have 
been included. Important to realize in this case is that even 
though the EU has increasingly started to use the term “AI” 
to refer to its robotics and AI strategy, the focus of the paper 
in general is still on robotic technologies, since the latter 
sections focus on the role of HRI research. The resulting 
insights describe how the EU represents the issues, goals 
and instruments of (future) robotics and AI governance. The 
method was designed to trace the different elements that 
make up the different potential issues, goals and instruments 
of governance.
2.1 Fostering Robotics Development and Managing 
its Economic Impact
In terms of robotics governance, policy-makers’ interest in 
these technologies is certainly not new. In fact, there are sev -
eral regulatory areas in which specific issues with respect to 
robotic technologies have been regulated for many years. 
Furthermore, predecessors to current robotic technologies 
have been around for more than half a century, and as such, 
they have been part of the EU’s economic, industrial, and 
research policies in recent decades. In order to improve the 
competitive situation and foster consolidated approaches to 
technological and economic growth, the EU has made mul -
tiple efforts to develop and support specific strategic initia -
tives. For instance, in 2000, the European Robotics Research 
Network (EURON) was founded in order to encourage and 
promote research, education and technology transfer in the 
field of robotics [ 9]. Interestingly, attempts to include robot 
ethics in robotics policy were also made here, based on Isaac 
Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics and mainly aiming to 
develop a taxonomy of potential ethical issues. Even though 
the content is not yet defined in much detail, many issues are 
already present, such as reliability and predictability, trace -
ability of robot actions as well as issues around safety and 
security [ 10]. Furthermore, in 2005, the European Robot -
ics Platform (EUROP) was founded and functioned as an 
industry-driven initiative to strengthen the EU’s competitive 
position in robotics research and development [ 11].
Furthermore, in terms of economic and societal impact, 
the increasing uptake of robots has long been a topic of 
EU (macro-)economic policy-making. In a range of fore -
sight documents from the last decade, different EU insti -
tutions and bodies have taken up various broader themes 
in relation to robots and their potential impact on society 
[12–15]. Such foresight studies generally maintain a strong 
focus on how new types of (mostly industrial) robots could 
be deployed in the near future, while also paying attention 
to the macroeconomic effects of this increase in automa -
tion. Foresight concerning these topics mostly focus on 
issues like the potential effects of robots on employment, while simultaneously emphasizing the positive potential of 
robotization for economic growth. In this way, a narrative is 
shaped which establishes (industrial) robots as potentially 
problematic in terms of socioeconomic impact, while simul -
taneously mitigating this impact because of the expected 
economic growth, which has the potential to foster a gen -
eral increase in welfare and employment. Furthermore, such 
studies often emphasize topics like potential re-shoring and 
the general strengthening of the EU’s industrial sector as an 
important effect of the increased implementation of robots.
2.2 The Ethics of Autonomous Systems as a Topic of 
Concern
Whereas the impact of robotics innovations has long been 
a theme in different types of governance, the explicit rise in 
attention paid to ethical issues surrounding robotics and AI 
in the EU policy-making context can be seen as more recent 
(even though it has been around for much longer in aca -
demic circles). Attention to ethical themes in this realm of 
EU policy-making was rather marginal before 2015, but has 
since evolved to become much more prominent. An impor -
tant development in that regard are several reports by expert 
bodies of the European Parliament and European Commis -
sion. For instance, in 2016, the European Parliament’s Panel 
for the Future of Science and Technology ( STOA ) issued a 
report titled ‘Ethical Aspects of Cyber-Physical Systems’ 
[16]. This report identifies in detail the impacts of and issues 
with cyber-physical systems in general, while also paying 
substantial attention to various types of robots in a range 
of areas of applications. In terms of what this study under -
stands to be important ethical issues, the most prominent 
are concerns about privacy infringement, questions regard -
ing liability and accountability with respect to autonomous 
machines, safety issues and health issues. Ethical issues 
are thus framed in terms of clearly definable problems that 
require specific legislative solutions.
A pivotal development for the further definition of robots 
and AI as a potential policy problem was when a new consen -
sus started to take shape around potentially unprecedented 
forms of artificial agency. A general trigger moment for the 
discussion regarding the position of interactive robots (and 
other artificial agents) in EU policy-making was the Euro -
pean Parliament resolution of 16 February 2017 entitled 
‘Civil Law Rules on Robotics’ [ 17]. The ideas expressed 
in this resolution had been informed by studies from the 
Parliament’s Scientific Foresight Unit, the European Parlia -
ment Research Service and the Committee on Legal Affairs 
[16, 18]. Generally, in the EP resolution, there is a strong 
focus on the expected impacts of AI and AI-powered robots 
in society, while autonomous features of these systems play 
a central role in the way they are problematized. It is in 
1 31283

==== Page 4 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295the European Commission (Juncker Commission) and 
its affiliated institutions also started to explicitly focus on 
robotics and AI as policy issues that required both dedicated 
policies as well as a consolidated strategy for technological 
research and development [ 20, 21]. Within a few years, the 
process of trust-building and the role of ethics in this process 
became important components of policy ideas with respect 
to an anticipatory governance and development strategy 
for robotics and AI. The Commission generally focused on 
those issues under the banner of AI technology, but robots 
were part and parcel of the considerations. This can partially 
be explained by the increased hype and buzzwords around 
AI technology that arose around that time.
An important development in the further establishment 
of a dedicated strategy on robotics and AI was in June 2018, 
when the European Commission established the indepen -
dent High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI 
HLEG). This group consisted of 52 experts from a range of 
different backgrounds. The group’s mission was to advise 
the European Commission concerning the potentials and 
challenges of autonomous systems and support the imple -
mentation of a new EU strategy on robotics and AI. Soci -
etal issues were evidently considered a prominent topic 
not only in the group’s mission but also in its composition, 
since quite a number of members were recognized experts 
in areas related to such issues.
2.3 Towards a Coordinated EU Robotics & AI 
Strategy
After its establishment, the AI HLEG published several 
deliverables, the most important of which was the ‘Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’ published in 2019. The doc -
ument provides four ethical principles (respect for human 
autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness, explicability) that 
form the foundation of trustworthy robotics and AI. Further -
more, it lists seven key requirements (human agency and 
oversight, technical robustness and safety, privacy and data 
governance, transparency, diversity, non-discrimination 
and fairness, environmental and societal well-being, and 
accountability) for the realization of trustworthy AI [ 22]. An 
important key argument in this deliverable is that trust in 
robotics and AI can be built through regulation, legislation 
and standardization efforts, while also emphasizing a need 
to pay increased attention to topics like participation and 
inclusivity. Partly based on the key requirements from the 
first deliverable, a second deliverable was published, called 
‘Policy and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy 
AI’ [ 23]. The group also provided an ‘Assessment List for 
Trustworthy AI’, which included a web-based version of 
the assessment list [ 24]. Finally, a deliverable on ‘Sectoral this context that the use of ethical approaches is mentioned 
abundantly and with respect to numerous applications. First 
of all, ethical principles are mentioned as constitutive com -
ponents of guidelines that restrict both the development 
and use of (AI-powered) robots. This is seen as relevant 
for a range of different ethical issues, such as preventing 
potential harm to humans, protection of human liberty as 
well as privacy, and the risk of manipulation. Interestingly, 
the resolution also maintains an emphasis on issues related 
to accessibility and equity, such as ensuring right to care 
or general access to technological progress in the form of 
robotics. The resolution also envisions an important role for 
ethical committees that assess robotics and AI research. In 
the resolution itself, these ethical principles are listed, along 
with other principles and objectives, such as research and 
innovation goals, standardization, safety and security.
Furthermore, to provide more insight into the Parlia -
ment’s line of argumentation, it is worth considering one 
short, but widely debated paragraph in this resolution. This 
paragraph caused a considerable stir, as it expressed the 
possibility of establishing forms of ‘electronic personality’ 
while arguing for ‘creating a specific legal status for robots 
in the long run, so that at least the most sophisticated auton -
omous robots could be established as having the status of 
electronic persons responsible for making good any dam -
age they may cause, and possibly applying electronic per -
sonality to cases where robots make autonomous decisions 
or otherwise interact with third parties independently’ [ 17]. 
This quote demonstrates how the Parliament anticipates 
that technological developments could lead to a situation 
in which new types of autonomous robots become engaged 
in (social) interactions. According to the proposal, this 
will impact the legal interpretation of autonomous robots’ 
actions and liability and render the notion of electronic per -
sonhood necessary in order to deal with the legal ramifica -
tions. This paragraph caused quite a controversy: in 2018, 
an open letter was published by 156 AI and robotics experts 
from different European countries, rejecting the recommen -
dation of a legal status for robots [ 19]. They mainly argued 
that the proposal overestimates actual technical develop -
ments in robotics, while also arguing that such a status for 
robots would be inappropriate from a legal and ethical point 
of view.
Apart from the discussion over the legal (and moral) 
status of autonomous systems, the resolution by the Euro -
pean Parliament marked an important moment for how such 
systems in general and interactive robots more specifically 
became defined in the EU’s agenda: as a specific policy 
problem that requires substantial attention to ethical issues 
that stretch beyond existing boundaries between humans and 
machines, especially in terms of the ethical consequences of 
potential robot autonomy. Roughly around the same time, 
1 31284

==== Page 5 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295regard that ‘[g]iven the major impact that AI can have on our 
society and the need to build trust, it is vital that European 
AI is grounded in our values and fundamental rights such as 
human dignity and privacy protection’ [ 30]. Also important 
with regards to values and fundamental rights is a report by 
the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) called ‘Get -
ting the future right – Artificial intelligence and fundamen -
tal rights’ [ 31]. While this report focuses on AI technologies 
in general, it does provide important arguments and ideas in 
the search for ways to grapple with the human rights impli -
cations of new forms of automated decision-making.
2.4 Establishing a Common Strategy and 
Regulatory Framework
In April 2021, an updated version of the coordinated 
plan was communicated, entitled ‘Fostering a European 
approach to Artificial Intelligence’ [ 32]. In this longer ver -
sion of the coordinated plan, the perceived need for trust -
worthy technology plays an important role in the way policy 
ideas are developed. Here as well, the ethical guidelines of 
the AI HLEG serve as an important inspiration. In general, 
the argument is that in order to achieve worldwide strategic 
leadership in AI and robotics, attention to trustworthiness 
and human-centeredness can be a key element that distin -
guishes the EU strategy from other global players, while 
further solidifying its status as a global regulatory power 
(for more context on this topic, see [ 33]).
Furthermore, also in April 2021, the European Commis -
sion came up with an important proposal for a legal frame -
work by providing the draft for an ‘AI Act’, which is short 
for ‘Regulation on Artificial Intelligence’ [ 34]. This act lays 
down quite specific rules for the development, implementa -
tion and use of AI systems and can be seen as a major out -
come of the activities and plans listed above. Furthermore, 
as is always important in an EU context, it aims for a harmo -
nized European approach consisting of governance systems 
at the level of the Member States as well as cooperation 
mechanisms on the level of EU governance. Moreover, 
the terms ‘trust’ and ‘trustworthy’ are mentioned multiple 
times in this AI Act and the different explanatory documents 
attached to it. Interestingly, these ideas are also central to 
aspirations regarding the EU’s future as a worldwide leader 
in the development of ethical robots.
Particularly interesting in relation to the process of build -
ing trust through ethical frameworks is the use of risk-based 
approaches in the AI Act. Risk plays a central role in these 
proposals, since the idea is to have different rules for dif -
ferent risk levels of AI-powered technologies. In this way, 
ethical risk assessment can become a way of enforcing ethi -
cal reasoning, with distinctions made between unaccept -
able risk, high risk and low or minimal risk. Overall, such Considerations on the Policy and Investment Recommenda -
tions’ was provided [ 25].
In the spirit of developing a socially sustainable, EU-
wide strategy for robotics and AI research and development, 
the ‘Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence’ was put for -
ward in April 2018 [ 26]. It contains the initial version of a 
coordinated plan on the EU level. Its content is quite closely 
related to the ideas the AI HLEG put forward, since the lat -
ter’s deliverables were supposed to serve as a foundation 
for the further evolution of the EU’s approach. Furthermore, 
the plan represents an important moment in terms of deeper 
EU integration on autonomous systems, since it implied 
that most EU member states would collaborate on a com -
mon strategy and approach. While several member states 
were already working on national approaches, this was a 
step that could have important consequences for the future 
of a harmonized policy (i.e. common policy across the EU) 
on autonomous systems in the EU. In this regard, another 
important communication document concerning such a 
strategy was ‘Building Trust in Human-Centric Artificial 
Intelligence’ in April 2019 [ 27]. As the title suggests, the 
document’s main aim is to further elaborate the European 
Commission’s focus on the development and implementa -
tion of trustworthy robotics and AI. Furthermore, the Euro -
pean Parliament drafted another important resolution with 
roughly the same theme, namely to establish a “comprehen -
sive European industrial policy on artificial intelligence and 
robotics” [ 28]. This resolution emphasizes the importance 
of AI and robotics as technologies that can support society, 
while outlining how this can be achieved through research 
and development and industrial policy. Also in this resolu -
tion, substantial attention is paid to potential new legal and 
regulatory frameworks, as well as ethics as a type of soft 
governance - for instance, in the form of standards as well as 
ethics-by-design frameworks. This goes hand in hand with 
a stronger focus on a use of ethics that is less focused on 
defining ethical issues, but more on it becoming an inherent 
part of engineering, design and implementation processes.
The work of the Juncker Commission has been continued 
under the current V on der Leyen Commission (installed in 
November 2019). Ursula von der Leyen states that a main 
goal of her new Commission is to set the standard and 
thus ‘put forward legislation for a coordinated European 
approach on the human and ethical implications of Artifi -
cial Intelligence’. She writes this in the political guidelines 
for the Commission under her leadership, entitled ‘A Union 
that Strives for More: My Agenda for Europe’ [ 29]. Further -
more, a white paper entitled ‘On Artificial Intelligence - A 
European approach to excellence and trust’ was published 
by the European Commission in 2020 [ 30]. This white paper 
establishes a connection between a strong focus on building 
trust and the attachment to ‘European values’. It states in this 
1 31285

==== Page 6 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–12953 From Policy Narratives to Ethical Robotics 
and AI
From the perspective of robot and AI ethics as an up-and-
coming subfield of applied ethics, it is encouraging to see 
how ethical approaches have come to constitute a prominent 
component of policy plans for the governance of autono -
mous systems. This can first of all be seen as a sign that 
policy-makers take the mitigation of their potential impact 
seriously. Moreover, on a broader level, the attention to the 
ethical dimensions of these technologies can be constitutive 
of how the general culture in the EU develops in terms of its 
attitude towards social robots and other interactive autono -
mous systems. As such, the plans and strategies described 
above can be interpreted as a hopeful development that 
could potentially play an important role in initiating large-
scale commitments to developing more pluralist, inclusive, 
equitable robotics and AI development. In short, such calls 
and commitments from a major player like the EU can be 
seen as an incentive for the further establishment of ethical 
governance in the research and development of robots and 
AI.
3.1 Problematizing the Ethics Narrative
In order to take this incentivizing function seriously, it is 
first and foremost important to maintain a critical stance - 
particularly towards the actual implications of the ethics 
narrative, but also with regards to the implementation of the 
policy plans that arise from it. AI and robot ethics might 
indeed have become a prominent component of the policy-
making consensus. This indicates promising intentions, but 
these intentions do not necessarily guarantee effectiveness 
and applicability. Others have already argued that many of 
the ideas to include ethical perspectives in EU policy on 
robotics and AI contain arguments with a rather abstract, 
imprecise character [ 37]. In the same vein, AI and robot eth -
ics have been described as potentially “toothless” [ 38]. It 
has also been argued that ethical approaches could easily 
turn into platitudes if their concepts and content are not con -
tinuously critically discussed [ 39].
Furthermore, there are voices that generally criticize the 
suitability of ethics as a tangible framework for a critical 
discourse on the societal impact of technological develop -
ment. For example, it has been argued that the rise of eth -
ics has hampered proper public debate about the respective 
technologies by crystallizing relevant issues into rigid areas 
of ethical expertise. In this way, the argument goes, ethical 
inquiries and discussions have become the property of the 
intellectual establishment, thereby neutralizing politicized, 
public discourse on the impact of emerging technologies 
[40]. Others have claimed that robot and AI ethics itself has proposals can be seen as an important step in the notion of 
governing artificial agents, since the aim is to develop a har -
monized set of rules that specifically target autonomous sys -
tems, while its explanations explicitly connect EU values 
and fundamental rights to risk assessments of those systems. 
While legal experts and relevant EU committees and bodies 
(e.g. the Parliament’s IMCO and LIBE committees) are cur -
rently assessing the consequences of those developments, 
this already constitutes an important development in the 
worldwide discourse on the regulation of autonomous sys -
tems. At this moment, an important subject of discussion in 
the interpretation of the new proposals are statements about 
standard-setting [ 35]. In this regard, standard-setting bodies 
in the EU are expected to continue to play a central role in 
the coming years.
Finally, the emphasis on ethics has developed such that 
the design and engineering of interactive robots has become 
a topic of concern in terms of fundamental human rights. 
This development is currently an important subject, since, 
for instance, UNESCO adopted the ‘Recommendation on 
the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence’ on 24 November 2021, 
intended as a global standard-setting instrument [ 36]. With 
its relatively strong focus on human rights, the EU has pro -
filed itself geopolitically as the place where robotics and AI 
technologies and their implementation are inherently ethi -
cal and developed in a human-centered manner. In this way, 
autonomous systems are on the way to becoming geopoliti -
cal objects of concern.
To summarize and conclude this overview, first of all, 
with regards to this section’s approach, interpreting eth -
ics reasoning as a narrative emphasizes its role as a central 
component of the policy process surrounding robotics and 
AI. As such, the ethics narrative provides specific discourses 
and solutions that allow the EU policy-making process to 
develop in a specific manner. Second, the ethics narrative 
can be seen as rooted in an emergent definition of autono -
mous systems as a topic of policy concern focused on poten -
tial ethical issues. The potential autonomy of these systems 
is playing an increasingly prominent role in this definition 
of these systems as a policy problem. Third and final, cur -
rent interpretations of the AI Act include several ways in 
which policy ideas about ethical reasoning are becoming 
solidified into regulation, mostly based on identifying risk. 
Simultaneously, ethics is increasingly becoming part of a 
discourse around soft governance, which means that it is 
expected to have an effect on the development and imple -
mentation of robots and other types of autonomous systems.
1 31286

==== Page 7 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–12953.2 The Ethics Narrative in a Context of Emerging 
Technology Governance
In order to answer that question, it is useful to first con -
textualize the use of ethical notions in the governance of 
technology. In that regard, the position of robotic and AI 
technologies as emerging technologies needs to be empha -
sized. The general benefit of doing so is that it provides 
better insights into the reasons for governmental interest in 
ethics as a solution in the quest for governance of auton -
omous systems. In the specific context of this paper, it is 
also instrumental for establishing the connection between 
the ethics narrative in policy-making and the integration of 
ethical notions in robotics and HRI research.
First of all, in a policy-making context, the term ‘emerg -
ing technologies’ generally encompasses notions of fast-
paced technological development, with a high level of 
societal and economic impact that governments need to 
manage [ 47, 48]. When understood in such a context, the 
use of ethical approaches as part of public policy decision-
making goes back further than one might expect. In fact, 
the implementation of ethics as a tool for the governance 
of emerging technologies can be traced back to the 1970s 
in the US and the 1980s in the EU [ 49]. In several areas of 
technological development, applied ethics approaches and 
committees have been advanced in response to societal and 
governmental concerns over technoscientific innovations. 
Good examples can be found in the establishment of applied 
ethics approaches in fields like nanotechnology (nanoeth -
ics), data technology (data ethics), biomedical technology 
(bioethics) and so on [ 50–52]. An important reason for 
the implementation of ethical perspectives in the context 
of emerging technologies is the emphasis on the potential 
high stakes, high expectations, and sizable amount of future 
unknowns surrounding these technologies [ 53, 54]. This is 
important for policy-makers because it captures aspirations 
for a more prosperous future on the one hand (e.g. in the 
form of economic growth), while also representing contra -
dictory and contested understandings of what that future 
might entail [ 55].
As is the case with other emerging technologies, robotics 
and AI technologies are often presented in the context of a 
future in which new innovations are expected to have many 
unprecedented properties and abilities with revolutionary 
and transformative potential. Furthermore, the historical 
dimension of such technologies is important to consider in 
this regard. Robots and other automata have captured the 
imagination since ancient times [ 56]. Especially in the last 
century, robotics and AI technologies have become promi -
nent, widely recognized technocultural icons that represent 
many different speculative expectations and imaginations 
[57, 58]. While robotics and AI technologies have become become “big business”, and that this could in fact aid the 
establishment of a rhetoric of “ethics washing” large-scale 
technological developments that harm society [ 41–43]. In 
line with this point, ethicists have argued that a collabora -
tive attitude within a system of technological innovation 
can be counterproductive and that sometimes, more politi -
cized, disruptive strategies should be considered to generate 
change for the better in the long run [ 44].
Finally, an often-heard argument is that the integration 
of ethics perspectives can complicate the process of techno -
logical development. This point goes hand in hand with two 
more general problems, namely the long-standing impasse 
between ethical and economic imperatives when it comes 
to innovation and the general problematization of the idea 
that AI and robotics technologies can be governed at their 
current stage of development. For instance, when it comes 
to ethical considerations regarding AI and robotics, some 
argue that they establish unnecessary hurdles in the current 
race for robotics and AI dominance (e.g., with regards to 
military supremacy) [ 45]. The idea is that if ethical limi -
tations in the EU are much more restrictive than in other 
jurisdictions, competitors worldwide could have an advan -
tage in terms of development speed. Accordingly, it is use -
ful not to disregard this narrative too quickly, but rather to 
consider which new frameworks can be employed to define 
and tackle this problem in a way that enables technologi -
cal development. Luciano Floridi states, for instance, that 
the EU’s normative, human-centered approach is unique 
on the world stage, but must be recognized as quite a dif -
ficult approach. Nevertheless, he also explicitly argues that 
“nobody ever said that doing the right thing was going to be 
cheap and easy” [ 46].
In short, the main issue with the ethics narrative in its 
current form is that the resulting plans and strategies mostly 
involve a top-down approach that is still quite strongly 
based on high-level principles. Even though it seems evi -
dent that the EU is poised to invest in human-centred, ethi -
cal robotics and AI, the pathways towards this goal are still 
rather unclear and are generally up for negotiation, espe -
cially in light of the need for economic and technological 
development. In the remainder of this paper, the main ques -
tion is how the high-level ideas and concepts that have been 
used to establish the narrative of ethical robotics and AI 
governance in the EU can become a meaningful component 
of research and development processes in practice-related 
fields like HRI. That is to say, HRI is explicitly understood 
as a field that can play an important role in the quest for 
more tangible implementations of ethics.
1 31287

==== Page 8 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295community with unique qualities and insights, to improve 
ethical perspectives regarding the interactions between 
humans and interactive autonomous systems. Furthermore, 
I argue that in order for the ethics narrative to have a posi -
tive, constructive effect, it is important that the term “eth -
ics” does not degenerate into dogmatic debates concerning 
human control over technology, but rather becomes further 
established in critical, inter- and transdisciplinary inquiries 
over the roles ascribed to social robots and other autono -
mous systems.
The two different contexts that are connected with one 
another here - the governance context vs. the robotics 
and HRI research context - are characterized by very dif -
ferent epistemologies and practices. In short, autonomous 
systems such as robots as emerging objects of governance 
are vastly different from their understanding as objects of 
robotics research and design. Thus, from the perspective 
of HRI research, an easy way out would be to denounce 
policy-making efforts and maintain a strong distinction 
between these two epistemologies. However, this would 
be a rather simplistic way of approaching the problem that 
does not keep pace with promising trends in other fields. 
Whereas more traditional interpretations of policy-making 
are indeed based on a rather strong distinction between the 
policy-making context and research and engineering con -
texts, there are many new notions of governance that argue 
otherwise. In fact, one trend in policy-making is the notion 
that well-implemented policy can be achieved by develop -
ing a type of governance that identifies and avoids problems 
by design [ 69, 70].
In recent years, these kinds of notions have increasingly 
led to deliberations about types of governance that under -
stand scientific and technical expertise as fields of practice 
that can contribute to the goals of newly developed gover -
nance frameworks [ 71]. For instance, in a paper on what they 
call “integrative expertise”, Michael Poznic and Erik Fisher 
refer to this type of governance as “midstream”, thereby dis -
tinguishing it from “upstream” research prioritization and 
“downstream” technology regulation [ 72]. In doing so, they 
focus on the normative aspects of technical experts’ prac -
tices, thereby establishing the possibility to understand eth -
ics as an integrated component of this midstream domain. 
They argue that this attention to the midstream can help 
with understanding and responding to socio-ethical consid -
erations in the practice of developing novel technologies. In 
the same spirit, I argue here that robotics and HRI as fields 
of research can be seen as very well equipped to develop 
clearer pathways towards further defining the concepts and 
ideas that are currently shaping the narrative of ethical AI 
and robotics governance. Thus, the role of HRI would be one 
that focuses on its own capacities of altering its practices in 
such a way that is focused on the socio-technical integration established as a professional field of research and engineer -
ing during the last half a century, it is this mix of expecta -
tions that makes them important objects of policy discourse. 
More specifically, as Sect. 2 has demonstrated, the increas -
ing interactive capabilities of autonomous systems have 
emerged as an important issue of concern in how current EU 
policy-making on robotics and AI is currently being defined. 
It is in such a context that ethics can function as an impor -
tant tool for anticipating and mitigating potential issues that 
have not yet fully materialized [ 59].
In relation to that, alongside the function of ethical rea -
soning as a multi-purpose toolkit for governing a range of 
different potential impacts of emerging technologies, ethics 
has an important function for managing public trust. Emerg -
ing technologies typically enjoy relatively strong coverage 
in general public discourse drawing on the anticipated tra -
jectories of their technological development [ 60]. As argued 
above, expectations about emerging technologies like 
robotics and AI often involve many questions and uncer -
tainties about the specificities of their (future) impact, lead -
ing to increased general public attention to the impacts of 
such technologies [ 61]. Prominent examples in the case of 
robotics technologies are their general impact on economic 
growth, the impact of potential automation on certain areas 
of the job market, potential gaps in the legal system, effects 
on intimate relationships and so on. From a governance 
perspective, the attention paid to such technology-based 
changes and the generation of socially sustainable narra -
tives around them can aid the process of building general 
public trust in the long run [ 62, 63].
3.3 The Discussion on Implementation
Having elaborated on criticisms of the robotics and AI eth -
ics narrative, as well as its wider embedding in the context 
of emerging technology governance, the next step is to dis -
cuss how this narrative can become strengthened and broad -
ened in order to enhance its actual effects. The growing 
applicability of concepts from the field of robot and AI eth -
ics has already led to increasing reflections on the position 
and possibilities of ethics in general [ 64, 65]. Furthermore, 
in a more general sense, the implementation of ethics is a 
widely discussed topic in different applied ethics contexts 
[66–68]. Here, it should be taken into consideration that the 
role of the ethics narrative in AI and robotics development 
is far from fixed and must be further materialized in order to 
have a proper effect. Different kinds of stakeholders (from 
industry, academia, NGOs, etc.) can still use their resources 
to inform the debate over how this narrative develops and 
gets implemented. I focus on the idea that it is fruitful for 
the general maturity of the ethics narrative to connect the 
governance context with the HRI context, as a professional 
1 31288

==== Page 9 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295through the anticipation of consequences of development 
and implementation.
In general, this way of applying ethics fits quite well with 
most of the existing HRI research and the specific ramifica -
tions of this approach are discussed quite regularly in the 
field. First of all, important attempts have been made to dis -
cuss what the main ethical issues in HRI are, while defin -
ing ethical codes and guidelines based on these discussions 
[73, 74]. Furthermore, even though ethical assessments 
and ethical standards are often portrayed as an endeavor 
that restricts robotics development and innovation, several 
practitioners have argued that increasing attention to eth -
ics now will likely lead to more socially sustainable inno -
vations in the long run [ 75–77]. A crucial argument in this 
regard is that when it comes to interactions between robotic 
systems and their users, the identification of ethical issues 
and implementation of ethical principles, guidelines and/or 
standards is often argued to aid in configuring human-robot 
interactions themselves. For instance, persistent attention to 
principles like non-maleficence or social justice can help to 
increase the acceptance of social robots and other autono -
mous systems, especially in the longer run [ 78]. Further -
more, this has led to important discussions in HRI on the 
assessment of norms and values that require recognition of 
the needs of minorities in autonomous systems [ 79, 80].
Further development and enrichment in order to contrib -
ute to a more profound and effective ethics narrative can 
be considerably advanced through research that explicitly 
engages with existing high-level principles that are cur -
rently discussed in governance. In line with the arguments 
above regarding technological innovation and ethics, it 
can be fruitful to see the ethical governance of interactive 
robots itself as an instance of sociotechnical innovation. 
Because of its focus on empirical analyses of interactions, 
HRI can add substantial insights to the ways in which high-
level notions can become part of ethics assessments in HRI 
practice. Translating such considerations and values into 
implementable rules, standards and guidelines allows them 
to evolve and be tested as components of robotics research. 
Crucial in this context are current advancements in the field 
of ethical standards. Robotics and HRI expertise plays an 
important role in the further development of these ethical 
standards [ 81].
4.2 Moral Competence for Artificial Ethical Agency
Thinking about normative reasoning in artificial agents has 
a rather long history in fields such as logical reasoning and 
other realms of AI and robotics research [ 82, 83]. As has also 
been argued in the EU context, the very prospect of more 
sophisticated automated decision-making systems renders it 
desirable to formalize and implement ethical reasoning - the of the ethics narrative. By translating issues from the realm 
of governance to research areas like HRI, ethical notions 
can move beyond conceptual stages and provide new, more 
precise insights into how the ethical development and use of 
interactive robots can be achieved.
4 Manifesting the Ethics Narrative in HRI 
Research
Up until this point, the EU governance context was 
described as the main locus of change, whereas the social 
robotics and HRI research contexts were mostly mentioned 
as a crucial component in that development. In this section, 
however, the focus will shift to the latter. As has been made 
clear above, an important future prospect that has sparked 
the EU’s focus on anticipatory AI and robot regulation is the 
emergence of new generations of AI-equipped robots with 
unprecedented interactive capabilities. The ramifications of 
these developments have also become an important point of 
discussion in robotics and HRI research, since they allow 
many more (unexpected) factors to affect the interactions 
between robots and humans. With this in mind, the sub -
sections below explore the different ways in which ethics 
and ethical notions in the EU ethics narrative are currently 
(a) already being discussed and studied in HRI research, 
including prominent examples from the literature; and (b) 
how these efforts can be further developed and enriched in 
order to contribute to a more profound and effective ethics 
narrative on a midstream level.
4.1 Ethical Assessment
One of the most common, straightforward forms of imple -
menting ethics in research and development processes 
across the board is to discern and define potential ethical 
issues. This also plays a major role in the EU governance 
plans, since a central aim of these plans is to stimulate the 
development of autonomous systems that serve societal 
needs, while simultaneously avoiding or mitigating ethical 
issues. Furthermore, the ethical risk assessment procedures 
that are part of the AI Act will likely be strongly grounded 
in this type of ethics implementation. An important way to 
achieve this kind of ethics consideration is through the insti -
tutionalization of ethical assessments in the form of commit -
tees that review certain decisions and establish a consensus 
on specific technologies based on expert review procedures. 
Apart from that, this type of ethics integration is generally 
concerned with the ways in which ethical principles, guide -
lines and standards can be employed by researchers and 
other practitioners. Ethical assessment procedures in such 
contexts often include elements of prediction and foresight 
1 31289

==== Page 10 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295to embed ethics itself within such definitions in a formalized 
manner.
4.3 Value-Based Design and Implementation
Another promising path to developing a more mature ethics 
narrative that is gaining traction at the moment concerns the 
proliferation of value-based design and implementation pro -
cesses. This kind of ethics implementation has also gained 
traction in the EU context, for instance through the notion of 
ethics-by-design. In short, the idea here is that deliberation 
on and implementation of values can help ensure a strategy 
in which societal and ethical issues become part and parcel 
of robotics research and development processes, as well as a 
central consideration when implementing robots in existing 
contexts [ 93, 94]. As such, central to this approach are the 
analysis of values and the establishment of new norms in the 
research, design, and development process for social robot -
ics applications [ 95]. From this point of view, responsible 
research and innovation practices are crucial to achieving 
this type of ethics integration.
By making the design, engineering and implementation 
of robotics more focused on values that are important in 
open, democratic societies, innovation processes can like -
wise become more open, responsible, and inclusive [ 96]. 
Examples of such values can be found in more general long-
standing democratic notions like transparency and account -
ability, but often require detailed deliberation in order to 
be properly implemented [ 90, 97, 98]. Many of these top -
ics are currently the subject of discussions and research in 
HRI. This includes discussions about the norms and values 
of roboticists and HRI practitioners themselves, as well as 
the implementation of new norms and values [ 99, 100]. 
Research approaches like Value-Sensitive Design (VSD) 
and Participatory Design (PD) have proven useful here, as 
they generally place a strong emphasis on integrating ethi -
cal principles and values [ 96, 101–104]. Furthermore, stan -
dardization can also play an important role in this context, 
since it can establish design requirements which are use -
ful for establishing new types of societal engagement with 
robotics engineering and design [ 105].
From a governance perspective, these kinds of ethics 
implementations draw attention to the question of how 
research and innovation systems can be modified to estab -
lish responsible, ethical innovation [ 106]. As such, design 
itself becomes acknowledged as a specific mode of ethical 
inquiry. One that is strongly grounded in immediate prac -
tical engagement with ethical issues. In this regard, it is 
also important to note that ethical notions from within HRI 
have become connected to broader value-based innovation 
frameworks in the governance of science and technology. 
Useful examples in this context are the responsible research main rationale being that human dependence on such auto -
mated systems requires their decisions to remain within the 
borders of what is determined to be ethical. When robot eth -
ics as a field began to take shape, this was an important part 
of considerations on how to make ethics a relevant notion 
for robotics development, and it remains an important point 
of consideration in current discussions on the implemen -
tation of ethics in autonomous systems. One of the most 
common examples illustrating the importance of ethics for 
autonomous systems can be found in the trolley problem, 
which is often used to show how autonomous systems (e.g., 
autonomous vehicles) need to be prepared to make deci -
sions of an ethical nature.
In its most strict sense, this kind of research concerns 
autonomous agents that can be considered morally compe -
tent. Thus, with regards to HRI research, the integration of 
ethics and ethical approaches can be achieved by formal -
izing ethical norms so that they can become embedded in 
the automated reasoning of robotic artifacts. It is particu -
larly relevant when the artifacts that have emerged from 
such research are tested in interaction research. In this case, 
social robots as autonomous agents could exhibit behavior 
that can be considered “ethical” [ 84]. There are several case 
studies that discuss and study the direct implementation of 
ethics in this sense as a part of autonomous agents’ behavior 
[85–88]. Other useful studies in this realm analyze human 
norms themselves and the way autonomous agents can 
engage in norm-conforming ways of interacting [ 89]. Fur -
thermore, the notion of trust in technology has been evolv -
ing together with initiatives that implement ethical rules to 
guide the behavior of artificial agents and ensure trustwor -
thy interactions [ 90].
Apart from the research that is needed to further develop 
moral reasoning in robots, this is very much a project where 
moral HRI can help us understand what it means to have 
moral machines and how this affects robotics’ socio-tech -
nical systems [ 91]. In terms of the high-level EU plans, 
this type of ethics involves the ambitious and important 
endeavor to create autonomous machines that can be inher -
ently trustworthy. Because of its direct research focus on 
interactions, as well as its high level of technical expertise, 
HRI has a lot to offer here to help make the very notion 
of the moral, trustworthy robot a success. For instance, an 
important task of HRI research in this context is to under -
stand how humans apply moral norms to (social) robots and 
judge their behavior [ 92]. Findings from such research can 
help to determine how social robots should behave, thus 
contributing to the discussion on meaningful ethical gover -
nance of more sophisticated forms of artificial agency. Thus, 
in this interaction context, it is important to develop elabo -
rate definitions of what constitutes normative behavior and 
1 31290

==== Page 11 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295are increasingly addressed in research, which could in turn 
be integrated with critical HRI perspectives [ 115, 116].
The ethics narrative in governance, in turn, largely takes 
a fundamentally critical approach. Even though this might 
not directly benefit governance or innovation strategies, it is 
crucial to maintain an open critical culture at a time of rapid 
technological development. In this regard, the practices of 
robot and AI ethicists on the one hand and HRI researchers 
on the other need to become ever more firmly integrated 
as part of interdisciplinary methodological frameworks. 
When established within the context of HRI research, these 
perspectives can facilitate research on how interaction in 
real-world contexts develops. In this way, more sophisti -
cated concepts can help to create improved policy ideas for 
the EU’s robotics and AI governance by helping us better 
understand the political economy of robotics and AI and the 
different roles ethics can play in changing it for the better.
5 Conclusion
The main point of this paper has been to engage in delib -
erations on the connection between the ethics narrative in 
EU governance and the implementation of ethical notions 
in HRI research. I have done so by providing an overview 
of the integration of this ethics narrative in the EU’s policy 
plans and demonstrating how this narrative provided new 
definitions of policy issues. In the face of emerging imple -
mentation of autonomous social robots, it is likely that ethi -
cal approaches continue to be relevant for discussions of 
issues pivotal to democratic societies, such as human rights 
and democratic values. This paper has argued for an inter -
pretation of EU policies and strategies not just as a way of 
developing new regulations inspired by ethics, but very 
much also as a trigger for and incentive towards develop -
ing more profound ethical approaches in a context of rapid 
and uncertain technological developments in social robot -
ics. As autonomous systems are projected to have a strong 
impact in our society, it is important to see the emergence of 
this narrative as an opportunity for substantial change while 
simultaneously understanding that new ideas will have to 
materialize quickly in order to ensure that our society is able 
to deal with the impact. As argued above, HRI can have an 
important role in solidifying and implementing this narra -
tive and the paper has provided a call to adopt an under -
standing of policy-making and technical expertise that in 
conjunction with one another.
These new ideas can serve as points of departure for 
deliberation on the ethical futures we consider desirable and 
which ones we would prefer to avoid. As such, they can be 
very informative while contributing to the emergence of a 
technological culture that has the ability to simultaneously and innovation (RRI) framework or the Sustainable Devel -
opment Goals (SDGs) [ 107, 108]. In addition to their goal 
of improving the innovation process, these frameworks can 
also actively increase public trust in technologies [ 109].
4.4 Ethical Sociotechnical Systems
Finally, ethics can play a role in the establishment of 
autonomous systems as components and drivers of large-
scale sociotechnical systems. From a philosophical point of 
view, this notion of ethics tends to see ethical approaches 
mostly as a form of critical engagement with wider socio-
cultural developments around robots. Mark Coeckelbergh, 
for instance, proposes a social-relational approach to robot 
ethics which aims to pay attention “to the moral significance 
of how we humans talk about robots, do things with robots, 
and live with robots” [ 110]. Other examples can be found 
in the integrative approach developed by Seibt et al. They 
argue that in HRI and social robotics, the aim has gener -
ally been to “investigat[e] what social robots can do, while 
robo-ethicists and policy-makers deliberate afterwards  what 
social robots ( may or) should  (not) do, relative to the profes -
sional discussion in applied ethics”. Instead, the real ques -
tion should be “what social robotics applications can and 
(may or) should  do” [ 95].
When looking at the current landscape of HRI research, 
the empirical and/or applied nature of the field generally does 
not facilitate the development of concepts referring to such 
macro-level ethics. Nevertheless, there are several research 
trends that can help to further this perspective. First of all, 
one of the most important developments is the realization 
that the rising feasibility of robots taking part in real-world 
scenarios is currently leading to discussions over the meth -
odologies used to conduct HRI research. The limitations of 
current experimental methodologies are being increasingly 
addressed, and several researchers have already argued for 
changes and additions to these mainstream methodologies. 
For instance, Kerstin Dautenhahn writes that HRI meth -
odologies sometimes fail to address “how real people, in 
real-world environments, would interact face to face with 
a real robot” [ 111]. As a part of this development, more 
HRI studies are now incorporating qualitative methods 
[112–114]. These methods can help to study interactions in 
which complex, autonomous robots interact with people in 
unrestricted (or less restricted) contexts. Others have also 
argued that robot ethics and HRI need to jointly develop 
models of analysis that can capture the complexity of inter -
actions by looking at the entire system in which robots are 
to play a facilitating role (e.g. the healthcare system) [ 104]. 
Finally, the entanglements that constitute the (mundane) 
relationships between humans and technological artifacts 
1 31291

==== Page 12 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–12952. McBeth MK, Lybecker DL (2018) The Narrative Policy Frame -
work, Agendas, and Sanctuary Cities: the construction of a pub -
lic Problem. Policy Stud J 46:868–893. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psj.12274
3. Allan BB (2017) Producing the climate: States, scientists, and the 
Constitution of Global Governance Objects. Int Org 71:131–162. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818316000321
4. Hampton G (2009) Narrative policy analysis and the integration 
of public involvement in decision making. Policy Sci 42:227–
242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-009-9087-1
5. Jones MD, McBeth MK (2010) A Narrative Policy Framework: 
clear enough to be wrong? Policy Stud J 38:329–353. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.2010.00364.x
6. McBeth MK, Shanahan EA, Arnell RJ, Hathaway PL (2007) 
The intersection of Narrative Policy Analysis and Pol -
icy Change Theory. Policy Stud J 35:87–108. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.2007.00208.x
7. Legro JW (2000) The Transformation of Policy Ideas. Am J Polit 
Sci 44:419–432. https://doi.org/10.2307/2669256
8. Sabel C, Herrigel G, Kristensen PH (2018) Regulation under 
uncertainty: the coevolution of industry and regulation. Regul 
Gov 12:371–394. https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12146
9. euRobotics (2020) AbouteuRobotics. https://www.eu-robotics.
net/eurobotics/about/about-eurobotics/about-eurobotics.html .
Accessed11Apr2022
10. Veruggio G (2006) The EURON Roboethics Roadmap. In: 2006 
6th IEEE-RAS International Conferenceon Humanoid Robots. pp 
612–617
11. DG INFSO (2006) EUROP--theEuropeanRoboticsPlatform
12. Connect DG, Jäger A, Moll C (2016) et al Analysis of the impact 
of robotic systems on employment in the European Union
13. DGRI (2020) Unlocking the potential of industrial human–robot 
collaboration: a visionon industrial collaborative robots for econ -
omy and society
14. Eurofound (2018) Game changing technologies: exploring the 
impact on production processes and work. Research Report
15. Joint Research Centre (2020) Global race for robotisation Look -
ing at the entire robotisation chain
16. EPRS,STOA (2016) STUDY Ethical aspects of cyber-physical 
systems: scientific foresight study: in-depth analysis
17. European Parliament (2017) RESOLUTION Civil Law Rules on 
Robotics
18. DG IPOL, Nevejans N, European P (2016) etal STUDY European 
civil law rules in robotics
19. Nevejans N (2018) Open letter to the European Commission. 
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
20. DGRI,European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technolo -
gies to the European Commission,European Commission (2018) 
Statement on artificial intelligence, robotics and “autonomous” 
systems: Brussels, 9 March 2018
21. EC (2018) Artificial Intelligence for Europe
22. AIHLEG (2019) DELIVERABLE Ethics Guidelines for Trust -
worthy AI
23. AIHLEG (2019) DELIVERABLE Policy and Investment Rec -
ommendations for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence
24. AIHLEG (2020) Assessment List for Trustworthy Artificial Intel -
ligence (ALTAI) for self-assessment
25. AIHLEG (2020) Sectoral considerations on the policy and invest -
ment. Recommendations for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence
26. European Commission (2018) COMMUNICATION Coordinated 
Plan on Artificial Intelligence
27. European Commission (2019) COMMUNICATION Building 
Trust in Human-Centric Artificial Intelligence
28. European Parliament (2019) RESOLUTION on a comprehensive 
European industrial policy on artificial intelligence and roboticsengage with the sociotechnical potential of autonomous 
systems as well as with the ethical consequences of these 
futures. In that regard, HRI can be seen as an epistemic 
community with its own unique position when it comes to 
the responsibility of implementing and materializing ethi -
cal notions. Furthermore, in order to draw ethics out of the 
buzzword context and elicit these profound effects, there 
is a clear necessity for developing new insights about eth -
ics implementation. This paper has attempted to do exactly 
that in the hope to provide new pathways for a new genera -
tion of ethical inquiry. Especially now that ethics is such a 
prominent topic in general, it is likely that new pathways 
and approaches will emerge. In that regard it is important to 
remark that this should not be confined to EU policy-mak -
ing. Whereas this paper maintained a strong emphasis on 
EU governance of autonomous systems, other governance 
context such as EU member-states, other major geopolitical 
players, intergovernmental organizations) should be very 
much seen as pivotal to this process. The same counts for 
other, non-governmental contexts of ethics integration (e.g. 
in business contexts) [ 66, 117].
Funding  This work was supported by the TrustRobots Doctoral Col -
lege, TU Wien.
Open access funding provided by TU Wien (TUW).
Data Availability  The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the 
current study are available from the corresponding author upon reason -
able request.
Declarations
Conflict of Interest  The author declares that the research was con -
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Smuha NA (2021) From a ‘race to AI’ to a ‘race to AI regula -
tion’: regulatory competition for artificial intelligence. Law Innov 
Technol 13:57–84. https://doi.org/10.1080/17579961.2021.1898
300
1 31292

==== Page 13 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–129550. Kearnes M, Grove-White R, Macnaghten P et al (2006) From 
Bio to Nano: Learning Lessons from the UK Agricultural Bio -
technology controversy. Sci as Cult 15:291–307. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09505430601022619
51. Schaper-Rinkel P (2013) The role of future-oriented technology 
analysis in the governance of emerging technologies: the exam -
ple of nanotechnology. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 80:444–452. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.10.007
52. Zwitter A (2014) Big Data ethics. Big Data & Society 
1:205395171455925. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951714559253
53. Kuhlmann S, Stegmaier P, Konrad K (2019) The tentative gover -
nance of emerging science and technology—A conceptual intro -
duction. Res Policy 48:1091–1097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
respol.2019.01.006
54. Sandler RL (2014) Ethics and Emerging Technologies. Palgrave 
Macmillan UK, London
55. Szekely I, Szabo MD, Vissy B (2011) Regulating the future? Law, 
ethics, and emerging technologies. J of Inf Com & Eth in Society 
9:180–194. https://doi.org/10.1108/14779961111167658
56. Rossi C, Russo F, Russo F (2009) Automata (towards automation 
and Robots). Ancient Engineers& inventions. Springer Nether -
lands, Dordrecht, pp 269–301
57. Geraci RM (2010) Apocalyptic AI: visions of heaven in robotics, 
artificial intelligence, and virtual reality. Oxford University Press, 
New York
58. Romic B (2018) Robotic Art and Cultural Imagination. In: Pro -
ceedings of EV A Copenhagen 2018. BCS Learning& Develop -
ment, Copenhagen, pp 1–10
59. Brey P (2012) Anticipatory Ethics for Emerging Technologies. 
Nanoethics 6:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11569-012-0141-7
60. Goyal N, Howlett M, Taeihagh A (2021) Why and how does the 
regulation of emerging technologies occur? Explaining the adop -
tion of the EU General Data Protection Regulation using the mul -
tiple streams framework. Regul Gov 15:1020–1034. https://doi.
org/10.1111/rego.12387
61. Frewer L (1999) Risk perception, Social Trust, and public par -
ticipation in strategic decision making: implications for Emerging 
Technologies. Ambio 28:569–574
62. Stebbing M (2009) Avoiding the Trust Deficit: Public Engage -
ment, values, the Precautionary Principle and the future of Nano -
technology. Bioethical Inq 6:37–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11673-009-9142-9
63. Wynne B (2006) Public Engagement as a Means of restoring Pub -
lic Trust in Science - Hitting the Notes, but missing the music? 
Community Genetics. Basel 9:211–220
64. Danks D (2022) Digital Ethics as Translational Ethics: In: 
Vasiliu-Feltes I, Thomason J (eds) Advances in Human and 
Social Aspects of Technology. IGI Global, pp 1–15
65. Stahl BC (2021) Concepts of Ethics and their application to AI. 
In: Stahl BC (ed) Artificial Intelligence for a better future: an 
ecosystem perspective on the Ethics of AI and emerging Digital 
Technologies. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 19–33
66. Eitel-Porter R (2021) Beyond the promise: implement -
ing ethical AI. AI Ethics 1:73–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s43681-020-00011-6
67. Grunwald A (2011) Responsible innovation: bringing together 
technology assessment, applied ethics, and STS research. Enterp 
Work Innov Stud 31:9–31
68. McLennan S, Fiske A, Tigard D et al (2022) Embedded eth -
ics: a proposal for integrating ethics into the development of 
medical AI. BMC Med Ethics 23:6. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12910-022-00746-3
69. Greer SL, Vasev N, Jarman H et al (2020) It’s the governance, 
stupid! TAPIC: a governance framework to strengthen deci -
sion making and implementation. World Health Organization, 
Copenhagen29. V on der Leyen U (2019) A Union that strives for more. My 
agenda for Europe: political guidelines for the next European 
Commission 2019–2024. Publications Office of the European 
Union, Luxembourg
30. European Commission (2020) WHITEPAPER On Artificial Intel -
ligence - A European approach to excellence and trust
31. European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (2020) REPORT 
getting the future right artificial intelligence and fundamental 
rights. Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg
32. European Commission (2021) COMMUNICATION Fostering a 
European approach to Artificial Intelligence
33. Bradford A (2020) The Brussels Effect: how the European Union 
Rules the World. Oxford University Press
34. European Commission (2021) PROPOSAL FOR a REGULA -
TION of the European Parliament and the Council laying down 
harmonised rules on Artificial Intelligence. Artificial Intelligence 
Act) and amending certain Union legislative acts
35. Veale M, Borgesius FZ (2021) Demystifying the Draft EU Artifi -
cial Intelligence Act
36. UNESCO (2021) DRAFT Recommendationon the Ethics of Arti -
ficial Intelligence
37. Fosch Villaronga E, Golia AJ (2019) Robots, standards and the 
law: rivalries between private standards and public policymak -
ing for robot governance. Comput Law Secur Rev 35:129–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2018.12.009
38. Rességuier A, Rodrigues R (2020) AI ethics should not 
remain toothless! A call to bring back the teeth of eth -
ics. Big Data & Society 7:2053951720942541. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2053951720942541
39. Mittelstadt B (2019) Principles alone cannot guarantee ethi -
cal AI. Nat Mach Intell 1:501–507. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-019-0114-4
40. Felt U, Wynne B (2009) Taking European knowledge society 
seriously. In: Science et devenir del’ homme, 2009, N°59, fas -
ciculethé matique “Science in Society: Dialogues and Scientific 
Responsibility”-Sciencein Society: Dialogues and Scientific 
Responsibility. European Conference, Paris, FRA, 2008-11-24. 
MURS, Paris(FRA)
41. Bietti E (2020) From ethics washing to ethics bashing: a view on 
tech ethics from with in moralphilosophy. In: Proceedings of the 
2020 Conferenceon Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 
As sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, pp 
210–219
42. Phan T, Goldenfein J, Mann M, Kuch D (2021) Economies of 
Virtue: the circulation of ‘Ethics’ in Big Tech. Sci as Cult 0:1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2021.1990875
43. Richardson K (2019) The business of Ethics, Robotics, and Arti -
ficial Intelligence. In: Heffernan T (ed) Cyborg Futures. Springer, 
Berlin, pp 113–126
44. Sætra HS, Coeckelbergh M, Danaher J (2021) The AI ethicist’s 
dilemma: fighting Big Tech by supporting Big Tech. AI Ethics. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-021-00123-7
45. Manson K (2021) US has already lost AI fight to China, says ex-
pentagon software chief. Financial Times
46. Floridi L (2021) The european legislation on AI: a brief analy -
sis of its Philosophical Approach. Philos Technol 34:215–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-021-00460-9
47. Rotolo D, Hicks D, Martin BR (2015) What is an emerging tech -
nology? Res Policy 44:1827–1843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
respol.2015.06.006
48. Taeihagh A, Ramesh M, Howlett M (2021) Assessing the regula -
tory challenges of emerging disruptive technologies. Regul Gov 
15:1009–1019. https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12392
49. Tallacchini M (2009) Governing by values. EU Ethics: Soft 
Tool, Hard Effects. Minerva 47:281. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11024-009-9127-1
1 31293

==== Page 14 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–129592. Malle B, Scheutz M, Arnold T, et al (2015) Sacrifice One For 
the Good of Many?: People Apply Different Moral Norms to 
Human and Robot Agents. ACM/IEEE International Confer -
ence on Human-Robot Interaction 2015:117–124. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2696454.2696458
93. Coeckelbergh M (2013) Human being @ risk: enhancement, 
technology, and the evaluation of vulnerability transformations. 
Springer, Dodrecht
94. Coeckelbergh M (2015) The tragedy of the master: automa -
tion, vulnerability, and distance. Ethics Inf Technol 17:219–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-015-9377-6
95. Seibt J, Damholdt MF, Vestergaard C (2020) Integrative social 
robotics, value-driven design, and transdisciplinarity. Interact 
Stud 21:111–144. https://doi.org/10.1075/is.18061.sei
96. Cheon E, Su NM (2016) Integrating Roboticist Values in to a 
Value Sensitive Design Framework for Humanoid Robots. In: 
The Eleventh ACM/IEEE International Conferenceon Human 
Robot Interaction. IEEE Press, Christchurch, New Zealand, pp 
375–382
97. Dignum V (2017) Responsible Artificial Intelligence: Designing 
Ai for Human values. ICT, ITU Journal. Discoveries 9
98. Wortham RH, Theodorou A, Bryson JJ (2017) Robot transpar -
ency: improving understanding of Intelligent Behaviour for 
designers and users. In: Gao Y , Fallah S, Jin Y , Lekakou C (eds) 
Towards Autonomous Robotic Systems. Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, pp 274–289
99. Liu H-Y , Zawieska K (2020) From responsible robotics towards 
a human rights regime oriented to the challenges of robotics and 
artificial intelligence. Ethics Inf Technol 22:321–333. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10676-017-9443-3
100. Winfield AFT, Winkle K, Webb H et al (2021) Robot Accident 
Investigation: a case study in responsible Robotics. In: Cavalcanti 
A, Dongol B, Hierons R,etal(eds) (eds) Software Engineering for 
Robotics. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 165–187
101. Darriba Frederiks A, Octavia JR, Vandevelde C, Saldien J (2019) 
Towards participatory design of social robots. In: IFIP Confer -
ence on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, pp 527–535
102. Winkle K, Senft E, Lemaignan S (2021) LEADOR: a method for 
End-To-End Participatory Design of Autonomous Social Robots.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI8
103. Azenkot S, Feng C, Cakmak M (2016) Enabling building ser -
vice robots to guide blind people a participatory design approach. 
In: 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI). pp 3–10.
104. van Wynsberghe A, Li S (2019) A paradigm shift for robot eth -
ics: from HRI to human–robot–system interaction (HRSI). MB 
9:11–21. https://doi.org/10.2147/MB.S160348
105. Siau K, Wang W (2018) Building Trust in Artificial Intelligence, 
Machine Learning, and Robotics. Cut Bus Technol J 31:8
106. Geels FW (2004) From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-
technical systems: insights about dynamics and change from soci -
ology and institutional theory. Res Policy 33:897–920. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2004.01.015
107. Asveld L, van Dam-Mieras R, Swierstra T et al (2017) Responsi -
ble innovation 3: a european agenda? Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
New York, NY
108. van den Hoven J, Vermaas PE, van de Poel I (2015) Handbook of 
Ethics, values, and Technological Design. Springer Netherlands, 
Dordrecht
109. Rask M, Mačiukaitė-Žvinienė S, Tauginienė L, et al (2016) Inno -
vative public engagement: A conceptual model of public engage -
ment in dynamic and responsible governance of research and 
innovation
110. Coeckelbergh M (2011) Is Ethics of Robotics about 
Robots? Philosophy of Robotics Beyond realism and 70. Guston DH (2014) Understanding ‘anticipatory governance’. Soc 
Stud Sci 44:218–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312713508669
71. Pohl C (2008) From science to policy through transdisciplinary 
research. Environ Sci Policy 11:46–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2007.06.001
72. Poznic M, Fisher E (2021) The Integrative Expert: Moral, Epis -
temic, and Poietic Virtues in Transformation Research. Sustain -
ability 13:10416. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131810416
73. Riek LD, Howard D (2014) A Code of Ethics for the Human-
Robot Interaction Profession. In: Proceedings of We Robot. 
Miami, p 10
74. Wullenkord R, Eyssel F (2020) Societal and ethical issues 
in HRI. Curr Robot Rep 1:85–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s43154-020-00010-9
75. Demir KA (2017) Research questions in Robot Ethics. Mugla J Sci 
Technol 3:160–165. https://doi.org/10.22531/muglajsci.359648
76. Zawieska K (2018) Is roboethics really optional? In: An Alterna -
tive HRI methodology: The use of ethnography to identify and 
address Ethical, Legal, & Societal (ELS) issues Workshop at 
the 13th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI2018). ACM/IEEE, Chicago, IL
77. Torresen J (2018) A review of future and ethical perspectives of 
Robotics and AI. Front Robot AI 4:75. https://doi.org/10.3389/
frobt.2017.00075
78. Bartneck C, Lütge C, Wagner A, Welsh S (2021) Trust and Fair -
ness in AI Systems. In: Bartneck C, Lütge C, Wagner A, Welsh 
S (eds) An introduction to Ethics in Robotics and AI. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp 27–38
79. Howard A, Borenstein J (2018) The Ugly Truth about ourselves 
and our Robot Creations: the Problem of Bias and Social Ineq -
uity. Sci Eng Ethics 24:1521–1536. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11948-017-9975-2
80. Howard A, Kennedy IIIM (2020) Robots are not immune to bias 
and injustice. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abf1364
81. Winfield A (2019) Ethical standards in robotics and AI. Nat Elec -
tron 2:46–48. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-019-0213-6
82. Anderson SL (2016) Asimov’s “Three Laws of Robotics” and 
machine metaethics. Science Fiction and Philosophy. John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd, pp 290–307
83. Bonnemains V , Saurel C, Tessier C (2018) Embedded ethics: 
some technical and ethical challenges. Ethics Inf Technol 20:41–
58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-018-9444-x
84. Gips J (1994) Toward the ethical Robot. In: Ford KM, Glymour 
C, Hayes P (eds) Android Epistemology. MIT Press, pp 243–252
85. Malle BF (2016) Integrating robot ethics and machine morality: 
the study and design of moral competence in robots. Ethics Inf 
Technol 18:243–256. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-015-9367-8
86. Malle BF, Scheutz M (2017) Moral competence in Social Robots. 
Machine Ethics and Robot Ethics. Routledge
87. Bringsjord S, Arkoudas K, Bello P (2020) Toward a General 
Logicist Methodology for Engineering Ethically Correct Roborts. 
pp 291–297
88. McBride N, Hoffman RR (2016) Bridging the ethical gap: from 
Human Principles to Robot instructions. IEEE Intell Syst 31:76–
82. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2016.87
89. Wallach W, Allen C (2009) Moral machines: teaching robots right 
from wrong. Oxford University Press, Oxford; New York
90. Wortham RH, Theodorou A (2017) Robot transparency, trust and 
utility. Connection Sci 29:242–248. https://doi.org/10.1080/0954
0091.2017.1313816
91. Doyle-Burke D, Haring KS (2020) Robots Are Moral Actors: 
Unpacking Current Moral HRI Research Through a Moral Foun -
dations Lens. In: Social Robotics: 12th International Conference, 
ICSR 2020, Golden, CO, USA, November 14–18, 2020, Proceed -
ings. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 170–181
1 31294

==== Page 15 ====
International Journal of Social Robotics (2024) 16:1281–1295116. Rommetveit K, van Dijk N, Gunnarsdóttir K (2020) Make way 
for the Robots! Human- and machine-centricity in constituting a 
european public–private Partnership. Minerva 58:47–69. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11024-019-09386-1
117. Jobin A, Ienca M, Vayena E (2019) The global landscape of 
AI ethics guidelines. Nat Mach Intell 1:389–399. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law. individualism. Law Innov Technol 3:241–250. https://doi.
org/10.5235/175799611798204950
111. Dautenhahn K (2018) Some brief thoughts on the past and future 
of Human-Robot Interaction. J Hum-Robot Interact 7:4:1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209769
112. Hasse C, Trentemøller S, Sorenson J (2019) Special issue on 
Ethnography in Human-Robot Interaction Research. Paladyn. J 
Behav Rob 10:180–181. https://doi.org/10.1515/pjbr-2019-0015
113. Weiss A, Spiel K (2021) Robots beyond Science Fiction: 
mutual learning in human–robot interaction on the way to 
participatory approaches. AI & Soc. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00146-021-01209-w
114. Fischer K, Seibt J, Rodogno R et al (2020) Integrative Social 
Robotics Hands-on. Interact Stud 21:145–185. https://doi.
org/10.1075/is.18058.fis
115. Maibaum A, Bischof A, Hergesell J, Lipp B (2022) A critique 
of robotics in health care. AI & Soc 37:467–477. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00146-021-01206-z
1 31295

