==== Page 1 ====
 
1 
 From Human -Computer Interaction to Human -AI Interaction :  
New Challenges and Opportunities for Enabling Human -Centered AI   
 
Wei Xu  a *, Marvin J. Dainoff  b, Liezhong Ge  a,  Zaifeng Gao  c 
 
a Center for Psychological Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; b Dept. of 
Psychology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio ; c Zhejiang University, Department of Psychology, 
Hangzhou, China   
 
Abstract  
While AI has benefited humans, it may  also harm humans if not appropriately developed . We 
conducted a literature review of current related work in developing AI systems from an HCI 
perspective. Different from other approaches, our focus is on the unique characteristics of AI 
technology and th e differences between non -AI computing systems and AI systems. We further 
elaborate on the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach that we propose d in 2019. Our review and 
analysis highlight unique issues in developing AI systems which HCI professionals have not 
encountered in non-AI computing systems. To further enable the implementation of HCAI, we 
promote the research and application of human -AI interaction (HAII) as a n interdisciplinary 
collaboration . There are many opportunities for HCI professionals to play a key role to make 
unique contributions to the main HAII areas as we identified. To support future HCI practice in 
the HAII area, we also offer enhanced HCI methods and strategic recommendations. In 
conclusion, we believe that promoting the HAII research and application will further enable the 
implementation of HCAI , enabling HCI professionals to address the unique issues of AI systems  
and develop human -centered AI systems . 
Keywords :  artificial intelligence; human -artificial intelligence interaction; human -centered 
artificial intelligence, human -computer interaction, human factors, autonomy    
Corresponding author:  Wei Xu; weixu6@yahoo.com  
 
1. Introduction  
When the personal computers (PC) first emerged in the 1980s, the development of its 
applications basically adopted a “technology -centered approach,” ignoring the needs of ordinary 
users. With the popularity of PC, the problems of user experience were  gradually exposed. With 
the initiative  primarily driven by human factors , psychology , and computer science, the field of 
 
* Address correspondence to Wei Xu, email : weixu6@yahoo.com   
 

==== Page 2 ====
 
2 
 human computer interaction (HCI) came into being ( Baecker  et al., 1995; Grudin, 2017; Xu, 
2003). As an interdisciplinary field, HCI adopt s the “human -centered design” approa ch to 
develop computing products meeting user needs. Accordingly, SIG  CHI (Special Interest Group 
on Computer –Human Interaction) of the ACM was established in 1982. The first SIG CHI 
Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems was held in 1983 and the main 
theme of “ human -centered design ” has been reflected in the annual conferences since 1983 
(Grudin, 2005) .  
History seems to be repeating ; we are currently facing a similar challenge  as seen in 1980s  
as we enter the era of artificial intelligence ( AI). While AI technology has brought in many 
benefits to humans, it is having a profound impact on people's work and lives. Unfortunately, the 
development of AI systems is mainly driven by a “technology -cente red design” approach 
(Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020c; Xu, 2019a; Zheng et al., 2017 ). Many AI professionals are 
primarily dedicated to studying algorithms, rather than providing useful AI systems to meet user 
needs , resulting in the failure of many  AI systems  (Choudhury et al., 2020 ; Hoffman et al., 2016; 
Lazer et al., 2014; Lieberman, 2009). AI systems trained with distorted data may produce biased 
"thinking," easily amplify prejudice and inequality to certain user groups, and even harm humans . 
Because of this, some large -scale AI projects have failed to be implemented  (Guszcza, 2018; 
Yampolsk iy, 2019; Scott & Yampolskiy, 2019). When more and more AI -based decision -making 
systems such as enterprises and government services are put into use, decisions made using biased 
"thinking" will directly affect people’s daily work and life, potentially har ming them.  For 
example,  AI-based autonomous vehicles have caused several fatal accidents (NTSB, 2017; 
Endsley, 2018; Hancock, 2019).  One issue of great concern is the significant numbers of AI-
related failures  that have been reported  (Dressel & Farid, 2018; Yampolskiy, 2019; Scott & 
Yampolskiy, 2019 ; Guszcza, 2018) . Specifically, the AI Incident Database has collected over 
1000 AI related accidents ( McGregor  et al. , 2021) , such as a n autonomous car  killing a 
pedestrian , a trading algorithm  causing a market " flash crash " where billions of dollars transfer 
between parties , and a facial recognition system  causing an innocent person to be arrested . Like 
the "dual use" nature of nuclear energy and biochemical technology, the rewards and potential 
risks brought by AI coexist. Since the development and use of AI is a decentralized global 
phenomenon, the barriers to entry are relatively low, making it mo re difficult to control (Li, 
2018).  
              Concerning the potential harm to humans from Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) in 
the long run, p romin ent critics have expressed their concern  that AI may create a "machine world" 
and eventually replace  humans (Hawking, Musk et al., 2015; Russell et al., 2015). Leading 
researchers  have also raised deep concerns  (e.g., Stephanidis, Salvendy et al., 2019; Shneiderman 
2020 a, 2020b ; Hancock, 2019, 2020; Salmon, Hancock & Carden, 2019; Endsley, 2017, 2018, 
2019; Lau, Hildebrandt & Jeon, 2020 ). Specifically, as Artificial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) (e.g., 
autonomous vehicles) is being used daily and we  are beginning to see problems emerge, Salmon, 
Hancock & Carden (2019) urged: “the ball is in our court, but it won’t be for much longer… we 

==== Page 3 ====
 
3 
 must take action .” Hancock (2019) further described the current boom in the development of AI -
based autonomous technologies as “a horse has left the stables” while Salmon ( 2019) believes 
that “we find ourselves in a similar situation: chasing a horse that has really started to run wild."  
Stephanidis, Salvendy et al. (2019) have conducted a comprehensive review that identifie s seven 
grand challenges with intelligent  interactive systems  and proposed the research priorities to 
address the challenges. Finally, twenty -three scholars from MIT, Stanford, Harvard and other 
universities jointly published a paper on machine behavior in Nature  (Rahwan et al., 2019),  
urging that society should fully understand unique AI-based machine behavior and its impacts  to 
humans and society .  
To respond to the challenges, Stanford University ha s established  a "Human -Centered AI" 
research institution : focusing on “ethically aligned design”  (Li, 2018; Donahoe , 2018) . 
Shneiderman and Xu have moved forward further proposing a human -centered AI (HCAI) 
approach  (Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020b, 2020c ; Xu, 2019a, 2019b; Xu & Ge, 2020; ).   To 
reinforce the transformative nature of a human -centered approach,  Shneiderman (2020c) 
describe s HCAI  as a Second Copernican Revolution , promoting the idea of putting  humans  at the 
center with algorithms with AI orbiting nearby , instead of putting algorithms and AI at the center . 
Shneiderman (2020 a, 2020d) further proposes a design framework and a governance structure of 
ethical AI for implementation of the HCAI approach . Cerejo (2021) prompts HCAI from a design 
process perspective.   
Like the HCI field that was brought about by PC technology 40 years ago, history has 
brought HCI professionals to a juncture. This time the conseque nce of ignoring the “ human -
centered design  philosophy ” is obviously more severe . As AI technology becomes increasingly 
ubiquitous in people’s work and lives, the machines being used by humans is no longer the 
“conventional” computer s as we have known  them . From the work focus perspective as  HCI 
professionals, we are witnessing the transition from “conventional” human -computer interaction 
to human interaction with AI-based computing systems  that exhibit new qualities such as 
individual machine behavior (Rahwan et al., 2019) and autonom y (Kaber, 2018; Xu , 2021) . While 
the HCI community has contributed to the development of AI systems, what else does  it need to do  
to enable  the implementation of the HCAI approach and offer HCI solutions to address the unique 
challenges posted to humans and society by AI technology ?   
This vision of work further challenges the HCI community to prepare for a future that 
requires the design of AI systems whose behaviors we cannot fully anticipate and for work that 
we do not know enough about (Stephanidis, Salvendy et al. , 2019; Hancock, 2020 ; Lau et al ., 
2018) . There are many questions requiring answers :  
• What new characteristics have been introduced by AI technology  
• How these new characteristics would impact humans in a way different from 
conventional non -AI computing systems   

==== Page 4 ====
 
4 
 • How the unique issues introduced by AI technology present both challenges and 
opportunities  to us as  we transition our focus from conventional HCI to human 
interaction with AI s ystems   
• Whether the current HCI methods and practices are effectively addressing the unique 
issues in AI systems  
• What we can do to further promote the HCAI approach from an HCI research and 
application perspective besides what have been proposed  
If we keep these and other points that may arise, in collaboration with other disciplines as 
we did in the past , we may jointly and effectively address the new challenges of AI systems to 
maximize the benefits of AI technology and minimize its potential ri sks. 
To answer these questions , we conducted a n analysis that focuses on a further 
understand ing of the unique issues that arise when human interaction with AI systems  is 
compared to the human interaction with non AI -computing systems . Through a literature review 
and our recent work in promoting the HCAI approach, we further elaborate the HCAI approach 
(Xu, 2019).  We have also identified key research and application areas where we believe HCI 
professionals can make (or continue to make)  unique contributions by leveraging the 
interdisciplinary nature of HCI, which will further enable the implementation of the HCAI 
approach from an HCI research and application perspective  beyond the recommendations already 
proposed .  
To investigate issues such as those mentioned above, this paper is organized as follows : 
(1) analyses of  the new challenges introduced by AI technology  and the initial work in search of a 
human -centered AI (HCAI) approach to address these challenges ; (2) formal promoti on of the 
HCI research and application in the emerging human -AI interaction (HAII)  area to further enable 
the HCAI  approach ; (3) highlight  of the current work on the key issues in the HAII area, and 
identif ication  of the future work agenda for HCI professionals ; (4) analyses  of the gaps in HCI 
methodology for future HAII work and propos als of enhanced  or alternative methods; (5) 
analyses  of the challenges in current HCI practices for future HAII work and our strategic 
recommendations. Our overall goal is to promote the research and application in the HAII area in 
order to further enable the development of human -centered AI systems based on an HCAI  
approach.  
 
2. The c hallenges introduced by AI technology  
2.1 Characteristics of the three AI waves   
It is commonly recognized that AI technology has mainly experienced three waves of 
development. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics presented in these three waves . The first two 
AI waves  mainly focused on scientific exploration and academic dominance . In 2006, the third 
wave of AI emerged thanks to the new technolog ies such as machine deep learning. During the 

==== Page 5 ====
 
5 
 third wave, AI technology has realized the change from " not useful” to "useful," beginning to 
provide humans with useful AI applications  to solve real problems. The work focuses on 
technology enhancement  and the identification of landing scenarios  for AI application s, ethical 
design, front -end applications, interaction  technology, and so on  (Xu, 2019a) . Differing from the 
previous two waves, the focus of the current AI work is around various types of “human factors ” 
in addition to technolog y enhancement . These efforts  intend  to revolve around human  needs for 
AI systems , adopting continuously enhanced AI technology  to improve social benefits by 
focusing on human needs , and useful AI systems f or human beings. Human related issues are 
becoming more dominant .  In the AI community, there have been discussion s around the concept s 
of introducing human’s role and function into AI system s, and hybrid intelligence over the last a 
few years ( e.g., Zheng et al., 2017) . Third wave of AI does not only pose new challenges of 
considering these “human factors” in developing AI systems , but also calls for a broader human -
centered approach. Thus, w e characterize t he third AI wave  "technology enhancement + 
application  development  + human -centered  approach ", which provides a great opportunity for the 
HCI community.   
 
Table 1 Comparison  of The Three Waves of AI from an HCI Perspective                             
(adapted from Xu, 2019)  
 First Wave  
(1950s –1970s)  Second Wave  
(1980s –1990s)  Third Wave  
(2006 –current ) 
Major 
technology and 
methods  Early symbolism and 
connectionism school, 
production systems, 
knowledge inference, 
preliminary expert 
systems  Statistical model in 
speech recognition and 
machine translation, 
artificial neural 
network s in pattern 
recognition,  expert 
systems  
 Breakthroughs in deep learning 
technology  (e.g., speech /pattern 
recognition ), big data, high -
performance computers  
User needs  Not satisfied  Not satisfied  Starting to provide useful and 
problem -solving AI systems  
 
Focus area s 
   
Technological 
exploration   
Technological  
enhancement   
Continued t echnological 
enhancement, e thical design,  
front -end AI applications , usage 
scenarios of AI application s, 
interaction technology , etc.  
 
Characteristics   
Academi c dominance   
Academi c dominance   
Technological enhancement + 
application  development  + 
human -centered  approach  
    

==== Page 6 ====
 
6 
 2.2 Autonomous c hara cteristics of AI technology from a HCI perspective   
Automation and autonomy respectively represent the typical characteristics of non -AI and 
AI technologies;  thus,  a comparative analysis of these characteristics can clearly reveal the key 
differences between non-AI and AI systems  (Kaber, 2018 ; Xu, 2021 ).  
Automation represent s the typical characteristics of non -AI computing systems.  
Automation  is the ability of a system to perform well -defined tasks and to produce deterministic 
results , typically relying on a fixed set of rules or algorithms  based  on mechanic al or computing 
technolog y, but without AI -based autonomous  technology . Automation cannot perform the tasks 
that were not designed for, in which operators must manual ly take over the automated system. 
Automation does not usually replace the human; instead, it changes the nature of the human’s 
work from direct operations to a more supervisory role  in complex domains . For example, the 
autopilot on a civil aircraft flight deck can carry out certain flight tasks previously undertaken by 
pilots, moving them away from their traditional role of directly controlling the aircraft to a more 
supervisory role managing the airborne automation. However, in abnormal situations  which the 
autopilot was not designed for, pilots must immediately inte rvene to take over manual control of 
the aircraft.  
AI-based autonomy  specifically refers to the ability of an AI -based autonomous system to 
perform specific tasks independently. They can exhibit unique machine behaviors and evolve to 
gain certain levels of  human -like cognitive, self -executing, and self-adaptive abilities (Rahwan et 
al., 2019 ; Xu & Ge, 2020 ). As AI technolog y advances , these autonomous systems can be 
developed to have these capabilities over time . They may successfully operate under some 
situations that are possibly not fully anticipated, and  the results may not be deterministic  (den 
Broek et al. , 2017 ; Kaber, 2018) . Current AI technolog y only allows us to develop autonomous 
systems that typically perform limited tasks in specific situations.  There  will be situations that the 
designers had never considered and which the system cannot handle. For example, no current 
autonomous vehicles can “solve” all driving  scenarios  without human intervention.   
Table 2 compares the characteristics between automation and autonomy from a n HCI 
perspective. The fundamental difference in capabilities between the two is that autonomous 
systems can be built with certain levels of human -like intelligent abilities. On the other hand, both  
automation and autonomy  require human intervention in operations for safety. The se differences 
and similarities between the two are of great significance for HCI solutions in developing AI  
systems .  
 
Table 2 Comparative analysis between non-AI-based automation and AI-based autonomy  
(adapted from Xu, 20 21) 
Characteristics  Non-AI Based Automated 
Systems  AI-Based Autonomous Systems  
(with varied degrees of autonomy)  

==== Page 7 ====
 
7 
 (with varied levels of automation)  
 Examples: Office software, 
washing machine, elevator, 
automated manufacturing lines  Example s: smart speakers, 
intelligent decision systems, 
autonomous vehicles, intelligent 
robot s 
Human -like sensing 
ability  Yes Yes 
(advanced technologies)  
Human -like cognitive 
abilities (perceptual 
integration, pattern 
recognition, learning, 
reasoning, etc.)  No  Yes 
(abilities vary across design 
scenarios; advanced systems may 
set self -defined goals, etc.)  
Human -like self-
executing  ability  No 
(require human manual activation 
and intervention according to 
predefined rules  Yes  
(perform operations independently  
in  
specific situations:  abilities vary 
across scenarios)  
Human -like self-adaptive 
ability to unpredictable 
environments  No  Yes  
(abilities vary across scenarios)  
Operation outcomes  Deterministic  Non-deterministic , unexpected                                                    
Human intervention  Human intervention is r equired and var ies across levels of automation 
and autonomy ; human must be the ultimate decision maker  
 
There have been debates about automation v ersus autonomy. Kaber (2018 ) believes that 
recent human -automation interaction research has confused concepts of automation and 
autonomy , which has led to inappropriate expectation for design and misdirected criticism of 
design methods. The situation is not new and has origins in historical human factors research. For 
example, Sheridan and Verplank  (1978) developed a taxonomy of 10 levels of automation to 
provide a basis for automated systems design. Parasuraman, Sheridan, and Wickens (2000) 
identified various aspects of automation to be considered in human – machine systems design as 
well as a space of possible human -automation combinations for complex systems control (e.g., 
initial function allocation decisions). O’Neill  et al. (2020)  defines the difference between 
automation and autonomy is a matter of degree and both exist on the level of automatio n 
continuum as defined by Sheridan and Verplank (1978).  

==== Page 8 ====
 
8 
 Kaber (2018) differentiates the concepts of automation and autonomy with a new 
framework. Key requirements of design for autonomy include  agent viability in a target context, 
agent self -governance in  goal formulation and fulfilment of roles, and independence in defined 
tasks performance. Kaber (2018) auges that Sheridan and Verplank’s (1978) taxonomy were not 
referring to autonomous agents capable of formulating objectives and determining courses of 
action and make no mention of, for example, self -sufficiency  or self -governance  in context.  
As Table 2 shows, we believe that automation and autonomy are not differentiated in 
terms of level of automation , whether there is a certain level of human -like intelligent capabilities 
on AI technology is the essential difference between the two. With the help of algorithms, 
machine learning ( ML) and training with big data, a n AI system can autonomously complete 
certain tasks that cannot be done by previous automation technolog y in certain scenarios ( Kaber, 
2018; Madni & Madni, 2018 ; Xu. 2021 ). These unique autonomous characteristics of AI 
technology are the starting point for considering how to effectively develop AI systems  from a  
HCI perspective .  
 
2.3 An emerging form of the human -machine relationship in the AI era  
Historically speaking, the evolution of human -machine relationship has been driven by 
technology  (Wickens  et al., 2015 ). The characteristics of the human -machine relationship in a 
specific technological period  determines the focus of human -machine interaction related work 
(e.g., human factors) during that period. As shown in Figure 1, the human -machine relationship 
has evolved from the "humans adapt to machines" paradigm before World War II to the 
"machines adapt to humans" paradigm after World War II. Since entering the co mputer era, it has 
evolved into the human -computer interaction (HCI) , that is, the interaction between humans and 
non-AI computing systems . The computing  products (e.g., automated machines) primarily work 
as an assistive tool , supporting human ’s monitoring and execution tasks.  
 

==== Page 9 ====
 
9 
  
Figure 1 The evolution of the human -machine relationship across eras   
 
As w e are currently entering in the AI-based “autonomous world ,” AI technology has 
given new roles to machines in human -machine systems. The interaction between human and an 
AI system is essentially the interaction between human and the autonomous /AI agent in the AI 
system. As AI technology advances, t he intelligent agents can be developed to exhibit unique 
behavior and possess autonomous chara cteristics with certain levels of human -like intelligent 
abilities as summarized in Table 2 (Rahwan et al., 2019 ; Xu, 2021 ). With AI technology a 
machine can evolve from an assistive tool that supports human operations to a collaborative 
teammate of a team with a human operator, playing the dual roles of "assistive tool + 
collaborative teammate"  (Grimm et al., 2018;  Brill et al., 2018 ; Lyons et al., 2018 ; Wynne et al., 
2018; O’Neill  et al., 2020; Seeber et al., 2020 ; Chen et al., 2016; Shannon et al., 2017 ; Wynne et 
al., 2018 ). Thus, the human -machine relationship  in the AI era has added a new type of human -
machine collaboration , often called "Human -Machine Teaming" ( e.g., Brill et al., 2018; Brandt et 
al., 2018; Shively et al., 2018 ; McDermott et al., 2018 ). The human -machine relationship has 
evolved into a “HCI + human -machine  teaming ” since HCI will continue to exist.  
The exploratory research work related to human -machine collaboration  has begun in some 
work domains. For example, intelligent air traffic management system (Kistan et al., 2018), 
operator -intelligent robot teaming (Calhoun et al., 2018), pilot -system teaming on the intelligent 
flight deck (Brandt et al., 2018), driver -system teaming in high -level autonomous vehicles (de 
Visser et al., 2018; Navarro, 2018). However, many questions remain open, which we will discuss 
in detail in Section 5.2.  
As history has proven  in the computer era , such a new form of human -machine 
collaborati ve relationship driven by AI technology will inevitably bring about a paradigmatic shift 
for HCI research and applications  in the AI era , driving new design thinking and approaches in 


==== Page 10 ====
 
10 
 developing AI systems. This also implies that w e may have alternative ways to maximize the 
advantages while minimizing the potential safety risks of AI technology by leveraging the human -
machine collaborati ve relationship.  
 
2.4 Comparative analysis between non -AI computing systems and AI systems  
To further understand the changes introduced by AI technology, we conducted a 
comparative analysis between non -AI computing systems (the focus of conventional HCI work) 
and AI systems covering across a range of aspects of analysis  from an HCI perspective  (see Table 
3). Herein, w e define AI systems as computing systems that incorporat es algorithms that r eplicate 
human -like intelligent capabilities such as learning  and self-adaptation, allow the machine to 
autonomously operate in certain complex  and continuously changing environments, or processes 
that adopt computational models of intelligent behavior to solve complex problems that humans 
are not able to solve  (Wienrich & Latoschik, 2021 ).  
  
Table 3 A comparative analysis between non -AI computing systems and AI systems  
 
Aspects  of 
Analysis  Human interaction with non -AI 
computing systems  Human interaction with AI systems   
Examples  Conventional office software, 
washing machine, elevator, civil 
flight deck  automation  Smart speakers, intelligent decision 
systems, autonomous vehicles, 
intelligent robots  
Machine 
behavior  Machine typically behaviors as 
expected based on design  Can be developed to exhibit unique 
machine behavio r with biased and 
unexpected  outcomes, and may evolve 
as machine learns  
Machine intelligence  No Can be developed to have human -like 
capabilities (e.g., cognitive, execution, 
adaption), levels vary  
Machine’s role  Primarily work as an assistive tool  Plus, can work as a collaborative 
teammate with humans (based on the 
level of machine intelligence)  
Machine outputs  Deterministic by following fixed 
rules & algorithms  Can be non -deterministic  and 
unexpected  
Human -machine 
relationship  Human -computer interaction  Plus, h uman -machine teaming 
(collaboration)  
User interface  Graphical user interface, touch 
interaction, visible/explicit 
interface, etc.  Plus, voice input, fac ial recognition, 
gesture interaction, brain -computer 
interface, invisible/implicit interface 
etc. 

==== Page 11 ====
 
11 
 Initiating ability  
 Typically humans can proactively 
initiate actions, machine is 
passive  Pus, m achines can initiate actions 
depending on the intelligent level of AI  
Directability  
 One-way (humans towards 
machines) trust, situation 
awareness  (SA) & decision -
making  Two-way (between humans & 
machines) shared trust, SA, & take 
over/handoff of system control 
(humans must be the ultimate decision 
makers)  
Complementarity  
 No intelligent complementation 
between humans & machines  Machine intelligence & human 
biological intelligence  complement 
each other to maximise the intelligence 
level  
Explainability of 
system output  Typically, explainable if the user 
interface is user -friend ly Plus, AI-specific ‘black box’ effect 
(caused by AI technologies such as 
deep neural networks) that may make 
the system output obscure to users  
Predictability  Only human operators have the 
ability  Plus, m achines can predict each other’s 
behaviours & system status (with 
advanced AI)  
Adaptability  Only human operators have the 
ability  Plus, m achines can adapt to each 
other’s behaviours & operating 
environment (with advanced AI)  
Goal setting ability  Only human operators have the 
ability  Plus, m achine can set or adjust goals 
(with advanced AI)  
Collaborating ability  Limited human -machine 
collaboration  Potentially more effective human -
machine collaboration based on the 
teammate relationship, & capabilities 
of complementarity, predic tability, 
adaptability, etc.  
User needs  Primarily in psychology, safety, 
physiology, usability, 
functionality, etc.  Plus,  higher levels of needs in the 
aspects of emotion, security, privacy, 
ethics, skill growth, decision -making 
authority, AI explainability, etc.  
 
It should be noted that some characteristics of AI systems as listed in Table 3 depend on 
the high degree of autonomy to be driven by future AI technology, which may not exist today and 
will be available as predicted (e.g., Bansal  et al., 2019b; Walliser  et al., 2019; Demir et al., 2018) . 
As HCI professionals, our job is to drive human -centered solutions to timely and effectively 
address the challenges that new technology has brought about or will bring about. As Table 3 
summarizes, i t is apparent that there are significant differences between the two types of systems 

==== Page 12 ====
 
12 
 across many aspects, ranging from behavior, role, relationship, interaction, and user interface to a 
variety of abilities between humans and machines.  
As AI technology be comes increasingly ubiquitous in people’s work and lives, the 
machine being used by us is no longer the “conventional” computer, but intelligent and AI -based 
systems.  The HCI community must seriously consider the technology and its impacts. 
Specifically, these significant differences raise many questions to us , such as :  
• What do these differences mean for future HCI research  and applications ? 
• Is the scope of current HCI approach (e.g., human -centered design, HCI methods ) that 
focuses on the human interaction with non -AI systems broad enough to cover the 
unique challenges and issues raised by AI systems?  
• What and how can HCI contribute to the research and application  of AI systems in 
order to deliver human -centered AI systems ? 
3  From human -centered design approach to a human -centered AI approach  
 Norman (1999) initially define d the human -centered design approach . The International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published several ISO standards to standardi ze the 
approach, process, and methods for human -centered design, such as ISO 9241 -210, 9241 -220 
(ISO 2010).  The h uman -centered ap proach has been in use by the HCI community for four 
decades  now.  
Human -centered AI is not a new concept . While the technology -centered approach is 
dominating the development of AI technology, researchers have individually explored a range of 
human -centered approaches to address the unique issues introduced by AI technology . For 
examples, t hese include humanis tic design research ( Auernhammer, 2020) , participatory design 
(Neuhauser & Kreps, 2011), inclusive design (Spencer et al., 2018), interaction design 
(Winograd, 1996), human -centered computing (Brezillon, 2003; Ford et al., 2015; Hoffman et al., 
2004 ), and social responsibility ( Riedl, 2019). Each approach provides a specific perspective and 
allows examination of specific aspects of an AI system design.  
In response to the possible negative ethical and moral impacts of AI systems, in 2018 
Stanford Univers ity established a “human -centered AI” research institution primarily driven by 
the computer science department. The strategy emphasizes on two aspects of work: technology 
and ethical design. They have realized that the next frontier for the development of AI systems 
cannot be just technology, it must also be ethical and beneficial to humans; AI is to augment 
human capabilities rather than replace them (Li, 2018; Donahoe , 2018).  
However, the proposed frameworks have not specifically called out for the needs in 
developing AI systems from a n HCI perspective. For instance, without an effective interaction 
design mechanism, the design cannot guarantee that humans remain the ultimate decision makers, 
cannot avoid potentially biased outcomes in human -centered  ML, and eventually violating the 
goals of ethical design. To address the gaps and the unique challenges brought in by AI 
technology, Xu (2019a) proposed a comprehensive approach for developing human -centered AI 

==== Page 13 ====
 
13 
 (HCAI) ; the HCAI approach includes three pri mary aspects of work interdependently: 
technology , human, and ethic s, promoting  the concept  that we must keep human at the central 
position when developing AI systems. Shneiderman (2020a) promotes HCAI by provid ing a two-
dimensional design framework to guide the implementation of the HCAI approach in developing 
AI systems.  
We further elaborate the HCAI approach from the following three aspects of work (Xu, 
2019a)  (see Figure 2)  
 
Figure 2 The Human -Centered AI (HCAI) Framework  (adapted from Xu, 2019 a) 
 
(1) "Human": We need to start from the needs of humans , identify effective usage 
scenarios  for AI app lications , implement human -centered  HCI methods (e.g., research, modeling, 
interaction design, engineering, test ) and other interdisciplinary approaches in the research and 
development of AI systems, so that we can achieve the design goals: develop ing AI systems that 
are useful  (with value to humans and society)  and usable  (with effective interaction design) , with 
humans as the ultimate decision makers for  AI system .  
(2) "Technology ": We need to focus on the organic combination of the three parts. (a) 
Machine intelligence  (i.e., AI) : Make s full use of advanced and effective technologies such as 
algorithms /models, big data, computing power, and other methods to achieve as much as possible 


==== Page 14 ====
 
14 
 a machine that reflects the depth characteristics of human intelligence; (b) Human intelligence: 
Promote s the use of human intelligence augmentation (IA) technology, and use AI technology, 
psychology, neurotechnology, biotechnology and other multidisciplinary methods to jointly 
promote human intelligence augmentation  (see 5.3 for details ); (c) Human -machine hybrid 
intelligence: Promotes a strategy for the development of AI techno logy by integrating human  
functions and roles into human -machine systems  and by taking complementary advantages  of 
machine intelligence and human intelligence , so that we can develop a more powerful form of 
human -centered hybrid intelligence  (see 5.4 for details).  The design  goal is to develop scalable, 
powerful, and human -controlled AI , ensuring it augment s human abilities, rather than replac ing 
humans.  
(3) "Ethic s": We must  guarantee fairness , justice , privacy, human decision -making 
authority, and accountability  in developing AI systems  as ethical issues are much more significant 
in AI systems than conventional non -AI systems. The design goal is to develop ethical and 
responsible AI  by leveraging HCI interdiscipl inary approach and meaningful human control (see 
Section 5.7 for details)  and the approaches already proposed  by others . From the macro 
perspective of the sociotechnical systems, the goal of the ethical design will be achieved with 
multiple disciplinary methods through system  and HCI  design, development  practice (e.g., 
process , developer skillset), standards  & governance , organizational culture, etc.   
             We need to meet all the design goals  across t he three aspects of work , then we can 
achieve the overall goal of HCAI: Reliable, safe , and trustworthy AI ( Shneiderman , 2020a ; Xu, 
2019 a).  Furthermore, the HCAI approach are characteri zed as follows.   
(1) Placing humans at the center . All the three primary aspects of work in the HCAI approach 
place humans at the center . Specifically, the “technology’ work ensures that humans are 
kept at the center of the human -machine hybrid AI systems through a deep integration 
between AI and human intelligence. The “human” work ensures that AI systems are 
human -controllable by keepin g humans as the ultimate decision makers, useful by meeting 
user needs, usable by providing effective interaction design, and explainable by providing 
transparent and understandable output to humans. The “ethic s” work  aims to address the 
specific ethical i ssues in AI systems and  guarantees that AI systems are humanistic and 
ethical by protecting human privacy  and miniating fairness  etc.   
(2) The complementarity between human intelligence and machine intelligence . People in the 
AI community start to recognize that machines at any level of intelligence cannot 
completely emulate human’s intelligence and advancing AI technology in isolation has 
encountered challenge s (Zheng et al., 2017). The HCAI approach emphasizes 
complementarity to overcome the limitation of AI development. The deficiencies of AI 
can be compensated by the integration of augmented human intelligence. The HCAI 
framework promotes the strategic approach that is to leverage the strength of both human 
and machine intelligence, so that we can build a hybrid augmented intelligence to 
maximize the intelligence level of AI systems. The HCAI approach offers a strategy for 

==== Page 15 ====
 
15 
 considering the growth direction of AI technology: "human -machine hybrid intelligence" 
(Johnson & Vera, 2019 ) 
(3) The interdependency of human, technology, and ethic s. The HCAI approach advocates 
synergy across the three aspects of work. For example, if the impact of AI on humans 
(e.g., ethics) is not considered in design, it is impossible for AI systems to achieve the 
human -centered goal and may eventually harm humans even though the AI technology  
deployed is technically made "more like humans." On the other hand, ethically designed 
AI systems emphasize augmenting human capabilities rather than replacing humans. AI 
systems, such as autonomous vehicles , need to provide human drivers with enough 
situation awareness and an effective human -controllable interface through human factors 
design to ensure that the driver can quickly and effectively take over the control of AV in 
an emergency  
(4) Systematic design thinking . From a technical point of view, the HCAI approach considers 
humans and machines as a system and  seeks to develop the complementarity of machine 
intelligence and human intelligence within the framework of human -machine systems. 
From the HCI perspective , the HCAI approach e mphasize s the perspective of human -
machine -environment system. An effective AI system should be the optimal match 
between human (needs, physiology, psychology, etc.), AI technology, and environment 
(physics, culture, organization, society , etc.). From the perspective of ethical design, the 
HCAI approach systematically considers factors such as ethics, morality, law, and 
fairness. Therefore, the HCAI approach emphasizes that the development of AI systems is 
not just a technological project,  but a systems project that collaboration across disciplines.  
 
Table 4 further highlights  the differences between the conventional human -centered 
design approach  and the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach. As listed in Table 4, although 
HCAI is rooted in the human -centered design approach, HCAI is an enhanced version of the 
conventional human -centered design approach in the AI era  which aims to address the specific 
challenges and issues introduced by AI technology. In the computer era, HCI research and 
applications enabled the implementation of the human -centered design approach . Similarly, we 
need to promote the research and application of human  interaction with AI systems, eventually 
enabling the implementation of the HCAI  approach .   
 
Table 4  Comparison between the conventional human -centered design approach                                 
and human -centered AI approach  
 
 Technology -
centered AI 
approach  Conventional 
human -centered 
approach  Human -centered AI  (HCAI)  approach  

==== Page 16 ====
 
16 
 Design 
physiology  Technology -
centered  Human -centered  Human -centered  
Primary 
focus  Algorithm, big data, 
computing power, 
intelligent 
interaction 
technology , simulate 
(or replace) human 
intelligence  by 
modeling human 
cognition, 
functionality of AI 
systems     User experience 
of non -AI 
computing 
systems   
 
 Human : user needs , usage scenarios of 
AI systems , useful ness ( valuable 
functionality)  and usability (user 
experience)  of AI systems  as well as 
intelligent interaction technology , 
human’s ultimate decision -making 
authority  
Technology : human -machine hybrid 
intelligence, integrated AI and human 
intelligence augmentation , augment 
humans (not replacing)  
Ethics : Ethical AI design achieved by 
meaningful human control, interaction 
design, HCI interdisciplinary approach , 
etc.   
Approach es 
and methods 
addressing  
unique AI 
issues  Software 
development 
methods, plus AI / 
machine learning 
algorithm/ models, 
human  cognitive 
modeling , etc.  HCI methods 
(e.g., user needs, 
iterative UI 
prototyping and 
usability testing)  HCI methods, plus i nterdisciplinary 
methods  such as meaningful  human  
control, hybrid intelligence, human -
centered/interactive machine learning, 
human -in-the-loop AI, human -controlled 
autonomy , human -AI collaboration 
beyond interaction, etc. (see Section 5 )  
In addition, enhanced HCI methods such 
as AI as a  design material, longitudinal 
study, W OZ prototyping (see Section 6)  
Multi -
disciplinary 
team  Professionals from 
fields such as AI, 
computer science, 
data science, 
neuroscience  Computer 
science and HCI 
professionals  Additional professionals from areas of 
AI, data, and neuroscience in addition to 
the conventional multi -disciplinary team  
 
In summary, as listed in Table 4, while the HCAI approach inherits the human -centered 
design philosophy, the HCAI approach goes beyond the conventional human -centered approach 
with: (1) expanded work focuses (not simply “human” related work); (2) expanded 
interdisciplinary approaches and m ethods; (3) expanded membership of the interdisciplinary 
team. With the expansion, the HCAI approach can address the unique issues and challenges of AI 
systems  more strategically and tactically. In addition, by taking the complementary strength of the 
technology -driven AI approach and the HCAI approach, we believe that HCI and AI 
professionals  can partner in developing human -centered AI systems.    

==== Page 17 ====
 
17 
 4. Transition  to an emerging interdisciplinary area : Human -AI Interaction (HAII)  
4.1 Motivation s for promoting the research and application of HAII  within the HCI 
community  
As discussed previously , the third wave of AI is becoming more  human -centered, the AI 
technology as represented by autonomy can exhibit  unique machine behavior with certain levels 
of human -like intelligent capabilities  with possible non-deterministic and unexpected output , and 
AI-based machine s can evolve and play the dual roles of "assistive tool + collaborative teammate"  
when interacted by humans.  Furthermore, the comparative analysis shows  such significant 
differences between non-AI and AI systems  across a variety of aspects . All of these are new 
issues that we have not  encountered when we address HCI issues in the computer era. 
Furthermore, researchers have initially proposed a human -centered AI  (HCAI)  approach to 
address these unique issues of AI systems.  
To respond to these changes  and the call for a HCAI approach ,  the HCI community must: 
(1) reassess the current scope of our HCI practices to ensure we expand our view beyond the 
boundary of our conventional focus of non -AI computing systems; (2) rethink our current 
approach at a paradigmatic level to ensure that we can effectively address the unique issues in AI 
systems; (3) reexamine our HCI practices that were originally created to suit non -AI systems so 
that we will be better to ad dress the issues of AI systems . By doing all of these, we can effective ly 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach  to maximize the benefits and minimize the risks 
of AI technology.   
The “technology -centered” approach had dominated the beginning stage of the computer 
era in the 1980s until a wake -up call was made to promote the human -centered design approach. 
Today, we are witnessing the “time lagging effect” again (Hancock , 2019, 2020 ; Xu, 2019a; 
Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020c). The practice of the  human -centered design approach in the AI era 
(i.e., the HCAI approach) has once again historically fallen on the shoulders of the HCI 
professionals and other related disciplines (e.g., human factors , AI, computer science ). With the 
HCAI approach as a weapon, we just need to find a platform as an appropriate battlefield to win 
the war that aims for any potential harms and risks when humans interact with AI systems. 
Researchers have proposed to enable the implementation of the HCAI approach from a variety of 
perspectives, such as design framework ( Shneiderman ,  2020 a), ethically aligned design ( Li, 
2018; Donahoe , 2018 ), governance of ethical AI (Shneiderman, 2020d), and design process 
(Cerejo , 2021) , we believe that promoting the research and application of human interaction with 
AI systems will al so provide a collaborative platform for HCI professionals  to address the unique 
issues introduced by AI technology , which will further enable the implementation of the HCAI 
approach .    
Research and application of h uman interactions with AI systems are not new research 
agenda, and many avenues have been investigated by researchers over the past several years  
(Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Shively et al., 201 7; Berberian, 2019; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ; Brill et al., 

==== Page 18 ====
 
18 
 2018; Azevedo  et al., 2017; O’Neill  et al., 2020) . People have promoted their work under a 
variety of labels, such as, “human -machine teaming” (e.g.,  Brill et al., 2018; Brandt et al., 2018; 
Shively et al., 2018; McDermott et al., 2018; Brill et al., 2018 ), “human -autonomy teaming” (e.g., 
Azevedo  et al. , 2017; O’Neill  et al., 2020; Shively  et al., 201 7; Wynne & Lyons, 2018 ), “human -
agent interaction” (e.g., Bradshaw et al., 2014; Prada & Paiva, 2014 ), “autonomy -human 
interaction” (e.g., Endsley, 2017), “human -autonomous system interaction” (e.g., Cummings & 
Clare, 2015),  “human -robot interaction” (e.g., Sheridan, 2016), “human -AI teaming /teams ” (e.g., 
Dellermann et al., 2019 ; Bansal et al., 2019a ), human -AI symbiosis (e.g., Nagao, 2019), human -
agent teaming (e.g., Prada & Paiva, 2014 ). While there  are different focuses across these 
studies, all of them essentially investigate human’s interactions with these “machines” (i.e., 
intelligent a gent, AI agent, autonomous system) based on AI technology. Also, some people 
already used the term of human -AI interaction (HAII) (e.g., Amershi et al., 2019; Yang, Steinfeld 
et al., 2020; Brill et al., 2018 ; Wienrich & Latoschik, 2021) . As a result, a n emerging area related 
to HAII is gradually taking shape. We believe that it is the time to formally propose and promote 
the research and application of HAII as an interdisciplinary area for the HCI community  to offer  
our unique contributions based on the unique interdisciplinary nature of HCI , just as we 
proactively initiated the HCI work 40 years ago.  
Why do we promote the research and application of HAII within the HCI community 
since there are HCI professionals who  have been working on the development of AI systems ?   
First, HAII helps recognize and emphasize on the fundamental differences between non -
AI and AI systems, getting more attention across professional communities (e.g., HCI, human 
factors, AI, computer science ). The primary object of the HAII work is AI systems, instead of just 
conventional  non-AI computing systems . HAII will reinforce HCI professionals to recognize the 
unique challenges and issues of AI technology, so that we can have new design thinking, 
understand the boundary and focus of the HAII research and applications, and develop effective 
strategy and methods to effectively address the unique challenges and issues in AI systems.  
Second, we are responding to the calls from the HCI and human factors communit ies as 
discussed earlier (e.g., Salmon, Hancock & Carden, 2019; Hancock, 2019, 2020; Lau, 
Hildebrandt & Jeon, 2020 ; Endsley, 2017, 2018, 2019; Stephanidis, Salvendy et al., 2019; 
Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020c ; Xu, 2019 a).  Thus, HAII can serve as an urgent wake -up call to the 
HCI community that we must get renewed attention to reassess and recast extant HCI approaches 
and methods, and prepare ourselves with necessary AI skillset and knowledge, so that we can take 
immediate actions with a new design thinking strategy to more influentially address the emerging 
and specific challenges from AI systems.   
Third , HAII , as labeled  by itself , helps us recognize that human’s interaction with AI 
systems is always required . As HCI professionals, we ad vocate to keep human s at the center  and 
as the ultimate decision makers  when developing AI systems to minimize  AI-related s afety risk s. 
The outcome from the HAII work will also help send a n alert message to the AI community that 
they must consider humans’ roles and functions in developing AI systems , AI is to augment 

==== Page 19 ====
 
19 
 human intelligence, instead of replacing it, building a “machine world” that may harm humans  
must not be the ultimate goal of AI technology .  
Finally , HAII will provide a  collaboration platform across disciplines and will enable 
these professional s to effectively implement the HCAI  approach by unify ing all the work  related 
to developing AI systems under the same umbrella . AI technology itself is a result of the 
collabo ration across disciplines. As a “universal” label , HAII  will help the professionals 
collaborate to identify the commonality and the needs from the specific perspective of individual 
disciplines (e.g., computer science, AI, psychology , HCI, human factors, engineering, design, 
neuroscience) in developing AI systems , jointly address ing the challenges the society is facing, 
and maximize the influences on the development of AI systems.  
The emergence of the HAII  area is inevitable  as technology advances , just like the 
emergence of HCI in the 1980’s , when HCI was relabeled  from the traditional human -machine 
interaction  as traditional machines were being computerized . All of this have been naturally 
driven by the human -machine relationship  and the unique issues of emerging technologies faced 
by humans and society, as technology advances over time  (see Tables 1, 2, &  3, Figure 1) . Today, 
we are just facing a new type of “machines” - AI systems that present unique characteristics and 
challenges to us, urging us to take action.  
What are the relationships between HCI and HAII? The discussions about the relationship 
between HCI and AI are not new  (Choudhury et al., 2020) . Activities in the field of HCI and AI 
have been intertwined  (Grudin, 2010 ; Lieberman, 2009 ). The goal of HCI is to make computing 
systems easier to their users. The goal of AI is to model human intelligence and to embody those 
mechanisms in computers. For many AI professionals developing AI systems, their main interest 
is on the development of a l earning algorithm rather than the users and interaction itself, resulting 
in many AI  sysytems  do suffer from poor usage  scenarios  and interaction design  (Choudhury et 
al., 2020 ). Through the developing histories of HCI and AI, the relation ship between HCI and AI 
has changed from competit ion (in the past) to mutual promotion (in the present) state  (Fan et al., 
2019 ). People have argued that AI and HCI can team up to fulfill the promise of both fields, 
neither field must  go it alone  (Lieberman, 2009 ). For instance, HCI provides research ideas and 
usages for application usages for AI (natural interactions, emotional computing, etc.)  while AI 
delivers the technology for more effective interaction for HCI  (Fan et al., 2019 ).  
Now we are witnessing a marriage of HCI and AI  (Choudhury et al., 2020) . Researchers 
have begun to be more vocal about the need for a stronger relationship  between HCI and AI.  The 
AI community has recently made investments in the topics of fairness, accountability, and 
transparency of AI systems1, as discussed earlier. There are more and more journals and 
conferences on HCI + AI, and the number and influence of papers continue to increase  (Fan et al., 
2019 ). Thus, we expect the emerging  area of HAII to revive and extend prior attempts to bridge 
HCI and AI , which provides a great opportunity for HCI professionals.  
Instead of proposing a new  sperate interdisciplinary filed for HAII , our overall goal in 
promoting the HAII work is to further enable implementation of the HCAI approach  through the 

==== Page 20 ====
 
20 
 HAII research and application , so that HCI professionals, in partnership with other disciplinary 
professionals, can effectively address the unique issues and challenges introduced by AI 
technology to develop human -centered AI systems.  
 
4.2 The HAII framework   
In this paper, we intend to provide the initial definitions for HAII as an emerging area with 
the hope that they can be further clarified as the work grows. We conducted a literature review of 
the HAII related work that has been done s o far for our assessment . As a result of the assessment, 
Figure 3 illustrates that: (1) HAII is a multidisciplinary area; (2) there are many unique issues or 
topics for research and application  (see the gray boxes in Figure 3), distin ct from conventional 
HCI, for HCI professionals to address by leveraging the knowledge and methods from the 
multiple disciplines.  As labeled by section number, Figure 3 also shows the relationships between 
sections of this paper.  
 
 
Figure 3 Illustration of the interdisciplinary nature and main unique issues  in the HAII area  
 
• Definition :  HAII is a n emerging interdisciplinary  research and application  area focusing 
on the interaction between humans and AI systems (i.e., any AI -based products, 
applications, services) by applying a human -centered AI approach and leveraging the 
methods from disciplines such as HCI, human factors , AI, computer science , and so on   


==== Page 21 ====
 
21 
 • Objective :  The HAII work  intends to effectively address the unique issues of AI systems  
by promo ting and implementing the HCAI approach as illustrated in Figure 2, so that we 
can deliver human -centered, reliable, safe, and trustworthy AI systems  
• Scope : HAII studies the impacts of various factors on humans’ interaction  specifically  
with AI systems  beyond the scope of the conventional HCI primarily focusing on non -AI 
computing systems ; these factors include development of the interaction technology and 
design for AI systems , user needs, and a variety of environmental factors from a broad 
socio -technical perspective as illustrated in Figure 3 
• Methods : As an interdisciplinary area, HAII leverages a variety of methods across 
multi ple disciplines as illustrated in Figure 3 as well as enhanced HCI methods  and 
optimized HCI practice to effectively address the unique issues of AI systems  (see 
Sections 6 & 7 for details)   
• Primary players : As a highly interdisciplinary area,  the primary players of HAII include a 
group of professionals from the communities of HCI, human factors, AI, computer 
science, neuroscience, data science, psychology, social science, and anybody who aims to 
develop AI systems. Obviously, the collaboration when doing HAII work is broader than 
HCI, requiring new membership, such as, professionals from AI, data science, 
neuroscience , and other dis ciplines . We believe that t he HCI community need s to take the 
leading role  as we did 40 years ago , when promoting the human -centered approach for 
computing systems.    
 
4.3 Promoting the HAII work for enabling HCAI   
As discussed earlier, t he overall goal of promoting the HAII work  is to further enable the 
implementation of the HCAI approach to deliver human -centered AI systems. To achieve this 
goal, we further illustrate the relationship between the HCAI approach and the HAII area . Table 5 
maps out some main HAII research topics and challenges with the specific design goals as 
defined in the HCAI framework (see  Figure 2).  As Table 5 shows, there are many challenges in 
these main  HAII research topics  (which we will elaborate in Section 5) , where HCI professionals 
can make (or continue to make) unique contributions . Addressing these challenges will help 
achieve the HCAI goals  as defined in Figure 2 , eventually developing human -centered AI 
systems.   
 
Table 5  Illustration of the Mapping between HCAI Goals and Main HAII Issues                                          
That HCI Can Make Unique Contributions  
Main HAII 
research 
areas  Section 
# for 
details  Main challenges in developing                              
human -centered AI systems 
(examples)  Possible HCAI -based 
solutions (examples)  Expected 
main HCAI 
goals  

==== Page 22 ====
 
22 
 Unique 
machine 
behavior of 
AI systems  Section 
5.1   Possible biased and unexpected 
behaviors, difficulty in training 
and testing of dynamic machine 
behavior, evolution of machine 
behavior, user participatory in 
machine learning, machine 
behavior in social  interaction, 
behavioral interaction of 
multi ple -AI agents  Human -centered machine 
learning, interactive machine 
learning, application of HCI 
methods in data collection, 
training, algorithm tuning, 
testing, visualization,  and 
interaction design for machine 
learning, HCI behavioral 
methods   Ethical AI, 
responsible 
AI, human -
controlled 
autonomy  
Human -AI 
interaction  Section 
5.2 Human -AI relationship (super 
tool vs. teammate), theory, 
cognitive architecture, and 
models for human -AI 
collaborative relationship, 
shared situation awareness, 
shared trust, shared mental 
model, and shared autonomy 
between humans and AI agents   Human -autonomy teaming, 
modeling the two -way shared 
situation awareness, trust, 
mental models, and autono my 
between humans and AI 
agents, cognitive modeling of 
human -AI collaboration, 
human directed decision -
making authority   Useful AI, 
usable AI, 
human -
controlled 
autonomy  
Human 
intelligence 
augmentation  Section 
5.3 Competition between human 
intelligence augmentation (IA) 
and AI; optimally combined 
solutions using both IA and AI  HCI as a collaborative bridge 
between IA and AI; integrated 
IA and AI by leveraging the 
complementary strengths from 
both sides, brain -computer 
interface -based solutions for 
disab led, a variety of 
intelligent systems (e.g., 
medical diagnosis, decision -
making)  Augmented 
human 
capability, 
useful AI, 
usable AI,   
Machine 
intelligence  Section 
5.4 A bottleneck effect in 
developing AI in isolation, 
difficulty in emulating 
advanced huma cognitive 
capabilities, autonomous 
systems without human control  Human -machine hybrid 
intelligence leveraging the 
complementary strength of 
machine and human 
intellig ence, human -in-the-
loop AI, human -machine 
collaborative control, theories 
& methods of hybrid 
intelligence, human -machine 
symbiosis  Scalable AI, 
powerful AI, 
human -
controlled AI, 
humans as 
ultimate 
decision 
makers  
AI 
explainability  Section 
5.5 The AI “ black box” effect, Ai is 
explainable but not 
interpretable to target users, 
knowledge transfer of User participatory explainable 
AI, visualization of AI system 
outputs, human -in-the-loop 
explainable AI, knowledge Trustworthy 
AI, 
responsible 
AI, usable AI  

==== Page 23 ====
 
23 
 psychological theories on 
explanation, end -user 
participatory approach   transfer from automation 
transparency research and 
psychological theories on 
explanation, socio -technical 
approach   
AI-based 
autonomy  Section 
5.6 Unique autonomous 
characteristics of AI systems 
and impacts, unclarity between 
automation and autonomy, 
underestimated impacts of 
autonomy (wrongly considered 
to be a higher level of 
automation)  
 Knowledge transfer from 
automation research, human -
controlled AI autonomy, 
human -autonomy tea ming, 
shared autonomy,  Human -
controlled 
autonomy, 
humans as the 
ultimate 
decision -
makers, 
ethical AI, 
usable AI,  
Ethical AI 
issues  Section 
5.7 Human control vs. machine 
control over AI systems, 
possible biased and unexpected 
outcomes, traceability of errors 
(caused by system vs. human), 
accountability of AI failure  Meaningful human control, 
tracing and tracking 
mechanism of AI errors, 
transparen t system design, 
integrating HCI methods into 
development, HCI methods in 
training and testing  Ethical AT, 
responsible 
AI, human -
controlled 
autonomy, 
usable AI,  
Intelligent 
interaction  Section 
5.8 Interaction paradigms/models 
designed for non -AI systems , 
limited human cognitive 
capability, design standards 
developed for non -AI systems  New paradigms & models for 
intelligent interaction, 
innovative approach for 
reducing human cognitive 
workload, design standards for 
AI systems, interface design 
for facili tating human -AI 
collaboration  Usable AI, 
useful AI  
HCI methods  Section 
6 Ineffective HCI methods to 
address unique issues of AI 
systems  Enhanced HCI methods, 
alternative methods from other 
disciplines  All the HCAI 
design goals  
HCI practice  Section 
7 HCI professionals join AI 
projects too late, lack of 
training in HCAI, knowledge & 
skillset gap in HCI 
professionals  Integrating HCI methods into 
development, training of next -
gen AI engineers  All the HCAI 
design goals  
 
Over the past four decades, researchers  in the HCI community have argued that they could 
make great contributions to human -centered solutions, as HCI is a unique discipline that focuses 
on the nature of human -artefact interactions  (Dekker and Nyce 2004; Dul et al. 2012; Karwowski 
2005). Cooke (2017) calls for action from the interdisciplinary perspective , such as HCI and 

==== Page 24 ====
 
24 
 human factors, to address the challenges from new technologies, recommending three steps: (1) 
focus on unique problem s from the human -artifact interaction perspective; (2) take a systems 
approach; and (3) collaborate with other disciplines. Promoting the HAII research and application 
echoes Cooke’s call very well (Cooke 2017). First, the HAII work focuses on the uniq ue 
problems introduced by AI technology. Secondly, the HAII work enables a systems approach 
(i.e., the HCAI approach ) by promoting the three aspects of work defined in the HCAI approach  
to systematically address the unique challenges of AI systems . Lastly, the HAII work encourages 
interdisciplinary  collaboration.  We believe that promoting the HAII work will help enable the 
implementation of the HCAI  approach , eventually developing human -centered AI systems . 
5  Unique HAII issues and opportunities for H CI professionals      
 
The HCI community has recognized that n ew technologies present both challenges and 
opportunities to HCI (e.g., Stephanidis, Salvendy  et al., 2019; Shneiderman  et al., 2016 ). 
Specifically, Stephanidis, Salvendy et al.  (2019 ) provide comprehensive recommendations on the 
research priorities to address the seven grand challenges with intelligent interactive systems . Our 
approach is to focus on a deep understanding of  the unique issues in the HAII  area compared to 
the human interaction with non AI -computing systems , then we further identify the opportunities 
in the HAII research and application for HCI professionals to make contributions  in order to 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach . We beli eve that HCI professionals need to 
drive the HAII work as identified in collaboration with other professionals, which will further 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach to develop human -centered AI systems.   
Based on a literature review , this section is organized as follows : (1) identification of eight 
main HAII areas (as highlighted in Figure 3) with unique issues  in developing AI systems  and 
challenges for achieving the HCAI goals ; (2) highlight of the unique issues and challenges in each 
area as compared to the human interaction with non -AI computing systems; (3) review of the 
overall status of current research in each area; ( 4) highlight of the future HAII work where HCI 
professionals can make (or cont inue to make) unique contributions .  
 
5.1 From conventional machine output to u nique m achine behavior  
Differing from the machine behavior (system output) of conventional non-AI computing 
systems , the behavioral outcome of AI systems could be non-deterministic and unexpected. 
Scholars are raising the alarm about the unintended consequences, which can produce negative 
societal effects (e.g., Yampolskiy, 2019; Scott & Yampolskiy, 2019; Dressel & Farid, 2018 ; 
McGregor  et al., 2021 ). The HAII work can help ensure  that we avoid generating extreme or 
unexpected behaviors and reduce biase s generated from AI technologies such as ML (Pásztor, 
2018; Zhang  et al., 2020; Leibo et al., 2018).  This is  aligned with the "ethical design" advocated 
by the HCAI approach .  

==== Page 25 ====
 
25 
 Machine behavior in AI systems has a special ecological form  (Rahwan et al. , 2019) . 
Currently, the majority of people studying machine behavior are AI and computer science 
professionals without formal training in behavioral science  (Epstein et al., 2018;  Leibo et al., 
2018).  The leading researchers in the AI community call for other disciplines  to join  (Rahwan et 
al., 2019) . Obviously,  the multi -disciplinary HCI should play a significant role here  (Bromham et 
al., 2016) . Machine  behavior  is one of the unique characteristics that distinguishes  the HAII work 
from the conventional HCI work . HCI professionals must fully understand the design implications 
of machine behavior  in developing AI systems  and find effective ways to manage the unique 
behaviors of AI systems in order to deliver HCAI -based systems. Driven by the HCAI  approach , 
HCI need s to put human s and their needs first  in the development process  (e.g., data collection, 
algorithm data training, test)  and to partner with AI professionals to manage  the development of 
machine behavior .  
With many of today’s AI systems being derived from ML methods, study of the 
mechanism behind a machine’s behavior will require assessment of how ML methods/processes 
impact machine behavior (Doshi -Velez & Kim, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016). Many AI systems are 
based on supervised, reinforced, and inter active learning approaches that  require work done by 
humans, such as, providing an enormous amount of labeled data for algorithm training. Ini tial 
work has started. As an example of HCAI -aligned design thinking, based on a "human -centered 
ML" approach (Fie brink et al., 2018; G oogle PAIR , 2019 ; Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021) , Interactive 
Machine Learning (IML) aims to avoid concerns over fairness, accountability and transparency 
(Fiebrink et al., 2018; Dudley & Kristensson, 2018 ). The i nteractive machine learning approach 
allows users to participate in the ML training iteratively by selecting, mark ing, and/or generating 
training examples to interact with required functions of the system, supported by HCI design and 
evaluation methods.  The interactive machine learning approach also pays special attention to the 
interaction between humans and the ML p rocess. From the HCAI perspective, the interactive 
machine learning approach emphasizes on human’s roles in the development with human goals 
and capabilities, so that an AI system can deliver better results than humans or algorithms 
working alone (Amershi et al., 2014).   
The unique m achine behavior creates challenges for developing AI systems, but also 
opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in future HAII work (Lau et al., 2018; Rahwan 
et al., 2019; Amershi et al., 2014; Ledford, 2015 ).  
First, a machine acquire s its behavior  during the development with AI technology , shaping 
the behavior is affected by many factors , like algorithm s, architectur e (e.g., learning parameter, 
knowledge representation ), training , and data. HCI professionals may leverage the current HCI 
methods ( e.g., iterative design and evaluation with end users) to continuously improve the design 
until no undesirable results. For instance, HCI professionals may translat e user needs into data 
needs and understand how to generate, train, optimize, and test AI -generated behaviors during 
development . Machine behavior can be shaped by exposing it to particular training data. 
Substantial human effort is necessary to annotate or characterize the data in the process of 

==== Page 26 ====
 
26 
 developing autonomous capabilities (e.g., labeling that a pedestrian is in the scene) ( Lau et al., 
2018 ; Dudley  et al., 2018; A cuna  et al., 2018; K im, 2018;  Amershi et al., 2014 ). For instance, 
classification algorithms for image s and text are trained to optimize accuracy on a specific set of 
human -labeled datasets. The choice /labeling of the dataset and those features represent ed can 
substantially influence the behavior  (Bolukbasi et al., 2016 ; Buolamwini  et al., 2018 ). HCI 
profes sionals need to figure out an effective approach that can bring in users’ expectations to tune 
the algorithm for prevent ing bad responses.  
Second, HCI needs  to study the evolution of the AI -based machine behavior . For instance , 
after being released to the market, algorithm s, learning, and training data will all affect the 
evolution of an AI systems ’ behavior s. An auton omous vehicle  will change its behavior s over 
time by software and hardware up grades ; a product recommendation algorithm make s 
recommendations based on continuous input from u sers, updating their recommendations 
accordingly. HCI professionals can help define a n approach on how to improve the design 
through re -training based on user feedback  and how to co llect training data and define the 
expected results that users hope to obtain from AI systems  (Pásztor, 2018) . It is not easy to define 
the expected result  due to user’s subjective expectation s, HCI professionals need to find a 
collaborati ve method that can effectively to train algorithms, build early prototypes, and evaluate 
the trained model with users , eventually improv ing the design of AI systems .  
Third, HCI needs to help enhance the test methodology in current practice . For instance, t he 
existing testing methods in software engineering are based on predictable software output, and 
there is a set of mature verification and testing methods. However, th e output s of AI system s are 
dynamic as the system s learn  over t ime. HCI professionals need to collaborate with AI and 
computer science professionals to find ways to improve the test methodologies from HCI and 
behavioral sciences . Due to the existence of the unique machine behavior , how to effectively test 
the output performance of AI systems is  an important area for exploration . Furthermore, as AI 
technology matures, it will be critical to study its influence on humans and society, on a long -term 
basis  (e.g., a longitudinal perspective ), which requires engagement with interdisciplinary groups, 
including social scientist, psychologists (Horvitz, 2017 ; Stephanidis, Salvendy et al., 2019 ). 
 Fourth, HCI can partner with AI professionals to improve their current appro ach by 
following . For instance,  for the interactive machine learning approach, the system displays the 
current model and corresponding results (such as classification results, clustering results, 
prediction results, etc.) to users through the user interfaces of AI systems , HCI pro fessionals  can 
support the design from the perspectives  of visualization design, interactive technology and 
mental modeling of target users. Also, many human -centered ML related work made ML 
engineers the ‘human’ at the center, targeting software engineers working in the ML domain , 
instead of target end users (Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021 ). HCI should advocate to expand the 
research to other non -AI-experts  and target end users . Therefore, collaborations between HCI and 
ML research must produce H CAI-based results . 

==== Page 27 ====
 
27 
 Fifth, HCI needs to study machine behavior in the context of social interaction in the real 
environment  (Krafft et al., 2017 ; Wang  et al., 2016) . Lab studies have shown that the interaction 
with simple intelligent machines (e.g., robots ) can enhance human coordination  (Shirado et al., 
2017 ), and robots can directly cooperate with humans like human -to-human cooperation  
(Crandall et al., 2018 ). However, it is necessary to further verify the impact of AI  technology on 
the way of human social  interaction in th e real social environment ( Pentland, 2015 ). These 
interventions may change the overall behavior s of the system and minimize potential  adverse 
effects.  
Finally, HCI need s to study the behavioral interaction between multi ple agents  for 
complex AI systems (e.g., smart city, smart factory ). Multiple AI systems  will operate in the same 
social environment . Each AI system  may optimize its own behavior according to the rules of the 
development organization  (Earthy & Downs, 2018 ; ISO, 2020 ). Multiple AI systems  designed 
with different rules should be able to interact with each other effectively. How should the 
design er consider t he compatibility issues across AI systems to avoid adverse behaviors ? How 
can a design effectively support t he interaction between multiple AI systems ? How should a 
design put humans to work as a bridge across i ncompatible systems  to avoid unexpected 
behavior s? Other challenges faced by HCI include  fully considering the human operator’s 
understanding of the system status es of multiple AI systems , identifying and mitigating errors, so 
that the user can effectively regain control ability  of AI systems  (Earthy & Downs, 2018 ).  
 
5.2 From human -computer interaction to human -AI collaboration   
As discussed earlier, the human -machine relationship in the AI era has added a new type 
of human -machine collaboration : human -AI/machine teaming . A significant amount of work has 
been invested in human -machine teaming across multiple work domains . Initial research suggests 
that humans and AI systems can be more effective when working together as a combined unit 
rather than as individual entities ( Bansal et al., 2019a, 2019b ; Walliser  et al., 2019 ; Demir  et al., 
2018 ). The more intelligent the AI system, the greater the need for collaborative capabilities  
(Johnson & Vera , 2019 ). Designing for such mutual cooperation suggests a radical shift from the 
current HCI thinking to a more sophisticated strategy based on teaming  (Johnson & Vera, 2019 ). 
While HCI traditionally studie d the interaction between humans and non -AI computing system, 
the human interactions with AI systems should be focused on understanding of how humans and 
AI systems interact, collaborate, negotiate,  and even work as teammate s, where AI systems do not 
only work as a supportive tool as we have known in the context of the conventional HCI work .  
A variety of topic s are being explored in the research and application of human -machine 
teaming : research strategy , architecture and conceptual framework of human -machine teaming 
(Madni & Madni, 2018;  Berberian, 2019; Johnson & Vera, 2019;  Azevedo et al., 2017 ; O’Neill et 
al., 2020; Prada & Paiva, 2014;  Shively et al., 2017) , metrics benchmark framework ( Damacharla  
et al., 2018 a), and team performance ( Bansal  et al., 2019a, 2019b; Walliser et al., 2019 ;  Demir et 

==== Page 28 ====
 
28 
 al., 2018;  Damacharla  et al., 2018b;  Walliser  et al., 2019 ). Furthermore, t he measurements of 
human -machine teaming  performance  include : human workload ( Heard et al., 2017; Heard & 
Adams, 2019; Dearing et al., 2018 ), human errors ( Damacharla  et al., 2018b ), human trust 
(Bindewald et al., 2017 ; Tenhundfeld  et al., 2018 ), and mental models ( Bansal  et al., 2019b ). The 
typical HF/E activities across different development stages also ha ve been explored : functional 
allocation ( Roth et al., 2019 ), task/functional analysis  (McCann & McCandless, 2003 ; Peters, 
2019a, 2019b) , fault analysis ( McCann & McCandless, 2003 ), cognitive  task analysis ( Molineaux  
et al., 2018 ), multirobot control ( Chen & Barnes, 2014 ), adaptive design ( Madni  & Madni,  2018 ), 
systems engineering design ( McDermott   et al., 2018; Ozkaya, 2020) , interaction design 
(Mercado  et al., 2016 ), system authority ( Haring  et al., 2019 ), and quantitative and qualitative 
modeling ( Shah  et al., 2012;  McDermot  et al., 2018; Tenhundfeld  et al., 2018; Heard & Adams, 
2019; Trautman, 2017; Perelman  et al., 2017; Peters  et al., 2019; Peters, 2019, 2020 ; Crandall, et 
al., 2018 ).      
To study human -machine teaming , researchers have leverag ed the theories and 
frameworks of other disciplines , such as psychological human -human team theory (Madhavan & 
Wiegmann, 2007; de Visser, 2018 ; Mou & Xu, 2017 ). For example, the human -human team 
theory  helps formulate basic principles : two-way/shared communication , trust, goals, situation 
awareness, language, intentions , and decision -making  between humans and AI systems (Madni & 
Madni, 2018; Shively et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2017 ; Azhar & Sklar, 2017 ; Demir et al., 2017 ; 
Grimm et al., 2018 ; Grigsby, 2018 ), instead of a one-way approach as we currently do in the 
conventional HCI context . Other framework s for exploration include Joint Cognitive Systems  
(Hollnagel & Woods, 2005) , Cognitive  Work Analysis (Vicente, 1999) , and Human -Machine 
Symbiosis (Licklider, 1960; McDermott et al., 2018) , more future work is needed for HCI 
professionals .  
 Specifically,  an important class of basic  research topics on human -machine teaming  
involves mental constructs  such as  situation awareness, trust , and mental models . The 
collaboration between humans and machines relies on bi-directional ity and mutual ity, which 
directly affect s the performance of human -machine teaming . Because AI systems need to be able 
to perceive and understand the user's behaviors , HCI professionals can help develop appropriate 
human models (e.g., cognition, physiology, behavior) for the AI systems to monitor human  status. 
On the other hand, AI systems should be transparent enough to enable humans to understand the 
system status  in turn . Previous stud ies on situation awareness  usually focused on one -way 
situation awareness  for non -AI systems  or shared situation awareness  in a human -human 
environment.  These results may not be applicable to the  shared and distributed situation 
awareness  in human -machine teaming  (Stanton, 2016; Kitchin  & Baber, 2016 ; Madni & Madni, 
2018). ). In addition, there is still a lack of situation awareness  models and measurement methods 
for human -machine teaming  (Stanton et al., 2017). The HCI work should enrich situation  
awareness theory for human -machine teaming  and define the cognitive architecture framework 
and evaluation methods in support of situation awareness modeling . To help both human and 

==== Page 29 ====
 
29 
 machines to understand  and adapt to each other in a dynamic environment , future HCI work 
needs to help de velop computational situation awareness model s, such as, understanding AI-based 
agent ’s intention  and operating c ontext ( Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Brill et al., 2018 ). 
Future AI systems need to dynamically adapt to the human s’ states and redistribute 
functions accordingly , which relies on the mutual trust between the two  sides . Current machine 
agents still lack human -like "thinking" (values, etc.), and cannot explain their reasoning and 
decision -making processes, which brings difficulties  in trust research  (Mercado et al., 2016; 
Azevedo  et al., 2017 ; Xu & Dudek , 2016; Xu, 2019b; ). Actively carrying out trust restoration 
after an error occurs should be the basic requirement for human -machine teaming  design  (de 
Visser et al. , 2018.)  These authors  proposed some strategies. Future HCI work is needed for trust 
measurement, trust modeling, repair, corrections  of violation s, and how to quantify the trust level 
to support effective take -over/hand off between humans and machines  (Kistan et al., 2018; Baker 
et al., 2018;  Chen et al. , 2017 ).  
The research on shared mental model s between humans and machines (e.g., intelligent 
robots ) is also one of the current research  foci. Intelligent robots already have some special 
abilities ( e.g., social  interaction), and it is possible to construct a "mental model" that understands 
human intentions (Prada & Paiva, 2014; Chen & Barnes, 2014), which helps become human 
partner. Scheutz et al. (2017) initially proposed a cognitive computing framework to build  a 
shared mental model for human -computer cooperation. Following this, Kaur, Williams, and 
Lasecki (2019) proposed a basic method for building shared mental models between human s and 
machines in complex fields such as healthcare and autonomous driving. Ramaraj  et al.  (2019) 
conducted experiments to study the factors that influence users to construct a robot mental model, 
and the results confirmed that good interface transparency can effectively improve accuracy in 
establishing a mental model. At present, there is still a lack of in -depth research on the 
relationship between mental models and social/emotional interactions in human -machine teaming , 
requiring further HCI work.    
Besides the research on the mental constructs as discussed above, there are needs for 
future HCI work in the area of human -machine teaming / collaboration.  
First, overall, HCI professionals need to understand what to model and the associated data 
needs  (e.g., situation awareness , behaviors, intention , trust ) (Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Brill et al., 
2018 ), We will need to devise a new way to assess and predict the performance of human -
machine teaming  in terms of effective metrics . We also need to develop theories, models, and 
framework s in human -machine teaming. The topics include the models of teaming relationships 
(e.g., peer, teammate, and mentor/mentee), teaming processes (e.g., interactions, communications, 
and coordination), and applications of human -machine teaming in different work domains.  
Second, we nee d to further understand the human -AI interaction in the context of human -
machine teaming and collaboration. Humans may collaborate with machines on a social level and  
be influenced by the social dynamics of the machines. These behaviors may manifest within  
human -machine teaming , and we need to understand the behavioral implications of social factors 

==== Page 30 ====
 
30 
 (e.g., social responsibility  and skills, computational morality) in the context of human -machine 
teaming . Additionally, we need to know how to allow the  machine agent s to take the roles  and 
make them less as tools and more as peers (Brill et al., 2018; Prada & Paiva, 2014 ). We are also 
confronted with the new challenge of i nteraction dynamics  and need to figure out h ow to 
effectively design long-term collaborative interaction  (e.g., patient with smart robot) , so that the 
AI agent can adapt the style of interaction, develop a good collaborative relationship  between 
human and machine  (e.g., trust, emotional support)  (Prada & Paiva, 2014 ).  
Third, there is a need for HCI professionals to explore the human cognitive mechanisms for 
modeling the interaction in the context of human -machine teaming  (Liu et al., 2018). The goal is 
to design interfaces of AI systems for facilitating collaboration. Conventional models (e.g., MHP, 
GOMS) can no longer meet the needs of complex interactions in the AI era (e.g., Card et al., 
1983). Some theoretical issues that pose challenges to HCI modeling should be considered , such 
as, distributed cognitive theory, context -based knowledge representation (Fan et al., 2018). 
Cognitive modeling of social and emotional interaction of human -machine teaming is also a 
challenge for AI systems.  
Fourth, beyond the convention al HCI, a new and important question for design ers of 
human -AI collaboration is the design -center for the mutual collaboration; that is, who are the 
ultimate decision makers ? There are debates about whether human s and AI agent s can be a true 
collaborative teammate v ersus an AI agent serving merely as a super tool (Shneiderman , 2020b ); 
as a peer versus  a supervisor ( Ötting, 2020) , or AI agents working a s leaders ( Wesche & 
Sonderegger, 2019 ). From the HCAI perspective , we believe that humans should not be required 
to adapt to non -human teammates; instead , designers should create technology to serve as a good 
team player alongside humans  (Cooke, 2018 ). Cooke ( 2018 ) cautions  that when machines mimic 
human social behavior, they may lead humans to hav e unrealistic  expectations  (Kwon  et al., 
2016 ). HCI professionals need to fully understand what the machines can do.  Future HCI research 
needs to investigate how we can ensure that when in complex or life -changing decision -making, 
humans retain  a critical and meaningful  role, while creating and maintaining an enjoyable user 
experience  (Inkpen  et al., 2019 ).  
Fifth,  HCI professionals should  not only leverage current HCI approach but do much more . 
For example, Computer -Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) has long been an active subfield 
of HCI, and its g oal is to use the computer as a facilitator to mediate communication between 
people . AI brings to the picture a collaboration between the user and the computer taking a more 
active collaborative role, rather than simply a conduit for collaboration between people  
(Lieberman, 2009 ). We need to assess what current HCI theories and methods we can leverage to 
help the work here and what innovative approach we need to take to close a gap.  
Finally, future HCI work also need s to explore innovative design through collaborative 
interaction , adaptive control strategy, human directed authority  from the perspective of human -
machine teaming. For instance, future HCI work need s to model under what conditions (e.g., 
based on a threshold of mutual trust) an AI agent will take over or hand off the control of system 

==== Page 31 ====
 
31 
 to a human  in specific domains such as autonomous vehicles  (Kistan et al., 2018 ; Muslim & Itoh , 
2018 ; Shively  et al., 2017) . In the context of d istributed AI (DAI) and multi-agent systems , we 
need to figure out the collaborative relationship b etween at least one human and the collective 
system of agents , where and how multiple agents communicate and interact with primitives such 
as common  goals , shared  beliefs , joint intentions , and joint commitments , as well 
as conventions  to manage any changes to plans and actions ( Wooldridge, 2009 ; Hurts et al., 
1994 ).  
  
5.3 HCI as a collaborative bridge between h uman intelligence augmentation  and AI  
Intelligence augmentation (IA) refers to the use of effective technologies to augment 
human intelligence. Broadly speaking, PC, smart phones, and PC software fall into the category 
of intelligence augmentation . Intelligence augmentation technology can be implemented by AI 
and non -AI technology. Although AI technology provides  additional support for intelligence 
augmentation, it also creates challenges and opportunities for HCI professionals .  
Almost at the beginning of AI development, scholars have been committed to another 
path: human  intelligence augmentation  (Engelbart, 1962) . As an interdisciplinary field , 
intelligence augmentation includes perception augmentation  (e.g., smart glasses ); mobility 
augmentation (e.g., remote operation s); cognitive augmentation  (e.g., implant able artificial , 
biological chip , genetic intervention ) (Raisamo et al., 2019; Mark et al., 2004; Stanney et al., 
2009; Fuchs et al., 2007) . In the AI era, researchers are using innovative technologies to carry out 
intelligence  augmentation research , jointly promoted by genetic technology, AI technology, 
psychology, cranial nerve enhancement technology, and microbial technology . Examples include  
brain -computer interface and  virtual reality  (Valeriani  et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019 ). From the 
perspective of the HCAI approach , the HAII work  and the intelligence augmentation field share 
the same goal: making better use of AI technology and enhancing human capabilities rather than 
replac ing humans.   
There is a classic dispute between AI and intelligence augmentation . The AI community 
believes that AI can emu late and replace human cognitive functions, pursuing a goal to replace 
humans , whereas the intelligence augmentation community believes  that current AI era is actually 
the era of intelligence augmentation because AI technology is merely used to help develop new 
technologies of  intelligence augmentation  (Hassani et al., 2020 ; Lavenda, 2016 ; Rui, 2017 ). 
Experts often cite Google search as an example. I t is based on an algorithm that efficiently 
collects human knowledge, and people will use it as a tool to find information to enhance their 
ability. It is no longer possible to tel l whether it is an intelligence augmentation  or an AI system. 
Most of the current AI applications are primarily used to augment human intelligence ( Rastogi, 
2016 ). For example : AI-based automobile collision avoidance systems , AI-based manufacturing 
robots, intelligent sorting robots in the logistics industry, and intelligent data analysis systems.  

==== Page 32 ====
 
32 
 Therefore, the HAII work may help understand the relationship between AI and intelligence 
augmentation  from the perspective of co llaborative partnership , rather than comp etition .   
From the HAII perspective, we acknowledge that b oth AI and intelligence augmentation  
are the two main forces in the AI era  (Hassani et al., 2020) . It is expected that the integration 
between AI and intelligence augmentation  will become a main theme for AI systems (Kamar, 
2016; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ; Dellermann  et al., 2019). Future HCI work may build a bridge 
between the two.  HCI professionals may help both sides work together and achieve the 
integration and complementary advantages of the two (Hassani et al., 2020) , such as the 
advantages of human intelligence (intuition, reasoning, creativity, etc.) with the advantages of 
machines (accuracy, memory, speed, logic, etc.) . Even in the case of so -called powerful AI, 
machine intelligence may not be able to emulate certain dimensions of human intelligence. 
Intelligence augmentation technology enhances the ability and efficiency of humans to use AI 
systems, and performs more and more complex tasks quickly and effectively. The s tudies  done in 
the medical diagnosis domain  have shown that the performance (e.g., diagnostic accuracy  and 
speed ) when using AI and intelligence augmentation technologies in combination is better than 
when using these two methods alone (Topol , 2019; Patel et al., 2019) . Therefore, intelligence 
augmentation can be regarded as a collaborative connection between humans and AI systems 
according to the concept of the HCAI  approach , and jointly promo ting the enhancement of human 
capabilities  (Sicular & Aron, 2019).  
There are key areas where HCI professionals can play a n important role. First, f uture HCI 
work need s to help achieve the collaboration between intelligence augmentation and AI, and help 
determine what kinds of  intelligence augmentation technology could provide a n effective  way to 
complement AI such that the inherent weaknesses of AI  are compensated for (Braga & Logan, 
2017).  Future HCI work needs  to study the optimal combination of AI and intelligence 
augmentation technologies that can effectively support human interactions with AI systems across 
various scenarios  in terms of interaction modality and compatibility, level of cognitive process, 
and the autonomy level of AI systems. What kind of research designs or problems are most 
amenable to and would benefit the most from combining artificial and human intelligenc e (Inkpen 
et al., 2019 )? How can we harness the best of humans and algorithms to make better decisions 
than either alone? According to the HCAI approach,  future HCI work needs to ensure that 
interaction design of these applications is usable,  and humans are the ultimate decision makers in 
these solutions .  
Second , intelligence augmentation research advocates placing humans at the center of 
human -computer interaction, which is in line with the HCAI approach . HCI professionals should 
actively pa rticipate in these studies from the HCI perspectives. For example, based on the 
plasticity mechanism, the research of building a new human -computer interaction system with 
controllable cognitive work load, timely physiological feedback, and two -way body -brain 
interaction may effectively  support the augmentation  and training of human intelligence (Wang et 
al., 2018).  Future HCI work needs to help understand the plasticity mechanism of human brain 

==== Page 33 ====
 
33 
 nerves and promote the application of new human -computer interaction paradigms, interactive 
technologies in the domains of personalized education, neurorehabilitation, and cognitive 
augmentation . 
Third , when applying AI technology to augment human intelligence for human -machine 
collaboration, it is important to determine  the needs of the macro -cognitive capabilities like 
situation awareness  and decision making.  Intelligence augmentation promotes machine’s 
understanding of humans (e.g., cognitive state  and emotion detection, intention projection) and 
human’s understanding of machines (e.g., shared situation awareness and trust) to support the 
mutual collaboration (Grigsby 2018) . Future HCI work can define effective approaches to help 
such promotion through research such as cognitive modeling  and behavioral measurements.  
Finally, in partnership with professionals from other fields such as cognitive neuroscience  
and brain imaging technology , future HCI work should collaborate with brain -computer interface  
researchers to explore the interaction between humans and AI systems for optimal team 
performance between AI and intelligence augmentation at a neurocognitive level , developing 
HCAI -based solutions to help people with disabilit ies (Valeriani  et al., 2019).   
 
5.4 From siloed machine intelligence to h uman -machine hybrid intelligence   
With the development of AI technology, the AI community has begun to realize that 
machines of any degree of intelligence cannot completely replace human intelligence (e.g., 
intuition, consciousness, reasoning, abstract thinking), and the path of developing AI technology 
in isolation has encountered challenges  (Zhe ng et al., 2017) . It is necessary to introduce the role 
of human or human cognitive model into the AI system to form a hybrid intelligence 
(Shneiderman, 2020a; Wang et al., 2019; Zheng  et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2016; Zheng  et al., 2015 ). 
This new form of hybrid intelligence is not a fresh idea. For instance, Stanford 
University’s (2016) AI Life Report lists “ Collaborative systems that utilize the complementary 
strengths of humans and machines” as one of the future AI trends (Stone et al., 2016). The U.S. 
National AI R & D Strategy Plan (2016) lists "De velop effective methods for human -AI 
collaboration " as one of the seven strategies ( Plan, S , 2016) . Researchers also have explored the 
hybrid intelligence by leveraging the strengths from both  human intelligence and AI (Zheng et al., 
2017; Dellermann et al., 2019, 2020; Kamar, 2016; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ). Recent work has 
initially found the significant potential of augmentation through integration of both kinds of  
intelligence . The applications of hybrid augmented intelligence help achieve collaborative 
decision -making in complex problems, thereby gaining superior excellent results that can be 
achieved separately (e.g., Carter & Nielsen, 2017; Shirado & Christakis, 2017; Crandall  et al., 
2018 ; Dellermann , et al., 2019 ).  
From the perspective of the HCAI approach , the hybrid intelligence must be developed in 
a context of “human -machine” systems by leveraging the complementary advantages of AI  and 
human intelligence  to produce more powerful intelligence form: human -machine hybrid 

==== Page 34 ====
 
34 
 intelligence  (Hassani  et al., 2020; Rui, 2017; Topol, 2019; Patel  et al., 2019; Sicular et al., 2019; 
Dellermann  et al., 2019).  This strategy not only solves the bottleneck effect of developing AI 
technology  as discussed earlier , but also emphasizes on the use of humans and machines as a 
system (human -machine system), introducing human functions, and ensuring the final decision of 
humans on the system control.  
At present, the research on human -machine hybrid intelligence can basically be divided 
into two categories. The first category is t o develop human -in-the-loop AI systems at the system 
level, so  that humans are always kept as a part of an AI syste m (e.g., Patel et al., 2019; Lundberg 
et al., 2019; Dellermann et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2017 ; Zanzotto , 2019 ; Lundberg  et al., 2019 ; 
Robinson  et al., 2020 ; Pardo,  2018; Nakano  et al., 2020 ). For instance, w hen the confidence of the 
system output is low, humans can intervene by adjusting input , creating a feedback loop to 
improve the system ’s performance  (Zheng et al., 2017; Zanzotto, 2019) . As an example, a human -
in-the-loop AI system was deployed for a collaborative robot including a human decision -making 
mechanism with ML and a knowledge base (Fu et al., 2019). The experimental results show that 
although the unstructured environment brought a high degree of uncertainty to th e robot's 
movement , the robot with the human -in-the-loop -AI solution performed better in dealing with 
unstructured environments than when only ML is used.  
Human -in-the-loop AI systems combines the advantages of human intelligence and AI, 
and effectively realizes human -AI interactions , an AI system required user interactions  (e.g., 
online assessment for crowdsource human input ) (Mnih et al., 2015; Dellermann et al., 2019 ). 
Also, humans directly participate in training, adjustment and testing of algorithms  (Hassani et al., 
2020 ; Dudley  et al., 2018; A cuna et al., 2018; K im, 2018; Amershi  et al., 2015；Correia  et al., 
2019 ). The emphasis is on solving complex problems using the deliberate allocation of tasks 
among AI-based machine  and human agents . Both the human and the machine agents of such 
systems can then co -evolve by learning and achieve a superior outcome on the system ic level 
(Dellerm ann, Ebel  et al., 2019) . Furthermore, human -in-the-loop hybrid - intelligence is able to 
process highly unstructured information, generating more accurate and more credible results than 
that can be derived from a single AI system (Zheng et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017).  Overall, these 
human -in-the-loop AI approaches are aligned with the HCAI  approach . HCI and AI professionals 
should closely collaborate for future work.  
Another approach  to human -in-the-loop methods  is to explore a hybrid intelligence 
between human s and machine s at a more biological level, such as hybrid brain -computer 
symbiosis (Sandini et al., 2018; Gerber  et al., 2020; Boff, 2006; Wang et al., 2018 ; Wu et al., 
2016; Zheng  et al., 2015 ). With the goal of deep fusion of biological and machine intelligence, 
researchers  expect to build hybrid brain -computer system s that use neural connection channels to 
develop the perception, memory, and reasoning capabilities to be augmented with human 
biological intelligence.  The purpose is to establish computational models to produce a 
complementary intelligent system through the fusion of (human) brain and machine s. As an initial 
step of an exploratory study  before exploring th is approach with humans, Wu et al . (2016) built a 

==== Page 35 ====
 
35 
 rat experimental platform to perform learning, memory, and cognition tasks , and proposed a 
series of brain -to-machine and machine -to-brain circuit information models  based on their initial 
empirical results . Their f uture work proposes to verify the superposition of artificial intelligence 
on higher cognitive processes , such as learning and memory , in rodents  and then proceed with 
human s.  
The second type of human -machine hybrid intelligence involves  embed ding the human 
cognitive model into an AI system to form a hybrid intelligence based on cognitive computing 
(Zheng et al., 2017) . This type of AI system introduces a variety of biologically inspired  
computing intelligence technologies. Elements include intuitive reasoning, causal models, 
memory and knowledge evolution, etc. According to the HCAI approach , this type of hybrid 
intellig ence is not in the true sense of human -machine hybrid intelligence, because such systems 
are not based on human -machine systems and cannot be effective to realize the central decision -
making role of human operators in the system. Of course, the introductio n of human cognitive 
models into machine intelligence, and reaching the level of human -like intelligence in reasoning, 
decision -making, memory, etc. is very important for the development of machine intelligence . 
Obviously, future HCI work need to support the research from the perspective of human cognitive 
modeling . 
There will be a lot of opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in developing 
human -machine hybrid intelligence  systems . First, future HCI work needs to explore cognitive 
computing based on human cognitive abilities ( e.g., intuitive reasoning, memory and knowledge 
evolution) to develop human -machine hybrid intelligent systems. An example includes  cognitive 
computing of audiovisual information , such as  the extraction, expression and integration of 
perceptual characteristics . Combining cognitive computing with multi -model deep neural 
networks may solve the c omplex planning and reasoning problems  in the current AI research 
(Zheng et al., 2017; Zheng, 2019) . Future HCI work should help accelerate the conversion of 
existing psychological research results to support the work of cognitive computing and define 
cognitive architecture  for AI research  (Salvi et al., 2016) . This is essential because  the existing 
hybrid intelligent system based on cognitive computing does not fully consider the central role 
and decision -making function of human operators in the system. Therefore, HCI professionals 
should collaborate with AI professionals to explore the approach of i ntegrati ng the cognitive 
computing method with the human -in-the-loop method , either at both system and/or at biological 
levels  (e.g., brain -computer interface technology ), developing HCAI -based human -machine 
hybrid intelligent system s. 
Second, the control mechanism (who is in control) of human -machine hybrid intelligent 
systems  is an important research topic. T here are currently two basic schemes: "human -in-loop 
control" and "human -machine collaborative control" (Wang, 2019). The effecti ve handover 
between humans and machines for AI systems in an emergency state is an important topic. The 
loss of control in autonomous  systems ( e.g., decision tracking after launch of autonomous weapon 
systems, and man -machine co -driving of autonomous vehicles) has become a widely concerned 

==== Page 36 ====
 
36 
 issue from the perspective of the “ ethical design ” defined in the HCAI approach . The HCAI 
approach  requires humans  to have the ultimate control. HCI needs to carry out this work from the 
HCI perspectives. Human -in-loop control ( a perspective  of system architecture ) and human -
machine collaborative control ( a functional perspective) may not be two mutually exclusive forms 
of control , but r esearche rs used to address the control mechanism issue from a single point of 
view (humans or machines ) (Wang, 2019). Future HCI work needs to seek solutions from an 
integrated p erspectives of system  design , human -machine collaboration , and ethical design .  
Third, future HCI work needs to lay the foundation for developing effective human -
machine hybrid intelligent systems in terms of theory and methods , such as the theories and 
methods for the research on machine behavior, human -machine teaming . For example, we may 
apply the joint cognitive systems theory  (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005 ) and consider human -
machine intelligent hybrid system as a joint cognitive system with two cognitive agents : human 
and machine. Research work needs to explore how to use the two cognitive agents to support the 
design of autonomous systems based on the concept of human -machine teaming through a deep 
integration between human biological  intelligence and machine intelligence.  
Finally, a s early as 1960 Licklider proposed the concept of human -computer symbiosis, 
pointing out that the human brain could be tightly coupled with computers to form a collaborative 
relationship (Licklider, 1960). In the long run, the human -machine hybrid intelligence will form 
an effective productive partnership to achieve a true human -machine symbiosis at both systemic 
and biological levels, eventually enabling a merge r between humans and machines ( Pacaux -
Lemoine  et al., 2019; Gerber  et al., 2020; Sandini et al., 2018; Boff, 2006; Grigsby, 2018 ；
Gamberini et al., 2017; Jacucci et al., 2014; Sun, 2017). Such a human -machine symbiosis will 
deliver the most value to humans  and fully ensure that human functions and roles are seamlessly 
integrated into AI systems as the ultimate decision makers without harming humans , eventually 
moving towards a “human -machine symbiosis world” with humans at the center ( Gerber  et al., 
2020), i nstead of a “machine world” . This may be the vision that the Joint Cognitive Systems 
framework defines : both humans and machines collaborate as cognitive agents to form joint 
cognitive systems (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005) . With the further advances of AI technology and 
implementation of  the HCAI  approach , the “hybrid intelligent” paradigm may shift to a “hybrid 
teamwork” paradigm, such a human -machine collaborative partnership will help build human -
centered AI  systems (Kamar, 2016; Zheng et al., 2017) .  
 
5.5 From UI usability to AI explainability and interpretability   
Designing a n effective and accessible user interface  for a computing system is the core 
task for HCI professionals. We encounter new challenges in d esigning the user interface s for AI 
systems besides usability.  As the core technology of AI, ML and the learning process are opaque, 
and the output of AI -based decisions is not intuitive. For many non -technical users, an ML -based 
intelligent system is like a "black box", especially neural ne tworks for pattern recognition in deep 

==== Page 37 ====
 
37 
 learning. This "black box" phenomenon causes users to question the decision s from AI systems : 
why do you do this, why is this the result, when did you succeed or fail, when can I trust you? 
The "black box" phenomenon has become one of the major concerns in developing AI system s 
(Muelle  et al., 2019 ; Hoffman  et al., 2018 ; Bathaee, 2018 ; Ehsan & Riedl, 2020; Theodorou et al., 
2017 ; Gunning, 2017; Doshi -Velez & Kim, 2017 ). The "black box" phenomenon may occur in 
various AI systems , including the application of AI in financial stocks, medical diagnosis, 
security testing, legal judgments, and other fields , causing decreased performance , inefficiency in 
decision -making , and loss of public trust in AI. 
As a solution, e xplainable AI intends to provide the user what the machine is thinking and 
can explain to the user why (PwC, 2018). Explainable AI is getting more and more attention. The 
most representative research is the f ive-year research plan for explainable AI launched by 
DARPA in 2016 (Gunning, 2017). The program covers three aspects of work : (1) develop a series 
of new or improved ML technologies to obtain explainable ML algorithms; (2) develop 
explainable UI model with advanced HCI technology and design strategies; (3) evaluate existing 
psychological theories on explanation to assist explainable AI .  
Existing psycholog ical theories on explanation may help the explainable AI work . 
Psychological research has been carried out in the aspects of mechanisms, measurements, and 
modeling. For example, inductive reasoning, causal reasoning, self -explanation, comparative  
explanation , counterfactual reasoning (Lombrozo, 2012; Hoffman, et al ., 2017; Broniatowski, 
2021 ). Although many hypotheses were v erified in laboratory studies (Mueller, et al., 2019) , 
much work is still needed to build computational models for explainable AI  work . HCI 
professionals can help the work and establish a framework for evaluating the effectiveness of 
proposed explainable AI solutions . Researchers have realize d the importance of non-AI 
disciplines such as HCI in explainable AI research  (Ehsan & Riedl ; Baumer, 2017 ; Bond  et al., 
2019; Hoffman  et al., 2018 ; Hois et al., 2019 ). For instance, t he survey of Miller et al. (2017) 
indicate s that most explainable AI projects  were only conducted within the AI discipline . AI 
professionals used to build explainable AI for themselves rather than target users ; most 
explainable AI publications do not follow a human -centered approach  (Kaluarachchi et al., 2021 ).  
Miller et al. (2017) believe that if explainable AI adopts appropriate models in behavioral science , 
and these evaluations focus more on users rather than technology, explainable AI research is more 
likely to be successful . These findings show the relevance of the HCAI approach and why HCI 
professionals should support explainable AI research.  
 While r esearch on explainable AI is currently underway , some researchers have realized 
that t he ultimate purpose of explainable AI should ensure that target users can understand the 
output by AI systems  (Kulesza et al. 2015 ; Broniatowski, 2021 ). For example, an "explainable 
AI" version of data scientists is not understandable to most people. Chowdhury (2018) believes 
that understandable AI requires the collaborations across disciplines besides AI and  data science.  
The solution should meet target user needs ( e.g., knowledge level), and ultimately achiev ing an 
understandable AI, which is aligned with HCAI . For instance, Zhu et al. (2018) adopted a HCAI -

==== Page 38 ====
 
38 
 like concept and focused on the needs of specific user groups  by working with game designers 
and AI/ML experts to find understandable AI  systems  for domain users ( i.e., game designers). 
The current work on understandable AI focuses on UI modeling, applications of psycholog ical 
theories , and validation of related experiments  (Zhou et al., 2018; Paudyal & Wong, 2018; 
Hoffman et al., 2018; DARPA, 2017).  
Future work cannot rely solely on technical methods  and requires the participation of HCI. 
Future  HCI work can be mainly considered as follows . First, research on the interaction design of 
AI systems  needs to continue , ranging from co-adaptive dialog -based  interface, visualization, user 
interface modeling, to natural interactive dialogue , etc.  Most previous explainable AI research 
was based on static, one -way interpretation  from AI system s. Future HCI work need s to continue 
to develop effective human -centered solutions, such as : user exploratory and interactive dialogues 
with AI systems  (Abdul et al., 2018) , visualization approach (Chatzimparmpas  et al., 2020; Yang 
et al., 2019) , human -in-the-loop explainable AI (Chittajallu et al, 2019),  and collaborative task -
driven (e.g., error detection) to support adaptation between humans and machines  (i.e., 
"exploratory interpretation ”) (Mueller et al., 2019 ; Kulesza ’s at al. , 2015) . 
Second, HCI professionals can leverage our own interdisciplinary backgrounds to act as 
intermedia ries, accelerating the tran sfer of the knowledge from other disciplines . For example, 
many of the existing psychological theories and models have not generated valuable results 
(Abdul et al., 2018; Muelle et al., 2019 ; Broniatowski, 2021 ). Also, t here is a large body of 
human factors research work on automation transparency /surprise  and situation awareness (e.g., 
Sarter & Woods, 1995 ; Endsley , 2017 ), their comprehensive mitigation solutions may offer 
possible solutions to explainable AI.  
Third , future HCI work need to further explore user-participatory solutions based on the 
HCAI approach , such as user exploratory, collaborative task -driven, and user -participation 
approaches (Mueller et al., 2019) . This is to ensure that AI is understandable to target users 
beyond explainability, which  AI professionals have previously neglected . In addition, there is a 
lack of user -participated experimental validation in many existing studies, along with a lack of 
rigorous behavioral science -based methods (Abdul et al., 2018; Mueller et al., 2019 ). HCI should 
give full play to its expertise to support validation methods. When adopting user -participated 
experimental evaluation, it is necessary to overcome the unilateral evaluation methods in some 
existing studies that only evaluate the performance of AI systems , HCI should promote the 
evaluation of the AI systems as a whole human -machine system  (Muelle et al., 2019 ; Hoffman, et 
al., 2018 ; Mercado  et al., 2016) .  
Finally, from the soci otechn ical system s perspective , the relationship s among user 
(including organization s), trust, acceptance, and explainability /comprehensi bility of AI should be 
further explored  (Ehsan & Riedl, 2020 ; Klein, et al., 2019 ). HCI professionals need to consider 
the influence of other factors, such as culture, user knowledge, skills, decision -making behaviors, 
user skill growth , users’ personality and cognitive style.  HCI can apply  its multidisciplinary 
expertise in this regard.  

==== Page 39 ====
 
39 
 5.6 From human -centered automation to human -controlled autono my  
AI technology demonstrates its unique autonomous characteristics as discussed earlier. 
Society is currently introducing more autonomous technologies that differ from traditional 
automation technologies, but safety and negative effects have not attracted enough attention 
(Hancock, 2017, 2019; Endsley, 2019; Salmon, 2019). As an example, m any companies have 
heavily invested in developing AI-based autonomous systems  (e.g., autono mous  vehicles ), but 
consumer’ s trust on AI is still questionable . Lee and Kolodge ’s survey (2018) shows that among 
the 8571 American drivers surveyed, 35 % of them said they definitely do not believe that 
autonomous vehicles  have the ability to operate safely without driver control. On the other side, 
some consumers over trusted AI -based autonomous systems  as evidenced by several fatal 
accidents of autonomous vehicles  (NTSB, 2017; Endsley, 2018).  Researchers have expressed 
their deep concerns about the safety issues caused by autonomous technologies ( e.g., de Visser et 
al., 2018; Endsley, 201 7, 2918 ; Hancock, 2017, 2019).   
As we just enter the AI age, people have begun to confuse the concepts of automation and 
autonomy, lead ing to inappropriate expectations and potential misuse of technology (Kaber, 
2018). In the past  few decades, the human factors community has carried out extensive research 
on automation ( e.g., Sarter & Woods, 1995; Endsley, 2017; Xu, 2007 ). The results have found 
that users  have over-trust and over -reliance on automation (Parasuraman & Riley, 1997)  and 
many automation systems have vulnerabilities  in complex domains , such as aviation and nuclear 
power . The system works well under normal conditions. However, it may cause the operator ’s 
“automation surprise ” problems when unexpected events occur (Sarter & Woods, 1995). 
Operators may not be able to understand what and why automation is doing, creating an “out-of-
the-loop” effect  and resulting in the wrong manual intervention (Endsley, 2015; Endsley & Kiris, 
1995; Wickens & Kessel, 1979; Young, 1969). This vulnerability of automation has brought 
challenges to safety. Civil flight deck  automation has caused deadly flight accidents (Endsley, 
2015; Mumaw , et al., 1999 ). Bainbridge (1983) defined a classic phenomenon  of “ironies of 
automation ”: the higher the degree of automation, the less the operator’s attention to the system ; 
in an emergency state, it is more difficult for the operator to control the system through manual 
control . 
We believe that differentiating  the autonomous characteristics of AI systems from 
conventional automation helps drive alternate and effective  design thinking to address the unique 
issues of AI -based a utonomous systems. Kaber (2018) proposes a conceptual framework of 
autonomy  that distinguishes it from automation . Furthermore, Xu (2021) propose s a simplified 
conceptual 3-D model to illustrate th e relationship between autonomy, automation , and human 
intervention, advocat ing a human -controlled autonomy design based on the HCAI approach  
(Figure 4). As discussed earlier , possession of human -like cognitive abilities is the essential 
difference between automation and autonomy; thus,  we assume an orthogonal relationship 
between automation and autonomy.  Since h uman intervention is the safety guarantee for both, 

==== Page 40 ====
 
40 
 there is a one -to-one relationship between human i ntervention and the degree /leve l of autonomy 
or automation; that is, as the degree/level  of autonomy and automation increases, the need for 
human intervention decreases  (primarily reduc ing the needs for human direct operations) . 
Furthermore, human  intervention is a dimension shared by the two planes (i.e., human 
intervention × autonomy, human intervention × automation  in Figure 4). Therefore, the three 
variables of autonomy, automation, and human intervention can be used to characterize a 3-D 
spati al relationship as illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
  
Figure 4 The conceptual model illustrating the relationship between autonomy, automation, 
and human intervention  (Adapted from Xu, 2021 )                           
In Figure 4, Point A refers to a system requiring full human operations without automation 
or autonomy  (e.g., a manual tool) . Point B represents a system with a full automation capability 
without AI-based autonomy implemented  (e.g., an elevator) , but still requiring a certain level of 
human inte rvention. Point C refers to an autonomous system with a high degree of autonomy , but 
a reasonable degree of human intervention must be reserved, and humans must always be the 
ultimate decision makers  (e.g., current level 3 autonomous vehicles) , implying th at all 
autonomous systems must be supervised or controlled by human operators at some level for 
safety . From the implementation perspective, the human ultimate control could be implemented 
by either direct manipulation or other mechanisms such as remote/teleoperations.   
Thus, the 3D space within the four planes (ABC, ABO, ACO, and BCO) conceptually 
illustrates the problem space of autonomy  with the implications : (1) autonomous systems are 


==== Page 41 ====
 
41 
 similar to automation , human intervention is required at all  times ; (2) h umans interact with 
autonomy and automation within the same space, implying that autonomous systems may 
encounter human factors problems similar to those seen in automation; past findings on 
automation may help address some issues on autonomy . The importance of human intervention 
defined in Figure 4 echoes the rationale of the HCAI approach  by advocating h uman -controlled 
autonomy and avoiding excessive autonomy (Shneiderman, 2020a ). At present, we can locate a 
position in the 3 -D conceptual space  for any AI system , implying that we must consider the 
integration of the three variables  when developing AI systems . In addition, Figure  4 is a 
conceptual model, and it is not constructed from the perspective of engineering implementation . 
The model therefore needs to be verified by further HCI research.  
Other researchers also advocate human -controlled autonomy. For instance, Endsley (2017) 
believes that in an autonomous system, with the improvement of the "automation" level of 
individual functions, and as the autonomy of the overall system increase s, the operator's attention 
to these functions and situation awareness will decrease  in emergency situations , so that the 
possibility of the “out-of-the-loop" effect will also increase. Fatal accidents involving autonomous 
vehicles  that have occurred in recent years have showed th ese typical human factors issues  as 
seen in automation (Navarro, 2018; NHTSA, 2017; Ends ley, 2017, 2018).  Also, AI-based 
autonomous systems ’ human -like intelligent abilities (e.g., learning ) will continue to evolve as 
they are used in different environments. The uncertainty of the operational results of autonomous 
systems means that the system may develop behaviors in unexpected ways . Therefore, initial 
research shows that autonomy may give operators a stronger shock than "automation surprise" 
(Prada & Paiva, 2014;  Shively  et al., 2017 ). These effects may further amplify the impact of the  
“automation surpri se” issue , which is called the "lumberjack" effect (Onnasch et al. , 2014).  
There is extensive research work carried out on automation awareness (e.g., Sarter &  
Woods, 1995; Endsley, 2017; Xu, 2007) and levels of automation (e.g., Sheridan & Verplank, 
1978; Parasuraman  et al., 2000; Onnasch et al., 2014), advocating human -centered automation 
(Billings , 1997). Also, there are debates about the relationship between automation and 
autonomy. We believe that automation and autonomy are not differentiated in terms of level of 
automation, instead, the presence or otherwise of a certain level of potential human -like cognitive 
and autonomous capabilities (e.g., learning, se lf-governance, self -independence, and self -
adaption) is the essential difference between the two (Kaber, 2018; Xu, 2021).  
From the human -machine teaming perspective, the researc h on human -autonomy 
teaming has been carried out over the last a few years (Shively  et al., 2017; Gutzwiller  et al., 
2017; Wynne & Lyons, 2018 ; O’Neill  et al., 2020 ). Researchers aim to investigate the reciprocal 
relationship between humans and autonomous systems ( Cooke  et al., 2020; Demir & Cooke, 
2018 ) from many aspects, such as: trust ( McNeese  et al., 2019; Bindewald  et al., 2017; 
Hillesheim et al., 2017;  Klein  et al., 2019; Neigel et al., 2018;  Tenhundfeld   et al., 2019; McNeese  
et al., 2019; Schaefer et al., 2018 ), mental model ( Scali & Macredie,  2019; Bazzano et al., 2017 ), 
situation awareness ( Chen   et al., 2018; Demir   et al., 2017, 2019; Chen et al., 2016), shared 

==== Page 42 ====
 
42 
 control authority ( Stanton et al., 2020; Bazzano et al., 2017 ), training ( Cummings  et al., 2017), 
team coordination and pe rformance ( Marathe  et al., 2018; Demir & Cooke, 2018;  Demir  et al., 
2017;  McNeese et al., 2018;  Klein et al., 2019 ).   
Overall, t he research on autonomy is currently in its infancy. New challenges and 
opportunities co -exist  as we enter the AI -based autonomous world , requiring HCI professionals 
go beyond current design thinking of the traditional automation technology and develop 
innovative approaches to address the unique issues in autonomy  brought about AI technology.  
First, there are many basic questions for HCI professionals to explore. We need to fully 
understand the impacts of the autonomous characteristics of AI system s from  an HCI perspective , 
what are the implications for HCI design? and so on. We also need to further empirically assess 
the “automation surprise” effect and t he "lumberjack" effect  for AI systems with a varied degree 
of autonomy . The effort to address the classic “ironies of automation” issue has existed over 30 
years, but is still not completely solved ( Bainbridge, 1983; Strauch, 2017 ). Today, we encounter 
new ironies , requiring us go beyond current design thinking. The potentially amplified impacts of 
autonomy plus its unique characteristics compels us to take the lessons lea rned from automation 
and explore new approaches to address the issues, driving towards human -controlled autonomy 
based on the HCAI  approach .  
Second , we need to explore alternate paradigms to optimize the design of autonomous 
systems. Although HCI professionals have participated in the development of autonomous 
systems (e.g., autonomous vehicles), recent accidents have sounded an alarm, compelling us to 
rethink the current approach (Xu, 2021). By leveraging the new form of human -machine 
collaborative relationship, we can explore the design for autonomy that emulates the interactions 
between people by considering mutual trust, shared situation awareness , and  shared control 
authority in a reciprocal relationship between human and autonomous systems. Thus, we can 
maximize design opportunities to minimize the potential risk caused by autonomous systems.  We 
may consider an autonomous vehicle as a “mobile autonomous system” instead of being 
conventionally automated. Future HCI work may explore applying the paradigm of human -
machine teaming and human -machine hybrid intelligence (e.g., brain -computer interface -based  
technology) to develop innovative solutions for effective human -machine co -driving and take -
over/handoff (J eong, 2019 ; Novitzky  et al., 2020; Clancy , 2019). A design strategy of human -
machine collaboration may help optimize the design of system architecture and interactions.  For 
interaction design, we need to take innovative approaches beyond traditional HCI design . By 
applying the HCAI approach, we need to develop  an effective human control mechanism with 
well-designed UIs  to enable human operators to monitor and quickly take over control of 
autonomous systems in emergencies.  
Third, we need a data -driven approach in developing autonomous systems by applying the 
HCAI approach.  For instance, SAE J3016 (2018) regulations presume  that when autonomous 
vehicles are equipped with high -level (L4 -L5) automatic driving functions, driver monitoring,  and 
manual intervention are not required. HCI professionals need to step in to ensure that humans are 

==== Page 43 ====
 
43 
 always the ultimate decision makers th rough “human meaningful control” design  to address the 
“out-of-the-loop"  problem , based on collected empirical data  (de Sio & den Hoven, 2018; 
Navarro, 2018 ). when defining the levels of “automation” for autonomous vehicles, SAE J3016 
(2018) seems to be ignoring the differences between automation and autonomy, and SAE J3016 
takes a system -centered approach classifying the “automation” level ( Hancock, 2019 ). HCI 
professionals need to obtain empirical data to help improve the classification of autonomous 
driving levels from a human -centered perspective, which may help standardize the way of 
defining product requirements, measurement for certification of autonomous driving technology, 
and the need for driver training.  
Finally , as an interdisciplinary  area, HCI professionals are in a unique position to address 
emerging HAII issues from a broad perspective of sociotechnical systems, including the impacts 
of autonomous systems on human expectations, operational roles, ethics, privacy, and so on. As 
compared with automation, initial studies also show that autonomy may also lead to a highly 
emotiona l reaction of the operator, some social factors are more likely to affect the operator's 
cognitive ability , personality traits and communication attributes (Clare et al., 2015; de Visser et 
al., 2018; Mou & Xu, 2017). While we have an established process o f certifying humans as 
autonomous agents, there is no industry consensus as to how to certify computerized autonomous 
systems with human -AI interaction ( Cummings, 2019; Cummings & Britton, 2020 ). More 
research is needed to further assess the impacts of aut onomy across a variety of context.    
 
5.7 Integrating HCI approach  to ethical AI design  
As one of the major challenges presented by AI technology , ethical AI design has   
received a lot of attentions in research and application . Multiple sets of ethical guidelines from 
various organizations around the world are currently available , large high -tech companies have 
publish ed internal ethical guidelines for development of AI systems (IEEE, 2019; Jobin et al., 
2019; Hagendorff, 2020) . Shneiderman (2021) proposes 15 recommendations at three levels of 
governance: team, organization, and industry , aiming at increas ing the reliability, safety, and 
trustworthiness of HCAI system s. Research  also shows that the effectiveness of the practic al 
application of these guidelines is currently far from satisfact ory (Mittelstadt, 2019).  Herein, w e 
approach the ethical AI issues from the HCI design perspective with the hope that ethical AI 
issues can only be successfully addressed in the frontline of system design  and development.   
First of all, t he concept of “meaningful human  control ”, which has recently gained more  
attention,  is one of the approaches being studied , (van Diggelen  et al., 2020;  Horowitz & Scharre, 
2015; Beckers  et al., 2019 ; Beckers et al., 2019) . In alignment with HCAI, van Diggelen  et al. 
(2020 ) define meaningful human control as having three essential components: (1) human 
operators are making informed  and conscious decisions about the use of autonomous technology; 
(2) human operators have sufficient information to ensure the lawfulness of the action they are 
taking; (3) the system is designed and tested, and human operators are properly trained, to ensure 

==== Page 44 ====
 
44 
 effective control over its use (e.g., autonomous weapon s). Currently there are many perspectives 
for consideration of meaningful human control . People believe that the real problem is creating 
the social and political will to assign and maintain accountability and propose to address 
meaningful human control through accountability and system transparency design (Bryson and 
Winfield, 2017; Theodorou et al., 2017)  as well as governance and regulation ( Bryson & 
Theodorou, 2019 ; Gur ses & van Hoboken ; 2018). Delegation in meaningful human control is also 
considered to be a possible solution for meaningful human control (van Diggelen  et al., 2020 ). 
There is a general consensus that the human must always remain in control of ethically sensitive 
decisions. ( van Diggelen  et al., 2020 ; de Sio & den Hoven, 2018; Horowitz & Scharre, 2015) . In 
addition, Cummings (2019)  believes that the key is meaningful human certification of 
autonomous systems (e.g., weapons ).  
From an HCI design perspective, c oncerning that current forms of control are not  
sufficient on autonomous systems  in a long run , Salmon, Hancock, & Carden (2019)  believe that 
meaningful human control is required to prevent the potential harm to humans from Artificial 
General Intelligence (AGI)  and propose three sets of controls:  (1) ensure AGI system designers 
create safe AGI systems ; (2) controls need to be built into the AGIs  (e.g., operating procedures, 
decision -rules ); (3) the controls need to be added to the broader systems  (e.g., monitoring 
systems ). To address the immediate needs, t hey believe that HCI methods can be used to identify, 
design and test such  controls well before AGI systems arrive , such as current Artificial  Narrow 
Intelligence  (ANI)  (e.g., autonomous vehicles) . HCAI advocates that humans remain as the 
ultimate decision makers, future HCI work need s to answer questions, such as, how we 
effectively design delegation of tasks between humans and AI systems, how we address 
meaningful human control from a perspective of human -machine teaming , how we can contribute 
to meaningful human control solutions from a broad sociotechnical systems perspective.  
HCI professionals  need to leverage exist ing knowledge from research on automation. One 
of the key requirements for meaningful human control is allowing human operators to make 
informed a nd conscious decisions about the use of autonomous technology . To achieve this 
design goal, HCI professionals need to partner with system designers to ensure a transparent 
system design and effective interaction design, keeping human operators in the loop with 
sufficient situation awareness . For life -critical autonomous systems (e.g., autonomous vehicles 
and weapons), we advocate the implementation of the design concepts of “tracking” and “tracing”  
mechanisms  (de Sio & den Hoven, 2018) , so that we can trace back the error  data to identify the 
accountability of system  versus  human operators if the  autonomous system fails, and be able to 
use the data for improvement of the design.   
The HCI community also needs to incorporate HCI approach i nto the AI development 
process.  Although multiple sets of ethical guidelines are currently available , the AI community 
lacks common aims, professional norms, methods to translate principles into practice . In some 
cases, e thical design was considered after the technology is developed ra ther than during 
development  (Mittelstadt, 2019) . Current ethical guidelines lack technical detail  or detailed 

==== Page 45 ====
 
45 
 example s of ML ethical design options . How then can we embed ethical AI design principles 
within AI itself , increase the effectiveness of ethical codes with respect to behavior of AI 
engineers , and enhance AI engineers’ skillset in ethical design  without appropriate guidelines and 
examples?  HCI professionals may have opportunities to offer  support. For example, we can 
leverage current human -centered HCI methods (e.g., iterative design and testing with end users) 
to translate user needs into data needs and understand how to generate, train, optimize, and test 
AI-generated behaviors during development , continuously improve the design to avoid biased 
outcomes .   
Finally, a s an interdisciplinary field of HCI, we need help AI professionals in ethi cal AI 
design. AI engineers typically lack formal training in applying ethics to design in their 
engineering courses and tend to view ethical decision making as another form of solving technical 
problems. The AI community now recognizes that the ethical AI  design requires wisdom and 
cooperation from a multidisciplinary field extending beyond computer science ( Li & 
Etchemendy, 2018 ). The HCI community can leverage their interdisciplinary skills to assess the 
ethical related issues and help propose solutions by adopting methods of social and behavioral 
science from a broader sociotechnical systems perspective.  
 
5.8 From conventional in teraction to i ntelligent interactions  
 In the AI era, as we transition from conventional  interaction with non -AI computing 
systems to the natural and intelligent interaction with AI systems  driven by AI technology, such 
as voice input  and facial recognition , HCI professionals face new challenges in design , but there 
are also opportunities.  
First of all , the interaction design for HAII requires new interaction paradigms and 
models. In the realization of multi -modality, natural UI, and pervasive computing, hardware 
technology is no longer an obstacle, but the user's interaction capabilities have not been 
correspondingly supported . How to design effective multi -modal integration of visual, audio, 
touch, gestures,  and parallel interaction paradigms for AI systems is an important topic for future 
HCI work . Historically, inter action paradigms have guided UI development , e.g., the WIMP 
(window, icon, menu, pointing) paradigm. However, WIMP's limited sensing channels and 
unbalanced input/output bandwidth restrict the human -machine  interaction (Fan et al., 2018). 
Researchers are exploring the concepts of Post -WIMP and Non -WIMP, e.g., the PIBG paradigm 
(physical object, icon, button, gesture) for pen interaction  (Dai et al., 2004) , and RBI ( reality -
based interaction ) for virtual reality (Jacob et al., 2008) , but the effectiveness requires verification  
(Fan et al., 2018).  To further analyze the interaction  paradigm for AI systems , Fan et al. (2018) 
proposed a software research framework , including interface paradigms, interaction design 
principles, and psychological models. Zhang et al. (2018) proposed a RMCP paradi gm that 
includes roles (role), interactive modal (modal), interactive commands (commands), and 
information presentation style (presentation style) for AI systems . This work  is mainly carried out 

==== Page 46 ====
 
46 
 in the computer science community . HCI should support for defining the paradigms , metaphors, 
and experimental verification  to address the unique issues in AI systems . 
The new c ollaborati ve relationship between humans and AI systems will change the way 
we design interface s. How HCI can design effective interfaces to facilitat e the collaboration is one 
of big opportunities for us. Conventional non-AI interfaces tend to be rigid in the order in which 
they accept instructions and the level of detail which they require  (Lieberman, 2009 ). AI-based 
technologies such as gesture recognition, motion recognition, speech recognition,  and 
emotion/intent/context detection, can let systems accept a broader range of human input. Many of 
the collaboration issues that arise in human collaboration also appear in AI when trying to model 
mach ine problem solving. A better understanding of these issues can help us improve interfaces  
for collaboration. HCI professionals need to support AI professionals ’ effort s by developing 
cognition models and knowledge  graphs  representing these (e.g., user intentions, 
affecti ve/emotional models) . 
Human limited cognitive resources become a bottleneck of HCI design in the pervasive 
computing environment. As early as 2002, Carnegie University's Aura project research showed 
that the most precious resource in pervasive computing is not computer technology, but human 
cognitive resources (Garlan  et al., 2002). In an implicit int eraction scenario initiated by ambient 
intelligent systems, intelligent system s may cause competition between human cognitive 
resources in different modalities, and users will face a high cognitive work load.  In addition, 
implicit , multi -modal, and pervasive interactions are anticipated to be not only conscious and 
intentional, but also subconscious and even unintentional  or incidental (Bakker & 
Niemantsverdriet, 2016; Dix, 2002). Thus, HCI design must consider the “bandwidth” of human 
cognitive processing and their resource allocation while develop ing innovative approach es to 
reduce user cognitive workload through appropriate interaction technology .  
Intelligent interaction design also calls for enhanced H CI methods . We need an innovative 
design approach which should not just focus on a single user -artifact interaction  as we do today 
for non -AI computing systems  but account for entire environments and eco systems of artifacts, 
services, and data (Brown et al., 2017) . Also,  we need to  assess the unique dynamic machine 
behavior of AI systems as evolved over time and the ir joint performance of human -machine 
system as a whole  by leveraging a longitudinal study approach , instead of the short -term HCI 
approach as we do today .  
Finally, w e also need interaction design standards  to guide HCI work  for HAII design . 
Current HCI design standards were primarily developed for non -AI systems , there is a lack of 
design standards and guidelines that specifically support HCAI -based systems . The design 
standards and guidelines for AI systems need to fully consider the unique characteristics of AI 
systems. Examples include , designing for transparency, unpredictability, learning, evolution, and 
shared contro l (Holmquist, 2017 ); design for engagement, decision -making, discovery, and 
uncertainty  (Girardin & Lathia, 2017) . There are initial design guidelines available: “Google AI + 
People Guidebook ” (Google PAIR , 2019) ; Microsoft ’s 18 design guidelines (Amershi et al., 

==== Page 47 ====
 
47 
 2019) ; Endsley ’s guidelines for the design of human -autonomy systems  (Endsley, 2017) ; 
Shneiderman’s 2-D HCAI design framework (Shneiderman, 2020a ). The International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) also sees this urgency. The ISO Human -System 
Interaction SC4 Work Group 6 (ISO TC 159/SC4/WG6) is drafting a document on AI systems, 
titled “ Ergonomics of Human -System Interaction - Part 810: Robotic, Intelligent and Autonomous 
Systems ” (ISO, 2020).  This document will provide the basis for ISO to determine the need for 
publishing ISO standards in this area. The HAII community needs to put forwa rd a series of 
design standards  based on empirical studies , helping play a  key role in optimizing the design of 
AI systems.  
6  Challenges  and opportunities of current HCI methodology for HAII work  
 
Future HCI work inevitably put s forward new requirements on methods  if we want to 
effectively address the unique issues discussed earlier . Existing  HCI methods were primarily 
created for non -AI computing systems and may not effectively address the unique issues in AI 
systems. For instan ce, recent research reported that many challenges have been encountered in the 
process  of developing AI systems for HCI professionals (Yang  et al., 2020). There is a lack of 
effective methods for designing AI systems. Designers had difficulty perform ing the typical HCI 
activities of conceptualization, rapid prototyping, and testing ( Yang  et al., 2020; Kuniavsky et al., 
2017  Holmquist , 2017; Dove et al., 2017; Kayacik et al., 2019; van Allen. , 2018; Yang et al. , 
2018 ).  
How will conventional HCI methods need to be modified in contexts where AI is a core 
technology component? Driven  by the unique characteristics of AI technology  as discussed 
earlier, there are new needs that pose challenges to the existing HCI methods. For example, the 
unique machine behavior of AI systems and the evol ving collaborative relationship between 
humans -AI systems have challenge d HCI methods that assess , design,  and test system s and 
interfaces in the short -term. Also, the pervasive computing environment and eco systems of 
artifacts, services, and data has challenged the existing HCI methods that fo cus on single user -
artifact interaction  (Brown et al., 2017) .    
The HCI community has realized the need to enhance exi sting methods (Stephanidis, 
Salvendy et al., 2019; Palvend o, 2019). T o effectively address the unique issues of AI  systems, 
we must  enhance existing methods and leverage the methods from other disciplinaries. To this 
end, we have assessed  the existing methods of HCI, human factors, and other related disciplines. 
Table 6 summarizes the outcome s showing a comparison between the conventional HCI methods 
(i.e., typical HCI methods being used in designing non -AI systems) and the alternative met hods 
that are presented by enhancing existing methods and leveraging the methods from other 
disciplines.  
 
 

==== Page 48 ====
 
48 
 Table 6   Comparison between conventional HCI methods and the alternative HCI methods                            
Alternative 
HCI methods  
(selected)     Characteristics of                                         
the alternative methods  Limitations of  
conventional  HCI  
methods  R & D 
stages of 
AI systems  Potential contributions of 
the alternative methods to 
AI systems  
Cognitive  
work analysis  
(Vicente,1999)  Needs analysis and 
modeling focus on various 
constraints affecting human 
decision -making activities 
(including unknown tasks) 
of the entire work domain, 
especially for new work 
domains  Task analysis and 
cognitive task 
analysis are based 
on the known tasks 
of existing work 
domains  Needs 
analysis, 
qualitative 
modeling  
 Analyze unforeseen 
scenarios, tasks, and 
constraints of new work 
domains, helping  intelligent 
systems (e.g., intelligent 
robots) to execute and make 
decisions adaptively  
Dynamic 
human -
machine 
functional 
allocation  Dynamic human -machine 
functions, task analysis and 
allocation as intelligent 
machines learn over time, 
emphasizing the 
complementarity of human 
intelligence and machine 
intelligence  Static and 
unchanging human -
machine functions, 
task analysis and 
allocati on (e.g., the 
Fitts model)  
 System and 
user needs 
analysis  
 Utilize the learning ability of 
intelligent machines to 
dynamically and intelligently 
replace more manual tasks 
and improve the overall 
efficiency of the human -
machine system  
Prototyping of 
machine 
intelligence  Use WOZ design prototype 
to emulate and test the 
intelligent functions of an 
AI system and design ideas 
in early stage  Focus on the non -
intelligent 
functions, difficult 
to present 
intelligent functions  
 Low-
fidelity 
prototyping
, HCI test At the early stage of 
development, prototype and 
test intelligent capabilities of 
the AI systems to assess and 
validate design ideas  
Ecological 
interface 
design  
(Burns et al., 
2004)  Structurally characterize 
and present the functional 
relationships, domain 
properties and constraints 
across the various levels of 
the work domain in the UI 
in terms of multiple 
embedded "means -ends" 
relations  Graphical user 
interface design 
focuses on user’s 
specific tasks, 
physical elements 
and characteris tics 
of the user interface 
(UI) 
 User 
interface 
design  Help users to effectively 
search for the information 
required for decision -making 
in the problem space of the 
entire work domain; help 
visually and effectively 
represent the information and 
big data o n the UI of a 
complex domain  

==== Page 49 ====
 
49 
 AI-first design  
(Google , 
2019） Emphasize on and leverage 
intelligent capabilities (e.g., 
intelligent search, voice 
input, user behavior and 
context -driven functions) to 
maximize UX  Focus on the design 
of the interaction 
between users and 
the physical 
elements of the UI, 
not the 
functionality of a 
system  UI design 
and 
prototyping
, system  
analysis 
and design  Reduce human manual work 
in AI system, reduce human 
physical workload, and 
improve the overall 
performanc e of the system  
AI as a design 
material   
(Holmquist, 
2017 ) 
  Plug in AI/intelligence as a 
new design material in 
developing AI applications 
without having technical 
know -how  
 No tool to 
effectively help 
design AI systems , 
HCI professionals  
need to  learn the 
technical details of 
AI System 
design, 
prototype  AI/intelligence is used as a 
tool to truly empower HCI 
designers;  technology 
becomes a valuable tool , 
facilitating designers 
throughout HCI iterative 
design and evaluation  
Big data -based 
design  Apply AI and big data to 
model real -time user 
behaviors, contextual 
scenes and other data to 
define digital personas, 
predict user usage 
scenarios, personalized 
needs, etc.  Difficult to predict 
user needs, and 
impossible to 
obtain real -time 
data, such as user 
behaviors and 
contextual 
information  Needs 
analysis, 
system 
design  
 Provide intelligent and 
personalized capabilities and 
content based on real -time 
user behaviors and usage 
context  
“Scaled up & 
ecological  
method”  
(Brown et al., 
2017 ) Study the impacts of the 
entire pervasive computing 
environment (multiple 
interactions between 
human -AI agent s and 
between AI agents ) and the 
ecosystem s of artifacts, 
services, and data in 
distributed contexts of use  Focus on a single 
user-computing 
artifact interaction  
with limited 
context of use  User 
research, 
HCI test  Comprehensively assess the 
impacts of the entire 
pervasive computing 
environment and optimize the 
design of AI systems such as  
an intelligent Internet of 
things  

==== Page 50 ====
 
50 
 “In-the-wild”  
study   
(Roger  et al., 
2017)   Carry out in -situ 
development and 
engagement, sampling 
experiences, and probing 
people in the field (e.g., 
home , workplace, street) to 
fully understand people’s 
real experience and 
behavior while interacting 
with AI    Limited to lab -
based study, cannot 
effectively assess  
the broad impacts 
of AI on people’s 
daily life and work  
 User 
research, 
HCI test  Comprehensively assess the 
impacts of AI technologies, 
and optimize the design to 
support people’s daily work 
and life  
Situation 
awareness -
oriented 
design 
(Endsley  
et al., 2012)  
 Emphasize that in a 
dynamic environment, 
users employ a real -time 
psychological construct to 
represent the perception, 
understanding and 
prediction of a system and 
environmental status, and 
support users' moment -to-
moment decision -making 
activities and performance  Focus on the stable 
mental model built 
by users after lon g-
term learning of 
systems  Needs 
analysis, 
interface 
design, SA 
modeling, 
HCI test  Build shared SA between 
humans and machine through 
modeling, promote human -
machine collaboration, and 
support shared control 
authority between human and 
machine under emerg ency 
conditions  
 
Cognitive 
performance 
modeling 
(Foyle et al., 
2007 ) 
 Conduct low -cost, 
quantitative human factors 
validation through 
cognitive performance 
modeling to reduce 
development risks and costs 
in the early stage of 
development,  
 Conduct human 
factors testing and 
validation of the 
design in the later 
stage of 
development  
 System and 
human 
performanc
e modeling, 
HCI test Simulate and validate the 
human - interaction with AI 
systems in the early stage; use 
the predictive data of the 
human performance model as 
the input of an AI system to 
support an adaptive and 
intelligent warning system  
Human -
machine 
teaming based 
collaborative 
design  
 Machine works as a tool + 
teammate. Emphasize on 
the human -machine 
teaming relationship, 
shared information, goals, 
tasks, execution, decision -
making between human and 
AI machine  Machine works as a 
tool, basically no 
collaboration 
between human and 
machine  System 
analysis 
and design, 
human -
machine 
functional 
analysis  Optimize the human -machine 
collaboration and 
performance of an AI system 
by taking advantage of the 
functional complementarity, 
replacement, and adaptability 
between hum an and AI  

==== Page 51 ====
 
51 
 HCAI -based 
HCI method  Collaborate with AI 
professionals to build 
transparent and 
understandable AI systems; 
optimize ML, training data, 
goals and algorithm models  Opaque and 
unexplainable AI 
systems; inefficient 
ML and training 
can lead to 
algorithm bias  UI design, 
system 
analysis 
and test  Solve the "AI black box" 
effect, improve user trust and 
decision -making efficiency, 
optimize the results of ML, 
avoid extreme algorithm bias  
Neuroergono
mics   
(Parasuraman  
et al.,2006)  
  Understand the mechanism 
of human information 
processing and changes in 
brain imaging 
measurements at the 
cognitive neural level in the 
operating environment  
 Focus on explicit 
behavioral 
performance and 
subjective 
perception of 
human operators in 
the ope rating 
environment.  UI design 
and HCI 
test  
  New brain -computer interface 
technology, gather sensitive 
brain imaging measures, use 
the measures to support 
adaptive intelligent system 
design  
Longitudinal 
study 
(Lieberman, 
2009)  Assess the performance of 
AI system or interface 
based on human -AI 
collaboration as evolved 
over time  Limited to make 
side-by-side 
comparison with 
existing 
conventional 
interfaces  at a fixed 
time without 
considering  human -
machine 
collaboration as 
evolved over time   HCI 
evaluation  Validate human -AI 
collaboration and its impact 
on AI interface over time, 
optimize the interface design 
to facilitate  human -AI 
collaboration  
Sociotechnical 
systems  
 Study the impact of AI 
technology on human in the 
macro environment 
(privacy, emotion, ethics, 
decision -making autonomy, 
skill growth, etc.)  Focus on physical 
environment and 
organizational 
factors, lack 
consideration of the 
entire 
sociotechnical 
system 
environment.  Needs 
analysis, 
system 
design, 
HCI test  Develop AI systems that meet 
the needs of the entire 
sociotechnical systems 
environment  
 
As shown in Table 6, current HCI methods show limitations in designing AI systems, the 
alternative methods most likely can overcome these limitations, and provide potential 
contributions to the development of AI systems by specifically addressing the unique issues in AI 
systems. From the perspective of  the development process , the alternative methods show their 
potential values across different development stages and their comprehensive contributions to AI 
systems. We expect these alternative methods will be further improve d in future HCI work.  

==== Page 52 ====
 
52 
 7  Challenges and opportunities in current HCI practice for HAII work  
 
As an emerging research and application area, HCI professionals must face challenges  in 
HAII practice. Effective strategies must be developed and applied to overcome the challenges. 
Unfortunately,  HCI professionals  still join AI project s only after  requirements are define d; a 
typical phenomenon  when HCI was an emerging new field  (Yang, Steinfeld et al., 2020). 
Consequently , the HCAI approach  and design  recommendations from HCI professionals could be 
easily declined  (Yang, 2018) . AI professionals often claim that many problems that HCI  could not 
solve  in the past  have been solved through AI technology  (e.g., voice and gesture input ), and they 
are able to design the interaction by themselves. A lthough some of the designs are innovative, 
studies have shown that the outcome may not be acceptable from user experience perspective 
(e.g., Budiu & Laubheimer, 2018 ). Also,  some HCI professionals find it challenging to 
collaborate effectively with AI professionals due to lack of a shared workflow and a common 
language (Girardin & Lathia, 2017 ). Recent studies have shown that HCI professionals do not 
seem to be prepared themselves for provid ing effective design support for AI systems  (Yang, 
2018) . We propose that the HCI community need s to reassess our approach in developing AI 
systems and offer several strategic recommendations on how HCI professionals can make 
contributions to the HAII area.   
First, HCI professionals need to integrate the existing and enhanced methods into the 
development process of AI systems to maximize the interdisciplinary collaboration  across AI and 
HCI professionals . A multi -disciplinary team, including AI, data, computer science , and HCI, 
may bring various frictions and opportunities for misunderstandings , which must be overcome  
through process  optimization  (Kuniavsky  et al., 2017; Girardin & Lathia , 2017;  Holmquist, 2017 ). 
For instance, in order for understanding the similarities and differences in practices between HCI 
professionals and the professionals from other disciplines , researchers summarize a series of 
touch points and principles  (Girardin & Lathia, 2017). Within  the HCI community, people have 
pointed out how the HCI process should be integrated into the development of autonomous 
capabilities built on AI and ML  and the  role th at HCI professionals should play in the 
development of AI (Lau et al., 2018) . For instance, Cerejo (2021) pro poses a “pair design” 
process that put s two people (one HCI professional and one AI professional) working together 
across the development stages of AI systems. While AI professionals should understand the HAII 
area and its approach, HCI professionals also need to fully understand and apply knowledge of AI 
to facilitate the process integration and collaborati on.  
Second , the HCI communit y should take a leading role to promote the HAII  area as we did 
40 years ago for promoting HCI . In response to the challenge faced by the interdisciplinary 
communities such as human factors  and HCI , past president of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics (HFES) society , William Howell, put forward a model of “shared philosophy ” by 
sharing the human -centered design philosophy with other disciplines  (Howell, 2001), instead of a 
"unique discipline " model  by claiming the sole ownership of the human -centered design by a 

==== Page 53 ====
 
53 
 discipline . Over the past 40 years, the participation of the professionals from HCI, human factors , 
computer science , psychology and other disciplines into the field s of HCI is the embodiment of 
the “shared philosophy” model. In the early days of the AI era, it is even more necessary for HCI 
professionals to actively share the HCAI design philosophy with the AI community. Although the 
HCAI approach and the HAII  area may not be fully accepted by all  in the initial stage, but we 
need to minimize this time -lagging effect. HCAI’s promotion needs to target to the whole of 
society for acceptance. Influence ultimately determines our continuing efforts , just as we jointly 
have been promoting user experience  to society over the last 40 years  and user experience  has 
finally become the consensus  model for society .  
Third, the research and application of HAII inevitably put forward new requirements for 
HCI methods.  As discussed earlier, m ost of the existing HCI methods were primarily created for 
non-AI systems and may not effectively address the unique issues in AI systems. Consequently, 
there is a  lack of effective methods for HCI professionals to design AI systems. To effectively 
address the unique challenges a nd issues of AI systems, there is an urgent need to enhance 
existing methods and leverage effective methods  (Xu & Ge, 2020) .   
Fourth, HCI professionals must update  their skillset and knowledge in AI so that they can 
fully understand the design implications of the unique characteristics  of AI systems  to overcome 
the weakness of lacking the ability to influence on AI systems  (Yang, 2018) . Some HCI 
professionals have already raised their concerns . One question is the issue of how we train our 
next-generation  of developers and designers to create a human -centered AI system . AI/ML 
demands new research  competence ; another is how HCI professionals should interpret and assess 
the relationships in the data  as well the complex relationship models from AI/ML  (Lau et al., 
2018) . We may take the lessons from the past. Over the past 40 years, HCI, human factors, and 
psychology disciplines have provided  an extensive array of professional capabilities. These 
capabilities have emerged into a relatively mature user experience  culture (Xu, 2005).   For this to 
occur for HAII, new measures at the level of university education are required.  Relevant 
departments  or programs (e.g., HCI, Human Factors, Computer Science , Informatics, Psychology ) 
need to proactively cultivate interdisciplinary talents doing HAII work for society. More 
specifically, it is necessary to provide students with multiple options to learn interdisciplinary 
knowledge , such as , hybrid curriculum s of “HCI  + AI or HAII ,” “AI major + social science 
minor ,” or “social science major + AI minor ,” and establish  master and doctorate  programs 
targeting the HAII area. 
Fifth , HCI professionals need to proactively conduct applied research  through  cross -
industry and cross -disciplinary collaboration s in order to increase their influences . Scholars in 
academia should actively participate in AI related collaborative projects across disciplines and 
collaboration between industry and academia. The development of autonomous vehicles is a good 
example. Many companies currently have heavily invested in develop ing autonomous vehicles . 
As discussed earlier, there are opportunities for academia to partner with industry to overcome the 

==== Page 54 ====
 
54 
 challenges. Also, the human -machine hybrid augmented intelligence , as advocated by the HCAI  
approach , needs collaborative work between academia and industry.  
Finally, we need to foster a mature environment  for the HAII practice , including 
government policy, management commitment, organizational culture, development process, 
design standards  and guidelines, governance structure , and process.  While the research and 
application of HAII are being promoted , some strategic and tactical approaches are also initially  
being developed  across academia and in dustry (e.g., IEEE, 2019; Li, 2018; Xu, 2019a; 
Shneiderman, 2020a; Google PAIR, 2019 ). Lau et al. (2018) believe that the human factors/HCI  
community also need s to seek to improve the adoption of AI technology by the public and 
regulators. The adoption process most likely needs to address cultural anxiet ies concerning AI 
technology (O'Neil, 2016). From the perspective of promoting well -designed and appropriate use 
of technology, the HCI community  should be ready for new responsibilities , particu larly how HCI 
can help promote the knowledge of AI/ML , thereby encourag ing appropriate adoption , and how 
HCI can support the regulation of AI/ML technology for safety critical systems. We firmly 
believe that a mature HAII culture will eventually come  in, the history has proved our initial 
success in promoting HCI  and user experience  the computer era.  The HCI community needs to 
take the leading role  again.     
8  Conclusions  
 
While AI technology has created benefits to humans, it may harm humans if not 
appropriately developed. The current third wave of IA can be characterized as “technology 
enhancement + application development + human -center ed approach .” Third wave of AI does not 
only pose new challenges of considering various “human factors” in developing AI systems, but 
also calls for a broader human -centered approach , which provides a great opportunity for the HCI 
community .  
From an HCI perspective, AI systems demonstrate unique characteristics  different from 
non-AI computing systems . AI systems can exhibit unique machine behavior and evolve to gain 
certain levels of human -like cognitive, self -executing, and self-adaptive abilities, and t heir output 
may be indetermin istic and unexpected . Driven by the unique characteristics of AI technology, AI 
systems may evolve fr om an assistive tool that primarily supports human operations to a 
collaborative teammate, forming a new form  of human -machine collaborative relationship as AI 
technology advances. Furthermore, our analysis shows that there are significant differences 
betw een non -AI and AI systems across many aspects , which compels HCI professionals to 
reassess  the scope and effectiveness of our current HCI approach which is primarily defined for 
non-AI computing systems.  
We advocate the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach to address the unique issues of AI 
systems strategically and tactically. The HCAI approach has three primary elements working 
interdependently : human, technology, and ethics. The HCAI approach calls for p lacing humans at 

==== Page 55 ====
 
55 
 the center  when developing AI systems and ensuring that they are the ultimate decision makers in 
all AI systems , developing reliable, safe, and trustworthy AI.    
To further enable the implementation of the HCAI approach, we formally promote the 
research and application of human -AI interaction (HAII), an emerging i nterdisciplinary area, as a 
collaboration platform across disciplines . HAII research and application will enable us to  address 
the unique issues more effectively  in AI system s by unifying all of the disciplines of professionals 
working on AI systems  to promote, collaborate, and develop human -centered AI systems driven 
by the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach .  
There are a multitude of unique opportunities for HCI professionals to play a key role to 
make (or continue to make) unique contributions to these  HAII areas , eventually enabling the 
development of human -centered AI systems. These key HAII areas include unique machine 
behavior of AI systems, human -AI collaboration, human intelligence augmentation , human -
machine hybrid intelligence, explainable AI, human -controlled autonomy, ethical design , and 
intelligent inter action .  
We also conducted an assessment of the current HCI methods  and the results show the 
limitations in designing AI systems . We propose and identify the alternative methods that most 
likely can overcome these limitations . These methods can provide potential contributions to the 
development of AI systems by specifically addressing the unique issues in AI systems.  
Finally, we discuss the challenges in current HCI practices for HAII work . We offer 
strategic recommendations. HCI professionals need to integrate HCI methods into the 
development of AI systems to maximize the interdisciplinary collaboration . The HCI communit y 
should take the initiative to promote the HAII research and application . Also, HCI professionals 
must update our skillset s and knowledge in AI so that we can fully understand the design 
implications of the unique characteristics of AI systems . Universities needs to proactively 
cultivate interdisciplinary HAII talents for society. HCI professionals need to proactively conduct 
applied research related to AI systems through  cross -industry and cross -disciplinary collaboration. 
Finally, we need to foster a mature organizational environment for the implementation of the 
HCAI approach and the HAII  work . The history has proved our initial success in promoting HCI  
in the computer era  over the last 40 years . The HCI community needs to take the leading role 
again.   
Acknowledgements  
The authors appreciate the insightful comments from Professor Ben Shneiderman on an earlier 
draft of this paper. Any opinion herein is those of the authors and does not reflect the views of 
any other individuals or corporation.   
 

==== Page 56 ====
 
56 
 References  
 
Acuna, D., Ling, H., Kar, A., & Fidler, S. (2018). Efficient interactive annotation of segmentation datasets  
with polygon -rnn++. In  Proceedings of t he IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern  
Recognition  (pp. 859 -868).  
Amershi S., Chickering M ., Drucker, S. M  et al. (2015). Model  tracker : Redesigning performance analysis 
tools for machine learning. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems -CHI’15 , 2015.  
Azhar, M. Q., & Sklar, E. I. (2017). A study measuring the impact of shared decision making in a human -
robot team. The International  Journal of Robotics Research , 36, 461 –482. https://doi.org/10. 
1177/0278364917710540  
Abdul, A., Vermeulen, J., Wang, D., Li m, B. Y., & Kankanhalli, M. (2018). Trends and trajectories for 
explainable, accountable and intelligible systems: an HCI research agenda. Proceedings of the 
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  Montreal, QC, Canada, Paper 
No.582.  
Amershi, S., Cakmak, M., Knox, W.B., Kulesza, T. (2014).  Power to the people: The role of humans in  
interactive machine learning.  AI Magazine , Winter, 2014, 105 -120. 
Amershi, S., Weld, D., Vorvoreanu, M., Fourney, A., Nushi, B., Collisson, P., Suh, J., Iq bal, S., Bennett,  
P. N. Inkpen, K., Teevan, J., Kikin -Gil, R., & Horvitz, E. (2019). Guidelines for human -AI  
interaction.  CHI 2019, May 4 –9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.  
Auernhammer, J. (2020) Human -centered AI: The role of human -centered design research in the  
development of AI, in Boess, S., Cheung, M. and Cain, R. (eds.),  Synergy  - DRS International   
Conference  2020 , 11-14 August, Held nline.  https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2020.282  
Azevedo, C. R., Raizer, K., & Souza, R. (2017 ). A vision for huma n-machine mutual understanding, trust  
establishment, and collaboration. In  2017 IEEE Conference on Cognitive and Computational  
Aspects of Situation Management (CogSIMA)  (pp. 1 -3).  
Bakker, S., & Niemantsverdriet, K. (2016). The interaction -attention  continuum: Considering  
various levels of human attention in interaction design. International Journal of Design,  
10(2), 1 –14. 
Baecker, R., Grudin, J., Buxton, W. A., & Greenberg, S. (1995). A historical and intellectual  
perspective.  Readings in Human -Computer Interaction: Toward the Year 2000 , 35-47. 
Bainbridge, L. (1983). Ironies of automation . Automatica, 19, 775 –779.   
Bansal , G., Nushi, B., Kamar, E., Weld, D.S., Lasecki, W. S., Horvitz, E. (2019 a). Updates in human -AI 
teams: Understanding and addressing the performance/compatibility tradeoff. Proceedings of the 
AAAI Conference on AI.  33: AAAI -19, IAAI -19, EAAI -20, 
https://do i.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33012429.  
Bansal, G., Nushi, B., Kamar, E., Lasecki, W. S., Weld, D. S., & Horvitz, E. (2019b). Beyond accuracy:  
The role of mental models in human -AI team performance. In  Proceedings of the AAAI  
Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing  (Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 2 -11). 
Bathaee，Y. (2018). The artificial intelligence black box and the failure of intent and causation. Harvard  
Journal of Law & Technology,  31(2), 890 -938.                      
Baumer, E. P. (2017). Towa rd human -centered algorithm design.  Big Data & Society , 4(2),  

==== Page 57 ====
 
57 
 2053951717718854.   
Bazzano, F., Grimaldi, A., Lamberti, F., Paravati, G., & Gaspardone, M. (2017). Adjustable autonomy for  
UAV supervision applications through mental workload assessment techniques. In  International  
Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction  (pp. 32-44). Springer, Cham.  
Beckers et al . (2019). Intelligent autonomous vehicles with an extendable knowledge base and meaningful  
human control. In Counterterrorism, Crime Fighting, Forensics, and Surveillance Technologies III  
(Vol. 11166, p. 111660C). Int. Soc. for Optics and Photonics.  
Beckers, G., Sijs, J., van Diggelen, J., van Dijk, R. J., Bouma, H., Lomme, M., ... & Mannucci, T. (2019). 
Intelligent autonomous vehicles with an extendable knowledge base and meaningful human control. 
In Counterterrorism, Crime Fighting, Forensics, and Surveillance Technologies III  (Vol. 11166, p. 
111660C). International Society for Optics and Phot onics.  
Berberian , B. (2019) . Man -Machine teaming: a problem of Agency. IFAC -PapersOnLine , Elsevier, 2019, 
51, 118 -123. ff10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.01.049ff. ffhal -02650437ff  
Bindewald, J. M., Rusnock, C. F., & Miller, M. E. (2017 ). Measuring human trust behavi or in human -
machine teams. In  International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics  (pp. 47 -
58). Springer, Cham.  
Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K. -W., Zou, J. Y., Saligrama, V. & Kalai, A. T. (2016). Man is to computer 
programmer as woman is to homemaker ? debiasing word embeddings. in Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems  4349 –4357.  
Bond, R., Mulvenna, M. D., Wan, H., Finlay, D. D., Wong, A., Koene, A., ... & Adel, T. (2019). Human 
centered artificial intelligence: weaving UX into algorithmic decision making. In  RoCHI  (pp. 2 -9). 
Bromham, L., Dinnage, R. & Hua, X.  (2016).  Interdisciplinary research has consistently lower funding 
success. Nature , 534, 684–687. 
Broniatowski, D. A. (2021). Psychological Foundations of  Explainability and Interpretability in Artificial 
Intelligence.  
Bryson, J. J., & Theodorou, A. (2019). How society can maintain human -centric artificial intelligence. In 
Human -centered digitalization and services (pp. 305 -323). Springer, Singapore.  
Boff, K.R.  (2006). Revolutions and shifting paradigms in human factors & ergonomics . Applied 
Ergonomics , 37, 391–399. 
Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K. -W., Zou, J. Y., Saligrama, V. & Kalai, A. T. (2016). Man is to computer  
programmer as woman is to home maker? debiasing word embeddings. in Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems,  4349 –4357.  
Bradshaw, J.M., Feltovich, P., Johnson, M. (2014).  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267819585_Human -Agent_Interaction  
Brandt, S. L., Lachter, R. R., & Shively, R. J. (2018). A Human -Autonomy Teaming Approach for a  
Flight -Following Task. In C. Baldwin (ed.), Advances in Neuroergonomics and Cognitive 
Engineering, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Springer  International Publishing AG,DOI  
10.1007/978 -3-319-60642 -2_2.   
Braga, A. & Logan, R.K. (2017). The emperor of strong AI has no clothes: Limits to artificial intelligence.  
Information , 8, 156. 
Brezillon, P. (2003). Focusing on context in human -centered comput ing. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 18 , 62- 
66. doi:10.1109/MIS.2003.1200731.  

==== Page 58 ====
 
58 
 Brill J., C., Cummings, M. L., Evans III, A. W., Hancock, P. A., Lyons, J. B., & Oden, K. (2018).  
Navigating the Advent of Human -Machine Teaming . In Proceedings of the Human Factors and  
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 455 -459). Sag e CA: Los Angeles, CA:  
SAGE Publications.  
Brown, B., Bødker, S., & Höök, K. (2017). Does HCI scale? Scale hacking and the relevance of 
HCI.  interactions , 24(5), 28 -33. 
Budiu，R. & Laubheimer, P. (2018). Intelligent Assistants Have Poor Usability: A User Study of Alexa, 
Google Assistant, and Siri.  https://www.nngroup.com  
Buolamwini, J. & Gebru, T. Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender 
Classification. in Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability an d 
Transparency (eds. Friedler, S. A. & Wilson, C.) 81, 77–91 (PMLR, 2018).  
Burns, C. M. & Hajdukiewicz, J.  (2004). Ecological Interface Design . CRC Press .  
Clancy, J. P. (2019). Breakdowns in human -AI partnership: Revelatory cases of automation bias in 
autonomous vehicle accidents . 
Cooke, Nancy (2018). 5 ways to help robots work together with people . The Conversation. 
https://theconversation.com/5 -ways -to-help-robots -work -together -with-people -101419  
Cooke, N., Demir, M., & Huang, L. (2020). A framework for human -autonomy team research. 
In International Conference on Human -Computer Interaction  (pp. 134 -146). Springer, Cham.  
Cooke, N. (2017). How can human factors/ergonomics take on the NAE grand challenges?  HFES 
Webinar Series , 2017/April, https://www.hfes.org/Security/ContentPages/?Id=167.  
Calhoun, G. L., Ruff, H. A., Behymer, K. J. & Frost, E. M. (2018). Human -autonomy teaming interface  
design considerations for multi -unmanned vehicle control. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics  
Science , 19, 321 -352. 
Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., & Newell, A. (1983). The Psychology of Human -Computer Interaction .  
Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
CARAVAN . (2018).  CARAVAN Public Opinion Poll: Driverless Cars. Report from Advocates for  
Highway and Auto Safety:   
https://saferoads.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/01/AV -Poll-Report -January -2018 -FINAL.pdf  
Carter , S. & Nielsen, M. (2017). Using artificial intelligence to augment human intelligence . Distill , 2, 12. 
Cerejo Joana (2021) The design process of human  centered AI — Part2 . BootCamp :  
https://bootcamp.uxdesign.cc/human -centered -ai-design -process -part-2-empathize -hypothesis -
6065db967716  
Chatzimparmpas, A., Martins, R. M., Jusufi, I., & Kerren, A. (2020). A survey of surveys on the use of  
visualization for interpreting machine learning models.  Information Visualization, 19 , 207 -233. 
Chittajallu , D. R., Dong, B., Tunisi n, P., et al.  (2019). XAI-CBIR: Explainable AI system for content  
based retrieval of video frames from minimally invasive  surgery videos. 2019 IEEE 16th  
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019) . 
Choudhury, M. D., Lee, M. K., Zhu, H., & Shamma, D. A. (2020). Introduction to this special issue on  
unifying human computer interaction and artificial intelligence.  Human –Computer  
Interaction , 35(5-6), 355 -361. 
Chen, J. Y. C., & Barnes, M. J. (2014). Human -agent teaming for multirobot control: A review of human  
factors issues.  IEEE Transactions on Human –Machine Systems, 44, 13 –29.   

==== Page 59 ====
 
59 
 Chen, J. Y., Barnes, M. J., Selkowitz, A. R., Stowers, K., Lakhmani, S. G., & Ka sdaglis, N. (2016).  
Human -autonomy teaming and agent transparency. In  Companion Publication of the 21st  
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces  (pp. 28 -31). 
Chen, J. Y., Lakhmani, S. G., Stowers, K., Selkowitz, A. R., Wright, J. L., & Barnes, M. (2018). Situation  
awareness -based agent transparency and human -autonomy teaming effectiveness.  Theoretical  
issues in ergonomics science , 19, 259 -282. 
Clare, A. S., Cummings, M.L., & Repenning, N. P. (2015). Influencing trust for human -automation  
collaborative scheduling of multiple unmanned vehicles.  Human Factors, 57, 1208 -1218.    
Cooke, N. 2017. How Can Human Factors/Ergonomics Take on the NAE Grand Challenges?  HFES 
Webinar Series , 2017/April, https://www.hfes.org/Security/ContentPages/?Id=167 . 
Correia, A., Paredes, H., Schneider, D., Jameel, S., & Fonseca, B. (2019). Towards hybrid crowd -AI  
centered systems: Developing an  integrated framework from an empirical perspective. In  2019  
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC)  (pp. 4013 -4018).  
Crandall, J. W. et al.  (2018). Cooperating with machines. Nat. Commun.  9, 233.  
Cummings , M. L.  & Clare , A.S. (2015) Holistic modelling for human autonomous system interaction,  
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics  Science , 16, 214-231, DOI:10.1080/1463922X.2014.1003990  
Cummings, M., Huang, L., Zhu, H., Finkelstein, D., & We i, R. (2019). The impact of increasing autonomy  
on training requirements in a UAV  supervisory control task.  Journal of Cognitive Engineering and  
Decision Making,  13, 295 -309. 
Cummings, M. L. (2019). Lethal autonomous weapons: Meaningful human control or meaningful human  
certification?  IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 38, 20-26. 
Cummings, M. L., & Britton, D. (2020). Regulating safety -critical autonomous systems: past, present, and  
future perspectives.  In Living with Robots (pp. 119 -140). Academic Press.  
de Visser, E. J., Pak, R. & Shaw, T. H. (2018). From automation to autonomy:  the importance of trust  
repair in human –machine interaction, Ergonomics, 61, 1409 -1427, DOI:  
10.1080/00140139.2018.1457725.  
de Sio, S. F., & den Hoven, V. J. (2018). Meaningful human control over autonomous systems: A  
philosophical account. Frontiers i n Robotics and AI , 5, 15.  doi: 10.3389/frobt.2018.00015  
den Broek, H.V., Schraagen, J. M., te Brake, G. & van Diggelin, J. (2017). Approaching full autonomy in  
the maritime domain: Paradigm  choices and human factors challenges.  In Proceedings of the  
MTEC, Singapore, 26–28 April 2017.    
Dai, G. Z. & Wang, H. (2004). Physical object icons buttons gesture (PIBG): a new interaction paradigm  
with pen. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative  
Work , Xiamen, 11 –20. 
Damacharla, P., Javaid, A. Y., Gallimore, J. J., & Devabhaktuni, V. K. (2018a). Common metrics to  
benchmark human -machine teams (HMT):  A review.  IEEE Access , 6, 38637 -38655.  
Damacharla, P., Javaid, A. Y., & Devabhaktuni, V. K. (2018b). Human error prediction using eye tracking  
to improvise team cohesion in human -machine teams. In  International Conference on Applied  
Human Factors and Ergonomics  (pp. 47 -57). Sprin ger, Cham.  
Damacharla, P. , Dhakal, P. , Bandreddi, J.P. , Gallimore, J. , Javaid, A. , Elkin, C. , Devabhaktuni, V. (2020).  
Novel Human -in-the-Loop (HIL) Simulation Method to Study Synthetic Agents and Standardize  
Human -Machine Teams (HMT). Preprints 2020, 2020110352 (doi:  

==== Page 60 ====
 
60 
 10.20944/preprints202011.0352.v1).  
Dearing, D., Novstrup, A., & Goan, T. (2018, September). Assessing wo rkload in human -machine teams  
from psychophysiological data with  sparse ground truth. In  International Symposium on Human  
Mental Workload: Models and Applications  (pp. 13 -22). Springer, Cham.  
Dekker , S. & Nyce , J. (2004 ). How can ergonomics influence design? Moving from research findings to 
future systems, Ergonomics , 47, 1624 -1639.  
Dellermann, D. , Calma, A. , Lipusch, N. , Weber, T. , Weigel, S. , de Visser, E. J., Pak, R. & Shaw, T. H.  
(2018). From automation to  autonomy: The importance of trust repair in human –machine  
interaction, Ergonomics , 61, 1409 -1427, DOI: 10.1080/00140139.2018.1457725.  
Dellermann D, Calma A, Lipusch N, Weber T, Weigel S, Ebel P (2019) The future of human -ai  
collaboration: a taxonomy of design knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems. In: Hawaii  
international conference on system sciences (HICSS).  Hawaii, USA  
Dellermann, D., Ebel, P., Söllner, M., & Leimeister, J. M. (2019). Hybrid intelligence.  Business &  
Information Systems Engineering , 61, 637 -643. 
Demir, M., McNeese, N. J., & Cooke, N. J. (2017). Team situation awareness withi n the context of human - 
autonomy teaming. Cognitive Systems  Research , 46, 3–12.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2016.11.003  
Demir, M., Amazeen, P. G., McNeese, N. J., Likens, A., & Cooke, N. J. (2017, September). Team  
coordination dynamics in human -autonomy  teaming. In  Proceedings of the Human Factors and  
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting  (Vol. 61, No. 1, pp. 236 -236). Sage C A: Los Angeles, CA:  
SAGE Publications.  
Demir, M., Likens, A. D., Cooke, N. J., Amazeen, P. G., & McNeese, N. J. (2018). Team coordination and  
effectiveness in human -autonomy teaming.  IEEE Transactions on Human -Machine Systems , 49,  
150-159. 
Demir, M., Cooke, N. J., & Amazeen, P. G. (2018). A conceptual model of team dynamical behaviors and  
performance in human -autonomy teaming.  Cognitive Systems Research , 52, 497 -507. 
Demir, M., McNeese, N. J., & Cooke, N. J. (2017). Team situation awareness  within the context of human - 
autonomy teaming.  Cognitive Systems Research , 46, 3-12. 
Demir, M., McNeese, N. J., Johnson, C., Gorman, J. C., Grimm, D., & Cooke, N. J. (2019). Effective team  
interaction for adaptive  training and situation awareness in huma n-autonomy teaming. In  2019  
IEEE Conference on Cognitive and Computational Aspects of Situation Management  
(CogSIMA)  (pp. 122 -126).  
Doshi -Velez, F., & Kim, B. (2017). Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.  arXiv  
preprint arXiv:1702.08608 . 
Donahoe, E. (2018). Human Centered AI: Building trust, democracy and human rights by design. An  
Overview of Stan ford’s global digital policy incubator and the XPRIZE Foundation’s June 11th  
Event. Stanford GDPi. https://medium.com/stanfords -gdpi/human -centered -ai-building -trust- 
democ racy-and-human -rights -by-design -2fc14a0b48af  
Dove, G., H alskov, K., Forlizzi, J. & Zimmerman , J. (2017 ). UX design innovation: Challenges for 
working with machine learning as a design material. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 . ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 
278–288. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025739  

==== Page 61 ====
 
61 
 Dressel, J. & Farid, H. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. Sci Adv , 4, eaao5580  
(2018).  
Dudley, J. J ., & Kristensson, P. O. (2018). A review of user interface design for interactive machine  
learning. ACM Transactions on Interactive  
Intelligent Systems (TiiS),  8, 1-37. 
Dul, J., Bruder, R., Buckle, P., Carayon, P., Falzon, P., Marras, W. S., Wilson, J.R.  & Doelen, B.V.D. 
(2012 ). A strategy for human factors/ ergonomics: Developing the discipline and profession. 
Ergonomics , 55, 377-395.  
Dudley, J. J., Kristensson, P.O. (2018). A review of user interface design for interactive machine learning. 
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , 8, 1 -37. 
Earthy, J. V., & Downs, J. L. (2018). Human -system interaction standards for robotic,  intelligent,  
autonomous systems. In NATO -STO HF/EM -300 Symposium on “Human Autonomy Teaming  (pp.  
15-17). 
Ehsan, U., & Riedl, M. O. (2020). Human -centered explainable AI: Towards a reflective sociotechnical  
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.01092.  
Engelbart , D. C. (1962). Augmenting Human Intellect: a conceptual framework. SRI Summary Report  
AFOSR -3223, Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Washington DC  
Endsley, M. R. & Jones, D. G. (2012). Designing for Situation Awareness: A n approach to User -Centered  
Design (2nd edition).  London: CRC Press.  
Endsley, M. R. (2015). Autonomous Horizons: System Autonomy in the Air Force - A Path to the Future  
(Autonomous Horizons No. AF/ST TR 15 -01). Washington D.C. Approved for Public Release .    
Endsley, M. R. (2017). From here to autonomy: lessons learned from human -automation research. Human  
Factors , 59, 5-27, DOI: 10.1177/0018720816681350.  
Endsley, M. R. (2018). Situation awareness in future autonomous vehicles: Beware of the unexpected.  
Proceedings of the 20th Congress of the International Ergonomics Association (IEA 2018) , IEA  
2018, published by Springer.    
Endsley,  M.R.  & Kiris , E. O. (1995).  The out -of-the-loop performance problem and level of control in  
automation. Human Factors, 37 , 381 –394.  
Endsley，M. R. (2019).  The limits of highly autonomous vehicles: an uncertain future, Ergonomics,  
62(4): 496 -499, DOI:10.1080/00140139.2019.1563330.    
Epstein, Z. et al.  Closing the AI Knowledge Gap. arXiv [cs.CY]  (2018).  
Fiebrink , R. & Gillies , M. ( 2018 ). Introduction to the special issue on human -centered machine learning.  
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 8, 2, Article 7 (June 2018), 7 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3205942 . 
Fan, J. J., Tian, F., Du, Y et al. (2018). Thoughts on human -computer interaction in the age of artificial  
intelligence (in Chinese). Sci Sin Inform, 48 , 361–375, doi: 10.1360/N112017 -00221  
Fan, X., F an, J., T ian, F., & D ai, G. (2019). Human -computer interaction and artificial intelligence:  
from competition to integration.  SCIENTIA SINICA Informationis , 49(3), 361 -368. 
Fiebrink , R. & Gillies , M. ( 2018 ). Introduction to the special issue on human -centered machine learning.  
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 8, 2, Article 7 (June 2018), 7 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3205942 . 
Ford, K. M., Hayes, P. J., Glymour, C., & Allen, J. (2015). Cognitive orthoses: Toward human -centered  

==== Page 62 ====
 
62 
 AI. AI Magazine, 36 . doi:10.1609/aima g.v36i4.2629  
Foyle, D. C., & Hooey, B. L. (2007).  Human Performance Modeling in Aviation. London: CRC Press.  
Fridman, L. (2018). Human -Centered Autonomous Vehicle Systems: Principles of Effective Shared  
Autonomy . MIT HCAV Research Program:  
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.01835.pdf.    
Fuchs S, Hale KS, Stanney KM, Juhnke J, & Schmorrow DD. (2007). Enhancing Mitigation in Augmented 
Cognition. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 1(3), 309 -326. 
Fu, H., Chen, S., Lin, Y., Xiong, G. & Hu, B. (2019).  Research and validation  of human -in-the-loop  
hybrid -augmented intelligence in Sawyer. Chinese Journal of Intelligent Science and Technology ,  
1, 280-286. 
Fu, X. L, Cai, L. H, Liu, Y., et al. (2014). A computational cognition model of perception, memory, and  
judgment.  Sci China  Inf Sci, 57 , 032114.  
Girardin,  F. & Lathia , N. (2017). When user experience designers partner with data scientists . . In the  
AAAI Spring Symposium Series Technical Report: Designing the User Experience of Machine  
Learning Systems . The AAAI Press, Palo Alto, California.  
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/SSS/SSS17/paper/view/ 15364  
Garlan, D., Siewiorek, D. P., Smailagic, A., &  Steenkiste, P. (2002). Project Aura: Toward distraction -free 
pervasive computing.  IEEE Pervasive Computing, 1 , 22-31. 
Gamberini, L.  & Spagnolli,  A. (2017).  Towards a definition of symbiotic relations between humans and  
machines”, Symbiotic Interaction 20 16, Springer International Publishing (2017), 1 –4. 
Gerber, A., Derckx, P., Döppner, D. A., & Schoder, D. (2020). Conceptualization of the human -machine  
symbiosis –A literature  review.  In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on  
System Sciences . 
Google PAIR (2019). People + AI Guidebook: Designing human -centered AI products .  
pair.withgoogle.com/  
Grigsby, S. S. (2018 ). Artificial intelligence for advanced human -machine symbiosis. In  International  
Conference on Augmented  Cognition  (pp. 255 -266). Springer, Cham.  
Grimm, D., Demir, M., Gorman, J. C., & Cooke, N. J. (2018). Team situation awareness in Human - 
Autonomy Teaming: A systems level approach. Proceedings of the Human Factors and  
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 62, 149 –149. https://doi .org/10.1177/1541931218621034  
Grigsby , S.S. (2018) Artificial Intelligence for Advanced Human -Machine Symbiosis. In: Schmorrow  
D., Fidopiastis C. (eds) Augmen ted Cognition: Intelligent Technologies . AC 2018. Lecture  
Notes in Computer Science, vol 10915. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319- 
91470 -1_22  
Grudin , J. (2010). AI and HCI: two fields divided by a common focus. AI Magazine, 30 , 48–57. 
Grudin, J. (2017). From tool to partner: The evolution of human -computer interaction.  Synthesis Lectures  
on Human -Centered  Interaction , 10(1), i -183. 
Grudin, J. (2005). Three faces of human -computer interaction.  IEEE Annals of the History of  
Computing , 27, 46-62. 
Gunning, D. (2017).  Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) at DARPA.  
https://www.darpa.mil/attachments/XAIProgramUpdate.pdf.  
Guszcza,  J. (2018).  Smarter together: Why artificial intelligence needs human -centered design. Deloitte  

==== Page 63 ====
 
63 
 Review , issue 22.  
Gurses, S. & van Hoboken, J. (2018). Privacy after the agile turn. In Selinger, E., Polonetsky, ¨ J., and  
Tene, O., editors, The Cambridge Handbook of Consumer Privacy , pages 579 –601. Cambridge  
University Press.  
Gutzwiller, R. S., Espinosa, S. H., Kenny, C., & Lange, D. S. (2017). A design pattern for working  
agreements in human -autonomy teaming. In  International Conference on Applied Human Factors  
and Ergonomics  (pp. 12 -24). Springer, Cham.  
Hassani , H., Silva, E. S., Unger, S. , TajMazinani, M. , Feely, M. S. (2020). Artificial intelligence (AI) or  
intelligence augmentation (IA): What is the future?  AI, 1, 143 -155, doi:10.3390/ai1020008  
Hancock, P.A. (2019). Some pitfalls in the promises of automated and autonomous vehicles. Ergonomics,  
62, 479-495, DOI: 10.1080/00140139.2018.1498136.   
Hancock, P. A. (2020). The humanity of humanless systems.  Ergonomics in Design , 28, 4-6. 
Haring, K. S.,  Mosley, A., Pruznick, S., Fleming, J., Satterfield, K., de Visser, E. J., ... & Funke, G. (2019).  
Robot authority in human -machine teams: effects of human -like appearance on compliance.  
In International Conference on Human -Computer Interaction  (pp. 63 -78). Springer, Cham.  
Hawking, S., Musk, E., Wozniak, S . et al., (2015).  Autonomous weapons: an open letter from AI &  
robotics researchers. Future of Life Institute.  
Heard, J., & Adams, J. A. (2019). Multi -dimensional human workload assessment for supervisory human – 
machine teams.  Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 13(3), 146 -170. 
Heard, J., Harriott, C. E., & Adams, J. A. (2017). A human workload assessment algorithm for  
collaborative human -machine teams. In  2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and  
Human Interactive Communication (RO -MAN)  (pp. 366 -371). IEEE.  
Hagendorf f, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines.  Minds and Machines , 30(1),  
99-120. 
Hillesheim, A. J., Rusnock, C. F., Bindewald, J. M., & Miller, M. E. (2017). Relationships between user  
demographics and user trust in an autonomous agent. In  Proceedings of the Human Factors and  
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting  (Vol. 61, No. 1, pp. 314 -318).  Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA:  
SAGE Publications.  
Hoffman, R.R., Mueller, S.t., & Klein, G. (2017). Explaining explanation, part 2: Empirical foundations .  
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 78-86. 
Hoffman, R.R., Cullen , T. M.  & Hawley , J. K. (2016) The myths and costs of autonomous weapon  
systems, Bulletin of the Atomic  Scientists,  72, 247 -255, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.2016.1194619  
Hoffman, R. R., Roesler, A., & Moon, B. M. (2004). What is design in the context of human -centered  
computing? IEEE  Intelligent Systems, 19 , 89-95. doi:10.1109/MIS.2004.36  
Hoffman, R. R., Klein, G., & Mueller, S. T. (2018). Explaining explanation for “explainable AI”.  
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting  (Vol. 62, No. 1,  
pp. 197 -201). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.  
Holmquist , L.E. ( 2017 ). Intelligence on tap: artificial intelligence as a new design material. Interactions ,  
24, 28 –33. 
Horowitz, M., & Scharre, P. (2015). Meaningful human cont rol in weapon systems: A primer . Washington:  
Center for a New American Security.  
Hollnagel, E. & Woods, D. D. (2005).  Joint Cognitive Systems: Foundations of Cognitive Systems  

==== Page 64 ====
 
64 
 Engineering. London: CRC Press.  
Hurts, K., & de Greef, P. (1994, August). Cognitive ergonomics of multi -agent systems: Observations,  
principles and research issues. In  International Conference on Human -Computer Interaction  (pp.  
164-180). pringer, Berlin, Heidelberg.  
Howell, W. C. (2001). The HF/E /E parade: A tale of two models.  Proceedings of the Human Factors and   
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 45 , 1−5.  
IEEE. (2019).  Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well -being with Autonomous  
and Intelligent Systems. (First Edition).  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  
(IEEE), Incorporated.  
Inkpen, K., Chancellor, S., De Choudhury, M., Veal e, M., & Baumer, E. P. (2019, May). Where is the  
human? Bridging the gap between AI and HCI. In  Extended abstracts of the 2019 chi conference  
on human factors in computing systems  (pp. 1 -9). 
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). (2020).  Ergonomics - Ergonomics of Human -System  
Interaction - Part 810: Robotic, Intelligent and Autonomous Systems (version for review).  
Jacob, R.J.K., Girouard, A., Hirshfield, L.M., Horn, M.S., Erin, O.S., Solovey, T. & Zigelbaum, J. ( 2008).  
Reality -Based Interaction: A Framework for Post -WIMP Interfaces. CHI 2008 , April 5 –10, 2008,  
Florence, Italy.  
Jacucci, G., Spagnolli, A., Freeman, J. & Gamberini,  L. (2014). Symbiotic interaction: A critical definition  
and comparison to other human-computer paradigms”, Symbiotic Interaction 2014 , Springer  
International Publishing (2014), 3 –20. 
Jeong, K. A. (2019). Human -system cooperation in automated driving.  International Journal of Human - 
Computer Interaction , 35, 917 -918. 
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines.  Nature Machine  
Intelligence , 1(9), 389 -399. 
Johnson, M., & Vera, A. (2019). No AI is an island: The case for teaming intelligence.  AI Magazine , 40,  
16-28. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v40i1.2842  
Kayacik, C., Chen, S., Noerly, S., Holbrook, J., Roberts, A. & Eck, D. (2019). Identifying the  
intersections: User experience + research scientist collaboration in a generative machine learning  
interface. In Exten ded Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in  
Computing Systems (CHI EA ’19) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article CS09, 8 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3299059   
Kuniavsky, M., Ch urchill, E., & Steenson, M. W. (2017). Designing the user experience of machine   
learning systems. In  AAAI Spring Symposium Proceedings (Technical Report SS -17-04) (pp. 27 - 
29). 
Kaber, D. B. (2018). A conceptual framework of autonomous and automated agents.  Theoretical Issues in  
Ergonomics Science, 19, 406-430.  
Kamar, E. (2016). Directions in hybrid intelligence: complementing AI systems with human intelligence .  
In Proceedings of the Twenty -Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  
(IJCAI'16 ). AAAI Press, 4070 –4073.  
Kaluarachchi, T., Reis, A., & Nanayakkara, S. (2021). A Review of Recent Deep Learning Approaches in 
Human -Centered Machine Learning.  Sensors , 21(7), 2514.  

==== Page 65 ====
 
65 
 Karwowski, W. (2005 ). Ergonomics and human factors: the paradigms for science, engineering, design, 
technology and management of human -compatible systems. Ergonomics , 48, 436-463.  
Kim, B., & Pardo, B. (2018). A human -in-the-loop system for sound event detection and annotation.  ACM  
Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) , 8, 1-23. 
Kistan, T., Gardi, A. & Sabatini, R. (2018). Machine learning and cognitive ergonomics in air traff ic  
management: Recent developments and considerations for certification. Aerospace,  5, 103,  
doi:10.3390/aerospace5040103.  
Klein, H. A., Lin, M. H., Miller, N. L., Militello, L. G., Lyons, J. B., & Finkeldey, J. G. (2019). Trust 
across culture and context . Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 13, 10-29. 
Krafft, P. M., Macy, M. & Pentland, A. ‘sandy’. (2017). Bots as virtual confederates: Design and  ethics. in 
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social 
Computing  183–190 (ACM, 2017). doi: 10.1145/2998181.2998354  
Kulesza, T., Burnett, M., Wong, W. K., & Stumpf, S. (2015). Principles of explanatory debugging to 
person alize interactive machine learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on 
Intelligent User Interfaces  (pp. 126 -137). ACM.  
Kwon, M., Jung, M. F., & Knepper, R. A. (2016, March). Human expectations of social robots. In  2016 
11th ACM/IEEE Int ernational Conference on Human -Robot Interaction (HRI)  (pp. 463 -464). 
IEEE.  
Lazer, D., Kennedy, R., King, G., & Vespignani, A. (2014). The parable of Google Flu: Traps in the big 
data analysis. Science, 343(6176),  1203 –1205. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1248506  
Lau, N., Fridman, L., Borghetti, B. J., & Lee, J. D. (2018). Machine learning and human factors: Status,  
applications, and future directions. In  Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society  
Annual Meetin g (Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 135 -138). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.  
Lau, N., Hildebrandt, M., & Jeon, M. (2020). Ergonomics in AI: Designing and Interacting with Machine  
Learning and AI . 
Ledford, H. (2015). How to solve the world’s biggest problems. Nature , 525, 308–311. 
Lee, J. D.  & Kolodge, K.  (2018). Understanding attitudes towards self -driving vehicles: quantitative 
analysis of qualitative data. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting , 2018, Phi lidelphia, PA.  
Leibo, J. Z. et al.  (2018). Psychlab: A psychology laboratory for deep reinforcement learning agents. arXiv  
[cs.AI] . 
Lavenda, D. (2016). Artificial intelligence vs. intelligence augmentation.  Network World (Online),  
Retrieved from http://search. proquest. com/docview/1809109037 . 
Licklider , J. C. R. (1960). Man-computer symbiosis. IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics,  
1, 4-11. 
Lieberman, H. (2009 ). User Interface Goals, AI Opportunities. AI Magazine, 30 , 16-22 
Li, F.F. (2018). How to make A.I. that’s good for people. The New York Times . 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/07/opinion/artificial -intelligence -human.html . 
Li, F.F. & Etchemendy, J. (2018). A common goal for the brightest minds from Stanford and  
beyond: Putting humanity at the center of AI.  
Lombrozo, T. (2012). Explanation and abductive inference.  Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning,  
260-276. 

==== Page 66 ====
 
66 
 Liu, Y., Wang , Y. M., Bian , Y. L., et al. (2018). A psychological model of human -computer cooperation  
for the era of artificial intelligence. Sci Sin Inform , 48, 376–389, doi: 10.1360/N112017 -00225  
Lundberg, J., Bång, M., Johansson, J., Cheaitou, A., Josefsson, B., & Tahboub, Z. (2019). Human -in-the- 
loop AI: Requirements on future  (unified) air traffic management systems. In  2019 IEEE/AIAA  
38th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)  (pp. 1 -9). IEEE.  
Lyons, J. B., Mahoney, S., Wynne, K. T., & Roebke, M. A. (2018). Viewing machines as teammates: A  
qualitative study. In 2018 AAAI Spring Symposium Series.  
Marathe, A. R., Metcalfe, J. S., Lance, B. J., Lukos, J. R., Jangraw, D., Lai, K. T., ... & McDowell , K.  
(2018). The privileged sensing framework: A principled approach to improved human -autonomy  
integration.  Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science , 19, 283 -320. 
McCann, R. S., & McCandless, J. (2003). Human -machine teaming for dynamic fault management in  
next-generation launch vehicles. In  Proceedings of the Joint Army -Navy -NASA -Air Force 3rd  
Modeling and Simulation Meeting  (pp. 1 -5). 
McDermott, P., Dominguez, C., Kasdaglis, N., Ryan, M., Trahan, I., & Nelson, A. (2018). Human - 
Machine Teaming Systems Engineering Guide . Bedford, MA: The MITRE Corporation  
McCourt, M. J., Mehta, S. S., Doucette, E. A., & Curtis, J. W. (2016). Human -machine teaming for  
effective estimation and path planning. In  Micro -and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and  
Applications VIII  (Vol. 9836, p. 98361W). International Society for  Optics and Photonics.  
Madhavan, P., & Wiegmann, D.A. (2007). Similarities and diﬀerences between human -human and human - 
automation trust: An integrative review.  Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 8 , 277 –301.   
Madni, A.M. & Madni, C. C. (2018). Architectural framework for exploring adaptive human -machine  
teaming options in simulated dynamic environments.  Systems, 6 , 1-17,  
doi:10.3390/systems6040044.    
Mark St. John, David A. Kobus, Jeffrey G. Morrison & Dylan Schmorrow  (2004)  Overview of the 
DARPA Augmented Cognition Technical Integration Experiment . International Journal of 
Human –Computer Interaction , 17, 131-149, DOI:  10.1207/s15327590ijhc1702_2  
McGregor , S. (2021). AI Incident Database. https://incidentdatabase.ai/  
McNeese, N., Demir, M., Chiou, E., Cooke, N., & Yanikian, G. (2019). Understanding the role of trust in  
human -autonomy teaming.  In Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii international conference on system  
sciences . 
McNeese, N. J., Demir, M., Cooke, N. J., & Myers, C. (2018). Teaming with a synthetic teammate:  
Insights into human -autonomy teaming.  Human factors , 60, 262 -273. 
Mercado, J. E., Rupp, M. A., Chen, J. Y., Barnes, M. J., Barber, D., & Procci, K. (2016). Int elligent agent  
transparency in human –agent teaming for Multi -UxV management. Human Factors , 58, 401 –415. 
Miller, T.; Howe, P.; Sonenberg, L.(2017). Explainable AI: Beware of Inmates Running the Asylum.  
Available online: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1712.00547.p df  
Mittelstadt, B. (2019). AI ethics –too principled to fail?.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06668 . 
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K et al.  (2015) Human -level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature ,  
518, 529–533. 
Mou, Y., & Xu, K. (2017). The media inequality: Comparing the initial human -human and human -AI  
social interactions.  Computers in Human Behavior , 72, 432 -440. 
Molineaux, M., Floyd, M. W., Dannenhauer, D., & Aha, D. W. (2018). Human -agent teaming as a  

==== Page 67 ====
 
67 
 common problem for goal reasoning. In  2018 AAAI Spring Symposium Series . 
Mueller, S. T., Hoffman, R. R., Clancey, W., Emrey, A., & Klein, G. (2019). Explanation in human -AI  
systems: A literature meta -review, synopsis of key ideas and publications, and bibliography for  
explainable AI.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01876 . 
Mumaw,  R. J., Boonman,  D., Griffin , J., & W. Xu. (1999) . Training and Design Approaches for  
Enhancing Automation Awareness  (Boeing  Document D6 -82577), December  1999.  
Muslim, H. & Itoh, M. (2018). A theoretical framework for designing human -centered automotive  
automation systems. Cognition, Technology & Work , 21, doi:10.1007/s10111 -018-0509 -8.   
Navarro, J. (2018). A state of science on highly automated driving. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics  
Science, 20 , 366 -296, DOI: 10.1080/1463922X.2018.1439544.    
NHTSA. (2018). Automated Vehicles for Safety. NHTSA (The U.S. Department of National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration) Report: https://www.nhtsa.gov/technology -innovation/automated -
vehicles -safety  
NTSB. (2017). Collisi on between a car operating with automated vehicle control systems and a tractor - 
semitrailor truck near Williston, Florida, May 7, 2016. Accidents Report, by National  
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)  2017, Washington, DC.  
Neuhauser, L., & Kreps, G. L. (2011). Participatory design and artificial intelligence: Strategies to improve 
health communication for diverse audiences. In  AAAI Spring Symposium  (pp. 49 -52). Association 
for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.  
Neigel, A. R., Caylor, J. P., Kase , S. E., Vanni, M. T., & Hoye, J. (2018). The role of trust and automation 
in an intelligence analyst decisional guidance paradigm.  Journal of Cognitive Engineering and 
Decision Making , 12, 239 -247. 
Novitzky, M., Semmens, R., Franck, N. H., Chewar, C. M., & Korpela, C. (2020). Virtual Reality for  
Immersive Human Machine Teaming with Vehicles. In  International Conference on Human - 
Computer Interaction  (pp. 575 -590). Springer, Cham.  
Onnasch, L., Wickens, C. D., Li H., & Manzey. D. (2014). Human performance c onsequences of stages  
and levels of automation: An integrated meta -analysis. Human Factors, 56 , 476 -488.   
O'Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens 
Democracy . New York, NY: Broadway Books.  
O’Neill, T., McNeese, N., Barron, A., & Schelble, B. (2020). Human –autonomy teaming: A review and 
analysis of the empirical literature.  Human Factors , 0018720820960865.  
Ötting, S. K. (202 0). Artificial intelligence as colleague and supervisor: Successful and fair interactions 
between intelligent technologies and employees at work.  Dissertation of Bielefeld University.  
Ozkaya, I. (2020). The Behavioral Science of Software Engineering and Human –Machine Teaming.  IEEE 
Software , 37, 3-6. 
Riedl, M. O . (2019). Human‐centered artificial intelligence and machine learning. Human Behavior and 
Emerging Technologies, 1 , 33-36. 
Pacaux -Lemoine, M. P., & Trentesaux, D. (2019). Ethical risks OF human -machine symbiosis IN industry 
4.0: insights from the human -machine cooperation approach.  IFAC -PapersOnLine , 52, 19-24. 
Paudyal,P.,& Wong, Bl.W. (2018). Algorithmic opacity: Making algorithmic processes transparent 
through abstraction hierarchy. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2018 
Annual Meeting . 192 -196. 

==== Page 68 ====
 
68 
 Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automation: Use, misuse, disuse and abuse. Human  
Factors, 39 , 230 –253.   
Parasuraman, R. & Rizzo, M. (2006). Neuroergonomics: The Brain at Work.  Oxford: Oxford University  
Press.  
Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T. B., & Wickens, C. D. (2000). A model for types and levels of human  
interaction with automation.  IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics -Part A: Systems  
and Humans , 30(3), 286-297. 
Pásztor, D (2018) AI UX: 7 Principles of Designing Good AI Products, UXStudio:  
https://uxstudioteam.com/ux -blog/ai -ux/ 
Patel, B.N., Rosenberg, L., Willcox, G.  et al.  (2019). Human –machine partnership with artificial  
intelligence for chest radiograph diagnosis.  npj Digit. Med.  2, 111. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746 - 
019-0189 -7 
Pentland, A. (2015). Social Physics: How Social Netw orks Can Make Us Smarter . Penguin Books.  
Perelman, B. S., Mueller, S. T., & Schaefer, K. E. (2017). Evaluating path planning in human -robot teams:  
Quantifying path agreement and mental model congruency. In  2017 IEEE Conference on  
Cognitive and Computational Aspects of Situation Management (CogSIMA)  (pp. 1 -7). IEEE.  
Peters, N. (2019a). Interruption timing prediction via prosodic task boundary model for human -machine  
teaming. In  Future of Information and Communication Conference  (pp. 501 -522). Sp ringer, Cham.  
Peters, N. (2019b). Task Engagement Inference Within Distributed Multiparty Human -Machine Teaming  
via Topic Modeling. In  International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics  (pp.  
15-24). Springer, Cham.  
Peters, N. S., Bradley, G. C., & Marshall -Bradley, T. (2019). Task boundary inference via topic modeling  
to predict interruption timings for human -machine teaming. In  International Conference on  
Intelligent Human Systems Integration  (pp. 783-788). Springer, Cham.  reference  The National  
Artificial Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan .  
https://www.nitrd.gov/PUBS/national_ai_rd_strategic_plan.pdf  
Prada, R., & Paiva, A. (2014 ). Human -agent interaction: Challenges for bringing humans and agents  
together. In Proc. of the 3rd Int.  Workshop on Human -Agent Interaction Design and Models  
(HAIDM 2014) at the 13th Int. Conf. on Agent and Multi -Agent Systems (AAMAS 2014) (pp. 1 - 
10). 
PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers).  (2018). Explainable AI: Driving Business Value through greater 
understanding.  https://www.pwc.co.uk/audit -assurance/assets/explainable -ai.pdf  
PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers).2019). Six AI priorities you can’t afford to ignore, PwC 2019, AI 
predictions.  http://explore.pwc.com/c/pwc -2019 -ai-exec-summary?eq=CT13 -PL1300 -DM2 -
CN_ai2019 -ai19-
exesumfoot&utm_campaign=ai2019&utm_medium=org&utm_source=pwc_ai2019&x=ae -asK 
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J. -F., Breazeal, C., . . . & Wellman, M.  
(2019). Machine behaviour. Nature, 568 , 477 -486. 
Raisamo, R., Rakkolainen, I., Majaranta, P., Salminen, K., Rantala, J., & Farooq, A. (2019). Human 
augmentation: Past, present and future. International Journal of Human -Computer Studies, 131 , 
131-143 
Rastogi , A. (2016) . All The Hype Is About AI, But The Real Action Is In IA. CBINSIGHTS,  

==== Page 69 ====
 
69 
 https://www.cbinsights.com/  
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S. & Guestrin, C. (2016). Why should I trust you? Explaining the predictions of any  
classifier. in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge  
Discovery and Data Mining  1135 –1144 (ACM, 2016).  
Robinson, C., Ortiz, A., Malkin, K., Elias, B., Peng, A., Morris, D., ... & Jojic, N. (2020). Human -machine  
collaboration for fast land cover mapping. In  AAAI  (pp. 2509 -2517).  
Rogers, Y & Marshall , P. (2017). Research in the Wild . Morgan & Claypool Publishers.   
Roth, E. M., Sushereba, C., Militello, L. G., Diiulio, J., & Ernst, K. (2019). Function allocation  
considerations in the era of human autonomy teaming.  Journal of Cognitive Engineering and 
Decision Making , 13, 199 -220. 
Rui, Y. (2017). From artificial intelligence to augmented intelligence.  IEEE MultiMedia , 24, 4-5. 
Russell, S ., Dewey,  D., Tegmark, M . (2015).  Research priorities for robust and beneficial artificial  
intelligence. AI Magazine,  105-114. 
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers).  (2018). Taxonomy and definitions for terms related to driving  
automation systems for on -road motor vehicles. Recommended Practice J3016 (revised 2018 - 
06）.  
Salmon, P. M.  (2019). The horse has bolted! Why human factors and ergonomics has to ca tch up with  
autonomous vehicles (and other advanced forms of automation). Ergonomics, 62 , 502 -504, DOI:  
10.1080/00140139.2018.1563333.    
Salmon, P. M., Hancock, P., & Carden, A. W. (2019). To protect us from the risks of advanced artificial  
intelligence, we need to act now. In  Conversation  (Vol. 25). Conversation Media Group.  
Salvi, C., Bricolo, E., Kounios, J. et al.  (2016 ). Insight solut ions are correct more often than analytic 
solutions. Think. Reason., 22 , 443-460. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13546783.2016.1141798  
Sandini, G., Mohan, V., Sciutti, A. M. & Morasso, P. (2018). Social cognition for human -robot symbiosis -
challenges and building blocks . Frontiers in Neurorobotics , 12, 1–19. 
Schaefer, K. E., Hill, S. G., & Jentsch, F. G. (2018). Trust in human -autonomy teaming: A review of trust  
research from the US Army Research Laboratory Robotics Collaborative Technology Alliance.  
In International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics  (pp. 102 -114). Springer, 
Cham.  
Shah, J., Kim, B., & Nikolaidis, S. (2012). Human -inspired techniques for human -machine team planning.  
In 2012 AAAI Fall Symposium Series . 
Sarter, N. B., & Woods, D. D. (1995). How in the world did we ever get into that mode: Mode error and  
awareness in supervisory control. Human Factors, 37 , 5-19, Doi: 1518/001872095779049516.    
Sarter,  N. B., Wickens,  C.D.,  Mumaw,  R. J., Kimball,  S., & Xu, W. (2003).  Modern flight deck  
automation: Pilots’ mental model and monitoring patterns and performance. Conference: 12th 
International Symposium on Aviation Psychology , August 2003, At: Dayton OH, United States.  
Scali, G., & Macredie, R. D. (2019). Shared mental models as a way of managing transparency in complex  
human -autonomy teaming.  
Scott, P. J., & Yampolskiy, R. V. (2019). Classification Schemas for Artificial Intelligence Failures.  arXiv  
preprint arXiv:1907.07771 . 
Sheridan, T. B., & Verplank, W. L. (1978).  Human and computer control of undersea teleoperators .  
Massachusetts Inst of Tech Cambridge Man -Machine Systems Lab.  

==== Page 70 ====
 
70 
 Sheridan, T. B. (2016). Human -robot interaction: status and challenges.  Human Factors, 58 , 525 –532. 
Shirado, H. & Christakis, N. A.  (2017). Locally noisy autonomous agents improve global human  
coordination in network exp eriments. Nature , 545, 370–374.  
Shively, R. J., Lachter, J., Brandt, S. L., Matessa, M., Battiste, V., & Johnson, W. W. (2017). Why human - 
autonomy teaming? In  International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics  (pp. 3 - 
11). Springer, Cham.  
Shneiderman , B. (2020a) Human -centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & trustworthy,  
International Journal of Human –Computer Interaction,  36, 495 -504, DOI:  
10.1080/10447318.2020.1741118  
Shneiderman, B. (2020b). Design lessons from AI’s two grand goals: Human emulation and useful  
applications, IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society , 1, 73-82.  
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9088114 .   
Shneiderman, B. (2020c). Human -centered artificial intelligence: Three fresh ideas.  AIS Transactions on  
Human -Computer Interaction , 12, 109 -124.  
Shneiderman, B. (2020d). Bridging the gap between ethics and practice: Guidelines for reliable, safe, and  
trustworthy Human -Centered AI systems.  ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems  
(TiiS) , 10, 1-31.  
Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., Cohen, M., Jacobs, S., Elmqvist, N., & Diakopoulos, N. (2016). Grand  
challenges for HCI researchers.  interactions , 23(5), 24 -25. 
Seeber, I., Bittner, E., Briggs, R. O., de Vreede, T., de Vreede, G. -J., Elkins, A., Maier, R.,  Merz, A. B.,  
Oeste -Reiß, S., Randrup, N.,  
Schwabe, G., & Söllner, M. (2020). Machines as teammates: A research agenda on AI in team  
collaboration. Information & Management , 57, 103174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2019.103174  
Spencer, J., Poggi, J., & G heerawo, R. (2018). Designing Out Stereotypes in Artificial Intelligence:  
Involving users in the personality design of a digital assistant. In  Proceedings of the 4th EAI  
international conference on smart objects and technologies for social good  (pp. 130-135).  
Sun, R. (2017). Potential of full human –machine symbiosis through truly intelligent cognitive systems”, AI  
& Society , 1–12. 
Sicular , S. & Aron , D. (2019). Leverage Augmented Intelligence to Win With AI. Published 13 June 2019  
– Gartner Report (ID G00386366).  
Stanney, K. M., Schmorrow, D. D., Johnston, M., Fuchs, S., Jones, D., Hale, K. S., ... & Young, P. (2009).  
Augmented cognition: An overview.  Reviews of human factors and ergonomics , 5, 195 -224. 
Stanton, N. A., Eriksson, A., Banks, V. A., & Hancock, P. A. (2020). Turing in the driver's seat: Can  
people distinguish between automated and manually driven vehicles?  Human Factors and  
Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries , 30(6), 418 -425. 
Stephanidis, C., Salvendy, G., Antona, M., Chen, J. Y., Dong, J., Duffy, V. G., ... & Zhou, J. (2019). S even  
HCI grand challenges.  International Journal of Human –Computer Interaction , 35(14), 1229 -1269.  
Stone, P., Brooks, R., Brynjolfsson, E., Calo, R., Etzioni, O., Hager, G., ... & Teller, A. (2016). Artificial  
Intelligence and Life in 2030. One hundred -year study on artificial intelligence: Report of the  
2015 -2016 Study Panel.  Stanford University, Sta nford, CA, http://ai100 . stanford. edu/2016 - 
report. Accessed: September  6, 2016.  
Strauch, B. (2017). Ironies of automation: still unresolved after all these years.  IEEE Transactions on  

==== Page 71 ====
 
71 
 Human -Machine Systems, 99, 1-15. DOI:10.1109/THMS.2017.2732506  
Tenhundfeld, N., De Visser, E., Tossell, C., & Finomore, V. (2018). Evaluating and Modeling Human -
Machine Teaming and Trust in Automation while on the Road.  
Tenhundfeld, N. L., de Visser, E. J., Haring, K. S., Ries, A. J., Fi nomore, V. S., & Tossell, C. C. (2019). 
Calibrating trust in automation through familiarity with the autoparking feature of a Tesla Model 
X. Journal of cognitive engineering and decision making , 13, 279 -294. 
Theodorou, A., Wortham, R. H., and Bryson, J. J. (2017). Designing and implementing transparency for 
real time inspection of autonomous robots. Connection Science , 29, 230–241. 
Topol, E. J. (2019). High -performance medicine: the convergence of human and ar tificial 
intelligence.  Nature medicine , 25, 44-56. 
Trautman, P. (2017). A Mathematical Theory of Human Machine Teaming.  arXiv preprint  
arXiv:1705.03124 . 
van Allen, P. (2018). Prototyping ways of prototyping AI.  Interactions , 25, 46-51. 
Vicente, K. J. (1999 ). Cognitive Work Analysis: Toward Safe, Productive, and Healthy Computer -Based  
Work. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Valeriani, D. , Cinel, C.  & Poli, R. (2019). Brain –Computer Interfaces for Human Augmentation.  Brain  
Sci. 9, 22. 
van Diggelen, J., Barnhoorn, J., Post, R., Sijs, J., van der Stap, N., & van der Waa, J. (2020) Delegation in  
Human -machine Teaming: Progress, Challenges and Prospects.  (no info from Google Scholar  
citation)  
Vu, K. L., Lachter , J., Battiste,  V., & Strybel, T. Z. (2018). Single pilot operations in domestic commercial  
aviation.  Human Factors, 6 0, 755 -762, https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720818791372.  
Walliser, J. C., de Visser, E. J., Wiese, E., & Shaw, T. H. (2019). Team structure and team building 
improve human –machine teaming with autonomous agents.  Journal of Cognitive Engineering and 
Decision Making , 13, 258 -278. 
Wang, K. J., Zheng, C. Y., & Mao, Z. H. (2019). Human -centered, ergonomic wearable device with  
computer vision augmented intelligence for VR multimodal human -smart home object interaction.  
In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human -Robot Interaction (HRI)  (pp. 767 - 
768). IEEE.  
Wang, W., Huang, X. , Zhao, J., Shen, Y. (2014). Implicit Hu man-Computer Interaction. Information and  
control, 43 , 101-109. 
Wang, D., Khosla, A., Gargeya, R., Irshad, H. & Beck, A. H. (2016). Deep Learning for Identifying  
Metastatic Breast Cancer. arXiv [q -bio.QM] .  
Wang, M., Abdelfattah, S., Moustafa, N., & Hu, J. (2018). Deep Gaussian mixture -hidden Markov model  
for classification of EEG signals.  IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational  
Intelligence , 2, 278 -287. 
Wang, J.  J., Ma, Y.Q., Chen, S.T., et al. , (2017 ). Fragmentation knowledge processing and networked  
artificial. Seieat. Sin. Inform. , 47, 1-22. 
Wesche, J. S., & Sonderegger, A. (2019). When computers take the lead: The automation of   
leadership.  Computers in human Behavior , 101, 197 -209. 
Wickens, C. D., Hollands, J. G., Banbury, S., & Parasuraman, R. (2015).  Engineering psychology and  
human performance . Psychology Press.  

==== Page 72 ====
 
72 
 Wickens , C.D. & Kessel,  C. (1979). The effects of participatory mode and task workload on the detection  
of dynamic system failures," in IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , vol. 9, no.  
1, pp. 24 -34, Jan. 1979, doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1979.4310070.  
Wienrich, C., & Latoschik, M. E. (2021). eXtended Artificial Intelligence: N ew Prospects of Human -AI  
Interaction Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15004.  
Winograd, T. (2006). Shifting viewpoints: Artificial intelligence and human –computer interaction.  
Artificial Intelligence, 170 , 1256 -1258. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artin t.2006.10.011 . 
Wooldridge, M. (2009).  An introduction to multiagent systems . John wiley & sons.  
Wu, Z., Zheng, N., Zhang, S., Zheng, X., Gao, L., & Su, L. (2016). Maze learning by a hybrid brain -computer  
system.  Scientific reports , 6, 1-12. 
Wynne, K. T., & Lyons, J. B. (2018). An integrative model of autonomous agent teammate -likeness.  
Theoretical  Issues in Ergonomics Science,  19, 353 -374. 
Xu, W. (2005). Recent trend of research and applications on human -computer interaction. Chinese J ournal of  
Ergonomics, 11, 37-40. 
Xu, W. (2007). Identifying problems and generating recommendations for enhancing complex systems:  
Applying the abstraction hierarchy framework as an analytical tool.  Human Factors, 49 , 975 -994. 
Xu, W. (2019a). Toward human -centered AI: A perspective from human -computer interaction.   
Interactions, 26 , 42-46.   
Xu, W. (2019b). User -centered design (IV): Human -centered artificial intelligence. Chine se Journal of  
Applied Psychology , 25, 291-305. 
Xu, W. (2020). User -centered design (V): From automation to the autonomy and autonomous vehicles in 
the intelligence era. Chines J ournal of Applied Psychology,  26,108-129。 
Xu, W. (2021).  From automation to autonomy and autonomous vehicles: Challenges and opportunities for  
human-computer interaction.  Interactions, 2 8, 49-53.  
Xu, W. & Ge, L. (2020). Engineering psychology in the era of artificial intelligence. Advances in  
Psychological Science, 28: 1409 -1425.  
Xu, A. & Dudek, G. (2016). Maintaining efficient collaboration with trustseeking robots , in Proc of the 
2016 IEEE/RSJ Int Conf on Intelligent  Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct 2016, pp. 3312 –3319.  
Yang, F., Huang, Z., Scholtz, J., & Arendt, D. L. (2020). How do visual explanations foster end users'  
appropriate trust in machine learning? In  Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference  
on Intelligent User Interfaces  (pp. 189 -201).  
Yang, Q., Steinfeld, A., Rosé, C. & Zimmerman , J. (2020 ). Re-examining whether, why, and how human - 
AI interaction  is uniquely difficult to design. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing  
Systems (CHI ’20), April 25 –30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376301  
Yang, Q., Scuito, A., Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J. & Steinfeld , A. ( 2018 ). Investigating how experienced  
UX designers effectively work with  machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing  
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’18) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 585 –596.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196730  
Yang , Q. (2018). Machine learning as a UX design material: How can we imagine beyond automation, 
recommenders, and reminders? Conference: 2018 AAAI Spring Symposium Series: User Experience 
of Artificial Intelligence , March  2018, At: Palo Alto, CA  

==== Page 73 ====
 
73 
 Yampolskiy, R.V. (2019). Predicting future AI failures from historic examples . foresight,  21, 138-152. 
Yue, W., Dong, S., Wang, Y., Wang, G., Wang, H., Chen, W. (2004). Study on human -computer  
interaction framework of pervasive computing. Chinese Journal of Computers,  27, 1657 -1664.  
Young, L.R.A.  (1969). On adaptive manual control. Ergonomics, 12 , 635 -657. 
Zhao, Y. (2019). Intelligent Control of Human -Machine Hybrid  (Chapter 17 ). In Wang F, Chen J (Editor),  
Intelligent Control: Methods and Applications (Part 2), Beijing: China Science and Technology  
Press . 
Zhao, G., & Wu, C. (2013). Effectiveness and acceptance of the inte lligent speeding prediction system  
(ISPS).  Accident Analysis and Prevention, 52, 19 -28, doi:10.1016/j.aap.2012.12.013.  
Zhu, J., Liapisy,  A., Risiz,  S., Bidarrax, R., & Youngblood, G.  M. (2018) . Explainable AI for designers: A 
human -centered perspective on  mixed -initiative co -creation.  IEEE Conference on Computational 
Intelligence and Games (CIG) . DOI:10.1109/CIG.2018.8490433  
Zanzotto, F. M. (2019). Human -in-the-loop Artificial Intelligence.  Journal of Artificial Intelligence  
Research , 64, 243 -252. 
Zhang , X. L., Lyu , F., Cheng , S. W. (2018). Interaction paradigm in intelligent systems (in Chinese). Sci  
Sin Inform, 48 , 406–418, doi: 10.1360/N112017 -00217  
Zhang, X., Khalili, M. M., & Liu, M. (2020). Long -term impacts of fair machine learning.  Ergonomics in  
Design , 28, 7-11. 
Zheng, N., Liu, Z., Ren, P.  et al.  (2017).  Hybrid -augmented intelligence: collaboration and  
cognition.   Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic  Engineering, 18 , 153-179.  
https://doi.org/10.1631/FITEE.1700053 . 
Zheng N, Su L, Zhang D, Gao L, Yao M, Wu Z. (2015). A computational model for ratbot locomotion 
based on cyborg  intelligence.  Neurocomputing,  170, 92-97. 
Zhou,J.& Chen, F.(2018 ). 2D Transparency Space — Bring Domain Users and Machine Learning Experts  
Together. In Book ：Zhou, J., & Chen, F. Human and Machine Learning: Visible, Explainable,  
Trustworthy and Transparent.  Springer International Publishing. Kindle Edition .  
 
 
    

