==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2003.08316v2  [cs.AI]  24 Mar 2020From Statistical Relational to Neuro-Symbolic Artiﬁcial I ntelligence
Luc De Raedt ,Sebastijan Duman ˇci´c,Robin Manhaeve andGiuseppe Marra
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science
{ﬁrstname.lastname }@kuleuven.be,
Abstract
Neuro-symbolic and statistical relational artiﬁcial
intelligence both integrate frameworks for learn-
ing with logical reasoning. This survey identi-
ﬁes several parallels across seven different di-
mensions between these two ﬁelds. These can-
not only be used to characterize and position
neuro-symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence approaches
but also to identify a number of directions for fur-
ther research.
1 Introduction
The integration of learning and reasoning is one of the key
challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
today , and various communities have been addressing it.
That is especially true for the ﬁeld of neuro-symbolic com-
putation (NeSy) [Besold et al. , 2017; Garcez et al. , 2019],
where the goal is to incorporate symbolic reasoning into
neural networks. NeSy already has a long tradition, and it
has recently attracted a lot of attention from various com-
munities (cf. e.g., the keynotes of Yoshua Bengio and Henry
Kautz on this topic at AAAI 2020). Many approaches to
NeSy aim at extending neural networks with logical rea-
soning.
Another domain that has a rich tradition in inte-
grating learning and reasoning is that of statistical
relational learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (StarAI)
[Getoor and Taskar, 2007; De Raedt et al. , 2016]. But
rather than focusing on how to integrate logic and neural
networks, it is centred around the question of how to inte-
grate logic with probabilistic graphical models. Despite t he
common interest in combining logic or symbolic reasoning
with a basic paradigm for learning, i.e., probabilistic gra ph-
ical models or neural networks, it is surprising that there
are not more interactions between these two ﬁelds.
This discrepancy is the key motivation behind this sur-
vey: it aims at pointing out the similarities between these
two endeavours and in this way stimulate more cross-
fertilization. In doing so, we start from the literature on
StarAI because, arguably , there is more consensus on what
the key concepts, challenges and issues are in StarAI than
in NeSy (cf. the number of tutorials and textbooks on re-
lated topics such as [Russell, 2015; De Raedt et al. , 2016]but see also[Besold et al. , 2017; Garcez et al. , 2019]). It
turns out that essentially the same issues and techniques
that arise in StarAI have to be addressed in NeSy as well.
The key contribution of this survey is that we identify a set of
seven dimensions that these ﬁelds have in common and that
can be used to categorize both StarAI and NeSy approaches .
These seven dimensions are concerned with (1) directed
vs undirected models, (2) grounding vs proof based infer-
ence, (3) integrating logic with probability and /or neural
computation, (4) logical semantics, (5) learning parame-
ters or structure, (6) representing entities as symbols or
sub-symbols, and, (7) the type of logic used. We provide ev-
idence for our claim by positioning a wide variety of StarAI
and NeSy systems along these dimensions and pointing out
analogies between them. This, in turn, allows us to iden-
tify interesting opportunities for further research, by lo ok-
ing at areas across the dimensions that have not seen much
work yet. Of course, there are also important differences
between StarAI and NeSy, the most important one being
that the former operates more at the symbolic level, lending
itself naturally to explainable AI, while the latter operat es
more at the sub-symbolic level, lending itself more natu-
rally for computer vision and natural language processing.
Unlike some other recent surveys or perspectives
on neuro-symbolic computation [Besold et al. , 2017;
Garcez et al. , 2019], the present survey limits itself to a
logical and probabilistic perspective, which it inherits f rom
StarAI, and to developments in neuro-symbolic computa-
tion that are consistent with this perspective. Furthermor e,
it focuses on representative and prototypical systems
rather than aiming at completeness (which would not be
possible given the page limitations). At the same time,
unlike many early approaches to neuro-symbolic compu-
tation (see[Bader and Hitzler, 2005 ]for an overview),
which focused more on modeling issues and principles, we
focus on approaches that are also used for learning.
The following sections of the paper each describe a
dimension. We summarize various neuro-symbolic ap-
proaches along these dimensions in Table 1. Furthermore,
for ease of writing, the table mentions for each system the
key reference (so that we do not always have to repeat
these references).

==== Page 2 ====
2 Directed vs undirected
Within the graphical model community there is a distinc-
tion between the directed andundirected graphical models
[Koller and Friedman, 2009 ], which has led to two distinct
types of StarAI systems. The ﬁrst generalizes directed mod-
els, and resembles Bayesian networks; the second gener-
alizes undirected models like Markov networks or random
ﬁelds. The key difference between the two is that the ﬁrst
class of models indicates a natural direction (sometimes th e
term “causal” is used) between the different random vari-
ables, while the second one does not.
In StarAI, the ﬁrst category includes well-
known representations such as plate notation
[Koller and Friedman, 2009 ], probabilistic relational mod-
els (PRMs)[Friedman et al. , 1999], probabilistic logic pro-
grams (PLPs)[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015 ], and Bayesian
logic programs (BLPs) [Kersting and De Raedt, 2007 ].
Today the most typical and popular representatives of
this category are the probabilistic (logic) programs. The
second category includes Markov Logic Networks (MLNs)
[Richardson and Domingos, 2006 ]and Probabilistic Soft
Logic (PSL)[Bach et al. , 2017]. They essentially specify a
set of weighted constraints, clauses or formulae.
From a logical perspective, the difference amounts to us-
ing a form of deﬁnite clauses (as in the programming lan-
guage Prolog) versus the use of full clausal logic or even
ﬁrst order logic. On the one side, a deﬁnite clause is an
expression of the form h←b1∧...∧bnwhere hand the
biare logical atoms of the form p(t1,...,tm), with pbe-
ing a predicate of arity mand the tibeing terms, that
is, constants, variables, or structured terms of the form
f(t1,...,tn), where fis a functor and the tiare again terms.
On the other side, full clausal logic also allows for formula e
of the form h1∨...∨hm←b1,...,bn.
In the ﬁrst type of rule the direction of the implication
indicates, just like the direction of the arrows in a Bayesia n
network, what can be inferred from what. In the second
type of rule, this relationship is blurred because of the dis -
junction in the head of the rule, which allows multiple con-
clusions for the same premises. This explains why the ﬁrst
type of rule is more directly used for inference, while the
second more as a constraint. It also reﬂects the kind of
knowledge that the user has about the problem. With di-
rected models, one can express that a set of variables has a
direct “causal” inﬂuence on another one, while with undi-
rected ones one expresses a kind of (soft) constraints on a
set of variables, that is, that the variables are related to o ne
another.
Borrowing this view from StarAI, we can devise a ﬁrst
dimension for neuro-symbolic approaches, which relies en-
tirely on the logical perspective outlined above.
The ﬁrst category includes NeSy systems based
on Prolog or Datalog, such as Neural Theorem
Provers (NTPs) [Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017 ],
NLProlog[Weber et al. , 2019], DeepProbLog
[Manhaeve et al. , 2018]and DiffLog[Siet al. , 2019].
These systems retain the directed nature of logical infer-
ence as they exploit backward chaining. Lifted RelationalNeural Networks (LRNNs) [Šourek et al. , 2018]and∂ILP
[Evans and Grefenstette, 2018 ]are other examples of
non-probabilistic directed models, where deﬁnite clauses
are compiled into a neural network architecture in a
forward chaining fashion. The systems that imitate logical
reasoning with tensor calculus, Neural Logic Programming
(NeuralLP)[Yang et al. , 2017]and Neural Logic Machines
(NLM)[Dong et al. , 2019], are likewise instances of
directed logic.
The undirected NeSy approaches consider logic as a con-
straint on the behaviour of a predictive model. A large
group of approaches, including Semantic Based regulariza-
tion (SBR)[Diligenti et al. , 2017]and Semantic Loss (SL)
[Xuet al. , 2018], exploits logical knowledge as a soft con-
straint over the hypothesis space in a way that favours so-
lutions consistent with the encoded knowledge. SBR im-
plements predicates as neural networks and translates the
provided logical formulas into a real valued regularizatio n
by means of fuzzy logic, while SL uses marginal probabil-
ities of the target atoms to deﬁne the regularization term
and relies on arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2011]to eval-
uate it efﬁciently .
Another group of approaches, including Logic Tensor
Networks (LTN) [Donadello et al. , 2017], Neural Markov
Logic Networks (NMLN) [Marra and Kuželka, 2019 ]and
Relational Neural Machines (RNM) [Marra et al. , 2020]
extend MLNs, allowing either predicates (LTN) or
factors (NMLN and RNM) to be implemented as neu-
ral architectures. Finally , [Rocktäschel et al. , 2015;
Demeester et al. , 2016]compute ground atoms scores as
dot products between relation and entities embeddings;
implication rules are then translated into a logical loss
by means of continuous relaxation of the implication
operator.
3 Grounding vs proofs
From a logical perspective there is a model-theoretic and a
proof-theoretic perspective to inference. This is clear wh en
looking at the difference between Answer Set Program-
ming and the programming language Prolog. In the model
theoretic perspective, one ﬁrst grounds out the clauses in
the theory and then calls a SAT solver (possibly after break-
ing cycles), while in a proof theoretic perspective, one per -
forms a sequence of inference steps in order to obtain a
proof.
Grounding is the step whereby a clause c(or formula)
containing variables {V1,...,Vk}is replaced by all instances
cθwhereθis a substitution{V1=c1,...Vk=ck}and the
ciare constants (or other ground terms) appearing in the
domain. The resulting clause cθis that obtained by simul-
taneously replacing all variables by the corresponding con -
stants. Usually the grounding process is optimised in order
to obtain only those ground clauses that are relevant for
the considered inference task.
These two perspectives carry over to the StarAI perspec-
tive. Many StarAI systems use the logic as a kind of tem-
plate to ground out the relational model in order to obtain
a grounded model and perform inference. This grounded

==== Page 3 ====
model can be a graphical model, or alternatively , it can be a
ground weighted logical theory on which traditional infer-
ence methods apply , such as belief propagation or weighted
model counting. This is used in well known systems such
as MLNs, PSL, BLPs, and PRMs. Some systems like PRMs
and BLPs also use aggregates or combining rules in their
knowledge base construction approach. The idea then is to
combine multiple conditional probability distributions i nto
one using, e.g., noisy-or.
Alternatively , one can follow a proof or trace based
approach to deﬁne the probability distribution and per-
form inference. This is akin to what happens in prob-
abilistic programming (cf. also [Russell, 2015]), in
StarAI frameworks such as PLPs, probabilistic databases
[Van den Broeck et al. , 2017]and probabilistic uniﬁcation
based grammars such as Stochastic Logic Programs (SLPs)
[Muggleton, 1996 ]. The idea is that a proof will form the
basis for probabilistic inference. Just like pure logic sup -
ports the model-theoretic and proof-theoretic, both per-
spectives have been explored in parallel for some of the
probabilistic logic programming languages such as ICL
[Poole, 2008]and ProbLog[Fierens et al. , 2015].
Again this carries over to neuro-symbolic methods. Ap-
proaches of NTPs, DeepProblog, ∂ILP and DiffLog are
proof-based. The probabilities or certainties that these s ys-
tems output are based on the enumerated proofs, and they
are also able to learn how to combine them. In contrast, ap-
proaches of LRNN, LTNs, RNM, NMLN, NLM and NeuralLP
are all based on grounding. Learning in these models is
done through learning the (shared) parameters over the
ground model and inference is based on possible ground-
ings of the model.
4 Logic vs Probability vs Neural
When two paradigms are integrated, examining which of
the base paradigms are preserved, and to which extent,
tells us a lot about the strengths and weaknesses of the
resulting paradigm. In StarAI, the traditional knowledge
based model construction approach is to use the logic only
to generate a probabilistic graphical model, implying that
both the inference and the semantics are pushed inside the
graphical model. The effect is that it is often harder to rea-
son at a purely logical level with such systems. What is
meant here is that it may become unclear how to apply log-
ical inference rules such as resolution (or extensions that
take into account the parameters) to such models or what
the effect of applying such rules will be. This is what hap-
pens with systems such as PRMs, BLPs, PSL , and MLNs.
For instance, in MLNs the addition of the resolvent of two
weighted rules, makes it hard to predict the effect on the
distribution. On the other hand, the opposite holds for PLPs
and its variants. While it is clear what the effect of a log-
ical operation is, it is often harder to directly identify an d
exploit properties such as conditional or contextual inde-
pendencies, which are needed for efﬁcient probabilistic in -
ference.
This position on the spectrum between logic and prob-
ability has a profound inﬂuence on the properties of theunderlying model. For NeSy, the spectrum involves not
only logic and neural networks, but often also probabil-
ity . It has been argued that when combining different
perspectives in one model or framework, such as neural,
logic and probabilistic ones, it is desirable to have the
originals or base paradigms as a special case, see also
[De Raedt et al. , 2019].
The vast majority of current NeSy approaches focus
on the neural aspect (i.e., they originated as a fully
neural method to which logical components have been
added). Some of these approaches like LTNs and Tensor-
Log[Cohen et al. , 2017]pursue a kind of knowledge-based
model construction approach in which the logic is compiled
away into the neural network architecture. A different fam-
ily of NeSy approaches, which includes SL and SBR, turns
the logic into a regularization function to provide a penalt y
whenever the desired logical theory or constraints are vi-
olated. This leads to the logic being compiled into the
weights of the trained neural network.
A small number of NeSy methods, however, retain the
focus on logic. Some of these methods start from ex-
isting logic (programming) frameworks and extend them
with primitives that allow them to interface with neural
networks and allow for differentiable operations. Exam-
ples include DeepProbLog and DiffLog. Other methods in-
stead take an existing framework and turn it into a differ-
entiable version. The key inference concepts are mapped
onto an analogous concept that behaves identically for
the edge cases, but is continuous and differentiable in
non-deterministic cases. Such methods include ∂ILP ,∂4
[Bošnjak et al. , 2017]and NTPs.
Even for methods that focus on logic, it can be use-
ful to map the problem onto an intermediate representa-
tion. One such idea concerns performing probabilistic in-
ference by mapping it onto a weighted model counting
(WMC) problem. This can then in turn be solved by com-
piling it into a structure (e.g. an arithmetic circuit) that
allows for efﬁcient inference. This has the added bene-
ﬁt that this structure is differentiable, which can facilit ate
the integration between logic based systems and neural
networks. DeepProbLog, for example, uses this approach.
In[Zuidberg Dos Martires et al. , 2019], the authors argue
that this intermediate representation can serve as an assem-
bly language for AI .
5 Semantics
Traditionally , StarAI combines two semantics: a logical an d
a probabilistic one. In a logical semantics, atoms are as-
signed a truth value in the {true,false}set (i.e.{0,1}). In a
probabilistic semantics, probability is deﬁned as a measure
over sets of possible worlds, where each possible world is
an assignment of values to the random variables. This im-
plies that a probabilistic logic semantics deﬁnes probabil -
ity distributions over ground logical interpretations, th at is,
over sets of ground facts. Prominent examples in StarAI
are ProbLog (from the directed side) and Markov Logic
(from the undirected one). However, the complexity of in-
ference in probabilistic logic has led to statistical relat ional

==== Page 4 ====
approaches (e.g. [Bach et al. , 2017]), where the truth val-
ues are relaxed in the continuous interval [0,1]and logic
operators are turned into real valued functions. This set-
ting is described in terms of fuzzy logic (or soft logic) se-
mantics, mathematically grounded in the t-norm theory . By
exploiting the translation of Boolean formulas into real va l-
ued functions, the fuzzy semantics allows to exploit alge-
braic and geometric properties of t-norms (including es-
pecially their differentiability) to reduce complexity . T he
main issue of fuzzy semantics in the context of StarAI is
that it is often not exploited to describe problems that are
intrinsically vague[Fine, 1975], but, simplistically , as a con-
tinuous surrogate of Boolean logic. A side effect of this
approximation is that many properties of the original logi-
cal theory can be realised in many different ways in their
continuous translation. Indeed, the fuzziﬁcation procedure
alters the logical properties of the original theory (such a s
satisﬁability), depending on the particular connectives e x-
ploited in the conversion. For example, in the Łukasiewicz
t-norm tŁ(x,y)=max{0,x+y−1}, the conjunction can
be 0 (i.e. false) even without any of the elements being 0
(e.g. x=y=0.5).
Neuro-symbolic approaches can easily be categorized in
terms of the same logical, probabilistic or fuzzy semantics .
Neural enhancements of the logic semantics either use neu-
ral networks to turn perceptive input to a logical atom or
introduce a relaxed version of logical reasoning performed
through tensor calculus. An instance of the former is ABL
[Daiet al. , 2019], which use logical abduction to provide
the feedback for a neural model processing the perceptive
input. Tensor calculus approaches, such as NLM and Neu-
ralLP , interpret predicates as tensors grounded over all co n-
stants in a domain and interpret clauses as a product of
those matrices.
Neural enhancements of the probabilistic semantics usu-
ally reparameterize the underlying distribution in terms o f
neural components. In particular, DeepProbLog exploits
neural predicates to compute the probabilities of probabil is-
tic facts as the output of neural computations over vectoria l
representations of the constants, which is similar to SL in
the propositional counterpart. NMLN and RNM use neural
potentials in order to implement factors (or their weights)
as neural networks. [Rocktäschel et al. , 2015]computes
marginal probabilities as logistic functions over similar ity
measures between embeddings of entities and relations.
Neural enhancements of the fuzzy semantics are usu-
ally realised by allowing continuous truth values to be the
outcome of a neural process and the differentiability of
the corresponding t-norm allows for an easy integration
with neural computation frameworks. In particular, SBR
and LTN turn atoms into neural networks taking as inputs
the feature representation of the constants and returning
the corresponding truth value. Similarly , in LRNN and
[Wang and Pan, 2019 ], the output of the neurons of the log-
ical network can be interpreted as fuzzy truth values of the
corresponding atoms.
Finally , there is a large class of methods
[Minervini et al. , 2017; Demeester et al. , 2016;
Cohen et al. , 2017; Weber et al. , 2019]realised by re-laxing logical statements in a numeric way , without giving
any other speciﬁc semantics, either probabilistic or fuzzy .
Here, atoms are assigned scores in /Rbbbcomputed by a neural
scoring function over embeddings. Numerical approxi-
mations are then applied either to combine these scores
according to logical formulas or to aggregate proofs scores .
The resulting neural architecture is usually differentiab le
and, thus, trained end-to-end.
6 Learning parameters or structure
StarAI distinguishes between two types of learning: struc-
ture learning, which corresponds to learning the logical
clauses of the model [Kok and Domingos, 2005 ], and pa-
rameter learning in which the probabilities or weights of
the clauses have to be estimated [Gutmann et al. , 2008;
Lowd and Domingos, 2007 ].
This distinction is less clear in the NeSy setting. Unlike
what is common in StarAI, the NeSy approaches do not per-
form a search through the discrete space of possible clauses ,
but rather through the space of parameters of such clauses
which are typically enumerated by following a template (of-
ten with a predeﬁned complexity). Examples of such sys-
tems include NTPs, ∂ILP , DeepProbLog, NeuralLP and Dif-
fLog. Alternatively , one can provide a sketch of the desired
program – a program with certain decisions left blank – and
learn a NeSy model to ﬁll out the blanks, such as Deep-
ProbLog and∂4.
A substantial number of approaches tries to leverage
the best of both worlds. These ideas include using neural
models to guide the symbolic search [Kalyan et al. , 2018;
Ellis et al. , 2018a; Valkov et al. , 2018], or using a neural
model to produce a program that is then executed symbol-
ically[Ellis et al. , 2018b; Mao et al. , 2019].
7 Symbols vs Sub-symbols
An important factor in both StarAI and NeSy systems is
the representation of entities. StarAI generally represen ts
entities by constants (symbols). But neural methods are
numerical by nature and therefore symbols are replaced
with sub-symbols, i.e., vectorized representations. If th e
entity has inherent numerical properties, these could be
used as sub-symbols (e.g. the pixel data of an image).
However, if this is not the case, a one-hot encoding or
learned embedding can be used instead. This, of course,
has an impact on the generalizability of the system to-
wards unseen entities, as new embeddings have to be
learned for new symbols. Naturally , among the neuro-
symbolic methods, there is a wide variety in how symbols
and sub-symbols are used in representation and reasoning.
The idea of mapping entities onto sub-symbols is made
very explicit in LTNs, where in a ﬁrst step, all symbols
are replaced with sub-symbols. In DeepProbLog, entities
are represented using symbols, but they sometimes have
sub-symbolic representations that are only used inside the
neural networks. Similarly , in [Lippi and Frasconi, 2009 ]
and RNM, MLNs are conditioned on a feature represen-
tation of constants (e.g. images, audio signals, etc.). Fi-
nally , among those models exploiting learned embeddings,

==== Page 5 ====
we ﬁnd[Rocktäschel et al. , 2015; Minervini et al. , 2017;
Demeester et al. , 2016].
Now that we discussed how entities can be represented
by symbols and sub-symbols, let us discuss how they can
be used for reasoning. Most methods either only work
with logic reasoning on symbols, or perform algebraic op-
erations on sub-symbols. However, some methods can use
both simultaneously . A very powerful and elegant mecha-
nism for reasoning about symbols in ﬁrst order logic is uni-
ﬁcation . It is used to reason about equality at the symbolic
level. For instance, the atomic expressions p(a,Y)and
p(X,b)can be uniﬁed using the substitution {X=a,Y=
b}. Uniﬁcation not only works for constants but also for
structured terms f(t1,...,tn)where fis a structured term
and the tiare constants, variables or structured terms them-
selves.
While uniﬁcation is not supported by standard neural
networks, reasoning about equality corresponds closely to
reasoning about similarity in embedding space. Entities ar e
typically embedded in some metric space, and represented
through their embeddings, that is, through sub-symbols.
Reasoning typically proceeds by performing algebraic oper -
ations (such as vector addition) on these embeddings, and
considering the similarity between two entities by using
their distance in embedding space. It is quite interesting
to see to what extent current neuro-symbolic approaches
support uniﬁcation on the one hand, and to what extent
the use of embeddings has been integrated into the neuro-
symbolic logics as a kind of softequality or uniﬁcation
This idea was implemented in NTPs and NLProlog as soft
orweak uniﬁcation . In these systems, two entities can be
uniﬁed if they are similar, and not just if they are identical .
As such, this system can interweave both symbols and sub-
symbols during inference. For each entity , an embedding
is learned and their similarity is determined based on the
distance between the embeddings using a radial basis func-
tion. However, this potentially adds a lot of different proo f
paths, which can result in computational issues for larger
programs. This problem was solved in later iterations of
the system[Minervini et al. , 2020].
8 Type of logic
There is a natural ordering of logical representations, sta rt-
ing with propositional logic (only arity 0 predicates), to
relational logic (having no structured terms, so only con-
stants and variables as terms, which is also the basis for
the Datalog database language), to general ﬁrst order logic
(FOL), and then to logic programs (LP) as in the program-
ming language Prolog. Logic programs are usually re-
stricted to deﬁnite clauses, while the semantics of a deﬁ-
nite clause program is given by its least Herbrand model,
the set of all ground facts that are logically entailed by the
program. This contrasts with the standard semantics of ﬁrst
order logic that would also allow for other models. This dif-
ference carries over to StarAI, where probabilistic logic p ro-
grams and Markov Logic inherit their semantics from logic
programming, respectively ﬁrst order logic. This explains ,
for instance, why Markov Logic’s semantics boils down toa maximum entropy approach when a theory has multiple
models (such as a∨b), cf.[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015;
De Raedt et al. , 2016]for more details. On the other hand,
logic programs are also the basis for the programming lan-
guage Prolog, which implies that they can be used to spec-
ify traditional programs such as sorting and data structure s
such as lists through structured terms. This is relevant esp e-
cially for those approaches to neurosymbolic computation
that are used to synthesize programs from examples.
Neuro-symbolic representations typically extend one of
these four types of logic: propositional, relational, ﬁrst or-
der logic, or logic programs. For instance, SL focuses only
on the propositional setting. On the other hand, ∂ILP , NTPs
and DiffLog are based on Datalog, which belongs to re-
lational logic segment. LTNs and SBR use fuzzy logic to
translate a general FOL theory into a training objective, ei -
ther isolated or in conjunction with a supervised criterion .
Just like Markov Logic, also RNM and NMLN use ﬁrst or-
der logic to generate a random ﬁeld. Finally , DeepProbLog,
NLProlog and LRNN are examples of neuro-symbolic logic
programming frameworks.
9 Open challenges
To conclude, we now list a number of challenges for NeSy,
which deserve, in our opinion, more attention.
Probabilistic reasoning Although relatively few meth-
ods explore the integration of logical and neural methods
through probabilities perspective, we believe that a proba -
bilistic approach is the best way to principally integrate t he
two[De Raedt et al. , 2019]. There should be further inves-
tigation into the applicability of probabilistic reasonin g for
neuro-symbolic computation.
Structure learning While signiﬁcant progress has been
made on learning the structure of purely relational models
(without probabilities), learning StarAI models remains a
major challenge due to the complexity of inference and the
combinatorial nature of the problem. Incorporating neural
aspects complicates the problem even more. NeSy methods
have certainly shown potential for addressing this problem
(Section 6), but the existing methods are still limited and
mostly domain-speciﬁc which impedes their wide applica-
tion.
Scaling inference Scalable inference is a major chal-
lenge for StarAI and therefore also for NeSy approaches
with an explicit logical or probabilistic reasoning com-
ponent. Investigating to which extent neural methods
can help with this challenge by means of lifted (exploit-
ing symmetries in models) or approximate inference, as
well as reasoning from the intermediate representations
[Abboud et al. , 2020], are promising future research direc-
tions.
Data efﬁciency A major advantage of StarAI methods, as
compared to neural ones, is their data efﬁciency – StarAI
methods can efﬁciently learn from small amount of data,
whereas neural methods are data hungry . On the other
hand, StarAI methods do not scale to big data sets, while
neural methods can easily handle them. We believe that

==== Page 6 ====
Dimension 1 Dimension 2 Dimension 3 Dimension 4 Dimension 5 D imension 6 Dimension 7
(D)irected
(U)ndirected(G)rounding
(P)roofs(L)ogic
(P)robability
(N)eural(L)ogic
(P)robability
(F)uzzy(P)arameter
(S)tructure(S)ymbols
(Sub)symbols(P)ropositional
(R)elational
(FOL)
(LP)
∂ILP[Evans and Grefenstette, 2018 ] D P L +N L P S R
DeepProbLog[Manhaeve et al. , 2018] D P L +P+N P P S +Sub LP
DiffLog[Siet al. , 2019] D P L +N L P +S S R
LRNN[Šourek et al. , 2018] D P L +N F P +S S+Sub LP
LTN[Donadello et al. , 2017] U G L +N F P Sub FOL
NeuralLP[Yang et al. , 2017] D G L +N L P S R
NLM[Dong et al. , 2019] D G L +N L P +S S R
NLProlog[Weber et al. , 2019] D P L +P+N P P +S S+Sub LP
NMLN[Marra and Kuželka, 2019 ] U G L +P+N P P +S S+Sub FOL
NTP[Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017 ] D P L +N L P +S S+Sub R
RNM[Marra et al. , 2020] U G L +P+N P P S +Sub FOL
SL[Xuet al. , 2018] U G L +P+N P P S +Sub P
SBR[Diligenti et al. , 2017] U G L +N F P Sub FOL
Tensorlog[Cohen et al. , 2017] D P L +N P P S +Sub R
Table 1: Taxonomy of a (non-exhaustive) list of NeSy models a ccording to the 7 dimensions outlined in the paper.
understanding how these methods can help each other to
overcome their complementary weaknesses, is a promising
research direction.
Symbolic representation learning The effectiveness of
deep learning comes from the ability to change the repre-
sentation of the data so that the target task becomes easier
to solve. The ability to change the representation on the
symbolic level as well would signiﬁcantly increase the ca-
pabilities of NeSy systems. This is a major open challenge
for which neurally inspired methods could help achieve
progress[Cropper, 2019; Duman ˇci´cet al. , 2019].
Acknowledgements
Robin Manhaeve and Sebastijan Dumancic are funded by
the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO). This work has
also received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement No [694980]
SYNTH: Synthesising Inductive Data Models).
References
[Abboud et al. , 2020]Ralph Abboud, ˙Ismail ˙Ilkan Ceylan, and
Thomas Lukasiewicz. Learning to reason: Leveraging neural
networks for approximate DNF counting. In AAAI , 2020.
[Bach et al. , 2017]Stephen H. Bach, Matthias Broecheler, Bert
Huang, and Lise Getoor. Hinge-loss markov random ﬁelds and
probabilistic soft logic. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 18:109:1–109:67,
2017.
[Bader and Hitzler, 2005 ]Sebastian Bader and Pascal Hitzler. Di-
mensions of neural-symbolic integration-a structured sur vey.
arXiv preprint cs/0511042 , 2005.
[Besold et al. , 2017]Tarek R Besold, Artur d’Avila Garcez, Se-
bastian Bader, Howard Bowman, Pedro Domingos, Pascal
Hitzler, Kai-Uwe Kühnberger, Luis C Lamb, Daniel Lowd,Priscila Machado Vieira Lima, et al. Neural-symbolic learn -
ing and reasoning: A survey and interpretation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.03902 , 2017.
[Bošnjak et al. , 2017]Matko Bošnjak, Tim Rocktäschel, Jason
Naradowsky, and Sebastian Riedel. Programming with a dif-
ferentiable forth interpreter. In ICML , 2017.
[Cohen et al. , 2017]William W . Cohen, Fan Yang, and Kathryn
Mazaitis. Tensorlog: Deep learning meets probabilistic db s.
CoRR , abs/1707.05390, 2017.
[Cropper, 2019]Andrew Cropper. Playgol: Learning programs
through play. In IJCAI 2019 , 2019.
[Daiet al. , 2019]Wang-Zhou Dai, Qiuling Xu, Yang Yu, and Zhi-
Hua Zhou. Bridging machine learning and logical reasoning
by abductive learning. In NeurIPS . 2019.
[Darwiche, 2011]Adnan Darwiche. Sdd: A new canonical rep-
resentation of propositional knowledge bases. In IJCAI , 2011.
[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015 ]Luc De Raedt and Angelika Kim-
mig. Probabilistic (logic) programming concepts. Machine
Learning , 100(1):5–47, 2015.
[De Raedt et al. , 2016]Luc De Raedt, Kristian Kersting, Sriraam
Natarajan, and David Poole. Statistical relational artiﬁc ial in-
telligence: Logic, probability, and computation. Synthesis Lec-
tures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning , 10(2):1–
189, 2016.
[De Raedt et al. , 2019]Luc De Raedt, Robin Manhaeve, Sebasti-
jan Duman ˇci´c, Thomas Demeester, and Angelika Kimmig.
Neuro-symbolic=neural+logical+probabilistic. In NeSy @
IJCAI , 2019.
[Demeester et al. , 2016]Thomas Demeester, Tim Rocktäschel,
and Sebastian Riedel. Lifted rule injection for relation em bed-
dings. In EMNLP , 2016.
[Diligenti et al. , 2017]Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, and
Claudio Saccà. Semantic-based regularization for learnin g and
inference. Artif. Intell. , 2017.

==== Page 7 ====
[Donadello et al. , 2017]Ivan Donadello, Luciano Seraﬁni, and
Artur S. d’Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networks for semantic
image interpretation. In Carles Sierra, editor, IJCAI , 2017.
[Dong et al. , 2019]Honghua Dong, Jiayuan Mao, Tian Lin,
Chong Wang, Lihong Li, and Denny Zhou. Neural logic ma-
chines. In ICLR, 2019.
[Duman ˇci´cet al. , 2019]Sebastijan Duman ˇci´c, Tias Guns,
Wannes Meert, and Hendrik Blockeel. Learning relational
representations with auto-encoding logic programs. In IJCAI
2019 , 2019.
[Ellis et al. , 2018a]Kevin Ellis, Lucas Morales, Mathias Sablé-
Meyer, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Josh Tenenbaum. Learn-
ing libraries of subroutines for neurally–guided bayesian pro-
gram induction. In NeurIPS . 2018.
[Ellis et al. , 2018b]Kevin Ellis, Daniel Ritchie, Armando Solar-
Lezama, and Josh Tenenbaum. Learning to infer graphics pro-
grams from hand-drawn images. In NeurIPS 2018 , pages 6062–
6071, 2018.
[Evans and Grefenstette, 2018 ]Richard Evans and Edward
Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. J.
Artif. Intell. Res. , 61:1–64, 2018.
[Fierens et al. , 2015]Daan Fierens, Guy Van den Broeck, Joris
Renkens, Dimitar Shterionov, Bernd Gutmann, Ingo Thon,
Gerda Janssens, and Luc De Raedt. Inference and learning
in probabilistic logic programs using weighted boolean for mu-
las.Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 15(3):358–401,
2015.
[Fine, 1975]Kit Fine. Vagueness, truth and logic. Synthese , pages
265–300, 1975.
[Friedman et al. , 1999]Nir Friedman, Lise Getoor, Daphne
Koller, and Avi Pfeffer. Learning probabilistic relationa l models.
InIJCAI , volume 99, pages 1300–1309, 1999.
[Garcez et al. , 2019]Artur d’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Luis C
Lamb, Luciano Seraﬁni, Michael Spranger, and Son N Tran.
Neural-symbolic computing: An effective methodology for
principled integration of machine learning and reasoning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06088 , 2019.
[Getoor and Taskar, 2007 ]L. Getoor and B. Taskar, editors. An
Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning . MIT Press, 2007.
[Gutmann et al. , 2008]Bernd Gutmann, Angelika Kimmig, Kris-
tian Kersting, and Luc De Raedt. Parameter learning in proba -
bilistic databases: A least squares approach. In ECML&PKDD ,
2008.
[Kalyan et al. , 2018]Ashwin Kalyan, Abhishek Mohta, Olek-
sandr Polozov, Dhruv Batra, Prateek Jain, and Sumit Gulwani .
Neural-guided deductive search for real-time program synt he-
sis from examples. In ICLR, 2018.
[Kersting and De Raedt, 2007 ]Kristian Kersting and Luc
De Raedt. Bayesian logic programming: Theory and tool.
Statistical Relational Learning , page 291, 2007.
[Kok and Domingos, 2005 ]Stanley Kok and Pedro Domingos.
Learning the structure of markov logic networks. ICML, 2005 .
[Koller and Friedman, 2009 ]Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman.
Probabilistic Graphical Models - Principles and Technique s. MIT
Press, 2009.
[Lippi and Frasconi, 2009 ]Marco Lippi and Paolo Frasconi. Pre-
diction of protein β-residue contacts by markov logic networks
with grounding-speciﬁc weights. Bioinformatics , 25(18):2326–
2333, 2009.[Lowd and Domingos, 2007 ]Daniel Lowd and Pedro Domingos.
Efﬁcient weight learning for markov logic networks. ECMLP-
KDD, 2007.
[Manhaeve et al. , 2018]Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Duman ˇci´c,
Angelika Kimmig, Thomas Demeester, and Luc De Raedt. Deep-
problog: Neural probabilistic logic programming. In NeurIPS ,
2018.
[Mao et al. , 2019]Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-symbolic con-
cept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences fr om
natural supervision. In ICLR, 2019.
[Marra and Kuželka, 2019 ]Giuseppe Marra and Ondrej Kuželka.
Neural markov logic networks. CoRR , abs/1905.13462, 2019.
[Marra et al. , 2020]Giuseppe Marra, Michelangelo Diligenti,
Francesco Giannini, Marco Gori, and Marco Maggini. Rela-
tional neural machines. In ECAI, 2020.
[Minervini et al. , 2017]Pasquale Minervini, Thomas Demeester,
Tim Rocktäschel, and Sebastian Riedel. Adversarial sets fo r
regularising neural link predictors. In UAI, 2017.
[Minervini et al. , 2020]Pasquale Minervini, Matko Bošnjak, Tim
Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Edward Grefenstette. D if-
ferentiable reasoning on large knowledge bases and natural
language. In AAAI , 2020.
[Muggleton, 1996 ]Stephen Muggleton. Stochastic logic pro-
grams. Advances in inductive logic programming , 32:254–264,
1996.
[Poole, 2008]David Poole. The independent choice logic and
beyond. In Probabilistic inductive logic programming , pages
222–243. Springer, 2008.
[Richardson and Domingos, 2006 ]Matthew Richardson and Pe-
dro M. Domingos. Markov logic networks. Machine Learning ,
62(1-2):107–136, 2006.
[Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017 ]Tim Rocktäschel and Sebastian
Riedel. End-to-end differentiable proving. In NIPS, 2017.
[Rocktäschel et al. , 2015]Tim Rocktäschel, Sameer Singh, and
Sebastian Riedel. Injecting logical background knowledge into
embeddings for relation extraction. In NAACL HLT , 2015.
[Russell, 2015]Stuart Russell. Unifying logic and probability.
Communications of the ACM , 58(7):88–97, 2015.
[Siet al. , 2019]Xujie Si, Mukund Raghothaman, Kihong Heo,
and Mayur Naik. Synthesizing datalog programs using numer-
ical relaxation. In IJCAI , 2019.
[Valkov et al. , 2018]Lazar Valkov, Dipak Chaudhari, Akash Sri-
vastava, Charles A. Sutton, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Houdini:
Lifelong learning as program synthesis. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[Van den Broeck et al. , 2017]Guy Van den Broeck, Dan Suciu,
et al. Query processing on probabilistic data: A survey. Foun-
dations and Trends® in Databases , 7(3-4):197–341, 2017.
[Wang and Pan, 2019 ]Wenya Wang and Sinno Jialin Pan. Inte-
grating deep learning with logic fusion for information ext rac-
tion. CoRR , abs/1912.03041, 2019.
[Weber et al. , 2019]Leon Weber, Pasquale Minervini, Jannes
Münchmeyer, Ulf Leser, and Tim Rocktäschel. Nlprolog: Rea-
soning with weak uniﬁcation for question answering in natur al
language. In ACL, 2019.
[Xuet al. , 2018]Jingyi Xu, Zilu Zhang, Tal Friedman, Yitao
Liang, and Guy Van den Broeck. A semantic loss function for
deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In ICML , 2018.

==== Page 8 ====
[Yang et al. , 2017]Fan Yang, Zhilin Yang, and William W Cohen.
Differentiable learning of logical rules for knowledge bas e rea-
soning. In NIPS 2017 . 2017.
[Zuidberg Dos Martires et al. , 2019]Pedro Zuidberg Dos Mar-
tires, Vincent Derkinderen, Robin Manhaeve, Wannes Meert,
Angelika Kimmig, and Luc De Raedt. Transforming probabilis -
tic programs into algebraic circuits for inference and lear ning.
2019.
[Šourek et al. , 2018]Gustav Šourek, Vojtech Aschenbrenner,
Filip Zelezný, Steven Schockaert, and Ondrej Kuželka. Lift ed
relational neural networks: Efﬁcient learning of latent re la-
tional structures. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 62:69–100, 2018.

