==== Page 1 ====
132Generative AdversarialNetworks: A SurveyTowardPrivate
and Secure Applications
ZHIPENG CAI, ZUOBINXIONG, HONGHUI XU, PENG WANG, and WEILI,
Georgia State University
YI PAN, Shenzhen Instituteof Advanced Technology, CAS, ChinaandGeorgia State University
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have promoted a variety of applications in computer vision and
naturallanguageprocessing,amongothers,duetoitsgenerativemodel’scompellingabilitytogeneratereal-
istic examples plausibly drawn from an existing distribution of samples. GAN not only provides impressive
performanceondatageneration-basedtasksbutalsostimulatesfertilizationforprivacyandsecurityoriented
researchbecauseofitsgametheoreticoptimizationstrategy.Unfortunately,therearenocomprehensivesur-
veysonGANinprivacyandsecurity,whichmotivatesthissurveytosummarizesystematically.Theexisting
worksareclassifiedintopropercategoriesbasedonprivacyandsecurityfunctions,andthissurveyconducts
acomprehensiveanalysisoftheiradvantagesanddrawbacks.ConsideringthatGANinprivacyandsecurity
isstillataveryinitialstageandhasimposeduniquechallengesthatareyettobewelladdressed,thisarticle
alsoshedslightonsomepotentialprivacyandsecurityapplicationswithGANandelaboratesonsomefuture
research directions.
CCSConcepts:• Generalandreference →Surveys and overviews ;•Securityandprivacy →Privacy-
preserving protocols ;•Computingmethodologies →Machinelearning;
Additional Key Words andPhrases:Generative adversarialnetworks,deep learning, privacyand security
ACM Reference format:
Zhipeng Cai, Zuobin Xiong, Honghui Xu, Peng Wang, Wei Li, and Yi Pan. 2021. Generative Adversarial Net-
works: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications. ACM Comput. Surv. 54, 6, Article 132 (July 2021),
38 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459992
1 INTRODUCTION
The technological breakthrough brought by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has
rapidly produced a revolutionary impact on machine learning and its related fields, and this im-
pacthasalreadyflourishedtovariousofresearchareasandapplications.Asapowerfulgenerative
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grants 1741277, 1829674, 1704287, and
2011845.
This work isdone whenYi PanwaslocatedShenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology.
Authors’ addresses: Z. Cai, Z. Xiong, H. Xu, P. Wang, and W. Li (corresponding author), Georgia State University, De-
partment of Computer Science, 25 Park Place, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 30303; emails: zcai@gsu.edu, {zxiong2, hxu16,
wpeng12}@student.gsu.edu, wli28@gsu.edu; Y. Pan (corresponding author), Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
CAS,1068XueyuanAvenue,Shenzhen,China,518055,andGeorgiaStateUniversity,DepartmentofComputerScience,25
Park Place,Atlanta,Georgia,USA, 30303;email:yipan@gsu.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Association for ComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2021/07-ART132$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459992
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.


==== Page 2 ====
132:2 Z.Cai et al.
framework,GANhassignificantlypromotedmanyapplicationswithcomplextasks,suchasimage
generation,super-resolution,andtextdatamanipulations.Mostrecently,exploitingGANtowork
out elegant solutions to severe privacy and security problems has become increasingly popular
in both academia and industry due to its game theoretic optimization strategy. This survey aims
toprovideacomprehensivereviewandanin-depthsummaryofthestate-of-the-arttechnologies
anddiscusssomepromisingfutureresearchdirectionsforGANintheareaofprivacyandsecurity.
Westartoursurveywitha briefintroductionto GAN.
1.1 Generative Adversarial Networks
GANwasfirstproposedbyGoodfellowetal.[ 40]toserveasagenerativemodelbridgingbetween
supervised learning and unsupervised learning in 2014, which is highly praised as “the most in-
teresting idea in the last 10 years in Machine Learning” by Yann LeCun, the winner of the 2018
Turing Award. Typically, a generative model takes a training dataset drawn from a particular dis-
tributionasinputandtriestoproduceanestimatedprobabilitydistributiontomimicagivenreal
data distribution. In particular, a zero-sum game between the generator and the discriminator is
designed to achieve realistic data generation. In other words, the generator of GAN is trained to
foolthediscriminatorwhosegoalisto distinguishtherealdata fromthegenerateddata.
GAN has promoted many emerging data-driven applications related to Big Data and Smart
Cities thanks to its fantastic properties: (i) the design of generative models offers an excellent
way to capture a high-dimensional probability distribution that is an important research focus in
mathematicsandengineeringdomains;(ii)awell-trainedgenerativemodelcanbreakthroughthe
imprisonment of data shortage for technical innovation and performance improvement in many
fields, especially for deep learning (e.g., the high-quality generated data can be incorporated into
semi-supervised learning, for which the influence of missing data could be mitigated to some ex-
tent);and(iii)generativemodels(particularlyGAN)enablelearningalgorithmstoworkwellwith
multi-modaloutputs,inwhichmorethanonecorrectoutputmaybeobtainedfromasingleinput
fora task(e.g.,thenext frame prediction)[ 79].
PriortoGAN,severalgenerativemodelsstemmingfromthemaximumlikelihoodestimationex-
isted,eachofwhichwasstateoftheartatthetimeitwasproposed.Thesepriorgenerativemodels
are either explicit density based or implicit density based, depending on whether the underlying
distributioncanbeexplicitlypre-defined.Somewell-knownexplicitdensity-basedmodels,includ-
ing Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [ 5], Fully Visible Belief Networks (FVBN) [ 37],Gauss-
ian Mixture Model (GMM) [102], Naive Bayes Model (NBM) [ 54], and Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)[100],canspecializesomespecificproblemsandscenariosbutarelimitedbytheircommon
weakness—when the explicitly defined probability density function has intensive parameters and
complexdimensions,thecomputationaltractabilityissuehappenswherethemaximumlikelihood
estimation may not be able to represent the complexity of the sample data and therefore cannot
learnthehigh-dimensiondatadistributionwell.Inaddition,themajorityofpriorgenerativemod-
els,suchasimplicitdensity-basedMarkovChainmodels,requireanassumptionofMarkovChain
that has an ambiguous distribution and can be mixed between patterns. On the contrary, GAN
gets rid of the high-dimension constraint and the Markov Chain dependence. The generator of
GAN uses a pre-defined low-dimension latent code as input and then maps its input to the target
data dimension. In addition, GAN is a non-parametric method and does not require any approx-
imate distribution or Markov Chain property, which endows GAN with the ability to represent
thegenerateddatainalowerdimensionusingfewerparameters.Mostimportantly,GANismore
like an adversarial training framework instead of a rigorous formulation. Thus, it is more flexible
and extensible to be transformed into many variants according to different requirements, such
asWasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) [7],Information Maximizing
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 3 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:3
Generative Adversarial Network (InfoGAN) [21], and CycleGAN [ 160]. Motivated by these
characteristics,novelresearchbenefitsfrom GAN in awidespreadway.
1.2 The MostRecent Research onGAN
Currently, two mainstream kinds of research on GAN are being conducted concurrently:
application-oriented study and theory-oriented study. As the restrictions of previous generative
models are overcome by GAN, the applications related to data generation are thoroughly investi-
gated for different data formats, such as image generation [ 83,95,131,145],Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [24,32,53,149], time series data generation [ 17,28,30,42], and semantic seg-
mentation [ 82,99,118,161]. These application scenarios can be further divided into fine-grained
subcategories, including image-to-image translation, image super-resolution, image in-painting,
face aging, human pose synthesis, object detection, sketch synthesis, text synthesis, medical data
generation, texture synthesis, language and speech synthesis, video and music generation, and
so on. Those prosperous applications demonstrate the extraordinary capability and widespread
popularityof GAN.
Meanwhile, to push GAN’s capability to a higher level, theoretical methodologies proceed
to tackle essential issues including non-stable training, mode collapse, gradient vanish, lack of
properevaluationmetrics,andsoon.Somefeasiblesolutionshavebeenproposed,suchasfeature
matching, unrolled GAN, mini-batch discrimination, the Self-Attention Generative Adversar-
ial Network (SAGAN) , label smoothing, proper optimizer, gradient penalty, and alternative loss
function[ 84].
1.3 GANin Privacy and Security
Withindividuals’increasingprivacyconcernsandgovernments’graduallystrengtheningprivacy
regulations,thwartingsecurityandprivacythreatshasbeenputinacriticalplacewhendesigning
applications,suchas medicalimage analysis,street-viewimage sharing,and facerecognition.
Thanks to the characteristics of adversarial training, GAN and its variants can be exploited to
investigatetheprivacyandsecurityissueswithoutanypre-determinedassumptionsofopponents’
capabilities that are often hard to be determined in traditional attacks and defense mechanisms.
As the adversarial training process can capture the interactions between an attacker and a de-
fender in a min-max game, the GAN-based methods can be formulated to either launch an attack
tobreakasoliddefenseorimplementprotectiontodefendagainststrongattackers.Foranattack
model, the generator is modeled as an attacker aiming at fooling a defender (i.e., the discrimina-
tor)[10,38,47,158].Inadefensemodel,thegeneratorismodeledasadefendertoresistapowerful
attacker (i.e., the discriminator), such as Generative Adversarial Privacy (GAP) [ 51], Privacy Pre-
serving Adversarial Networks (PPANs) [ 127], Compressive Adversarial Privacy (CAP) [ 22], and
ReconstructiveAdversarialNetwork(RAN)[ 77].
In a nutshell, the existing GAN-based privacy and security methods mainly differ in their con-
figurations of GAN models and formulations of loss functions. However, from the perspective of
application scenarios, model design, and data utilization, there is plenty of room for taking maxi-
mumadvantageofGAN,leavinglotsofresearchblanksforfurtherenhancements.Thosepotential
directionsareelaboratedattheend ofthissurvey.
The organization of this survey is illustrated in Figure 1. We present the preliminaries about
GANanditsvariantsinSection 2.TheapplicationsofGANforprivacy,includingdataprivacyand
modelprivacy,arereviewedinSection 3andSection 4,respectively.Security-relatedapplications
are described in Section 5, and promising future works are discussed in Section 6.F i n a l l y ,w e
concludethesurveyin Section 7.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 4 ====
132:4 Z.Cai et al.
Fig. 1. Theorganization of thissurveyanditstaxonomy.
Fig.2. Thearchitecture of GANanditsvariants.
2 PRELIMINARIES
Inthissection,wereview thebasicstructureof GAN and itsvariantmodels.
2.1 Basic Structure ofGAN
The basic idea of GAN was first proposed by Goodfellow et al. [ 40], where a generator can be
welltrainedunderanadversarialtrainingframework.AsshowninFigure 2(a),GANconsistsofa
generator Gand a discriminator D.Gis a function of operating a latent space zto generate real-
likefakedata Xfake,whereas Disafunctiontodistinguish Xfakeandrealdata Xreal.Thetraining
processof Gisterminateduntil XfakeandXrealareindistinguishableby D[48].Theinteractions
betweenGandDintheadversarialtrainingscenariocanbemodeledasamin-maxgamewiththe
followingobjective:
min
Gmax
DEx∼pdata[logD(x)]+Ez∼pz[log(1−D(G(z)))], (1)
wherex∼pdatadenotesthedistributionof Xreal,a n dz∼pzdenotesthedistributionof z.
2.2 Variant Modelsof GAN
InspiredbytheinitialdesignofGAN,anumberofvariantmodelshavebeenproposedforvarious
scenarios.In thefollowing, we introduceseveralpopularones.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 5 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:5
2.2.1 WassersteinGAN. WGANwasdevelopedtosolvetheproblemofmodecollapseinatrain-
ingprocesstosomeextent[ 7].Togeneratereal-lookingdatathatcanfooladiscriminator,WGAN
is trained for minimizing the Wasserstein distance between the real-like data distribution pдand
therealdatadistribution pdata.
2.2.2 Least Squares GAN. To tackle the issue of gradients vanishing in the training process
of GAN, the a-bcoding scheme was utilized in the least squares method to formulate the loss
function of discriminator in Least Squares Generative Adversarial Network (LSGAN) [84].
Accordingly,theobjectivefunctionsofthediscriminatorandthegeneratorareexpressedasfollows
respectively:
min
D1
2Ex∼pdata[(D(x)−b)2]+1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(x))−a)2], (2)
min
G1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(x))−δ)2], (3)
whereδrepresentsthevalue that GwantsDtoclassify onfake data.
2.2.3 Conditional GAN. Considering that auxiliary information can also assist in generating
data, it is natural to extend GAN to a conditional version named Conditional Generative Ad-
versarialNetwork(cGAN) thatprovidesboththegeneratorandthediscriminatorwithauxiliary
information[ 90,91].IncGAN,thelatentspace zandtheauxiliaryinformation y(e.g.,classlabels
and data from other modalities) are combined as the conditional input of the generator to make
theconditionalfakedataassimilarastheconditionalrealdata.Accordingly,theobjectivefunction
of cGAN canbe expressedby Equation( 4):
min
Gmax
DEx∼pdata[logD(x|y)]+Ez∼pz[log(1−D(G(z|y)))]. (4)
2.2.4 Information Maximizing GAN. InfoGAN attempts to learn representations with the idea
of maximizing the mutual information between labels and the generative data [ 21]. To this end,
InfoGAN introduces another classifier Qto predict ygiven by G(z|y)based on cGAN. Thus, the
objectivefunctionofInfoGANisaregularizationofcGAN’sobjectivefunction,shownasfollows:
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)−λI(G,Q), (5)
whereV(D,G)is the objective function of cGAN but the discriminator does not take yas input,
I(·)isthemutualinformation,and λisa positivehyperparameter.
2.2.5 AuxiliaryClassifierGAN. TheAuxiliaryClassifierGenerativeAdversarialNetwork
(ACGAN) isavariantofthebasicGANwithanauxiliaryclassifier[ 95],whichattemptstolearna
representationfor zwithaclasslabel.InACGAN,everygeneratedsamplealsohasacorresponding
classlabel c.However,thediscriminatoristrainedtoclassifyitsinputasrealorfake.Theauxiliary
classifierisusedtoobtainaprobabilitydistributionovertheclasslabels.Hence,therearetwoloss
functionsfortrainingACGAN:thelog-likelihoodofthecorrectsourceshowninEquation( 6)and
thelog-likelihoodof thecorrectlabelpresentedin Equation( 7):
LS=E[logP(S=real|Xreal)]+E[logP(S=fake|Xfake)], (6)
LC=E[logP(C=c|Xreal)]+E[logP(C=c|Xfake)]. (7)
In Equation ( 6) and Equation ( 7),P(S=real|Xreal)is the probability of determining the data
sample to be real when it is real, and P(C=c|Xreal)is the probability of determining the correct
class when the data sample is real. In ACGAN, the generator is trained via maximizing LC−LS,
and thediscriminatoristrainedvia maximizing LC+LS.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 6 ====
132:6 Z.Cai et al.
2.2.6 DeepConvolutionalGAN(DCGAN). Withthesuccessofdeeplearningmodels,especially
theConvolutionalNeuralNetwork(CNN) [64],theDeepConvolutionalGenerativeAdver-
sarialNetwork(DCGAN) hasbeenproposedtogenerateimagesandvideosefficientlybysetting
boththegeneratorandthediscriminatorasCNNs.DCGANcanevenproducehighervisualquality
images withthehelpof a CNN-basedgeneratorand discriminator[ 119].
2.2.7 Boundary Equilibrium GAN. By configuring the discriminator as an Autoencoder, the
Boundary Equilibrium Generative Adversarial Network (BEGAN) was developed in the
work of Berthelot et al. [ 13]. To prevent the discriminator from beating the generator easily, BE-
GANlearnstheAutoencoderlossdistributionsusingalossderivedfromtheWassersteindistance
insteadoflearningdata distributionsdirectly.
In BEGAN, the generator is trained to minimize the loss of image generation in Equation ( 8),
andthediscriminatoristrainedinEquation( 9)tominimizethereconstructionlossoftherealdata
andmaximize thereconstructionlossof thegeneratedimages:
LG=L(G(z)), (8)
LD=L(D(x))−ktL(D(G(z))). (9)
In Equation ( 9),kt=kt−1+λk(βL(D(x))−L(D(G(z)))is a variable that controls the weight of
L(D(G(z)))inLD,w h e r eλkis the learning rate at the k-th iteration in the training process, and
β=E[L(D(G(z)))]
E[L(D(x))]balancestheeffortsallocatedto thegeneratorandthediscriminator.
2.2.8 Progressive-Growing GAN. TheProgressive-Growing Generative Adversarial Net-
work (ProGAN) [57] is built based on DCGAN, where both GandDstart training with low-
resolutionimages.Itgraduallyincreasesthemodeldepthbyaddingnewlayersto GandDduring
thetrainingprocessand endswiththegenerationof high-resolutionimages.
2.2.9 Self-AttentionGAN. TraditionalCNNsonlyfocusonlocalspatialinformationduetothe
limitedreceptivefieldofCNNs,makingitdifficultforCNN-basedGANstolearnmulti-classimage
datasets. SAGAN [ 155] is derived from DCGAN to ensure a large receptive field in GandDvia a
self-attentionmechanismsothatSAGANcanbeusedtolearngloballong-rangedependenciesfor
generatingmulti-class images better.
2.2.10 Multi-Scale Gradients GAN. When there is not enough overlap in the supports of the
real and fake data distributions, gradients passing from DtoGbecome uninformative, making it
difficult to exploit different datasets using GAN models. The Multi-Scale Gradient Generative
Adversarial Network (MsgGAN) [56] overcomes this problem by connecting latent space of G
andDwhile training GAN on multiple datasets, in which more information is shared between G
andDto makeMsgGAN applicabletodifferent datasets.
Summary . The variants of GAN mentioned previously can be categorized into three categories
basedontheirimprovementfocus,whoseevolutionispresentedinFigure 2(b):(1)Latentspace :In
cGAN,thelabelscanbeusedinthelatentspaceasakindofextrainformationforbettergeneration
and discrimination of labeled data. Based on cGAN, InfoGAN expects to learn representation by
maximizingthemutualinformationbetweenlabelsandthegenerativedata,whereasACGANtries
to learn representation with labels by using an auxiliary classifier. (2) Loss function :W G A Nu s e s
WassersteindistancetocalculatethelosstosolvetheproblemofmodecollapseinGAN,whereas
LSGAN applies the a-bcoding scheme in the least squares method to the design of D’s loss to
solvetheproblemofgradientvanishinGAN.(3) Architecture :ThegeneratorinDCGANisadeep
CNN-based architecture to generate more real-like images and videos with high visual quality.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 7 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:7
Fig. 3. The applications of GAN-baseddata privacyprotection.
The discriminator in BEGAN is an autoencoder-based architecture to prevent the discriminator
from easily beating the generator at the early training stage for fair adversarial training. Based
on DCGAN, ProGAN gradually increases the depth of GandDin the training process of GAN
togeneratehigh-resolutionimages,SAGANreliesonaself-attentionmechanismtoobtainglobal
long-rangedependencytogeneratemulti-classimages,andMsgGANconnectsthelatentspaceof
GandDwhiletrainingon multipledatasetstoensureit canbeexploited todifferentdatasets.
3 PRIVACY OF DATA
According to data type, the mainstream applications of GAN in data privacy protection can be
classified into six major categories, including image data privacy, video data privacy, textual data
privacy, speech data privacy, spatio-temporal data privacy, and graph data privacy, for which a
more detailed classification is presented in Figure 3. Technically speaking, on the one hand, the
generator is designed as a perturbation function to hide the private information and/or trained
by one or more discriminators for privacy-preserving data generation. On the other hand, the
discriminatorisemployedtoensuredatasimilaritysothatthegeneratedprivacy-preservingdata
is stillusablein realapplicationsbutishardto bedistinguishedfromtherealdata byattackers.
3.1 Image Data Privacy
As the most popular images used in deep learning, face images contain various individuals’ sen-
sitive information, easily causing privacy leakage, and thus have received lots of research atten-
tion [15,16,18,20,26,88,136,148]. In addition, the privacy of medical images [ 58] and street-
viewimages[ 129,141]havecapturedresearchinterestinrecentyears.Furthermore,anumberof
GAN-based schemes have been developed for image steganography [ 87,115], image anonymiza-
tion[62,68,122],andimageencoding[ 27,94,98,147],whichindeedcanbeexploitedonanytype
ofimagebesidesface/medical/street-viewimages.Currently,thestudyoffaceimagesandmedical
images focuses on a single object, such as one face and one human organ, whereas the study of
street-view images deals with multiple objects, including pedestrians, vehicles, buildings, and so
on.Inthefollowing,theexistingworksonfaceimages,medicalimages,street-viewimages,image
steganography,image anonymization, and image encodingareintroducedin order.
3.1.1 FaceImages. Chenetal.[ 20]proposedamethodofimagerepresentationlearningbased
ontheVariationalGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(VGAN) forprivacy-preservingfacialex-
pressionrecognition,where VariationalAutoencoder(VAE) [80]andcGAN[ 90]arecombined
to create an identity-preserving representation of facial images while generating an expression-
preserving realistic vision. In VGAN, the generator (i.e., the encoder-decoder pair in VAE) takes
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 8 ====
132:8 Z.Cai et al.
a real image Iand its class label c(that indicates a user’s identity) as inputs to synthesize a face
image.ThreediscriminatorsinthisVGANmodelaredesignedwithdifferentfunctionalities:(i) D1
isusedforimagequality(i.e.,thesynthesizedfaceimagesshouldbesimilartotherealones),(ii) D2
isemployedtoidentityrecognition(i.e.,theidentityofthesyntheticimageshouldbedetermined
incorrectly by the person identifier); and (iii) D3is exploited for expression recognition (i.e., the
facialexpressioninthesynthesizeddatashouldbeguaranteed).Duringthetrainingprocess,three
parameters are set to control the weights of image quality, identity recognition, and expression
recognition so that a balance between privacy and utility can be achieved in the synthesized im-
ages. In addition, to generate identity-preserving face images, Yang et al. [ 148]a l s od e v e l o p e da
targetedidentity-protectioniterativemethod(TIP-IM)usingGANtogenerateadversarialidentity
masksforfaceimagestoalleviatetheidentityleakageoffaceimageswithoutsacrificingthevisual
qualityof theseface images.
Multi-view identity-preserving face image synthesis ( i.e., 3D identity-preserving face image
generation) has also been studied by Cao et al. [ 18]. They proposed a DCGAN-based approach to
producerealistic3Dphotoswhilepreservingidentityofmulti-viewresults,inwhichafacenormal-
izer and an editor are set as the generators to synthesize the 3D photos, and their corresponding
discriminators are used to ensure similarity between the synthesized data and the real data. This
proposed method was demonstrated to dramatically improve the pose-invariant face recognition
andgeneratemulti-view faceimages whilepreventingtheleakageof individuals’ identification.
As is well known, real-world recognition systems depend on high-resolution images, which
can be used to infer users’ identities and biometric information like age, gender, race and health
condition through a soft biometric classifier. Mirjalili et al. [ 88] proposed a model based on AC-
GAN[95]tohidethegenderinformationinimagesforprivacyprotection.Intheirwork[ 88],Au-
toencoder [ 80] is used as the generator, which is the state-of-the-art method of image generation.
Thediscriminatorconsistsofa0–1classifiermakingtheperturbedimages tobereal-likefaceim-
ages,anauxiliarygenderclassifierensuringthatthegenderattributeoffaceimagesisconfounded,
anda facematchermitigating theimpactontheperformanceof otherbiometricrecognition.
BasedoncGAN,Wuetal.[ 136]designedamodel,called Privacy-Protective-GAN(PP-GAN) ,
to preserve soft-biometric attributes during the generation of realistic face with identification.
ComparedwithACGAN,PP-GANaimsathidingmoresoft-biometricattributesinsteadofgender
information. Moreover, Mirjalili et al. [ 89] proposed a multi-attribute face privacy model, Priva-
cyNet,basedonGANtoprovidecontrollablesoft-biometricprivacyprotection.PrivacyNetallows
ustomodifyaninputfaceimagetoobfuscatetargetedsoft-biometricattributeswhilemaintaining
therecognitioncapabilityon thegeneratedfaceimages.
3.1.2 MedicalImages. Today,medicaldatahasbeenwidelyappliedtomedicalresearchbutpos-
siblysuffersfromtheleakageofindividuals’identificationinmedicalimageanalysis.Tosolvethis
issue, an adversarial training framework of identity-obfuscated segmentation has been proposed
by Kim et al. [ 58]. Their novel DCGAN-based architecture contains three entities: (i) a deep en-
coder network used as the generator to remove identity features of medical images with the help
ofadditionalnoise,(ii)a0–1classifierusedasadiscriminatortoguaranteesimilaritybetweenthe
encoded images and the original images, and (iii) a CNN-based medical image analysis network
used as another discriminator to analyze image segmentation content. This design integrates an
encoder,a0–1classifier,andasegmentationanalysisnetworktoprotectmedicaldataprivacyand
simultaneouslymaintainmedical image segmentation performance.
3.1.3 Street-View Images. Street-view services, such as Google Street View and Bing Maps
Streetside, typically serve users through collecting millions of images, which some individuals
oftenrefuseduetoseriousprivacyconcerns[ 65].Uittenbogaardetal.[ 129]designedamulti-view
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 9 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:9
GANmodelbasedonDCGAN,wherethegeneratorisusedtodetect,remove,andpaintinmoving
objectsbyusingmulti-viewimagery,andthediscriminatorisusedtomakethegeneratedimages
photorealistic. With these settings, the multi-view GAN removes private regions and is able to
retaintheutilityofthesynthesizedstreet-viewimages.Similarly,Lietal.[73]proposedthePicPri-
vacymodel[ 73]tosegmentanderasesensitiveinformation,suchashumanportraits,fromstreet-
viewimageswhilerepairingblankregionsbasedonGANtomaintaintheperformanceof3Dcon-
struction.Inaddition,todefendagainstlocationinferenceattacksonvehicularcameradata,Xiong
etal.[140,141]proposedthree Auto-DrivingGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(ADGAN) mod-
elsbasedonDCGANtogenerateprivacy-preservingvehicularimagesandvideosforautonomous
vehicles. The core idea of their three methods is to prevent the location-related background in-
formation in images/videos from being identified by attackers and maintain data utility simulta-
neously. The generator takes original data as input and outputs the privacy-preserving data, and
multiple discriminators are constructed following the convolutional 0–1 classifier structure with
different filter sizes to distinguish real/fake data more efficiently. Additionally, for the trade-off
between privacy and utility, customized privacy loss and utility loss are calculated through the
difference between the original data and the generated data. To improve model performance and
data quality, an extra target model was added in the work of Xiong et al. [ 140] to provide more
accuratefeedbackondata generation.
3.1.4 Image Stegangraphy. With the widespread Internet of Things (IoT) applications in re-
cent years, the risk of privacy leakage has increased. Traditionally, steganography is a critical
method to find the trade-off between personal privacy disclosure and covert communication. A
new steganography algorithm is developed based on image-to-image translation using a cyclic
DCGANframework,where G1isasteganographymoduletransferringdatafrom x1-domainto x2-
domain,and G2isanothersteganographymoduletransferringdatafrom x2-domainto x1-domain.
These two steganography modules are used as two generators in Steganography-CycleGAN so
that the stego images generated by the proposed method will be close to the cover images. Two
discriminators Dx2andDx1ar eusedtom akesur ethatnotonl ythesteg oim ag esfr om x1-domain
tox2-domain but also the stego images from x2-domain to x1-domain are similar to the real ones.
Inaddition,toresistdetectionbythesteganalysismodule,onesteganalysismodule DSisdeployed
to realize the concealment and security in transmission by an adversarial training. Similarly, Shu
et al. [115] applied GAN to successfully achieve the encrypted rich-data steganography during
transmissionin wirelessnetworks.
3.1.5 ImageAnonymization. Protectingindividuals’dataprivacyisanessentialtaskforpublic
data collection and publication. In the work of Kim and Yang [ 62], a privacy-preserving adversar-
ial protector network (PPAPNet) was designed as a DCGAN-based anonymization method that
converts a sensitive image into a high-quality and attack-immune synthetic image. Under PPAP-
Net, the generator is initialized as a protector with pre-trained Autoencoder, the discriminator
is the WGAN [ 43] critic with a gradient to guide the protector to generate realistic images that
candefendmodelinversionattacks,andanoiseamplifierinsidetheprotectorplaysavitalrolein
noise optimization for effective image anonymization. Similarly, Lee et al. [ 68] implemented face
anonymization on the drone patrol systems to hide the sensitive information in face images by
convertingasensitiveimage intoanothersyntheticimage basedonDCGAN.
3.1.6 Image Encoding. A formula was established for learning an encoding function based on
DCGAN in the work of Pittaluga et al. [ 98]. The encoder is trained to prevent privacy inference
and maintain the utility of predicting non-private attributes. In this adversarial framework, the
generator is an encoding function that outputs limited information of private attributes while
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 10 ====
132:10 Z.Cai et al.
preserving non-private attributes, and the discriminators are neural network–based estimators
for privacy protection. Similarly, other works [ 27,94,147] attempted to learn representations or
dimension-reduced features from raw data based on DCGAN, in which the desired variables are
maintainedforutilityrepresentations,andthesensitivevariablesarehiddenforprivacyprotection.
Especially, these representations encoded from users’ data can exhibit the predictive ability and
protectprivacy.
3.2 Video Data Privacy
There is an increasing concern in computer vision devices invading users’ privacy by recording
unwanted videos [ 87,107,134,141]. On the one hand, some previous works that focus on im-
age privacy can be applied to hide sensitive content in videos by simply considering a video as a
sequence of image frames [ 62,147]. On the other hand, videos can also be used to recognize im-
portanteventsandassisthumans’dailylivesbyadvanceddeeplearningmodels,whichdifferfrom
imagerecognitionapplications.Thus,itisexpectedthatinvideos,individuals’privacyshouldnot
be intruded and the efficiency of detecting continuous action should be kept at the same time. A
videofaceanonymizerisbuiltbasedontheDCGANmodelbyRenetal.[ 104],wherethegenerator
isdesignedasamodifierofthefaceinvideos,andtwodiscriminators,includingone0–1classifier
andonefaceclassifier,aredeployed.Specifically,the0–1classifierisappliedforadversarialtrain-
ing, and the face classifier is used for face detection. As a result, the video face anonymizer can
finally hidethefacesbutmaintain theinformationusedfor actionrecognition.
3.3 Textual Data Privacy
To implement privacy protection using GAN for textual data, various schemes for anonymous
textsynthesis[ 74,112]andprivacy-preservingpublic/medicalrecordsrelease[ 23,66,97,123,143]
havebeenproposed.
3.3.1 Texts. NLP[52]enablesauthoridentificationofanonymoustextsbyanalyzingthetexts’
stylisticproperties,whichhasbeenalreadyappliedtodescribeusersbydeterminingtheirprivate
attributeslikeageand/orgender.Shettyetal.[ 112]pr oposedan AuthorAdversarialAttribute
Anonymous Neural Translation (A4NT) with a basis of DCGAN to defend NLP-based adver-
saries. The objective of A4NT is to fool the identity classifier by altering the semantics of the
input text in person while maintaining semantic consistency. To this end, the A4NT network is
designedasastyle-transfernetworkthattransformstextsintoatargetstylebasedon longshort-
term memory (LSTM) [120] and fools the attribute classifier simultaneously. The generator in
anA4NTnetworktransformstheinputtextsfromasourceattributeclasstogeneratethestyleof
adifferentattributeclass.Onediscriminatorusesa0–1classifiertohelpthegeneratorhidetheau-
thor’sidentity,andtheotherdiscriminatormakesthetextsemanticconsistentbyminimizingthe
semanticandlanguageloss.Withasimilaridea,Lietal.[ 74]presentedamethodtolearntextrep-
resentations instead of texts, preserve users’ personal information, and retain text representation
utility.
3.3.2 PublicRecords. Whensharingrecordswithpartnersand/orreleasingrecordstothepub-
lic, traditional approaches perform privacy protection by removing identifiers, altering quasi-
identifiers, and perturbing values. In the work of Park et al. [ 97], the DCGAN architecture with
an auxiliary classifier is exploited to develop a model called AC-DCGAN , where the generator
produces synthetic records to hide sensitive information. Through adversarial training, the auxil-
iary classifier is used to predict synthetic records’ labels such that the records’ identification can-
not be re-identified, and the discriminator is trained to ensure that the synthetic records have
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 11 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:11
similar distributions of real records. Thus, the fake and synthetic records can defend re-
identificationattacks[ 15] whileachievinghigh utility.
3.3.3 Medical Records. Accessing Electronic Health Record (EHR) records data has pro-
moted computational advances in medical research and raised people’s privacy concerns about
their EHR data. Choi et al. [ 23] constructed a Medical Generative Adversarial Network
(medGAN) based on the basic structure of GAN to generate privacy-preserving synthetic pa-
tient records. MedGAN can generate high-dimensional discrete variables, in which an autoen-
coder network is used as the generator to produce the synthetic medical data with the help of
additionalnoise,anda0–1classifierisusedasthediscriminatortoensuredatasimilarity.Asare-
sult,thesyntheticmedicaldataisapplicabletodistributionstatistics,predictivemodeling,medical
expertreview,andothermedicalapplications.Alimitedprivacyriskinbothidentityandattributes
can be achieved using medGAN. Moreover, to improve the performance of privacy protection of
medGAN, the evaluation of privacy-preserving medical records of medGAN was investigated by
Yaleetal.[ 143].CorGANwasdevelopedbyTorfiandFox[ 123]takingintoaccountthecorrelations
of medical records, and a dual-autoencoder was configured as the generator in medGAN to gen-
erate sequential EHRs instead of discrete records for higher predictive accuracy to assist medical
experts[66].
3.4 SpeechData Privacy
The works on privacy-preserving speech data based on GAN mainly focus on two fields: remote
healthmonitoring[ 130] and voiceassistantsin IoTsystems[ 6].
3.4.1 Remote HealthMonitoring. Remote healthmonitoringhasbeenintroducedasa solution
to continuous diagnosis and trace of subjects’ condition with less effort, which can be partially
achieved by passive audio recording technology that may disclose subjects’ privacy. Vatanparvar
et al. [130] designed a GAN-based speech obfuscation mechanism for passive audio recording
whenusingremotehealthmonitoring.Inthisspeechobfuscationmodel,thegeneratorisemployed
to map the audio recording into the distribution of human speech audio and filter the private
backgroundvoice,andthediscriminatorisone0–1classifiertodeterminetheprobabilityofhuman
speechpresencewithintheaudio.Aftertheadversarialtraining,thesyntheticaudiorecordingcan
be obtained to match the human speech distribution for medical diagnosis and avoid the trace of
privateinformation.
3.4.2 Voice Assistance. Voice-enabled interactions provide more human-like experiences in
manypopularIoTsystems.Currently,manyspeechrecognitiontechniquesaredevelopedtooffer
speechanalysisservicesbyextractingusefulinformationfromvoiceinputsasthevoicesignalisa
richresourcecontainingvariousstatesofspeakers,suchasemotionalstates,confidenceandstress
levels, and physical conditions. With the voice signal, service providers can build a very accurate
profile for a user through the voice, which, however, may lead to privacy leakage. In the work of
Aloufi et al. [ 6], a cyclic GAN model was built to translate voice from one domain into another
domain to hide the users’ emotional states in voice, in which the generators are used to do voice
translation,andthediscriminatorsareusedtoforcegeneratorstoproducethesyntheticvoicewith
highquality.Thesyntheticvoicecanstillbesuccessfullyexploitedtoperformspeechrecognition
for voice-controlledIoTserviceswhileresistinginferenceon users’emotionalstates.
3.5 Spatio-TemporalData Privacy
The popularity of edge computing accelerates the emergence and innovation of IoT applications
and services. Since various spatio-temporal data need to be collected from IoT devices (e.g., GPS)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 12 ====
132:12 Z.Cai et al.
Table 1. Comparison of GAN-BasedMechanisms for DataPrivacy Protection
Literature Application Input Output Model DataUtility DataPrivacy
[20] ExpressionRecognition Face Images Synthetic Face Images VGAN ExpressionRecognition Identity
[148] Face Image Synthesis Face Images Synthetic Face Images TIP-IM Face Synthesis Identity
[18] 3DFace Image Synthesis Face Images 3D SyntheticFace Images ADGAN 3DFace Synthesis Identity
[88] Face Recognition Face Images Synthetic Face Images ACGAN Face Recognition Gender
[89,136] Face Recognition Face Images Synthetic Face Images PP-GAN Face Recognition Soft-BiometricAttributes
[58] MedicalImage Analysis MedicalImages SyntheticMedicalImages DCGAN ImageSegmentation Identity
[73,129] StreetImageSynthesis StreetImages InpaintedStreet Images DCGAN StreetImage Synthesis Private Regions
[140,141] AutonomousVehicles CameraData PerturbedCameraData ADGAN CameraDataSynthesis Location
[87,115] ImageSteganography Images SteganographicImages Cyclic DCGAN — –
[62,68] ImageAnonymization Images AnonymizedImages DCGAN — –
[27,94,98,147] ImageEncoding Images ImageRepresentations DCGAN — –
[104] ActionDetection Video Face-AnonymizedVideo DCGAN ActionDetection Face
[112] Text Synthesis Texts SyntheticTexts A4NT Text Synthesis Identity
[74] Text Representation Texts Text Features LSTM-GAN Text Representation Identity
[97] RecordRelease Public Records SyntheticRecords AC-DCGAN RecordSynthesis Identity
[23,123,143] MedicalRecordSharing EHRRecords SyntheticEHR Records MedGAN RecordSynthesis Identity
[130] HealthMonitoring Audio Synthetic Audio Obfuscation Audio Synthesis BackgroundAudio
[6] Voice Assistance Voice Signal SyntheticVoice Cyclic GAN Voice Synthesis EmotionalStates
[105,152] DataSharing Mobile Data Synthetic Mobile Data Perturbation Mobile DataSynthesis Sensitive Information
[101] Location-BasedServices Trajectories SyntheticTrajectories LTSM-TrajGAN TrajectoriesSynthesis Identity
[31,69,70] GraphSharing Graph AnonymizedGraph Perturbation GraphSynthesis Communities
[72] GraphEmbedding Graph GraphRepresentations APGE RepresentationsSynthesis Private Attributes
and the data contains a lot of users’ sensitive information, privacy issues are raised unavoid-
ably[105,152].
In the work of Yin and Yang [ 152], a GAN-based training framework was designed to protect
dataprivacyintworeal-worldmobiledatasets,wherethegeneratoristrainedtolearnthefeatures
ofdataforprivacy-preservingsharing,andthediscriminatorisusedtoguaranteetheutilityofthe
synthesized data. Considering the limited computation capacity of IoT devices, Rezaei et al. [ 105]
created a privacy-preserving perturbation method that can efficiently run on IoT devices by com-
biningadeeplearningnetworkandthebasicstructureofGAN.Theyimplementedonegenerator
toaddnoiseandtwodiscriminativeclassifiers(includingatargetclassifierandasensitiveclassifier)
foradversarialtraining.Moreconcretely,thetargetclassifierattemptstomaintaintheutilityofthe
mobiledata.Thesensitiveclassifiertriestohelphidesensitiveinformationduringthedatagener-
ation process, aiming to find a good trade-off between utility and privacy for mobile data in IoT.
Inlocation-basedservices,theprivacyofspatio-temporaltrajectoriessubmittedfromIoTdevices
wasstudiedbyRaoetal.[ 101].TheauthorsproposedanLTSM-TrajGANmodelbasedonDCGAN
to generate privacy-preserving synthetic trajectory data, in which the generator is based on an
LSTM recurrent neural network trained by minimizing the spatial and temporal similarity loss
and the discriminator is a 0–1 classifier for performing the adversarial training. LTSM-TrajGAN
can produce privacy-preserving synthetic trajectory data to prevent reidentification of users and
preservetheessentialspatial-temporalcharacteristicsof trajectorydata.
3.6 GraphData Privacy
The graph data (e.g., social networks) promotes the research and applications of data mining, but
privacy leakage in graph data is also becoming more serious during data processing and sharing
procedures.Althoughthetraditionalanonymizationmethodsforthegraphdatacanbalancedata
utility and data privacy to some extent, these methods are vulnerable to the state-of-the-art in-
ference approaches using graph neural networks [ 71]. Therefore, more powerful strategies are
desiredtodefend inferenceattacksfor graphdata.
3.6.1 GraphSharing. Fangetal.[ 31]developedaGraphDataAnonymizationusingtheGener-
ativeAdversarialNetwork(GDAGAN)thatexploitstheLSTM-basedgeneratorfordatageneration
andthe0–1classifier-baseddiscriminatorforutilityguarantee.Inaddition,Laplacenoiseisadded
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 13 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:13
into the synthetic graph for perturbation to protect privacy before publishing graph data to the
public.TheideaofanadversarialgraphhasbeenextendedintheworkofLietal.[ 70]toconsider
boththeproblemsofimperceptibledatagenerationandcommunitydetectionforanenhancedpri-
vacyprotection.TheproposedGAN-basedmodelofLietal.[ 70]hasthreecriticalcomponents:(i)
aconstrainedgraphgeneratorbasedonagraphneuralnetworktogenerateanadversarialgraph,
(ii) a 0–1 classifier working as the discriminator to make the synthetic graph real-like for main-
taining utility, and (iii) a community detection model that helps the adversarial graph prevent
community detection attacks. Similarly, the graph feature learning model of Li et al. [ 69] was de-
signed based on GAN to perturb a probability adjacency matrix with the help of Laplace noise in
the graph reconstruction process to obtain an anonymous graph. This reconstructed anonymous
graph maintains the utility of link prediction due to GAN’s good feature learning ability, and can
be used to defend community detection and de-anonymization attack owing to the utilization of
Laplace noise.
3.6.2 Graph Embedding. It is well known that graph embedding is useful to learn low-
dimension feature representations for various prediction tasks. Adversaries can also infer sensi-
tiveinformationfromthesegraphnoderepresentations,resultinginprivacyleakage.Lietal.[ 72]
designed an Adversarial Privacy Graph Embedding (APGE) training framework based GAN
to remove users’ private information from the learned representations of graph data. In APGE,
oneautoencoder-basedgeneratorisusedtolearngraphnoderepresentationswhileimplementing
disentangling, and purging mechanisms. During the process of adversarial training, one 0–1 clas-
sifier is employed to make the synthetic representations real-like, and one non-private attribute
predictionmodelandoneprivateattributepredictionmodelaredesignedtokeepdatautilityand
protectusers’privacy,respectively.
Thecomparisonof surveyedapproachesfordata privacyissummarized in Table 1.
4 PRIVACY OF MODELS
In the previous section, we discussed the works on the privacy issues of various sensitive data. It
is worth noting that privacy can be inferred not only through data but also through the adopted
models,especiallyin MachineLearningasaService(MLaaS) [106].Asanalyzedintheworkof
Fredriksonetal.[ 36],amodel’sprivacybreachesifanadversarycanusethemodel’soutputtoinfer
the private attributes used to train the model. This section will survey how to steal privacy from
thelearningmodelsandhowtoprotectthelearningmodelprivacyusingGAN-basedapproaches.
4.1 MembershipPrivacy
Membership inference attacks can be launched toward a machine learning and/or deep learning
model to determine if a specific data point is in the given model’s training dataset or not [ 114].
Typically, after a model is trained, an attacker feeds data into the model and gets the correspond-
ingpredictionresultsthatcanbeusedasadditionalknowledgetoperformblack-boxmembership
inference attacks. Such an attack will cause privacy leakage and even other severe consequences.
For instance, with a patient’s medical records and a predictive model trained for a disease, an at-
tackercanknowwhetherthepatienthasacertaindiseasebyimplementingmembershipinference
attacks. To defend against such attacks, the techniques of GAN, anonymization, and obfuscation
have beenexploited todesign countermeasures[ 4,29].
4.1.1 Attacks on Membership Privacy. Membership privacy of generative models was studied
f o rt h efi r s tt i m eb yH a y e se ta l .[ 46], in which a model named LOGANwas designed to attack
a generative model through either black-box or white-box via released API in MLaaS. In white-
box attacks, an attacker is assumed to know the target GAN model’s structure and parameter
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 14 ====
132:14 Z.Cai et al.
consisting of a generator and a discriminator. It is known that the discriminator is able to assign
a higher probabilityto a data point that is in the trainingdataset. Accordingly, an attackerinputs
several data points into the discriminator obtaining the corresponding probabilities and selects
thenmost probable data points as the nmembers of the training dataset. For black-box attacks,
membershipprivacycanbeinferredwithoutorwithauxiliaryknowledge.Ifthereisnoauxiliary
knowledge, an attacker uses the generator of the target GAN from query API to produce enough
generateddatalabeledas“real”fortrainingalocalGANsuchthathe/shecangetaparameterized
discriminator. Then, the attacker performs the aforementioned white-box attacks on his/her dis-
criminator to learn membership privacy. If the attacker knows some auxiliary information, such
asthedataonlyfromthetrainingdatasetorthedatafromboththetrainingandtestdatasets,the
attacker’sdiscriminatorcanbebettertrainedandusedinwhile-boxattacksformembershipinfer-
ence. However, there are too many assumptions in black-box attacks, which may be impractical
inrealapplications.
Sumetal.[ 76]proposed“co-membership”attacktowardgenerativemodels.Unliketheprevious
worksthatinferthemembershipofasingledatapointeachtime,theco-membershipattackaims
to simultaneously decide whether n(n≥1) data points are in the training dataset of the target
generativemodel.Theimplementationofco-membershipattackscomesfromtheintuitiveunder-
standingofGAN:ifGANispowerfulenough,itshouldbeabletogenerateanydatafromalatent
vectororreconstructanydatafromitslatentrepresentation.Toaccomplishsuchattacks,aneural
network is trained on the attacker side with the following objective: min γ1
n/summationtextn
iΔ(xi,G(Aγ(xi))),
whereγis a network parameter, Gis the generator of GAN that takes a latent vector zas input
and outputs generated data G(z),a n dAγis the attacker’s network that takes original data xias
input and outputs a low-dimensional vector with a shape same as z. After the training process is
finished,theattackergetsadistance(e.g., L2distance) Δ(xi,G(Aγ(xi)))betweenxiandG(Aγ(xi)).
If the distance is greater than a threshold, the reconstruction of xifromzis not associated with
the original xi,w h i c hm e a n s ximay not be a member of the training dataset; otherwise, xiis a
member of the training dataset. The proposed attack method has some fatal flaws: (i) for a large
training dataset, if the pre-determined value of nis small, the attack accuracy is lower than that
of the traditional membership attacks, and (ii) for each victim model, an attacker needs to train a
different attack network Aγfrom randomly initialized weights. So the attack efficiency is not as
high as expected. In addition, the proposed co-membership attack is a kind of white-box attack
andis impossibleto beusedin ablack-boxscenario.
4.1.2 Protection of Membership Privacy. To prevent membership inference attacks, Nasr
et al. [93] proposed an end-to-end method that trains a machine learning model with member-
ship privacy protection using adversarial regularization based on GAN, which enables a user to
train a privacy-preserving predictive model on the MLaaS platforms (e.g., Google, Amazon, and
Microsoft).Theirproposedmethodcontainstwoparties:anattacker handadefensiveclassifier f.
Theattacker’sprivacygain fromthevictimmodel fisdefinedas follows:
Gf(h)= E
(x,y)∈D(X,Y)[log(h(x,y,f(x)))]+ E
(x,y)∈D/prime(X,Y)[log(1−h(x,y,f(x)))],(10)
where(x,y)is a data point, D(X,Y)is a training dataset, and D/prime(X,Y)is the set of data that is
not inD(X,Y). By maximizing Equation ( 10), an attacker can obtain an accurate prediction on
all data points and know if they are in the training dataset. A defender’s loss function is formu-
lated as min f(LD(f)+λmaxhGf(h)),w h e r eLDis the normal loss when training a classifier (
e.g.,crossentripy),and λisaparametertoadjustthetrade-offbetweenutilityandprivacy.Inthis
method,thedefensiveclassifierhastwoobjectives:(i)minimizingthenormallossfunctionof fand
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 15 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:15
(ii) reducing the inference gain Gf(h).M o r e o v e r , Gf(h)also works as a regularization term con-
trolled by λ, improving the generalization capability of classifier f. The min-max optimization
cantrainaprivateclassifiereveniftheattackerhasthestrongestinferencegain.Nevertheless,the
proposedmethodhasitsdisadvantages.Asshownintheexperiments,thetrainedclassifier’sclassi-
fication accuracy is decreased by around 3% compared with the classifiers without an adversarial
regularization term. Another flaw is that the training process of the proposed method requires
much data as a reference dataset. In practice, it is hard to obtain so much data with the same
distribution as the data given by users in MLaaS, which lowers the applicability of the proposed
method.
Wuetal.[ 135]investigatedthegeneralizationabilityofGANfromanovelperspectiveofprivacy
protection. They theoretically analyzed the connection between the generalization gap and the
membershipprivacyforaseriesofGANmodels.Motivatedbyawell-knownintuition[ 150],“the
smallerthegeneralizationgapis,thelessinformationofthetrainingdatasetwillberevealed,”they
linkedthestability-basedtheoryanddifferentialprivacy[ 29],whichillustratesthatadifferentially
private training mechanism not only reduces the membership privacy leakage but also improves
thegeneralization capabilityof themodel.
4.2 Preimage Privacy
Some other attacks (e.g., model inversion attacks [ 35] and data reconstruction attacks [ 34]) move
onemorestepandcancausemoreseriousdamagetomachinelearningmodels.Inmodelinversion
attacks, given a target model fand a label yt, the purpose of an attacker is to retrieve the input
xof the target model fsuch that f(x)=yt. Similarly, in data reconstruction attacks, an attacker
focuses on recovering the raw data in the training dataset of a given model fwith the help of
additional information. The objective of these two types of attacks is to find private information
of input data of learning models, for which we propose a new term called preimage privacy to
depictmodelinversionattacksanddata reconstructionattacks.
4.2.1 Attacks on Preimage Privacy. Model inversion attacks have been successfully conducted
as a severe threat under the white-box setting, whereas for the black-box scenario, there are no
impressive works before the birth of GAN. In the work of Aïvodji et al. [ 3], a model inversion
attack framework was built under the black-box setting. Given a target model fand a label yt,
an attacker aims at characterizing data xtbelonging to yt. To achieve the goal, an attacker trains
a GAN framework using adaptive loss in BEGAN [ 13], where the generator Gworks as a data
inverter(i.e., G:z→x),andthediscriminator Disreplacedbyaneuralnetworkclassifiertaking
xas input and predicting a label yas output. Since there is no real data, a randomly sampled
datasetXD∼N(0,1)isusedforself-adaptiveupdatingbasedonBEGAN.Thetrainingprocessof
an attackisexpressedasfollows:
min
GH(f(G(z)),yt), (11)
min
DH(D(XD),f(XD))−ktH(D(G(z)),f(G(z))). (12)
In Equation ( 11) and Equation ( 12),Hdenotes the cross-entropy loss, and ktis a parameter of
self-adaptiveupdating.Thisattackmethodcanefficientlyattacktheblack-boxmodeleventhough
the model is trained with a differential privacy mechanism, providing much inspiration to future
research.Butthismethodhasanessentialflawthatiscommonforallblack-boxattacks:anattacker
has to issue lots of queries to get a predicted label of input data as auxiliary training information,
bringingahugecost.Forexample,inthiswork,1,280,000queriesareneededtoachievethedesired
attackperformance.Suchafrequentandintensivequeryoperationmaybedetectedbythetarget
modeleasily.Thus,thereshouldbesome otherways toimprove theattackmethod.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 16 ====
132:16 Z.Cai et al.
Moreover,when a target model (e.g., a neuralnetwork) has high-dimension input, it is difficult
toobtainanoptimalsolutiononlywiththegivenlabel yfortheattackmodel,makingtheresulted
xlike a random noise in high-dimension space. Thus, the results of GAN-based model inversion
attacksusuallylead to unrecognizablerepresentationsthatarenot usefultoattackersin reality.
T oa d d r e s st h i sp r o b l e m ,B a s ue ta l .[ 11] proposed another white-box attack method, where an
attacker is able to access the target model and know the domain information of the target model
(e.g.,thetargetmodelistrainedonahumanfaceoropticalcharacterrecognition).Withthedomain
information, an attacker can establish a GAN model to search correct representations in a quite
low-dimension spaceby thegenerator G,formulatedin Equation( 13):
ˆz=argmin
zL(f(G(z)),y)+λR(z), (13)
whereLis the loss function of the target model, λis a parameter, and R(·)is a regularization
term.Whenanattackerlearnsthedomaininformation,hecangrabsufficientdatainthatdomain
as the training data from public data sources, such as the Internet. The grabbed data is used as
the real dataset to train a traditional GAN model. After being trained, the generator Gis used in
Equation ( 13) to obtain an optimal low-dimension input z. Essentially, GAN acts as a transmitter
to transfer a high-dimension problem into a low-dimension problem. Then the model inversion
result can be generated with ˆx=G(ˆz)quickly. This method’s attack efficiency is impressive as
shownbytheauthorsand doessolve theproblemof unrecognizedrepresentations.
Later, an improved version of model inversion attacks was developed in the work of Zhang
et al. [157]:Generative Model Inversion (GMI) , which is similar to that in the work of Basu
etal.[11]butmorepowerful.ThemajormeritsofGMIlieintwoaspects:(i)itcanperforminver-
sionattackssuccessfullyevenifthedistributionoftheattacker’spriorinformationisdifferentfrom
thatofthetrainingdataset,and(ii)animprovedobjectivefunctionmakesattackersstronger.The
implementationofGMIhastwophases: publicinformationdistillation andsecretrevelation .Inthe
firstphase,anattackertrainsaWGANmodelonpublicinformationsothatthetrainedgenerator
canbeusedtorecoverrealisticdata.Inthesecondphase,anattackeroptimizesthelatentvector z
(i.e.,theinputofthegenerator)via ˆz=argmin zLprior(z)+λLid(z),whereLprior(z)isusedtope-
nalize unrealistic data, and Lid(z)encourages the generated images to have maximum likelihood
under the target model. Additionally, it has been proved that the more accurate a model is, the
easieritistobeattacked,whichindicatesatrade-offbetweenaccuracyandsecurityvulnerability
fora learningmodel.
4.2.2 Protection of Preimage Privacy. To preserve preimage privacy in the MLaaS scenarios,
GAN-basedmechanismshavebeenutilizedtopreprocessprivatedatabeforethetrainingstage.As
showninFigure 4,theCompressivePrivacyGenerativeAdversarialNetwork(CPGAN) [128]
contains three modules: (i) the generator Gthat is a privatization mechanism for generating
privacy-preservingdata, (ii) the service module Sproviding prediction service with the predicted
labelYasutility,and(iii)theattackermodule Athatisamimicattackeraimingatgettingtherecon-
structed data X/primeusingZ. More specifically, producing ZinGrequires that the prediction service
S(Z)shouldperformwellandthereconstructionerrorof A(Z)shouldbelargeeveniftheattacker
Aisthestrongest,basedon whichtheobjectiveof CPGAN canbe formulatedby Equation( 14):
max
G[min
ALA(X,A(G(Z)))−λmin
SLS(S(G(X)),Y)]. (14)
CPGAN can defend preimage privacy attacks in MLaaS because the input data of Sdoes not con-
tain any sensitive information. However, the generator Gdirectly accesses sensitive data, which
introduces potential privacy threats to G. Furthermore, the unstable training property of GAN
makestheoptimizationprocesshardto converge.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 17 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:17
Fig.4. Theframework of CPGAN.
4.3 Privacy in Distributed Learning Systems
As aforementioned, membership privacy andpreimage privacy can be maliciously inferred in an
end-to-end centralized machine learning system [ 8,36] because all sensitive information is held
by a central server that is likely to suffer single point failure. To address this issue, decentral-
izedlearningsystemsbecomepromisingsolutions,inwhichthegeographicallydistributeddatais
trainedbydifferentparticipantslocallywithoutdatasharing.Twomostpopulardistributedlearn-
ingschemesare distributedselectiveSGD(DSSGD) [113]andfederatedlearning[ 85].InDSSGD,
local models only share and exchange a small fraction of parameters through a remote server. In
federated learning, the server aggregates parameters using the submitted locally trained parame-
ters.Bothmethodscantrainaglobalmodelbuiltonaserverwithanaccuracycomparabletothat
in the centralized learning system [ 113]. Although distributed learning can protect data privacy
to someextent asno onecould havea global view of all trainingdata,it isstill far fromperfect.
4.3.1 Privacy Attacks in Distributed Learning Systems. Since the generator of GAN can mimic
datadistribution,awell-designedGAN-basedmodelcanthreatendataprivacyindistributedlearn-
ingscenarios.Besidesmembershipprivacyandpreimageprivacy,morechallengingprivacyissues
shouldbehandledfordistributedlearning.Forexample,attackerscaninvadeaserverorlocalusers
tostealparameters,performingmaliciousattacks.Undersuchsituation,moreprivateinformation
needstobeprotected,e.g.,whichdatabelongstowhichlocaluser,whichuserparticipateinthedis-
tributedtrainingprocess,andhowtoidentify/defendmaliciousserversorlocaluserswhopretend
to betrusted.
The first attack method targeting DSSGD was proposed by Hitaj et al. [ 47] using GAN as an
attacker,inwhichanattackerpretendstobeanhonestlocalmodelwithinthedistributedtraining
system with a goal of recovering sensitive information of a specific label that he does not have.
Without compromising the central server or any local models, the attacker only uses parameters
shared by other models and some common information (i.e., all class labels in a training dataset)
tobuildalocaldynamicGAN.Unlikemodelinversionattacks,theattackercanupdateitsGANin
realtimetoadjustattackperformanceaslongastheentiretrainingisnotstopped.Theattacker’s
key principle is to share a crafted gradient to the central server to push a victim model to upload
more local datainformation.
In distributed learning systems, the central server may be untrusted as well. As studied in the
workofWangetal.[ 133],user-levelprivacyinthedistributedlearningsystemscanberevealedin-
visiblybythemaliciousserverviatrainingamulti-taskGANwithauxiliaryidentification(mGAN-
AI) without affecting system performance. In mGAN-AI, Gis a conditional generator outputting
fakedatawithrandomnoiseanddatalabelasinput,and Disamulti-taskclassifierbuiltfromthe
shared model in the distributed learning systems. When Dis under training, except for the last
layer,thesharedmodelwithadditionalthreeparallelfullyconnectedlayersiscopiedto Dforthe
purposes of data generation, categorization, and identification. To find an optimal solution, Gis
trainedbyminimizingthelossofdatageneration,classification,andvictimidentification,whereas
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 18 ====
132:18 Z.Cai et al.
Distrainedbymaximizingthelossofdatagenerationandvictimidentification.Afterthetraining
process,theattackercanuse Gtogeneratesensitiveinformationofanytargetvictimmodel.Inad-
dition,amorepowerfulactiveattackisprovided,inwhichthemaliciousserverallocatesanisolated
model to a victim model without sharing any model. In this case, Din the attacker’s GAN model
is exactly the same as the model uploaded by the victim. As a result, the attacker can reconstruct
Gto produce more accurate data without influence on other local models. But this active model
actuallyaffectstheprotocolofdistributedlearninganddecreaseslearningperformancecompared
withoriginalattacks.Moreover,thereisaverystrongassumption:theserverhasaglobaldataset.
Ifthisis true,thereisno needtouseGAN for attackimplementation.
4.3.2 PrivacyProtectioninDistributedLearningSystems. Privacyprotectionindistributedlearn-
ingsystemsalsodeservesourattention.Yanetal.[ 144]designedaprotectionmechanismagainst
two different attack behaviors, including stealing user information and attacking server parame-
ters. In their protection mechanism, except for the attacker, every local model is embedded with
an additional layer called the buried point layer and all of its weights are set to be 0. When an
attacker starts to attack, for the sake of an unknown buried point layer, the parameters uploaded
to the server should be different from harmless local models. At the server, a detection module is
used to detect abnormal changes. If the attacker uploads parameters to the server, the detection
module immediately discovers the intrusion. When an intrusion is detected for the first time, the
linkbetweentheattackerandtheserverisawaitedforacheck,andwhenanintrusionisdetected
forthesecondtime,theconnectionis blacklisted.
A few current works focus on the extension of GAN to a federated scenario. Due to the con-
straintthatnorawdatacanleaveitslocaldataset,federatedlearningissomehowrestrictedtotrain
classifiers only and thus cannot be used in other important applications, such as data generation
and reinforcement learning, especially on small datasets. The integration of GAN and federated
learning can realize distributed data generation, improving traditional federated learning’s appli-
cability.Generallyspeaking,federatedGAN’sobjectiveistoobtainaglobalgeneratorattheserver
toproducerealisticdatafollowingthedatadistributionoflocalclientswithoutprivacyleakage.In
theworkofHardyetal.[ 45],thegenerateddataandcorrespondingerrorsareexchangedfordata
generationamongageneratorattheserveranddistributeddiscriminatorsatlocalclients.Similar
updatingrulesareadoptedbyYonetanietal.[ 153]fordatagenerationinanon-i.i.d.settingbyas-
signingdifferentweightstolocaldiscriminatorsattheaggregationstage.Rasoulietal.[ 103]built
thefederatedGANinanotherwaythattrainsboththegeneratorandthediscriminatorlocallyon
eachprivatedatasetand employstheserverasa parameteraggregator and distributor.
4.4 Differential Privacy in GAN
According to the analysis in Sections 4.1through4.3and the conclusion of Song et al. [ 116], we
canfindthattherootcauseofprivacyleakageofmodelsisthatmachinelearningmodelsremem-
ber too much. In other words, during the training process of a model, the model parameters are
optimized to fit the underlying training dataset, which implies that the information of training
data (e.g., distribution, features, membership) is embedded into the model parameters. Therefore,
theadversarycan unveilprivateinformation byexploitingthemodelparameters.
So far, two types of solutions have been proposed to overcome this vulnerability in learning
models. The first method is adding a regularization term in a loss function to avoid overfitting
during the training process. The regularization item can improve robustness and generalize a
model to work on the data that the model has never seen. For example, this method can be used
to defend membership inference attack [ 93] as described in Section 4.1.2. The second method is
to add acceptable noise into model parameters to hinder privacy inference attacks. Such type of
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 19 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:19
Table 2. Comparisonof GAN-BasedMechanismsfor ModelPrivacy Protection
Literature Purpose White/BlackBox Scenario GANModel Requirement Model Privacy
[46] Attack Both MLaaS GAN Partial trainingdata Membership
[76] Attack White Centralized GAN Partial trainingdata Membership
[93] Protection – MLaaS GAN+Regularization Large amount ofdata Membership
[135] Protection – Centralized WGAN Large amount ofdata Membership
[3] Attack Black MLaas/Centralized BEGAN Multiplequery+random dataset Preimage
[11] Attack White Centralized GAN Domaininformation Preimage
[157] Attack White Centralized WGAN Public information Preimage
[128] Protection – MLaaS GAN Large amount ofdata Preimage
[47] Attack White Decentralized GAN Target label Data feature
[133] Attack White Decentralized cGAN Maliciousserver User information
[45,103,153] Protection – Decentralized GAN Localtrainingdata Localdata privacy
[2,154] Protection – Centralized GAN k, publicdata Membership
[78,139] Protection – Centralized WGAN DP Data feature
[142,156] Protection – Centralized WGAN Public dataset,DP Data feature
[124] Protection – Centralized cGAN Target labels,DP Membership
[9,126] Protection – Decentralized GAN DP Data feature
[81] Protection – Centralized GAN Newdefined metrics Data feature
obfuscation method (e.g., k-anonymity, l-diversity, t-closeness, and differential privacy) has at-
tracted lots of research interests for privacy protection, especially the combination of differential
privacy [19] and neural networks [ 1]. Notably, recent research [ 135,150] has illustrated the re-
lation between differential privacy and the overfitting problem: introducing differential privacy
noiseinto modelparameterscould reduceoverfitting, therebymitigating privacyleakage.
A c se ta l .[ 2] presented a first-of-its-kind attempt to build private generative models based on
GAN. In their method, GAN is trained to generate unlimited data for data release with a differ-
ential privacy guarantee, which improves the generative model’s performance significantly and
eliminates the constraints of limited data sources. The proposed method divides the whole train-
ing dataset into kdisjoint sub-datasets using the differentially private k-means algorithm and
trainsthelocalgenerativemodelsoneachsub-datasetseparately.IntheworkofYoonetal.[ 154],
a PATE mechanism-based model named PATE-GAN also adopted a dataset dividing strategy. In
PATE-GAN,thereisagenerator G,ateacher Twithkteacherstrainedon kdisjointdatasets,and
astudent S.First,Tistrainedwithpublicdatatodifferentiatereal/fakeasthediscriminator.Then
Tisusedasanoisylabelgeneratortoproduceadifferentiallyprivatedatasetfortrainingstudent
Sthat is the real discriminator. Especially, GandSwork as a couple of networks to generating
realisticdatawithaprivacyguarantee.Thenoticeablethingisthatduringtheadversarialtraining
of GAN,Tis also updated with GandSat each iteration, which is better for the discrimination
capability of T. The training performance of the preceding approaches is dependent on the value
ofk. If an appropriate kis chosen, the training process would be benefited; otherwise, the train-
ingprocesswouldsufferbecauseaninappropriate kispossibletoinduceunevenclusteringanda
large privacy budget. To get rid of the restriction of k,X i ee ta l .[ 139] and Liu et al.[78]p r o po s ed
anothermore straightforwarddifferentially privateGAN model (DPGAN) by carefully adding de-
signed noise into gradients during the training procedure. Based on the training process of GAN,
DPGAN makes several improvements for privacy protection. First, the loss function of WGAN
is adopted to generate better results and resist model collapse, which is crucial for considering
a trade-off between privacy and utility. Then, at the training stage, Gaussian noise is added into
gradient calculation. After that, the updated weights are clipped by an upper bound, which helps
achieveasmallerprivacyloss.Sincethegeneratorhasnowaytoaccesstheoriginaldata,thereis
awasteofprivacybudgetforaddingnoiseonthegenerator.Thus,theprivacylossofDPGANcan
be furtherreduced.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 20 ====
132:20 Z.Cai et al.
Tothisend,Zhangetal.[ 156]andXuetal.[ 142]proposedtwomethodsaddingdifferentialnoise
on the discriminator only. The basic idea of these two methods is too similar, so we review them
heretogether.Atthebeginningoftraining,WGANisusedforpursingstabilityofthetrainingpro-
cess.Duringthetrainingprocedure,thegradientsofthediscriminatorareboundedandperturbed
using the methods of DPGAN [ 139]. However, the generated data has low quality, and the pro-
posed models converge slower than the traditional GAN, resulting in excessive privacy loss. The
followingthreesolutionswereproposedtoimprovedataquality,convergencerate,trainingstabil-
ity,andscalability.First,parametergroupingisacommonschemeusedindifferentialprivacy[ 44].
Abalancebetweenconvergencerateandprivacycostcouldbeachievedbycarefullygroupingthe
trainingparametersandclippingoverdifferentgroups.Second,adaptiveclippingcanenhancethe
data quality of using random clipping. Assume that a public dataset can be used to dynamically
adjust the clipping bounds to achieve faster convergence and stronger privacy protection. Third,
warm starting can save privacy budget for critical iterations, in which a public dataset is used to
initializethemodelswithagoodstartingpoint.Thiswork’sshortageisthattheassumptionofan
available public dataset is too strong in such a private data release scenario. Until now, all of the
generative models with differential privacy focused on unlabeled data, and the work on labeled
datahadnot beenaddressed.
Triastcyn and Faltings [ 124] developed a cGAN-based framework for the generation of labeled
data.Theproposedframeworkcanachievedifferentialprivacyforboththegeneratorandthedis-
criminatorbyonlyinjectingnoiseintothediscriminator.Thisframework’sadvantageisthatwith
the class label as auxiliary information in cGAN, the quality of generated data is extremely high
withalowprivacyloss.However,sincethegenerativemodelobservesthelabelinformation,more
information may be leaked to attackers when the model is published. As a result, this framework
might only beableto preventmembershipinferenceattacksbutfailtoprotectpreimage privacy.
As discussed in Section 4.3, for the distributed GAN, the privacy of generators in federated set-
ting also needs to be protected because the physical separation of data is not enough. More anal-
ysisofdifferentialprivacyintheprivatefederatedGANmodelswaspresentedelsewhere[ 9,126],
where the authors proposed to add differential privacy during the training process of local GAN
models. Thenoise mechanisms also utilize clippingand noisy gradients,which is similar to other
methods [ 139,142,156]. To achieve a better trade-off between utility and privacy, a relaxed ex-
pected privacy loss is adopted by Triastcyn and Faltings [ 126], whereas the work of Augenstein
et al. [9] utilizes the original Moments Accountant strategy. In a nutshell, differential privacy is a
classic standard for privacy protection and an efficient approach for preserving the membership
and preimage privacy of GAN. But the protection efficacy of differential privacy is greatly deter-
mined bythenoisescale,whichmay introduceutilityloss andneedsmore researchendeavors.
Not stopping here, a study performed by Lu et al. [ 81] pointed out that even though there had
been much research on private data release by generative models, the adopted quality metrics
are not quite suitable. For example, adopting differential privacy may impair data utility more or
less.Thus,theusers(e.g.,companies)oftendonotadoptthestrictprivacyguaranteeinacademic
areas.Instead,theyonlyrequiretheprivacylevelofsomemechanismstobeslightlybetterthanthe
governmentregulationevenintheboundaryoflaw.Forthoseusers,amorepracticalmeasurement
could be considered. In the work of Lu et al. [ 81], the experiments were set up to evaluate new
definedmetricsinadditiontotheprivacybudgetofdifferentialprivacy,suchashittingrate,record
linkage, and Euclidean distance. The extensive experiments demonstrate that for formal privacy
definition(i.e.,differentialprivacy),eventhoughitachievesstrictprivacyprotection,itlosesmore
datautility.Forindustrialandcommercialapplications,informalprivacyguarantees,suchasGAN-
basedmethods,canmeet privacyrequirementsand havebetterdata utility.
WecomparetheprecedingreviewedmethodsinTable 2fromdifferentperspectives.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 21 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:21
5 SECURITYWITH GAN
Besides privacy issues, a variety of security issues also exist in GAN. In this section, the research
findingsonsecurityforGANareintroducedfromtheaspectsofmodelrobustness,malware,fraud
detection,vehiclesecurity,industryprotocol,andsoon,andacomparisonispresentedinTable 3.
5.1 ModelRobustness
For machine learning models, one of the most severe secure threats is adversarial sample attack.
LetXbethefeaturespaceofdataand Ybetheclassspace.Supposefortheoriginaldata x∈X,its
ground-truthlabelis y∈Y.Foragivenclassifier f:X→Y,anadversarialexampleattackintends
tomanipulateasample x/primethroughunperceptivemodificationtomisleadclassification,whichcan
be mathematicallyformulated asthefollowing optimizationproblem:
minL(x/prime,x), (15a)
s.t.f(x/prime)/nequalf(x)=y. (15b)
Equation ( 15a) implies the objective of minimizing the distance, L(x/prime,x), between the adversar-
ial data and the original data, where L(·,·)is a pre-defined distance metric (e.g., L2norm). Equa-
tion (15b) indicates the incorrect classification result on the adversarial data. There are two kinds
ofadversarialattacks:non-targetedandtargeted.Non-targetedattacksonlyrequire f(x/prime)/nequalf(x),
andtargetedattacksexpect f(x/prime)=yt/nequalf(x)withyt∈Ybeingatargetlabelpre-determinedby
an attacker.
5.1.1 AdversarialSampleAttacks. Therehavebeenmanyworksontargetedattacks[ 92,96]and
non-targetedattacks[ 41,138]basedontraditionaloptimizationmethods.BalujaandFischer[ 10],
for the first time, generated targeted adversarial samples using GAN to attack machine learning
models. Unlike previous works that produce adversarial samples by optimizing a noise δadded
into the original data x, the idea of Baluja and Fischer [ 10] is to train a neural network to obtain
an adversarial sample x/primedirectly from the original data x. Such an adversarial generator aims to
simultaneouslyminimizethedistancelossinthefeaturespaceandtheclassificationlossinthepre-
dictionspace.Particularly,intheimplementationoftargetedattacks,anattackerhiresareranking
functiontoresorttothepredictedlabelssuchthatthetargetlabelhasamaximumprobabilityand
the other labels maintain their original order. Compared with the traditional optimization-based
methods,thisgenerativeattackmechanismisextremelyfastandefficientoncetheneuralnetwork
has been trained. However, this attack mechanism is model dependent, which means that it does
not performwellintheblack-boxscenarioandlackstransferability.
To deal with the preceding weakness, Zhao et al. [ 158] suggested using a GAN-based model
plusadatainvertertoenhanceattackcapability.TheyadoptedWGANtogeneratevividdatafrom
random noise z∼N(0,1)and used the dense representation zto produce realistic adversarial
samples, in which a data inverter Iwas designed to map normal data to the corresponding dense
representations z∼N(0,1). With the help of this inverter I, any normal data can be transferred
intoitscorrespondingrepresentation I(x)usedasinputtoproduceanadversarialdenserepresen-
tation˜zfor sample generation in WGAN. The workflow of this attack is briefly summarized in
Figure5.
In the work of Xiao et al. [ 137], a target classifier model was seamlessly integrated into GAN
to train a stronger attacker in the black-box scenario. The proposed model aims at minimiz-
ing the target prediction loss, normal form of GAN loss, and the noise scale simultaneously.
When performing a black-box attack, the whole network is updated to obtain a strong clas-
sifierfvia two steps: (i) fix the target classifier and update the generator and the discrimi-
nator in GAN according to the objective, and (ii) fix GAN and update the classifier satisfying
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 22 ====
132:22 Z.Cai et al.
Fig. 5. The structureof aGANinverter.
argmin fExH(f(x),b(x))+H(f(x+G(x)),b(x+G(x))),wherebisthetargetblack-boxclassifier,
fis a shadow model built from observation of b,a n dH(·,·)is the cross-entropy function. After
the training process, the generator in GAN can be used to produce adversarial sample x+G(x).
Since the attack model is dynamically trained based on the target classifier’s changes, the attack
capabilityis enhanced,andtheattacksuccessrateisincreased.
Unlikethepreviousattackmethodsrequiringsmalladversarialnoiseforaccuratehumanpercep-
tionandclassification,anunrestrictedadversarialattackmethodwasproposedbySongetal.[ 117]
to mislead the victim classifier to the target label ytusing a modified ACGAN model of Odena
et al. [95]. In the beginning, a generator G(z,y)is trained to generate synthetic labeled data from
random noise zand data label y. To generate the adversarial samples with target label yt,a na t -
tackertriestooptimize zto˜zuntilf(G(˜z,y))=yt,wherefisagivenvictimclassifier.Thisattack
isachievedbytwooptimizationproceduresinACGAN:(i)forthevictimclassifier f,minimizethe
loss between f(G(˜z,y))andyt, and (ii) for the additional classifier C, minimize the loss between
C(G(˜z,y))andy.Theadvantageofthisattackisthatitcangeneratenumerousadversarialsamples
thatcould beeven different fromtheoriginaldatawithoutbeingdetectedbya human.
Similar to Odena et al. [ 95], Wang et al. [ 132] designed an AT-GAN model using a pre-trained
generator GandACGANtotransfer GtoGattackthatcanbeusedtoproduceadversarialsamples
directly. In the beginning, an attacker trains G(z,y)to mimic real data distribution with ACGAN.
Based on the training results of G(z,y), the attacker slightly modifies G(z,y)toGattack(z,y)by
minimizing/bardblGattack(z,y)−G(z,y)/bardblsuchthat Gattack(z,y)canproducedatawiththetargetlabel
yt, where the prediction loss, L(f(G(z,y)),yt), and the distance loss, /bardblGattack(z,y)−G(z,y)/bardbl,
are taken into account for simultaneous minimization. For the desired adversarial samples, the
prediction loss assures the modified samples can be classified to the target class, and the distance
losscontrolsperturbationmagnitude betweenrealand fakedata.
However,asagenerativemodel,GANitselfalsofacesthedangerofbeingattacked.Inthework
of Kos et al. [ 63], a framework was given to show how to design adversarial samples to attack
generative models, such as GAN and VAE. Apart from the original adversarial samples in classi-
fication models, an adversarial sample x/primein the generative model is achieved by minimizing the
distanceL(x/prime,x)such that f(G(x/prime))=yt/nequalf(G(x)).To realize the attack purpose, the entire loss
function, λL(x,x/prime)+H(f(G(x/prime)),yt), should be minimized, in which L(·,·)controls the distance
betweenxandx/prime,andH(·,·)compelsG(x/prime)tobeclassifiedtothe ytclass.Thisisthefirstworkto
design an attack model for the generative models. However, the proposed attack model can only
handle white-box attack implementation, making it infeasible to perform attacks without prior
knowledge.
5.1.2 Adversarial Sample Defense. The existing strategies against adversarial sample attacks
can be briefly classified into three categories: denoising, adversarial training, and detection. The
GAN-baseddefensemethodswillbesummarized from theprecedingcategories.
The first denoising method based on GAN was designed by Shen et al. [ 111] with the funda-
mental idea that the generator can take adversarial samples to output normal data. Accordingly,
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 23 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:23
aconditionalGANstructurewasestablished,wherethegenerator G(x/prime)takesadversarialsample
x/primeas training data and learns the normal data distribution with G(x/prime)=x. In other words, the
distribution of the generated data should be the same as that of the real data to make the output
become clean data. In this GAN framework, the loss function of the discriminator is the same as
that in the original GAN, whereas the generator’s goal consists of a distance loss that constraints
thedistancebetween xandG(x/prime)tobesmallandanadversariallossthatrequires D(G(x/prime))tohave
ahigherscore.AsimilarideawasexploitedbySamangoueietal.[ 108]todevelopa“Defense-GAN”
frameworkthatde-noisesadversarialsamplestoobtainnormalsamplesthroughthegeneratorof
GAN.Theslightdifferenceisthatintheirwork[ 108],thedenoisinggeneratoristrainedonclean
datafromnoise ztominimizethedistancebetweeninputdataandgenerateddata.Aftertheopti-
mizedz∗is obtained, a reconstructed data G(z∗)is fed into fexpecting that the output f(G(z∗))
is the same as normal data. The denoising method can be used in conjunction with any classifier
anddoesnotneedtomodifytheclassifierstructure.Thus,itwillnotdecreasetheperformanceof
thetrainedmodel.Inaddition,itisindependentofanyattackmethod,whichmeansthatitcanbe
usedas adefenseagainst anyattack.
Totackletheissueofinsufficientadversarialdatainadversarialtraining,agenerativeadversarial
training method was proposed by using GAN [ 67]. In this method, the generator G(∇)takes the
gradient∇ofnormaldata xasinputandoutputsadversarialnoisetoperturb x.Thelossfunctionof
GisLG(∇,y)=H(f(x+G(∇)),y)+λ/bardblG(∇)/bardbl2,whereH(f(x+G(∇)),y)encouragesthegenerated
datax+G(∇)to be classified correctly by the classifier f,a n dλ/bardblG(∇)/bardbl2requests the generated
noiseG(∇)to be small and imperceptible. The desired classifier fwas configured as a GAN’s
discriminator to reduce the classification loss for both the normal data and the generated data.
Thelossfunctionoftheclassifier fisLf=αH(f(x),y)+(1−α)H(f(x+G(∇)),y),whereH(·,·)is
definedascrossentropy.ThisarticlepresentsthefirstworktoapplyGANtoadversarialtraining
andprovidesarobustclassifiersothatenoughadversarialdatacanbeusedtoenhancethedesired
model’s regularization power effectively. It is worth pointing out that the proposed method is
modeldependentandcanonlyworkonsomespecificmodelsduetotheclassifier f’sinvolvement
in theadversarialtraining.
AnimprovementhasbeenmadebyLiuetal.[ 75],whoproposedamodel-independentmethod
namedGanDefthatcanbeadefenseformanydifferentclassifiers.Accordingtotheiranalysis,the
misclassification of deep models is caused before the soft-max layer. The input of soft-max layer
would be different from adversarial samples and normal samples through forward propagation,
which explains why the final output of deep models is different. Moreover, the normal samples
hold a property of “invariant features”; in other words, if a set of data is classified into correct
classes, the input of soft-max should follow the same distribution. The failure of classification on
theadversarialsamplesindicatesthattheadversarialsamplesandthenormalsamplesdonothave
the same invariant features. Thus, for correct classification, a classifier and a discriminator are
deployed in a GAN framework to modify adversarial samples such that their invariant features
arethesameasnormaldata.FollowingthetrainingprocessoftheoriginalGAN,theclassifierand
the discriminator are iteratively updated. Finally, the classifier is supposed to have the ability to
make the adversarial sample’s invariant features similar to (ideally, even the same as) the normal
samples. Thus, any data can be processed before the soft-max layer with this mechanism and get
thecorrectprediction.
5.2 MalwareDetection
Hu and Tan [ 49] developed MalGAN to generate adversarial malware examples, where GAN was
employed as a binary malware feature generator to attack a malware detector. The malware only
extracts the program output of detection with the assumption that the attacker only knows the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 24 ====
132:24 Z.Cai et al.
detector’s features without the machine learning algorithm the detector uses and the parameters
of the trained model. As the trained model details are unkown, a substituted detector is used to
fit the black-box detector and provide gradient information. The adopted substituted detector’s
training data has two parts: the set of adversarial malware examples from the generator of GAN
andthesetof examples froman additionalbenign dataset.
In the work of Shahpasand et al. [ 110], GAN was applied for detecting Android malware. The
detection focuses on black-box attacks, where attackers cannot access the inner details of the
network (including network architecture and parameters) but can get the classifier’s output and
alter the malware codes based on detection results. Generally, given a malware xwith the true
labelf(x)=1, the attacker aims to avoiding malware detection via generating an adversarial
versionx/prime=x+δsuch that f(x/prime)=0, where f(·)is a malware detector. The loss function
includes the similarity between the generated and the benign samples (denoted by LGAN)a n d
misclassification rate of the adversarial malware samples (denoted by Ladv .Mal), which can be
mathematicallyexpressedas L=αLGAN+(1−α)Ladv .Mal,whereLGANrepresentsdiscriminative
loss of GAN on real and fake data and Ladv .Mal=lf(x+G(z),0)is supposed that an adversarial
samplecanbypassthetargetedclassifier fbymanipulatingitselfas abenign class.
Furthermore, GAN can be utilized for analyzing Linux and Windows malware. Kargaard
et al. [55] brought GAN to the analysis of malware detection, where the malware binaries are
converted to images for training in GAN. In particular, the malware is collected via a honeypots
system and contains WannaCry ransomware, Linux SMB trojan, and MySQL Trojan, and so on.
All of the malware binary files are converted to greyscale images with a size of 32 ×32 for pro-
cessing.Taherietal.[ 121]proposedusingfederatedGANtodefendattackandenablethedevices
tocommunicatewitheachotherefficientlyandsecurely.Asillustratedinthiswork,theproposed
methodismuch moreeffective andreliable thanthepreviousmethods.
Among various malware, zero-day malware is outstandingly difficult to be detected because it
cannot be removed by antivirus systems that mainly use the characteristics of stored malware
fordetection.Kimetal.[ 60,61]proposedatransferreddeep-convolutionalgenerativeadversarial
network(tDCGAN)thatappliesadeepAutoencodertolearnmalwarecharacteristicsandtransfers
the characteristics to train the generator of GAN. The architecture of tDCGAN has three parts:
(i) data compression and reconstruction, in which preprocessed data is input to compress and
reconstruct the malware data; (ii) fake malware generation, in which deep Autoencoder is used
to reconstruct malware data and the decoder is transferred to the generator of GAN; and (iii)
malware detection, in which the generator is given the probability distribution to produce fake
malware.Thenthediscriminatorof GAN istransferredto themalware detector.
5.3 Bioinformatic-Based Recognition
Bio-information (e.g., fingerprints and iris) recognition systems have been widely deployed in
many areas, such as banking, criminal investigation, and national security. However, the bio-
information gathering process is expensive and time consuming. In addition, due to privacy pro-
tection legislation, publishing a bio-information database is not easy. Fortunately, GAN provides
anovelway to constructbio-informationsystemsfor authentication.
Bontrager et al. [ 14] used GAN to generate synthetic fingerprints for a fingerprint verification
systemidentifyingdifferentpeople.Intheirwork,twomethodsaredesignedbasedonGAN,with
the first one applying evolutionary optimization in the space of latent variables and the second
oneusinggradient-basedsearch.IntheworkofKimetal.[ 59],thefingerprints,namelythemaster
minutiaset,weregeneratedfromatwo-stageGAN.Thetwo-stageGANiscomposedoftwoGANs:
the first GAN is for generally describing fingerprints, and the second GAN uses the outputs from
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 25 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:25
Fig.6. Theframework of adversarialattack networks.Source: http://iprobe.cse.msu.edu/datasets.php.
the first GAN to create fingerprint images. Then the minutiae extracted from the second GAN’s
outputsand a featureextractionalgorithmisusedtodo extraction.
For face recognition, there are also more and more attack methods that generate adversarial
examplestoviolatethedeeplearningbasedfacerecognitionmodels.Zhuetal.[ 162]appliedGAN
to make up adversarial example attack on well-trained face recognition models. The proposed
method consists of two GAN-based sub-networks, including a “makeup transfer sub-network”
that transfers face images from non-makeup domain to makeup domain and an “adversarial at-
tack sub-network” that generates adversarial examples. The configuration of “makeup transfer
sub-network”followsCycleGAN[ 160]asshowninFigure 6(a),inwhich xistherealnon-makeup
input,yistherealmakeupinput,thegenerator GoutputsG(x)toobfuscatethediscriminator Dy,
andthenetwork F:Y→Xgeneratesresultsof non-makeupfacestoobfuscatethediscriminator
Dx. In the “makeup transfer sub-network,” one generator adds makeup effect to non-makeup im-
ages, and the other removes makeup effect while still maintaining the original identity. However,
Dxdistinguishes between the real non-makeup photos and the generated ones, and Dydistin-
guishes between the real makeup photos and the generated ones. The structure of “adversarial
attack sub-networks” is presented in Figure 6(b), where a transformation T(·,·)is input with the
blendoforiginalimage xandthegeneratedoutput G(x)of“makeuptransfersub-network.”Then,
T(x,G(x))servesastheinputofthegenerator H,whichisusedtogenerateimages H(T(x,G(x)))
that can deceive both the target network Aand the discriminator Dh. In the “adversarial attack
sub-networks,”thediscriminator Dhfunctionssimilarlyas Dy,andDyisalsousedasapre-trained
model parametertoinitialize Dh.
In addition, Damer et al. [ 25] proposed MorGAN to launch a realistic morphing attack by con-
sideringtherepresentationloss.MorGANisinspiredbytheideaofadversariallylearnedinference
but uses a VAE instead of simple Autoencoder. By doing so, MorGAN can avoid the possibilities
of non-continuous latent space and further lead to more realistic output from the interpolation
betweenencodedvectors.
5.4 Fraud Detection
Financialfrauddetectionproblems,includingcreditcardfraud,telecomfraud,andinsurancefraud,
and so on, are well known for highly non-linear and complex solutions. The artificial neural net-
work,whichsimulatesinteractingneurons’properties,hasbeensuccessfullyutilizedtosolvesuch
problems.However,inrealapplicationsforfrauddetection,theartificialneuralnetworkfacestwo
problems: (i) the receiving bank cannot get access to detailed information about the sending ac-
counts when the transaction happens between different banks, and (ii) the receiving bank also
cannotobtaincallrecordsof therecipientsof transfersfromthetelecommunicationprovider.
To deal with these problems, in the work of Zheng et al. [ 159], GAN was applied to telecom
fraud detection under the bank receiving scenario, which is also useful for many other anomaly
detection problems when the training dataset is limited. In this work, the authors coupled GAN,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 26 ====
132:26 Z.Cai et al.
Autoencoder, and GMMs for fraud detection. Particularly, the encoder together with a GMM was
usedasthediscriminator,andthedecoderwasusedasthegenerator.Thentheencoderandanother
GMMoutputtheclassificationresults(i.e.,whethera given sample isnormalorfraud).
5.5 Botnet Detection
As one of the most formidable threats to cybersecurity, a botnet is often enrolled in launching
large-scale attack sabotage [ 33]. The network-based detection mainly studies the abnormal char-
acteristics of botnets based on network flows. Some other classic detection approaches are based
ontheextractionandselectionoffeaturesusingstatisticalanalysis,machinelearning,datamining,
andothermethods.However,thesetraditionaldetectionschemeshavetwomainshortcomings.On
the one hand, most of the existing network-based methods for botnet detection are limited to the
packet inspection level and focus on partial characteristics of network flows, which cannot fully
characterize botnets’ abnormal behaviors. On the other hand, botnets keep pace with the times
and take advantage of advanced ideas and technologies to escape detection, raising insurmount-
ablechallengesto thetraditionaldetectionschemes.
The discriminator is essentially a binary classifier that classifies the samples into real or fake
categories. Similarly, the real samples can be further categorized into normal traffic or abnormal
trafficforabotnetdetector.Inspiredbytheseobservations,Yinetal.[ 151]proposedaGAN-based
botnetdetectionframework,whichissuitableforaugmentingtheoriginaldetectionmodel.Intheir
work [151], the discriminator was replaced with a botnet detector, and the corresponding binary
output(i.e.,normalandanomaly)wastransformedintoatripleoutput(i.e.,normal,anomaly,and
fake)fordetectionusingthesoft-maxfunction.
5.6 Network Intrusion Detection
Network environment is very complex and time varying, so it is difficult to use traditional meth-
ods to extract accurate features of intrusion behaviors from the high-dimensional data samples
and process the high-volume data efficiently. Even worse, the network intrusion samples are sub-
merged intomany normaldata packets,leadingto insufficientsamplesfor modeltraining.
Yangetal.[ 146]proposedaDCGAN-basedmethodtoextractfeaturesdirectlyfromtherawdata
andthengeneratednewtrainingdatasetsbylearningfromtherawdata,inwhichLSTM[ 39]was
applied to learn the features of network intrusion behaviors automatically. The generator Gwas
configuredwithCNN,wherethepoolinglayerwasreplacedwiththefractionalstrideconvolutions.
Then, the fully connected layer was removed, ReLU was applied for all layers except the output
layer, and tanh is used at the output layer. In addition, batchnorm was utilized to solve the poor
initializationproblemandpropagateeachlayer’sgradient.Thediscriminatorwasalsoconstructed
usingCNNthatcontainsapoolinglayerwithoutanyfullyconnectedlayer,andLeakyReLUisused
at all layers. Batchnorm was used to propagate the gradient to each layer to avoid the generator
convergingallsamplesto thesame point.
5.7 Vehicle Security
Seo et al. [ 109]p r o p o s e da GAN-based Intrusion Detection System (GIDS) for vehicular net-
works. A Controller Area Network (CAN) bus in the networks is an efficient standard bus en-
ablingcommunicationbetweenallElectronicControlUnits.However,CANitselfisvulnerabledue
tothelackofsecurityfeatures.GIDSaimsatdetectingunknownattacksonCANwithtwodiscrim-
inativemodels.ThefirstdiscriminatorreceivesnormalandabnormalCANimagesextractedfrom
theactualvehicle.Becausethefirstdiscriminatorusesattackdatainthetrainingprocess,thetype
of attacks that can be detected may be limited to the attack used for training. The generator and
theseconddiscriminatoraretrainedsimultaneouslyinanadversarialprocess,wherethegenerator
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 27 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:27
Table3. Comparisonof GAN-BasedMechanisms forSecurity
Literature Purpose White/BlackBox Application GANModel Strategy Target
[10] Attack White Breakrobustness GAN Generatingadversarialsamples Misclassification
[158] Attack Black Breakrobustness WGAN Explore latentspace z Misclassification
[137] Attack Black Breakrobustness GAN+shadowmodel Minimizenoise scale byclassifier Misclassification
[117] Attack White Breakrobustness ACGAN Explore latentspace z Misclassification
[132] Attack Black Breakrobustness ATGAN Perturbnormalgenerator misclassification
[63] Attack White Datageneration VAE-GAN Modifylatentrepresentation Incorrect generation
[108,111] Defense Black Datasanitizing cGAN Usegeneratorto cleanadversarialdata Denoising
[67] Defense White Adversarialtraining GAN Generatingadversarialsamples Enhance classifier
[75] Defense White Datageneration GAN Modifyinvariantfeaturesinadversarialsamples Enhance classifier
[49] Attack Black Malwaredetection GAN Generateadversarialmalwareexamples Invadedetector
[110] Defense Black Malwaredetection GAN Generatenoise formalware Enhance detector
[55] Defense White Malwaredetection GAN Convertmalwareinto greyscale images Enhance detector
[60,61] Attack White Malwaredetection DCGAN Generatemalware Invadedetector
[14,59] Defense White Bioinforecognition GAN Generatefingerprints Bypassverification
[162] Attack White Bioinforecognition CycleGAN Modifyfacewithout changingID Misclassification
[159] Defense White Frauddetection GAN Generatemorefrauddatafortraining Enhancedetector
[151] Attack White Botnetdetection GAN Modifydiscriminatorto adetector Enhance detector
[146,162] Defense White Networkintrusiondetection DCGAN Generatingintrusionbehaviordata DataAugmentation
[50] Defense White Industryprotocols GAN Generatedataforindustrialprotocolfuzzing DataAugmentation
generatesfakeimagesbyusingrandomnoiseandtheseconddiscriminatordetermineswhetherits
inputimagesarerealCANimagesorfakeimagesgeneratedbythegenerator.InGIDS,thesecond
discriminator ultimately beats the generator so that the second discriminator can detect even the
fake images thataresimilar toreal CAN images.
5.8 IndustryProtocols
In industry, people often use fuzz to detect whether the industrial network protocols are secure.
Traditionally,togeneratethefuzzingdataeffectively,theguidanceofprotocolgrammarisapplied
to the generating process, where the grammar is extracted from interpreting the protocol specifi-
cationsand reversingengineeringin networktraces.
TheworkofHuetal.[ 50]employedGANtotrainthegenerationmodelonasetofrealprotocol
messages for industrial network protocol fuzzing. Specifically, in the GAN framework, an RNN
with LSTM cells is used as the generative model, and a CNN was set as the discriminative model.
They used the trained generative model to produce fake messages, based on which an automatic
fuzzingframeworkwasbuilttotestindustrialnetworkprotocols.Theirexperimentsshowedthat
since the proposed framework does not rely on any specified protocols, the proposed framework
outperformsmanypreviousframeworks.Moreover,someerrorsandvulnerabilitieswereidentified
successfullyin ateston severalsimulatorsof theModbus-TCPprotocol.
6 FUTURE WORKS
The survey of the state-of-the-art GAN models displays the innovative contributions of GAN to
solvingtheissuesofprivacyandsecurityinvariousfields.Asapreliminaryattempt,GAN’spoten-
tials have not been fully and deeply explored by the existing GAN-based approaches yet, leaving
manyunsolvedchallengingproblems.Thissectionprovidesacomprehensivediscussiontoaddress
thesechallengesand promisingdirectionsforfutureresearch.
6.1 Future Research onData Privacy
6.1.1 CT Medical Images. In medical image analysis, there exists one work that implements
the GAN-based model on MR images to generate privacy-preserving synthetic medical images
while maintaining segmentation performance. However, in reality, CT images are more widely
used in medical analysis than MR images. To leverage the advantages of GAN to further benefit
medical image analysis in real applications, protecting private information in CT images with a
performanceguaranteewould deserveresearchers’attention.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 28 ====
132:28 Z.Cai et al.
6.1.2 Sequential Records. Although some methods have been proposed to protect public
records’ privacy before collaborative use, they take these records as discrete data for privacy-
preservingprocessing.Theserecordsactuallyareakindofsequentialdataastherelationbetween
two words in a textual sentence is not ignorable. Thus, separating one sentence into words may
causeperformancelossfordatagenerationandprivacyprotection.Inotherwords,itisindispens-
abletotaketheserelationsintoaccountwhengeneratingprivacy-preservingpublicrecords,which
isone promisingresearchdirectionfor theeffectivenessimprovement in practice.
6.1.3 Spatio-Temporal Information in Videos and Speeches. In the prior works on privacy pro-
tectioninvideosandspeeches,thesensitiveinformationishiddenbynoiseaddedviaagenerator
and the data utility is maintained by a discriminator through an adversarial training. A video is
treated as a sequence of image frames for generation, ignoring the spatio-temporal relation be-
tween frames; a speech is only considered as a distribution of voice information, overlooking the
spatio-temporal relation between voice segments. Notably, such spatio-temporal relations can be
exploitedasside-channelinformationtomineindividuals’privateinformation,especiallywiththe
developmentofdeeplearningmodels.Asaresult,thechallengeofincorporatingspatio-temporal
relationsintoprivacyprotectionforvideos andspeechesshouldbeovercome.
6.1.4 UnderstandingSensitiveInformation. Typically,thecurrentGAN-basedmodelsaddnoise
into the synthesized data to hide sensitive information through the generator and demon-
strate the capability of privacy protection through the experimental results of reduced predic-
tion/classification accuracy. However, in these models, it is still unknown what type of sensitive
information is hidden and where the noise is added. This is because the generator is a black-box
functionofdatasynthesis,onlyrelyingonthediscriminator’sfeedbackintheadversarialtraining
process.Such a kind of training mechanism makes the privacy protection inefficient when facing
theprivacydetectorsthatarenottakenintoaccountbythediscriminator(s)inthetrainingprocess.
Therefore,understandingtheprivacy-relatedfeaturesinsourcedatawillbehelpfultostrengthen
privacyprotectionin GAN.
6.1.5 GuaranteeofPrivacyProtection. Whenappliedtoprivacy-preservingdatageneration,all
existing GAN-based methods fail to provide a theoretical guarantee of privacy protection. The
root causeis that the generatoris a black-box function of data synthesis,and its synthesisperfor-
mance is mainly determined by the feedback of the discriminator during the adversarial training
process. What is worse is that the adversarial training is not stable, resulting in the generator’s
unpredictable capabilities and the discriminator. To further promote GAN’ development and ap-
plication,techniquebreakthroughisdesiredtoofferatheoreticalguaranteeofprivacyprotection.
6.1.6 Computation Cost. With the increased popularity of emerging applications, such as IoT
and edge/fog computing, a large amount of user data is shared through connected devices ( e.g.,
mobile phones),resultingin seriousprivacyleakage duringtransmission.To protectdata privacy
in the connected devices timely before transmission, light-weighted GAN models are expected
such that the computation cost (e.g., time and energy) is affordable for these connected devices,
in which balancing the trade-off between computation performance and computation cost is an
unavoidablechallenge.
6.2 Future Research onModel Privacy
6.2.1 GANModelImprovement. FutureworksonmodelprivacyaretightlyrelatedtotheGAN
model’simprovement,whichisamainstreamresearchdirectioninthelearningfieldandwillcon-
tinuetoattractmoreresearchinterest.Forexample,theinvestigationontheconvergencerateand
mode collapse of GAN will definitely enhanceGAN’s efficacy on both attackand defense aspects.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 29 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:29
Increasingtheconvergenceratewouldsavemoretimeandcostfortheattacker,aswellasprovide
a more efficient way to train a defense mechanism. Rectifying the problem of mode collapse in
GANcanyieldastrongergeneratorwithmorerepresentationcapability,whichcaneitherencour-
agetheattackertorecoverdatawithhigherqualitywhenstealingpreimageprivacyorproducea
morepowerfuldenoisingmoduleforbetterdefense.Tounderstandhowtoaccelerateconvergence
and howto avoid mode collapse,conductingfundamentaltheoreticalresearchis essential.
6.2.2 GANinPrivacyAcquisition. UsingGANtoproceedprivacy-relatedattackalwaysfacesa
realistic problem: it requires a lot of real data as prior knowledge for training a well-performed
GANmodel,whichisastrongassumptionandishardtobesatisfiedinpractice.Possiblesolutions
to thisprobleminclude transfer learning andprobably approximately correctlearning .
Transfer learning . In the real world, some private information is not accessible for the public,
butlotsofavailablerelateddatacanbeusedtobridgetoprivacy.Transferlearningisapromising
paradigmtoperformknowledgetransferbetweenpublicdataandprivatedata.Inlightofthisidea,
transferlearningandGANcanbeintegratedtoestablishanapproximateGANmodelthatisvery
closeto theGAN modeltrainedonunknown privatedata.
Probably approximately correct learning . Until now, GAN has been applied to various attack
methods,butthereisnotheoreticalanalysisillustratingwhythesemethodscanworkand/orhow
good they can be. It is probably approximately correct learning to provide a novel way of carry-
ingouttheoreticalanalysisontheprecedingproblems,fillingintheblankintheliterature.Asan
elegant framework, probably approximately correct learning explores the mathematical analysis
of machine learning and computational learning theory. Especially, it can quantitatively analyze
some parameters in learning algorithms, including the approximate correctness, the probability
of getting approximate correctness, the number of sample needed in learning, and so on. Since
noworkhasstudiedprobablyapproximatelycorrectlearninginGAN,therearemanyopenques-
tionsforfurtherinvestigation.Onenovelideaisusingseriestheorytoderivethenecessarycondi-
tions/requirementforlaunchingprivacy-relatedattackwithGAN,whichcouldtellusifitisworth
launchinganattackornot,suchaswhattheminimumsizeofthetrainingdatasetistotrainagood
GAN model with a certain attack success probability, and when there is limited training dataset
locally,whattheupperboundof theattackaccuracyis.
6.2.3 GANinPrivacyProtection. Originally,GANwasbornwithaprivatefeature:modelsepara-
tiontoprotectprivacy.Inotherwords,duringthetrainingprocessofGAN,onlythediscriminator
canaccessdatadirectlywhilethegeneratorisinnocentwithdata.However,withthedevelopment
of different attackmethods,theprivacythreatstoGAN havebeenincreased.
Differential privacy . Differential privacy has been treated as a golden defensive mechanism but
hasitsdefects,suchaslowerdatautilitywhennoiseisaccumulated.Infuturework,investigating
differential privacy deeply for GAN is still an attractive topic, for which some possible directions
are briefly addressed in the following. First, according to the application requirements, different
kindsofdifferentialprivacycouldbeexploredratherthanonlyusing (ϵ,δ)-differentialprivacy.For
example, Renyi-differential privacy and concentrated differential privacy are possible choices. In
theworkofBeaulieu-Jones[ 12],Renyi-differentialprivacywasproposedtoachieveamoretighter
boundonprivacyloss.AspointedbyTriastcynandFaltings[ 125],Bayesiandifferentialprivacyin
federatedlearningisflexibleandcansaveprivacylosssignificantlyforutilitycriticalapplications.
Second,theconvergenceanalysisofGANinadifferentiallyprivatesettingshouldbestudied.Cur-
rentworksmainlyfocusonthefinalresultsoftrainedmodelsandrarelyconsidertheconvergence
issues, leading GAN’s research on an experiment-driven path. In the long term, GAN’s develop-
ment needs the guidance of fundamental theory for accelerated progress in privacy protection.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 30 ====
132:30 Z.Cai et al.
Last but not least, the use of differential privacy should be granulated at an appropriate level for
fine-grained protection, such as for the instance level and the client level. It has been shown in
previouswork[ 47]thatinstance-leveldifferentialprivacyfailstoprotectpreimageprivacy.Thus,
in the design of differentially private GAN, more details should be considered for performance
improvement.
Federatedlearning .Federatedlearning[ 86]canhelprelieveprivacyleakagewhenfacingapow-
erful attack. Since the training data in federated learning is geographically distributed among all
local non-contact clients, single failure issues can be avoided. In addition, integrating federated
learninganddifferentialprivacyisnotahardjob,whichcanfurtherimproveGAN’scapabilityof
privacyprotection.
6.3 Future Research onSecurity in GAN
6.3.1 AdversarialSampleGeneration. TheadversarialsamplesgeneratedbyGANcanbeusedto
eitherlaunchanattackorimplementadefense,whichhasbeenintensivelystudiedsofar. Attack.
It is worth mentioning that the actual attack success rate and training cost of GAN-based attack
methodsarenotasgoodasthoseofthetraditionaloptimization-basedattackmethods.Improving
these two metrics is closely related to GAN’s fundamental research direction (i.e., convergence
andmodecollapse).Thefastertheconvergencerate,thelessisthetrainingcost,andthelowerthe
modecollapseprobability,thehigheristheattacksuccessrate.Anotherreasonforthelowattack
successrateisthelackofdedicatedobjectivefunctions.Amongthegeneratedresultsofatrained
generator,somesamplesarebenignwhilesomeareadversarial.Thisisbecausethespaceofgener-
ativesamplesisamulti-foldspace,whereonlyapartialregionmayhaveadversarialattributes.In
otherwords,eventhoughtherecallofadversarialsamplesishigh,theprecisionofbeingadversar-
ialintheentirespaceisquitesmall.Thus,analyzingthegenerativespacetorestricttheprobability
of adversarial samples falling into the benign region from a mathematic perspective is a problem
worththinkingabout,whichisnon-trivialandrequiresthoroughinvestigation.Inaddition,when
the number of training samples is limited, the generated adversarial examples become worse in
the presence of a pure black-box classifier because black-box provides less useful information for
training GAN. To tackle this problem, as illustrated in Section 6.2.2, probably approximately cor-
rect learning is a promising scheme to measure how much data is needed and/or how good the
attackcan be.
Defense. Among the techniques of adversarial training, detection, and de-noising, adversarial
sample detection might be the most practical approach as it can be deployed in a plug-and-play
mode without involving the trained models. Motivated by this observation, GAN can be used to
detectadversarialsamplesinvariousways.Forexample,wecanconfigure Gasafeaturesqueezer
that transforms data point xto latent space z(i.e.,G(x)=z) and then train the discriminator D
as a binary classifier to check whether the latent vector comes from real data G(x)or adversarial
sampleG(x/prime).Finally,an adversarialsamplecould beeasily detectedthrough D(G(·))operation.
6.3.2 Malware-RelatedResearch. Most of the current malware-related research based on GAN
focusesonAndroidmalwarebecausethesecurityprotectionmechanismisrelativelyconsummate
intheOSlikeWindows,Linux,andMacOS.ThisindicatesthatintheareaofthoseOS,therestillex-
istmanyresearchopportunitiestoovercometheunsolvedchallenges,suchasanalysiscombining
statisticand dynamic parameters,defensive programming, white-boxattack,and codereviewing.
Statisticanalysis .Themajorityofthepreviousworksareaboutstatisticanalysisthateffectively
identifies the existing malware. With the help of GAN, the issue of insufficient malware samples
can be fixed. In addition, another drawback of statistic analysis on malware is its relatively weak
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 31 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:31
performanceofdetectingunknowingmalware.GANisabletogenerateunknowingmalwarebased
on the known attacks but still needs experts to extract features by hand. How to detect malware
against virtualizationand extractstatisticdata moreeffectively make theissuesworthexploring.
Dynamic analysis . Dynamic analysis is more robust than statistic analysis, but the existing dy-
namic analysis tools and techniques are imperfect. GAN can help enhance the performance of
malware detection by applying dynamic analysis via generating more adversarial samples. How-
ever, only several dynamic features are actually utilized in the current works. As virtualization
is getting widespread, dynamic analysis on VMM and hypervisor may be a promising direction.
Moreover, dynamic analysis on the side channel of attack behaviors is still left blank now, which
shouldbe filledto advancemalware detectiontechniques.
White-box attacks . Black-box attacks and semi white-box attacks are the focus of most of the
existing works.Compared withblack-box attacks,white-boxattacks requirehigher transparency
of the target systems. Usually, white-box attacks are related to code review, which has a high
requirementforexperts’experience.Inaddition,thereisalackofdatasetsforthewhite-boxattack,
whichisa good applicationscenariofor GAN.
6.3.3 BioinformaticRecognition. Bioinformatic-basedrecognitionhasbeenwidelyusedinvar-
ious areas, some of which are related to the applications requiring a high degree of security pro-
tection, such as bioinformatic authentication. Slight modifications on bioinformatics may cause
the results of recognition change thoroughly. Current works are limited to fingerprint and face
recognition,ignoringotherimportantbioinformaticslikeiris.Asaresult,moreeffortsareneeded
to design GAN-basedmethodsfordifferent bioinformaticrecognitionsystems.
6.3.4 Industrial Security and Others. Industrial security is more complex and challenging and
thus has higher requirements. Here, using GAN to generate adversarial data from limited data
is helpful in enhancing industrial security. However, GAN also has its limitation: the probability
distributionofadversarialdatamaybeunbalancedwhenthereistoolittleoriginaldata.Especially
inasituationwherethespecificcontextofatestismissing,combiningtransferlearningandGAN
may enablethegenerationof adversarialsamplesfromlimited dataresources.
7 CONCLUSION
Thissurveyintensivelyreviewsthestate-of-the-artapproachesusingGANforprivacyandsecurity
in a broad spectrum of applications, including image generation, video event detection, records
publishing, distributed learning, malware detection, fraud detection, and so on. For the different
purposesofattackanddefense,theseexistingapproachesestablishproblemformulationbasedon
the variants of GAN framework, taking into account attack success rate, classification/prediction
accuracy, data utility, and other performance metrics. After a thorough analysis, the unsolved
challengesandpromisingresearchdirectionsareprovidedforfurtherdiscussionfromperspectives
of applicationscenario,modeldesign, anddata utilization.
REFERENCES
[1] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016.
Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security . ACM, NewYork, NY, 308–318.
[2] Gergely Acs, Luca Melis, Claude Castelluccia, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. 2018. Differentially private mixture of
generativeneuralnetworks. IEEETransactionsonKnowledge andData Engineering 31,6 (2018),1109–1121.
[3] UlrichAïvodji,SébastienGambs,andTimonTher.2019.GAMIN:Anadversarialapproachtoblack-boxmodelinver-
sion. arXiv: 1909.11835 .
[4] MohammadAl-RubaieandJ.MorrisChang.2019.Privacy-preservingmachinelearning:Threatsandsolutions. IEEE
Security & Privacy 17(2019),49–58.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 32 ====
132:32 Z.Cai et al.
[5] Constantin F. Aliferis, Ioannis Tsamardinos, and Alexander Statnikov. 2003. HITON: A novel Markov blanket algo-
rithm for optimalvariableselection.In Proceedings oftheAMIA Annual Symposium . 21–25.
[6] Ranya Aloufi, Hamed Haddadi, and David Boyle. 2019. Emotionless: Privacy-preserving speech analysis for voice
assistants. arXiv: 1908.03632 .
[7] Martín Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala,andLéonBottou.2017.Wasserstein GAN.arXiv: 1701.07875
[8] Giuseppe Ateniese, Giovanni Felici, Luigi Mancini, Angelo Spognardi, Antonio Villani, and Domenico Vitali. 2015.
Hacking smart machines with smarter ones: How to extract meaningful data from machine learning classifiers.
International Journal ofSecurity and Networks 10(2015),137–150.
[9] SeanAugenstein,H.BrendanMcMahan,DanielRamage,SwaroopRamaswamy,PeterKairouz,MingqingChen,Rajiv
Mathews, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. 2019. Generative models for effective ML on private, decentralized datasets.
arXiv:1911.06679
[10] ShumeetBalujaandIanFischer.2017.Adversarialtransformationnetworks:Learningtogenerateadversarialexam-
ples.arXiv: 1703.09387
[11] Samyadeep Basu, Rauf Izmailov, and Chris Mesterharm. 2019. Membership model inversion attacks for deep net-
works. arXiv: 1910.04257
[12] Brett K. Beaulieu-Jones, Zhiwei Steven Wu, Chris Williams, Ran Lee, Sanjeev P. Bhavnani, James Brian Byrd, and
CaseyS.Greene.2019.Privacy-preservinggenerativedeepneuralnetworkssupportclinicaldatasharing. Circulation:
Cardiovascular Quality andOutcomes 12,7(2019),e005122.
[13] David Berthelot, Tom Schumm, and Luke Metz. 2017. BEGAN: Boundary equilibrium generative adversarial net-
works. arXiv: 1703.10717
[14] Philip Bontrager, Julian Togelius, and Nasir D. Memon. 2017. DeepMasterPrint: Generating fingerprints for presen-
tationattacks.arXiv: 1705.07386
[15] Karla Brkić, Tomislav Hrkać, Zoran Kalafatić, and Ivan Sikirić. 2017. Face, hairstyle and clothing colour de-
identificationin video sequences. IETSignal Processing 11,9 (2017),1062–1068.
[16] Karla Brkic, Ivan Sikiric, Tomislav Hrkac, and Zoran Kalafatic. 2017. I know that person: Generative full body and
face de-identification of people in images. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE CVPR Workshops . IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA,
1319–1328.
[17] Eoin Brophy, Zhengwei Wang, and Tomas E. Ward. 2019. Quick and easy time series generation with established
image-basedGANs.arXiv: 1902.05624
[18] JieCao,YiboHu,BingYu,RanHe,andZhenanSun.2019.3DAidedDuetGANsformulti-viewfaceimagesynthesis.
IEEETransactions onInformationForensics and Security 14,8(2019),2028–2042.
[19] Kamalika Chaudhuri, Jacob Imola, and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. 2019. Capacity bounded differential privacy. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,Vol. 32.Curran Associates, Red Hook, NY,1–10.
[20] Jiawei Chen, Janusz Konrad, and Prakash Ishwar. 2018. VGAN-based image representation learning for privacy-
preserving facial expression recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE CVPR Workshops . IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA,
1570–1579.
[21] XiChen,YanDuan,ReinHouthooft,JohnSchulman,IlyaSutskever,andPieterAbbeel.2016.InfoGAN:Interpretable
representationlearningbyinformationmaximizinggenerativeadversarialnets.In Proceedingsofthe30thConference
on Neural Information Processing Systems .2172–2180.
[22] XiaoChen,PeterKairouz,andRamRajagopal.2018.Understandingcompressiveadversarialprivacy.In Proceedings
of the2018 IEEEConferenceonDecision andControl(CDC’18) .IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 6824–6831.
[23] Edward Choi, Siddharth Biswal, Bradley Malin, Jon Duke, Walter F. Stewart, and Jimeng Sun. 2017. Generating
multi-label discrete patient records using generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the Machine Learning
for Healthcare Conference .286–305.
[24] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Fan Yang, William W. Cohen, and Russ R. Salakhutdinov. 2017. Good semi-supervised
learning that requires a bad GAN. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
6510–6520.
[25] Naser Damer, Alexandra Mosegui Saladie, Andreas Braun, and Arjan Kuijper. 2018. MorGAN: Recognition vulnera-
bilityandattackdetectabilityoffacemorphingattackscreatedbygenerativeadversarialnetwork.In Proceedings of
the9th IEEEInternational ConferenceonBiometrics Theory, Applications,andSystems . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,1–10.
[26] DebayanDeb,JianbangZhang,and AnilK.Jain. 2019.AdvFaces: Adversarial facesynthesis. arXiv: 1908.05008
[27] Xiaofeng Ding, Hongbiao Fang, Zhilin Zhang, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, and Hai Jin. 2020. Privacy-preserving
featureextractionviaadversarial training. IEEETransactionsonKnowledge andData Engineering 1(2020),1–10.
[28] Chris Donahue, Julian J. McAuley, and Miller S. Puckette. 2018. Synthesizing audio with generative adversarial net-
works. arXiv: 1802.04208
[29] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. 2006. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private
dataanalysis.In Proceedings of theTheoryof Cryptography Conference .265–284.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 33 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:33
[30] CristóbalEsteban,StephanieL.Hyland,andGunnarRätsch.2017.Real-valued(medical)timeseriesgenerationwith
recurrent conditional GANs. arXiv: 1706.02633
[31] Junbin Fang, Aiping Li, and Qianyue Jiang. 2019. GDAGAN: An anonymization method for graph data publishing
using generative adversarial network. In Proceedings of the 2019 6th International Conference on Information Science
and ControlEngineering . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA, 309–313.
[32] William Fedus, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Andrew M. Dai. 2018. MaskGAN: Better text generation via filling in the
______. arXiv: 1801.07736
[33] Maryam Feily, Alireza Shahrestani, and Sureswaran Ramadass. 2009. A survey of botnet and botnet detection. In
Proceedings of the 2009 3rd International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems, and Technologies .
IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 268–273.
[34] Jianjiang Feng and Anil K. Jain. 2010. Fingerprint reconstruction: From minutiae to phase. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis andMachine Intelligence 33(2010),209–223.
[35] MattFredrikson,SomeshJha,andThomasRistenpart.2015.Modelinversionattacksthatexploitconfidenceinforma-
tionandbasiccountermeasures.In Proceedingsofthe22ndACMSIGSACConferenceonComputerandCommunications
Security. ACM, New York, NY, 1322–1333.
[36] MatthewFredrikson,EricLantz,SomeshJha,SimonLin,DavidPage,andThomasRistenpart.2014.Privacyinphar-
macogenetics:Anend-to-endcasestudyofpersonalizedwarfarindosing.In Proceedingsofthe23rdUSENIXSecurity
Symposium . 17–32.
[37] Brendan J. Frey, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Peter Dayan. 1996. Does the wake-sleep algorithm produce good density
estimators? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .MITPress, Cambridge,MA,661–667.
[38] YutongGaoandYiPan.2020.Improveddetectionofadversarialimagesusingdeepneuralnetworks.arXiv: 2007.05573
[39] FelixA.Gers,JürgenSchmidhuber,andFredA.Cummins.2000.Learningtoforget:ContinualpredictionwithLSTM.
Neural Computation 12,10(2000),2451–2471.
[40] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
andYoshuaBengio.2014.Generativeadversarialnets.In AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems .Curran
Associates, RedHook, NY, 2672–2680.
[41] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
arXiv:1412.6572
[42] KayGregorHartmann,RobinTiborSchirrmeister,andTonioBall.2018.EEG-GAN:generativeadversarialnetworks
for electroencephalograhic(EEG) brainsignals.arXiv: 1806.01875
[43] IshaanGulrajani,FarukAhmed,MartinArjovsky,VincentDumoulin,andAaronC.Courville.2017.Improvedtrain-
ing of Wasserstein GANs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 5767–5777.
[44] Qilong Han, Zuobin Xiong, and Kejia Zhang. 2018. Research on trajectory data releasing method via differential
privacybased onspatialpartition. Security and Communication Networks 2018(2018),Article 4248092.
[45] Corentin Hardy, Erwan Le Merrer, and Bruno Sericola. 2019. MD-GAN: Multi-discriminator generative adversarial
networks for distributed datasets. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing
Symposium . IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 866–877.
[46] JamieHayes,LucaMelis,GeorgeDanezis,andEmilianoDeCristofaro.2019.LOGAN:Membershipinferenceattacks
againstgenerativemodels. Proceedings on Privacy EnhancingTechnologies 2019(2019),133–152.
[47] BrilandHitaj,GiuseppeAteniese,andFernandoPérez-Cruz.2017.DeepmodelsundertheGAN:Informationleakage
from collaborative deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security . ACM, NewYork, NY, 603–618.
[48] Yongjun Hong, Uiwon Hwang, Jaeyoon Yoo, and Sungroh Yoon. 2019. How generative adversarial networks and
their variantswork: An overview. ACMComputing Surveys 52,1 (2019),10.
[49] Weiwei Hu and Ying Tan. 2017. Generating adversarial malware examples for black-box attacks based on GAN.
arXiv:1702.05983
[50] ZhichengHu,JianqiShi,YanHongHuang,JiawenXiong,andXiangxingBu.2018.GANFuzz:AGAN-basedindustrial
networkprotocolfuzzingframework.In Proceedingsofthe15thACMInternationalConferenceonComputingFrontiers .
ACM, NewYork, NY, 138–145.
[51] ChongHuang,PeterKairouz,XiaoChen,LalithaSankar,andRamRajagopal.2017.Context-awaregenerativeadver-
sarialprivacy. Entropy19,12(2017),656.
[52] MohdIbrahimandRodinaAhmad.2010.Classdiagramextractionfromtextualrequirementsusingnaturallanguage
processing (NLP) techniques. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Research and Development .
IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 200–204.
[53] Nikolay Jetchev, Urs Bergmann, and Roland Vollgraf. 2016. Texture synthesis with spatial generative adversarial
networks. arXiv: 1611.08207
[54] Liangxiao Jiang, Harry Zhang, and Zhihua Cai. 2008. A novel Bayes model: Hidden naive bayes. IEEE Transactions
onKnowledge andData Engineering 21(2008),1361–1371.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 34 ====
132:34 Z.Cai et al.
[55] Joakim Kargaard, Tom Drange, Ah-Lian Kor, Hissam Twafik, and Emlyn Butterfield. 2018. Defending IT systems
against intelligent malware. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 9th International Conference on Dependable Systems, Ser-
vices, and Technologies .IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 411–417.
[56] AnimeshKarnewarandOliverWang.2020.MSG-GAN:Multi-scalegradientsforgenerativeadversarialnetworks.In
ProceedingsofIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .IEEE,LosAlamitos,CA,7799–7808.
[57] TeroKarras,TimoAila,SamuliLaine,andJaakkoLehtinen.2017.ProgressivegrowingofGANsforimprovedquality,
stability,and variation.arXiv: 1710.10196
[58] BachNgocKim,ChristianDesrosiers,JoseDolz,andPierre-MarcJodoin.2019.Privacy-Net:Anadversarialapproach
for identity-obfuscatedsegmentation.arXiv: 1909.04087
[59] Hakil Kim, Xuenan Cui, Man-Gyu Kim, and Thi Hai Binh Nguyen. 2019. Fingerprint generation and presentation
attack detection using deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference on Multimedia Information
Processing and Retrieval . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,375–378.
[60] Jin-Young Kim, Seok-Jun Bu, and Sung-Bae Cho. 2017. Malware detection using deep transferred generative adver-
sarial networks. In Proceedings oftheInternational ConferenceonNeural Information ProcessingSystems . 556–564.
[61] Jin-Young Kim, Seok-Jun Bu, and Sung-Bae Cho. 2018. Zero-day malware detection using transferred generative
adversarial networks basedon deep autoencoders. Information Sciences 460(2018),83–102.
[62] Taehoon Kim and Jihoon Yang. 2019. Latent-space-level image anonymization with adversarial protector networks.
IEEEAccess 7(2019),84992–84999.
[63] JernejKos,IanFischer,andDawnSong.2018.Adversarialexamplesforgenerativemodels.In Proceedingsofthe2018
IEEESecurity andPrivacy Workshops .IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,36–42.
[64] AlexKrizhevsky,IlyaSutskever,andGeoffreyE.Hinton.2012.ImageNetclassificationwithdeepconvolutionalneu-
ral networks. In Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems . Curran Associates, Red Hook, NY, 1097–1105.
[65] Martha Larson, Zhuoran Liu, S. F. B. Brugman, and Zhengyu Zhao. 2018. Pixel privacy: Increasing image appeal
while blocking automatic inference of sensitive scene information. In Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval
2018 Workshop ,Vol. 2283.
[66] Dongha Lee, Hwanjo Yu, Xiaoqian Jiang, Deevakar Rogith, Meghana Gudala, Mubeen Tejani, Qiuchen Zhang, and
Li Xiong. 2020. Generating sequential electronic health records using dual adversarial autoencoder. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association 27,9(2020),1411–1419.
[67] HyeungillLee,SungyeobHan,andJungwooLee.2017.Generativeadversarialtrainer:Defensetoadversarialpertur-
bations withGAN.arXiv: 1705.03387
[68] Harim Lee, Myeung Un Kim, Yeong-Jun Kim, Hyeonsu Lyu, and Hyun Jong Yang. 2020. Privacy-protection drone
patrolsystem basedon faceanonymization.arXiv: 2005.14390
[69] Aiping Li, Junbin Fang, Qianye Jiang, Bin Zhou, and Yan Jia. 2020. A graph data privacy-preserving method based
ongenerativeadversarialnetworks.In Proceedings oftheInternationalConferenceonWebInformationSystemsEngi-
neering. 227–239.
[70] Jia Li, Honglei Zhang, Zhichao Han, Yu Rong, Hong Cheng, and Junzhou Huang. 2020. Adversarial attack on com-
munitydetection byhiding individuals.In Proceedings oftheWeb Conference2020 . ACM, New York, NY, 917–927.
[71] Kaiyang Li, Guoming Lu, Guangchun Luo, and Zhipeng Cai. 2020. Seed-free graph de-anonymization with adver-
sarial learning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .
ACM, New York, NY, 745–754.
[72] KaiyangLi,GuangchunLuo,YangYe,WeiLi,ShihaoJi,andZhipengCai.2020.Adversarialprivacypreservinggraph
embeddingagainstinferenceattack.arXiv: 2008.13072
[73] Qinya Li, Zhenzhe Zheng, Fan Wu, and Guihai Chen. 2020. Generative adversarial networks-based privacy-
preserving3Dreconstruction.In Proceedingsofthe2020IEEE/ACM28thInternationalSymposiumonQualityofService .
IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 1–10.
[74] Yitong Li, Timothy Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn. 2018. Towards robust and privacy-preserving text representations.
InProceedings of the56th Annual Meeting oftheAssociation forComputational Linguistics . 25–30.
[75] Guanxiong Liu, Issa Khalil, and Abdallah Khreishah. 2019. GanDef: A GAN based adversarial training defense for
neuralnetworkclassifier.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonICTSystemsSecurityandPrivacyProtection .
19–32.
[76] Kin Sum Liu, Bo Li, and Jiexin Gao. 2019. Performing co-membership attacks against deep generative models. In
Proceedings ofthe2019 IEEEInternational Conference onData Mining . IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 459–467.
[77] SicongLiu,AnshumaliShrivastava,JunzhaoDu,andLinZhong.2019.Betteraccuracywithquantifiedprivacy:Rep-
resentations learnedvia reconstructive adversarial network.arXiv: 1901.08730
[78] Yi Liu, Jialiang Peng, J. Q. James, and Yi Wu. 2019. PPGAN: Privacy-preserving generative adversarial network. In
Proceedingsofthe2019IEEE25thInternationalConferenceonParallelandDistributedSystems(ICPADS’19) .IEEE,Los
Alamitos, CA,985–989.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 35 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:35
[79] WilliamLotter,GabrielKreiman,andDavidD.Cox.2015.Unsupervisedlearningofvisualstructureusingpredictive
generativenetworks. arXiv: 1511.06380
[80] ChristosLouizos,KevinSwersky,YujiaLi,MaxWelling,andRichardS.Zemel.2016.Thevariationalfairautoencoder.
InProceedings ofthe4th International ConferenceonLearning Representations .31–40.
[81] Pei-Hsuan Lu, Pang-Chieh Wang, and Chia-Mu Yu. 2019. Empirical evaluation on synthetic data generation with
generative adversarial network. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining, and
Semantics .A C M ,N e wY o r k ,NY ,1 – 6 .
[82] PaulineLuc,CamilleCouprie,SoumithChintala,andJakobVerbeek.2016.Semanticsegmentationusingadversarial
networks. arXiv: 1611.08408
[83] Liqian Ma, Xu Jia, Qianru Sun, Bernt Schiele, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. 2017. Pose guided person image
generation.In Proceedings ofthe31st Conferenceon Neural Information Processing Systems .406–416.
[84] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond Y. K. Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. 2017. Least squares
generativeadversarialnetworks. In Proceedings oftheIEEEInternational ConferenceonComputer Vision .2794–2802.
[85] BrendanMcMahan,EiderMoore,DanielRamage,SethHampson,andBlaiseAguerayArcas.2017.Communication-
efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralizeddata.In ArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics .PMLR,1273–1282.
[86] H. Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2017. Learning differentially private language
models withoutlosing accuracy.arXiv: 1710.06963
[87] Ruohan Meng, Qi Cui, Zhili Zhou, Zhangjie Fu, and Xingming Sun. 2019. A steganography algorithm based on
CycleGANfor covert communicationintheInternet of Things. IEEEAccess 7(2019),90574–90584.
[88] Vahid Mirjalili, Sebastian Raschka, Anoop Namboodiri, and Arun Ross. 2018. Semi-adversarial networks: Convo-
lutional autoencoders for imparting privacy to face images. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on
Biometrics . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,82–89.
[89] Vahid Mirjalili, Sebastian Raschka, and Arun Ross. 2020. PrivacyNet: Semi-adversarial networks for multi-attribute
faceprivacy. IEEETransactions onImage Process 29(2020),9400–9412.
[90] Mehdi Mirza andSimon Osindero. 2014.Conditional generativeadversarial nets.arXiv: 1411.1784
[91] TakeruMiyato andMasanori Koyama.2018.cGANs withprojection discriminator.arXiv: 1802.05637
[92] Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. 2016. DeepFool: A simple and accurate
method to fool deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,2574–2582.
[93] MiladNasr,RezaShokri,andAmirHoumansadr.2018.Machinelearningwithmembershipprivacyusingadversarial
regularization.In Proceedingsofthe2018ACMSIGSACConferenceonComputerandCommunicationsSecurity .A CM,
New York, NY, 634–646.
[94] HungNguyen,DiZhuang,Pei-YuanWu,andMorrisChang.2020.AutoGAN-baseddimensionreductionforprivacy
preservation. Neurocomputing 384(2020),94–103.
[95] AugustusOdena,ChristopherOlah,andJonathonShlens.2017.Conditionalimagesynthesiswithauxiliaryclassifier
GANs. In Proceedings ofthe34th International Conference onMachine Learning .2642–2651.
[96] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and Ananthram Swami. 2017.
Practicalblack-boxattacksagainstmachinelearning.In Proceedingsofthe2017ACMonAsiaConferenceonComputer
and Communications Security . ACM, NewYork, NY, 506–519.
[97] NoseongPark,MahmoudMohammadi,KshitijGorde,SushilJajodia,HongkyuPark,andYoungminKim.2018.Data
synthesis basedon generativeadversarial networks. Proceedings of theVLDBEndowment 11,10(2018),1071–1083.
[98] Francesco Pittaluga, Sanjeev Koppal, and Ayan Chakrabarti. 2019. Learning privacy preserving encodings through
adversarialtraining.In Proceedingsofthe2019IEEEWinterConferenceonApplicationsofComputerVision .IEEE,Los
Alamitos,CA, 791–799.
[99] Zhaofan Qiu, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei. 2017. Deep semantic hashing with generative adversarial net-
works. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. ACM, NewYork, NY, 225–234.
[100] Lawrence R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition.
Proceedings oftheIEEE 77(1989),257–286.
[101] Jinmeng Rao, Song Gao, Yuhao Kang, and Qunying Huang. 2021. LSTM-TrajGAN: A deep learning approach to
trajectory privacy protection. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Geographic Information Science
(GIScience’21) , Vol. 177.Article 12,17pages.
[102] Carl Edward Rasmussen. 1999. The infinite Gaussian mixture model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.MITPress, Cambridge,MA, 554–560.
[103] Mohammad Rasouli, Tao Sun, and Ram Rajagopal. 2020. FedGAN: Federated generative adversarial networks for
distributed data.arXiv: 2006.07228
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 36 ====
132:36 Z.Cai et al.
[104] Zhongzheng Ren, Yong Jae Lee, and Michael S. Ryoo. 2018. Learning to anonymize faces for privacy preserving
action detection.In Proceedings oftheEuropean ConferenceonComputer Vision .620–636.
[105] Aria Rezaei, Chaowei Xiao, Jie Gao, and Bo Li. 2018. Protecting sensitive attributes via generative adversarial net-
works. arXiv: 1812.10193
[106] Mauro Ribeiro, Katarina Grolinger, and Miriam A. M. Capretz. 2015. MLaaS: Machine Learning as a Service. In
Proceedingsofthe2015IEEE14thInternationalConferenceonMachineLearningandApplications .IEEE,LosAlamitos,
CA, 896–902.
[107] MichaelS.Ryoo,BrandonRothrock,CharlesFleming,andHyunJongYang.2017.Privacy-preservinghumanactivity
recognition from extremelow resolution. In Proceedings ofthe31st Conferenceon Artificial Intelligence . 4255–4262.
[108] PouyaSamangouei,MayaKabkab,andRamaChellappa.2018.Defense-GAN:Protectingclassifiersagainstadversar-
ialattacksusing generativemodels.arXiv: 1805.06605
[109] Eunbi Seo, Hyun Min Song, and Huy Kang Kim. 2018. GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection system for in-vehicle
network. In Proceedings of the 2018 16th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust . IEEE, Los Alamitos,
CA, 1–6.
[110] MaryamShahpasand,LenHamey,DinushaVatsalan,andMinhuiXue.2019.Adversarialattacksonmobilemalware
detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 1st International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Mobile . IEEE, Los
Alamitos, CA,17–20.
[111] ShiweiShen,GuoqingJin,KeGao,andYongdongZhang.2017.APE-GAN:Adversarialperturbationeliminationwith
GAN. arXiv: 1707.05474
[112] Rakshith Shetty, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. 2018. A4NT: Author attribute anonymity by adversarial training of
neural machinetranslation.In Proceedings ofthe27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX’18) . 1633–1650.
[113] Reza Shokri and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2015. Privacy-preserving deep learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC
Conferenceon Computer and Communications Security . ACM, New York, NY, 1310–1321.
[114] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2017. Membership inference attacks against
machine learning models. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, Los Alamitos,
CA, 3–18.
[115] DuleShu,WeilinCong,JiamingChai,andConradS.Tucker.2020.Encryptedrich-datasteganographyusinggenera-
tiveadversarialnetworks.In Proceedingsofthe2ndACMWorkshoponWirelessSecurityandMachineLearning .A CM,
New York, NY,55–60.
[116] CongzhengSong,ThomasRistenpart,andVitalyShmatikov.2017.Machinelearningmodelsthatremembertoomuch.
InProceedingsofthe2017ACMSIGSACConferenceonComputerandCommunicationsSecurity .ACM,NewYork,NY,
587–601.
[117] YangSong,RuiShu,NateKushman,andStefanoErmon.2018.Constructingunrestrictedadversarialexampleswith
generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Red Hook, NY, 8312–
8323.
[118] NasimSouly,ConcettoSpampinato,andMubarakShah.2017.Semisupervisedsemanticsegmentationusinggenera-
tiveadversarialnetwork.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEInternationalConferenceonComputerVision .IEEE,LosAlamitos,
CA, 5688–5696.
[119] Patricia L. Suárez, Angel D. Sappa, and Boris X. Vintimilla. 2017. Infrared image colorization based on a triplet
DCGAN architecture. In Proceedings oftheIEEECVPRWorkshops .IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 18–23.
[120] Martin Sundermeyer, Ralf Schlüter, and Hermann Ney. 2012. LSTM neural networks for language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings ofthe13th AnnualConferenceof theInternational Speech Communication Association . 194–197.
[121] R.Taheri,M.Shojafar,M.Alazab,andR.Tafazolli.2020.FED-IIoT:Arobustfederatedmalwaredetectionarchitecture
in Industrial IoT. IEEETransactions onIndustrial Informatics. Earlyaccess. December9,2020.
[122] WeixuanTang,ShunquanTan,BinLi,andJiwuHuang.2017.Automaticsteganographicdistortionlearningusinga
generativeadversarial network. IEEESignal ProcessingLetters 24,10(2017),1547–1551.
[123] Amirsina Torfi and Edward A. Fox. 2020. CorGAN: Correlation-capturing convolutional generative adversarial net-
worksforgeneratingsynthetichealthcarerecords.In Proceedingsofthe33thInternationalFloridaArtificialIntelligence
Research Society Conference ,RomanBartákand Eric Bell(Eds.). AAAI Press, 335–340.
[124] Aleksei Triastcyn andBoi Faltings.2018.Generatingdifferentiallyprivatedatasetsusing GANs.arXiv: 1803.03148
[125] AlekseiTriastcynandBoiFaltings.2019.FederatedlearningwithBayesiandifferentialprivacy.In Proceedingsofthe
2019 IEEEInternational Conference onBig Data . IEEE, LosAlamitos,CA, 2587–2596.
[126] Aleksei Triastcyn andBoi Faltings.2020.Federated generativeprivacy. IEEEIntelligentSystems 35,4(2020),50–57.
[127] Ardhendu Tripathy, Ye Wang, and Prakash Ishwar. 2019. Privacy-preserving adversarial networks. In Proceedings
of the 2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing . IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA,
495–505.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

==== Page 37 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks: A Survey Toward Private and Secure Applications 132:37
[128] Bo-Wei Tseng and Pei-Yuan Wu. 2020. Compressive privacy generative adversarial network. IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics andSecurity 15(2020),2499–2513.
[129] Ries Uittenbogaard, Clint Sebastian, Julien Vijverberg, Bas Boom, Dariu M. Gavrila, and Peter H. N. de With. 2019.
Privacyprotectioninstreet-viewpanoramasusingdepthandmulti-viewimagery.In Proceedingsofthe2019IEEE/CVF
Conferenceon Computer Vision andPattern Recognition . IEEE, LosAlamitos, CA,10581–10590.
[130] KoroshVatanparvar,ViswamNathan,EbrahimNemati,MdMahbuburRahman,andJilongKuang.2020.Adaptingto
noiseinspeechobfuscationbyaudioprofilingusinggenerativemodelsforpassivehealthmonitoring.In Proceedings
of the 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society . IEEE, Los
Alamitos,CA, 5700–5704.
[131] CarlVondrick,HamedPirsiavash,andAntonioTorralba.2016.Generatingvideoswithscenedynamics.In Proceedings
ofthe30th ConferenceonNeural Information Processing Systems .613–621.
[132] XiaosenWang,KunHe,andJohnE.Hopcroft.2019.AT-GAN:AGenerativeattackmodelforadversarialtransferring
on generativeadversarial nets.arXiv: 1904.07793
[133] ZhiboWang,SongMengkai,ZhifeiZhang,YangSong,QianWang,andHairongQi.2019.Beyondinferringclassrep-
resentatives: User-level privacy leakage from federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications . IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 2512–2520.
[134] Zihao W. Wang, Vibhav Vineet, Francesco Pittaluga, Sudipta N. Sinha, Oliver Cossairt, and Sing Bing Kang. 2019.
Privacy-preservingactionrecognitionusingcodedaperturevideos.In ProceedingsoftheIEEECVPRWorkshops .IEEE,
Los Alamitos,CA, 1–10.
[135] BingzheWu,ShiwanZhao,ChaochaoChen,HaoyangXu,LiWang,XiaoluZhang,GuangyuSun,andJunZhou.2019.
Generalization in generative adversarial networks: A novel perspective from privacy protection. In Proceedings of
the33rd Conferenceon Neural Information Processing Systems . 307–317.
[136] Yifan Wu, Fan Yang, Yong Xu, and Haibin Ling. 2019. Privacy-Protective-GAN for privacy preserving face de-
identification. Journal ofComputer Science andTechnology 34,1(2019),47–60.
[137] ChaoweiXiao,BoLi,Jun-YanZhu,WarrenHe,MingyanLiu,andDawnSong.2018.Generatingadversarialexamples
withadversarial networks. arXiv: 1801.02610
[138] CihangXie andAlan L.Yuille. 2019.Intriguing properties of adversarialtraining.arXiv: 1906.03787
[139] Liyang Xie, Kaixiang Lin, Shu Wang, Fei Wang, and Jiayu Zhou. 2018. Differentially private generative adversarial
network. arXiv: 1802.06739
[140] Zuobin Xiong, Zhipeng Cai, Qilong Han, Arwa Alrawais, and Wei Li. 2020. ADGAN: Protect your location privacy
incamera data of auto-driving vehicles. IEEETransactions onIndustrial Informatics. Early access.October20,2020.
[141] ZuobinXiong,WeiLi,QilongHan,andZhipengCai.2019.Privacy-preservingauto-driving:AGAN-basedapproach
to protect vehicular cameradata.In Proceedings of the2019 IEEEInternational Conference onData Mining . IEEE, Los
Alamitos,CA, 668–677.
[142] ChuguiXu,JuRen,DeyuZhang,YaoxueZhang,ZhanQin,andKuiRen.2019.GANobfuscator:Mitigatinginforma-
tionleakageunderGANviadifferentialprivacy. IEEETransactionsonInformationForensicsandSecurity 14,9(2019),
2358–2371.
[143] Andrew Yale, Saloni Dash, Ritik Dutta, Isabelle Guyon, Adrien Pavao, and Kristin P. Bennett. 2020. Generation and
evaluationof privacypreserving synthetic health data. Neurocomputing 416(2020),244–255.
[144] X.Yan,B.Cui,Y.Xu,P.Shi,andZ.Wang.2019.Amethodofinformationprotectionforcollaborativedeeplearning
under GANmodel attack. IEEE/ACMTransactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 1(2019),1.
[145] Chao Yang, Xin Lu, Zhe Lin, Eli Shechtman, Oliver Wang, and Hao Li. 2017. High-resolution image inpainting us-
ing multi-scale neural patch synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 6721–6729.
[146] JinYang,TaoLi,GangLiang,WenboHe,andYueZhao.2019.Asimplerecurrentunitmodelbasedintrusiondetection
system with DCGAN. IEEEAccess 7(2019),83286–83296.
[147] Tsung-Yen Yang, Christopher Brinton, Prateek Mittal, Mung Chiang, and Andrew Lan. 2018. Learning Informative
and private representations via generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Big Data . IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 1534–1543.
[148] Xiao Yang, Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Jun Zhu, and Hang Su. 2020. Towards privacy protection by generating
adversarialidentity masks.arXiv: 2003.06814
[149] Zhilin Yang, Junjie Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and William W. Cohen. 2017. Semi-supervised QA with generative
domain-adaptivenets.arXiv: 1702.02206
[150] SamuelYeom,IreneGiacomelli,MattFredrikson,andSomeshJha.2018.Privacyriskinmachinelearning:Analyzing
the connection to overfitting. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 31st Computer Security Foundations Symposium . IEEE,
Los Alamitos,CA, 268–282.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July 2021.

==== Page 38 ====
132:38 Z.Cai et al.
[151] Chuanlong Yin, Yuefei Zhu, Shengli Liu, Jinlong Fei, and Hetong Zhang. 2018. An enhancing framework for botnet
detection using generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence andBig Data .IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 228–234.
[152] Dan Yin and QingYang.2018.GANs based density distribution privacy-preservation on mobilitydata. Security and
Communication Networks 2018(2018),Article 9203076.
[153] RyoYonetani,TomohiroTakahashi,AtsushiHashimoto,andYoshitakaUshiku.2019.Decentralizedlearningofgen-
erativeadversarial networks from multi-clientnon-iid data.arXiv: 1905.09684
[154] JinsungYoon,JamesJordon,andMihaelavanderSchaar.2019.PATE-GAN:Generatingsyntheticdatawithdifferen-
tialprivacyguarantees.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations .IEEE,LosAlamitos,
CA, 536–545.
[155] Han Zhang, Ian Goodfellow, Dimitris Metaxas, and Augustus Odena. 2019. Self-Attention generative adversarial
networks. In Proceedings of theInternational ConferenceonMachine Learning . 7354–7363.
[156] Xinyang Zhang, Shouling Ji, and Ting Wang. 2018. Differentially private releasing via deep generative model.
arXiv:1801.01594
[157] YuhengZhang,RuoxiJia,HengzhiPei,WenxiaoWang,BoLi,andDawnSong.2020.Thesecretrevealer:Generative
model-inversion attacks against deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition . IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 253–261.
[158] ZhengliZhao, Dheeru Dua,andSameer Singh. 2017.Generatingnaturaladversarialexamples.arXiv: 1710.11342
[159] Yu-JunZheng,Xiao-HanZhou,Wei-GuoSheng,YuXue,andSheng-YongChen.2018.Generativeadversarialnetwork
based telecomfraud detectionatthe receivingbank. Neural Networks 102(2018),78–86.
[160] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. 2017. Unpaired image-to-image translation using
cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV’17) .IEEE, Los Alamitos,CA, 2223–2232.
[161] Wentao Zhu and Xiaohui Xie. 2016. Adversarial deep structural networks for mammographic mass segmentation.
arXiv:1612.05970
[162] Zheng-An Zhu, Yun-Zhong Lu, and Chen-Kuo Chiang. 2019. Generating adversarial examples by makeup attacks
onfacerecognition.In Proceedingsofthe2019IEEEInternationalConferenceonImageProcessing .IEEE,LosAlamitos,
CA, 2516–2520.
Received December 2020; revised March 2020; accepted April 2021
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.6,Article 132.Publicationdate:July2021.

