==== Page 1 ====
nature communications
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Generalization in quantum machine learning
from few training data
Matthias C. Caro1,2, Hsin-Yuan Huang3,4,M .C e r e z o5,6, Kunal Sharma7,
Andrew Sornborger5,8,L u k a s zC i n c i o9&P a t r i c kJ .C o l e s9
Modern quantum machine learning (QML) methods involve variationally
optimizing a parameterized quantum c ircuit on a training data set, and sub-
sequently making predictions on a testing data set (i.e., generalizing). In this
work, we provide a comprehensive study of generalization performance inQML after training on a limited number Nof training data points. We show that
the generalization error of a qua ntum machine learning model with Ttrainable
gates scales at worst asﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=Np
. When only K≪Tgates have undergone sub-
stantial change in the optimization proc ess, we prove that the generalization
error improves toﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K=Np
. Our results imply that the compiling of unitaries into
a polynomial number of native gates, a crucial application for the quantum
computing industry that typically uses exponential-size training data, can besped up signi ﬁcantly. We also show that classi ﬁcation of quantum states across
a phase transition with a quantum convolutional neural network requires onlya very small training data set. Other pot ential applications include learning
quantum error correcting codes or qua ntum dynamical simulation. Our work
injects new hope into the ﬁe l do fQ M L ,a sg o o dg e n e r a l i z a t i o ni sg u a r a n t e e d
from few training data.
The ultimate goal of machine learning (ML) is to make accurate pre-
dictions on unseen data. This is known as generalization, and sig-niﬁcant effort has been expended to understand the generalization
capabilities of classical ML models. For example, theoretical results
have been formulated as upper bounds on the generalization error as a
function of the training data size and the model complexity
1–5.S u c h
bounds provide guidance as to how much training data is requiredand/or suf ﬁcient to achieve accurate generalization.
Quantum machine learning (QML) is an emerging ﬁeld that has
generated great excitement
6–9. Modern QML typically involves training
a parameterized quantum circuit in order to analyze either classical orquantum data sets
10–16. Early results indicate that, for classical data
analysis, QML models may offer some advantage over classical modelsunder certain circumstances17–19. It has also been proven that QML
models can provide an exponential advantage in sample complexityfor analyzing quantum data
20,21.
However, little is known about the conditions needed for accurate
generalization in QML. Signi ﬁcant progress has been made in under-
standing the trainability of QML models18,22–36, but trainability is a
separate question from generalization18,37,38.O v e r ﬁtting of training
data could be an issue for QML, just as it is for classical machinelearning. Moreover, the training data size required for QML general-ization has yet to be fully studied. Naïvely, one could expect that anexponential number of training points are needed when training afunction acting on an exponentially large Hilbert space. For instance,some studies have found that, exponentially in n, the number ofReceived: 12 April 2022
Accepted: 4 August 2022
Check for updates
1Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany.2Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology (MCQST),
Munich, Germany.3Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA.4Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences,
Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA.5Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.6Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.7Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742, USA.8Quantum Science Center, Oak Ridge, TN 37931, USA.9Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.
e-mail: caro@ma.tum.de
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

==== Page 2 ====
qubits, large amounts of training data would be needed, assuming that
one is trying to train an arbitrary unitary39,40. This is a concerning result,
since it would imply exponential scaling of the resources required forQML, which is precisely what the ﬁeld of quantum computation would
like to avoid.
In practice, a more relevant scenario to consider instead of arbi-
trary unitaries is learning a unitary that can be represented by apolynomial-depth quantum circuit. This class of unitaries correspondsto those that can be ef ﬁciently implemented on a quantum computer,
and it is exponentially smaller than that of arbitrary unitaries. Moregenerally, one could consider a QML model with Tparameterized
gates and relate the training data size Nneeded for generalization to T.
Even more general would be to consider generalization error adynamic quantity that varies during the optimization.
In this work, we prove highly general theoretical bounds on the
generalization error in variational QML: The generalization error is
approximately upper bounded byﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=Np
. In our proofs, we ﬁrst
establish covering number bounds for the class of quantum operationsthat a variational QML model can implement. From these, we thenderive generalization error bounds using the chaining technique forrandom processes. A key implication of our results is that an ef ﬁciently
implementable QML model, one such that T2OðpolynÞ, only requires
an ef ﬁcient amount of training data, N2OðpolynÞ, to obtain good
generalization. This implication, by itself, will improve the ef ﬁciency
guarantees of variational quantum algorithms
10,41,42that employ train-
ing data, such as quantum autoencoders13, quantum generative
adversarial networks43, variational quantum error correction44,45, var-
iational quantum compiling46,47, and variational dynamical
simulation48–51. It also yields improved ef ﬁciency guarantees for clas-
sical algorithms that simulate QML models.
We furthermore re ﬁne our bounds to account for the optimiza-
tion process. We show that generalization improves if only someparameters have undergone substantial change during the optimiza-tion. Hence, even if we used a number of parameters Tlarger than the
training data size N, the QML model could still generalize well if only
some of the parameters have changed signi ﬁcantly. This suggests that
QML researchers should be careful not to overtrain their models
especially when the decrease in training error is insuf ﬁcient.
To showcase our results, we consider quantum convolutional
neural networks (QCNNs)
27,45,aQ M Lm o d e lt h a th a sr e c e i v e ds i g -
niﬁcant attention. QCNNs have only T=OðlognÞparameters and yet
they are capable of classifying quantum states into distinct phases. Ourtheory guarantees that QCNNs have good generalization error forquantum phase recognition with only polylogarithmic trainingresources, N2Oðlog
2nÞ. We support this guarantee with a numerical
demonstration, which suggests that even constant-size training datacan suf ﬁce.
Finally, we highlight the task of quantum compiling, a crucial
application for the quantum computing industry. State-of-the-art
classical methods for approximate optimal compiling of unitariesoften employ exponentially large training data sets
52–54. However,
our work indicates that only polynomial-sized data sets areneeded, suggesting that state-of-the-art compilers could be furtherimproved. Indeed, we numerically demonstrate the surprisingly lowdata cost of compiling the quantum Fourier transform at relativelylarge scales.
Results
Framework
Let us ﬁrst outline our theoretical framework. We consider a quantum
machine learning model (QMLM) as being a parameterized quantum
channel, i.e., a completely positive trace preserving (CPTP) map that isparameterized. We denote a QMLM as E
QMLM
α ð/C1Þwhere α=(θ,k)
denotes the set of parameters, including continuous parameters θ
inside gates, as well as discrete parameters kthat allow the gatestructure to vary. We make no further assumptions on the form of the
dependence of the CPTP map EQMLM
α ð/C1Þon the parameters α. During the
training process, one would optimize the continuous parameters θand
potentially also the structure kof the QMLM.
A QMLM takes input data in the form of quantum states. For
classical data x,t h ei n p u ti s ﬁrst encoded in a quantum state via a map
x↦ρ(x). This allows the data to be either classical or quantum in
nature, since regardless it is eventu ally encoded in a quantum state. We
assume that the data encoding is ﬁxed in advance and not optimized
over. We remark here that our results also apply for more generalencoding strategies involving data re-uploading
55, as we explain in
Supplementary Note 3.
For the sake of generality, we allow the QMLM to act on a sub-
system of the state ρ(x). Hence, the output state can be written as
ðEQMLM
α /C10idÞðρðxÞÞ. For a given data point ( xi,yi), we can write the loss
function as
‘ðα;xi,yiÞ=T r Oloss
xi,yiEQMLM
α /C10id/C16/C17
ðρðxiÞÞhi
, ð1Þ
for some Hermitian observable Oloss
xi,yi. As is common in classical learn-
ing theory, the prediction error bounds will depend on the largest(absolute) value that the loss function can attain. In our case, we
therefore assume C
loss :=s u px,y∣∣Oloss
x,y∣∣<1, i.e., the spectral norm can
be bounded uniformly over all possible loss observables.
In Eq. ( 1), we take the measurement to act on a single copy of the
output of the QMLM EQMLM
α ð/C1Þupon input of (a subsystem of) the data
encoding state ρ(xi). Atﬁrst this looks like a restriction. However, note
that one can choose EQMLM
α ð/C1Þto be a tensor product of multiple copies
of a QMLM, each with the same parameter setting, applied to multiple
copies of the input state. Hence our framework is general enough to
allow for global measurements on multiple copies. In this addition tothe aforementioned situation, we further study the case in whichtrainable gates are more generally reused.
For a training dataset S=fðx
i,yiÞgN
i=1of size N, the average loss for
parameters αon the training data is
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1‘ðα;xi,yiÞ, ð2Þ
which is often referred to as the training error .W h e nw eo b t a i nan e w
input x,t h e prediction error of a parameter setting αis taken to be the
expected loss
RðαÞ=E
ðx,yÞ~P‘ðα;x,yÞ ½/C138 , ð3Þ
where the expectation is with respect to the distribution Pfrom which
the training examples are generated.
Achieving small prediction error R(α) is the ultimate goal of
(quantum) machine learning. As Pis generally not known, the training
error ^RSðαÞis often taken as a proxy for R(α). This strategy can be
justiﬁed via bounds on the generalization error
gen ðαÞ=RðαÞ/C0 ^RSðαÞ, ð4Þ
which is the key quantity that we bound in our theorems.
Analytical results
We prove probabilistic bounds on the generalization error of a QMLM.
Our bounds guarantee that a good performance on a suf ﬁciently large
training data set implies, with high probability, a good performance onpreviously unseen data points. In particular, we provide a precise
meaning of "suf ﬁciently large ”in terms of properties of the QMLM and
the employed training procedure.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 2

==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1gives an overview of the different scenarios considered in
this work. We begin with the basic form of our result. We consider aQMLM that has arbitrarily many non-trainable global quantum gatesandTtrainable local quantum gates. Here, by local we mean κ-local for
some n-independent locality parameter κ, and a local quantum gate
can be a unitary or a quantum channel acting on κqubits. Then we have
the following bound on the generalization error for the QMLM withﬁnal parameter setting α* after training:
Theorem 1 .(Basic QMLM ). For a QMLM with Tparameterized local
quantum channels, with high probability over training data of size N,
we have that
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogT
Nr !
: ð5Þ
Remark 1 . Theorem 1 directly implies sample complexity bounds: For
any ε> 0, we can, with high success probability, guarantee that
gen(α*)⩽ε, already with training data of size N~TlogT=ε2,w h i c h
scales effectively linearly with T, the number of parameterized gates.
For ef ﬁciently implementable QMLMs with T2OðpolynÞ,as a m -
p l es i z eo f N2Opolyn=ε2/C0/C1
is already suf ﬁcient. More concretely, if
T2OnD/C0/C1
for some degree D, then the corresponding suf ﬁcient
sample complexity obtained from Theorem 1 satis ﬁesN2~OnD=ε2/C0/C1
,
where the ~Ohides factors logarithmic in n.I nt h eN I S Qe r a56,w ee x p e c t
the number Tof trainable maps to only grow mildly with the number of
qubits, e.g., as in the architectures discussed in refs. 18,45,57.I nt h i s
case, Theorem 1 gives an especially strong guarantee.
In various QMLMs, such as QCNNs, the same parameterized local
gates are applied repeatedly. One could also consider running thesame QMLM multiple times to gather measurement data and thenpost-processing that data. In both cases, one should consider theQMLM as using the same parameterized local gates repeatedly. Weassume each gate to be repeated at most Mtimes. A direct application
of Theorem 1 would suggest that we need a training data size Nof
roughly MT, the total number of parameterized gates. However, the
required number of training data actually is much smaller:
Theorem 2 .(Gate-sharing QMLM ). Consider a QMLM with Tindepen-
dently parameterized local quantum channels, where each channelis reused at most Mtimes. With high probability over training data of
sizeN,w eh a v e
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogðMTÞ
Nr !
: ð6Þ
Thus, good generalization, as in Remark 1, can already be guar-
anteed, with high probability, when the data size effectively scaleslinearly in T(the number of independently parameterized gates) and
only logarithmically in M(the number of uses). In particular, applying
multiple copies of the QMLM in parallel does not signi ﬁcantly worsen
the generalization performance compared to a single copy. Thus, as wediscuss in Supplementary Note 3, Theorem 2 ensures that we can
increase the number of shots used to estimate expectation values at
the QMLM output without substantially harming the generalizationbehavior.
The optimization process of the QMLM also plays an important
role in the generalization performance. Suppose that during theoptimization process, the t
thlocal gate changed by a distance Δt.W e
can bound the generalization error by a function of the changes fΔtgt.
Theorem 3 .(Gate-sharing QMLM under optimization ). Consider a
QMLM with Tindependently parameterized local quantum channels,
where the tthchannel is reused at most Mtimes and is changed by Δt
during the optimization. Assume Δ1≥…≥ΔT. With high probability over
training data of size N,w eh a v e
gen ðα*Þ2O min
K=0 , ...,Tﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ
Nr
+∑T
k=K+1MΔk() !
: ð7Þ
When only K≪Tlocal quantum gates have undergone a sig-
niﬁcant change, then the generalization error will scale at worst line-
arly with Kand logarithmically in the total number of parameterized
gates MT. Given that recent numerical results suggest that the para-
meters in a deep parameterized quantum circuit only change by asmall amount during training
58,59,T h e o r e m3m a y ﬁnd application in
studying the generalization behavior of deep QMLMs.
Finally, we consider a more advanced type of variable ansatz
optimization strategy that is also adopted in practice60–63. Instead of
Fig. 1 | Various types of Quantum Machine Learning Models (QMLMs). Panel ( a)
depicts a basic QMLM with T= 6 independently parameterized gates. The gray
boxes illustrate some global evolutions that are not trainable. Panel ( b) shows a
gate-sharing QMLM with T= 2 independently parameterized gates, each gate is
repeatedly used for M= 3 times. In panel ( c), we depict a multi-copy QMLM. We take
measurement data from Mrounds of a basic QMLM with T= 6 parameterized gates
and post-process the measurement outcomes to produce an output. Running M
copies of a basic QMLM with Tgates is equivalent to running a gate-sharing QMLMwith T= 6 parameterized gates, in which each gate is repeated Mtimes. Panel ( d)
describes a gate-sharing QMLM under optimization. The parameterized gate to theleft undergoes a small change, while the one to the right undergoes a large change.
If we sort the changes Δ
1,Δ2from large to small, then Δ1≫Δ2≈0. Finally, panel ( e)
illustrates gate-sharing QMLM with variable structure. The number Tof para-
meterized gates changes throughout the optimization. The ﬁgure begins with T=1
and ends with T=2 .Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 3

==== Page 4 ====
ﬁxing the structure of the QMLM, such as the number of para-
meterized gates and how the parameterized gates are interleaved with
theﬁxed gates, the optimization algorithm could vary the structure,
e.g., by adding or deleting parameterized gates. We assume that foreach number Tof parameterized gates, there are G
Tdifferent QMLM
architectures.
Theorem 4 .(Gate-sharing QMLM with variable structure ). Consider a
QMLM with an arbitrary number of parameterized local quantumchannels, where for each T>0 , w e h a v e G
Tdifferent QMLM archi-
tectures with Tparameterized gates. Suppose that after optimizing on
the data, the QMLM has Tindependently parameterized local quantum
channels, each repeated at most Mtimes. Then, with high probability
over input training data of size N,
gen ðα*Þ2Oﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TlogðMTÞ
Nr
+ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
logðGTÞ
Nr  !
: ð8Þ
Thus, even if the QMLM can in principle use exponentially many
parameterized gates, we can control the generalization error in termsof the number of parameterized gates used in the QMLM after opti-m i z a t i o n ,a n dt h ed e p e n d e n c eo nt h en u m b e ro fd i f f e r e n ta r c h i -tectures is only logarithmic. This logarithmic dependence is crucial aseven in the cases when G
Tgrows exponentially with T,w e
have log ðGTÞ=N2OðT=NÞ.
Numerical results
In this section we present generalization error results obtained by
simulating the following two QML implementations: (1) using a QCNNto classify states belonging to different quantum phases, and (2)training a parameterized quantum circuit to compile a quantumFourier transform matrix.
We begin with the quantum phase classi ﬁcation application. The
QCNN architecture introduced in
45generalizes the model of (classical)
convolutional neural networks with the goal of performing patternrecognition on quantum data. It is composed of so-called convolu-
tional andpooling layers, which alternate. In a convolutional layer, a
sequence of translationally invariant parameterized unitaries on
neighbouring qubits is applied in parallel, which works as a ﬁlter
between feature maps in different layers of the QCNN. Then, in thepooling layers, a subset of the qubits are measured to reduce the
dimensionality of the state while preserving the relevant features of
the data. Conditioned on the corresponding measurement outcomes,translationally invariant parameterized 1-qubit unitaries are applied.The QCNN architecture has been employed for supervised QML tasksof classi ﬁcation of phases of matter and to devise quantum error
correction schemes
45. Moreover, QCNNs have been shown not to
exhibit barren plateaus, making them a generically trainable QMLarchitecture
27.
The action of a QCNN can be considered as mapping an input
state ρinto an output state ρoutgiven as ρout=EQCNN
α ðρinÞ.T h e n ,g i v e n
ρout, one measures the expectation value of a task-speci ﬁc Hermitian
operator.
In our implementation, we employ a QCNN to classify states
belonging to different symmetry protected topological phases. Spe-ciﬁcally, we consider the generalized cluster Hamiltonian
H=∑n
j=1Zj/C0J1XjXj+1/C0J2Xj/C01ZjXj+1/C16/C17
, ð9Þ
where Zi(Xi)d e n o t et h eP a u l i z(x) operator acting on qubit i,a n dw h e r e
J1and J2are tunable coupling coef ﬁcients. As proved in64,a n da s
schematically shown in Fig. 2, the ground-state phase diagram of the
Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 9) has four different phases: symmetry-protected
topological (I), ferromagnetic (II), anti-ferromagnetic (III), and trivial(IV). In the Methods section, we provide additional details regardingthe classical simulation of the ground states of H.
By sampling parameters in the ( J
1,J2) plane, we create a training set
fð∣ψi/C11
,yiÞgN
i=1composed of ground states ∣ψi/C11
ofHand their associated
labels yi. Here, the labels are in the form of length-two bit strings, i.e.,
yi∈{0, 1}2, where each possible bit string corresponds to a phase that
∣ψi/C11
can belong to. The QCNN maps the n-qubit input state ∣ψi/C11
to a
2-qubit output state. We think of the information about the phase asbeing encoded into the output state by which of the 4 computational
basis effect operators is assigned the smallest probability. Namely, we
deﬁne the loss function as ‘ðα;∣ψ
i/C11
,yiÞ:=yi/C10
∣EQCNN
α ð∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Þ∣yi/C11
.T h i sFig. 2 | Generalization performance of quantum phase recognition. We
employed the QCNN architecture for quantum phase recognition on ground states
of the generalized cluster Hamiltonian Hof Eq. ( 9). We evaluated the phase
assigned by the QCNN to a point in the J1-J2-plane by sampling 8192 computational
basis measurement outcomes and taking the least frequent outcome as the pre-
dicted phase. Panel ( a) visualizes the performance of the QCNN for 16-qubits,
trained with 30 data points, which were labelled according to the analyticallydetermined phase diagram. Blue crosses denote training data points (not all 30 areshown). Blue (red) circles represent correctly (incorrectly) classi ﬁed points. Panel(b) shows that, as the training data size increases, the training accuracy quickly
becomes a good predictor for the testing accuracy on 10,000 randomly sampled
points, i.e., the dependence of testing accuracy on training accuracy is approxi-
mately linear with slope increasing with N. The different points in the plot corre-
spond to different parameter settings in the QCNN throughout the optimization.
The dotted gray line shows the baseline accuracy of 25% achieved by random
guessing. Panel ( c) shows that the improvement in the slope with growing training
data size is similar for different numbers of qubits, re ﬂecting the at-worst poly-
logarithmic dependence of Nonnpredicted by our bounds.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 4

==== Page 5 ====
leads to an empirical risk given by
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1hyi∣EQCNN
α ð∣ψiihψi∣Þ∣yii: ð10Þ
In Fig. 2, we visualize the phase classi ﬁcation performance
achieved by our QCNN, trained according to this loss function, while
additionally taking the number of misclassi ﬁed points into account.
Moreover, we show how the true risk, or rather the test accuracy asproxy for it, correlates well with the achieved training accuracy,already for small training data sizes. This is in agreement with ourtheoretical predictions, discussed in more detail in SupplementaryNote 4, which for QCNNs gives a generalization error bound poly-logarithmic in the number of qubits. We note that refs. 65,66observed
similarly favorable training data requirements for a related task oflearning phase diagrams.
Next, we turn our attention to the unitary compiling application.
Compiling is the task of transforming a high-level algorithm into a low-
level code that can be implemented on a device. Unitary compiling is aparadigmatic task in the NISQ era where a target unitary is compiledinto a gate sequence that complies with NISQ device limitations, e.g.,hardware-imposed connectivity and shallow depth to mitigate errors.Unitary compiling is crucial to the quantum computing industry, as it isessentially always performed prior to running an algorithm on a NISQdevice, and various companies have their own commercialcompilers
67,68. Hence, any ability to accelerate unitary compiling could
have industrial impact.
Here we consider the task of compiling the unitary Uof the n-
qubit Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT)69into a short-depth para-
meterized quantum circuit V(α). For V(α) we employ the VAns (Vari-
able Ansatz) algorithm62,70, which uses a machine learning protocol to
iteratively grow a parameterized quantum circuit by placing andremoving gates in a way that empirically leads to lower loss functionvalues. Unlike traditional approaches that train just continuous para-meters in a ﬁxed structure circuit, VAns also trains discrete para-
meters, e.g., gate placement or type of gate, to explore the architecturehyperspace. In Supplementary Note 5, we apply our theoretical resultsin this compiling scenario.
The training set for compilation is of the form f∣ψ
i/C11
,U∣ψi/C11
gN
i=1,
consisting of input states ∣ψi/C11
and output states obtained through the
action of U.T h e ∣ψi/C11
are drawn independently from an underlying data-
generating distribution. In our numerics, we consider three such dis-tributions: (1) random computational basis states, (2) random (non-orthogonal) low-entangled states, and (3) Haar random n-qubit states.
Note that states in the ﬁrst two distributions are easy to prepare on a
quantum computer, whereas states f rom the last distribution become
costly to prepare as ngrows. As the goal is to train V(α) to match the
action of Uon the training set, we de ﬁne the loss function as the
squared trace distance between U∣ψ
i/C11
and VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
, i.e.,
‘ðα;∣ψi/C11
,U∣ψi/C11
Þ:=∣∣U∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Uy/C0VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣VðαÞy∣∣2
1.T h i sl e a d st o
the empirical risk
^RSðαÞ=1
N∑N
i=1∣∣U∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣Uy/C0VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
ψi/C10
∣VðαÞy∣∣2
1, ð11Þ
where ∣∣⋅∣∣1indicates the trace norm.
Figure 3shows our numerical results. As predicted by our analy-
tical results, we can, with high success probability, accurately compilethe QFT when training on a data set of size polynomial in the number ofqubits. Our numerical investigation shows a linear scaling of thetraining requirements when training on random computational basisstates. This better than the quadratic scaling implied by a directapplication of our theory, which holds for any arbitrary data-
generating distribution. Approximate implementations of QFT with a
reduced number of gates
71, combined with our results, could help tofurther study this apparent gap theoretically. When training on Haar
random states, our numerics suggest that an even smaller number oftraining data points is suf ﬁcient for good generalization: Up to n=9
qubits, we generalize well from a constant number of training data
points, independent of the system size.
Even more striking are our results when initializing close to the
solution. In this case, as shown in Fig. 4,w eﬁnd that two training data
points suf ﬁce to obtain accurate generalization, which holds even up
to a problem size of 40 qubits. Our th eoretical results in Theorem 3 do
predict reduced training requirements when initializing near thesolution. Hence, the numerics are in agreement with the theory,although they paint an even more optimistic picture and suggest thatfurther investigation is needed to understand why the training datarequirements are so low. While the assumption of initialization nearthe solution is only viable assuming additional prior knowledge, it
could be justi ﬁed in certain scenarios. For example, if the unitaries to
be compiled depend on a parameter, e.g., time, and if we have alreadycompiled the unitary for one parameter setting, we might use this asinitialization for unitaries with a similar parameter.
Discussion
We conclude by discussing the impact of our work on speci ﬁc appli-
cations, a comparison to prior work, the interpretation of our resultsfrom the perspective of quantum advantage, and some openquestions.
W eb e g i nw i t had i s c u s s i o no ft h ei m p a c to ns p e c i ﬁc applications.
Quantum phase classi ﬁcation is an exciting application of QML, to
which Ref. 45has successfully applied QCNNs. However, Ref. 45only
provided a heuristic explanation for the good generalization perfor-mance of QCNNs. Here, we have presented a rigorous theory thatencompasses QCNNs and explains their performance, and we haveconﬁrmed it numerically for a fairly complicated phase diagram and a
wide range of system sizes. In particular, our analysis allows us to gobeyond the speci ﬁc model of QCNNs and extract general principles for
how to ensure good generalization. As generating training data for thisproblem asks an experimenter to prepare a variety of states fromdifferent phases of matter, which will require careful tuning of differ-
ent parameters in the underlying Hamiltonian, good generalization
guarantees for small training data sizes are crucial to allow for theimplementation of phase classi ﬁcation through QML in actual physical
experiments.
Several successful protocols for unitary compiling make use of
training data
52–54. However, prior work has relied on training data sets
whose size scaled exponentially with the number of qubits. This scalingis problematic, both because it suggests a similarly bad scaling of thecomputational complexity of processing the data and because gen-erating training data can be expensive in actual physical implementa-tions. Our generalization bounds provide theoretical guarantees on
the performance that unitary compiling with only polynomial-size
training data can achieve, for the relevant case of ef ﬁciently imple-
mentable target unitaries. As we have numerically demonstrated in thecase of the Quantum Fourier Transform, this signi ﬁcant reduction in
training data size makes unitary compiling scalable beyond what pre-vious approaches could achieve. Moreover, our results provide newinsight into why the VAns algorithm
62is successful for unitary com-
piling. We believe that the QML perspective on unitary compilingadvocated for in this work will lead to new and improved ansätze,which could scale to even larger systems.
Recent methods for variational dynamical simulation rely on
quantum compiling to compile a Tro tterized unitary into a structured
ansatz with the form of a diagonalization
48,49,72,73. This technique allows
for quantum simulations of times longer than an iterated Trotteriza-tion because parameters in the diagonalization may be changed byhand to provide longer-time simulations with a ﬁxed depth circuit. We
expect the quantum compiling results presented here to carry over toArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 5

==== Page 6 ====
this application. This will allow these variational quantum simulation
methods to use fewer training resources (either input-output pairs, orentangling auxiliary systems), yet still achieve good generalization andscalability.
Discovering quantum error correcting codes can be viewed as an
optimization problem
44,45,74–78. Furthermore, it can be thought of as a
machine learning problem, since computing the average ﬁdelity of the
code involves training data (e.g., chosen from a 2-design44). Signi ﬁcant
effort has been made to solve this problem on classical computers74–78.
Such approaches can bene ﬁt from our generalization bounds, poten-
tially leading to faster classical discovery of quantum codes. Morerecently, it was proposed to use near-term quantum computers to ﬁndsuch codes
44,45. Again our bounds imply good generalization perfor-
mance with small training data for this application, especially for
QCNNs45, due to their logarithmic number of parameters.
Finally, autoencoders and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
have recently been generalized to the quantum setting13,43,79,80.B o t h
employ training data, and hence our generalization bounds providequantitative guidance for how much training data to employ in theseapplications. Moreover, our results can provide guidance for ansatzdesign. While there is no standard ansatz yet for quantum auto-encoders or quantum GANs, ansätze with a minimal number of para-meters will likely lead to the best generalization performance.
Next, we give a comparison to previously known results. Some
prior works have studied the generalization capabilities of quantum
models, among them the classical learning-theoretic approachesof
81–89; the more geometric perspective of17,18; and the information-
theoretic technique of20,37. Independently of this work, Ref. 38also
investigated covering numbers in QMLMs. However our bounds arestronger, signi ﬁcantly more general, and broader in scope. We give a
detailed comparison of our results to related work in Supplemen-tary Note 1.
To view our results in the context of the quest for quantum
advantage, it is important to note that we do not prove a quantumadvantage of quantum over classical machine learning. However,
generalization bounds for QMLMs are necessary to understand their
potential for quantum advantage. Namely, QMLMs can outperformclassical methods, assuming both achieve small training error, only inscenarios in which QMLMs generalize well, but classical ML methodsdo not. We therefore consider our results a guide in the search forquantum advantage of QML: We need to identify a task in whichQMLMs with few trainable gates achieve small training error, butclassical models need substantially higher model complexity toachieve the same goal. Then, our bounds guarantee that the QMLMperforms well also on unseen data, but we expect the classical modelto generalize poorly due to the high model complexity.
We conclude with some open questions. For QMLMs with expo-
nentially many independently trainable gates, our generalization error
bounds scale exponentially with n, and hence we do not make non-
trivial claims about this regime. H owever, this does not yet imply that
exponential-size QMLMs have bad generalization behavior. Whetherand under which circumstances this is indeed the case is an interestingFig. 3 | Generalization performance of variational unitary compiling. We
employed a variable structure QMLM (as discussed near Theorem 4). Panel ( a)
shows the dependence of Nmin, the minimum training data size for accurate com-
pilation, on n, the number of qubits. Accurate compilation is de ﬁned as achieving
kU/C0VðαÞk2
F<1 0/C05on 1 out of 8 (blue) or on 7 out of 8 (red) runs. For training data
with random computational basis inputs (solid lines), Nminscales linearly in n.W h e n
training on examples with Haar random inputs (dashed lines), Nminis constant up to
system size n= 9. In Panel ( b), for n= 9 qubits, we plot the prediction error ofsuccessfully trained (training cost < 10−8) runs for 8 training data sets with N=1 6t o
N= 30 random computational basis inputs. Panel ( c) shows the dependence of the
testing error on the reciprocal of the training error for different training data sizes,in the case of 9 qubits. Here, the data consisted of random computational basis
states and the corresponding outputs. As Nincreases, small training error becomes
a more reliable predictor for small testing error. Each subplot shows 8 differenttraining runs, trained on different training data sets.
Fig. 4 | Performance of variational unitary compiling when initializing near thesolution. Each panel shows the results of a single randomly initialized training run,
where we used randomly drawn low-entangled states for training. The testing erroron 20 test states, which we allow to be more strongly entangled than the states used
during training, is plotted versus the reciprocal of the training error for training
data sizes N=1 ,2 ,f o rd i f f e r e n ts y s t e ms i z e s n. A training data set of size N= 1 is not
sufﬁcient to guarantee good generalization: Even with decreasing training error,
the testing error remains large. In contrast, assuming favorably initialized training,
N= 2 training data points suf ﬁce for good generalization, even for up to n=4 0
qubits.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 6

==== Page 7 ====
open question (e.g., see17,37for some initial results). More generally,
one can ask: Under what circumstances will a QMLM, even one ofpolynomial size, outperform our general bound. For example, if wehave further prior knowledge about the loss, arising from speci ﬁc
target applications, it might be possible to use this information to
tighten our generalization bounds. Moreover, as our generalization
bounds are valid for arbitrary data-generating distributions, they maybe overly pessimistic for favorable distributions. Concretely, in ournumerical experiments for unitary compiling, highly entangled stateswere more favorable than especially ef ﬁciently preparable states from
the perspective of generalization. It may thus be interesting to inves-tigate distribution-speci ﬁc tightenings of our results. Finally, it may be
fruitful to combine the generalization bounds for QMLMs studied inthis work and the effect of data encodings in
86to yield a better picture
on generalization in quantum machine learning.
Methods
This section gives an overview over our techniques. First, we outlinethe proof strategy that leads to the different generalization boundsstated above. Second, we present more details about our numericalinvestigations.
Analytical methods
An established approach to generalization bounds in classical statis-tical learning theory is to bound a complexity measure for the classunder consideration. Metric entropies, i.e., logarithms of covering
numbers, quantify complexity in exactly the way needed for general-
ization bounds, as one can show using the chaining technique from thetheory of random processes
90,91. Therefore, a high level view of our
proof strategy is: We establish novel metric entropy bounds forQMLMs and then combine these with known generalization resultsfrom classical learning theory. The strongest form of our general-ization bounds is the following.
Theorem 5 .(Mother theorem ). Consider a QMLM with an arbitrary
number of parameterized local quantum channels, where for eachT> 0, we have G
Tdifferent QMLM architectures with Ttrainable local
gates. Suppose that after optimizing on the training data, the QMLM
hasTindependently parameterized local quantum channels, where the
tthchannel is reused at most Mtimes and is changed by Δtduring the
optimization. Without loss of generality, assume Δ1≥…≥ΔT.T h e nw i t h
high probability over input training data of size N, we have
gen ðα*Þ2O min
K=0 , ...,TfðKÞ+ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
logðGTÞ
Nr  !
, ð12Þ
where fðKÞ:=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ
Nq
+∑T
k=K+1MΔk.
We give a detailed proof in Supplementary Note 3. There, we also
describe a variant in case the loss function cannot be evaluated exactly,but only estimated statistically. Here, we present only a sketch of howto prove Theorem 5.
Before the proof sketch, however, we discuss how Theorem 5
relates to the generalization bounds stated above. In particular, wedemonstrate how to obtain Theorems 1, 2, 3, and 4 as special cases ofTheorem 5.
In the scenario of Theorem 1, the QMLM architecture is ﬁxed in
advance, each trainable map is only used once, and we do not takeproperties of the optimization procedure into account. In the languageof Theorem 5, this means: There exists a single T>0w i t h G
T= 1 and we
have G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T.A l s o , M= 1. And instead of taking the minimum
over K=1 ,…,T, we consider the bound for K=T. Plugging this into the
generalization bound of Theorem 5, we recover Theorem 1.
Similarly, Theorem 5 implies Theorems 2, 3, and 4. Namely, if we
take GT=1a n d G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T, and evaluate the bound for K=T,w erecover Theorem 2. Choosing GT= 1 and G~T=0f o ra l l ~T≠T,t h eb o u n d
of Theorem 5 becomes that of Theorem 3. Finally, we can obtainTheorem 4 by bounding the minimu m in Theorem 5 in terms of the
expression evaluated at K=T.
Now that we have established that Theorem 5 indeed implies
generalization bounds for all the different scenarios depicted in Fig. 1,
we outline its proof. The ﬁrst central ingredient to our reasoning are
metric entropy bounds for the class of all n-qubit CPTP maps that a
QMLM as described in Theorem 5 can implement, where the distancebetween such maps is measured in terms of the diamond norm. Note:The trivial metric entropy bound obtained by considering this class ofmaps as compact subset of an Euclidean space of dimension expo-nential in nis not suf ﬁcient for our purposes since it scales exponen-
tially in n. Instead, we exploit the layer structure of QMLMs to obtain a
better bound. More precisely, we show: If we ﬁx a QMLM architecture
with Ttrainable 2-qubit maps and a number of maps 0 ⩽K⩽T,a n dw e
assume (data-dependent) optimization distances Δ
1⩾…⩾ΔT,t h e ni t
sufﬁces to take ( ε/KM)-covering nets for each of the sets of admissible
2-qubit CPTP maps for the ﬁrstKtrainable maps to obtain a
ðε+∑T
k=K+1MΔkÞ-covering net for the whole QMLM. The cardinality of
a covering net built in this way, crucially, is independent of n,b u t
depends instead on K,M,a n d T. In detail, its logarithm can effectively
be bounded as 2OKlogMT =ε/C0/C1/C0/C1
. This argument directly extends
from the 2-local to the κ-local case, as we describe in Supplemen-
tary Note 3.
Now we employ the second core ingredient of our proof strat-
egy. Namely, we combine a known upper bound on the generalization
error in terms of the expected supremum of a certain random pro-cess with the so-called chaining technique. This leads to a general-ization error bound in terms of a metric entropy integral. As we needa non-standard version of this bound, we provide a complete deri-vation for this strengthened form. This then tells us that, for eachﬁxed T,M,K,a n d Δ
1⩾…⩾ΔT, using the covering net constructed
above, we can bound the generalization error asgen ðα*Þ2Oðﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
KlogðMTÞ=Np
+∑
T
k=K+1MΔkÞ, with high probability.
The last step of the proof consists of two applications of the union
bound. The ﬁrst instance is a union bound over the possible values of
K. This leads to a generalization error bound in which we minimize
over K=0 ,…,T. So far, however, the bound still applies only to any
QMLM with ﬁxed architecture. We extend it to variable QMLM archi-
tectures by taking a second union bound over all admissible numbersof trainable gates Tand the corresponding G
Tarchitectures. As this is,
in general, a union bound over countably many events, we have toensure that the corresponding failure probabilities are summable.Thus, we invoke our ﬁxed-architecture generalization error bound for
a success probability that is proportional to ðG
TT2Þ/C01. In that way, the
union bound over all possible architectures yields the logarithmicdependence on G
Tin the ﬁnal bound and completes the proof of
Theorem 5.
Numerical methods
This section discusses numerical methods used throughout the paper.
The subsections give details on computational techniques applied tophase classi ﬁcation of the cluster Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 9) and Quantum
Fourier Transform compilation.
Phase classi ﬁcation . The training and testing sets consist of ground
states ∣ψ
i/C11
of the cluster Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 9), computed for different
coupling strengths ( J1,J2). The states ∣ψi/C11
were obtained with the
translation invariant Density Matrix Renormalization Group92.T h e
states in the training set (represented by blue crosses in Fig. 2a) are
chosen to be away from phase transition lines, so accurate descriptionof the ground states is already achieved at small bond dimension χ.
That value determines the cost of further computation involving thestates ∣ψ
i/C11
a n dw ek e e pi ts m a l lf o re f ﬁcient simulation.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 7

==== Page 8 ====
We use Matrix Product State techniques93to compute and opti-
mize the empirical risk in Eq. ( 10). The main part of that calculation is
the simulation of the action of the QCNN EQCNN
α on a given ground state
∣ψi/C11
.T h em a p EQCNN
α consists of alternating convolutional and pooling
layers. In our implementation the layers are translationally invariant
and are represented by parameterized two-qubit gates. The action of aconvolutional layer on an MPS amounts to updating two nearestneighbor MPS tensors in a way similar to the time-evolving blockdecimation algorithm
94. The pooling layer is simulated in two steps.
First, we simulate the action of all two-qubit gates on an MPS. This isanalogous to the action of a convolutional layer, but performed on adifferent pair of nearest neighbor MPS tensors. This step is followed bya measurement of half of the qubits. We use the fact that the MPS canbe written as a unitary tensor network and hence allows for perfectsampling techniques
95. The measurement step results in a reduction of
t h es y s t e ms i z eb yaf a c t o ro ft w o .
We repeat the application of convolutional and pooling layers
using the MPS as described above until the system size becomes smallenough to allow for an exact description. A few ﬁnal layers are simu-
lated in a standard way and the empirical risk is given by a two-qubitmeasurement according to the label y
i,a si nE q .( 10). The empirical risk
is optimized with the Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approx-imation algorithm
96. We grow the number of shots used in pooling
layer measurements as the empirical risk is minimized. This results in ashot-frugal optimization
97, as one can control the accuracy of the
gradient based on the current optimization landscape.
Unitary compiling . In the Numerical results section, we show that the
task of unitary compilation can be translated into minimization ofthe empirical risk ^R
SðαÞdeﬁned in Eq. ( 11). Here, α=(θ,k) denotes a
set of parameters that speci ﬁes a trainable unitary V(α). The opti-
mization is performed in the space of all shallow circuits. It has dis-crete and continuous components. The discrete parameters k
control the circuit layout, that is, the placement of all gates used inthe circuit. Those gates are described by the continuous parametersθ. The optimization min
α^RSðαÞis performed with the recently intro-
duced VAns algorithm62,70. The unitary V(α) is initialized with a circuit
that consists of a few randomly placed gates. In subsequent itera-
tions, VAns modi ﬁes the structure parameter kaccording to certain
rules that involve randomly placing a resolution of the identity andremoving gates that do not signi ﬁcantly contribute to the mini-
mization of the empirical risk ^R
SðαÞ. The qFactor algorithm54,m o d -
iﬁed to work with a set of pairs of states as opposed to a target
unitary, is used to optimize over continuous parameters θforﬁxedk.
This optimization is performed after each update to the structureparameter k. In subsequent iterations, VAns makes a probabilistic
decision whether the new set of parameters α
0is kept or rejected.
This decision is based on the change in empirical risk ^RSðα0Þ/C0 ^RSðαÞ,
an arti ﬁcial temperature T,a n daf a c t o r Λthat sets the penalty for
growing the circuit too quickly. To that end, we employ a simulatedannealing technique, gradually decreasing TandΛ, and repeat the
iterations described above until ^R
SðαÞreaches a suf ﬁciently
small value.
Let us now discuss the methods used to optimize the empirical
risk when V(α) is initialized close to the solution. Here, we start with a
textbook circuit for performing the QFT and modify it in the followingway. First, the circuit is rewritten such that it consists of two-qubitgates only. Next, each two-qubit gate uis replaced with u
0=ueiδh,
where his a random Hermitian matrix and δis chosen such that ∣∣u/C0
u0∣∣=ϵfor an initially speci ﬁedϵ. The results presented in the Numer-
ical results section are obtained with ϵ=0 . 1 . T h e p e r t u r b a t i o n c o n -
sidered here does not affect the circuit layout and hence theoptimization over continuous parameters θis suf ﬁcient to minimize
the empirical risk ^R
SðαÞ. We use qFactor to perform that optimization.The input states ∣ψi/C11
in the training set f∣ψi/C11
,UQFT ∣ψi/C11
gN
i=1are
random MPSs of bond dimension χ=2 . T h e Q F T i s e f ﬁciently
simulable98for such input states, which means that UQFT ∣ψi/C11
admits an
efﬁcient MPS description. Indeed, we ﬁnd that a bond dimension χ<2 0
is suf ﬁcient to accurately describe UQFT ∣ψi/C11
. In summary, the use of
MPS techniques allows us to construct the training set ef ﬁciently. Note
that the states VðαÞ∣ψi/C11
are in general more entangled than UQFT ∣ψi/C11
,
especially at the beginning of the optimization. Because of that, wetruncate the evolved MPS during the optimization. We ﬁnd that a
maximal allowed bond dimension of 100 is large enough to performstable, successful minimization of the empirical risk with qFactor. Thetesting is performed with 20 randomly chosen initial states. We testwith bond dimension χ= 10 MPSs, so the testing is done with more
strongly entangled states than the training. Additionally, for systemsizes up to 16 qubits, we verify that the trained unitary Vis close (in the
trace norm) to U
QFT, when training is performed with at least two
states.
Data availability
The data generated and analyzed during the current study are availablefrom the authors upon request.
Code availability
Further implementation details are available from the authors uponrequest.
References
1. Vapnik, V. N. & Chervonenkis, A. Y. On the uniform convergence of
relative frequencies of eve nts to their probabilities. Th. Prob. App.
16,2 6 4 –280 (1971).
2. Pollard, D. Convergence of stochastic processes (Springer, 1984).
3. Giné, E. & Zinn, J. Some limit theorems for empirical processes. Ann.
Probability 929 –989. https://doi.org/10.1214/aop/
1176993138 (1984).
4. Dudley, R. M. Uniform Central Limit Theorems (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1999).
5. Bartlett, P. L. & Mendelson, S. Rademacher and gaussian com-
plexities: Risk bounds a nd structural results. J. Machine Learning
Res.3,4 6 3 –482 (2002).
6. Biamonte, J. Quantum machine learning. Nature 549,
195 –202 (2017).
7. Schuld, M., Sinayskiy, I. & Petruccione, F. An introduction
to quantum machine learning. Contemporary Phys. 56,
172–185 (2015).
8. Schuld, M., Sinayskiy, I. & Petruccione, F. The quest for a quantum
neural network. Quantum Inf. Process. 13,2 5 6 7 –2586 (2014).
9. Dunjko, V. & Briegel, H. J. Machine learning & arti ﬁcial intelligence in
the quantum domain: a review of recent progress. Rep. Prog. Phys.
81,0 7 4 0 0 1( 2 0 1 8 ) .
10. Cerezo, M. Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3,
625 –644 (2021).
11. Havlí ček, V. Supervised learning with quantum-enhanced feature
spaces. Nature 567,2 0 9 –212 (2019).
1 2 . F a r h i ,E .&N e v e n ,H . Classi ﬁcation with quantum neural networks on
near term processors , arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06002 (2018).
13. Romero, J., Olson, J. P. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum autoencoders
for ef ﬁcient compression of quantum data. Quantum Sci. Technol.
2,0 4 5 0 0 1( 2 0 1 7 ) .
1 4 . W a n ,K .H . ,D a h l s t e n ,O . ,K r i s t j á n s s o n ,H . ,G a r d n e r ,R .&K i m ,M .S .
Quantum generalisation of feedforward neural networks. npj
Quantum Inf. 3,1–8( 2 0 1 7 ) .
1 5 . L a r o c c a ,M . ,J u ,N . ,G a r c í a - M a r t í n ,D . ,C o l e s ,P .J .&C e r e z o ,M .
Theory of overparametrization in quantum neural networks, arXivpreprint arXiv:2109.11676 (2021).Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 8

==== Page 9 ====
16. Schatzki, L., Arrasmith, A., Coles, P. J. & Cerezo, M. Entangled
datasets for quantum machine learning, arXiv preprintarXiv:2109.03400 (2021).
17. Huang, H. Y. Power of data in quantum machine learning. Nat.
Commun. 12,1–9( 2 0 2 1 ) .
18. Abbas, A. The power of quantum neural networks. Nat. Comput. Sci.
1,4 0 3 –409 (2021).
19. Liu, Y., Arunachalam, S. & Temme, K. A rigorous and robust quan-
tum speed-up in supervi sed machine learning, https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41567-021-01287-z Nat. Phys. ,1–5( 2 0 2 1 ) .
20. Huang, H. Y., Kueng, R. & Preskill, J. Information-theoretic bounds
on quantum advantage in machine learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126,
190505 (2021).
21. Aharonov, D., Cotler, J. & Qi, X. L. Quantum algorithmic measure-
ment. Nat. Commun. 13,1–9 (2022).
22. McClean, J. R., Boixo, S., Smelyanskiy, V. N., Babbush, R. & Neven,
H. Barren plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes.Nat. Commun. 9,1–6( 2 0 1 8 ) .
23. Cerezo, M., Sone, A., Volkoff, T., Cincio, L. & Coles, P. J. Cost
function dependent barren plateaus in shallow parametrizedquantum circuits. Nat. Commun. 12,1–12 (2021).
24. Cerezo, M. & Coles, P. J. Higher order derivatives of quantum neural
networks with barren plateaus. Quantum Sci. Technol. 6,
035006 (2021).
2 5 . A r r a s m i t h ,A . ,C e r e z o ,M . ,C z a r n i k ,P . ,C i n c i o ,L .&C o l e s ,P .J .E f f e c t
of barren plateaus on gradient-free optimization. Quantum 5,
558 (2021).
26. Holmes, Z., Sharma, K., Cerezo, M. & Coles, P. J. Connecting ansatz
expressibility to gradient magnitudes and barren plateaus. PRX
Quantum 3, 010313 (2022).
27. Pesah, A. Absence of barren plateaus in quantum convolutional
neural networks. Phys. Rev. X 11, 041011 (2021).
28. Volkoff, T. & Coles, P. J. Large gradients via correlation in random
parameterized quantum circuits. Quantum Sci. Technol. 6,
025008 (2021).
29. Sharma, K., Cerezo, M., Cincio, L. & Coles, P. J. Trainability of dis-
sipative perceptron-based quantum neural networks. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 128, 180505 (2022).
30. Holmes, Z. Barren plateaus pr eclude learning scramblers. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 126, 190501 (2021).
3 1 . M a r r e r o ,C .O . ,K i e f e r o v á ,M .&W i e b e ,N .E n t a n g l e m e n t - i n d u c e d
barren plateaus. PRX Quantum 2,0 4 0 3 1 6( 2 0 2 1 ) .
32. Uvarov, A. V. & Biamonte, J. D. On barren plateaus and cost function
locality in variational quantum algorithms. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor.
54, 245301 (2021).
33. Patti, T. L., Naja ﬁ,K . ,G a o ,X .&Y e l i n ,S .F .E n t a n g l e m e n td e v i s e d
barren plateau mitigation. Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 033090 (2021).
34. Wang, S. Noise-induced barren plateaus in variational quantum
algorithms. Nat. Commun. 12,1–11 (2021).
35. Larocca, M. et al. Diagnosing barren plateaus with tools from
quantum optimal control , arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14377 (2021).
36. Thanaslip, S., Wang, S., Nghiem, N. A., Coles, P. J. & Cerezo, M.
Subtleties in the trainability of quantum machine learning models ,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14753 (2021).
37. Banchi, L., Pereira, J. & Pirandola, S. Generalization in quantum
machine learning: a quantum information standpoint. PRX Quantum
2, 040321 (2021).
38. Du, Y., Tu, Z., Yuan, X. & Tao, D. Ef ﬁcient measure for the expressivity
of variational quantum algorithms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128,
080506 (2022).
39. Poland, K., Beer, K. & Osborne, T. J. No free lunch for quantum
machine learning , arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14103 (2020).
40. Sharma, K. Reformulation of the no-free-lunch theorem for entan-
gled datasets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 070501 (2022).41. Bharti, K. Noisy intermediat e-scale quantum algorithms. Rev. Mod-
ern Phys. 94, 015004 (2022).
42. Endo, S., Cai, Z., Benjamin, S. C. & Yuan, X. Hybrid quantum-
classical algorithms and quantum error mitigation. J. Phys. Soc.
Japan 90,0 3 2 0 0 1( 2 0 2 1 ) .
43. Romero, J. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Variational quantum generators:
Generative adversarial quantum machine learning for continuousdistributions. Adv. Quantum Technol. 4, 2000003 (2021).
44. Johnson, P. D., Romero, J., Olson, J., Cao, Y. & Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Qvector: an algorithm for device-ta ilored quantum error correction ,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02249 (2017).
45. Cong, I., Choi, S. & Lukin, M. D. Quantum convolutional neural
networks. Nat. Phys. 15,1 2 7 3 –1278 (2019).
46. Khatri, S. Quantum-assisted quantum compiling. Quantum 3,
140 (2019).
47. Sharma, K., Khatri, S., Cerezo, M. & Coles, P. J. Noise resilience of
variational quantum compiling. New J. Phys. 22, 043006 (2020).
48. Cirstoiu, C. Variational fast forwarding for quantum simulation
beyond the coherence time. npj Quantum Inf. 6,1–10 (2020).
49. Commeau, B. et al. Variational hamiltoni an diagonalization for
dynamical quantum simulation , arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.02559 (2020).
50. Endo, S., Sun, J., Li, Y., Benjamin, S. C. & Yuan, X. Variational
q u a n t u ms i m u l a t i o no fg e n e r a lp r o c e s s e s . Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
010501 (2020).
51. Li, Y. & Benjamin, S. C. Ef ﬁcient variational quantum simulator
incorporating active error minimization. Phys. Rev. X 7,
021050 (2017).
52. Cincio, L., Suba şí, Y., Sornborger, A. T. & Coles, P. J. Learning the
quantum algorithm for state overlap. New J. Phys. 20, 113022 (2018).
53. Cincio, L., Rudinger, K., Sarovar, M. & Coles, P. J. Machine learning
of noise-resilient quantum circuits. PRX Quantum 2, 010324 (2021).
54. Younis, E. & Cincio, L. https://github.com/BQSKit/qfactor Quantum
Fast Circuit Optimizer (qFactor).
55. Pérez-Salinas, A., Cervera-Lierta, A., Gil-Fuster, E. & Latorre, J. Data
re-uploading for a universal quantum classi ﬁer.Quantum 4,
226 (2020).
56. Preskill, J. Quantum compu ting in the nisq era and beyond. Quan-
tum2,7 9( 2 0 1 8 ) .
57. Romero, J. Strategies for quant um computing molecular energies
using the unitary coupled cluster ansatz. Quantum Sci. Technol. 4,
014008 (2018).
5 8 . S h i r a i ,N . ,K u b o ,K . ,M i t a r a i ,K .&F u j i ,K . Quantum tangent kernel ,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02951 (2021).
59. Liu, J., Tacchino, F., Glick, J. R., Jiang, L. & Mezzacapo, A. Repre-
sentation learning via quantum neural tangent kernels ,a r X i vp r e -
print arXiv:2111.04225 (2021).
60. Grimsley, H. R., Economou, S. E., Barnes, E. & Mayhall, N. J. An
adaptive variational algorithm for exact molecular simulations on a
quantum computer. Nat. Commun. 10,1–9( 2 0 1 9 ) .
61. Tang, H. L. qubit-adapt-vqe: an adaptive algorithm for constructing
hardware-ef ﬁcient ansätze on a quantum processor. PRX Quantum
2, 020310 (2021).
62. Bilkis, M., Cerezo, M., Verdon, G., Coles, P. J. & Cincio, L. As e m i -
agnostic ansatz with variable structure for quantum machine learn-ing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06712 (2021).
63. Zhu, L. et al. An adaptive quantum approximate optimization algo-
rithm for solving combinatorial problems on a quantum computer,arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10258 (2020).
64. Verresen, R., Moessner, R. & Pollmann, F. One-dimensional sym-
metry protected topological phases and their transitions. Phys. Rev.
B96, 165124 (2017).
65. Kottmann, K., Corboz, P., Lewenstein, M. & Acín, A. Unsupervised
mapping of phase diagrams of 2d systems from in ﬁnite projectedArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 9

==== Page 10 ====
entangled-pair states via deep anomaly detection. Sci. Post Phys. 11,
025 (2021).
66. Kottmann, K., Metz, F., Fraxanet, J. & Baldelli, N. Variational quan-
tum anomaly detection: Unsupervised mapping of phase diagrams
on a physical quantum computer. P h y s .R e v .R e s . 3, 043184 (2021).
6 7 . C r o s s ,A .W . ,B i s h o p ,L .S . ,S m o l i n ,J .A .&G a m b e t t a ,J .M . Open
quantum assembly language , arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03429 (2017).
6 8 . S m i t h ,R .S . ,C u r t i s ,M .J .&Z e n g ,W .J . A practical quantum
instruction set architecture , arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03355 (2016).
6 9 . N i e l s e n ,M .A .&C h u a n g ,I .L . Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
70. Bilkis, M. An implementation of VAns: A semi-agnostic ansatz with
variable structure for quantum machine learning .https://github.
com/matibilkis/qvans .
71. Nam, Y., Su, Y. & Maslov, D. Approximate quantum fourier transform
with o (n log (n)) t gates. NPJ Quantum Inf. 6,1–6( 2 0 2 0 ) .
72. Gibbs, J. et al. Long-time simulations with high ﬁdelity on quantum
hardware , arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04313 (2021).
7 3 . G e l l e r ,M .R . ,H o l m e s ,Z . ,C o l e s ,P .J .&S o r n b o r g e r ,A .E x p e r i m e n t a l
quantum learning of a spectral decomposition. Phys. Rev. Res. 3,
033200 (2021).
7 4 . F l e t c h e r ,A .S . ,S h o r ,P .W .&W i n, M. Z. Channel-adapted quantum
error correction for the amplitude damping channel. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory 54,5 7 0 5 –5718 (2008).
75. Fletcher, A. S., Shor, P. W. & Win, M. Z. Structured near-optimal
channel-adapted quantum error correction. Phys. Rev. A 77,
012320 (2008).
76. Kosut, R. L., Shabani, A. & Lidar, D. A. Robust quantum error cor-
rection via convex optimization. P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 100, 020502 (2008).
77. Kosut, R. L. & Lidar, D. A. Quantum error correction via convex
optimization. Quantum Inf. Process. 8,4 4 3 –459 (2009).
78. Taghavi, S., Kosut, R. L. & Lidar, D. A. Channel-optimized quantum
error correction. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 56,1 4 6 1 –1473 (2010).
79. Lloyd, S. & Weedbrook, C. Quantum generative adversarial learn-
ing.Phys. Rev. Lett. 121,0 4 0 5 0 2( 2 0 1 8 ) .
8 0 . D a l l a i r e - D e m e r s ,P .L .&K i l l o r a n , N. Quantum generative adversarial
networks. P h y s .R e v .A 98,0 1 2 3 2 4( 2 0 1 8 ) .
81. Caro, M. C. & Datta, I. Pseudo-dimension of quantum circuits.
Quantum Mach. Intell. 2, 14 (2020).
82. Bu, K., Koh, D. E., Li, L., Luo, Q. & Zhang, Y. Statistical complexity of
quantum circuits. P h y s .R e v .A 105, 062431 (2022).
83. Bu, K., Koh, D. E., Li, L., Luo, Q. & Zhang, Y. Effects of quantum
resources on the statistical co mplexity of quantum circuits ,a r X i v
preprint arXiv:2102.03282 (2021).
84. Bu, K., Koh, D. E., Li, L., Luo, Q. & Zhang, Y. Rademacher complexity
of noisy quantum circuits , arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03139 (2021).
85. Gyurik, C., van Vreumingen, D. & Dunjko, V. Structural risk mini-
mization for quantum linear classi ﬁers, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.05566 (2021).
8 6 . C a r o ,M .C . ,G i l - F u s t e r ,E . ,M e y e r ,J .J . ,E i s e r t ,J .&S w e k e ,R .
Encoding-dependent generalization bounds for parametrizedquantum circuits. Quantum 5, 582 (2021).
87. Chen, C. C. On the expressibility and over ﬁtting of quantum circuit
learning. ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 2,1–24 (2021).
8 8 . P o p e s c u ,C .M .L e a r n i n gb o u n d sf o rq u a n t u mc i r c u i t si nt h e
agnostic setting. Quantum Inf. Process. 20,1–24 (2021).
8 9 . C a i ,H . ,Y e ,Q .&D e n g ,D .L .S a m p l ec o m p l e x i t yo fl e a r n i n gp a r a -
metric quantum circuits. Quantum Sci. Technol. 7, 025014 (2022).
90. Mohri, M., Rostamizadeh, A. & Talwalkar, A. Foundations of Machine
Learning (MIT Press, 2018).
91. Vershynin, R. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with
Applications in Data Science (Cambridge University Press, 2018).
92. White, S. R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization
groups. P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 69,2 8 6 3( 1 9 9 2 ) .93. Orús, R. A practical introduction to tensor networks: Matrix product
states and projected entangled pair states. Ann. Phys. 349,
117–158 (2014).
94. Vidal, G. Classical simulation of in ﬁnite-size quantum lattice sys-
tems in one spatial dimension. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 070201 (2007).
95. Ferris, A. J. & Vidal, G. Perfect sampling with unitary tensor net-
works. P h y s .R e v .B 85, 165146 (2012).
96. Spall, J. C. An overview of the simultaneous perturbation method
for ef ﬁcient optimization. Johns Hopkins Apl Technical Digest 19,
482 –492 (1998).
97. Kübler, J. M., Arrasmith, A., Cincio, L. & Coles, P. J. An adaptive
optimizer for measurement-fr ugal variational algorithms. Quantum
4, 263 (2020).
98. Browne, D. E. Ef ﬁcient classical simulation of the quantum fourier
transform. New J. Phys. 9
,1 4 6( 2 0 0 7 ) .
Acknowledgements
M.C.C. was supported by the TopMath Graduate Center of the TUM
Graduate School at the Technical University of Munich, Germany, theTopMath Program at the Elite Network of Bavaria, and by a doctoralscholarship of the German Academi c Scholarship Foundation (Stu-
dienstiftung des deutschen Volkes). H.H. is supported by the J. Yang &Family Foundation. M.C., K.S., and L.C. were initially supported by theLANL LDRD program under project number 20190065DR. M.C. was alsosupported by the Center for Nonlinear Studies at LANL. K.S. acknowl-edges support the Department of Defense. A.T.S. and P.J.C. acknowl-
edge initial support from the LANL ASC Beyond Moore ’s Law project.
P.J.C. and L.C. were also supported by the U.S. Department of Energy(DOE), Of ﬁce of Science, Of ﬁce of Advanced Scienti ﬁcC o m p u t i n g
Research, under the Accelerated Research in Quantum Computing(ARQC) program. L.C. also acknowledges support from LANL LDRDprogram under project number 20200022DR. A.T.S. was additionallysupported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Of ﬁce of Science, National
Quantum Information Science Res earch Centers, Quantum Science
Center. This research used resources provided by the Los AlamosNational Laboratory Institutional Computing Program, which is sup-ported by the U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security
Administration under Contra ct No. 89233218CNA000001.
Author contributions
The project was conceived by M.C.C., H.-Y.H., and P.J.C. The manuscript
was written by M.C.C., H.-Y.H., M.C., K.S., A.S., L.C., and P.J.C. Theore-tical results were proved by M.C.C. and H.-Y.H. The applications wereconceived by M.C.C., H.-Y.H., M.C., K.S., A.S., L.C., and P.J.C. Numericalimplementations were performed by M.C. and L.C.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary
material available athttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3 .
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Matthias C. Caro.
Reprints and permission information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 10

==== Page 11 ====
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in thisarticle are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is notincluded in the article ’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory re gulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2022, corrected publication 2022Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32550-3
Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:4919 11

