==== Page 1 ====
ARTICLE OPEN
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) based ef ﬁcient
sampling of chemical composition space for inverse
design of inorganic materials
Yabo Dan1, Yong Zhao2, Xiang Li1, Shaobo Li1,3, Ming Hu4and Jianjun Hu1,2✉
A major challenge in materials design is how to ef ﬁciently search the vast chemical design space to ﬁnd the materials with desired
properties. One effective strategy is to develop sampling algorithms that can exploit both explicit chemical knowledge and implicit
composition rules embodied in the large materials database. Here, we propose a generative machine learning model (MatGAN)based on a generative adversarial network (GAN) for ef ﬁcient generation of new hypothetical inorganic materials. Trained with
materials from the ICSD database, our GAN model can generate hypothetical materials not existing in the training dataset, reaching
a novelty of 92.53% when generating 2 million samples. The percentage of chemically valid (charge-neutral and electronegativity-
balanced) samples out of all generated ones reaches 84.5% when generated by our GAN trained with such samples screened fromICSD, even though no such chemical rules are explicitly enforced in our GAN model, indicating its capability to learn implicit
chemical composition rules to form compounds. Our algorithm is expected to be used to greatly expand the range of the design
space for inverse design and large-scale computational screening of inorganic materials.
npj Computational Materials            (2020) 6:84 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00352-0
INTRODUCTION
Discovering new inorganic materials such as solid electrolytes for
lithium-ion batteries is fundamental to many industrial applica-tions. While recent years have observed tremendous efforts onrational materials design, progress has been limited due to thechallenge to ﬁnd new materials that meet diverse technical and
economic constraints. From the computational perspective, brute-force molecular simulations or ﬁrst-principles methods are
computationally too expensive for large-scale screening of thevast chemical space. A recent effort
1to quantify the magnitude of
the compositional space for multi-component inorganic materialsshowed that even after the application of chemical ﬁlters such as
charge neutrality or electronegativity balance, the space for four-component/element materials exceeds 10
10combinations and the
ﬁve-component/element space exceeds 1013combinations.
Indeed, a machine learning (ML) based model has been appliedto screen billions of hypothetical materials to identify promisinghigh ion-conductors
2. Considering the huge space of doped
materials with different mixing ratios of elements and manyapplications such as high-temperature superconductors, where sixto seven component materials are common, the number ofpotential materials is immense. Such combinatorial explosion callsfor the need for more effective sampling approaches to search thechemical design space that employ existing explicit chemical andphysical knowledge and also implicit elemental compositionknowledge embodied within known synthesized materials. Togain more ef ﬁcient search, a variety of explicit chemical rules for
assessing the feasibility of a given stoichiometry and thelikelihood of particular crystal arrangements have been used incomputational screening such as the Pauling ’s rules (charge
neutrality), electronegativity balance, the radius ratio rules
3,
Pettifor maps4and etc. However, such approaches still fail tocapture enough implicit chemical rules to achieve ef ﬁcient
chemical design space sampling.
Recently, generative machine learning models such as auto-
encoders (AE) and its variants (VAE, AAE), RNNs, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) have been successfully applied toinverse design of organic materials5–8. These algorithms mainly
exploit the sequential or graph representations of organic
materials to learn the composition rules of the building blocksfor generating valid and novel hypothetical materials. Given alarge set of samples, a GAN is capable of learning complicated
hidden rules that generate the training data, and then applies
these learned rules to create new samples with target properties.When applied to inverse design, GANs have demonstrated their
power in ef ﬁcient sampling of design space
5,9, more ef ﬁcient than
other sampling approaches such as random sampling10, Monte
Carlo sampling, and other heuristic sampling (such as genetic
algorithms11). However, due to the radical difference in building
blocks and their composition rules, such generative machinelearning models have not been applied to the generation of
inorganic materials so far to the best of our knowledge. Recently,
variational autoencoders11,12have been proposed to generate
hypothetical crystal structures of inorganic materials. However,these methods are either limited to generate new structures of a
given material system such as the V –O system11or tend to mostly
generate crystal materials that are not physically stable12. A GAN
model for discovering new crystal structures have also been
recently proposed13. However, their study is limited to very
restricted binary systems and lacks composition diversity forgenerated structures. Another related work14proposes to use
conditional GAN and VAE models for composition generation.
However, they use real-valued one-hot encoding of materials, fullyconnected neural network architecture, and mixed Wasserstein
1School of Mechanical Engineering, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China.2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
29201, USA.3Key Laboratory of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China.4Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29201, USA.✉email: jianjunh@cse.sc.eduwww.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;

==== Page 2 ====
losses and least square loss of properties, which makes their
models tend to generate invalid compositions with very low
composition diversity.
In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst generative adversarial
network model for ef ﬁcient sampling of inorganic materials design
space by generating hypothetical inorganic materials. Trained
with materials from inorganic materials databases such as
OQMD15, Materials Project16, and ICSD, our GAN models are able
to learn the implicit chemical compositional rules from the knownmaterials to generate hypothetical but chemically sound com-
pounds. Without explicitly specifying the chemical rules, our GANs
trained with all charge-neutral and electronegativity-balancedsamples of the ICSD subset can generate hypothetical materials
with 84.5% reproducing the charge neutrality and balanced
electronegativity. The analysis shows that our generative GAN canachieve much higher ef ﬁciency in sampling the chemical
composition space of inorganic materials than the exhaustive
enumeration approach.
RESULTS
Representation of inorganic materialsThrough simple statistical calculation of the materials in the
OQMD dataset
17, 85 elements are found, and each element
usually has <8 atoms in any speci ﬁc compound/formula. We then
represent each material as a sparse matrix T2
Rd´sd¼8;s¼85 ðÞ with 0/1 integer values. Each column
represents one of the 85 elements while the column vector is aone-hot encoding of the number of atoms of that speci ﬁc element
(see Supplementary Fig. 5). The binary one-hot encoding is chosen
as two of the major chemical rules for valid chemical compositionsincluding the charge neutrality and electronegativity balance are
checked by the discrete atom numbers of composing elements
and our binary encoding allows us to take advantage of the strongbinary pattern learning capability of convolutional neural net-works used in our GAN models. Here the columns (elements) are
sorted by their atomic number and rows are sorted from 0 to 7.
The GAN generation model
Generative models can be built on several machine learning
algorithms such as variational autoencoder (VAE), generativeadversarial networks (GAN), reinforcement learning (RL), recurrentneural networks (RNN), and their hybrids
5. Different from other
generative models18,19, GANs do not directly use the discrepancy
of the data and an assumed model distribution (as VAE) to trainthe generator. Instead, it uses an adversarial training approach: it
ﬁrst trains a discriminator to differentiate real samples from faked
samples, which then guides the training of the generator toreduce this difference. These two training processes are alter-natively repeated. Their arm race will lead to high performance of
both the generator and the discriminator.
Our generative ML model for inorganic materials (MatGAN) is
based on the GAN scheme as shown in Fig. 1.
We choose the 8 × 85 matrix representation of materials
samples to build the GAN model. We found the integer
representation of materials greatly facilities the GAN training. Inour GAN model, both the discriminator (D) and the generator (G)
are modeled as a deep neural network. The generator is
composed of one fully connected layer and seven deconvolutionlayers. The discriminator is composed of seven convolution layersfollowed by a fully connected layer. Each of the convolution and
deconvolution layer comes with a batch normalization layer. The
output layer of the generator uses the Sigmoid function as theactivation function while all other batch normalization layers usethe ReLu as the activation function. The detailed network
conﬁguration is shown in Supplementary Table 2. In order to
avoid the gradient vanishing issue of standard GANs, we adoptthe Wasserstein GAN
20, which replaces the JS divergence distance
with the Wasserstein distance. The GAN model will be trainedusing the Wasserstein GAN approach by minimizing both the
generator loss and discriminator loss, which are de ﬁned as
Loss
G¼/C0Ex:PgfwðxÞ ½/C138 (1)
Loss D¼Ex:PgfwðxÞ ½/C138 /C0 Ex:prfwðxÞ ½/C138 (2)
where, Pgand Prare the distributions of generated samples and
real samples; fwðxÞis the discriminant network. Equations ( 1) and
(2) are used to guide the training process. The smaller the Loss D,
the smaller the Wasserstein distance between the generated
samples and the real samples and the better the GAN is trained.
Variational autoencoder for evaluating GAN performance
During our GAN generation experiments for OQMD dataset, we
found that it sometimes has dif ﬁculty to generate a speci ﬁc
category of materials. This may be caused by the limited samplesto learn the required composition rules to generate those samples.
To investigate this issue, we built an autoencoder (AE)21model as
shown in Fig. 2. The autoencoder is composed of an encoder with
seven convolutional layers followed by a fully connected layer anda decoder composed of a fully connected layer followed by sevendeconvolution layers. After each of the convolution and deconvo-
lution layer, there is a batch normalization layer used to speed up
Real 
samplesGenerated fake 
samples
Generator(G)
Discriminator(D)zLatent space
Is D
Correct
Fine-tuning
Fig. 1 Architecture of MatGAN for inorganic materials. It is
composed of a generator, which maps random vectors intogenerated samples and a discriminator, which tries to differentiatereal materials and generated ones. Detailed con ﬁguration para-
meters are listed in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1.
Encoder Decoder
Conv DeConvComposition
EncodingComposition
EncodingMnAu MnAu
Latent space
Fig. 2 Architecture of autoencoder. Detail con ﬁguration para-
meters are shown in Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary
Fig. 2.Y. Dan et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;

==== Page 3 ====
training and reduce the in ﬂuence of initial network weights22. The
ReLu is used as the activation function for all the batch
normalization layers. The Sigmoid function is used as the
activation function for the decoder ’s output layer. The detailed
conﬁguration parameters are listed in Supplementary Table 2. The
autoencoder are trained with 291,840 inorganic materials selectedfrom the OQMD database. In order to ensure the overlap betweenthe original input matrix T and the matrix reconstructed by thedecoder as much as possible, we adopt the negative dicecoefﬁcient
23commonly used in medical image semantic segmen-
tation as the loss function of AE. The AE model is then trainedusing the back-propagation algorithm. The loss function is shownin the following equation:
Loss
AE¼/C0Dice ¼/C02A\Bjj
AjjþBjj/C25/C02´A/C1B
SumðAÞþSumðBÞ(3)
where A\Bdenotes the common elements of Aand B, |g|
represents the number of elements in a matrix, /C1denotes dot
product, Sum(g) is the sum of all matrix elements. Dice coef ﬁcient
essentially measures the overlap of two matrix samples, with
values ranging from 0 to 1 with 1 indicating perfect overlap24.
The decoder module of the AE model shares the same
architecture of the generator in our MatGAN model. Ourhypothesis is that if the trained AE model cannot decode aspeci ﬁc material, it is unlikely our GAN model can generate it. By
screening out the non-decodable materials out of the OQMDdatabase using the AE, we may obtain a deeper understanding ofthe limitations of our GAN models.
The model performance of GANs
Efﬁcient sampling of the inorganic chemical space by the GANs .W e
trained our GANs according to the procedures as detailed in the
“Methods ”section. For all these GANs, including GAN-OQMD,
GAN-MP, and GAN-ICSD, we then generated 2 million hypotheticalmaterials using each of these generators and evaluate theirvalidity, uniqueness, and novelty.
Mapping inorganic materials design space
Out of the 2 million samples generated by the GAN-ICSD, we ﬁlter
out all samples that do not satisfy charge neutrality and balanced
electronegativity leading to 1.69 million generated samples. To
visualize how the generated ones are distributed compared to thetraining datasets from ICSD, we applied T-sne dimensionreduction technique
25to reduce the dimension of the matrix
representations of the samples from the generated set, thetraining set, and the leave-out validation set. The distribution ofthe generated samples versus the training and validation set areshown in Fig. 3. It is observed that the training samples from ICSDoccupy only a very small portion of the whole space. The GAN-
ICSD, however, has been able to generate potentially interestinghypothetical materials that ﬁll the design space, which may
signi ﬁcantly expand the range of the ICSD database.
Validity check . Charge neutrality and electronegativity balance
are two fundamental chemical rules of crystals. It is thus
interesting to check how the generated samples from our GANmodels satisfy these rules without explicit enforcement of suchrules during model training. To do this, we adopt the charge-
neutrality and electronegativity check procedure as proposed in
ref.
1to calculate the percentages of samples that obey these rules
within the training and generated sets of all four databases. The
results are shown in Fig. 4. First, we found that the percentages of
the validly generated samples are very close to those of thetraining set. For OQMD, when the training set has 55.8% charge-neutral samples, the generated set has 56.1%. For MP and ICSD,
the percentage of generated charge-neutral samples (84.8 and
80.3%) are also close to those of the training sets (83.5% and84.4%). Similar observations are found for electronegativity check.It is impressive that when we ensure all training samples in the
ICSD_ ﬁlter are charge-neutral and electronegativity-balanced, up
to 92.1% and 84.5% of the generated samples satisfy the twochemical rules, respectively, despite that no such rules areexplicitly modeled or enforced in our GAN training models. To
demonstrate the signi ﬁcance of this high percentage of chemi-
cally valid candidates, we compare our results to the exhaustiveenumeration approach in ref.
1, Table 1. The percentage of all
binary/ternary/quaternary samples that satisfy both charge
neutrality and electronegativity is 0.78% with exhaustive enu-meration compared with our 62.24%, which corresponds to 77times of enrichment in terms of sampling ef ﬁciency. This strongly
indicates that our GAN models have successfully learned implicit
chemical rules for generating chemically valid hypotheticalmaterials.
Formation energy distribution of generated materials
another way to evaluate the quality of generated hypothetical
materials is to check their stability, which can be measured by
their formation energy
26. To do this, ﬁrst, GAN-OQMD, GAN-ICSD,
and GAN-MP were used to generate 2 million materials candidateseach. Then, we selected all the materials with lithium element and
then ﬁlter out all those materials that do not satisfy charge
neutrality and balanced electronegativity. Finally, we obtained15,591, 137,948, and 281,320 lithium-containing compounds,
respectively, from GAN-OQMD, GAN-ICSD, and GAN-MP. We then
downloaded the formation energy prediction machine learningmodel (ElemNet) developed by Jha et al.
26and then used it to
Fig. 3 Inorganic materials space composed of existing ICSD materials and hypothetical materials generated by GAN-ICSD. The two axes
correspond to the two dimensions after t-sne-based dimension reduction. The ICSD materials only occupies a tiny portion of the chemical
space of inorganic materials. aTraining samples (green dots) and leave-out validation samples (red dots) from ICSD; b50,000 generated
samples (blue dots) together with training and leave-out samples; c200,000 generated samples together with training and leave-out samples.Y. Dan et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 

==== Page 4 ====
predict the formation energies of all these hypothetical materials.
Figure 4b shows that the formation energy of these generated
materials is mostly <0, especially for those generated by GAN-ICSDand GAN-MP, which are trained with more chemically valid
samples. Also, much higher percentage of generated samples by
the GAN-OQMD are found to have higher formation energy scoresin the ﬁgure, which is due to the fact that 68.48% training samples
of OQMD have formation energies larger than 0.
Uniqueness check . To check the uniqueness of the generated
samples, we calculate the percentages of the number of unique
samples out of the number of all generated samples ( n)a sngoes
from 1 to 340,000 for all three GANs trained on the OQMD, MP,and ICSD datasets, respectively (Fig. 5a). First, it can be found that
with the generation of more and more samples, the percentage of
unique samples goes down, showing that it is more dif ﬁcult to
generate new hypothetical materials. However, even aftergenerating 340,000 samples, our GANs still maintain a 68.09%,
85.90%, and 73.06% uniqueness for GAN-OQMD, GAN-MP, and
GAN-ICSD, respectively. While all three curves decay withincreasing number of generated samples, the GAN-MP maintainshigher percentage of unique samples. Actually, the uniqueness
curve of GAN-MP dominates the one of GAN-ICSD, which further
dominates the one of GAN-OQMD. After close examination of thedistributions of training and generated samples in terms of theirelement numbers, we found that this is mainly due to the
distribution bias of the training sets of the three GANs (see
Supplementary Fig. 3). For GAN-OQMD, the training set isdominated by ternary compounds (84.4%) and it tends togenerate ternary samples while the total number of chemically
valid materials as estimated by SMACT
1(Semiconducting Materials
from Analogy and Chemical Theory) to be around 200,000. So, ittends to generate many duplicate ternary samples. For GAN-ICSD,
the ratio of binary/ternary/quaternary is about 2:3:1, which allowsit to generate more diverse samples, leading to higher uniqueness
curve. For GAN-MP, the ratio of binary/ternary/quaternary is about
0.8:2:1, which is much more balanced than those of GAN-OQMDand GAN-ICSD and it also has much more quaternary and quinarytraining samples (see Supplementary Table 3). This allows it to
generate most diverse samples.
Novelty check . To check the capability of our GANs to generate
novel materials, we use the hold-out validation approach. We ﬁrst
leave out 10% samples from each of the three datasets OQMD,
MP, and ICSD. Then we train the GANs and use them to generate acertain number of samples. We then examine what percentage of
training samples and hold-out validation samples have been
recovered/re-discovered and how many new samples have beengenerated. The results are shown in Table 1. First, we found that
when the GANs recover/generate a certain percentage of training
samples, the approximate corresponding percentages of valida-
tion (hold-out novel) samples are also recovered. For example,when the GAN-MP recovered 47.36% of its training set, about48.82% of the hold-out samples have also been simultaneously
generated. This demonstrates that our GANs can be used to
discover new materials that do not exist in the training set. Tofurther understand the generation performance, we calculated the
recovery percentages of the training set and the leave-out
validation set along with the percentages of new samples forbinary, ternary, and quaternary samples (Fig. 5b). First, by
generating 2 million samples, GAN-ICSD has generated 78.1%
training binary samples while also generating/rediscovering 82.7%
leave-out validation binary materials. The recovery rates drop to30.4% and 31.2%, respectively, or ternary training and validationsamples as the number of possible ternary samples are larger than
binary ones, which also explains the recovery rates dropping to 3.3
and 5.2% for quaternary training and validation sets. In addition,out of all the generated binary/ternary/quaternary samples,83.15%/98.68%/99.98% of them are novel hypothetical materials,
which strongly shows the capability of our GAN model to generate
new materials candidates as a majority of these new candidatessatisfy the basic chemical rules as shown in Fig. 4.
Conditional generation of hypothetical materials by GAN .I n
addition to generating valid inorganic materials, it is interestingto check if our GAN models can generate new materials with
desired properties by sampling from the generative distribution
estimated by the model
27. To verify this, we collected 30,186
inorganic materials from Materials Project whose bandgap valuesare larger than 0. We then use these high-bandgap materials set
to train a GAN-bandgap model aiming to generate hypotheticalTable 1. Novelty check of generated samples by GANs.
GAN-OQMD GAN-MP GAN-ICSD
Training sample # 251,368 57,530 25,323
Leave-out sample # 27,929 6392 2813Generated sample # 2,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000Recovery % of training samples 60.26% 47.36% 59.54%Recovery % of leave-out sample 60.43% 48.82% 60.13%New samples 1,831,648 1,969,633 1,983,231
55.8%84.4% 83.5%100.0%
56.1%80.3%84.8%92.1%
39.3%78.1%79.3%100.0%
38.4%70.3%73.4%84.5%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
OQMD ICSD MP ICSD_FilterPercentage
Train CN Gen CN Train EN Gen EN
(a) (b)
Fig. 4 Evaluation of the validity of generated materials. a The percentages of charge-neutral (CN) and electronegativity-balanced (EN)
samples of the generated samples are very close to those of the training sets for all four datasets. Train/gen CN: percentage of training/generated samples that satisfy charge neutrality; Train/gen EN: percentage of samples that satisfy balanced electronegativity. bFormation
energy distribution of the Li-containing compounds generated by three GANs. Both GAN-ICSD and GAN-MP can generate a large percentage
of hypothetical materials with low (<0) formation energy.Y. Dan et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 5 ====
high-bandgap materials. To verify the bandgap values of
generated samples, we trained a bandgap prediction model usingthe Gradient-Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) machine learning
algorithm with Magpie features28(see the Methods section for its
training details). We also use this model to predict the bandgapvalues of the exhaustively enumerated materials set. Figure 6
shows the distribution of the band gaps of the generated
materials set versus those of the training set and the exhaustively
enumerated set. The bandgap distribution of generated samples ismuch similar to that of the training set, which demonstrates the
capability of our GAN-bandgap can generate hypothetic high-
bandgap materials ef ﬁciently.
Discovery of potential new materials . To evaluate how likely our
GAN models can generate con ﬁrmed new materials, we take a
cross-validation evaluation approach. Essentially, for all the newhypothetical materials generated by each of our GAN models, wecheck how many of them are con ﬁrmed/included by the other
two datasets. Table 2lists the cross-validation con ﬁrmation results.
It is found that out of the 2 million generated materials by GAN-ICSD, 13,126 materials are con ﬁrmed by and included in the MP
dataset and 2349 new materials are con ﬁrmed by the OQMD
dataset. GAN-MP also has 6880 and 3601 generated samples
conﬁrmed by ICSD and OQMD, respectively. Another validation of
the predictive power of our GAN models come from a recent
study on discovering four new materials of aluminum and sul ﬁde
using DFT-based crystal structure prediction software CALYPSO
29.
Two of the four materials are in our candidate list: AlS 2, AlS, whichare con ﬁrmed by their study and we have predicted an additional
undiscovered AlS 3.
Limitation of MatGAN examined by autoencoder . Here we aim to
check the relation of AE non-decodable materials and thedifﬁculty of our GANs to generate them. To train the AE model,
we randomly split the OQMD_L dataset with 90% samples for AE
training and 10% samples as testing. The learning rate is set as10
−3, batch size 1024, and Adam optimizer is used. The ﬁnal AE
model is picked as the model with the best performance over the
test set within 1000 epochs of training. We found that our AEmodel can decode 96.31% and 95.50% of the samples from thetraining set and the test set. These samples seem to share some
common chemical composition rules.
To show the difference between the decodable samples and
non-decodable ones, we applied T-sne dimension reductiontechnique
25to reduce the dimension of the matrix representa-
tions of all OQMD_L dataset to 2 and then visualize 20% of the
samples on the 2D plot (Fig. 7), in which the red dots represent
non-decodable samples while blue ones represent decodableones. The apparent different distributions show that these two
categories of samples have different composition rules. Our
hypothesis is that the decodable samples share well-establishedchemical composition rules, which allows our GAN generators for
efﬁcient sampling of the corresponding chemical space. On the
other hand, the non-decodable samples will be dif ﬁcult to
generate by our GAN model. To verify this, we calculated thepercentage of non-decodable samples that have been generated
by the trained GAN-OQMD. It is observed that almost 95% of the
non-decodable materials are out of the scope of the generatedsamples even after generating 2 million of samples while 60.26%of the decodable training samples have been re-discovered.
This shows that our GANs have limitation in generating non-
decodable materials type. It also means that non-decodablematerials have special composition rules that either need more
data or more powerful generator models to learn. Indeed,
comparison on the enriched element distribution analysis(Supplementary Fig. 4) shows that the decodable and non-decodable materials have distinct element distributions.Fig. 6 Comparison of bandgap distributions of the generated
materials by GAN-bandgap, the training set, and the enumerated
set.The GAN-generated samples show much more similar bandgap
distribution than the enumerated compositions.Table 2. Cross-validation con ﬁrmation of generated new materials by
our GANs.
ICSD dataset MP dataset OQMD dataset
GAN-ICSD N/A 13,126 2349
GAN-MP 6880 N/A 3601GAN-OQMD 3428 58,603 N/A(a) (b)78.1%
30.4%
3.3%82.7%
31.2%
5.2%83.15%98.68% 99.98%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Binary Ternary QuaternaryTrain recover% Leave out recover% New rate%60%70%80%90%100%
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0Percentage of unique materias
Number of generated materials(1E4)OQMD
ICSD
MP
Fig. 5 Uniqueness and novelty check of the generated materials. a Comparison of uniqueness curves of the hypothetical materials
generated by three GANs. GAN-MP achieves the dominating curve due to its more balanced distribution of binary/ternary/quaternary trainingsamples. bDistribution of recovery rates of training and validation samples, and also percentages of new generated hypothetical materials.Y. Dan et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 

==== Page 6 ====
DISCUSSION
The con ﬁgurational phase space for new inorganic materials is
immense. Forming four-component compounds from the ﬁrst 103
elements of the periodic table results in more than 1012
combinations. Such a vast materials design space is intractable
to high-throughput experiments or ﬁrst-principle computations.
On the other hand, current inorganic materials databases such asICSD and Materials Projects all consist of only a tiny portion of thewhole inorganic chemical space, which needs expansion for
computational screening of new materials.
Here we proposed a GAN-based generative model for ef ﬁcient
sampling of the vast chemical design space of inorganic materials.Systematic experiments and validations show that our GANmodels can achieve high uniqueness, validity, and diversity in
terms of its generation capability. Our generative models can be
used to explore the uncharted inorganic materials design space byexpanding ICDS, material projects (MP), and OQMD databases. Thederived expanded databases can then be used for high-throughput computational screening with higher ef ﬁciency than
exhaustively screening billions of candidates
2. While principles of
charge neutrality and electronegativity balance1have been
applied to ﬁlter out chemically implausible compositions for more
effective search of new materials, such explicit composition rulesare still too loose to ensure ef ﬁcient sampling in the vast chemical
design space for new materials search. Indeed, while thehypothetical materials with <5 elements can be enumerated (32
billion for 4-element materials with charge neutrality and
balanced electronegativity), the design space of more elementscan be challenging for which our GAN models can help a lot.
One limitation of our composition-based GAN model is due to
the issue of possible polymorphism for a given composition: onecomposition may correspond to multiple structure phases and
then multiple materials properties such as the bandgap. In this
case, structural prediction and exploration is needed for ourprediction compositions to search those phases to ensure acomprehensive inverse design process.
Our work can be extended in multiple ways. First, we found that
MatGAN can learn chemical composition rules implicitly even
though we did not explicitly enforce those rules into our GANmodel. However, it is sometimes desirable to implement chemicalruleﬁlters to remove chemically invalid candidates, which can be
easily implemented based on our matrix representation ofmaterials. Another limitation in our current study is that we only
considered the integer ratios of elements in compounds in our
material representation while doped materials with fractionalratios are very common in functional materials such as lithium-ionbattery material LiZn
0.01Fe0.99PO4, which is a doped cathodematerial. Our study can be extended by allowing real numbers on
the representation matrix. However, considering the in ﬁnite
possibility of doping ratios, our GAN method may need to work
together with other sampling techniques such as geneticalgorithms
30,31, genetic programming32, and active machine
learning for mixed parameter search33,34or the Bayesian
optimization approach33. In addition, our current GAN models
do not tell the crystal structures (lattice constants, space group,atomic coordinates, etc.) of the hypothesized materials. However,
with suf ﬁcient computational resources, it is possible to exploit
DFT-based computational software packages such as USPEX
35or
CALYPSO36to determine the crystal structure given a material
composition and its stoichiometry. Our GAN models can also be
used to work together with material structure generators11.
METHODS
Datasets
We use a subset of inorganic materials deposited in the OQMD15,17
database to train our AE and GAN models. OQMD is a widely used DFT
database with crystal structures either calculated from high-throughput
DFT or obtained from the ICSD37database. Currently it has 606,115
compounds. We use a similar screening criteria by Jha et al.38to choose
the OQMD subset for GAN training: for a formula with multiple reportedformation energies, we keep the lowest one to select the most stablecompound. Single-element compounds are all removed along withmaterials whose formation energy is out of the range of {u −5σ,u+5σ},
where u and σare the average and standard deviation of the formation
energies of all samples in OQMD. Our ﬁnal dataset, OQMD_L, has 291,884
compounds.
As comparison, we also train two GANs for the MP and ICSD databases,
respectively. Both the MP and ICSD datasets here are prepared byremoving all the single-atom compounds, the compounds which has anyelement with more than 8 atoms in their unit cell, and compoundscontaining Kr and He elements. The ﬁnal MP dataset used here has 63,922
compounds. The ﬁnal ICSD dataset used here has 28,137 compounds.
GAN neural networks training
We have optimized the hyper-parameters for training the GANs by setting
the learning rate from 0.1 to 10−6(each time decrease by 10-fold) and
batch normalization size from 32 to 1024, and using different optimizers.We train our GANs using the screened samples from the OQMD, MP, andICSD, and ICSD_ ﬁlter database, which is an ICSD subset with all charge-
neutral and electronegativity-balanced materials. These Wasserstein GANsare trained for 1000 epochs with the Adam optimizer with learning rate of
0.001 for the generator training and 0.01 for the discriminator training. The
batch size for GAN training on OQMD is set to 512 while the batch sizes areset as 32 for GAN training on all other datasets. The AE is trained with theAdam optimization algorithm with a learning rate of 10
−3and batch size
of 1024.
Training of bandgap prediction model
We choose 30,186 inorganic materials whose band gaps are >0 out of the
63,922 compounds in the selected MP dataset as the training samples to
train the bandgap prediction model. Gradient-boosted decision tree(GBDT) machine learning model is then trained with the Magpie features.The learning rate is set as 0.06. The maximum tree depth is set as 20. Thesubsample is set to 0.4. The number of estimator is set to 100.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The training and test data are downloaded from the Materials Project database and
OQMD database. Other results data that support the ﬁndings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Code and work ﬂow developed in this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.-30-20-100102030
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30X2
X1Can decoder
Can not decoder
Fig. 7 Distribution of decodable and non-decodable materials. X1
and X2 are the two dimensions after dimension reduction.Y. Dan et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 7 ====
Received: 12 November 2019; Accepted: 4 June 2020;
REFERENCES
1. Davies, D. W. et al. Computational screening of all stoichiometric inorganic
materials. Chem. 1, 617 –627 (2016).
2. Cubuk, E. D., Sendek, A. D. & Reed, E. J. Screening billions of candidates for solid
lithium-ion conductors: a transfer learning approach for small data. J. Chem. Phys.
150, 214701 (2019).
3. Jensen, W. B. & Jensen, W. B. The origin of the ionic-radius ratio rules. J. Chem.
Educ. 87, 587 –588 (2010).
4. Ranganathan, S. & Inoue, A. An application of Pettifor structure maps for the
identi ﬁcation of pseudo-binary quasicrystalline intermetallics. Acta Materialia 54,
3647 –3656 (2006).
5. Sanchez-Lengeling, B. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Inverse molecular design using machine
learning: generative models for matter engineering. Science 361,3 6 0 –365 (2018).
6. Xue, D. et al. Advances and challenges in deep generative models for de novo
molecule generation. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Computational Mol. Sci. 9, e1395 (2019).
7. Xu, Y. et al. Deep learning for molecular generation. Future Med. Chem. 11,
567–597 (2019).
8. Elton, D. C., Boukouvalas, Z., Fuge, M. D. & Chung, P. W. Deep learning for molecular
design-a review of the state of the art. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 4,8 2 8 –849 (2019).
9. Ferguson, A. L. Machine learning and data science in soft materials engineering. J.
Phys.-Condens. Mat .30, 043002 (2018).
10. Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S. & Bottou, L. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks,
InProc. 34th Int. Confer. Mach. Learning. Sydney, Australia 70, 214 –223 (2017).
11. Noh, J. et al. Inverse design of solid-state materials via a continuous repre-
sentation. Matter 1, 1370 –1384 (2019).
12. Hoffmann, J. et al. Data-driven approach to encoding and decoding 3-D crystal
structures. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.00949 (2019).
13. Nouira, A., Sokolovska, N. & Crivello, J.-C. Crystalgan: learning to discover crys-
tallographic structures with generative adversarial networks. Preprint at https://
arxiv.org/abs/1810.11203 (2018).
14. Sawada, Y., Morikawa, K. & Fujii, M. Study of deep generative models for inorganic
chemical compositions. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.11499 (2019).
15. Kirklin, S. et al. The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing the
accuracy of DFT formation energies. npj Computational Mater. 1, 15010 (2015).
16. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: a materials genome approach to
accelerating materials innovation. Apl. Mater. 1, 1049 (2013).
17. Saal, J. E., Kirklin, S., Aykol, M., Meredig, B. & Wolverton, C. Materials design and
discovery with high-throughput density functional theory: the open quantum
materials database (OQMD). Jom65, 1501 –1509 (2013).
18. Doersch, C. Tutorial on variational autoencoders. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
1606.05908 (2016).
19. Chen, X. et al. Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by information
maximizinggenerative adversarial nets, in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , 2172 –2180 (2016).
20. Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S. & Bottou, L. Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Net-
works, Proc. 34th Int. Confer. Mach. Learning. PMLR 70, 214 –223, (2017).
21. Pu, Y. et al. Variational autoencoder for deep learning of images, labels and
captions. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2352 –2360 (2016).
22. Ioffe, S. & Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In Proc. 32nd Int. Confer. Int. Confer. .Mach.
Learning. 37, 448 –456 (2015).
23. Shamir, R. R., Duchin, Y., Kim, J., Sapiro, G. & Harel, N. Continuous dice coef ﬁcient:
a method for evaluating probabilistic segmentations. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1906.11031 (2019).
24. Shamir, R. R., Duchin, Y., Kim, J., Sapiro, G. & Harel, N. Continuous Dice Coef ﬁcient:
a Method for Evaluating Probabilistic Segmentations. Preprint at https://www.
biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/306977v1 (2018).
25. Maaten, L. V. D. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9,
2579 –2605 (2008).
26. Ye, W., Chen, C., Wang, Z., Chu, I.-H. & Ong, S. P. Deep neural networks for
accurate predictions of crystal stability. Nat. Commun. 9, 3800 (2018).
27. Kang, S. & Cho, K. Conditional molecular design with deep generative models. J.
Chem. Inf. Model 59,4 3–52 (2018).
28. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine
learning framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials. Npj Comput.
Mater. 2, 16028 (2016).
29. Shao, S. et al. The exotically stoichiometric compounds in Al –S system under high
pressure. npj Computational Mater. 6,1–6 (2020).
30. Atilgan, E. & Hu, J. First-principle-based computational doping of SrTiO 3using
combinatorial genetic algorithms. Bull. Mater. Sci. 41, 1 (2018).31. Atilgan, E. & Hu, J. A combinatorial genetic algorithm for computational doping
based material design. In Proc. Companion Pub. 2015 Annual Confer. Genetic Evol.
Comp. (ACM) 1349 –1350 (2015).
32. Atilgan, E. Computational Doping for Fuel Cell Material Design Based on Genetic
Algorithms and Genetic Programming . Ph.D. thesis, University of South Carolina (2016).
33. Xue, D. et al. Accelerated search for materials with targeted properties by
adaptive design. Nat. Commun. 7, 11241 (2016).
34. Lookman, T., Balachandran, P. V., Xue, D. Z., Hogden, J. & Theiler, J. Statistical
inference and adaptive design for materials discovery. Curr. Opin. Solid St. M .21,
121–128 (2017).
35. Glass, C. W., Oganov, A. R. & Hansen, N. USPEX —evolutionary crystal structure
prediction. Comput. Phys. Commun. 175, 713 –720 (2006).
36. Wang, Y., Lv, J., Zhu, L. & Ma, Y. CALYPSO: a method for crystal structure pre-
diction. Comput. Phys. Commun. 183, 2063 –2070 (2012).
37. Bergerhoff, G., Hundt, R., Sievers, R. & Brown, I. The inorganic crystal structure
data base. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 23,6 6–69 (1983).
38. Jha, D. et al. Elemnet: deep learning the chemistry of materials from only ele-
mental composition. Sci. Rep. 8, 17593 (2018).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work as partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant
numbers: 1940099, 1905775, OIA-1655740, and SC EPSCoR GEAR Grant 19-GC02 andby DOE under grant number DE-SC0020272. The views, perspective, and contentneither necessarily represent the of ﬁcial views of the SC EPSCoR Program nor those
of the NSF and DOE. The authors also acknowledge funding from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under grant number 51741101. This work is alsopartially supported by National Major Scienti ﬁc and Technological Special Project of
China under grant number 2018AAA0101803 and also by Guizhou Province Science& Technology Plan Talent Program under grant number [2017]5788. We would like tothank Zhuo Cao, Chengcheng Niu, and Rongzhi Dong for helpful discussions.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.H. conceived the project. J.H. and Y.D. developed the methodology. Y.D.implemented the method. Y.D. and J.H. performed the calculations. Y.D., X.L., andY.Z. prepared the ﬁgures. J.H., Y.D., X.L., S.L., and M.H. interpreted the results. J.H and
Y.D. wrote the paper. J.H. and S.L. supervised the project. All authors reviewed andcommented on the paper.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-020-00352-0 .
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.H.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2020Y. Dan et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 

