==== Page 1 ====
REVIEW
published: 12 May 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00164
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164Editedby:
ShuihuaWang,
UniversityofLeicester,
UnitedKingdom
Reviewedby:
RobertasDamasevicius,
KaunasUniversityof
Technology,Lithuania
FuhaiLi,
WashingtonUniversityinSt.Louis,
UnitedStates
*Correspondence:
LanLan
lanl@scu.edu.cn
NianyinZeng
zny@xmu.edu.cn
†Theseauthorshavecontributed
equallytothiswork
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
DigitalPublicHealth,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinPublicHealth
Received: 30December2019
Accepted: 17April2020
Published: 12May2020
Citation:
LanL,YouL,ZhangZ,FanZ,ZhaoW,
ZengN,ChenYandZhouX(2020)
GenerativeAdversarialNetworksand
ItsApplicationsinBiomedical
Informatics.
Front.PublicHealth8:164.
doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00164Generative Adversarial Networks and
Its Applications in Biomedical
Informatics
LanLan1*†,LeiYou2†,ZeyangZhang3†,ZhiweiFan4†,WeilingZhao2,NianyinZeng5*,
YidongChen6andXiaoboZhou2
1WestChinaBiomedicalBigDataCenter,WestChinaHospital, SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China,2Centerfor
ComputationalSystemsMedicine,SchoolofBiomedicalInfor matics,UniversityofTexasHealthScienceCenteratHousto n,
Houston,TX,UnitedStates,3DepartmentofComputerScienceandTechnology,CollegeofE lectronicsandInformation
Engineering,TongjiUniversity,Shanghai,China,4DepartmentofEpidemiologyandHealthStatistics,WestChi naSchoolof
PublicHealthandWestChinaFourthHospital,SichuanUnive rsity,Chengdu,China,5DepartmentofInstrumentaland
ElectricalEngineering,XiamenUniversity,Fujian,China ,6DepartmentofComputerScienceandTechnology,Collegeof
ComputerScience,SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China
ThebasicGenerativeAdversarialNetworks(GAN)modelisco mposedoftheinputvector,
generator, and discriminator. Among them, the generator an d discriminator are implicit
function expressions, usually implemented by deep neural n etworks. GAN can learn the
generative model of any data distribution through adversar ial methods with excellent
performance.Ithasbeenwidelyappliedtodifferentareass inceitwasproposedin2014.
In this review, we introduced the origin, speciﬁc working pr inciple, and development
history of GAN, various applications of GAN in digital image processing, Cycle-GAN,
and its application in medical imaging analysis, as well as t he latest applications of GAN
in medical informatics and bioinformatics.
Keywords: Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), generat or, discriminator, data augmentation, image
conversion, biomedical applications
INTRODUCTION
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) was introduced into the ﬁeld of deep learning by
Goodfellow et al. ( 1). As can be seen from its name, GAN, a form of generative model s, is trained
inanadversarialsettingdeepneuralnetwork.Morespeciﬁcal ly,GANlearnsthegenerativemodel
of data distribution through adversarial methods. GAN is th e most successful generative model
developed in recent years and has become one of the hottest res earch directions in the ﬁeld of
artiﬁcial intelligence. Because of its excellent performan ce, GAN attracts great attention since it
was proposed. It is especially important that GAN can not only be u sed as a generative model
withexcellentperformance,butalsoitsinspiringadversari allearningideapenetratesdeeplyintoall
aspectsofdeeplearning,resultinginaseriesofnewresearc hdirectionsandvariousapplications( 2).
ThebasicfunctionofGANistotrainageneratoranddiscrimi natorinanadversarialway.Based
ondiﬀerentrequirementsofprojects,eitherastrongergener atororamoresensitivediscriminator
is designed as the target goal. In this manuscript, we focus on the generation purpose of GAN
used in four areas: digital image processing, medical image pr ocessing, medical informatics, and
its latest applications in omic data. The generation purpose can be further categorized into data
simulation ( 3), data augmentation for small dataset ( 4), style transformation ( 5), and gene data
simulation ( 6). The great successful applications of GAN in medical image ge neration ( 7,8) and
cell gene imputation ( 6) motivated us to review the literatures in these four sub are as, rather than

==== Page 2 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
just focusing on the digital image processing ﬁeld. We searche d
in the top conferences of computer science and Google Scholar
withkeywordsrelatedtoGAN.Throughscreeningtheliterat ure
abstracts by our team in digital image processing, medical
imaging analysis, medical informatics, and bioinformatic s,
respectively, the literature that was very relevant to our su bject
was retained for full text reading. The contents of these eli gible
literaturesaresummarizedbelow.
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF GAN
Origin of GAN
Ingeneral,deeplearningmodelscanbedividedintodiscrim inant
models and generative models ( 9). In the perspective of the
probability and statistical theory, a discriminant model is a
method of modeling the relationship between unknown data
yand known data x. A generating model refers to a model
that can randomly generate observations, especially under t he
condition of given some implicit parameters ( 10). Due to the
invention of algorithms such as Back Propagation (BP) and
Dropout, the discriminant model has been evolved rapidly.
The development of the generative model is lagged due to the
diﬃcultyofmodeling,thoughthegenerativemodelhasapivot al
role in the history of machine learning. When processing larg e
amountsofdata,suchasimages,speech,text,genomics,etc. ,the
generative models can help us simulate the distribution of t hese
high-dimensionaldata.Itwillbebeneﬁcialformanyapplicat ions,
such as super-resolution, data augmentation, image and medi cal
image conversion, caption generation, electronic health re cords
data generation, biomedical data generation, data imputati on,
andotherill-posedproblems( 11–15).
Likelihood describes the probability of the event under
diﬀerentconditionswhentheresultsareknown( 16).Sometimes
we may not know the distribution function, but we know the
observed data. Therefore, the maximum likelihood estimati on
is applied to evaluate model parameters using the observed
data.TraditionalgenerativemodelssuchasRestrictedBolt zmann
Machine (RBM) ( 17,18), Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
(19), Naive Bayes Model (NBM) ( 20), Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)( 20)andsoon,aremostlybasedonmaximumlikelihood
estimate. However, while the explicitly deﬁned probability
density function brings computational tractability, maxim um
likelihood estimation may not represent the complexity of
the actual data distribution and cannot learn the high-
dimensional data distributions. The majority of generativ e
models require the utilization of Markov chains. GAN uses
latent codes to express latent dimensions, control data impli cit
relationships, etc. and does not require Markov chains ( 21).
Adversarial networks can represent very sharp, even degenera te
distributions, while Markov chain-based approaches require
somewhat ambiguous distributions so that the chains can
be mixed between patterns. Various types of loss functions
can be integrated into GAN models. This allows diﬀerent
types of loss functions to be designed for diﬀerent tasks,
all of which can be learned and optimized under the GAN
framework. GAN is also a nonparametric modeling method
and does not require an approximate distribution of trainingdata to be deﬁned in advance. When probability density is not
computable, some traditional generative models that rely on the
statistical interpretation of data cannot be used for learnin g and
application.ButGANcanstillbeusedinsuchcases.
Speciﬁc Principles of GAN
In this section, we will introduce the architecture and speciﬁ c
principles of GAN. Basic GAN model is composed of an
input vector, a generator, and a discriminator. The generato r
and discriminator are implicit function expressions, usually
implementedbydeepneuralnetworks( 22).
We use abstract mathematical language to explain the basic
principles of the GAN. The ﬁxed distribution Pdata(x)is usually
calculated based on the assumption that the data distribution
for the training sample xisPdata. However, this distribution is
diﬃcult to be determined. The traditional methods assume th at
the distribution Pdata(x)obeys a Gaussian mixture distribution
andusesthemaximumlikelihoodasthesolution.However,whe n
the model is complicated, it is often unable to calculate and th e
resulting performance is limited ( 23). This is due to the limited
expressionabilityoftheGaussiandistributionitself.Thus, neural
networks were proposed to deﬁne the distribution Pg(x). The
generator is a neural network with parameter θg. It collects the
randomvariablezfromthepriordistributionandmapsittothe
pseudo-sample distribution through the neural network, that i s,
the generated data is recorded as G(z)and the data distribution
is recorded as Pg(z). The input zusually uses Gaussian noise,
whichisarandomvariableorarandomvariableinthepotentia l
space.Accordingto θg,asimpleinputdistributioncanbeusedto
generate various complex distributions. The Pg(x) generated by
the generator and the real image distribution Pdata(x)should be
as similar as possible ( 24). So, for the generator, the target is to
ﬁndaG∗asshownbelow.
G∗=argmin
GDiv(Pg,Pdata) (1)
Thenthenextquestionishowtocalculatethediﬀerencebetwe en
the two distributions. If the form of Pdata(x)andPg(x) is
known,itcanbecalculatedtomake Pdata(x)andPg(x)getclose.
Althoughwedon’tknowthespeciﬁcdistribution,wecansample
from it. So, GAN proposed a very magical way, discriminator,
to calculate the diﬀerence between the two distributions. The
discriminator was deﬁned by the original GAN as a binary
classiﬁer ( 25) with θd. During training, when the input is a real
samplex,theoutputofdiscriminatorshouldbe1,otherwise,the
outputgoesto0.Fordeﬁningdiscriminator,Goodfellowetal .(1)
usedbinarycrossentropyfunction,whichiscommonlyusedfor
binaryclassiﬁcationproblems.
Loss= −(ylog/parenleftbig
ˆy/parenrightbig
+/parenleftbig
1−y/parenrightbig
log(1− ˆy)) (2)
Whereˆyis the probability that the model prediction sample is a
positiveexample,and yisthesamplelabel.Ifthesamplebelongs
to a positive example, the value is 1; otherwise, the value is 0.
A speciﬁc sample may come either from the real distribution
or the generated distribution. The positive and negative case s
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 3 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
are substituted into PdataandPg, respectively. The whole object
functionfordiscriminatoris:
V(G,D)=Ex∼Pdata/bracketleftbig
logD(x)/bracketrightbig
+Ex∼Pg[log(1−D(x))] (3)
By merging Equation (1) into (3), the objective function of t he
basicGANisdeﬁnedbyEquation(4):
min
Gmax
DV(G,D)=min
Gmax
DEx∼Pdata/bracketleftbig
logD(x)/bracketrightbig
+Ez∼Pz[log(1−D(G(z)))] (4)
By optimizing this objective function, we can get a GAN model.
GAN’s training can be regarded as a min–max optimization
process. The generator wants to deceive the discriminator, s o
it tries to maximize discriminator’s output when a fake sample
is presented to the discriminator. Instead, the discriminat or
attempts to distinguish the diﬀerence between real and false
samples.Consequently,discriminatortriestomaximize V(G,D)
while generator tries to minimize V(G,D), thus forming
the minimax relationship. During the training of GAN, the
parameters of G(θg) andD(θd) are continuously updated.
When the generator is undergoing training, the parameters of
the discriminator are ﬁxed. The data generated by the genera tor
is marked as fake and input into the discriminator. The error i s
calculated between the output of the discriminator D(G(z)) and
the sample label, and the parameters of generator are updated
using the error of BP algorithm. When the discriminator is
undergoingtraining,theparametersofthegeneratorbeingﬁ xed.
Discriminator gets positive sample xfrom the real data set, and
thegeneratorgeneratesanegativesample G(z).Theoutputofthe
discriminator and sample labels are used to calculate the err or.
Finally, the parameters of the discriminator are updated by th e
errorofBPalgorithm.
Ideally, the generator and discriminator are in equilibrium
whenPdata(x)=Pg(x). When the generator is ﬁxed, we can
take the derivative of V(D,G) to ﬁnd the optimal discriminator
D∗(x),asshownintheEquation(5).
D∗(x)=Pg(x)
Pg(x)+Pdata(x)(5)
BysubstitutingtheoptimaldiscriminatorintheEquation(3 ).
max
DV(G,D)=−2log2+2JSD(Pdata(x)/bardblPg(x)) (6)
The objective function can be further calculated as optimizi ng
the JS divergence of Pdata(x)andPg(x)under the optimal
discriminator( 26).
Development History of GAN
GAN is an excellent generative model. However, the original
GANmodelhasmanyproblems,suchasthevanishinggradient,
diﬃculty in training, and poor diversity ( 27). Many eﬀorts
have been devoted to obtaining better GANs through diﬀerent
optimization methods. Therefore, since 2014, theories and
articles related to GAN have emerged in an endless stream, andmany new GANs-based models have been proposed to improve
thestabilityandqualityofthegeneratedresults( 28).
A number of review articles have summarized and classiﬁed
the current GAN-related models ( 22,24,29). Creswell et al.
(22) classiﬁed the evolution of GAN models from the aspects of
architecturaldevelopmentandlossfunctionimprovement.Ho ng
et al. (29) summarized the development of GAN models from
theaspectsoftheoreticalanalysis,supervised,unsupervised ,and
common problems. Guo et al. ( 24) focused on the improvement
of the model structure, the expansion of the theory, the novel
application and so on. We will introduce several common
improvementsofGANhere.
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (CGAN)
CGANisanimprovedGANmodelproposedbyMirzaetal.( 30).
Unlike the original GAN, CGAN uses a supervised approach
increasing controllability of generated results. CGAN take s the
randomnoise zandthecategorylabel casinputsofthegenerator
andthegeneratedsample/realsampleandcategorylabelasinput s
of the discriminator to learn the correlation between label s and
images.Byintroducingaconditionalvariable yintothemodeling
andaddingconditionstothemodelwithadditionalinformat ion
y,thedatagenerationprocesscanbeguided.
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks
(DCGAN)
One year after the ﬁrst GAN paper was published, researchers
found that the GAN model was unstable and required a lot of
trainingskills.In2015,Radfordetal.( 31)proposedanupgraded
version of the GAN architecture, named DCGAN. The authors
of DCGAN improved the architecture of the original GAN with
deepconvolutionalnetworks(CNNs).Sofar,DCGAN’snetwor k
structure is still widely used and is the hottest GAN archite cture
and a milestone in the history of GAN. Compared with the
original GAN, DCGAN almost completely uses the convolution
layer instead of the fully connected layer. The discriminato r is
almost symmetric with the generator. The entire network doe s
not have pooling layers and up-sampling layers. DCGAN also
used Batch Normalization algorithm to solve the problem of
vanishinggradient.
f-GAN
The objective function of the original GAN can be seen as
minimizing the JS divergence between two distributions. In
fact, there are many ways to measure the distance between
two distributions, and JS divergence is just one of them.
Deﬁning diﬀerent distance metrics can result in diﬀerent
objective functions. Nowozin et al. ( 32) applied f-divergence
to GAN ( f-GAN) for training generative neural samplers. The
f-divergence is a function Df(P/bardblQ) that measures the
diﬀerencebetweentwoprobabilitydistributions PandQ.Under
the framework of f-divergence, f-GAN generalizes various
divergencessothatthecorrespondingGANtargetcanbederiv ed
for a speciﬁc divergence. Many common divergences ( 33),
such as KL-divergence, Hellinger distance, and total variat ion
distance, are the special cases of f-divergence, coinciding with
a particular choice of f. Many improvements in GAN training
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 4 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 1 | Literatures for the application of GAN in image processing.
References Model Public dataset
Mirza and Osindero ( 30) CGAN MNIST
Radford et al. ( 31) DCGAN LSUN, IMAGENET-1K
Nowozin et al. ( 32) f-GAN MNIST Digits, LSUN
Zhao et al. ( 34) EBGAN MNIST digit, LSUN, CelebA,
ImageNet
Arjovsky et al. ( 26) WGAN LSUN-Bedrooms
Karras et al. ( 37) proGAN CelebA, LSUN
Ledig et al. ( 12) SRGAN Set5, Set14, BSD100
Pathak et al. ( 38) Context
encoderParis Street View, ImageNet
stabilityareachievedbyusingdiﬀerentdistancemetricsbe tween
distributions, such as Energy-based GAN (EBGAN) ( 34), Least
SquaresGAN(LSGAN)( 35),etc.
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks
(WGAN)
WGAN mainly improved GAN from the perspective of the
loss function. WGAN theoretically explained the reason for
the instability of GAN training, that is, cross entropy (JS
divergence) is not suitable for measuring the distance betw een
distributions with disjoint parts. Therefore, WGAN proposed
a new distance measurement method, Earth Moving Distance,
also known as Wasserstein distance or optimal transmission
distance, which refers to the minimum transmission quality t hat
converts the probability distribution qtop(probability density
is called probability quality in discrete cases) ( 26,36). The
superiority of Wasserstein distance compared to KL divergenc e
and JS divergence is that even if two distributions do not
overlap, Wasserstein distance can still reﬂect their distan ce. The
theoretical derivation and interpretation of WGAN are quite
complicated. The authors of WGAN ( 26) pointed out that the
use of Wasserstein distances needs to satisfy a strong conti nuity
condition,i.e.Lipchitzcontinuity.
Inshort,GANstillhasmanyunresolvedproblemsandcanbe
furtherimprovedinvariousaspects.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN IMAGE
PROCESSING
GAN is widely used in virtual image generation ( Table1).
Whether it is a face image, a room scene image, a real image
(37) such as a ﬂower or an animal, or an artistic creation image
such as an anime character ( 39), it can be learned using GAN to
generatenewsimilarimages( Figure1) .GANisfullyutilizingits
uniqueadvantagesandhasevolvedfromtheoriginalGANtoth e
progressively growing GAN (proGAN). Its imaging generation
capability has been greatly improved from 32 ×32 resolution to
2KtrueandfalseHDresolution( 37).
Image super-resolution task (SR) is to generate high-
resolution images from low-resolution images. Image
super-resolution algorithms are important in areas such asvideo surveillance, medical diagnostics, and remote sensing
applications. Super-resolution problem is actually an ill-pose d
problem because the lost high-frequency details are diﬃcult
to recover during the resolution of the image. Traditional
methods are generally interpolated, and interpolation inevit ably
creates blurring. However, GAN can learn the distribution of
high-resolution images to a certain extent, so that high-qu ality
images with better quality can be generated. CNN has also
achieved very good results in single-frame super-resolutio n
reconstruction and can achieve a higher peak signal-to-noise
ratio (PSNR) ( 40,41). However, most of them use MSE as the
objective function. Although a higher peak signal-to-noise r atio
can be achieved using MSE, when the image down-sampling is
higher(fourtimes),thereconstructedpicturewillbetoosmo oth
andlosedetails.Thus,in2016,SuperResolutionGAN(SRGAN)
was proposed by Ledig and others of Twitter. SRGAN was the
ﬁrst to propose the application of GAN to super-resolution
reconstruction ( 12). The generated model of SRGAN takes
a blurred low-resolution image as input and outputs a clear
image with high resolution. The discriminant model of SRGAN
determines whether the input image is a “true high-resolutio n
image” or a high-resolution image converted from a low-
resolution image. This greatly simpliﬁes the learning proces s
of the image super-resolution model. Because traditionally
conducting an image super-resolution needs to model some
high-frequencydetails,butherethepurposeofgeneratingmod el
training is simpliﬁed to the confusing discriminant model.
Comparedtopreviousresultsbasedondeeplearningmodelsfor
image super-resolution such as SRResNet, etc., GAN’s images
canprovidemoredetails.
Image inpainting refers to the process of reconstructing
missing or damaged parts of images and videos. It involves in
imageeditingandimagegenerationandisaprocessofartiﬁci ally
ﬁlling a region where information on the image is missing
according to certain rules. Conventional image inpainting
methods typically utilize undamaged image information to
estimate missing portions and autoﬁll the missing parts.
Therefore, a structure-based partial diﬀerential equation ( PDE)
image restoration algorithms were proposed. The repair process
of these models is similar to the diﬀusion phenomenon of
physics, and the key and the diﬃculty lies in how to build a
diﬀusionmodel.Whentheimagedamageareaislarge,therepair
eﬀect plummets. Texture-based image inpainting algorithms
emerged as the times require, and the eﬀect based on partial
diﬀerential equations was improved to some extent. Because th e
traditional image inpainting algorithms depend on the struct ure
ortextureinformationoftheimage,theycannotmeetbasicr epair
requirements, and often cannot achieve satisfactory resul ts,
when the image semantic information is missing. Deep learni ng
has strong learning ability and can learn advanced features
from images, so the inpainting problem can be solved with
such features ( 42–44). Image inpainting is a problem between
image editing and image generation, so using the GAN model
can solve this problem well. The solution for using GAN is
to input an image with missing part to the generator. The
generator will use this missing input image to generate a new
complete image. The discriminator will learn to judge whether
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 5 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 1 | Digital image diagram of GAN.
this image is realistic enough and feedback to the generator .
Through continuous training to optimize, the generator can
ﬁnally generate a complete image that is suﬃciently realisti c.
Then the inpainting was ﬁnished. Context encoder ( 38) is a
pioneeringworkofdeeplearningintheﬁeldofimageinpainting .
Pathak et al. ( 38) trains an encoder-decoder and combines
adversarialnetworklosstopredictthemissingportionaccor ding
tothecontextpixelandstructuralsemanticsofthemissinga rea.
The network is able to obtain a reasonable image structure an d
can quickly and accurately evaluate the repair results ( 45–47).
Because GAN’s generator and discriminator can be any form of
neural network, diﬀerent network architectures can be selec ted
forsolvingdiﬀerentproblems.Theautoencodermodelwasused
asthegeneratorpartinourpreviouswork( 3).Thisisbecausethe
autoencoder is also an important generative model. It encodes
the input data and generates new data through the decoding
operation. It can retain the characteristics of the original input
and introduce the newly generated part. Therefore, it can not
only keep the undefected part of the inpainting input, but also
generate some data for ﬁlling in the missing area by using
autoencoder. Our discriminator is a simple binary classiﬁca tion
discriminant neural network whose input are the generated
repaired image and the complete image in the original dataset.
By learning to distinguish between the two, the generator is
prompted to generate results that are more in line with the
dataset,therebycompletingtheinpainting.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN MEDICAL IMAGE
PROCESSING
Multiplefactorssuchastimecost,laborcost,economiccost, etc.
make it more diﬃcult for researchers to acquire labeled medi cal
images than normal images. However, there is a great demand
formedicalimagesbyscholarsnowadays.Forexample,thedee p
learning-based model can achieve a better performance in the
ﬁelds of medical image segmentation, classiﬁcation, regis tration,
etc. than the hand-crafted features when dealing with a larg e
amount of data ( 48). Traditional image augmentation methods
can be used for its purpose. However, the generated images by
traditional augmentation methods share a similar distribu tionwith the original ones ( 49,50). Those methods are not suitable
for the need of generating more incidences among diﬀerent
patients. Accordingly, GAN is used more popular in medical
image analysis, such as data augmentation and multi-modalit y
imagetranslations.
Recently, with the development of deep learning algorithms
and the growing of labeled image datasets, convolutional ne ural
networks (CNN)-based models ( 51) have achieved great success
in many computer vision tasks, such as object detection ( 52),
semantic segmentation ( 53), human action recognition ( 54)
andsoon.
Since 2014, many CNN-based medical image analysis works
(55,56) have shown great learning possibility when enough
imagesareavailableformodeltraining.ThedatabaselikeT CGA
(57) supplies a large number of images for some common
diseases. Since image acquisition and annotation is a time-
consumingprocess,imagedataformanydiseasesremainsscarc e.
There are many deep learning models that are pre-trained on
largerimagedatasetssuchasImageNet( 58),COCO( 59),andso
on.Transferlearning( 60)useslimitedlabeleddataforsupervised
training.Inthetransferlearningtasks,mostoftheweights ofthe
model keep ﬁxed and only the weights of the last several layer s
areﬁne-tunedonthenewdataset.Inthisway,awellpre-traine d
deepneuralnetworkisappliedinthemedicalimageanalysis.
Transfer learning may still suﬀer from lack of training
images(61).Asmentionedabove,traditionaldataaugmentation
methods can only generate data that share a close distribution
with the original ones. If the data set is too small, these met hods
almost have no eﬀort on the data augmentation. GAN ( 26)
supplies a solution to the lack of data in medical image analysis .
Inthefollowingsection,wewilldiscusstheapplicationsofsin gle
GANandCycle-GANinmedicalimageanalysis( Table2).
GAN Used in Medical Image Analysis
Pandeyetal.( 64)proposedatwo-stagestrategytogeneratenuclei
cell images and their corresponding masks based on GAN. In
their ﬁrst stage, a generator is trained to generate the synt hesis
masks from noise like conventional GAN model does. On their
second stage, a conditional GAN utilized real mask and rando m
noises to train a generator for synthesizing images. Finall y, they
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 6 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 2 | Literatures for the application of GAN in medical image proc essing.
References Model Public Dataset
Zhang et al. ( 62) PAC-GAN VIPeR, CUHK03, Market-1501
Dirvanauskas et al. ( 63) GAN/medical Miri TL
Pandey et al. ( 64) Two-stage
GAN/MedicalKaggle Data Science bowl’s ﬁrst
stage of competition
Frid-Adar et al. ( 65) GAN Private
Chen et al. ( 66,67) Dense GAN A large publicly accessible brain
structural MRI database
Mahapatra and
Bozorgtabar ( 68)Skip-
connection
GANhttp://www.eyepacs.com/
Yi and Babyn ( 69) SAGAN National Cancer Imaging Archive
Shitrit and Raviv ( 70) GAN Private
Zhu et al. ( 5) Cycle GAN Cityscapes, Google Maps, CMP
Facade Database, UT Zappos50K,
ImageNet
Wolterink et al. ( 71) Cycle GAN Private
Hiasa et al. ( 4) Cycle GAN Private
Huo et al. ( 72) Cycle GAN Private
Tanner et al. ( 73) Cycle GAN Private
Zhang et al. ( 74) Cycle GAN Private
Zhang et al. ( 75) Cycle GAN Private
utilizedthesetwogeneratorstogenerateimagesandmasksf rom
randomnoise.
Dirvanauskas et al. ( 63) generated human embryo cell
images for three stages (one-cell, two-cell, and four-cell) by a
conventional GAN model. All the synthesized images could be
used to facilitate the development, training, and evaluatio n for
embryoimageprocessingtasks.
Zhang et al. ( 62) used GAN-based model to solve the data
shortage problems in person re-identiﬁcation task. Two view
images (cross view images) are generated by a conditional
GAN from existing original images and skeleton images. Afte r
that, these cross-view images are sent into a discriminator for
personre-identiﬁcation.
Frid-Adar et al. ( 65) used two variations of GAN models to
generate synthetic liver lesions. The synthetic images con tained
the regions of interest (ROI) on abdomen CT images with
a resolution of 64 ×64. Experiment results showed that the
synthetic data augmentation from these two GAN models
improved classiﬁcation accuracy from 77.5 to 85.0% compared
totheclassicdataaugmentation.
Chen et al. ( 66) proposed a high-resolution MRI (HR MRI)
image generation architecture. Instead of generating 2D HR
MRIs,theauthorsgenerated3DHRMRIstolearn3Dstructures
of MRI volumetric images. However, 3D networks bring more
computing requirements. To solve this problem, the authors
used 3D dense net-based architecture ( 67) in the generator. By
combining 3D dense net and GAN, synthetic HR MRIs have
morelocalimagetexturesanddetails.
MahapatraandBozorgtabar( 68)usedlocalsaliencymapsand
GAN for generating high-resolution retinal images. In addi tion
to the GAN’s lost function, they also added local saliency lo ss
FIGURE 2 | The architecture of Cycle-GAN.
from the diﬀerence between HR images and low-resolution
imagesinthesaliencymaps.
Yi and Babyn ( 69) proposed a deep neural
network-based architecture for low dose CT denoizing.
The generator-synthesized denoized CT image was sent to a
sharpnessdetectionnetworkforcomparisonwithaconventiona l
CTimage.ThisbranchcontributesasharpnesslostfortheGAN
objectivefunction.
Shitrit and Raviv ( 70) applied GAN to accelerate the MRI
image generation process. Instead of generating MRI images
from existing MRI images, the authors used GAN to generate
missingk-space samples. Their approach can be used for time-
sensitiveorresolution-sensitiveMRIscantasks.
Huo et al. ( 72) proposed a similar GAN architecture for
splenomegaly segmentation. Instead of generating images fro m
randomnoises,theauthorsusedaU-Net( 76)basedarchitecture
to get a segmented version and a Dice lost function as the
discriminator. Isola et al. ( 77) used a Patch-GAN model as the
discriminatorforthepatchesfromboththegeneratedimages and
thegroundtruthimages.
Cycle-GAN Used in Medical Image Analysis
Cycle-GAN ( 5) is utilized to learn the mapping from a domain
image set X(orAinFigure2) to another domain image set Y
(orBinFigure2)whenthepairwisealignmentsbetweenthetwo
domains are unavailable. The forward generator is deﬁned as G
and the backward generator as F. The cycle consistency forces
F(G(x))≈xandG(F(y))≈y.F◦GorG◦Fworks similarly to an
auto-encoder( 78)forlearningtherepresentationsoftheoriginal
images.AsimilarmethodwaspresentedbyYietal.( 79).
It is essential that images from two diﬀerent sources must
have shared visual content, such as from wild horses to zebra s.
Normal image translation may be greatly aﬀected when there
is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between two domains. However, it
is more suitable for multi-modality medical image synthesi s,
such as synthesizing images from Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 7 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 3 | The experiment results from Cycle-GAN, where real B is the re al MRI image, fake A is the generated CT image based on the real MRI image, and rec B is
the reconstructed MRI image based on the generated CT image o f heart for a patient.
(MRI)toComputedTomography(CT)( 71)fordiagnosingsome
speciﬁcdiseases.
Wolterink et al. ( 71) applied Cycle-GAN to CT and MRI
images of brain tumors in the radiotherapy treatment planning .
Since a limited number of patients had paired CT and MRI
images, unpaired images were generated from the paired images
by ﬁrst padding the images into a larger resolution and
then cropping them into the same smaller resolution. Their
results showed that Cycle-GAN trained with unpaired images
outperformsasingleGANtrainedwithpairedimages.
Hiasa et al. ( 4) improved the Cycle-GAN architecture by
adding the gradient consistency loss with the goal of better
edge alignment between the MRI images and CT images.
Comparing the generated CT/MRI images with the actual ones,
the gradient consistency had improved the synthesis accurac y
andsegmentationaccuracy.
Huo et al. ( 80) combined Cycle-GAN and segmentation
network in an end-to-end manner to take advantage of
the complementary information between synthesis and
segmentation. The ﬁnal lost function of their network consi sted
of the Cycle-GAN lost functions and the segmentation
loss function. Compared with the ﬁrst synthesis and then
segmentationmethod( 81),themethodfromHuoetal.achieved
better segmentation results on the spleen and other organs.
Their experiments indicate that MRI images with multiple
organ labels can be used to generate corresponding segmented
CT images. Tanner et al. ( 73) used Cycle-GAN for MRI-CT
deformableimageregistrationofthoracicandabdominalor gans.
Jin et al. ( 82) applied Cycle-GAN for CT-MRI image synthesis.
A discriminator was added for the real paired CT-MRI images
and generated paired CT-MRI images. The combination of
paired images and unpaired images achieved the lowest mean
absoluteerror.
Yue et al. ( 74) proposed a task-driven generative model
for X-ray image segmentation. A U-Net-based network ( 76)was trained supervised on Digitally Reconstructed Radiographs
(DRRs) for organs segmentation. Thereafter, a Cycle-GAN was
trained for DRRs and X-ray images synthesis. Speciﬁcally,
the segmentation loss generated by the previously trained
segmentation network was added to the cycle of real DRRs to
fakeX-raytoreconstructedDRRs.Inthatcase,thesegmentati on
resultsofX-rayimagesweregreatlyimproved.
Zhang et al. ( 75) replaced discriminators with segmenters to
address shape consistency problem. 3D fully convolution laye rs
were used in the Cycle-GAN network and long-range U-Net
network. Experiment results showed that the Cycle-GAN-base d
synthesis network and segmentation network were mutually
beneﬁcialinsegmentingcardiovascularvolumes.
WeappliedCycle-GANtoachieveagoodconversionbetween
the CT and MRI images based on the data from MICCAI
Workshop( Figure3).
APPLICATION OF GAN IN MEDICAL
INFORMATICS
With the development of health informatization, hospital
information systems, Internet of Things (IoT)-based healt h
Platform, wearable devices and other platforms have led to th e
explosive growth of medical data, such as electronic medical
records (EMR) ( 83). The growth in the quantity and quality of
medical data has also facilitated the use of scientiﬁc researc h
and algorithms in medicine. However, due to data security,
especially privacy security, although patient’s data can be de -
identiﬁed, the medical data after de-identiﬁcation can sti ll be
re-identiﬁed by some combinations. Because there are barrie rs
between the health information systems, it is very diﬃcult to
correlatemedicaldatacollectedfromdiﬀerentmedia,resul tingin
lessmedicaldataavailableforscientiﬁcresearch.Theapplic ation
of medical informatics often requires a large number of data
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 8 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 3 | Literatures for the application of GAN in medical informati cs.
References Model Public dataset
Choi et al. ( 84) medGAN PAMF, MIMIC III
Baowaly et al. ( 85) medGAN,
WGAN-GP, BGANMIMIC-III
Yoon et al. ( 86) RadialGAN MAGGIC
Che et al. ( 87) ehrGAN Private
Esteban et al. ( 88) RGAN, RCGAN Philips eICU database
Li et al. (89) GAN IQVIA longitudinal prescription (Rx)
and medical claims (Dx) database
Guan et al. ( 90) mtGAN Private
Yang et al. ( 91) GAN UCI medical database, Cerebral
stroke dataset
Tang et al. ( 92) IRGAN 4705 hyperlipidemia questions from
the internet
Hassounietal.( 93) GAN WISDM
to train parameters. The lack of medical data severely limits
the application of deep learning algorithms, especially artiﬁ cial
intelligence in the ﬁeld of medical informatics. Therefore , the
development of medical informatics is behind ﬁelds such as
medicalimages.
GAN has proven to play an important role in generating
images and has shown good performance in generating
continuous data. Since the gradient function is required to be
diﬀerentiable,thetraditionalGANcannotgeneratediscret edata.
Inmedicaldata,thediagnosisofadiseaseandtheseverityo fthe
disease are discrete data. Due to the high cost, less labeled , and
unbalanced classiﬁcation medical data are available. Ther efore,
we explored the application of GAN in generating discrete data
basedonrealmedicaldataandinsolvingproblemssuchasfewe r
labelsandunbalancedclassiﬁcations( Table3).
Choi et al. ( 84) generated synthetic electronic health records
(EHR) by using medical Generative Adversarial Networks
(medGAN) based on the Sutter Palo Alto Medical Foundation
(PAMF) and the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care
(MIMIC-III)datasets.TheoriginalGANcannotbedirectlyuse d
to learn the discrete data of patients. medGAN can handle high -
dimensional multi-label discrete variables (binary and co unt
variables such as diagnoses, medications, and procedure cod es)
by leveraging the autoencoder to overcome the limitation fr om
the original GAN. The autoencoder learned from real patient
records and the same decoder in autoencoder was used to
construct the discrete output after the generator. The autho rs
obtained impressive results for discrete variables. Baowal y et al.
(85) synthesized more realistic EHR than those generated
by the medGAN using MIMIC-III, extended MIMIC-III, and
TaiwanNationalHealthInsuranceResearchDatabase(NHIRD).
Two synthetic data generation models, Wasserstein GAN with
gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) and boundary-seeking GAN
(BGAN),wereappliedbasedonthemedGANframework.These
two GAN models were named as medWGAN and medBGAN,
respectively. The count (the frequency of a speciﬁc ICD or
procedure of disease) and binary data (presence or absence of
a speciﬁc ICD code) were created using medGAN, medWGAN,
and medBGAN. Their results showed that the two improved
FIGURE 4 | The architecture of LSTM-based GAN in medical informatics.
GANmodelsoutperformedthemedGAN.medBGANperformed
bestinthesethreemodels.
Yoon et al. ( 86) used the auxiliary datasets, external datasets
from related but diﬀerent hospitals, as the noise for a GAN
framework based on the fact that the patient distribution from
one hospital will be better matched by the patient distribution
from another hospital than by random noise such as Gaussian,
enlarging the target dataset eﬀectively. They used 14 studies of
MAGGIC to create target datasets and compared the prediction
performancebetweentheproposedradialGAN,target-onlyGAN
and benchmarks such as conditional-GAN and starGAN, etc.
Integrating datasets from diﬀerent hospitals by radialGAN ca n
improvetheperformanceoftarget-speciﬁcpredictivemodels.
Che et al. ( 87) used two longitudinal real clinical datasets
of heart failure and diabetes to investigate how well ehrGAN
generated EHR as real samples. The structure of the basic
prediction model was adopted in the discriminator. Based
on the variational contrastive divergence, the generator w as
altered for semi-supervised learning setting. Data augment ation
was performed by semi-supervised learning utilizing ehrGAN
to boost risk prediction; thus, generalization capacity and
predictionperformancewereimproved.
Esteban et al. ( 88) presented a recurrent GAN (RGAN)
and a recurrent conditional GAN (RCGAN) to generate
sequences without/with some conditional inputs. Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) was selected as the architecture for both
discriminator and generator. They predicted whether or not a
patient will become “critical” in the near future based on the
four most frequently recorded variables measured by bedsid e
monitors from Philips eICU database using a method named
“Train on Synthetic, Test on Real” (TSTR). The models trained
on the synthetic dataset from LSTM-based GAN ( Figure4)
achievedperformanceattimescomparabletothatoftherealda ta
ontheeICUdataset.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 9 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 5 | Bioinformatics diagram of GAN.
Lietal.(89)usedGANtopredictifapatienthasararedisease.
Thelogprobabilityofunlabeleddataasrealdatawasmaximiz ed
and added in the objective function of the discriminator bas ed
on the IQVIA longitudinal prescription and medical claims
database. Compared to the baseline techniques, the predictio n
accuracy of the semi-supervised learning framework for rare
disease detection (precision-recall curves and area under t he
curve)was5%higher.
Guanetal.( 90)usedmedicaltextGAN(mtGAN)toreinforce
theelectronicmedicalrecordtexts.mtGANisaconditional GAN
that takes designated disease features as input and generate s
corresponding EMR text to address privacy issues as well as
inadequate and unbalanced and the insuﬃcient and imbalance
samplesproblem.
Yang et al. ( 91) presented a semi-supervised method in
association with GAN to support medical decision making. In
theirstudy,GANgeneratedsyntheticdatabytakinglabeled setas
input.Labelsoftheunlabeledsetwerepredictedbytwolearne rs.
By taking the expanded labeled set as input, GAN was used
again to generate the labeled set. Both expanded labeled set a nd
syntheticsetwereusedasthetrainingsettobeclassiﬁedba sedon
thecerebralstrokesetcollectedfromIoT-basedplatform.
Tang et al. ( 92) proposed a GAN-based method to
automatically retrieve patient questions. Supervised deep
learning-basedapproacheswereusedtodeterminethesimilar ity
between patient questions. Their study showed that ﬁne tunin g
with GAN can improve performance. Hassouni et al. ( 93) used
GAN with LSTM to generate realistic simulation environment s
based on the WISDM dataset. Their results showed that the
model trained on the data artiﬁcially generated by the GAN ha d
similarperformancetrainedonrealdata.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN
BIOINFORMATICS
As a branch of the life science, bioinformatics is a new
multidisciplinary ﬁeld that understands and organizesinformation related to biomolecules through a combination
of disciplines such as applied mathematics, biology, computer
science, and statistics ( 94). It applies conventional statistics,
modern computer science, machine learning, and other
modeling algorithms to explore large volumes of biological
data, including molecular sequences of DNA, RNA, proteins
and metabolites, and other whole genome data. Bioinformati cs
researchandapplicationsincludeanalysisofmolecularsequ ence
and genomics data; genome annotation; molecular folding,
modeling, and design; building biological networks; analys is
of the cellular organization and computational evolutionary
biology(95,96).
One of the most important and diﬃcult issues for
bioinformatics researchers is the accessibility and avail ability
of large datasets. Though the increased throughput and
technological advances have changed the landscape of
metagenomics, the cost of sequencing is still relatively hig h. In
addition, since the accessibility of data for research purpose
involves many legal and ethical issues, bioinformatics dat a
is highly sensitive ( 97). The lacking of available biological
samples could result in imbalanced datasets, which can lead
to over-ﬁtting problems and poor classiﬁcation performance.
Recently, researches have used GAN to generate data samples to
overcome these problems ( Figure5). Here, we present some of
bioinformaticsapplicationcases( Table4).
Ghahramani et al. ( 98) successfully simulated realistic
scRNA-seq data using WGAN-GP, covering diverse scRNA-seq
datasetsofvariouscelltypes,includingmouseepidermal,mou se
neural and human hematopoietic single-cell RNA-seq data
spanningfromdiﬀerentlaboratoriesandexperimentalprotocol s.
The performance was evaluated at diﬀerent checkpoints using
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( t-SNE) and the
correlationbetweenrealcellsandgeneratedcells.Asthetrai ning
steps increased, the generator was capable of producing cells
mappingtomultipleclustersinthe t-SNEplot,coveringdiﬀerent
celltypes,cellstates,celloriginandexperimentalbatches present
inthecombinedrealdataset( 98).Byusingthegenerativemodel,
the researchers were able to obtain a universal representati on
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 10 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 4 | Literatures for the application of GAN in bioinformatics.
References Model Public dataset
Ghahramani et al. ( 98) Wasserstein-GAN (WGAN)
with gradient penalty loss
functionGSE90848, GSE67602,
GSE99989
Marouf et al. ( 99) Conditional single-cell
GAN68,579 PBMCs (healthy
donor A)
Xu et al. ( 6) Generative adversarial
networks for scRNA-seq
imputationGSE65525
Li et al. (100) GAN Not applicable
Anand and Huang ( 101) GAN Protein Data Bank
Killoran et al. ( 102) GAN Not applicable
Gupta and Zou ( 103) Feedback GAN Uniprot database
Wang et al. ( 104) GAN GEO, GTEx, 1000G
RNA-Seq expression data
of epidermal diﬀerentiation and the representation features c an
be used to predict the eﬀect of cell state perturbations on gene
expressionathightemporalresolution.Thetaskofthegenera tor
was to produce realistic output data from a random latent
spacevectors z.Correspondinglatentspacevectorsofterminally
diﬀerentiated and undiﬀerentiated cells ( zdiﬀerentiated andzbasal)
were obtained according to the correlation between the real
expression proﬁles and those generated, and the diﬀerence
betweenthesevectorswascalculatedas δ=zdiﬀerentiated −zbasal.
Then 1,000 time points were interpolated between the latent
space diﬀerentiation vectors δ(98), so the dynamics of time-
seriesgene expressionovercell diﬀerentiationcouldbe explo red
usingtheGANmodel,whichcannotbedetectedbyexperiments.
By doing so, transiently expressed and subsequently down-
regulatedgenesassociatedwiththeprocessofdiﬀerentiatio ncan
be identiﬁed. They also performed a sensitivity analysis of th e
discriminator network to identify biological state-deter mining
genes. By analyzing those networks, the authors obtained
regulatoryrelationshipsforinferredgenes.
Marouf et al. ( 99) built a single cell GAN model for scRNA-
seq data generation using a Peripheral Blood Mononuclear
Cell (PBMC) scRNA-seq dataset with 68,579 cells. A customed
LibrarySizeNormalization(LSN)functionandFully-Conne cted
Neural Network with Batch Normalization were used in the
scGAN’s generator to improve training speed and stability.
scGAN was able to model the dependency and correlation of
intergenic, which are a hallmark of biological gene-regula tory
networks. scGAN also captured gene count distributions and
correlations well, and the training time was proportional to t he
complexityandsizeofscRNAseqdatasets.
Marouf et al. ( 99) proposed a conditional scGAN model
(cscGAN) for the realistic generation of single-cell RNA-seq
data. The projection discriminator, along with the Conditio nal
Batch Normalization and LSN function in the generator, is us ed
to generate speciﬁc cell types of interest while learning mult i-
cell type complex data. Conditional generation of cell types
could be used to augment the number of sparse speciﬁc cell
populations that might represent only a small part of the total
cellssequenced.However,itmayhelptosolvetheclassimba lanceproblem. Similar to the above research, Wang et al. used CGAN
for inferring target gene expression proﬁles by incorporating
both adversarial and L1-norm loss terms. Comparative analys is
showed that this model outperformed previous linear methods
ingeneexpressioninference( 104).
Xu et al. proposed the GAN for scRNA-seq imputation
(scIGANs), which uses generated realistic rather than obse rved
cells to avoid the limitations, such as many sources of techn ical
noises and dropouts, and the powerless for rare cells. ScIGANs
converts the expression proﬁles of individual cells to images a nd
feeds them to GAN. The trained generative network produces
expressionproﬁlesrepresentingtherealisticcellsofdeﬁnedt ypes.
Thegeneratedcells,ratherthantheobservedcells,arethenu sed
toimputethedropoutsoftherealcells( 6).
Hi-C is commonly used to study three-dimensional genome
organization. Hong et al. ( 105) developed a GAN, namely
DeepHiC, to predict high-resolution Hi-C contact maps from
low-coverage sequencing data. DeepHiC can reproduce high-
resolution Hi-C data from as few as 1% down sampled reads.
Application of DeepHiC to Hi-C data on mouse embryonic
development can facilitate chromatin loop detection with
higheraccuracy.
Killoran et al. ( 102) developed a WGAN-based deep
generativenetworkforcreatingnewDNAsequencesbyencodi ng
the discrete sequences of characters (the nucleotides A, C, G, T)
into a continuous representation using one-hot encodings. Th e
authors proposed a joint approach that extends an activation
maximization version by incorporating a trained generator
model on a dataset of 4.6M 50-nucleotide-long sequences
encompassing chromosome 1 of the human genome hg38. This
approach is suitable for discrete sequences such as DNA. They
found that the generative model can learn important structur es
fromDNAsequences,andcanbeusedtoexploreanddesignnew
DNAsequenceswithdesiredproperties( 102).
Guptaand Zou ( 103) proposed a novel feedback-loop
architecture, called Feedback GAN (FBGAN) to optimize
syntheticgenesequencesfordesiredpropertiesusinganexter nal
function analyzer. The feedback-loop model consists of two
components,includingGANandadiﬀerentiableneuralnetwork .
GAN was used to generate novel raw gene sequences. The
diﬀerentiable neural network named analyzer converted a
gene sequence into a probability that the sequence encoded
an antimicrobial peptide (AMP). The ntop-ranked favorable
generated sequences replaced the oldest ngenes present in the
discriminator training dataset. This model was able to gene rate
synthetic genes coding for peptides of up to 50 amino acids
in length, and the peptides can be optimized for the secondary
alpha-helicalstructureoftheresultingpeptides( 103).
Anand and Huang ( 101) applied GAN to generate protein
structures by encoding protein structures in terms of pairwise
distances between α-carbons on the protein backbone by
using data from the Protein Data Bank, and used the
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) and
Rosetta algorithm to transform 2D pairwise distances into
3D Cartesian coordinates. The authors compared their work
with traditional HMMs-based methods. They found that their
generator model could learn to construct meaningful seconda ry
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 11 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
structure elements such as alpha helices and beta sheets. The
generatedmapswerehighlyvariableandsimilarbutnotident ical
to the actual data, indicating that the GAN model was not
just memorizing the training data. Finally, the authors ver iﬁed
that the generative model can reconstruct missing sections of
corruptedproteinstructures( 101).
Similarly, Yeh et al. ( 106) also proposed a 2D distance
map representation of protein GAN model to predict particular
missing regions in a protein structure using the idea of image
inpainting. The author used this model to learn the distribut ion
of a particular loop region with the context of the loop region
fromthecandidatepatchpoolandsuccessfullypredictedtheloo p
region (100). Compared to the traditional time-consuming and
expensive experimental methods such as X-ray crystallography
orNuclearMagneticResonance(NMR),thisGANmodelismore
convenientandtime-saving.
Accurate identiﬁcation of prognostic biomarkers is an
important but challenging goal in bioinformatics. Kim et al.
(107) applied GAN model to specify candidate prognostic gene
modulebygraphlearningalgorithmsandevaluatedgenesscor es
via a PageRank algorithm using multiple-omics data, includi ng
copy number, gene expression, DNA methylation, and somatic
mutation data from ﬁve cancer types. Firstly, they reconstruc ted
functional interaction networks (FIs network) that includ ed
known pathways in human biology. Then the reconstructed FIs
network was learned by GAN to select features via PageRank
with GAN weights, and ﬁnally, the prognosis was predicted.
They successfully identiﬁed a number of genes involved in
cancer development and analyzed their roles in biological
pathways. Their model showed better predictive accuracy than
existingmethods.
There are some other applications in bioinformatics using
GAN to enhance gene expression classiﬁcation. Huynh et al.
realized new data generation from original training datase ts
throughthecombinationofGANwithnonlinearSupportVector
Machines (SVMs). The results of GAN-SVM model displayed
a better performance than the most advanced classiﬁcation
methods, including k-nearest neighbors (KNN), SVMs, decision
tree (DTs) of C4.5, and random-forest (RFs) ( 108). Bhat
et al. proposed a deep generative machine learning architectu re
(DeepCancer) to test the ability of GAN in classifying breast
cancer and prostate cancer samples via the features learned by
the discriminator. The results showed that the generative m odel
achievedahighaccuracyscore( 109).
CONCLUSION
Inthisarticle,webrieﬂyintroducedtheorigin,workingpri nciple,
the development history of GAN, and numerous applications to
the areas of digital image processing, medical imaging analys is,
medicalinformatics,andbioinformatics.
In digital image processing, GAN can do image generation,
high-resolution images generation from low-resolution im ages
and image inpainting, which perform well and are widely used.
Considering too many applications in digital image processing ,
due to space limitations, we only selected the articles withthe most citations as the lead application to introduce, which
leads to some applications in the directions of image processin g
weren’t introduced comprehensively such as Style migration,
imagecoloring,etc.
From the application of GAN in medical images, we can
see that GAN-based models provide a good solution for data
shortage in medical image analysis. It can be regarded as one of
theimportantadditionstothemanuallabelingfromradiolog ists.
The models based on a single GAN are more used as data
augmentation methods to increase the variety and quantity o f
images in the same modality. On this basis, Cycle-GAN-based
models make translations between multiple modalities possible .
Involving in segmentation networks within the Cycle-GAN
models, cross-modality segmentations can be learned in an en d-
to-end manner. This will eﬀectively promote the application
and development of deep learning algorithms in medical image
analysis. However, GAN or Cycle-GAN still have limitations.
For example, the CT images from the head cannot be generated
from the CT images of the abdomen or MRI images from the
legs. Researchers need to carefully design their data ﬂow and
lost functions to avoid problems such as non-convergence or
model collapse. Additionally, some medical image analysis ta sks
require detailed 3D information of the organ. Involving 3D
feature learning or 3D segmentation in the GAN-based model
wouldbeachallenge.
Based on EMR or EHR data, although GAN can generate
realistic synthesized discrete data, continuous data, and even
time series data to solve the issues of fewer labels and
unbalanced classiﬁcations in medical informatics, there a re
still some limitations. How to evaluate these generated dat a
and how to apply these generated data to solve medical
problems has been controversial, which requires real data
tovalidate.
So far, the application of GAN models in bioinformatics
is still in a relatively early stage of development. Most
studies applied GAN to generate and/or augment datasets.
The above results have demonstrated the similarity of the
data generated using GAN models to the original data. Most
machine learning algorithms work well when the number of
cases in each class is roughly equal. So, using the generated
data, we can not only perform a lot of downstream analyses,
such as detecting marker genes, dimensionality reduction
and clustering, and reconstructing a particular secondary
structure, but also decrease the number of human and animal
experiments with a concomitant reduction in experimental
costs, addressing important ethical and ﬁnancial issues. In
addition, GAN framework can work with any type of
neural networks, so its application in bioinformatics will be
moreextensive.
In conclusion, more and more applications of GAN in
biomedical research are being proposed. Some of GANs
such as WGAN, Cycle-GAN, CGAN, medGAN are receiving
more and more attention because of their importance in
biomedical research. Although GAN has its advantages in
simulating various problems, there are also some limitations .
For example, when the sample size is small, the accuracy
of the model will be relatively low. As GAN uses deep
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 12 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
neural networks as generators, poor interpretability is also a
commonproblem.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LL, LY, ZZ, and ZF reviewed the literature and wrote the initi al
manuscript. LL, NZ, and XZ proposed an article outline. WZ,
XZ, NZ, and YC revised the drafts. LL created and maintained
anEndNotedatabase.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sichuan Science and Technology Program
(No. 2019YFS0147), 1 ·3·5 project for disciplines of
excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
(No. ZYJC18010), 1 ·3·5 project for disciplines of
excellence-Clinical Research Incubation Project, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University (No. 2019HXFH022),
and the medical big data and statistical application
technologyworkshop.
REFERENCES
1. Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Bing X, Warde-Farley D, O zair
S, et al. Generative Adversarial Nets. In: International Conference on Neural
InformationProcessingSystems Montréal,QC(2014).
2. Lin Y, Dai X, Li L, Wang X, Wang F. The new Frontier of AI
research:generativeadversarialnetworks. ActaAutomSin. (2018)44:775–92.
doi:10.16383/j.aas.2018.y000002
3. Zhang Z, Zhou X, Zhao S, Zhang X. Semantic prior guided face inpain ting.
In: Zhang Z, Zhou X, Zhao S, Zhang X, editors. MMAsia ’19 . New York,
NY(2019).
4. Hiasa Y, Otake Y, Takao M, Matsuoka T, Sato Y. Cross-modality
image synthesis from unpaired data using CycleGAN: eﬀects of gradi ent
consistency loss and training data size. In: Goksel O, Oguz I, G ooya A,
Burgos N, editors. Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging - Third
International Workshop, SASHIMI 2018, Held in Conjunction with MI CCAI
2018,Proceedings .Granada:Springerverlag(2018).
5. ZhuJY,ParkT,IsolaP,EfrosAA.Unpairedimage-to-imagetranslatio nusing
cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In: IEEE International Conference on
ComputerVision .Venice(2017).
6. Xu Y, Zhang Z, You L, Liu J, Fan Z, Zhou X. Single-cell RNA-
seq imputation using generative adversarial networks. bioRxiv. (2020).
doi:10.1101/2020.01.20.913384
7. Welander P, Karlsson S, Eklund A. Generative adversarial network s for
image-to-image translation on multi-contrast MR images - a comparison o f
CycleGANandunit. arXiv[Preprint].(2018)arXiv:1806.7777.
8. Li M, Tang H, Chan MD, Zhou X, Qian X, Li M. DC-AL GAN:
Pseudoprogression and true tumor progression of glioblastoma multiform
image classiﬁcation based on DCGAN and AlexNet. Med Phys. (2019) 47,
1139–50.doi:10.1002/mp.14003
9. LiH.StatisticalLearningMethod .Beijing:TsinghuaUniversityPress(2012).
10. Feng X, Liu M, Liu J, Qin B, Sun Y, Liu T. Topic-to-essay genera tion with
neuralnetworks.In:FengX,LiuM,LiuJ,QinB,SunY,LiuT,edito rs.IJCAI.
Stockholm(2018).p.4078–84.doi:10.24963/ijcai.2018/567
11. Xian W, Xu K, Hall P. A survey of image synthesis and editing wit h
generative adversarial networks. Tsinghua Sci Technol. (2017) 22:660–74.
doi:10.23919/TST.2017.8195348
12. Ledig C, Theis L, Huszar F, Caballero J, Aitken A, Tejani A, et a l.
Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative a dversarial
network. arXiv:1609.04802 .(2016).doi:10.1109/CVPR.2017.19
13. Benaim S, Wolf L. One-sided unsupervised domain mapping.
arXiv:1706.00826 .(2017).
14. Yang Z, Yuan Y, Wu Y, Salakhutdinov R, Cohen WW. Review netw orks for
captiongeneration. arXiv:1605.07912 (2016).
15. Alom MZ, Taha TM, Yakopcic C, Westberg S, Sidike P, Nasrin MS, et al. A
state-of-the-artsurveyondeeplearningtheoryandarchitectu res.Electronics.
(2019)8:292.doi:10.3390/electronics8030292
16. Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin DB. Maximum likelihood from
incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J R Stat Soc. (1977) 39:1–38.
doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1977.tb01600.x
17. Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A. HITON: a novel Markov
Blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. AMIA Annu Symp Proc.
(2003)2003:21–5.18. Zeng N, Wang Z, Zhang H, Liu W, Alsaadi FE. Deep belief networks for
quantitativeanalysisofagoldimmunochromatographicstrip. CognComput.
(2016)8:684–92.doi:10.1007/s12559-016-9404-x
19. Rasmussen CE. The inﬁnite gaussian mixture model. In: International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . Breckenridge,
CO(1999).
20. Rabiner LR. A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applic ations
inspeechrecognition. ProcIEEE. (1989)77:257-86.doi:10.1109/5.18626
21. Goodfellow I. NIPS 2016 tutorial: generative adversarial netw orks.
arXiv:1701.00160 (2017).
22. Creswell A, White T, Dumoulin V, Kai A, Sengupta B, Bharath AA.
Generativeadversarialnetworks:anoverview. IEEESignalProcMag. (2018)
35:53–65.doi:10.1109/MSP.2017.2765202
23. Spall JC. A stochastic approximation technique for generating ma ximum
likelihood parameter estimates. In: American Control Conference .
St.Louis,MO(2009).
24. Guo Y, Yu L, Oerlemans A, Lao S, Song W, Lew MS. Deep learning
for visual understanding: a review. Neurocomputing. (2016) 187:27–48.
doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2015.09.116
25. Deng LY. The cross-entropy method: a uniﬁed approach to combinato rial
optimization, Monte-Carlo simulation, and machine learning.
Technometrics. (2004)48:147–8.doi:10.1198/tech.2006.s353
26. Arjovsky M, Chintala S, Bottou L. Wasserstein GAN.
arXiv:1701.07875 (2017).
27. WangK,ChaoG,DuanY,LinY,ZhengX,WangFY.Generativeadv ersarial
networks: introduction and outlook. IEEE/CAA J Autom Sin. (2017) 4:588–
98.doi:10.1109/JAS.2017.7510583
28. SalimansT,GoodfellowI,ZarembaW,CheungV,RadfordA,XiC.Improve d
techniquesfortrainingGANs. arXiv:1606.03498 (2016).
29. Hong Y, Hwang U, Yoo J, Yoon S. How generative adversarial
networks and their variants work. ACM Comput Surv. (2019) 52:1–43.
doi:10.1145/3301282
30. Mirza M, Osindero S. Conditional generative adversarial net s.arXiv
[Preprint] .(2014):2672–80. arXiv:1411.1784.
31. Radford A, Metz L, Chintala S. Unsupervised representation learni ng with
deepconvolutionalgenerativeadversarialnetworks. ComputSci .(2015).
32. NowozinS,CsekeB,TomiokaR.f-GAN:traininggenerativene uralsamplers
usingvariationaldivergenceminimization. arXiv:1606.00709 (2016).
33. FenchelW.Onconjugateconvexfunctions.In:GiorgiG,K jeldsenT,editors,
TracesandEmergenceofNonlinearProgramming .Basel:Birkhäuser(2014).
34. Zhao J, Mathieu M, LeCun Y. Energy-based generative adver sarial network.
arXiv:1609.03126 (2016).
35. MaoX,LiQ,XieH,LauRYK,ZhenW,SmolleySP.Leastsquaresgenerat ive
adversarialnetworks. arXiv:1611.04076 .(2016).doi:10.1109/ICCV.2017.304
36. Gulrajani I, Ahmed F, Arjovsky M, Dumoulin V, Courville A. Improved
trainingofwassersteinGANs. arXiv:1704.00028 (2017).
37. Karras T, Aila T, Laine S, Lehtinen J. Progressive growing of GAN s for
improvedquality,stability,andvariation. arXiv:1710.10196 (2017).
38. Pathak D,Krahenbuhl P, Donahue J, DarrellT, EfrosAA.Context encoders:
featurelearningbyinpainting. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Visionand
PatternRecognition. LasVegas,NV:IEEE(2016).
39. JinY,ZhangJ,LiM,TianY,FangZ.Towardstheautomaticani mecharacters
creationwithgenerativeadversarialnetworks. arXiv:1708.05509 (2017).
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 13 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
40. Wang S, Sun J, Mehmood I, Pan C, Chen Y, Zhang YD. Cerebral micro-
bleeding identiﬁcation based on a nine-layer convolutional ne ural network
with stochastic pooling. Concurrency Comput Pract Exp. (2020) 32:e5130.
doi:10.1002/cpe.5130
41. Jiang X, Zhang Y. Chinese sign language ﬁngerspelling via six- layer
convolutional neural network with leaky rectiﬁed linear units for
therapy and rehabilitation. J Med Imag Health Inform. (2019) 9:2031–90.
doi:10.1166/jmihi.2019.2804
42. Li W, Jiang X, Sun W, Wang S, Liu C, Zhang X, et al. Gingivitis
identiﬁcation via multichannel gray-level co-occurrence matrix an d particle
swarm optimization neural network. Int J Imag Syst Technol. (2019) 1–11.
doi:10.1002/ima.22385
43. Wang S, Zhang Y, Yang M, Liu B, Ramirez J, Górriz JM. Unilateral
sensorineural hearing loss identiﬁcation based on double-densi ty dual-
tree complex wavelet transform and multinomial logistic regression. Integr
ComputAidedEng. (2019)26:411–26.doi:10.3233/ICA-190605
44. ZengN,WangZ,ZhangH,KimK-E,LiY,LiuX.Animprovedparticleﬁlte r
with a novel hybrid proposal distribution for quantitative analys is of gold
immunochromatographicstrips. IEEETransNanotechnol. (2019)18:819–29.
doi:10.1109/TNANO.2019.2932271
45. Zeng N, Wang Z, Zineddin B, Li Y, Du M, Xiao L, et al. Image-base d
quantitative analysis of gold immunochromatographic strip via cellular
neural network approach. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. (2014) 33:1129–36.
doi:10.1109/TMI.2014.2305394
46. ZengN,ZhangH,LiY,LiangJ,DobaieAM.Denoisinganddeblu rringgold
immunochromatographic strip images via gradient projection algorithms.
Neurocomputing. (2017) 247:165–72. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2017.
03.056
47. ZengN,LiH,LiY,LuoX.Quantitativeanalysisofimmunochromato graphic
strip based on convolutional neural network. IEEE Access. (2019) 7:16257–
63.doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2893927
48. Zhang Y, Govindaraj V, Tang C, Zhu W, Sun J. High performance
multiple sclerosis classiﬁcation by data augmentation and AlexNet
transfer learning model. J Med Imag Health Inform. (2019) 9:1–10.
doi:10.1166/jmihi.2019.2692
49. Zeng N, Zhang H, Song B, Liu W, Li Y, Dobaie AM. Facial expressi on
recognition via learning deep sparse autoencoders. Neurocomputing. (2017)
273:643–49.doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2017.08.043
50. Zhang G, You L, Lan L, Zeng N, Chen W, Poehling GG, et al. Risk
prediction model for knee arthroplasty. IEEE Access. (2019) 7:34645–54.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2900619
51. Szegedy C, Ioﬀe S, Vanhoucke V. Inception-v4, inception-R esNet and the
impactofresidualconnectionsonlearning. arXiv:1602.07261 (2016).
52. Dai J, Yi L, He K, Jian S. R-FCN: Object Detection via region- based fully
convolutionalnetworks. arXiv:1605.06409 (2016).
53. Long J, Shelhamer E, Darrell T. Fully convolutional networks for se mantic
segmentation. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition(CVPR) .Boston,MA:IEEE(2015).
54. Shuiwang J, Ming Y, Kai Y. 3D convolutional neural networks f or human
action recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. (2013) 35:221–31.
doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2012.59
55. Kayalibay B, Jensen G, Smagt PVD. CNN-based segmentation of medical
imagingdata. arXiv:1701.03056 (2017).
56. Li Q, Cai W, Wang X, Zhou Y, Feng DD, Chen M. Medical image
classiﬁcation with convolutional neural network. In: International
Conference on Control Automation Robotics and Vision. IEEE:
Singapore(2014).
57. Yitan Z, Peng Q, Yuan J. TCGA-assembler: open-source softwa re for
retrieving and processing TCGA data. Nat Methods. (2014) 11:599–600.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.2956
58. Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li LJ, Li K, Li FF. ImageNet: a large- scale
hierarchical image database. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
PatternRecognition. Miami,FL(2009).doi:10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848
59. Lin TY, Maire M, Belongie S, Hays J, Perona P, Ramanan D, et al.
Microsoft COCO: common objects in context. arXiv:1405.0312 . (2014).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10602-1_48
60. Shin HC, Roth HR, Gao M, Lu L, Xu Z, Nogues I, et al. Deep convolut ional
neural networks for computer-aided detection: CNN architecture s, datasetcharacteristics and transfer learning. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. (2016)
35:1285–98.doi:10.1109/TMI.2016.2528162
61. Wang S-H, Xie S, Chen X, Guttery DS, Tang C, Sun J, et al. Alcoholism
identiﬁcationbasedonanAlexNettransferlearningmodel. FrontPsychiatry.
(2019)10:205.doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00205
62. Zhang C, Zhu L, Zhang S, Yu W. PAC-GAN: an eﬀective pose
augmentation scheme for unsupervised cross-view person re-ident iﬁcation.
Neurocomputing. (2019)387:22–39.doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2019.12.094
63. Dirvanauskas D, Maskeliunas R, Raudonis V, Damasevicius R ,
Scherer R. HEMIGEN: human embryo image generator based on
Generative Adversarial Networks. Sensors (Basel). (2019) 19:3578.
doi:10.3390/s19163578
64. Pandey S, Singh PR, Tian J. An image augmentation approach usin g two-
stage generative adversarial network for nuclei image segmentati on.
Biomed Signal Process. (2020) 57:101782. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2019.
101782
65. Frid-Adar M, Diamant I, Klang E, Amitai M, Goldberger J, Greenspa n
H. GAN-based synthetic medical image augmentation for increased CNN
performance in liver lesion classiﬁcation. Neurocomputing. (2018) 321:321–
31.doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2018.09.013
66. Chen Y, Feng S, Christodoulou AG, Zhou Z, Li D. Eﬃcient and
accurate MRI super-resolution using a generative adversarial net work
and 3D multi-level densely connected network. arXiv:1803.01417 . (2018).
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-00928-1_11
67. Chen Y, Xie Y, Zhou Z, Feng S, Christodoulou AG, Li D. Brain MRI s uper
resolutionusing3Ddeepdenselyconnectedneuralnetworks.In: 2018IEEE
15th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018). IEEE:
Washington,DC(2018).pp.739–42.
68. Mahapatra D. Retinal vasculature segmentation using local sali ency
maps and Generative adversarial networks for image super resolution.
arXiv:1710.04783 (2017).
69. Yi X, Babyn P. Sharpness-aware low-dose CT denoising using con ditional
Generative Adversarial Network. J Digit Imaging. (2018) 31:1–15.
doi:10.1007/s10278-018-0056-0
70. Shitrit O, Raviv TR. Accelerated magnetic resonance imaging by adversarial
neural network. In: Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and
Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support: Third In ternational
Workshop, DLMIA 2017, and 7th International Workshop, ML-CDS
2017, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2017. Québec, QC (2017).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-67558-9_4
71. Wolterink JM, Dinkla AM, Savenije MHF, Seevinck PR, Berg CATV , Išgum
I. Deep MR to CT synthesis using unpaired data. arXiv:1708.01155 . (2017).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-68127-6_2
72. Huo Y, Xu Z, Bao S, Bermudez C, Moon H, Parvathaneni P,
et al. Splenomegaly segmentation on multi-modal MRI using Deep
Convolutional Networks. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. (2019) 38:1185–96.
doi:10.1109/TMI.2018.2881110
73. Tanner C, Ozdemir F, Profanter R, Vishnevsky V, Konukoglu E, Goksel O.
GenerativeAdversarialNetworksforMR-CTdeformableimageregistra tion.
arXiv:1807.07349 (2018).
74. Yue Z, Miao S, Mansi T, Rui L. Task driven generative modeling f or
unsupervised domain adaptation: application to x-ray image segmenta tion.
arXiv:1806.07201 (2018).
75. Zhang Z, Lin Y, Zheng Y. Translating and segmenting multimodal me dical
volumeswithcycle-andshape-consistencyGenerativeAdversaria lNetwork.
arXiv:1802.09655 .(2018).doi:10.1109/CVPR.2018.00963
76. Ronneberger O, Fischer P, Brox T. U-Net: Convolutional Netw orks for
biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical
ImageComputingandComputer-assistedIntervention. Cham(2015).
77. Isola P, Zhu JY, Zhou T, Efros AA. Image-to-Image translation
with Conditional Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1611.07004 . (2016).
doi:10.1109/CVPR.2017.632
78. Lu X, Tsao Y, Matsuda S, Hori C. Speech enhancement based on deep
denoising Auto-Encoder. In: Proceedings of Interspeech . Lyon (2013).
pp.436–40.
79. Yi Z, Hao Z, Gong PTM, Yi Z, Hao Z, Gong PTM, et al.
DualGAN: unsupervised dual learning for image-to-image translatio n.
arXiv:1704.02510 .(2017).doi:10.1109/ICCV.2017.310
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

==== Page 14 ====
Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
80. Huo Y, Xu Z, Bao S, Assad A, Abramson RG, Landman BA. Adversarial
synthesis learning enables segmentation without target modality ground
truth.arXiv:1712.07695 .(2017).doi:10.1109/ISBI.2018.8363790
81. Chartsias A, Joyce T, Dharmakumar R, Tsaftaris SA. Adversarial image
synthesis for unpaired multi-modal cardiac data. In: Tsaftaris S, G ooya A,
Frangi A, Prince J, editors. Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging.
SASHIMI2017.LectureNotesinComputerScience .Cham:Springer(2017).
82. JinCB,JungW,JooS,ParkE,CuiX.DeepCTtoMRsynthesisusi ngpaired
andunpaireddata. arXiv:1805.10790 .(2018).doi:10.3390/s19102361
83. Li Q, Lan L, Zeng N, You L, Yin J, Zhou X, et al. A framework for big d ata
governance to advance RHINs: a case study of China. IEEE Access. (2019)
7:50330–8.doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2910838
84. Choi E, Biswal S, Malin B, Duke J, Stewart WF, Sun J. Generatin g
multi-label discrete patient records using Generative Adversarial N etworks.
arXiv:1703.06490 .(2017).
85. Baowaly MK, Lin C, Liu C, Chen K. Synthesizing electronic hea lth records
using improved generative adversarial networks. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
(2019)26:228–41.doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy142
86. YoonJ,JordonJ,vanderSchaarM.RadialGAN:leveragingmultiple datasets
to improve target-speciﬁc predictive models using Generative Advers arial
Networks. arXiv:1802.06403 (2018).
87. Che Z, Yu C, Zhai S, Sun Z, Yan L, Che Z, et al. Boosting deep lea rning
risk prediction with Generative Adversarial Networks for electroni c health
records.arXiv:1709.01648 .(2017).doi:10.1109/ICDM.2017.93
88. Esteban C, Hyland SL, Rätsch G. Real-valued (Medical) time serie s
generationwithrecurrentconditionalGANs. arXiv:1706.02633 (2017).
89. LiW,WangY,CaiY,ArnoldC,ZhaoE,YuanY.Semi-supervisedrare disease
detectionusinggenerativeadversarialnetwork. arXiv:1812.00547 (2018).
90. Guan J, Li R, Yu S, Zhang X. Generation of synthetic electronic
medical record text. arXiv:1812.02793v1 . (2018). pp. 374–80.
doi:10.1109/BIBM.2018.8621223
91. Yang Y, Nan F, Yang P, Meng Q, Xie Y, Zhang D, et al. GAN-
based semi-supervised learning approach for clinical decision
support in health-IoT platform. IEEE Access. (2019) 7:8048–57.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2888816
92. TangG,NiY,WangK,YongQ.Fine-tuningneuralpatientques tionretrieval
model with Generative Adversarial Networks. Stud Health Technol Inform.
(2018)247:720–4.
93. Hassouni AE, Hoogendoorn M, Muhonen V. Using generative adv ersarial
networkstodeveloparealistichumanbehaviorsimulator.In:MillerT, Oren
N, Sakurai Y, Noda I, Savarimuthu B, Cao Son T, editors. PRIMA 2018:
Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems. PRIMA 2018. Lect ure Notes
inComputerScience. Cham:Springer(2018).
94. Shahnaz M, Chowdhary M, Asha Rani D, Parkash J, Dev D. Bioinf ormatics:
an overview for cancer research. J Drug Deliv. Ther. (2016) 6:69–72.
doi:10.22270/jddt.v6i4.1290
95. Mount DW. Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis. 2nd edn. New
York,NY:ColdSpringHarborLaboratoryPress(2004).
96. Abdurakhmonov IY. Bioinformatics: basics, development, and fu ture.
IntechOpen. (2016)3–26.doi:10.5772/6381797. Sharmilan S. Generate bioinformatics data using Generative Adv ersarial
Network: a review. In: 2nd International Conference on Information
TechnologyResearch .Colombo(2017).
98. Ghahramani A, Watt FM, Luscombe NM. Generative adversarial ne tworks
simulate gene expression and predict perturbations in single cells. bioRxiv.
(2018)262501.doi:10.1101/262501
99. Marouf M, Machart P, Bansal V, Kilian C, Magruder DS, Krebs CF, e t al.
Realistic in silico generation and augmentation of single-cell RN A-seq
data using generative adversarial networks. Nat Commun. (2020) 11:1–12.
doi:10.1038/s41467-019-14018-z
100. Li Z, Nguyen SP, Dong X, Yi S. Protein Loop Modeling Using Dee p
GenerativeAdversarialNetwork.In: IEEEInternationalConferenceonTools
withArtiﬁcialIntelligence .Boston,MA(2017).
101. Anand N, Huang P. Generative modeling for protein structures. In :ICLR
2018Workshop. Vancouver,BC(2018).
102. Killoran N, Lee LJ, Delong A, Duvenaud D, Frey BJ. Generating an d
designingDNAwithdeepgenerativemodels. arXiv:1712.06148 (2017).
103. Gupta A, Zou J. Feedback GAN (FBGAN) for DNA: a novel
feedback-loop architecture for optimizing protein functions.
arXiv:1804.01694 .(2018).
104. Wang X, Ghasedi Dizaji K, Huang H. Conditional generative ad versarial
network for gene expression inference. Bioinformatics. (2018) 34:i603–11.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty563
105. Hong H, Jiang S, Li H, Du G, Sun Y, Tao H, et al. DeepHiC: A
generative adversarial network for enhancing Hi-C data resolutio n.
Plos Comput Biol. (2020) 16:e1007287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1007287
106. Yeh RA, Chen C, Lim TY, Schwing AG, Hasegawajohnson M, Do MN.
Semantic image inpainting with deep generative models. arXiv.(2016).
doi:10.1109/CVPR.2017.728
107. Kim M, Oh I, Ahn J. An improved method for prediction of cancer
prognosis by network learning. Genes.(2018) 9:478. doi: 10.3390/genes91
00478
108. Huynh P, Van Hoa Nguyen, Do T. Enhancing gene expression class iﬁcation
of support vector machines with generative adversarial networks. KCI
AccreditedJ. (2019)17:14–20.
109. Bhat RR, Viswanath V, Li X. DeepCancer: detecting cancer t hrough gene
expressionsviadeepgenerativelearnin. arXiv(2016).
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potentialconﬂictofinterest.
Copyright © 2020 Lan, You, Zhang, Fan, Zhao, Zeng, Chen and Zhou. T his is an
open-accessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCrea tiveCommonsAttribution
License(CCBY).Theuse,distributionorreproductioninot herforumsispermitted,
providedtheoriginalauthor(s)andthecopyrightowner(s)a recreditedandthatthe
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordanc e with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitte d which does not comply
withtheseterms.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164

