==== Page 1 ====
1 
 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Marketing: Applications, 
Opportunities, Challenges, and Research Agenda  
 
Nir Kshetri  
(Corresponding Author)  
Bryan School of Business and Economics  
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA  
Email: nbkshetr@uncg.edu    
 
Yogesh K Dwivedi  
Digital Futures for Sustainable Business & Society Research Group, School of Management, 
Swansea University, Bay Campus, Fabian Bay, Swansea, Wale s, UK  
Email: y.k.dwivedi@swansea.ac.uk  
 
Department of Management, Symbiosis Institute of Business Management, Pune & Symbiosis 
International (Deemed University), Pune, Maharashtra, India  
 
Thomas H. Davenport  
Distinguished Professor of IT and Management, B abson College, USA  
Senior Advisor, Deloitte Analytics and AI Practice  
Digital Fellow, MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy  
Email: tdavenport@babson.edu  
 
Niki Panteli  
Department of Management Science  
Lancaster University Management School, Lancaster Unive rsity, UK  
Email: n.panteli1@lancaster.ac.uk  
 
 
Highlights:  
• Marketing has been affected  positively by the recent developments in GAI .  
• Insights generated by GAI are more effective in personaliz ation.  
• GAI’s use in content creation leads to higher efficiency.  
• GAI can help generate insights to improve the sales lead generation process.  
• GAI can help improve sales lead generation .  
• Further research is needed to understand the impact of GAI on marketing . 
Abstract  
While all functional areas in organization s are benefiting  from the recent development in 
generative artificial intelligence  (GAI) , marketing has been particularly affected positively by this 
breakthrough innovation. However, scholars have not paid attention to the transformative impacts 
GAI has on marketing activities.  This editorial article aims to fill this void. It outlines the current 
state of generative artificial intelligence in marketing. The article discusses the facilitators and 
barrier s for the use of gen erative artificial intelligence in marketing. It highlights the effectiveness 
of insights generated by GAI in personalizing content and offerings and argues that marketing  

==== Page 2 ====
2 
 content generated by GAI is likely to be more personally relevant than that produced  by earlier 
generations of digital technologies. The article explains how higher efficiency and productivity of 
marketing activities can be achieved  by using GAI to create marketing content. It also describes 
the roles of i nsights and marketing content gen erated by GAI to improve the sales lead generation 
process. Implications for research, practice and policy are also discussed .    
 
Keywords: ChatGPT; customer engagement; customer experience; generative AI ; 
personalization  
 
1. Introduction  
Generative artificial intelligence (GAI) has been emerging as a major force to trigger a truly 
enterprise -wide adoption of AI (Dwivedi et al., 2023 a; 2023b ; Kshetri, 2023a). GAI denotes a 
category of AI systems capable of creating apparently new content th rough text, images, or other 
forms of media ( Susarla et al., 2023 ). While all functional areas in organization s are benefitting 
from this breakthrough innovation ( Dwivedi et al., 2023b; MIT Technology Review, 2023), 
marketing has been an area that has been  particularly affected positively by the recent 
developments in GAI (Kshetri, 2023a).  Indeed, GAI’ s usefulness  is especially  clear in industries 
such as marketing and advertising where high -quality written materials are essential 
for communicating  and interacting  with customers and other stakeholders ( Fintechnews 
Switzerland , 2023).  
Unsurprisingly the use of GAI, and AI in general , in marketing is  growing  exponentially.  
As of March 2023,  73% of U.S. organizations had used GAI tools, including chatbots, in 
marketing activities ( Dencheva , 20231) . Another survey of chief data and AI officers found that 
32% of organizations are prioritizing marketing and sales applications of GAI, and 44% are 
prioritizing customer operations use cases, including ch atbots (Davenport et al, 2023). The 
market for AI in marketing was estimated at $15.84 billion in 2021, which is predicted to 
reach  $107.5 billion by 2028 ( Dencheva , 2023 b).  

==== Page 3 ====
3 
 In general, utilization of digital technologies  helps organizations deliver perso nalized, 
timely and relevant communications via the chosen platform, thus contributing to an enhanced 
customer experience (Buttle & Stan, 2015).  A better customer experience drives engagement 
with products and brands (Grewal et al., 2017) , which in turn positively impacts  customer 
loyalty, and firm performance (Barari et al., 2021). Preliminary evidence indicates that GAI has a 
more powerful impact than previous generations of digital technologies on marketing processes 
and outcomes (Kshetri, 2023a).  Prima rily, this is due to GAI’s ability to generate human -like and 
easily customized text, images and videos, offer ing marketing professionals  a wide range of 
powerful tools for optimizing content creation processes (Anisin, 2023) .  
Marketers view GAI as a major productivity booster. For instance, in a survey conducted 
by the non -profit business membership and research gr oup organization Conference Board 
(Table 2), more than four -fifths (82%) of respondents expected that productivity will improve 
with the further adoption of GAI , compared to just 4% who expected the productivity to decline 
(The Conference Board , 2023). The  benefits of GAI in marketing, however, go far beyond their 
roles as just cost -cutting or time -saving tools. GAI can be used to do things that are not otherwise 
possible to do.  For instance, GAI enables brands to take marketing and sales to the next level  
and deliver truly one -to-one personalized experiences in a way that is not possible by humans 
alone. GAI brings benefits such as dynamic messaging capabilities by leverag ing personalization 
to send the right message at the right time to customers based on  detailed and valuable data. For 
instance, relevant real -time imagery, customized text, and predictive recommendations can help 
scale personalization across key moments in a cost -effective way (Bernard, 2023).  
While  some  studies  have been conducted to exam ine the use of GAI tools in marketing 
(e.g., Huh et al., 2023; Kunz & Wirtz, 2023; Paul, et al., 2023; Peres et al., 2023; Polonsky & 

==== Page 4 ====
4 
 Rotman, 2023 ), there is little research on how these tools  are being used and the effects they 
have on marketing activitie s and outcomes and a firm’s financial performance.  The purpose of 
this editorial article is to fill this void. A central question addressed in this article is: What are the 
mechanisms by which GAI impacts marketing activities and outcomes? While GAI plays a 
critical role in numerous areas of marketing, we specifically focus on the top three marketing 
applications of GAI as identified by Boston Consulting Group’s April 2023 survey: 
personalization, insight generation and content creation.   
This editorial ar ticle is structured as follows. We proceed by first discuss ing some 
generative AI examples and their marketing applications. In the section following these 
examples, we provide an overview of the current state of GAI uses in marketing. Next, we 
discuss the facilitators for the use of GAI in marketing . Then, we highlight key barriers hindering 
the use of GAI in marketing. It is followed by a section that develops some propositions related 
to the effect of GAI on marketing p rocess es and marketing outcome s and discusses implications 
for research and practice. The final section provides conclusions.  
2. Generative AI Examples and their Marketing Applications  
A wide variety of GAI tools have been  built to  facilitate marketing activities (Table 1  and Figure 
1). It is worth noting that the U.S. start -up OpenAI's ChatGPT has been  the most popular GAI 
tool with the  general public as well as marketing  professionals . In a June 2023 survey conducted 
by Bank of America  among a group of 1,100 US Internet users aged 18 to 55 , ChatGPT emerged 
as the favored AI chatbot among respondents, with 59% utilizing the tool. Bank of America also 
reported that 51% of those surveyed were using Microsoft's Bing, while Google's Bard was  being 
used by 31%  (Quarles, 2023) . Likewise, a ccording to a survey conducted by Botco.ai, a provider 

==== Page 5 ====
5 
 of AI -powered marketing chat solutions, ChatGPT was the predominant choice among marketing 
professionals for their GAI -based tools (Butler, 2023).  
Figure 1: Percentage of marketing professionals using different GAI tools.  
 
Data source: Butler ( 2023), B otco.ai’s survey.  
 
Some of these tools are foundational GAI models (e.g., GPT -4, DALL -E2, Midjourney) 
and others are versions of these models tuned specific ally for marketing purposes (e.g., Jasper.ai, 
Copy,ai) While ChatGPT responds only to text  prompts,  OpenAI's more advanced GAI tool  
GPT -4, which is available to paid users of ChatGPT+, accepts image as well as text inputs .   
Table 1: Some examples of GAI tools and their marketing applications  
GAI Example  How can it help with 
marketing?  Url of GAI  Example of its application  
OpenAI's  
ChatGPT and 
GPT-4 Brainstorming and  
stimulating the creativity 
process, c reating, marketing 
content, developing 
personalized  solutions  https://chat.open
ai.com/  The provider of AI -powered 
storytelling tool  Tome : help s 
customers create presentations using 
online documents, videos, and other 
digital content (Cromwell et al., 2023) .  
Khan Academy’s  GPT-4-based 
Khanmigo  provides personalized and 
interactive learning experiences for 
students and teach ers (Kshetri, 2023c)  
(Personalization of offerings) . 55
42
36
29 2825 24
ChatGPT Copy.ai Jasper.ai Peppertype Lensa DALL-E Midjourney

==== Page 6 ====
6 
 OpenAI ’s DALL -
E2 Creating custom images and 
art based on a prompt  https://chat.open
ai.com/  Toy company Mattel : came up with a 
new Hot Wheels model car. 
GAI advertising platform Omneky : 
create d visuals for ads for social 
platforms ( Mehta, 2023)  (Efficiency 
and productivity of marketing 
activities)  
Meta’s AI 
Sandbox  Creating different variations 
of a copy, generating 
background through text 
prompts, image cropping  https://www.face
book.com/busine
ss/new s/introduci
ng-ai-sandbox -
and-expanding -
meta -advantage -
suite  Jones Road Beauty used the solution to 
generate more versions of ads faster. 
(Adams, 2023).  This can lead to faster 
creative cycle by shortening the time 
requi red to develop, refine, and revise 
ideas, designs, or concepts to achieve 
the desired outcome  (Efficiency and 
productivity of marketing activities) .  
Midjourney  Creating images  based on 
text prompts.  https://www.midj
ourney.com/   Elder care management service 
platform PrimeCare  uses Midjourney -
generated  art for blog  posts . 
Jasper .ai Generating marketing 
content such as blog posts, 
product descriptions, 
company bios and ad copy  https://www.jasp
er.ai/   Goosehead Insurance :  create s and 
disseminate s a marketing content such 
as blog articles for the company's 
online learning center, email 
campaigns for potential and existing 
clients. It also repurposed social media 
content to maximize reach and 
engagement  (Personalization of 
content, Efficiency and productivity of 
marketing activities)  
Peppertype.ai  Creating  short -form,  
contextual  copies  and 
generating product  
descriptions  https://www.pep
percontent.io/pe
ppertype -ai/ As of October 2021, over 800 
businesses, including Meta  Adobe, and 
Amazon used it for content creation.  
Copy.ai  Crafting ad  copy and other 
marketing  content.  https://www.cop
y.ai/  Cloud -based collaborative platform 
and database service  provider  Airtable 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k
WrFKhhszmQ)  
GPT -4’s enhanced language generation capabilities would allow marketers to create 
higher -quality content than is possible with ChatGPT  (currently based on GPT -3.5). Thus, GPT -
4-created content is likely to be more engaging and more relevant to audiences. GPT -4’s 
enhanced fine -tuning capabilities are expected to assist digital marketers in customizing content 
and messaging for individual users, thereby fostering a more personalized customer experience.  
While many GAI systems used by marketing professionals such as Copy.ai, Jasper .ai, 
Peppertype.ai mainly help to create text -based marketing content, others such as DALL -E2 are 

==== Page 7 ====
7 
 capable of generating realistic visuals and artworks based on text -to-image prompts. In addition, 
digital advertising giants such as Meta have made GAI tools available to their clients.  For 
instance, in May 2023, Meta announced a GAI Sandbox that offered advertisers access to three 
tools. The first tool would help advertisers create different variations of a copy of an ad in the 
company’s F acebook or Instagram platform. When advertisers enter an ad copy, GAI will 
suggest several variations of the copy to test. The second tool would help generate background 
through text prompts. An advertiser can use text prompts to describe the background ap pearance 
or style. The GAI tool offers various images and advertisers can test their impact on 
performance. The third tool involves an image cropping feature to create visuals in different 
aspect ratios for various media such as social posts, stories, or s hort videos (IBL News, 2023).   
3. The  current  state  of GAI use in marketing  
Recent surveys have shown that there is widespread use of GAI among marketers and a growing 
demand of this innovation (Table 2). Especially mid -level and junior marketers are repor ted to 
have higher GAI adoption rates compared to senior marketers (The Conference Board, 2023). 
The characteristics of marketing professionals using GAI are consistent with the broader 
population. For instance, a new Pew Research Center survey conducted i n July 2023 found that a 
significantly higher proportion of younger adults used ChatGPT compared to  older adults.  
Table 2:  GAI use among marketers: Some representative surveys  
Survey conducted by  Conducted/released 
in (respondents)  Key findings  Additional findings  
Salesforce in partnership 
with YouGov ( Salesforce. 
202)  Conducted from 
May 18 – 25, 2023 
(1,029 marketers)  
  51% using GAI. An 
additional 22% had 
plans to use the tools 
“very soon”.  GAI saves marketers over five 
hours of work per week  
Boston Consulting Group  
(Ratajczak et al., 2023)  Conducted in April 
2023 ( >200 CMOs  
from several sectors 
in 8 countries in 
North America, 
Europe, and  Asia).  70% using  GAI and 19% 
were testing. Only 3% 
had no plans to use the 
technology  Top 3 uses: p ersonalization 
(67%), insight generation (51%) 
and content creation (49%).  

==== Page 8 ====
8 
 AI-powered marketing 
chat solution provider 
Botco.ai 
(StreetInsider.com , 2023)  Conducted in March  
2023 (1,000 
marketing 
professionals)   73% used GAI tools to 
create marketing 
content  Most common benefits expected 
from GAI: increased performance 
(58% ), increased creative variety 
(50%) cost efficiencies (50%), 
faster creative cycles (47%), 
ability to learn and improve 
(39% ), augmentation  of human 
creativity (34%)  
The C onference Board, in 
collaboration with Ragan 
Communications (The 
Conference Board , 2023)  August 2023 ( 287 
marketers and 
communicators ) 87% of marketers had 
used/experimented 
with AI tools  Top applications:  summarizing 
content (44%), doing the 
legwork/ stimulating creative 
thinking (41%), personalizing of 
customer/user content (33%), 
research (30%), generating 
content faster (30%), enhancing 
customer service (17%).  
Software company 
Sitecore   (“AI & 
Composable Marketing 
Software 
Survey”)  (Siteco re , 2023 ) March 2023 (over 
400 marketing 
professionals in the 
U.S.)   > 80% experimented 
with AI.  78% believed 
GAI can help get  
“closer” to “desired 
customer experience” 
(7% worried it might 
make more “distant”) .  Mechanisms by which GAI can 
help closer to customers:  more 
personalized content (75%), a 
better understanding of 
customer needs (74%), ability to 
provide a stream of re levant 
content (67%) (Bennett, 2023 a). 
Management consulting 
company  Chief Outsiders  2023 (80 CMOs with 
Fortune 500 
experience)  (Chief 
Outsiders, 2023)  Areas in which GAI tools 
are likely to provide 
most value (score out of 
8):  content creation 
and management 
(7.37) , market research 
and competitive insights 
(6.1) , digital marketing 
(5.6)  Improving the customer 
experience (5.08)  
Marketing technology stra tegy, 
adoption and use (4.41)  
 
 
 Recent surveys have revealed that personalization is among the most frequent GAI use 
cases in marketing (Table 2). Chief marketing officers (CMOs) are already taking advantage of 
GAI to better personalize products and serv ices. For instance, banks use GAI to analyze 
customer data and offer personalized investment advice based on their risk profile. Likewise, 
some retailers use GAI to create personalized recommendations that would influence customers 
to buy more. The goals o f these personalization efforts include better engagement, improved 
conversion rates and increased customer loyalty (Ratajczak et al., 2023). However, 

==== Page 9 ====
9 
 personalization at scale will require close integration of a GAI system with customer relationship 
manage ment (CRM) or marketing automation systems.   
 As Table 2 makes it clear, insight generation has been another key use of GAI in 
marketing. Companies are using GAI to conduct market and consumer research in a reliable 
manner to gain insights, which can be used to improve products and services (Ratajczak et al., 
2023). In general, AI has reduced the time taken to generate insights from raw data  and respond 
in (near) real -time ( Dwivedi et al., 2021). ). AI solutions can produce insights in seconds that 
often take human teams days or even weeks.  However, a large prop ortion of data in the past was 
illegible for the existing AI solutions. This means that organizations could not make use of such 
data. The recent developments in GAI have changed this dramatically. Leading software vendors 
such as Microsoft and Salesforce have incorporated GAI capab ilities in their products, which can 
be used to gain customer insight. Note that customer insight is knowledge about the customer 
that is valuable for a company (Smith et al., 2006). For instance, Copilot feature in Microsoft’s 
Dynamics 365 Customer Insigh ts has added GPT -4 to popular Office products such as Word, 
Excel, Teams, PowerPoint and Outlook. Marketers can use Copilot's GAI capabilities to gain 
insights from their customer data platform (Reines, 2023). ChatGPT Plus’ Advanced Data 
Analysis GAI offer ing can, with only a short prompt, address missing data issues, analyze data 
with machine learning models, create visualizations of data, and interpret results (Horsey, 2023) .  
 GAI is also being used to improve content marketing. The Content Marketing Ins titute 
defines content marketing as “a strategic marketing approach focused on creating and 
distributing valuable, relevant, and consistent content to attract and retain a clearly defined 
audience — and, ultimately, to drive profitable customer action” (Th e Content Marketing 
Institute, 2015). Content marketing focuses on creating and distributing marketing content such 

==== Page 10 ====
10 
 as videos, photos/imageries, presentations, flyers, blogs, infographics, social media posts, and 
tweets to enhance customer engagement and i ncrease sales (The Content Marketing Institute, 
2015). GAI is a valuable way to come up with new ideas and work more quickly , and thus create 
an effective marketing content faster and at a low cost .  
4. Facilitators for the use of GAI in marketing  
Several factors have facilitated the use of GAI in marketing. A thorough understanding of these 
facilitators may explain why such tools are being successfully adopted in some settings and by 
some firms but not others.  
First, many popular GAI tools such as ChatGPT perform well in terms of perceived ease of 
use, which is a major factor in a technology adoption decision (Davis, 1989). Marketing 
practitioners have noted that ChatGPT , the most popular GAI tool used in marketing (Figure 1) , 
has an extremely friendly interface that makes it easy to perform a number of marketing tasks 
(Pay, 2023). Most marketing professionals are also reported to view GAI tools to generate 
image s such as Midjourney, DALLE -2 and Stable Diffusion as simple and a ccessible that almost 
anyone can use to develop sophisticated graphics. Potential users do not need specific skills 
(Chen, 2023).   
Second, GAI performs well in terms of trialability, which describes potential adopters’ ability 
to experiment or try (on a l imited basis) a product before formally adopting. The free availability 
of GAI tools such as ChatGPT has facilitated trialability and driven a rapid early growth rate in 
its user base. As of September 2023 , ChatGPT was in OpenAI's feedback period, which me ans 
anyone can create a ChatGPT account and use it. Likewise, Midjourney was reported to offer 
free trial for new users from time to time  (Chen, 2023) . Stable Diffusion is open source and free 
to use  (Chen, 2023).  

==== Page 11 ====
11 
 Third, while not all GAI tools used in ma rketing are  freely available, the costs  to use most of 
them are not prohibitive. Most do not need costly software (Chen, 2023).  Likewise, until April 
2023, OpenAI provided new users of DALL -E with 50 complimentary credits during their initial 
month of use . Following that period, they would receive only 15 free credits for subsequent 
months.  Despite OpenAI's decision to discontinue the free trial feature, the costs associated with 
using DALL -E remain reasonably affordable. With a pricing structure of $15 fo r 115 prompts, 
each generating four image variations, the cost equates to approximately $0.13 per prompt or 
roughly $0.035 per generated image  (Broadway, 2023) . Stable Diffusion also offers monthly 
subscription plans for developers and businesses that need  more advanced uses. As of May 2023, 
the basic plan cost $9/month, the standard plan $49/month and the premium plan $149/month 
(Chen, 2023). Consequently, GAI tools are diffusing rapidly not only among large companies  
but also among small and medium enter prises (SMEs). For instance, accounting software 
company FreshBooks’ May 2023 survey of more than 1,000 North American small -business 
owners regarding the usefulness and impact of GAI found that 25% of small -business owners 
had already tested GAI tools suc h as ChatGPT, Google Bard, and Microsoft Bing in their 
business and two -thirds had plans to test them in their business within the next year  (Grothaus, 
2023) .  
 
A fourth facilitating factor is the availability of a large variety of GAI tools for marketing 
purposes. While ChatGPT  has been the most commonly used GAI tool for marketing, a number 
of similar tools are being used for such purpose (Figure 1). For instance, Jasper.ai, which 
provides an AI writing tool to generate marketing copy (e.g., blog posts, p roduct descriptions, 
company bios, ad copy), offers a wide range of GAI models to its customers that are tailored to 
their needs. It works with GAI providers such as OpenAI, Google, Meta and AI safety startup 

==== Page 12 ====
12 
 Anthropic to satisfy the needs of various types  of clients (O'brien, 2023). For instance, Jasper 
uses Anthropic’s Claude, which helps marketing teams to scale their content strategies more 
quickly. Jasper noted that Anthropic’s model is especially appropriate for clients concerned 
about accuracy. Anthr opic release Claude 2 in July 2023. Anthropic noted that Claude 2 
significantly improves performance on some metrics such as coding, math and logic problems. 
The improved reasoning ability is reported to give more accurate answers to user queries (Nuñez, 
2023). For marketers that are concerned with the security of their proprietary source data, a 
different model is provided (O'brien, 2023).   
The final facilitating factor in the adoption of GAI models is the ability to customize or fine -
tune GAI models for specific content domains, including marketing content. There are at least 
three methods of training models on an organization’s own content (Davenport & Alavi, 2023). 
Most organizations train GAI models with the use of prompts, but incorporating large volumes 
on content into models through prompts requires specific techniques, including embeddings, 
vector databases, and similarity algorithms. Such fine -tuning could be used, for example, to train 
GAI models on a company's specific products and services, marketing policies, and particularly 
effective ad or marketing copy from the past.  
5. Challenges and barriers to the use of GAI in marketing  
There are several  barriers  and challenges  to the widespread use of  GAI in marketing. 
For the same  reason  as mentioned above for the facilitators , it is essential to understand these 
barriers and challenges.   
 The most important barrier , especially  for SMEs , centers on costs. For instance, i n order 
to get access to Copilot, Microsoft 365 businesses need to pay additional $30 per user per month  
(Warren, 2023) . Likewise, as of September 2023, GPT -4 cost $20 with monthly subscription to 

==== Page 13 ====
13 
 ChatGPT Plus . While ChatGPT can be used for free, its training data goes up until 2021 only. 
This means that , as of September 2023, it could not ac cess real -time content and it d id not search 
the internet for answers. Companies thus cannot rely on the app to get timely insig hts such as 
consumers ’ current perception about a brand  and current trends impacting a market . However, on 
September 27, 2023, OpenAI made the Internet b rowsing feature available to its Plus and 
Enterprise users and announced that the br feature will be ex pand to “all users soon” 
(https://twitter.com/OpenAI/status/1707077713490854127 )  
 Second, marketers are worried about data security and privacy in GAI tools  (The 
Conference Board , 2023 ). There are privacy concerns if marketers enter sensitive customer dat a 
as a part of their prompts.  The ability of these tools to collect and store date from consume rs’ 
online interactions  also raises privacy concerns (Eliot,  2023 ). Surveys have reported 
many  instances of  companies’ employees putting confidential client data into GAI tools such as 
ChatGPT (Kshetri, 2023b) . Newer offerings such as ChatGPT Enterprise provide companies 
with protection against revealing confidential data through prompts.  
 Further, there  are significant trust issues, with surveys showing  that consumers are 
increasingly concerned about organizations’ data protection measures, and they are less likely to 
do business with a company that fails to protect their sensitive data  (Kshetri, 2021) . For these 
reasons, several companies have banned ChatGPT to prevent a worst -
case scenario  of an employee uploading sensitive data into the chatbot while seeking help at 
work  (Telford & Verma , 2023 ). 
 Third, perceived risks and costs associated with transi tioning to a new  way of performing 
marketing tasks may lead to businesses’ and employees’  unwillingness  to use GAI for such 
tasks. There are often substantial immediate costs involved in learning new ways of doing things 

==== Page 14 ====
14 
 such as writing effective prompts  (Kshetri, 2023d) to get the results they want , the time and 
frustration costs, and the cost of correcting any mistakes produced by unfamiliarity  (Margetts & 
Dunleavy , 2002) .  There are also concerns about how GAI would  fit in the corporate  culture . In 
gener al, organizations are still trying to figure out how to adapt team culture and processes 
around GAI  (Kang, 2023) .  Marketers maintain a gloomy view regarding the impact of GAI on 
organizational culture. For instance, in the Conference Board survey (Table 2), only 16% 
expected improvements in team culture while 22% expected negative effects on such culture  
(The Conference Board , 2023) . 
 Finally, there are concerns about  GAI-led job losses . According to the consulting 
organization Challenger, Gray & Christmas, GAI use in organizations resulted in about 4,000 job 
losses in May 2023  alone (Challenger, Gray & Christmas , 2023) . In the Conference Board 
survey (Table 2), only 4% of respondents expected that GAI’s use would lead to an increase in 
the number of marketing jobs whereas 40% expected a decline in such jobs  (The Conference 
Board,  2023 ). 
6. Implications for r esearch and practice  
6.1 Research questions and propositions  
As noted earlier, in this editorial article, we seek to address the following broad research 
question: What are the mechanisms by which GAI impacts marketing activities and outcomes? 
As a visual aid, Figure 2 schematically represents the propositions and h ow they relate to 
companies ’ broader  marketing efforts. Specifically, solid arrows represent the propositions 
presented in this editorial article. The dashed arrows indicate how the dependent variables of this 
article are related to overall marketing and o rganizational goals.   

==== Page 15 ====
15 
  
Figure 2: The effect of GAI on marketing processes and outcomes  
6.1.1 Impact on personalization of content and offerings  
Prior researchers have suggested that in order to deliver an excellent experience, it is important 
to have a deep understanding of customer needs and design organizational activities and 
processes to satisfy those needs (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990; Lemke et al. , 2011).  The key is to 
leverage customer data to personalize marketing efforts such as marketing con tent and offerings 
(Guni et al., 2021).  Nonetheless, the process involved in personalization is challenging and hard 
to apply (Vesanen, 2007). For instance, firms need to gather and analyze information about the 
customer and their interactions from intern al and external sources. Then, key marketing activities 
such as advertising, product design, packaging, pricing, and distribution need to be customized 
based on a customer profile (Vesanen & Raulas, 2006). Personalized response is thus often too 
time-consu ming for marketing teams.   
Although personalization has been discussed for many years, m ost traditional marketing 
tools fail to effectively personalize marketing efforts  (Davenport, 2023) . For instance, content 


==== Page 16 ====
16 
 recommendation systems rely on generic algor ithms such as collaborative filtering, which 
predicts a user’s preference and filters out items based on reactions by similar users. This 
technique involves search ing a large group of people and identifying a smaller set of users with 
preferences similar t o a particular user. Such algorithms , however,  often fail to capture an 
individual’s preferences (AI & Insights, 2023).  Prior research has also noted that AI such as 
natural language processing chatbots can help make decisions related to products and bran ds that 
can lead to increase personalization.  Such tools can recognize patterns from data using 
techniques such as text mining, speech recognition, a nd facial recognition to provide 
personalized contents and offerings to diverse groups of customers. Marke ters also benefit from 
personalized outcomes such as personalized recommendation systems (Huang  & Rust, 2021).  
Marketers can utilize GAI tools to generate sophisticated responses at the individual 
level, which can be used to develop and automate an effective personalized marketing strategy at 
scale (Bennett, 2023b). These tools can help deliver hyper -personalized c ontent, and product 
recommendations, experience and offers at just the right time. As section 3 makes clear, 
unsurprisingly, one of the foremost applications of GAI is personalization (Table 2).  We 
illustrate this with an example of a lawnmower shopper. GA I such as ChatGPT can analyze a 
user’s language patterns, behavior, and other data points to make recommendations that are 
highly tailored to a potential shopper (AI & Insights, 2023). For instance, when the shopper starts 
to search for a lawnmower, ads ca n be personalized and delivered based on their profile. A trend 
that has been evident in marketers’ interaction with customers across all stages is that the 
personalization of content and offerings is key to deliver a good consumer experience (Gupta et 
al., 2020). Personalization involves using data collected from customers to  deliver customized 
content and offers to meet their unique needs (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005; Lemke et al., 

==== Page 17 ====
17 
 2011). New digital technologies  can help collect and analyze relevant dat a to create personalized 
offerings (Gupta et al., 2020). GAI tools perform better than previous generations of digital 
technologies to achieve these goals.    
A notable example of GAI tool being used in generating customer insight and making 
effective use of such insight is Salesforce’s Einstein GPT. Einstein GPT combines Salesforce’s 
proprietary AI models with OpenAI’s GPT model.  The goal is to have layers on top of  
OpenAI’s GPT model and use content stored in the Salesforce cloud to fine -tune the model 
(Kerner, 2023). Einstein GPT is available across the company’s entire Customer 360 customer 
relationship management (CRM) platform (Salesforce’s portfolio of products). It is integrated 
into Salesforce cloud, Tableau (visual analytics platform), Slack (mes saging app) and Mulesoft 
(integration platforms to help businesses to connect their data, devices, and applications) 
(Kerner, 2023). While employing widely -available vendor offerings such as this may not confer 
competitive advantage, the integration of GAI  with transactional systems greatly facilitates 
enterprise adoption.  
Salesforce’s Customer 360 can conduct research on a prospective new customer and  
provide an overview about the customer. A new side pane l--Einstein Assistant --opens on the 
screen. The ov erview of the prospect company appears in the form of a text. The assistant can 
also find news articles about the company (e.g., plans to move into a new market or launch of a 
new product) (Sullivan, 2023).  It can access Tableau to learn more about specif ic products that 
the prospective customer had purchased in the past (Sullivan, 2023). These insights are 
invaluable in helping to create personalized recommendations.      
It is also important to note that consumer needs differ at different stages of the 
relationship lifecycle (Frow & Payne, 2007).  GAI tools such as ChatGPT learn and adapt over 

==== Page 18 ====
18 
 time. As users interact with the recommended content, the system can refine its 
recommendations based on more data. This ensures that future recommendations are eve n more 
tailored to the shopper’s preferences. All these can create a virtuous cycle of feedback and 
improvement that can lead to more accurate suggestions (AI & Insights, 2023). In sum, we argue 
that:    
Proposition 1: Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, market and customer 
insights generated by GAI are more effective in personalizing content and offerings.     
 
As emphasized above, personalization  of content is key for deliver ing good consumer 
experience (Gupta et al., 2020).  From a personalization perspective, GAI is not only a market 
research tool to generate insights into customers ’ attitudes and behavior but also an effective 
content -creation tool. By making use of a huge amount of data about human language and 
aesthetic styles, GAI tools can generate personalized marketing content. Depending on target 
customers’ interest, it is possible to create an ad for a product in the style of famous artists such 
as Salvador Dali, Pablo Pica sso and Vincent Van Gogh (Graham, 2023). If a company is 
planning to launch a new product, GAI tools can write effective social media copy that can be 
used on sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn (Graham, 2023).   
As noted above, m arketers’ use of  GAI in the creation of personalized content is also 
facilitated by digital advertising giants such as Meta, which have made such tools available. In 
May 2023, Meta made three  GAI-based  tools --to create different variations of a copy of an ad , 
generate bac kground through text prompts  and crop image to create visuals in different aspect 
ratios (IBL News , 2023 )-- available to a small number of advertisers with a plan to roll out in the 
future. For instance, the makeup brand Jones Road Beauty is one of the early testers of the 
Sandbox (Adams, 2023).    

==== Page 19 ====
19 
 Contextualizing the experience is an important way to improve p ersonalization. GAI 
tools can generate contextually relevant marketing content. For instance, marketing efforts and 
recommendations can be specifically tailored towards local conditions (Bernard, 2023).   A key 
use of GAI could be in image  and video genera tion. For instance, GAI can help automate image 
generation process es using deep learning algorithms and generative adversarial networks 
(GANs). Image s generated through these tools can be used in marketing in for different 
purposes. For instance, marketers  can create highly realistic images of products that can be used 
in online stores, social media channels and other outlets. They can also create engaging and 
visually appealing advertising. GAI -based video tools can be used to create high -quality 
marketing  videos and product demo videos (Gill, 2023), which can be personalized to enhance 
engagement and facilitate conversions.  GAI thus can be used to create images and videos and 
show products in real -time in locations and situations that are relevant for pot ential customer. 
Going back to the lawnmower shopper example above, GAI can create backyard pictures, which 
can be uploaded on the product page. The vend or can show how the lawnmower could work 
there or show a product that has been designed to the shopper’ s use case (Bernard, 2023). This 
means that a user shopping for a lawnmower in Denver, Colorado in the U.S. is delivered a 
different experience compared to one in Dusseldorf, Germany.     
The information -processing perspective of customer experience, also referred to as the 
cognition, affect and behavior (CAB) approach, suggests that customers are often engaged in 
goal-directed activities such as searching for relevant information, evaluating available 
alternatives and making decisions about purchasing a pa rticular product or service (Frow & 
Payne, 2007).  The above examples make it clear that GAI tools can help deliver relevant content 
and customer experience. It is thus proposed that:  

==== Page 20 ====
20 
 Proposition 2:  Marketing content generated by GAI is likely to be more  personally relevant than 
that produced by earlier generations of digital technologies.  
 
6.1.2 Efficiency and productivity of marketing activities  
Prior researchers have noted that the use of digital technologies can help reduce costs and 
enhance marketing efficiency and productivity in marketing activities (Buttle and Stan 2015).  
For instance, Parveen et al. ’s (2015) study of Malaysian organizations  found that social media 
helped reduce the costs of marketing and customer service.  
Compared to pr evious generations of digital technologies, GAI can help organizations 
achieve even  more dramatic impact s on efficiency and productivity in marketing activities.  
Management consulting firm McKinsey & Company’s estimate suggests that GAI could increase 
the productivity of the marketing function, potentially saving  between 5% and 15% of total 
marketing spending (McKinsey & Company , 2023 ). In Salesforce's May 2023 survey, a part of 
its Generative AI Snapshot Series, it was found that GAI can enable a marketin g professional to 
save roughly 32.5 days per year, equating to more than a month's worth of time annually  (5 
hours *52 weeks in one year) / 8 -hour working day = 32.5 days) (Salesforce, 2023 , Table 2 ).  For 
instance, GAI can be used for tasks such as analyzi ng customer reviews, social media comments, 
or any other text data and provide a summary of positive and negative comments (Graham, 
2023). GAI can even easily detect and classify sarcasm in customer sentiment, which previous 
versions of sentiment analysis were unable to do with accuracy (IEEE Spectrum, 2021). This 
accurate sentiment analysis allows marketing professionals to shift their attention to more 
strategic tasks.   
More importantly, GAI can drastically reduce the costs and time to create marketing 
content. As noted, GAI tools can generate personalized, contextually relevant and sophisticated 
content quickly and thus drastically cut the time to produce marketing content. With appropriate 

==== Page 21 ====
21 
 prompts, it is possible to create different 10 ad angles for a p roduct based on customer reviews or 
other factors (Graham, 2023). This has been suggested by anecdotal evidence from companies. 
For instance, the British advertising company WPP is reported to be working with consumer 
goods companies such as Nestle and Mon delez to use GAI in advertising campaigns. Shooting a 
commercial with GAI is estimated to cost only one -twentieth to one -tenth of what it normally 
costs. For instance, since everything can be created virtually, the company does not have to fly a 
film crew to Africa. In India, WPP worked with Mondelez on a GAI -driven Cadbury campaign 
with Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan.  Ads were produced that 'featured' the actor asking 
customers to shop at 2,000 local stores during the Hindu festival of lights , Diwali. Sma ll 
businesses selling Cadbury generate versions of the ads that featured their own store, which 
could be posted on social media and other platforms. About 130,000 ads were reported to be 
created that featured 2,000 stores. As of mid -August 2023, t he ads had been viewed 94 million 
times on YouTube and Facebook (NDTV , 2023 ). Thus, we propose that:  
Proposition 3: Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, GAI’s use in the 
creation of marketing content leads to higher efficiency and productivity of marketing activities.  
 
6.1.3 Impact on the  sales  lead generation  process  
Prior researchers have suggested that marketing automation can help generate high -quality sales 
leads through behavioral targeting (Järvinen  & Taiminen, 2016). In this regard,  Section 3 and 
Table 2 emphasize the vital role of GAI in marketing, particularly in generating high -quality  
sales leads through insight generation.  Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, 
GAI tools can offer  higher quality insights into customers and thus enables better behavioral 
targeting. For instance, using Microsoft’s Dynamics 365 Customer Insights, which has added 
GPT -4 to popular Office products, companies can learn about new customer groups to ta rget 
(Reines, 2023). The case of Salesforce’s Einstein GPT discussed above makes it clear that GAI 

==== Page 22 ====
22 
 tools can also use the insights gained from various data sources to facilitate the cold outreach 
process , which involves reaching out to potential customers that have not yet expressed interest 
in the company’s products. A company can target a large number of potential customers at the 
same time. GAI tools can be used to automate cold outreach campaigns (Moulton, 2023).  Large 
language model ( LLMs ) such as ChatGPT can also help in the process of lead qualification, 
which is a key step in in the lead generation process. Lead qualification involves checking out 
the quality of leads to assess the probability that they convert into customers. This proce ss helps 
to identify the leads that have the highest probability of making a purchase. The sales team can 
focus their efforts on promising leads (Moulton, 2023). It is thus proposed that:  
Proposition 4: Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, GAI can help generate 
better market and customer insights to improve the sales lead generation process.     
 
Prior researchers have suggested that content marketing plays a key role in lead generati on 
(Järvinen & Taiminen, 2016). Drawing from insights in the Chief Outsiders' survey, it is evident 
from Section 3 and Table 2 that content creation and management represent areas where GAI 
tools are well -positioned to provide exceptional value . Especially , digital tools are effective in 
content personalization, which can help generate high -quality sales leads (Järvinen & Taiminen, 
2016).   Compared to previous generations of digital technologies GAI tools can create more 
effective and engaging content. GAI  tools can be used to craft personalized and well -researched 
messages that resonates with the target audience (Moulton, 2023).  For instance, Salesforce’s 
Einstein GPT can write a letter to the prospective customer acknowledging a new sales plan. It 
can be  asked to rewrite the letter in a different tone. Einstein Assistant can also create a message 
for another salesperson in Slack who had dealt with the prospect company in the past (Sullivan, 
2023).  Based on above discussion, the following proposition is p resented:  

==== Page 23 ====
23 
 Proposition 5:  Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, GAI can help create 
more effective marketing content, which can improve the sales lead generation process.  
 
6.2 Future research directions  
The framework we have presented in this  editorial article provides numerous opportunities for 
future  investigation. Some potential  future  research  avenues are presented in Table 3 and are 
explored in this section . 
In this editorial article , we mainly focused on top applications  of GAI in marketing. 
Future research might also explore other applications we could not deal with in depth in this 
article. For instance, one of the current popular applications of GAI is in enhancing customer 
service (The Conference Board, 2023). In this  regard, a comparison of LLMs with traditional 
chatbots in terms of their roles in enhancing customer service could be a future research avenue.  
Similarly, LLMs such as ChatGPT and Google Bard are viewed as valuable tools for 
jumpstarting exploratory digi tal marketing tasks, encompassing activities like keyword research 
and content ideation, areas that numerous marketers are presently delving into  (DeBois, 2023) . 
Likewise, the emergence of GAI tools like ChatGPT is set to bring about substantial shifts in the 
landscape of the internet search sector ( Stahl & Eke, 2024 ). Future research thus 
needs  to be conducted on the use of  GAI in facilitating these marketing tasks. In the context of 
customer service, some of the key benefits of traditional chatb ots identified by prior researchers 
include increasing convenience and efficiency of interactions, providing a timely and effective 
response to customers’ informational needs and enabling firms to provide a fast response (André 
et al., 2018; Fotheringham &  Wiles, 2023; Iles, 2020). Thus, in future research scholars should 
attempt to compare the performance of LLMs with traditional chatbots in terms of these 
measures.   

==== Page 24 ====
24 
 Previous researchers have noted that LLMs such as ChatGPT can expand a company’s 
value pr oposition by helping them develop personalized solutions that can potentially help 
customers solve new problems in a way that complements the current offering (Cromwell et al., 
2023) . Researchers could thus examine various other mechanisms by which GAI can  help firms 
develop value propositions.  Prior researchers have suggested that personalization has a positive 
effect on emotional (e.g., moods, feelings, and emotions) as well as on cognitive (e.g., 
enjoyment, involvement, and concentration) customer exper ience (Tyrväinen et al., 2020). In this 
regard, a third area of future research might be to compare the effects of GAI -led personalization 
efforts on emotional and cognitive customer experience.    
Fourth, different units of adoption differ in their times of adoption of an innovation 
(Rogers, 1963). As noted above, in the case of the adoption of GAI tools in marketing, mid -level 
and junior marketers have a higher propensity to use such tools compared to senior marketers 
(The Conference Board, 2023). In addi tion to factors such as job title and level of seniority, 
future researchers also need to consider how psychographic and perceptual factors such as 
comfort with technology can affect the use of GAI in marketing. In addition, research in this area 
should al so be extended from individual level to organizational level. Prior researchers have 
suggested that firm specific factors such as firm’s characteristics such as size, type of business 
and past experience with and attitude towards technology impact the adop tion decision of ICTs 
(Dholakia  & Kshetri, 2004). Another intriguing avenue for future research is thus to examine 
how organizational characteristics are related to the adoption of GAI in marketing.  In relation to 
this, researchers may also want to compare the impact of GAI across different organi zations  
especially those with established marketing departments , and examine the impact on marketing 
professionals , their roles in the department and effect on marketing skills. In this area, there i s a 

==== Page 25 ====
25 
 need for deeper understanding on issues related to  deskilling, reskilling and new skills et that may 
be needed when working with GAI.   
Table 3: Some potential  future  research  directions  
 
 Future research direction  Research question s 
1 GAI applications in marketing not 
covered in detail in this editorial 
article ( e.g., customer service)  How do LLMs perform compared to traditional chatbots in the 
delivery of customer service ? 
2 Develop ing value propositions  What are the various mechanisms by which GAI can help firms 
develop  value propositions?  
3 Emotional and cognitive customer 
experience  How do the effects of GAI -led personalization efforts on 
emotional customer experience compare with cognitive 
customer  experience?  
4 Response of different units of 
adoption to GAI  How do psychographic and perceptual factors affect  the use of 
GAI in marketing?  
How are organizational characteristics related to the adoption 
of GAI in marketing?  
5 Fostering creativity in GAI era  How can GAI enable marketing professionals to become more 
creative?  
How can marketing professionals  work alongside GAI in order 
to promote creativity?  
6 Comparison of the effects of GAI 
on marketing with other 
organizational functions  How are the effects of GAI on marketing similar to and 
different from the effects on other organizational functions?  
 
Fifth, given that marketing as a function is expected to generate creative out comes , there 
is a need to examine the role of GAI in fostering creativity within this context. A related theme is 
to examine how marketing professionals can work alongside GAI in order to promote creativity. 
Understanding these issues has implications on organizations and specifically in how they manage 
their marketing function  and in how they train and develop marketing professionals . There are also 
implications o n marketing educators and how they  teach creativity formally within the marketing 
curriculum in the era of GAI.  Future studies therefore should also take an interest in marketing 
management and marketing pedagogy and consider GAI -driven transformation in these areas.  
Finally, as noted above, GAI has been transforming multiple organizational functions, not 
only marketing (Dwivedi et al., 2023a; 2023b; Kshetri, 2023a).  However, these effects are likely 
to vary across different organizational functions. While some of eff ects discussed above (e.g., 

==== Page 26 ====
26 
 personalization of marketing contents and offerings) are unique to marketing, others (e.g., 
enhancing efficiency and productivity) (Figure 1) might be more general and also applicable to 
other functional areas. A comparison of t he effects of GAI on marketing with other 
organizational functions thus might be worthwhile target of study.   
6.3 Implications for practice and policy  
The above discussion makes it clear that GAI offers great  opportunities  to marketers  and is likely 
to have a positive effect on marketing's bottom line. As noted above, GAI’ benefits have been 
especially apparent in functions and activities that require high -quality written materials 
(Fintechnews Switzerland, 2023) as well as images and videos  (Anisin, 2023), which are a key 
part of the marketing function. Unsurprisingly recent surveys conducted among organizations 
have shown that GAI’s use in marketing has been more common compared to more other 
organizational functions. For instance, FreshBooks’  survey of North American small -business 
owners discussed above viewed analytics, sales and marketing, and customer communications as 
the areas that are most likely to be impacted by GAI (Grothaus, 2023).   Feely available GAI 
tools such as ChatGPT and Goo gle Bard can provide even small firms with opportunities to 
boost effectiveness in digital marketing tasks, such as keyword research and content generation 
(DeBois, 2023).  There are various mechanisms by which GAI’s use in marketing activities may 
drive fi rms' financial performance. Scholars (e.g., Grewal et al., 2017) and practitioners (e.g., 
Accenture 2015; Marketing Science Institute, 2016) have emphasized that improving customer 
experience is a key goal for companies. Customer experience is regarded as the foundation for 
customer engagement with products and brands (Grewal et al., 2017). Prior research has 
suggested that customer engagement is positively related to customer loyalty, customer 
satisfaction, positive word of mouth and the firm’s financial p erformance (Barari et al., 2021; 

==== Page 27 ====
27 
 Fotheringham & Wiles, 2023).  As previously discussed, GAI can help marketers take actions 
that have a positive effect on these various marketing processes and outcomes.   
Especially, effective personalization is usually a prerequisite to achieve these goals. 
Personalization leads to improved marketing performance. Prior researchers have suggested that 
personalization has a positive effect on customer experience (Rose et al. 2012; Tyrväinen et al., 
2020) and personalized mes sages lead to greater customer engagement (Buttle  & Stan, 2015). In 
this editorial article, we demonstrated how GAI can help in the personalization of content and 
offering, enhance productivity of marketing activities and improve the lead generation proces s. 
For instance, GAI tools such as Einstein GPT generate customer insight and act rapidly and 
effectively on the insight (Sullivan, 2023). The insight can help companies develop and 
introduce new products and services to address unmet needs of the customer .  All these can lead 
to an improvement in customer experience and engagement.    
However, GAI also presents an opportunity to directly influence customer loyalty and 
various other firm outcomes. A benefit of digital channel s that prior researchers have suggested 
is that their use in real -time marketing can result in greater responsiveness (Buttle  & Stan, 2015). 
For instance, GAI has the capability to analyze customer preferences, enabling the delivery of 
personalized emails a nd messages, ultimately driving higher engagement. This personalized 
approach, informed by factors like online activity and location, has the potential to significantly 
boost click -through rates. (Hameed, 2023).  
Likewise, marketers can use GAI tools such a s ChatGPT to analyze a customer’s 
purchase history and other behavioral data to offer personalized product recommendations.  
GAI’s use to generate product and service recommendations based on user behaviors and interest 

==== Page 28 ====
28 
 can lead to higher customer engagemen t (Hameed, 2023). In this way, GAI tools such as  
ChatGPT can help increase sales and customer loyalty (PYMNTS, 2023).  
Prior researchers have suggested that in order to help potential shoppers learn more about 
a company’s products, find precisely what they  are looking for and inspire them to make 
purchases, they should be offered various digital touchpoints on their path to purchase and 
opportunity to engage with the company (Blom et al., 2017). The above lawnmower shopper 
example illustrated that GAI provi des firms with great opportunities to deliver rich, contextually 
relevant and highly personalized content at various touchpoints. This will also allow the 
company to collect information regarding their needs and preferences (Blom et al., 2017). It is 
thus imperative for firms to use these powerful tools to transform their marketing.  
This does not , however , mean that LLM -based chatbots can completely replace 
conventional chatbots or human teams. LLM -based chatbots differ from conventional chatbots in 
terms of the purposes they serve.  Some argue that LLMs’ open nature make the m inappropriate 
for many custome r experience applications. It is important to build a chatbot that can specifically 
answer questions about a company's products or services and help users with challenges they are 
facing. Thus, in order to provide a better customer experience , it is critical to appropriately 
combin e LLMs such as ChatGPT with conventional chatbots (Albrecht, 2023). Likewise, human 
teams’ skills and experiences are still needed in most marketing activities , and thus it is 
unreasonable to think that GAI will comp letely replace them.  
As discussed above, firms can take advantage of opportunities offered by GAI to enhance 
efficiency and productivity by cutting costs. However,  it is important to note that GAI’s cost -
cutting mechanisms in marketing might be different f rom other digital technologies. For 
instance, as noted above, some companies use social media as a lower cost channel to reach 

==== Page 29 ====
29 
 customers. The case of WPP discussed above suggests that GAI can significantly reduce content 
creation costs (NDTV , 2023 ). Market ers are also required to pay attention to a wide range of 
GAI tools that are rapidly evolving and are providing them with the ability to generate high 
quality content at a low cost. For instance, image editing app Lensa, which is one of the most 
common too ls among marketers, makes it possible to generate unique artwork at minimal cost, 
which was not possible a few years ago ( Wong, 2023) .  
7. Conclusion   
In this article, we provided an overview of how GAI is transforming key areas and activities in 
marketing. We have focused our attention on the current top three marketing applications of 
GAI: personalization, insight generation and content creation. It sh ould be noted that these uses 
are interrelated. For instance, insight generated by GAI can be used as a basis to develop better 
marketing content that enhances user engagement. Likewise, personalization is a key part of 
content creation. We discussed the r oles of GAI in achieving personalization of content and 
offerings. Indeed, about a third of respondents in the Conference Board survey used GAI to 
personalize customer/user content (Table 1). Overall, GAI is effective personalization tool, 
which can help m arketers establish a powerful form of customer experience and engagement. 
Marketers are also using GAI as a tool to  cut costs and boost efficiency and productivity of 
marketing activities. GAI can also improve marketers’ lead generation process.    
While G AI tools cannot completely replace human teams’ skills and experiences, as the 
above discussion suggests, these tools can perform a number of marketing tasks at a lower cost, 
higher speed and more effectively than human teams or other tools. For instance, on the 
personalization front, past algorithms were less effective. Likewise, past AI models performed 
poorly in terms of scalability. GAI can help develop a marketing automation program which can 

==== Page 30 ====
30 
 produce hyper -personalized content based on individual custo mer profile and their journeys and 
interactions with a company and its products and services. GAI tools thus have the potential to 
help achieve personalization at scale.  Indeed, the capabilities of GAI tools are so numerous and 
diverse that organizational and individual learning about their full capabilities may be the 
greatest barrier to effective adoption.  
References  
Accenture. (2015) Improving Customer Experience is Top Business Priority for Companies 
Pursuing Digital Transformation, According to Accen ture Study, News Release (October 
27). https://newsroom.accent ure.com/news/improvingcustomer -experience -is-top-business -
priority -for-companiespursuing -digital -transformation -according -to-accenture -study.htm  
Adams, P.  (2023) Meta bets its advertising scale can differentiate new gene rative AI tools, May 
11, https://www.marketingdive.com/news/Meta -launches -AI-sandbox -tool-social -media -
advertising/650117/  
Adomavicius, G., & Tuzhilin, A. (2005). Toward the next generation of recommender systems: 
A survey of the state -of-the-art and possi ble extensions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering , 17(6), 734 -749. 
AI & Insights (2023), Personalize Your Content Recommendations with ChatGPT May 12  
AIhttps://medium.com/@AIandInsights/personalize -your-content -recommendations -with-
chatgp t-dbc7f9d59877  
Albrecht, V. (2023) ChatGPT and its implications for customer experience February 26,  
https://venturebeat.com/ai/chatgpt -and-its-implications -for-customer -experience/  
André, Q., Carmon, Z., Wertenbroch, K., Crum, A., Frank, D., Goldstein, W., Huber, J., van 
Boven, L., Weber, B., & Yang, H. (2018). Consumer choice and autonomy in the age of 
artificial intelligence and big data.  Customer Needs and Solutions, 5 (1–2), 28 –37. 
Anisin, A. (2023), Generative AI For Content Creation: How Marketers Can Use It August 17 
https://www.forbes.com/sit es/theyec/2023/08/17/generative -ai-for-content -creation -how-
marketers -can-use-it/?sh=7db8f8c7619e  
Barari, M., Ross, M., Thaichon, S., & Surachartkumtonkun, J. (2021). A meta‐analysis of 
customer engagement behaviour. International Journal of Consumer Studies , 45(4), 457 -477.  
Bennett, R. (2023a) Marketers Reveal Insights on Generative AI's Impact on Digital Customer 
Experience July 10, https://www.cmswire.com/digital -experience/marketers -reveal -insights -
on-generative -ais-impact -on-digital -customer -experience/  
Bennett, R. (2023b). 6 Ways ChatGPT May Ch ange Digital Customer Experience,  January 26, 
https://www.cmswire.com/digital -experience/6 -ways -chatgpt -may-change -digital -customer -
experience/  
Bernard, A.  (2023) “AI in Ecommerce: True One -on-One Personalization Is Coming” April 21, 
2023 https://www.cmswire.com/customer -experience/ai -in-ecommerce -true-one-on-one-
personalization -is-coming/  

==== Page 31 ====
31 
 Blom, A., Lange,  F., & Hess Jr, R. L. (2017). Omnichannel -based promotions’ effects on 
purchase behavior and brand image. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services , 39, 286 -
295.  
Broadway, M. (2023). Is DALL -E 2 free? No, not anymore. August 7,  
https://www.pcguide.com/apps/dall -e-2-free/ 
Butler, R.  (2023) Where Are Marketers on the Generative AI Adoption Curve? May 4, 
2023 https://www.cmswire.com/digital -experience/where -are-marketers -on-the-generative -ai-
adoption -curve/  
Buttle, F., & Stan, M. (2015).  Customer relationship management: concepts and technologies . 
(3rd ed.). Routledge.  
Challenger, Gray & Christmas  (2023) Layoffs Jump in May on Tech, Retail, Aut o; Ytd Hiring 
Lowest Since 2016, June 1, 2023 –https://omscgcinc.wpenginepowered.com/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/The -Challenger -Report -May23.pdf  
Chen, T. (2023), To Work Fewer Hours, They Put AI on the Job May 30, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/using -ai-shorten -work -day-b7e7126f  
Chief Outs iders.(2023) 2023 CMO Survey, 
https://www.chiefoutsiders.com/hubfs/2023%20CMO%20Survey%20Results_r1.pdf?_ga= 2.
136900147.2081511388.1692493282 -1931368805.1692493282  
Cromwell,  J. R., Harvey, J., Haase,  J. &  Gardner, H. K.  (2023), Discovering Where ChatGPT 
Can Create Value for Your Company , Harvard Business Review , June 09, 
https://hbr.org/2023/06/discovering -where -chatgpt -can-create -value -for-your-company  
Davenport, T. (2022) Hyper -personalization for customer engagement with artificial intelligence, 
Management and Business Review  2 (3 & 4), Summer and Fall, https://mbrjournal.com/wp -
content/uploads/2023/07/AI -Customer -Engagement -issue.pdf  
Davenport, T. and Alav i, M. (2023) How to train generative AI using your company’s data, 
Harvard Business Review , July 6, 2023, https://hbr.org/2023/07/how -to-train-generative -ai-
using -your-companys -data 
Davenport, T; Wang, R., and Bean, R. (2023) Chief data officers prepare fo r generative AI, 
Amazon Web Services,  https://aws.amazon.com/data/cdo -report/   
Davis,  F.  (1989) Perceived  Usefulness,  Perceived  Ease  of  Use,  and  User  Acceptance  of  
Information Technology, MIS Quarterly , 13,  3,  319 -340 
DeBois, P. (2023). Insider's Look at Google Bard and How Can It Help Marketers, April 14,  
https://www.cmswire.com/digital -experience/insiders -look-at-google -bard-and-how-can-it-
help-marketers/  
Dencheva , V. (2023a).  Share of marketers using generative artificial intelligence (AI) in their 
companies in the United States as of March 2023, 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1388390/generative -ai-usage -marketing/  
Dencheva , V. (2023b).  AI in marketing revenue worldwide 2020 -2028 January  6, 2023,  
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1293758/ai -marketing -revenue -
worldwide/#:~:text=In%202021%2C%20the%20market%20for,than%20107.5%20billion%2
0by%202028 . 
Dholakia, R. & Kshetri, N. (2004), Factors Impacting the Adoption of The Internet among 
SMEs, Small Business Economics , 23(4), 311 -322 

==== Page 32 ====
32 
 Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., ... & Williams, M. 
D. (2021). Artificial Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging 
challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research, practice and policy . International Journal 
of Information Management , 57, 101994.  
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kshetri, N., Hughes, L., Slade, E. L., Jeyaraj, A., Kar, A. K., ... & Wright, R. 
(2023a). “So what if ChatGPT wrote it?” Multidisciplinary perspectives on opportunities, 
challen ges and implications of generative conversational AI for research, practice and policy. 
International Journal of Information Management , 71, 102642.  
Dwivedi, Y. K., Pandey, N., Currie, W., & Micu, A. (2023b). Leveraging ChatGPT and other 
generative artifi cial intelligence (AI) -based applications in the hospitality and tourism 
industry: practices, challenges and research agenda. International Journal of Contemporary 
Hospitality Management , doi: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM -05-2023 -0686  
Eliot. (2023).  Gener ative AI ChatGPT can disturbingly gobble up your private and confidential 
data, forewarns AI ethics and AI law, 
Forbes.  https://www.forbes.com/sites/lanceeliot/2023/01/27/generative -ai-chatgpt -can-
disturbingly -gobble -up-your-private -and-confidential -data-forewarns -ai-ethics -and-ai-
law/?sh=776524727fdb  
Fintechnews Switzerland  (2023) “The Implications of ChatGPT and AI Models on Fintech and 
Banking” January 9, https://fintechnews.ch/aifintech/the -implications -of-chatgpt -and-ai-
models -on-fintech -and-banking/57552/  
Fotheringham, D., & Wiles, M. A. (2023). The effect of implementing chatbot customer service 
on stock returns: an event study analysis. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 
51(4), 802 -822. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747 -022-00841 -2 
Frow, P., & Payne, A. (2007). Towards the ‘perfect’customer experience . Journal of Brand 
Management , 15(2), 89 -101. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2550120  
Gill, L . (2023) Generative AI In Marketing: 5 Use Cases, April 3,  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2023/05/24/increase -in-cyber -attacks -is-your-business -
safe/?sh=48d0c1426fa2  
Graham , M. (2023) . Five Things Marketers Should Know About Generative AI in Advertising, 
March 16, https://www.wsj.com/articles/five -things -marketers -should -know -about -
generative -ai-in-advertising -5381c1d0  
Grewal, D., Roggeveen, A. L., Sisodia, R., & Nordfält, J. (2017). Enhancing customer 
engagement through consciousness. Journal of Retailing , 93(1), 55 -64. 
Grothaus, M.  (2023) . Generative AI intrigues small -business owners, but many aren’t sure 
what t o do with it, 05-26, https://www.fastcompany.com/90901901/generative -ai-chatgpt -
small -business -help-hiring -plans -survey  
Guni, A., Normahani, P., Davies, A., & Jaffer, U. (2021). Harnessing machine learning to 
personalize web -based health care content. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 23(10), 
e25497.  
Gupta, S., Leszkiewicz, A., Kumar, V., Bijmolt, T., & Pota pov, D. (2020). Digital Analytics: 
Modeling for Insights and New Methods.  Journal of Interactive Marketing , 51(1), 26 –
43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2020.04.003  

==== Page 33 ====
33 
 Hameed, R. (2023). AI -driven personalization in marketing: Maximizing impact with 9 top tools 
for marketing, content, and design.  July 20,  https://datasciencedojo.com/blog/ai -driven -
personalization/  
Horsey, J. (2023)  “ChatGPT Advanced Data Analysis features explained – form erly known as  
Code Interpreter ,” Geeky Gadgets website, https://www.geeky -gadgets.com/chatgpt -
advanced -data-analysis/  
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2021). A strategic framework for artificial intelligence in 
marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 49, 30 -50. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747 -020-00749 -9 
Huh, J., Nelson, M. R., & Russell, C. A. (2023). ChatGPT, AI Advertising, and Advertising 
Research and Education . Journal of Advertising , 52(4), 477 -482. 
IBL News (2023) Meta Will Provide Generative AI for Advertisers in Instagram or Facebook 
June 1,   https://iblnews.org/meta -will-provide -generative -ai-for-advertisers -in-instagram -or-
facebook/  
IEEE Spectrum (2021) . How computers can finally detect sarcasm. Podcast transcript, July 01, 
https://hbr.org/2023/07/how -to-train-generative -ai-using -your-companys -data 
Iles, V. (2020).  The total economic impact ™ of IBM Watson assistant: Cost savings and 
business benefits ena bled by Watson assistant  (pp. 1 –
24). https://www.ibm.com/watson/assets/duo/pdf/wat son_assistant/The_Total_Economic_Im
pact_of_IBM_Watson_Assistant -March_2020_v3.pdf. Accessed 6 January 2021 . 
Järvinen, J., & Taiminen, H. (2016). Harnessing marketing automation for B2B content 
marketing.  Industrial Market ing Management,  54, 164 –175.Kang, M.  (2023). What can AI 
really do for us at work? June 6, 2023 
https://www.peoplemattersglobal.com/article/tec hnology/what -can-ai-really -do-for-us-at-
work -38084  
Kerner, S. M.  (2023).Einstein AI was good, but Salesforce claims Einstein GPT is even better  
March 7, 2023 https://venturebeat.com/ai/einstein -ai-was-good -but-salesforce -claims -
einstein -gpt-is-even -better/  
Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. J. (1990). Market orientation: the construct, research propositions, 
and managerial implications.  Journal of Marketing, 54 , 1–18. 
Kshetri, N. (2021). Cybersecurity Management: An Organization al and Strategic Approach, The 
University of Toronto Press: Toronto.  
Kshetri, N. (2023a).  Generative artificial intelligence in marketing, IEEE IT Professional 
(forthcoming)   Kshetri, N. (2023b). Cybercrime and privacy threats of large language 
models, IEEE IT Professional, 25 (3), 9 -13 
Kshetri, N. (2023c).  The economics of generative artificial intelligence in the academic industry, 
IEEE Computer, 56(8), 77 -83 
Kshetri, N. (2023d).  Generative Artificial Intelligence and the Economics of Effective 
Prompti ng, IEEE Computer , (forthcoming)   
Kunz, W. H., & Wirtz, J. (2023). Corporate digital responsibility (CDR) in the age of AI: 
implications for interactive marketing . Journal of Research in Interactive 
Marketing , https://doi.org/10.1108/JRIM -06-2023 -0176  

==== Page 34 ====
34 
 Lemke, F., Clark, M., & Wilson, H. (2011). Customer experience quality: an exploration in 
business and consumer contexts using repertory grid technique. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science , 39, 846 -869. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747 -010-0219 -0Margetts , H. & 
Dunleavy , P. (2002), Cultural Barriers to e -Government : Better. Public Services through e -
government , www.na o.gov.uk/ publications/nao -reports/01 -02 
Marketing Science Institute. (2016) Research Priorities 2016 –2018 Mark eting Science 
Institute,  Cambridge, MA   http://www.msi.org/uploads/articles/MSI_RP16 -18.pdf   
McKinsey  & Company  (2023) .The economic potential of generative AI: The next productivity 
frontier, June 14, , https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey -digital/our -insights/the -
economic -potential -of-generative -ai-the-next-productivity -frontier#introduction  
Mehta,  I. (2023)  Meta announces generative AI features for advertisers , May 11, 
https://techcrunch.com/2023/05/11/meta -announces -generative -ai-features -for-
adver tisers/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce
_referrer_sig=AQAAAK5w074vOuB6tZfQwG2Z6Bi2vLDwLr7j6oJG_0NN7qw0xTJG9yX
xYuea -WYb1EbEvhlfPbW -WteDxGRK6cFu3gaJHIE3WsPtMmW -ocArZBKYl6 -
4KoDIHre9JUTFYLcDDMwqQNOjA -5KAf5cA -5G5XaDF0ubxY3Wpb3kCCU luxm0  
MIT Technology Review Insights (2023) .The great acceleration: CIO perspectives on generative 
AI: How technology leaders are adopting emerging tools to deliver enterprise -wide AI. July 
18,  https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/07/18/1076423/the -great -acceleration -cio-
perspectives -on-generative -ai/ 
Moulton, L. (2023) 7 Ways ChatGPT Can Help with Lead Generation, March 24, 
https://leadsync.me/blog/chatgpt -lead-generation/  
NDTV (2023) Biggest Ad Agencies Now Using AI -ChatGPT To Cut Costs, Increase 
Productivity, August 18,  https://www.ndtv.com/world -news/advertisers -using -ai-chatgpt -to-
cut-costs -increase -productivity -4308025  
Nuñez, M. (2023), Anthropic unveils Claude 2, an AI model that produces longer, safer 
responses, July 11, https://venturebeat.com/ai/anthropic -unveils -claude -2-an-ai-model -that-
produce s-longer -safer -responses/  
O'brien, M.  (2023),  Tech experts are starting to doubt that ChatGPT and A.I. 
“‘hallucinations’ will ever go away: ‘This isn’t fixable’, August 1, 
https://fortune.com/2023/08/01/can -ai-chatgpt -hallucinations -be-fixed -experts -doubt -altman -
openai/  
Parveen, F., Jaafar, N.I., & Ainin S.  (2015). Social Media Usage , and  Organizational 
Perform ance: Reflections  of Malaysian Social Media Managers . Telematics and Informatics , 
32(1), 67 -78. 
Paul, J., Ueno, A., & Dennis, C. (2023). ChatGPT and consumers: Benefits, pitfalls and future 
research agenda. International Journal of Consumer Studies , 47(4), 1213 -1225.  
Pay, K. (2023) ChatGPT beyond the hype: How to use AI models for better email market ing, 
May 25, https://www.clickz.com/chatgpt -beyond -the-hype -how-to-use-ai-models -for-better -
email -marketing/268522/  
Peres, R., Schreier, M., Schweidel, D., & Sorescu, A. (2023). On ChatGPT and beyond: How 
generative artificial intelligence may affect research, teaching, and practice. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing , 40(2), 269 -275.  

==== Page 35 ====
35 
 Polonsky, M. J., & Rotman, J. D. (2023). Should Artificial Intelligent Agents be Your Co -
author? Arguments in Favour, Informed by ChatGPT . Australasian Marketing Journal , 
31(2), 91 -96. 
PYMNTS, (2023). Shopify, Coca Cola Harness the Power of ChatGPT, March 24, 
https://www.pymnts.com/news/retail/2023/shopify -coca-cola-harness -power -chatgpt/  
Quarles, S. (2023). BofA Survey Shows 59% Of US Internet Users Are Already On ChatGPT.  , 
June 26,  https://biz.crast.net/bofa -survey -shows -59-of-us-internet -users -are-already -on-
chatgpt/  
Ratajczak, D., Kropp, M., Palumb o, S., de Bellefonds, N., Apotheker, J., Willersdorf, S. & 
Paizanis, G, (2023).How CMOs Are Succeeding with Generative AI June 15, , 
https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/genera tive-ai-in-marketing  
Reines,  M. (2023) Microsoft's new Dynamics 365 Copilot uses generative AI, March 6, 2023  
https://www.techtarget.com/searchcustomerexperience/news/365532058/Microsofts -new-
Dynamics -365-Copilot -uses-generative -AI 
Rogers, E. M. (1963). What are innovators like?. Theory into Practice , 2(5), 252 -256. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00405846309541872  
Rose, S., Clark, M., Samouel, P., & Hair, N. (2012). Online customer experience in e -retailing: 
an empirical  model of antecedents and outcomes. Journal of Retailing , 88(2), 308 -322. 
Salesforce. (2023). New Research: 60% of Marketers Say Generative AI will Transform Their 
Role, But Worry About Accuracy, June 5, 
https://www.salesforce.com/news/stories/generative -ai-for-marketing -research/  
Sitecore   (2023). Marketers Quickly Embracing AI Technologies like ChatGPT, diverting from 
Metaverse P rograms, Survey Finds, May 9, 
https://www.sitecore.com/company/newsroom/press -releases/2023/05/marketers -quickly -
embracing -ai-technologies -like-chatgpt -diverting -from -metaverse -programs -survey  
Smith,  B.,  Wilson, H. N.  &   Clark,  M.  (2006 ) Creating a nd using customer insight: 12 Rules of 
best practice . Journal of Medical Marketing , 6(2),  135–139. 
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jmm.5050013  
Stahl,  B. C., & Eke, D. (2024).  The ethics  of ChatGPT –Exploring  the ethical  issues  of an 
emerging  technology.  International  Journal of Information Management , 74, 
102700.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102700  
StreetInsider.com   (2023) Nearly Three -Quarters of  All Marketing Departments Use Generative 
AI Tools, Botco.ai Survey Finds,  May 4, 
https://www.streetinsider.com/Press+Releases/Nearly+Three -
Quarters+of+All+Marketing+Departments+Use+Generative+AI+Tools%2C+Botco.ai+Surve
y+Finds/21611019.html  
Sullivan, M.  (2023) .Salesforce’s Einstein GPT may be the most  meaningful application of AI 
chatbots yet, March 7, , https://www.fastcompany.com/90862354/salesforces -einsteingpt -
may-be-the-most -meaningful -application -of-ai-chatbots -yet 
Susarla, A., Gopal, R., Thatcher, J. B., & Sarker, S. (2023). The Janus Effect of Generative AI: 
Charting the Path for Responsible Conduct of Scholarly Activities in Info rmation Systems. 
Information Systems Research , 34(2), iii -vii, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2023.ed.v34.n2   

==== Page 36 ====
36 
 Telford, T.  & Verma, P. (2023) “Employees want ChatGPT at work. Bosses worry they’ll spill 
secrets.”, July 10, https://www.washingtonpost.com/busi ness/2023/07/10/chatgpt -safe-
company -work -ban-lawyers -code/  
The Conference Board   (2023)  Survey: AI Usage for Marketers and Communicators, August 3, 
https://www.conference -board.org/topics/AI -for-business/press/AI -in-marketing -and-
communications  
The Content Marketing Institute (2015). What Is Content Marketing?, 
https://contentmarketinginstitute.com/what -is-content -
marketing/#:~:text=Content%20marketing% 20is%20a%20strategic,to%20drive%20profitabl
e%20customer%20action . 
Tyrväinen, O., Karjaluoto, H., & Saarijärvi, H. (2020). Personalization and hedonic motivation 
in creating customer experiences and loyalty in omnichannel retail. Journal of Retailing and 
Consumer Services , 57, 102233.  
Vesanen, J. (2007). What is personalization? A conceptual framework.  European Journal of 
Marketing , 41(5/6), 409 -418. 
Vesanen, J., & Raulas, M. (2006). Building bridges for personalization: a process model for 
marketing. Journal of Interactive Marketing , 20(1), 5 -20.  
Warren, T.  (2023). Microsoft puts a steep price on Copilot, its AI -powered future of Office 
documents, J ul 18, https://www.theverge.com/2023/7/18/23798627/microsoft -365-copilot -
price -commercial -enterprise  
Wong, H. (2023), Exploring The Impact Of Lensa AI on Digital Marketing, January 13, 
https://www.primal.com.my/marketing/exploring -the-impact -of-lensa -ai-on-digital -
marketing/  

