==== Page 1 ====
37Generative AdversarialNetworks in Computer Vision:
A Surveyand Taxonomy
ZHENGWEI WANG, School of Computer Science andStatistics,TrinityCollgeDublin, Ireland
QI SHE, ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing,China
TOMÁSE. WARD, Insight Centrefor Data Analytics, School of Computing,DublinCityUniversity,
Ireland
Generativeadversarialnetworks(GANs)havebeenextensivelystudiedinthepastfewyears.Arguablytheir
most significant impact has been in the area of computer vision where great advances have been made in
challengessuchasplausibleimagegeneration,image-to-imagetranslation,facialattributemanipulation,and
similar domains. Despite the significant successes achieved to date, applying GANs to real-world problems
stillposessignificantchallenges,threeofwhichwefocusonhere.Theseareasfollows:(1)thegenerationof
highqualityimages,(2)diversityofimagegeneration,and(3)stabilizingtraining.Focusingonthedegreeto
whichpopularGANtechnologieshavemadeprogressagainstthesechallenges,weprovideadetailedreview
ofthestate-of-the-artinGAN-relatedresearchinthepublishedscientificliterature.Wefurtherstructurethis
review through a convenient taxonomy we have adopted based on variations in GAN architectures and loss
functions. While several reviews for GANs have been presented to date, none have considered the status of
this field based on their progress toward addressing practical challenges relevant to computer vision. Ac-
cordingly,wereviewandcriticallydiscussthemostpopulararchitecture-variant,andloss-variantGANs,for
tackling these challenges. Our objective is to provide an overview as well as a critical analysis of the status
of GAN research in terms of relevant progress toward critical computer vision application requirements. As
wedothiswealsodiscussthemostcompellingapplicationsincomputervisioninwhichGANshavedemon-
stratedconsiderablesuccessalongwithsomesuggestionsforfutureresearchdirections.Codesrelatedtothe
GAN-variants studiedinthisworkis summarizedon https://github.com/sheqi/GAN_Review .
CCSConcepts:• Computing methodologies →Computer vision ;Reconstruction ;Unsupervisedlearning ;
Neuralnetworks ;
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases:Generativeadversarialnetworks,computervision,architecture-variants,
loss-variants,stabilizingtraining
ACM Reference format:
ZhengweiWang,QiShe,andTomásE.Ward.2021.GenerativeAdversarialNetworksinComputerVision:A
Surveyand Taxonomy. ACMComput. Surv. 54,2, Article37 (February2021), 38 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3439723
This work is funded as part of the Insight Centre for Data Analytics which is supported by Science Foundation Ireland
under GrantNumberSFI/12/RC/2289_P2.
Authors’ addresses: Z. Wang, V-SENSE, School of Computer Science and Statistics, Stack B, Custom House Quay, IFSC,
Dublin1,Ireland,Postcode:D01Y6C3;email:zhengwei.wang@tcd.ie;Q.She(correspondingauthor),XiZhiMenWaiNan
LuBuilding1,XichengDistrict,Beijing,China,Postcode:100044;email:sheqi1991@gmail.com;T.E.Ward,InsightCentre
for DataAnalytics, DublinCity University, Glasnevin,Dublin9,Ireland,Postode: D09W6Y4;email:tomas.ward@dcu.ie.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Association forComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2021/02-ART37$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3439723
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.


==== Page 2 ====
37:2 Z.Wanget al.
1 INTRODUCTION
Generativeadversarialnetworks(GANs)areattractinggrowinginterestinthedeeplearningcom-
munity[45,83,107,117,128,136].GANshavebeenappliedtovariousdomainssuchascomputer
vision [38,72,79,89,106,130,139,152], natural language processing [ 28,40,59,141], time-series
synthesis [ 15,34,39,48,75], semantic segmentation [ 37,86,112,122,155]a n ds oo n .G A N sb e -
longtothefamilyofgenerativemodelsinmachinelearning.Comparedtoothergenerativemodels,
e.g.,variationalautoencoders,GANsofferadvantagessuchastheabilitytohandlesharpestimated
density functions, the ability to efficiently generate desired samples, the elimination of determin-
isticbias,andgoodcompatibilitywiththeinternalneuralarchitecture[ 44].Thesepropertieshave
allowed GANs to enjoy great success especially in the field of computer vision, e.g., plausible im-
agegeneration[ 22,65,110,132,150],image-to-imagetranslation[ 23,58,82,83,90,125,153,154],
image super-resolution[ 37,74,91,92,133],andimage completion[ 21,33,77,142,146].
However, GANs are not without problems. The two most significant are that they are hard to
train and that they are difficult to evaluate. In terms of being difficult to train, it is non-trivial for
thediscriminatorandgeneratortoachieveNashequilibriumduringtraininganditiscommonfor
thegeneratortofailtolearnwellthefulldistributionofthedatasets.Thisisthewell-knownmode
collapseissue.Lotsofworkhasbeencarriedoutinthisarea[ 27,68,69,78].Intermsofevaluation,
the primary issue is how best to measure the dissimilarity between the real distribution of the
targetprandthegenerateddistribution pд.Unfortunatelyaccurateestimationof prisnotpossible.
Thus, it is challenging to produce good estimations of the correspondence between prandpд.
PreviousworkhasproposedvariousevaluationmetricsforGANs[ 10,12,46,47,49,124,134,135,
138] and it is an active area of research. However, it is the first set of problems, those associated
withtraining,andinparticularthoseconcerningimagequality,imagediversity,andstabilitythat
weareconcernedwithhere.Inthiswork,wearegoingtostudyexistingGAN-variantsthathandle
thisaspectintheareaofcomputervision.Thosereadersinterestedintheevaluationchallengemay
consult[12,124].
MuchofcurrentGANresearchcanbeconsideredintermsofthefollowingtwoobjectives:(1)the
improvementoftrainingand(2)thedeploymentofGANsforreal-worldapplications.Theformer
seekstoimproveGANsperformanceandisthereforeafoundationforthelatter,i.e.,applications.
Considering the many published results that deal with GAN training improvement, we present a
succinctreviewon themostimportantGAN-variantsthatfocusonthisaspectinthisarticle.The
improvement of the training process provides benefits in terms of GANs performance as follows:
(1) improvements in the generated image diversity (also known as mode diversity), (2) increases
in generated image quality, and (3) stabilizing training such as remedying the vanishing gradient
issueforthegenerator.Toimprovetheperformanceasmentionedabove,modificationsforGANs
can be done from either the architectural side or the loss perspective. We will study these GAN-
variantsaccordingtoeachperspectiveinterms of howtheyimprove performance.
The rest of the article is organized as follows: (1) We introduce related review work for GANs
andillustratethedifferencebetweenthosereviewsandthiswork,(2)wegiveabriefintroduction
to GANs, (3) we review the architecture-variant GANs in the literature, (4) we review the loss-
variantGANsintheliterature,(5)weintroducesomeGAN-basedapplicationsmainly inthearea
ofcomputervision,(6)wesummarizetheGAN-variantsinthisstudyandillustratetheirdifferences
andrelationshipsandalsodiscussseveralavenuesforfutureresearchregardingGANs,and(7)we
concludethisreview and previewlikely futureresearchworkin thearea.
Many GAN-variants have been proposed in the literature to improve performance. These can
bedividedintotwotypes:(1)architecture-variants.ThefirstproposedGANusedfullyconnected
neural networks [ 45] so specific types of architecture may be beneficial for specific applications,
e.g.,convolutionalneuralnetworks(CNNs)forimagesandrecurrentneuralnetworks(RNNs)for
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 3 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:3
Fig.1. The proposedtaxonomyof therecent GANs.
time-seriesdata;and(2)loss-variants.Heredifferentvariationsofthelossfunction(Equation( 1))
areexplored toenablemore stablelearningof G.
Figure1illustrates our proposed taxonomy for the representative GANs presented in the liter-
ature from 2014 to 2020. We divide current GANs into two main variants, i.e., the architecture-
variant and the loss-variant. In the architecture-variant, we summarize three categories, which
are network architecture, latent space, and application-focus. The network architecture category
referstoimprovementormodificationmadeontheoverallGANarchitecture,e.g.,theprogressive
mechanism deployed in Progressive GAN (PROGAN) [ 64]. The latent space category indicates
that the architecture modification is made based on different representations of the latent space,
e.g., Conditional GAN (CGAN) [ 99] involves providing label information to both the generator
and the discriminator. The last category, application-focused, refers to modifications made ac-
cording to different applications, e.g., CycleGAN [ 153] has a specific architecture that deals with
image style transfer. In terms of the loss-variants, we divide this into two categories, loss types
and regularization. Loss types refers to different loss functions that can be optimized for GANs
and regularization refers to additional penalization designed into the loss function or any type of
normalization operation made to the network. More specifically, we divide the loss function into
integralprobabilitymetric (IPM)[101]basedandnon-IPMbased.InIPM-basedGANs,the discrim-
inatorisconstrainedtoaspecificclassoffunction[ 60],e.g.,thediscriminatorinWassersteinGAN
(WGAN) is constrained to 1-Lipschitz . The discriminator in non-IPM based GANs does not have
suchconstraints.
2 RELATEDREVIEWS
There have been previous GANs review papers, for example, in terms of reviewing GANs
performance [ 71]. That work focuses on experimental validation across different types of GANs
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 4 ====
37:4 Z.Wanget al.
benchmarking on the Large-scale Scene Understanding (LSUN)-BEDROOM [ 145], CELEBA-HQ-
128[84],andtheCIFAR10[ 70]imagedatasets.TheresultssuggestthattheoriginalGAN[ 45]with
spectral normalization [ 144] is a good starting choice when applying GANs to a new dataset. A
limitation of that review is that the benchmark datasets do not consider diversity in a significant
way. Thus the benchmark results tend to focus more on evaluation of the image quality, which
may ignore GANs efficacy in producing diverse images. Other work [ 51] surveys different GANs
architectures and their evaluation metrics. A further comparison on different architecture-
variants’performance,applications,complexityandsoonneedstobeexplored.Otherpapers[ 26,
52,131] focus on investigation of the newest development treads and the applications of GANs.
They compareGAN-variantsthroughthelensof differentapplicationtargets.
Comparing our review to other existing review articles we emphasize an introduction to
GAN-variants based on their performance including their ability to produce high quality and
diverse images, stability of training, and their ability to handle the vanishing gradient prob-
lem. We approach this exposition through taking a perspective based on architecture and loss
function considerations. This perspective is important, because it covers fundamental challenges
for GANs and it will help researchers on how best to choose an architecture and loss func-
tion for their GAN requirements and specific application. It also gives a snapshot of how re-
searchers to date have dealt with those problems and will thus provide new researchers with a
starting point for their own study. Our literature search strategy and the results of this search
are presented in Supplementary Materials. A detail of searched papers are listed at this link:
https://github.com/sheqi/GAN_Review/blob/master/GAN_CV.csv .
In summary,thecontributionsof thisreview arethreefold:
•We focus on GANs by addressing three important problems: (1) high-quality image gener-
ation;(2)diverse image generation;and (3)stabilizingtraining.
•We proposea usefulGAN taxonomy and contextualize recent GANs through variations in
(1) architecture of generators and discriminators, e.g., network architecture, latent space,
and application driven design, and (2) the objective function for training, e.g., loss design
in IPM based and non-IPM based methods, regularization approaches. Compared to other
reviewson GANs,thisreview providesauniqueview of differentGAN variants.
•We also provide a comparison and analysis in terms of pros and cons across the GAN-
variantspresentedin thisarticle.
3 GENERATIVEADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
A typical GAN comprises two components, one of which is a discriminator ( D) distinguishing
betweenrealimagesandgeneratedimageswhiletheotheroneisagenerator( G)creatingimages
tofoolthediscriminator.Givenadistribution z∼pz,Gdefinesaprobabilitydistribution pдasthe
distributionofthesamples G(z).TheobjectiveofaGANistolearnthegenerator’sdistribution pд
that approximates the real data distribution pr. Optimization of a GAN is performed with respect
to ajoint lossfunctionfor DandG
min
Gmax
DEx∼prlog[D(x)]+Ez∼pzlog[1−D(G(z))]. (1)
GANs, as a member of the deep generative model (DGM) family, have attracted exponentially
growing interest in the deep learning community because of some advantages comparing to the
traditionalDGMs:(1)GANsareabletoproducebetteroutputthanotherDGMs.Comparedtothe
most well-known DGMs, variational autoencoder (VAE), GANs are able to produce any type of
probabilitydensitywhileVAEisunabletogeneratesharpimages[ 44].(2)TheGANframeworkcan
train any type of generator network. Other DGMs may have pre-requirements for the generator,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 5 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:5
Fig. 2. Timeline of architecture-variant GANs presented in this article. Complexity in blue stream refers to
sizeofthearchitectureandcomputationalcostsuchasbatchsize.Mechanismsrefertothenumberoftypes
of operations (e.g., convolution, deconvolution, self-attention) used in the architecture (e.g., FCGAN uses
fullyconnected layers for both discriminatorand generator.Inthis case,thevalue for mechanisms is1).
e.g.,theoutputlayerofgeneratorisGaussian[ 32,44,67].(3)Thereisnorestrictiononthesizeof
the latent variable. These advantages have led GANs to achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on producingsyntheticdataespeciallyfor image data.
4 ARCHITECTURE-VARIANTGANS
There are many types of architecture-variants proposed in the literature (see Figure 2)[11,64,
113,150,153].Architecture-variantGANsaremainlyproposedforthepurposeofdifferentappli-
cations, e.g., image-to-image transfer [ 153], image super resolution [ 74], image completion [ 55],
and text-to-image generation [ 114]. In this section, we provide a review on architecture-variants
that helps improve the performance for GANs under the three aspects mentioned before, namely
that of improving image diversity, improving image quality and stabilizing training. A review of
architecture-variantsinterms ofdifferent applicationscanbefound here[ 26,51].
4.1 Fullyconnected GAN
The original Energy-based GAN (EBGAN) paper [ 45] uses fully connected neural networks for
both generator and discriminator. This architecture-variant was applied for some simple image
datasets, i.e., MNIST [ 73], CIFAR-10 [ 70], and the Toronto face dataset. The authors suggest k
stepsforoptimizing Dandonestepforoptimizing Gduetooverfittingofthediscriminatorifthe
completionofoptimizing Disdoneintheinnerloopoftraining.Inpractice,Equation( 1)mayin-
duce the vanishing gradient issue for optimizing the generator and the authors instead maximize
logD(G(z))for training G. This modification equivalently optimizes the reverse Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between pдandprforG, which also causes the asymmetry issue. We will revisit
this in detail in Section 5. For the architecture setting, maxout [ 41] was deployed for the discrim-
inator while a mixture of ReLU and sigmoid activations were used for the generator. It does not
demonstrategoodgeneralization performancefor more compleximage types.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 6 ====
37:6 Z.Wanget al.
4.2 Semi-supervised GAN
Semi-supervisedGAN(SGAN)isproposedinthecontextofsemi-supervisedlearning[ 105].Semi-
supervised learning is a promising research field between supervised learning and unsupervised
learning.Unlikesupervisedlearning,inwhichweneedalabelforeverysample,andunsupervised
learning, in which no labels are provided, semi-supervised learning has labels for a small subset
ofexamples.ComparedtofullyconnectedGAN(FCGAN),SGAN’sdiscriminatorismulti-headed,
i.e., it has softmax and sigmoid for classifying the real data and distinguishing between real and
fake samples, respectively. The authors trained SGAN on the MNIST dataset. Results show that
both the discriminator and the generator in SGAN are improved compared to the original GAN.
We think the architecture of the multi-headed discriminator is relatively simple that limits the
diversity of the model, i.e., the experiment is only carried out on the the MNIST dataset. A more
complexarchitectureforthediscriminatormay improve theperformanceofthemodel.
4.3 Bidirectional GAN
TraditionalGANshavenomeansoflearningtheinversemapping,i.e.,projectingdatabackintothe
latent space. Bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) is designed for this purpose [ 35]. As seen in Figure 3(c),
the overall architecture consists of an encoder ( E), a generator ( G), and a discriminator ( D).E
encodesrealsampledatainto E(x)whileGdecodes zintoG(z).Asaresult, Daimstoevaluatethe
difference between each pair of (E(x),x)and(G(z),z).A sEandGdo not communicate directly,
i.e.,Eneversees G(z)andGneversees E(x).Theauthorsprovethattheencoderanddecodermust
learn to invert one another to fool the discriminator in the original paper. It would be interesting
toseeifsuchamodelisabletodealwithadversarialexamplesinfuturework.BiGANwastrained
ontheMNISTandtheImageNetdatasets.Adamoptimizerwith β1=0.5andβ2=0.999isusedfor
optimization.Thebatchsizeis128andtheweightdecayas2 .5×10−5isappliedforallparameters.
Batchnormalization isalso deployed.
4.4 ConditionalGAN
The CGAN has the innovation of conditioning on both the discriminator and the generator by
feeding each with class labels [ 99]. As seen in Figure 3(b), CGAN feeds the extra information y
(ythat can be class label or other modal data) to both discriminator and generator. It should be
notedthat yisnormallyencodedinsidethegeneratoranddiscriminatorbeforebeingconcatenated
with the encoded zand encoded x. For example, in the MNIST experiment in the original work,
both zandyare mapped to hidden layers with layer sizes 200 and 1,000, respectively, before
being combined with each other (the combined layer dimensionality is 200 +1000=1200) in the
generator.Bydoingthis,CGANenhancesthediscriminativeabilityofthediscriminator.Theloss
function of CGAN is slightly different from the FCGAN as seen in Equation ( 2), in which xandy
are conditioned by z. Benefiting from the extra encoded yinformation, CGAN is not only able to
handleunimodalimage datasetsbutalsomultimodaldatasetssuchasFlickrthatcontainslabeled
imagedatawiththeirassociateduser-generatedmetadata,i.e.,inparticularuser-tags,whichbrings
GANsovertotheareaofmultimodaldatageneration.TheauthorsexperimentedwiththeCGAN
on the MNIST and Yahoo Flickr Creative Common 100M (YFCC 100M). For the MNIST dataset,
themodelwastrainedusingstochasticgradientdescent(SGD)withmini-batchsizeof100andan
initiallearningrateof0.1thatwasexponentiallydecreaseddownto1 ×10−6withthedecayfactor
set as 1.00004. Dropout was utilized with probability of 0.5 to both generator and discriminator.
Momentum was used with an initial value of 0.5 and finally was increased up to 0.7. Class labels
wereencodedasone-hotvectorsandfedtoboth GandD.IntermsoftheYFCC100Mexperiment,
traininghyperparametersarethesameastheset-upintheMNISTexperiment.EventhoughCGAN
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 7 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:7
Fig.3. Thearchitectures of SGAN, CGAN, BiGAN,InfoGAN, BEGAN,andAC-GANstudiedinthis work.
enhancesthediscriminativeabilityofthediscriminatorbyintroducingencodedlabels,someofthe
encodedlabelsstill looseconnectionwithimages,
min
Gmax
DEx∼prlog[D(x|y)]+Ez∼pzlog[1−D(G(z|y))]. (2)
4.5 InfoGAN
InfoGAN is proposed as a step beyond the CGAN [ 20], which learns the interpretable represen-
tations in an unsupervised manner by maximizing the mutual information between conditional
variables and the generative data. To achieve this, InfoGAN introduces another classifier Q(see
Figure3(d))topredictthe ygivenbyG(z|y).Thecombinationof GandQherecanbeunderstood
asanautoencoder,inwhichweaimtofindtheembedding( G(z|y))minimizingthecrossentropy
between yandy/prime. However, Dperforms the same job as with the FCGAN, which distinguishes
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 8 ====
37:8 Z.Wanget al.
samples generated from Gor from real data. To reduuce computational cost, QandDshare all
convolutionallayersexceptthelastfullyconnectedlayer,whichenablesthediscriminatortohave
thecapabilityofdistinguishingrealandfakesamplesandrecovertheinformation y.Thiscanim-
provethediscriminativeabilityforInfoGANcomparedtotheoriginalGANarchitecture.Theloss
usedin InfoGAN isa regularizationof CGAN’s loss
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)−λI(G,Q),λ>0, (3)
whereV(D,G)istheobjectiveofCGANexceptthatthediscriminatordoesnottake yasinputand
I(·)is the mutual information. The authors experimented with InfoGAN using the MNIST, three-
dimensional (3D) face images [ 109], 3D chair images [ 6], SVHN and CelebA. All datasets shared
the same training setting, in which the Adam optimizer was used and batch normalization was
applied. Leaky ReLU with a 0.1 leaky rate was applied to the discriminator while ReLU was used
forthegenerator.Alearningrateof2 ×10−4wassetfor Dwhile1×10−3issetforG.λwassetas
1. Here we think the diversity of the model is very limited due to the fact that the parameters for
DandQare shared with each other except the last layer. A more complex set-up for Qcould be
usefully investigated.
4.6 Auxiliary Classifier GAN
Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN) [ 106] is very similar to CGAN and InfoGAN. It contains an
auxiliary classifier in the architecture as seen in Figure 3(f). In AC-GAN, each generated sample
has a corresponding class label cin addition to z. It should be noted that the difference between
AC-GANandtheprevioustwoarchitecture-variants(CGANandInfoGAN)istheadditionalinfor-
mationhere,whichonlyreferstotheclasslabelwhiletheprevioustwocanbeotherdomaindata.
Thus we use candc/primein AC-GAN to explicitly flag this difference from the previous two variants.
The discriminator in AC-GAN consists of a discriminator D(distinguishes real and fake samples)
and a classifier Q(classifies real and fake samples). Similarly to InfoGAN, the discriminator and
classifier share all weights except the last layer. The loss function of AC-GAN can be constructed
by consideringthediscriminatorand classifier,whichcanbe statedas
LS=Ex∼prlog[D(x|c)]+Ez∼pzlog[1−D(G(z|c))],LC=Ex∼prlog[Q(x|c)]+Ez∼pzlog[Q(G(z|c))],
(4)
whereDis trained by maximizing LS+LCandGis trained on maximizing LC−LS. The authors
trained AC-GAN on the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets for all 1,000 classes. For both CIFAR-10
and ImageNet, the model was trained by using Adam with α=2×10−4,β1=0.5, andβ2=0.999
forD,G,a n dQ. The mini-batch size was set to 100. Details of model performance and relate
experimentscanbefoundintheoriginalpaper[ 106].AC-GANhasimprovedvisualqualityforthe
generated images and has high model diversity. However, these improvements depend on large-
scalelabeleddatasets,whichmayposechallengesinsomereal-worldapplications.Acombination
of AC-GAN and unsupervised or self-supervised approaches should be further investigated. We
havealsointroducedatypeofGAN,label-noiseRobustGANs(rGANs)inSection 4.13,whichdeals
withthenoisy labelissue.
4.7 Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks
Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks (LAPGAN) is proposed for the production of higher-
resolutionimagesfromlowerresolutioninputGAN[ 31].TheLaplacianpyramid[ 16]isanimage
codingapproach,whichuseslocaloperatorsofmanyscalesbutidenticalshapeasthebasicfunc-
tions.LAPGANutilizesacascadeofCNNswithinaLaplacianpyramidframework[ 16]toproduce
high quality images, which are demonstrated in Figure 4(from right to left). Rather than using a
deconvolutionalprocess(i.e.,usedinDeepConvolutionalGAN(DCGAN))toup-samplethekernel
output of the previous layer, LAPGAN uses Laplacian pyramids to up-sample the image. First,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 9 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:9
Fig.4. Up-samplingprocessofgeneratorinLAPGAN(fromrighttoleft).Theup-samplingprocessismarked
usinggreenarrowandaconditioningprocessviaaconditionalGAN(CGAN)[ 99]ismarkedusingtheorange
arrow. The process initially uses G3to generate image /tildewideI3and then up-samples the image /tildewideI3tol2. Together
with another noise z2,G2generates a difference image /tildewideh2and adds /tildewideh2tol2, which produces the generated
image /tildewideI2.Therestcanbedoneinthesamemanner.LAPGANcontains3generatorsinthisworktoup-sample
theimage. Figureis regenerated fromRef.[ 31].
LAPGANusethefirstgeneratortoproduceaverysmallimage,whichcanalleviatetheinstability
issue for the generator, and this image is then up-sampled through use of a Laplacian pyramid.
Then the up-sampled image is fed to the next generator for producing the image difference and
the summation of the image difference. The input image will be the generated image. It can be
seen that only the G3in Figure 4is used for generating images but the dimension is very small,
which encourages stabilizing training. For larger images, the generator is used to generate the
image difference, which is much less complex than the same sized raw images. This structure
facilitatesstabilizingtrainingandhighresolutionmodeling.CIFAR10(28 ×28pixel),STL(96×96
pixel), and LSUN (64 ×64 pixel) were used for generation. The Laplacian pyramid up-sampling
processes for each dataset are 8 →14→28 (CIFAR10), 8→16→32→64→96 (STL) and
4→8→16→32→64 (LSUN). The discriminator used three hidden layers and a sigmoid out-
put,whilethegeneratorusedafive-layerCNNwithReLUandbatchnormalization.Alinearouput
layerwasutilized.SGDwithaninitiallearningrateof0.02,decreasedbyafactorof (4×10−5)atev-
eryepoch,wasdeployedintheexperiment.Momentumstartedat0.5,increasingby0.0008ateach
epoch up to a maximum of 0.8. The current structure includes multiple generators for generating
images and the connections between these generators have not been established. In Section 4.10,
we introduce a more advanced strategy, which trains the model in a progressive fashion, i.e.,
PROGAN.
4.8 Deep ConvolutionalGAN
DCGAN is the first work that applied a deconvolutional neural network architecture for G[113].
Deconvolution is proposed to visualize the features for a CNN and has shown good performance
for CNNs visualization [ 148]. DCGAN deploys the spatial up-sampling ability of the deconvo-
lution operation for G, which enables the generation of higher resolution images using GANs.
TherearesomecriticalmodificationsinthearchitectureofDCGANcomparedtooriginalFCGAN,
which benefits high-resolution modeling and stabilizing training. First, DCGAN replaces any
poolinglayerswithstridedconvolutionsfordiscriminatorandfractional-stridedconvolutionsfor
generator.Second,batchnormalizationisusedforboththediscriminatorandthegenerator,which
helpslocatethegeneratedsamplesandtherealsamplescenteringonzero,i.e., similarstatisticsfor
generatedsamplesandrealsamples .Third,theReLUactivationisusedinthegeneratorforalllayers
except the output, which uses Tanh, while Leaky ReLU activation is used in the discriminator for
alllayers.Inthiscase,theLeakyReLUactivationwillpreventthenetworkstagnatingina“dying
state”situation(e.g.,inputssmallerthan0intheReLUlayers)asthegeneratorreceivesgradients
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 10 ====
37:10 Z.Wanget al.
from the discriminator. DCGANs are trained on LSUN [ 145], ImageNet [ 30] and the customized-
assembled face datasets. All models were trained using SGD with a mini-batch size of 128. All
weightswereinitializedfromazero-centeredNormaldistributionwithstandarddeviationof0.02.
An Adam optimizer was utilized with a learning rate of 0.0002 and momentum term of 0.5. The
slopeofLeakyReLUwassetto0.2forallmodels.Modelsweretrainedbyusing64 ×64pixelimage.
DCGANisaveryimportantmilestoneinthehistoryofGANsandthedeconvolutionideabecomes
amainstayforthemainarchitectureusedinGANgenerators.Duetothelimitofthemodelcapac-
ity and the optimization used in DCGAN, it is only successful on low-resolution and less diverse
images.
4.9 BoundaryEquilibrium GAN
BoundaryEquilibriumGAN(BEGAN)usesanautoencoderarchitectureforthediscriminatorthat
was first proposed in EBGAN [ 151]. As seen in Figure 3(e), the autoencoder loss can be gener-
ated forGandD, respectively. When training the autoencoder ( D), the objective is to maximize
the reconstruction loss of real images and maximizes the reconstruction loss for generated im-
ages, i.e., minimize E[L(x)]−E[L(G(z))]. When training the G, the objective is to minimize
E[L(G(z))].Byintroducingtheautoencoder,theauthorshaveprovedtheoptimizationofthere-
construction loss above is equivalent to the Wasserstein distance. The authors also propose the
use of a hyperparameter γ=E[L(G(z))]
E[L(x)],γ∈[0,1]to control the balance between the generator
and discriminant losses, which allows a balancing of the effort allocated to the generator and the
discriminator,i.e.,controlavarietyofgeneratedfaces.Theexperimentintheoriginalpapershows
thatsmaller γmakesGgeneratefacesthatlookoverlyuniform.Thevarietyoffacesincreaseswith
a larger value of γbut this also introduces artifacts. The overall loss function is summarized in
Equation( 5),
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩LD=L(x)−ktL(G(zD)), for updating θD
LG=L(GzG), for updating θG
kt+1=kt+λk(γL(x)−L(G(zG)),for eachtrainingiterationt, (5)
whereL(·)represents the autoencoder reconstruction loss ( L2),kt∈[0,1] is a variable that con-
trolshowmuchemphasisof L(G(z))ispenalizedfortheloss. kisinitializedas0andiscontrolled
byλk(λkcanbeinterpretedasalearningratefor k,whichissetas1×10−3intheoriginalpaper).
Compared to traditional optimization, the BEGAN matches the autoencoder loss distributions
usingalossderivedfromtheWassersteindistanceinsteadofmatchingdatadistributionsdirectly.
This modification helps Gto generate easy-to-reconstruct data for the autoencoder at the be-
ginning, because the generated data are close to 0 and the real data distribution has not been
learnedaccuratelyyet,whichprevents Deasilywinning Gattheearlytrainingstage.Forencoder
and decoder, exponential linear units were applied at their outputs. The model was trained on
CelebAdatasetusing128 ×128pixelimages.SeparateAdamoptimizerswithinitiallearningrates
of1×10−4,decayingbyafactorof2whenthemeasureofconvergencestalls,wereusedfor Dand
G.Thebatchsizewasset as16in theoriginalwork.
4.10 PROGAN
PROGAN involves progressive steps toward the expansion of the network architecture [ 64].
This architecture uses the idea of progressive neural networks first proposed in Reference [ 116].
This technology does not suffer from forgetting and is able to deploy prior knowledge via
lateral connections to previously learned features. Consequently it is widely applied for learning
complextasksequences.Figure 5demonstratesthetrainingprocessforPROGAN.Trainingstarts
withlowresolution4 ×4pixelsimage .Both GandDstarttogrowwiththetrainingprogressing.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 11 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:11
Fig. 5. Progressive growing step for PROGAN during the training process. Training starts with 4×4pix-
els image resolution. With the training step growing, layers are incrementally added to GandD, which
increases the resolution for the generated images. All existing layers are trainable throughout the training
stage.Figureis regenerated from Reference[ 64].
Importantly, all variables remain trainable throughout this growing process. This progressive
training strategy enables substantially more stable learning for both networks. By increasing the
resolutionlittlebylittle,thenetworksarecontinuouslyaskedamuchsimplerquestioncompared
to the end goal of discovering a mapping from latent vectors. All current state-of-the-art GANs
employ this type of training strategy and it has resulted in impressive, plausible images [ 13,64,
65]. The authors start training the PROGAN with 4 ×4 pixel images and incrementally add the
doubled-sized layers to GandDas seen in Figure 5, in which the new layers are faded smoothly.
The multi-scaled training images are produced by using Laplacian pyramid representations [ 16],
i.e.,similartoLAPGAN.ModelsweretrainedonCIFAR10(32 ×32pixelimages),LSUN(256 ×256
pixel images), and CelebA-HQ (1 ,024×1,024 pixel images). Leaky ReLU with leakness 0.2 were
used for all layers of both DandGexcept for the last layer (used linear activation). Only
pixelwise normalization of the feature vectors after each Conv 3 ×3 layer in the generator was
deployed, i.e., no batch normalization, layer normalization, or weight normalization in either
network. The Adam optimizer with α=1×10−3,β1=0,β2=0.99, andϵ=1×10−8was utilized
for training DandG. The mini-batch size was gradually decreased with increasing image pixel
for saving on memory, i.e., batch size 16 for 4 ×4t o8×8, 256×256→14, 512×512→6, and
1,024×1,024→3.TheWGAN-GP [ 136]losswasusedfor optimizingboth DandG.
4.11 Self-attention GAN
TraditionalCNNscanonlycapturelocalspatialinformationandthereceptivefieldmaynotcover
enoughstructure,whichcausesCNN-basedGANstohavedifficultyinlearningmulti-classimage
datasets (e.g., ImageNet) and the key components in generated images may shift, e.g., the nose
in a face-generated image may not appear in the correct position.Self-attention mechanism have
been proposed to ensure a large receptive field without sacrificing computational efficiency for
CNNs [129]. Self-attention GAN (SAGAN) deploys a self-attention mechanism in the design of
the discriminator and generator architectures for GANs [ 149] (see Figure 6). Benefiting from the
self-attentionmechanism,SAGANisabletolearnglobal,long-rangedependenciesforgenerating
images.Ithasachievedgreatperformanceonmulti-classimagegenerationbasedontheImageNet
datasets. The authors trained SAGAN on the ImageNet dataset (128 ×128 pixel images). Spectral
normalization [ 100] was applied for both DandG. Conditional batch normalization was used
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 12 ====
37:12 Z.Wanget al.
Fig.6. Self-attentionmechanismarchitectureproposedinthearticle. f,д,andhcorrespondwithquery,key
andvalueintheself-attentionmechanism.Theattentionmapindicatesthelong-rangespatialdependencies.
The⊗denotes matrixmultiplication. Figureis regeneratedfromReference [ 149].
in the generator while batch projection was used in the discriminator. An Adam optimizer with
β1=0a n dβ2=0.9 was used and the learning rate for the discriminator was 4 ×10−4and for
the generator was 1 ×10−4. The authors also demonstrate that the deployment of a self-attention
mechanism for both the discriminator and the generator at large feature maps is more effective,
i.e., deployment of self-attention mechanism with a feature map with 32 ×32 size achieves the
best performance using FID score and deployment of a self-attention mechanism with a feature
m a pw i t h6 4×64 size achieves the best performance using Inception score, which indicates the
self-attention mechanism is complementary to convolution for large feature maps. Thus the self-
attentionmechanism,wesuggest,shouldbeappliedforlargefeaturemapstoimprovethediversity
for GANs.
4.12 BigGAN
BigGAN [ 13] has also achieved state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet datasets. Its design
is based on SAGAN and it has demonstrated that the performance can yield a scaling up of GAN
training, i.e., an increase in the number of channels for each layer and an increase in the batch
size. The authors train the model on ImageNet with 128 ×128, 256×256, and 512×512 resolu-
tions.ThetrainingsettinginthisworkfollowstheSAGAN,inwhichthelearningratewashalved
and train two Dsteps per Gstep. Different selections of latent variables zare explored and the
authors state that Bernoulli {0,1}and Censored Normal max (N(0,I),0)work best without trun-
cation.Thetruncationtrickinvolvesusingadifferentdistributionforthegeneratoraslatentspace
during training than during inference or image synthesis. In BigGAN, a Gaussian distribution is
used during training, and a truncated Gaussian is used during inference. This truncation trick
providesatradeoffbetweenimagequalityorfidelityandimagevariety.Amorenarrowsampling
rangeresultsinbetterquality,whereasalargersamplingrangeresultsinmorevarietyinsampled
images. We summarize the following operations on BigGAN that make BigGAN scale-up the ar-
chitecture. (1) Self-attention module andHinge loss : The BigGAN uses a model architecture with
attention modules from SAGAN and is trained via hinge loss, in which self-attention contributes
tothemodeldiversityandhingelossenablesstabilityoftraining.(2) Classconditionalinformation :
Theclassinformationisprovidedtothegeneratormodelviaclass-conditionalbatchnormalization.
(3)Update discriminator more than generator : The BigGAN slightly modifies this and updates the
discriminatormodeltwicebeforeupdatingthegeneratormodelineachtrainingiteration.(4) Mov-
ing average of model weights : Before images are generated for evaluation, the model weights are
averagedacrosspriortrainingiterationsusingamovingaverage.(5)Someoperationsonthenet-
work:orthogonal weight initialization ,larger batch size ,skip-z connections (skip connections from
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 13 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:13
Fig. 7. Discriminators of (a) AC-GAN, (b) rAC-GAN, (c) CGAN, and (d) rCGAN. A noise transition model is
denoted as an orange rectangle. Generators in rAC-GAN and rCGAN remain the same as in AC-GAN and
CGAN. Thefigureis regenerated andreorganized fromReference [ 62].
the latent to multiple layers), and shared embeddings , i.e., the authors show these operations are
all able to help improve the performance.The authors also characterizethe analysis of instability
specifictosuchlarge scale.Moredetails canbefound in theoriginalpaper.
4.13 Label-noiserGANs
We have discussed CGAN in Section 4.4and AC-GAN in Section 4.6, respectively, in which both
havetheabilitytolearnthedisentangledrepresentationandimprovethediscriminativeabilityof
GANs. However, large-scale labeled datasets are required for training models, which poses some
challengesinreal-worldscenarios.Kanekoetal.[ 62]proposeafamilyofGANsnamedlabel-noise
rGANs, which incorporates a noise transition model that is able to learn a clean label conditional
generative distribution even when provided training labels that are noisy. Two variants are dis-
cussed, which are an extension for AC-GAN (rAC-GAN) and an extension for CGAN (rCGAN)
as seen in Figure 7. The core part of rGANs is a noise transition module p(˜y|ˆy)(˜yis the noisy
label and ˆyis the clean label) introduced to the discriminator, in which p(˜y=j|ˆy=i)=T(i,j)as
Tis a noise transition matrix T(i,j)∈[0,1](c×c)(/summationtext
iTi,j=1,cis the number of classes). The au-
thors trained rGANs on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The authors demonstrate that rAC-GAN and
rCGANperformbetterthantheoriginalarchitecturesonCIFAR-10andalsoexhibitrobustnessto
label noise. However, in CIFAR-100, when high noise is introduced to labels, their performance
drops.Wethinksuchaframeworkisstillsomewhatlimitedwhenencounteringmorecomplicated
datasets,e.g.,ImageNetand itneedstobe investigatedfurtherin thefuture.
4.14 Your LocalGAN
This work [ 29] introduces a new local sparse attention layer that preserves the two-dimensional
geometryandlocality.Toshowtheapplicabilityoftheidea,theyreplacethedenseattentionlayer
of SAGAN [ 129] with a new construction. The key innovations are (1) the attention patterns are
wellsupportedbytheinformationtheoreticframeworkofInformationFlowGraphs;(2)YourLocal
GAN (YLG)-SAGAN is introduced and achieves superior performance with reducing the training
time by approximately 40%; (3) they have made the natural inversion process of performing gra-
dient descent on the loss work for bigger models rather than previous work on small GANs. One
specifictricktheauthorutilizesiscalledEnumerate,Shift,Apply(ESA).Theymodifyonedimen-
sional sparsifications to become aware of two-dimensional locality via enumerating pixels of the
imagebasedontheirManhattandistancefromthepixelatlocation(0,0)(breakingtiesusingrow
priority), shiftingtheindicesofanygivenone-dimensionalsparsificationtomatchtheManhattan
distanceenumerationinsteadofthereshapeenumeration,and applyingthisnewonedimensional
sparsification pattern, that respects two-dimensional locality, to the one-dimensional reshaped
versionof theimage.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 14 ====
37:14 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 8. Architecture of MSG-GAN. Progressive training similar to PROGAN is deployed here. MSG-GAN
includes connections from the intermediate layers of the generator to the intermediate layers of the dis-
criminator.Multi-scaleimagesaresenttothediscriminator,whichareconcatenatedwiththecorresponding
mainpath,i.e.,greeninthediscriminatorrepresentsimagesproducedbythegeneratorwhileorangerepre-
sentstheoriginalfeaturesinthemainpathofthediscriminator.Figureisregeneratedandreorganizedfrom
Reference [ 63].
However, we think two conflicting objectives exist in this work. On the one hand, this method
intendstomakethenetworksassparseaspossibleforcomputationalandstatisticalefficiency,on
theotherhandtheystillneedtosupportgood andfullinformation flow.
4.15 AutoGAN
AutoGAN[ 43]introducestheneuralarchitecturesearch(NAS)algorithmtogenerativeadversarial
networks (GANs). The search space of the generator architectural variations in are guided via an
RNN together with parameter sharing and dynamic-resetting to accelerate the process. They use
the Inception score as the reward, and introduce a multi-level search strategy to perform NAS in
aprogressiveway.TheauthorsusehingelossfortrainingthesharedGAN,followingthetraining
settingofspectralnormalization GAN (SN-GAN).
The whole pipelineis insightful but also posesnovel challenges w.r.t.the marriage of NAS and
GANs. NAS remains to be optimized for standard classification problems, let alone the unstable
training problems brought by GANs. Although in the article AutoGAN shows promising results
with NAS for GAN architecture, which is quite unique compared to the manual design GAN ar-
chitecturesintroducedabove.We thinkitstillhastwocriticalissuesyetto besolved:
•The search space for the generator is limited and the search strategy for the discriminator
isnotdiscussed.
•AutoGAN has not yet been tested on high-resolution image generation datasets. Thus, we
do not have an intuitive estimation of the applicability of this methods. The current image
generationtaskispreliminary.
4.16 MSG-GAN
It is well known that GANs are very difficult to adapt to different datasets. Karnewar et al. argue
thatoneofthereasonsforthisisgradientspassingfromthediscriminatortothegeneratorbecome
uninformativewhenthereisnotenoughoverlapinthesupportsoftherealandfakedistributions.
TheyproposeMSG-GAN[ 63]asameanstohandlesuchproblems.AsseeninFigure 8,latentspace
ofthegeneratorandthediscriminatorareconnectedsoastosharemoreinformationbetweenthe
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 15 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:15
Fig.9. (a)Anoverviewofthefootprintforarchitecture-variantGANsdiscussedinthissection.(b)Summary
of recent architecture-variant GANs for solving the three challenges highlighted in this article (by our esti-
mationandquantitativeresultscanbereferredtoTable 2inSection 7).Thechallengesarerepresentedbythe
three orthogonal axes. A larger value for each axis indicates better performance. Red points indicate GAN-
variants that cover all three challenges, blue points cover two, and black points cover only one challenge.
Quantitative resultscanbe foundinTable 2in Section 7.
generatorandthediscriminator.Morespecifically,activationsineachtransposeconvolutionalstep
(three steps in Figure 8)i nGare mapped to an image at different scales by operation r, i.e., 1×1
convolutioninthiscase.Similarly,themappedimageisthenencodedby r/primetoactivations,whichis
concatenatedwithactivationsencodedbyarealimage.Thisconnectionenablesmoreinformation
sharingbetween DandGandexperimentalresultsdemonstratethebenefits.Theauthorstrained
MSG-GAN on multiple datasets, i.e., CIFAR10, Oxford flowers, LSUN, Indian Celebs, CelebA-HQ
(1,024×1,024),andFFHQ(1,024×1,024).Thehyperparametersettingsarealmostidenticalforall
datasets.Specifically, z∈R512×1isdrawnfromastandardnormaldistribution.TheRMSpropwitha
learningrateof0.003wasusedforboth DandG.WGAN-GPlosswasusedfortrainingthenetwork.
AlthoughMSG-GANhasachievedverygoodresultsonseveralimagedatasets,theabilityofMSG-
GANtogeneratediverseimageshasnotbeentestedyetandwefoundtheresultsonCIFAR10are
notasgoodasfortheotherdatasets.Weguessthismightbecausedbytheconnectionbetween G
andD,whichmayconstrainthediversityon Gasactivationsfrom GandD.Thediversityonimages
mightcauseinconsistentmatchedactivations,whichhaveanegativeimpactonthetraining.More
development may solve thisissuesuchasthroughtheadditionof a self-attentionmodule.
4.17 Summary
We have provided an overview of architecture-variant GANs centered on how they can poten-
tiallyimproveperformancewithrespecttothethreekeychallengesofimagequality,modediver-
sity and the unstable training problem. Figure 9(a) illustrates a footprint for architecture-variant
GANs from 2014 to 2020 that discussed in this section. It can be seen that there are lots of inter-
connections in different GAN variants. Figure 9(b) illustrates relative performance with respect
to the three challenges. We suggest that interested readers should consult the original articles to
getdeeperinsightsonthetheoryandtheperformanceofeachGANvariant.Herewegiveaquick
recaponhowarchitecture-variantGANsremedyareidentifiedchallenges(quantitativeresultsare
summarized in Table 2in Section 7).
Image Quality OneofthebasicobjectivesofGANsistoproducerealisticimageswithhighimage
quality. The original GAN (FCGAN) was only applied to the MNIST, Toronto face and CIFAR-10
datasetsbecauseofthelimitedcapacityofthearchitecture.DCGANandLAPGANintroducedthe
deconvolutional and the up-sampling processes to the design. Both enable the model to produce
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 16 ====
37:16 Z.Wanget al.
higher resolution images. The remaining architecture variants (i.e., BEGAN, PROGAN, SAGAN,
and BigGAN) all have some modifications on the loss function that we will address in a later
section of this article and these are also beneficial in producing better image quality. Regarding
thearchitecturecomponentonly,BEGANusesanautoencoderarchitectureforthediscriminator,
which compares generated images and real images at the pixel level. This helps the generator
produce easy-to-reconstruct data. PROGAN utilizes a deeper architectureand the model expands
as the training progresses. This progressive training strategy improves the learning stability for
discriminatorandgeneratorthusitiseasierforthemodeltolearnhowtoproducehighresolution
images. SAGAN mainly benefits from the spectral normalization, which we address in the next
section. BigGAN demonstrates that high resolution image generation can benefit from a deeper
modelwithlarger batchsizes.
Vanishing Gradient Changing the loss function is the only way to remedy such a problem
currently. Some architecture variants here avoid the vanishing gradient issue but only because
they usedifferentlossfunctions.Wewillexplore thisin thenext section.
Mode Diversity This is the most challenging problem for GANs. It is very difficult for GANs
toproducerealisticdiverseimagessuchasnaturalimages.Intermsofarchitecture-variantGANs,
only SAGAN and BigGAN address this issue explicitly. Benefiting from the self-attention mecha-
nism, CNNs in SAGAN and BigGAN can process a large receptive field that overcomes the shift-
ingcomponentsproblemingeneratedimages.ThisenablessuchtypesofGANtoproducediverse
images.
5 LOSS-VARIANT GANS
AnotherdesigndecisioninGANsthatsignificantlyimpactsperformanceisthechoiceoflossfunc-
tioninEquation( 1).WhiletheoriginalGANwork[ 45]hasalreadydemonstratedglobaloptimal-
ity and the convergence of GANs training, it still highlights the instability problem that can arise
whentrainingaGAN.TheproblemiscausedbytheglobaloptimalitycriterionasstatedinRefer-
ence [45]. Global optimality is achieved when an optimal Dis reached for any G.S ot h eo p t i m a l
Dis achievedwhenthederivative of Dforthelossin Equation( 1) equals0.So we have
−pr(x)
D(x)+pд(x)
1−D(x)=0→D∗(x)=pr(x)
pr(x)+pд(x), (6)
where xrepresentstherealdataandgenerateddata, D∗(x)istheoptimaldiscriminator, pr(x)isthe
real data distribution and pд(x)is the generated data distribution. We have the optimal discrimi-
natorDso far and when we have the optimal D,t h el o s sf o r Gcan be visualized by substituting
D∗(x)intoEquation( 1),
LG=Ex∼prlogpr(x)
1
2/bracketleftBig
pr(x)+pд(x)/bracketrightBig+Ex∼pдlogpд(x)
1
2/bracketleftBig
pr(x)+pд(x)/bracketrightBig−2·log2. (7)
Equation ( 7) demonstrates the loss function for a GAN when the discriminator is optimized and
it is related to two important probability measurement metrics. One is KL divergence, which is
defined as
KL(p1/bardblp2)=Ex∼p1logp1
p2, (8)
and theotherisJensen-Shannon(JS)divergence,whichisstatedas
JS(p1/bardblp2)=1
2KL/parenleftbigg
p1/bardblp1+p2
2/parenrightbigg
+1
2KL/parenleftbigg
p2/bardblp1+p2
2/parenrightbigg
. (9)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 17 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:17
Fig.10. IllustrationoftrainingprogressionforaGAN.Twonormaldistributionsareusedhereforvisualiza-
tion.Givenanoptimal D,theobjectiveoftheGANistoupdate Gtomovethegenerateddistribution pд(red)
towardtherealdistribution pr(blue)(Gisupdatedfromlefttorightinthisfigure.Left:initialstate,middle:
during training, right: training convergence). However, JS divergence for the left two figures are both 0.693
andthefigure ontheright is0.336, indicatingthat JSdivergence does not providesufficient gradient at the
initialstate.
Fig. 11. JS divergence and gradient change with the distance between prandpд. (a) Left: JS divergence
changes with distance. Right: Gradient JS divergence changes with distance. The distance is the difference
between thetwodistributionmeans. (b) Lossandgradient for generator of different loss-variantGANs.
Thusthelossfor Gregardingtheoptimal Din Equation( 7)canbe reformulatedas
LG=2·JS(pr/bardblpд)−2·log2, (10)
which indicates that the loss for Gnow equally becomes the minimization of the JS divergence
betweenprandpд. With training Dstep by step, the optimization of Gwill be closer to the mini-
mizationofJSdivergencebetween prandpд.Wecannowstarttodescribetheinstabilityproblem
in training, where Doften easily wins over G. This unstable training problem is actually caused
by the JS divergence in Equation ( 9) .G i v e na no p t i m a l D, the objective of optimization for Equa-
tion(10)istomove pдtowardpr(seeFigure 10).JSdivergenceforthethreeplotsfromlefttoright
are 0.693, 0.693, and 0.336, which indicates that JS divergence remains constant (log2 =0.693) if
thereisnooverlapbetween prandpд.Figure11(a)demonstratesthechangeofJSdivergenceand
its gradient corresponding to the distance between prandpд. It can be seen that JS divergence
is constant and its gradient is almost 0 when the distance is greater than 5, which indicates that
training process does not have any effect on G. The gradient of JS divergence for training the G
is non-zero only when pдandprhave substantial overlap, i.e., the vanishing gradient will arise
forGwhenDisclosetooptimal.Inpractice,thepossibilitythat prandpдdonotoverlaporhave
negligible overlap isvery high[ 3].
TheoriginalGANswork[ 45]alsohighlightstheminimizationof −Ex∼pдlog[D(x)]fortraining
Gtoavoidavanishinggradient.However,thistrainingstrategywillleadtoanotherproblemcalled
modedropping.First,letusexamine KL(pд/bardblpr)=Ex∼pдlogpд
pr.Withanoptimaldiscriminator D∗,
KL(pд/bardblpr)canbe reformulatedas
KL(pд/bardblpr)=Ex∼pдlogpд(x)/(pr(x)+pд(x))
pr(x)/(pr(x)+pд(x))=Ex∼pдlog1−D∗(x)
D∗(x)
=Ex∼pдlog[1−D∗(x)]−Ex∼pдlog[D∗(x)].(11)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 18 ====
37:18 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 12. Optimized q(in red) when minimizing KL divergence KL(p/bardblq)(left) and reverse KL divergence
KL(q/bardblp)(right).
The alternative loss form for Gcan now can be stated by switching the order of the two sides in
Equation( 11)
−Ex∼pдlog[D∗(x)]=KL(pд/bardblpr)−Ex∼pдlog[1−D∗(x)]
=KL(pд/bardblpr)−2·JS(pr/bardblpд)+2·log2+Ex∼pxlog[D∗(x)],(12)
where the alternative loss for Gin Equation ( 12) is only affected by the first two terms (the last
two terms are constant), however, this loss function is dominated by KL(pд/bardblpr), sinceJS(pr/bardblpд)
isboundedin[0,log2]asillustratedinFigure 11(a)ontheleft.Itcanbeseenthatthefirsttermin
Equation( 12)isreverseKLdivergence,inwhichthe pдoptimizedbythereverseistotallydifferent
from the pдoptimized by KL divergence. Figure 12illustrates this difference by using a mixture
of two Gaussians for pand a single Gaussian for q.W h e nphas multiple modes, qtries to blur all
modestogethertoputahigh-probabilitymassonallasseeninFigure 12(a).However,Figure 12(b)
shows that qchooses to recover a single Gaussian to avoid putting probability mass in the low-
probability areas at the centre of the two Gaussians. The optimization on reverse KL divergence
thereforewillcausemodecollapseduringthetrainingofGANs. Thisishighlightedbelow,
•Whenpд(x)→0,pr(x)→1,KL(pд/bardblpr)→0.
•Whenpд(x)→1,pr(x)→0,KL(pд/bardblpr)→+∞.
The penalization for two instances of poor performance made by Gare totally different. The first
instance of poor performance is that Gis not producing a reasonable range of samples and yet
incursaverysmallpenalization.Thesecondinstanceofpoorperformanceconcerns Gproducing
implausible samples but has very large penalization. The first example concerns the fact that the
generated samples lack diversity while the second concerns that fact that the generated samples
are not accurate. Considering this first case, Ggenerates repeated but “safe” samples instead of
takingrisktogeneratediversebut“unsafe”samples,whichleadstothemodecollapseproblem.In
summary,usingtheoriginallossinEquation( 1)willresultinthevanishinggradientfortraining G
and using the alternative loss in Equation ( 12) will incur the mode collapse problem. These kinds
ofproblemscannotbesolvedbysimplychangingarchitectures.Therefore,itcouldbearguedthat
the ultimate problem for GANs stems from the design of the loss function and that innovative
ideas for this redesign of the loss function may solve the problem. Loss-variant GANs have been
researchedextensively toimprove thestabilityof trainingGANsand we considerthesenext.
5.1 WassersteinGAN
WGAN [4] has successfully solved the two problems for the original GAN by using the Earth
mover(EM)orWasserstein-1[ 115]distanceasthelossmeasureforoptimization.TheEMdistance
is definedas
W(pr,pд)=inf
γ∈/producttext(pr,pд)E(x,y)∼γ/bardblx−y/bardbl, (13)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 19 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:19
Fig.13. ComparisonoftheparameterdistributionbetweenWGAN(left)andWGAN-GP(right).Figurefrom
Reference [ 47].
where/producttext(pr,pд)denotes the set of all joint distributions and γ(x,y)whose marginals are prand
pд. Compared with KL and JS divergence, EM is able to reflect distance even when prandpдdo
not overlap. It is also continuous and thus able to provide a meaningful gradient for training the
generator. Figure 11(b) illustrates the WGAN gradient compared to that for the original GAN. It
isnoticeablethatWGANhasasmoothgradientfortrainingthegeneratorspanningthecomplete
space.However, the infimum in Equation ( 13) is intractablebut the creatorsdemonstrate thatthe
Wassersteindistancecanbe alternativelyestimatedas
max
w∼WExpr[fw(x)]−Ez∼pz[fw(G(z))], (14)
wherefwcanberealizedby Dbuthassomeconstraints(fordetailstheinterestedreadercanrefer
to the original work [ 4]) and zis the input noise for G.S owhere is the parameters in DwhereD
aims to maximize equation ( 14) to make the optimization distance equivalent to the Wasserstein
distance.When Disoptimized,Equation( 13)willbecometheWassersteindistanceand Gaimsto
minimize it.Sotheloss for Gis
−min
GEz∼pz[fw(G(z))]. (15)
AnimportantdifferencebetweenWGANandtheoriginalGANisthefunctionof D.TheDinthe
original work is used as a binary classifier but Das used in the WGAN has the purpose of fitting
the Wasserstein distance, which is a regression task. Thus, the sigmoid in the last layer of Dis
removedintheWGAN.TheauthorstrainedWGANontheLSUNdatasetwith64 ×64resolution.
Importantly, training of the WGAN will be unstable if a momentum based optimizer such as Adam
(β1>0isused).Therefore,RMSPropisutilized fortrainingtheWGAN.
5.2 WGAN-GP
EventhoughWGANhasbeenshowntobesuccessfulinimprovingthestabilityofGANtraining,
it is not well generalized for a deeper model. Experimentally it has been determined that most
WGAN parameters are localized at −0.01 and 0.01 because of parameter clipping (see Figure 13).
This will dramatically reduce the modeling capacity of D. WGAN-GP has been proposed using a
gradient penalty for restricting /bardblf/bardblL≤Kfor the discriminator [ 47] and the modified loss for the
discriminatornow becomes
LD=Exд∼pд[D(xд)]−Exr∼pr[D(xr)]+λEˆx∼pˆx[(/bardbl/triangleinvˆxD(ˆx)/bardbl2−1)2], (16)
where xris sample data drawn from the real data distribution pr,xдis sample data drawn from
the generated data distribution pдandpˆxis sampled uniformly along the straight lines between
thosepairsofpoints,whicharesampledfromtherealdatadistribution prandthegenerateddata
distribution pд.ThefirsttwotermsaretheoriginallossinWGANandthelasttermisthegradient
penalty.WGAN-GPdemonstratesabetterdistributionoftrainedparameterscomparedtoWGAN
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 20 ====
37:20 Z.Wanget al.
(Figure13)andbetterstabilityperformanceduringtrainingofGANs.BeforeWGAN-GP,success-
ful training of GANs only took place on those models consisting of a few layers both in the dis-
criminator and generator,i.e.,DCGAN uses four convolutional layers in Dand 4 deconvolutional
layers in G. WGAN-GP successfully demonstrates stabilizing training by using the ResNet-101
architecture as the backbone. This has had significant impact on research into GANs for large-
scaleimagegeneration,i.e.,PROGAN,BigGAN.Asmentionedintheprevioussection,WGANhas
stability issues when using momentum based optimizers such as Adam. WGAN-GP in contrast
exhibits stabilizing training by using the Adam optimizer and even faster convergence using the
same training settings. WGAN-GP was experimentally explored using the ImageNet dataset with
32×32 image resolution, the LSUN dataset with 128 ×128 image resolution and CIFAR-10 with
32×32 image resolution. Adam optimizer with α=1×10−4,β1=0,β2=0.9 was utilized in the
experiment.Thelearningratewas2 ×10−4andabatchsizeof64.Theauthorsfindpiecewiselin-
ear activation functions, e.g., ReLU, Leaky ReLu and smooth activation functions, e.g., Tanh both
can traintheWGAN-GP in a stableway.
5.3 LeastSquare GAN(LSGAN)
The Least Square GAN (LSGAN) is a new approach proposed in Reference [ 94]t or e m e d yt h e
vanishing gradient problem for Gfrom the perspective of the decision boundary determined by
thediscriminator.Thisworkarguesthatthedecisionboundaryfor DoftheoriginalGANpenalizes
asverysmallerrorinupdatesof Gforthosegeneratedsamplesthatarefarawayfromthedecision
boundary. The creators propose using a least square loss for Dinstead of sigmoid cross entropy
loss asstatedintheoriginalGAN paper[ 45].Theproposedlossfunctionis definedas
min
DLD=1
2Ex∼pr[(D(x)−b)2]+1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(z))−a)2],min
GLG=1
2Ez∼pz[(D(G(z))−c)2],
(17)
whereais the label for the generated samples, bis the label for the real samples and cis the hy-
perparameter that GwantsDto recognize the generated samples as the real samples by mistake.
Thismodificationhastwobenefits:(1)Thenewdecisionboundarygeneratedby Dpenalizeslarge
errors arising from those generated samples that are far away from the decision boundary. This
pushesthose“bad”generatedsamplestowardthedecisionboundary.Thisisbeneficialintermsof
generatingimprovedimagequality.(2)Penalizingthegeneratedsamplesthatarefarawayfromthe
decisionboundaryprovidessufficientgradientwhenupdatingthe G,whichremediesthevanish-
inggradientproblemsfortraining G.Figure14demonstratesacomparisonofdecisionboundaries
for LSGAN and the original GAN. The work [ 94] has proven that the optimization of LSGAN is
equivalent to minimizing the Pearson χ2divergence between pr+pдand 2pдwhena,bandc
subject to b−c=1a n db−a=2. Similarly to WGAN, Dhere involves regression and the sig-
moid is also removed. LSGAN was evaluated on LSUN and HWDB1.0 [ 81] with 112×112 image
resolution. The Adam optimizer with β1=0.5 was used and the learning rate was 1 ×10−3and
2×10−4forLSUNandHWDB1.0,respectively.SimilarlytoDCGAN,ReLUactivationsandLeaky
ReLU activationswere usedforthegeneratorand discriminatorrespectively.
5.4f-GAN
f-GAN works on the basis that GANs can be trained by using f-divergence [ 104].f-divergence
Df(pr/bardblpд)measures the difference between two probability distributions ( prandpдregarding
GANs), e.g., KL divergence, JS divergence, and Pearson χ2as mentioned before, which can be
summarized as
Df(pr/bardblpд)=/integraldisplay
Xpд(x)f/parenleftBiggpr(x)
pд(x)/parenrightBigg
dx, (18)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 21 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:21
Fig.14. DecisionboundaryillustrationoforiginalGANandLSGAN.(a).Decisionboundariesfor Doforiginal
GAN and LSGAN. (b). Decision boundary of Dfor the original GAN. It has small errors for the generated
samples, which are far away from the decision boundary (in green), for updating G. (c). Decision boundary
forDof LSGAN. It penalizes as large error any generated sample that is far away from the boundary (in
green).Thus it pushesgenerated samples (ingreen) towardtheboundary[ 94].
Table 1. Examples of Df(pr/bardblpд)withf-divergence Function Based on References [ 103,104]
Divergence Df(pд/bardblpq) f-divergence function
KL divergence/integraltext
pr(x)logpr(x)
pд(x)dx tlogt
ReverseKL/integraltext
pд(x)logpд(x)
pr(x)dx −logt
FCGAN (2·JS−2·log2)[45]/integraltext
pr(x)log2pr(x)
pr(x)+pд(x)+pд(x)log2pд(x)
pr(x)+pд(x)dx−2·log2tlogt−(t+1)log(t+1)
LSGAN(PearsonX2)[94]/integraltext(pд(x)−pr(x))2
pr(x)dx (t−1)2
EBGAN[ 151]/integraltext
|pr(x)−pд(x)|dx |t−1|
wherefisaconvexfunctionand f(1)=0.Itshouldbenotedthat fistermedageneratorfunction
in the original paper [ 104], which is totally different from the concept of a generator Gin GANs.
Thusweuse forf-divergencefunctioninthissectioninsteadofgeneratorfunctionintheoriginal
paper to avoid confusion with the generator Gused in this article. f-GAN generalizes the loss
function of GANs according to an f-divergence function presented in Equation ( 18). A list of f-
divergencewith f-divergencefunctionsareshowninTable 1.However,Equation( 18)isintractable
thusitrequiresestimationinacomputablewaysuchasthroughtheuseofanexpectationform.By
usingtheconvexconjugate(Fenchelconjugate) f(u)=supt∈domf∗{tu−f∗(t)}[50],f-divergence
canbe representedas alower boundon thedivergence
Df(pr/bardblpд)=/integraldisplay
Xpд(x)sup
t∈domf∗/parenleftBigg
tpr(x)
pд(x)−f∗(t)/parenrightBigg
dx≥sup
T∈T/parenleftBigg/integraldisplay
XT(x)pr(x)−f∗(T(x))pд(x))/parenrightBigg
dx
=sup
T∈T/parenleftBig
Ex∈pr[T(x)]−Ex∈pд[f∗(T(x))]/parenrightBig
,
(19)
whereTis an arbitrary function class of Tthat satisfiesX→R(e.g., a parameterized discrimi-
nator with a specific activation function such as a sigmoid). The derivation above yields a lower
bound for Df(pr/bardblpд)that is tractable, thus this can be directly calculated. The optimization for
f-GAN firstly is characterized by maximizing the lower bound (last line in Equation ( 19)) with
respecttothediscriminator,whichaimstomakethelowerboundtheestimationof f-divergence,
and then minimizes the f-divergence regarding the generator to bring pдclose topr.T h i so p t i -
mizationisknownasvariationaldivergenceminimization(VDM).Theauthorstrainedgenerative
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 22 ====
37:22 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 15. An example of computation for an unrolled GAN with three unrolling steps. GandDupdate using
Equation( 22). Each step kuses thegradients of fkregarding θk
DstatedintheEquation( 20).
neuralsamplersbasedonVDMonMNIST(28 ×28pixelimages)andLSUN(96 ×96pixelimages).
Themodelarchitectureandtrainingsettingsarethesame asproposedin DCGAN.
5.5 UnrolledGAN
UnrolledGAN(UGAN)isadesignproposedtosolvetheproblemofmodecollapseforGANsduring
training[ 98].ThecoredesigninnovationofUGANistheadditionofagradienttermforupdating
G, which has an ability of capturing responses of the discriminator to a change in the generator.
Theoptimalparameterfor Dcanbe expressedasan iterativeoptimizationprocedureasfollows:
θ0
D=θD,θk+1
D=θk
D+ηkdf(θGθk
D)
dθk
D,θ∗
D(θG)=lim
k→∞θk
D, (20)
whereηkis the learning rate, θDrepresents parameters for DandθGrepresents parameters for
G.Thesurrogatelossby unrollingfor Kstepscan beexpressedas
fK(θG,θD)=f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD)). (21)
Thissurrogatelossis thenusedforupdatingparametersfor DandG,
θG←θG−ηdfK(θGθD)
dθG,θD←θD+ηdf(θGθD)
dθD. (22)
Figure15illustrates the computational diagram for an unrolled GAN with three unrolling steps.
Equation( 23)illustratesthegradient forupdating G,
dfK(θG,θD)
dθG=∂f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD))
θG+∂f(θG,θK
D(θG,θD))
∂θK
D(θG,θD)dθK
D(θG,θD)
dθG. (23)
It should be noted that the first term in Equation ( 23) is the gradient for the original GAN. The
second term here reflects how Dreacts to changes in G.I fGtends to collapse to one mode, then
Dwill increase the loss for G. Thus, this unrolled approach is able to prevent the mode collapse
problemforGANs.TheauthorstrainedUGANonMNISTandCIFAR10datasets.Allconvolutions
have kernel size of 3 ×3 with batch normalization. The discriminator used Leaky ReLU with a
0.3leakinessandthegeneratorusedReLUs.Thegeneratorconsistedoffivelayers,withonefully
connectedlayer,threedeconvolutionallayers,andoneconvolutionallayer.Thediscriminatorhad
four layers, three of which are convolutional layers and one fully connected layer. The Adam
optimizer with a generator learning rate of 1 ×10−4and a discriminator learning rate as 2 ×10−4
was utilizedin theexperiment.
5.6 LossSensitive GAN (LS-GAN)
LS-GAN is introduced to train the generator to produce realistic samples by minimizing the des-
ignated margins between real and generated samples [ 111]. This work argues that the problems
such as the vanishing gradient and mode collapse as appearing in the original GAN is caused by
a non-parametric hypothesis that the discriminator is able to distinguish any type of probability
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 23 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:23
Fig.16. DemonstrationofthelossinEquation( 25).Δ(x,G(z))isusedtoseparaterealsamplesandgenerated
samples. If some generated samples are close enough to the real samples, then LS-GAN will focus on other
generated samples that are far away from the real samples. This optimization loss puts a restriction on D
to prevent it from separating generated and real samples too well. Thus, it solves the vanishing gradient
problem that arises in the original GAN design. ( Gϕ(z)here is equivalent to G(z)whereϕrepresents the
parameters forgenerator). Figureis regeneratedfromReference [ 111].
distribution between real samples and generated samples. As mentioned before, it is very normal
for the overlap between the real samples distribution and the generated samples distribution to
be negligible. Moreover, Dis also able to separate real samples and generated samples. The JS di-
vergence will become a constant under this situation, where the vanishing gradient arises for G.
In LS-GAN, the classification ability of Dis restricted and is learned by a loss function Lθ(x)pa-
rameterizedwith θ,whichassumesthatarealsampleoughttohavesmallerlossthanagenerated
sample.Thelossfunctioncan beincorporatedas thefollowingconstraint:
Lθ(x)≤Lθ(G(z))−Δ(x,G(z)), (24)
whereΔ(x,G(z))isthemarginmeasuringthedifferencebetweenrealsamplesandgeneratedsam-
ples. This constraint indicates that a real sample is separated from a generated sample by at least
am a r g i no f Δ(x,G(z)).Theoptimizationfor theLS-GAN is thenstatedas
min
DLD=Ex∼prLθ(x)+λEx∼prz∼pz(Δ(x,G(z))+Lθ(x)−Lθ(G(z)))+,min
GLG=Ez∼pzLθ(G(z)),
(25)
whereλis a positive balancing parameter, (a)+=max(a,0)andθare the parameters in D.F r o m
the second term in LDin the Equation ( 25),Δ(x,G(z))is added as a regularization term for op-
timizingDto prevent Dfrom overfitting the real samples and the generated samples. Figure 16
demonstratestheefficacyofEquation( 25).Thelossfor Dputsarestrictiononthecapabilityof D,
i.e., it challenges the ability of Dto separate well-generated samples from real samples, which is
theoriginalcauseforthevanishinggradient.Moreformally,LS-GANassumesthat prliesinaset
ofLipschitzdensitieswitha compactsupport.
The models were trained with CIFAR-10, SVHN [ 102], and CelebA with a mini-batch of 64 im-
ages. All weights were initialized from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with a standard devia-
tion of 0.02. The Adam optimizer was used to train the model with an initial learning rate set as
1×10−3andβ1as0.5whilethelearningratewasdecreasedevery 25epochsby a factorof0.8.
5.7 ModeRegularized GAN
ModeRegularizedGANproposesametricforregularizationtopenalizemissingmodes[ 18],which
is then used to solve the mode collapse problem. The key idea behind this work is the use of an
encoderE(x):x→zto produce the latent variable zforGinstead of using noise. This procedure
hastwobenefits:(1)Theencoderreconstructioncanaddmoreinformationto Gsothatisnotthat
easyforDtodistinguishbetweengeneratedsamplesandrealsamples;and(2)theencoderensures
acorrespondencebetween xandz(E(x)),whichmeans Gcancoverdifferentmodesinthe xspace.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 24 ====
37:24 Z.Wanget al.
So itpreventsthemode collapseproblem.Thelossfunctionfor thismode regularized GAN is
LG=−Ez[log[D(G(z))]]+Ex∼pr[λ1d(x,G◦E(x))+λ2log[D(G(x))]]
LE=Ex∼pr[λ1d(x,G◦E(x))+λ2log[D(G(x))]],(26)
wheredis a geometric measurement that can be chosen from many options, e.g., pixelwise L2
and distance of extracted features. The authors evaluate the performance of including the mode
regularization ontheMNISTand CelebA(64 ×64)datasets.
5.8 GeometricGAN
ThelossfunctionforgeometricGANs[ 80]canbederivedviaanalternativemeansbyminimizing
thehinge lossas
LD=−E(x,y)∼pr[min(0,−1+D(x,y))]−Ez∼pz,y∼pr[min(0,−1−D(G(z),y))]
LG=−Ez∼pz,y∼prD(G(z),y).(27)
This hinge loss fashion is also deployed in the SAGAN mentioned in Section 4.11and BigGAN
mentionedinSection 4.12.Comparedtotheotherlossfunctions,theauthorsdemonstratetheeffi-
cacyofhingelossfordealingwiththehigh-dimensionlow-samplesizeproblem[ 2,17,96],which
is a classification problem caused when the mini-batch size is much smaller than the dimension
of the feature space. In this article, the geometric GAN is designed based on a soft-margin SVM
linear classifier rather than a hard-margin SVM linear classifier. The networks were trained on
MNIST (64×64 resolution), CelebA (64 ×64 resolution), and LSUN (64 ×64 resolution) datasets.
The DCGAN architecture trained using the RMSprop optimizer with learning rate 2 ×10−4and
mini-batch size 64 was deployed in this work. The authors demonstrate that geometric GAN is
more stablefor trainingand lessproneto modecollapse.
5.9 Relativistic GAN
Relativistic GAN (RGAN) [ 60] is proposed as a general approach to devising new cost functions
from the existing one, i.e., it can be generalized for all IPM [ 101,123] GANs. The discriminator
in the original GAN measures the probability for a given real sample or a generated sample .T h e
authors argue that key relative discriminant information between real data and generated data
is missing in the original GAN. The discriminator in RGAN takes into account how a given real
sample is more realistic compared to a given random generated sample . The loss function of RGAN
appliedtotheoriginal GAN design is statedas
min
DExr∼prxд∼pд[log(sigmoid(C(xr)−C(xд)))],min
GExr∼prxд∼pд[log(sigmoid(C(xд)−C(xr)))],(28)
whereC(x)is the non-transformed layer. Figure 17demonstrates the effect on Dof using the
RGAN approach compared to the original GAN. In terms of the original GAN, the optimization
aims to push the D(x)to 1 (right one). For RGAN, the optimization aims to push D(x)to 0.5 (left
one), which is more stable compared to the original GAN. The author also claims that RGAN can
be generalized to other types of loss-variant GANs if those loss functions belong to IPMs. The
generalization lossis statedas
LD=Exr∼prxд∼pд[f1(C(xr)−C(xд))]+Exr∼prxд∼pд[f2(C(xд)−C(xr))]
LG=Exr∼prxд∼pд[д1(C(xr)−C(xд))]+Exr∼prxд∼pд[д2(C(xд)−C(xr))],(29)
wheref1(y)=д2(y)=−yandf2(y)=д1(y)=y.DetailsoflossgeneralizationforotherGANscan
be foundin theoriginalpaper[ 60].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 25 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:25
Fig.17.DoutputcomparisonbetweenRGANandtheoriginalGAN.(a) DoutputinRGAN;(b) Doutputin
theoriginalGAN whentrainingthe G.Figureis regenerated fromReference [ 60].
The authors trained the networks on the CIFAR-10 and the CAT datasets with various image
sizes,i.e.,64×64,128×128,and256×256.TheDCGANarchitecturewiththeAdamoptimizerwas
used. Various training settings have been explored and more details can be found in the original
paper[60].Theauthorssuccessfullydemonstratethattherelativisticdiscriminatoroffersawayto
improveonthestandardGANapproachandisabletoachievebetterperformancewithothertricks,
e.g., spectral normalization and gradient penalty. More importantly, the authors demonstrate the
generabilityofthisapproach,inwhichanytypeofGANcanbetrainedthroughanRGANfashion.
5.10 SN-GAN
SN-GAN[ 100]proposestheuseofweightnormalizationtotrainthediscriminatorinamorestable
way. This technique is computationally light and easily applied to existing GANs. Previous work
forstabilizingthetrainingofGANs[ 4,47,111]emphasizestheimportancethat Dshouldbefrom
thesetof K-Lipshitzcontinuousfunctions .Lipschitzcontinuity [5,36,42]canbeconsideredamore
strictformofcontinuity,onewhichrequiresthatthefunctiondoesnotchangerapidly.Thissmooth
Dis of benefit in stabilizing the training of GANs. The work mentioned previously focused on
the control of the Lipschitz constant of the discriminator function. This work demonstrates an
alternative, simpler way to control the Lipschitz constant through spectral normalization of each
layer forD. Spectralnormalizationis performedas
¯WSN(W)=W
σ(W), (30)
where Wrepresentsweightsoneachlayerfor Dandσ(W)istheL2matrixnormof W.Thearticle
proves this will make /bardblf/bardbl≤1. The fast approximation for the σ(W)is also demonstrated in the
originalpaper.
The authors evaluated the performance of SN-GAN on the CIFAR-10 (32 ×32 resolution), the
STL-10(48×48resolution)[ 25]andtheImageNet(128 ×128resolution)bycomparingtotheexist-
ingregularization/normalizationtechniquesincludingweightclipping[ 4],gradientpenalty[ 136],
batch normalization [ 57], weight normalization [ 118], layer normalization [ 7], and orthonormal
regularization [ 14]. Several training settings have been carried out for a comprehensive compari-
son.Theauthorsdemonstratetheefficacyofspectralnormalizationonthediversityandthequality
of generatedimages comparedtopreviouslyproposedapproaches.
5.11 RealnessGAN
In the original GAN design, the discriminator only outputs 0 and 1, i.e., real and fake instead of a
continuousdistributionasthemeasureofrealness.Xianglietal.[ 137]proposetheRealnessGANto
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 26 ====
37:26 Z.Wanget al.
tacklethisnewperspective,whichtreatsrealnessasarandomvariablethatcanbeestimatedfrom
multiple angles. Traditional GANs adopt a single scalar (discriminator output) as the measure of
realness.Theauthorsarguethattherealnessismorecomplicatedandcoversmultiplefactorssuch
astextureandoverallconfigurationinthecaseofimages.Followingthisobservation,thediscrim-
inatorisre-designedtolearnarealnessdistributioninsteadofasinglescalar.Toachievethis,Real-
nessGAN replaces the single scalar by a distribution prealnessso thatD(x)={prealness(x,u);u∈Ω}
given by an input sample, where Ωis the set of outcomes of prealnessand each outcome ucan be
viewed as a potential realness measure by a chosen realness measuring criteria. In the original
paper,thediscriminatorreturns Nprobabilitieson these Noutcomes Ω={u0,u1,...,uN−1}as
prealness(x,ui)=eθi(x)
/summationtext
jeθj(x), (31)
whereθ={θ0,θ1,...,θN−1}aretheparametersof D.Apartfromtheoutcomes Ω,twodistributions
A1for real andA0for fake are also defined on Ω. In practical implementation, given a mini-
batch{x0,x1,...,xm−1},i.e.,logitscomputedbythediscriminatoronthe ithoutcome,aGaussian
distributionN(μi,σi)is fitted on{θi(x0),θi(x1),...,θi(xm−1)}and new logits is re-computed as
{θ/primei(x0),θ/primei(x1),...,θ/primei(xm−1);θ/primei∼N(μi,σi)}. Increasing the number of outcomes will make D
more rigorous and put more constraints on G. In other words, a larger number of outcomes is
suggested fora more complicateddataset.Theminmax losscanfinally be representedas
min
Gmax
DEx∼prKL(A1/bardblD(x))+Ez∼pzKL(A0/bardblD(G(z))),KLrefersto KLdivergence. (32)
The authors trained RealnessGAN on CIFAR10 and CelebA by using the Adam optimizer. The
network architecture of RealnessGAN is identical to the DCGAN architecture with z∼N(0,I).
Batchnormalizationwasdeployedfor Gandspectralnormalizationwasappliedfor D.Thenumber
of outcomesweresetto 51for CelebAand 3 forCIFAR10datasets,respectively.
5.12 SphereGAN
Sphere GAN [ 108] is a novel IPM-based GAN, which uses the hypersphere to bound IPMs in the
objective function, thereby it can facilitate stability of training. By exploiting the information of
higher-orderstatisticsofthedatausinggeometricmomentmatching,theGANmodelcanprovide
more accurateresults.Theobjectivefunctionof sphereGAN is definedas
min
Gmax
D/summationdisplay
rEx/bracketleftbigdr
s(N),D(x)/bracketrightbig−/summationdisplay
rEz/bracketleftbigdr
s(N,D(G(z)))/bracketrightbig. (33)
Forr=1,...,Rwherethefunction dr
smeasuresthe rthmomentdistancebetweeneachsample
and the north pole of the hypersphere, N. Note that the subscript sindicates that dr
sis defined
onSn.DifferentfromconventionaldiscriminatorsbasedontheWassersteindistancethatrequire
Lipschitz constraints (which forces the discriminators to be 1-Lipschitz functions ) the sphere GAN
relaxesthisconditionbydefiningIPMsonthehypersphere.Figure 18showsthepipelineofsphere
GAN.
UnlikewithconventionalapproachessuchasWGAN-GP,WGAN-CT,andWGANL,sphereGAN
does not need any additional constraints that forces discriminators to lie in a desired function
space. By using geometric transformations, sphere GAN ensures that distance functions lie in a
desiredfunctionspacewithnoadditionalconstraintterm.
5.13 Self-supervisedGAN(SS-GAN)
Although the conditional GAN has achieved great success in natural image synthesis. The main
drawbackofconditionalGANsisthenecessityforlabeleddata.Self-SupervisedGANs[ 19]exploit
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 27 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:27
Fig. 18. Pipeline of sphere GAN. The generator outputs the real and fake data (generated via noisy inputs)
intothediscriminator.Thefinaloutputisan n-dimensionalEuclideanfeaturespace(yellowplane).Thegreen
andpurplecirclesarethefeaturepointsofthefakeandrealsamples. The key idea behind the sphere GAN is a
remapping of the feature points on to the n-dimensional hypersphere (i.e., yellow sphere). After the geometric
transformation,themappedpointscanbeusedforcalculatingthegeometricmomentscenteredatthenorth
poleofthehypersphere.Atthesametime,thediscriminatortriestomaximizethemomentdifferencesofreal
and fake samples, while the generator tries to interfere with the discriminator by minimizing the moment
differences. Figureis adoptedfromReference [ 108].
adversarial training and self-supervision for bridging the gap between conditional and uncondi-
tionalGANs.
This work imbues the discriminator with a mechanism to learn useful representations, inde-
pendently of the quality of the current generator. In a self-supervised manner, they train a model
onpredictingrotationangleforextractingrepresentationsfromtheresultingnetworks,andthen
proposetoadd a self-supervisedtask(arotation-basedloss)to thediscriminator,as
LG=−V(G,D)−αEx∼PGEr∼R[logQD(R=r|xr)], (34)
LD=V(G,D)−βEx∼PdataEr∼R[logQD(R=r|xr)], (35)
whereV(G,D)istheoriginalvaluefunction[ 45],r∈Risarotationselectedfromasetofpossible
rotations(R={0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦}).Image xrotatedby rdegreesisdenotedas xr,andQ(R|xr)is
thediscriminator’spredictivedistributionovertheanglesofrotationofthesample.Theimplemen-
tationtrickistheyuseoutputofthesecondlastlayerofdiscriminatoraddedwithalinearlayerto
predicttherotationtype.Thisworktriestoenforcethediscriminatortolearngoodrepresentation
via learningtherotationinformation.
5.14 Summary
We explain the training problems (mode collapse and vanishing gradient for G) present in the
original GAN design and we have introduced loss-variant GANs from the literature, which are
proposed primarily for the purposes of improving the GANs performance in terms of three key
aspects. Figure 19(a) illustrates the footprint of loss-variants that are discussed in this section.
Figure19(b) summarizes the efficacy of loss-variant GANs for these challenges. More details of
quantitativeresultsareprovidedinSection 7.LossesofLSGAN,RGAN,andWGANareverysim-
ilar to the original GAN loss. We use a toy example (i.e., two distributions used in Figure 10)t o
demonstrate the Gloss regarding the distance between real data distribution and generated data
distributionin Figure 11(b).
ItcanbeseenthatRGANandWGANareabletoinherentlysolvethevanishinggradientprob-
lems for the generator when the discriminator is optimized. LSGAN in contrast still suffers from
a vanishing gradient for the generator, however, it is able to provide a better gradient compared
to the original GAN in Figure 11(a) when the distance between the real data distribution and the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 28 ====
37:28 Z.Wanget al.
Fig. 19. (a) An overview of the footprint for loss-variant GANs discussed in this section. (b) Current loss-
variantsforsolvingthemainidentifiedchallenges.Challengesarecategorizedintermsofthreeindependent
axes.RedpointsindicatetheGAN-variantcoversallthreechallenges,bluepointscovertwo,andblackpoints
cover only onechallenge. Alarger valuefor each axis indicates better performance.
generated data distribution is relatively small. This is demonstrated in the original paper [ 94]
where LSGAN is shown to more easily push the generated samples to the boundary established
by thediscriminator.
Loss-variantGANscanbeappliedtoarchitecture-variants.However,SN-GANandRGANshow
strongergeneralizationabilitiescomparedtootherloss-variants,wherethesetwoloss-variantscan
be deployed by other types of loss-variants. Spectral normalization can be applied to any GAN-
variant [100] while the RGAN concept can be applied to any IPM-based GAN [ 60]. We strongly
recommend the use of spectral normalization for all GANs applications as described here. There
areanumberofloss-variantGANsmentionedinthisarticlethatareabletosolvethemodecollapse
and trainingstabilityproblems.
6 APPLICATIONS
6.1 Image Synthesis
Image synthesis is still a main focus area for GANs currently, and as a result has produced many
GAN variants. In this section, we classify all applications related to images under the image syn-
thesiscategorysuchasimage super-resolution,image-to-image translation,and image matting.
Image Super-Resolution Image super-resolution enables a high-resolution image to be gen-
erated from a low-resolution image by upsampling. SRGAN [ 74] is a representative framework
forimage super-resolutionbyusingGANs.ApartfromgeneraladversariallossinGANs,SRGAN
extendsthelossbyaddingcontentloss(e.g.,apixelwiseMSEloss)intheareaofsuper-resolution,
whichlead toa perceptualloss presentedas follows:
LSR=LSR
X+10−3LSR
GAN, (36)
whereLSR
Xis the content loss and LSR
GANis the GAN loss. In practice, the content loss LSR
Xis
chosen depending on applications. SRGAN presents three content losses (1) standard pixelwise
MSElossLSR
MSE,(2)alossdefinedonfeaturemapsrepresentinglower-levelfeatures LSR
VGG22,and
(3) a loss defined on feature maps representing higher-level features LSR
VGG54. The authors show
that different content losses perform differently according to different evaluation metrics. The
generatorinSRGANisconditionedbylow-resolutionimages,whichareinferredwith4 ×upscaling
factors.TheauthorsshowthesuperiorperceptualperformanceofSRGANcomparedtotraditional
approaches.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 29 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:29
Image Completion/Repair Image completion/repair is a common image editing operation,
whichaimstofillthemissingormaskedregionsinimageswithsynthesizedcontent.Mostefficient
traditional completion algorithms [ 9,54] depend on low-level cues, which are used to search for
patches from known regions of the same image, and synthesize the contents that locally appear
similarly to the matched patches. These approaches perform well for background completion as
patterns from the background are similar to each other. The assumption of similar patterns for a
missing part with other parts in an image can be violated in some situations, e.g., filling missing
partsforafaceimage,inwhichmanyobjectshaveuniquepatterns.Lietal.[ 77]proposetheuseof
anautoencoderincorporatingGANs.Twodiscriminators DGandDLaredeployed(oneforglobal
image content and the other for local image content), which produces two adversarial losses that
areusedfor optimization.Theoveralllossfunctionis representedas
L=Lr+λ1LDG+λ2LDL+λ3Lp, (37)
whereLristheL2distancebetweentheautoencoderoutputandtheoriginalimage, LDGandLDL
areadversariallossesof DGandDL,andLpisthepixelwisesoftmaxfortheparsingnetwork[ 85,
140].λ1,λ2,andλ3arehyperparametersusedtocontroltheeffectscausedbydifferent losses.
Image Matting Natural image matting is defined as the operation of accurately estimating the
opacityofaforegroundobjectinanimageorvideostream[ 88].Thisfieldisattractinggrowingin-
terestasithaswideapplicationssuchasforimageeditingandfilmpost-production.Imagematting
approachesformallyrequireaninputimagewithaforegroundobjectandtheimagebackground,
whichcan bemathematically expressedas
Ii=αiFi+(1−αi)Bi,αi∈[0,1], (38)
whereαiis a scalar value that defines the foreground opacity at pixel i,Fiis a scalar value of
foregroundobjectatpixel iandBiisascalarvalueofthebackgroundatpixel i.Lutzetal.introduces
GANstothisfieldandproposedAlphaGANthatcanproducevisuallyappealingcompositions.In
their work, they train the discriminator on images composited with the ground-truth alpha and
thepredictedalphaandthegeneratoris usedtogeneratethecompositions.
Image-to-image Translation Image-to-image translation is a class of graphic problems, in
whichtheobjectiveistolearnthemappingbetweenanoutputimageandaninputimageusinga
trainingsetofalignedimagepairs.Isolaetal.[ 58]proposedtheuseofCGANforimage-to-image
translation when paired training data is available. CycleGAN [ 153] is proposed as a soluution
when unpaired training data is not available for image-to-image translation. CycleGAN achieves
this by introducing a cycle consistency loss to enforce the requirement that the mapping from
one domain Xto the other domain Yis roughly the same in each direction. Other work such
as DiscoGAN [ 66] and DualGAN [ 143] are also proposed to solve the missing paired training
data issue in the area of image-to-image translation. More details can be found in the original
papers.
6.2 Video Generation
GANshavealreadyachievedstrikingresultsfornaturalimagesgeneration.Somerecentworkhas
attempted to extend this success to the area of video generation [ 24,61,126]. Convincing video
generation using GANs remains a significant challenge as it exacerbates all the issues associated
with image generation using GANs. Also it has the problems of increased memory and computa-
tioncostsduetothenatureofvideoandtherequirementfortemporalmodeling.Inaddition,dueto
the limitation of memory and training stability, the generation becomes increasingly challenging
with the increase of the resolution/duration of videos. The current foci of video generation re-
searchviaGANswebelieveare(1)theproductionofhigh-resolutionvideos,e.g.,upto/morethan
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 30 ====
37:30 Z.Wanget al.
256×256,(2)increasingthelengthsofthegeneratedvideobeyond48frames,and(3)thegenera-
tion of more realistic video so that much of the generated video contentis not blurred,indistinct,
orevensurreal.Video-basedGANsdonotonlyhavetoconsiderthespatialmodelingproblembut
alsorequiretemporalmodeling,i.e.,themotionbetweeneachadjacentframesinavideosequence.
MoCoGAN[ 126]isproposedtolearnmotionandcontentinanunsupervisedfashionanddivides
the image latent space into content and motion spaces. DVD-GAN [ 24] is able to generate longer
andhigherresolutionvideosbasedontheBigGANarchitecturewhileintroducingscalable,video-
specific generator and discriminator architectures. DVD-GAN comprises two discriminators DS
(spatial discriminators) and DT(temporal discriminators), in which DSscores input frames from
thespatialperspectiveand DTscoresinputframes fromthetemporalperspective(motion).
6.3 Feature Generation
“Can machines think?” This is the question raised in Alan Turing’s seminal paper entitled “Com-
puting Machinery and Intelligence” [ 127] in 1950. The ultimate goal of machines is to be as intel-
ligentashumanbeings.CurrentAIdependsonlargedatasetsratherthanbeinggeneralizedfrom
small datasets and has a catastrophic forgetting problem [ 97] when learning tasks sequentially.
Few-shotlearningandcontinuallearningattractsignificantattentionfromthescientificcommu-
nity in recent years and aims to fill the gaps between AI and humans. Both of these fields suffer
from the problem of a lack of data, i.e., few-shot learning uses few samples (e.g., normally 1 sam-
pleor5samples)foreachcategoryandcontinuallearningcomesacrossunseendatainsequential
tasks. Mandal et al. [ 93] proposes the use of conditional Wasserstein GAN with two additional
terms,i.e.,cosineembeddingandcycle-consistencylossestosynthesizeunseenactionfeaturesfor
zero-shot action recognition. Shin et al. [ 119] proposes a deep generative replay framework for
continual learning, in which training data for previous tasks are sampled by the generator and
interleavedwiththoseforanewtask.TheseshowthatGANshavethepotentialabilitytoprovide
solutionsfor othermachinelearningproblems.
7 DISCUSSION
We have introduced the most significant problems present in the original GAN design namely
mode collapse and vanishing gradients when updating G. We have surveyed significant GAN-
variantsthatremedytheseproblemsthroughtwodesignconsiderations:(1)architecture-variants.
ThisaspectfocusesonarchitecturaloptionsforGANs.ThisapproachenablesGANstobesuccess-
fullyappliedtodifferentapplications,however,itisunabletofullysolvetheproblemsmentioned
above; (2) loss-variants. We have provided a detailed explanation as to why these problems arise
in the original GAN. These problems are essentially caused by the loss function in the original
GAN.Consequently,modifyingthislossfunctioncansolvethisproblem.Itshouldbenotedhow-
ever that the loss function may change for some architecture-variants and it is, in many cases,
an architecture-specific loss. Therefore, it is unable to generalize to other architectures. Table 2
demonstrates our summary for the performance of the presented GANs in this work by using
Inception Score and FID as presented in the literature. Four image datasets are considered in the
summary, i.e., CIFAR10, ImageNet, LSUN, and CelebA, which are the most widely used bench-
markingdatasets.
Interconnections between Architecture and Loss In this article, we highlight the prob-
lemsinherentintheoriginalGANdesign.Inhighlightinghowsubsequentresearchershavereme-
died those problems, we explored architecture-variants and loss-variants in GAN designs sep-
arately. However, it should be noted that there are interconnections between these two types
of GAN-variants. As mentioned before, loss functions are easily integrated to different architec-
tures.Benefitingfromimprovedconvergenceandstabilizationthrougharedesignedlossfunction,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 31 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:31
Table 2. PerformanceSummaryacross Different Types of GANs DiscussedinThisPaper on
Different Datasetsin theLiterature,i.e., CIFAR10,ImageNet, LSUN, and CelebA
Model CIFAR10(IS/FID) ImageNet (IS/FID) LSUN(FID) CelebA(FID)
FCGAN 6.41/42.6 —/— — —
BEGAN 5.62/— —/— — 83.3
PROGAN 8.80/— —/— 8.3 7.3
LSGAN 6.76/29.5 —/— 21.6 —
DCGAN 6.69/42.5 —/74.2 160.1 63.1
WGAN-GP 8.21/21.5 11.6/62.1 22.8 —
SN-GAN 8.43/18.8 36.8/27.6 — —
GeometricGAN —/27.1 —/— — —
RGAN —/15.9 —/— — —
AC-GAN 8.25/— —/— — —
BigGAN 9.22/14.7 166.5/7.4 — —
RealnessGAN —/34.6 —/— — 23.5
MSG-GAN —/— —/— 5.2 8.0
SS-GAN —/15.7 —/43.9 13.3 24.36
YLG —/— 57.2/15.9 — —
SphereGAN —/— —/— 16.9 —
“—” refers to experiments have not been done in the literature. Studies from References [ 47,56,60,63,63,64,
94,95,100,106,113,120,120,121,134,137,149].
architecture-variants are able to achieve better performance and accomplish solutions to more
difficult problems. For examples, BEGAN and PROGAN use Wasserstein distance instead of JS
divergence.SAGANandBigGANdeployspectralnormalization,wheretheyachievegoodperfor-
mancebasedonmulti-classimagegeneration.ThesetwovarianttypesequallycontributetoGANs
progress.
Future Directions GANs were originally proposed to produce plausible synthetic images and
have achieved exciting performance in the computer vision area. GANs have been applied to
some other fields (e.g., time-series generation [ 15,39,48,87] and natural language processing [ 8,
40,76,147]) with some success. Compared to computer vision, GANs research in other areas
is still somewhat limited. The limitation is caused by the different properties inherent in image
versus non-image data. For instance, GANs work to produce continuous value data but natural
language is based on discrete values like words, characters and bytes, so it is difficult to apply
GANs successfully for such data. As this is also a very promising area, success in this area will
leadtomanyapplicationssuchasgeneratingsubtitlesandcommentstolivestreaming,andsoon.
Research areas such as health have sensitivity around privacy issues in particular and successful
data augmentation will have significant impact in these areas. However, generation for other
datamodalitiesrelevanttosuchapplicationareassuchastime-seriesdatahasonlybeenexplored
in a limited way. Notable challenges here include the lack of efficient metrics for evaluating the
performanceof GANs in suchareas.Moreresearchisrequiredin theseareas.
Since the first GAN was proposed in 2014, their development has brought many benefits both
infomentingnewresearchideasandthroughimpactintheworldoutsideresearchandacademia.
However, improper use of GANs can bring challenges and should be of concern to society, e.g.,
GANs can be used to generate fake video of specific people and fabricate evidence of events that
mayhaveneverhappened,creatingmediasourcesthatarecounterfactualtoaparticularperson’s
opinions and actions, detrimental to their reputation, and may even affect their personal safety
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 32 ====
37:32 Z.Wanget al.
[1,53].Weshouldthereforefocustoo,ondevelopingforgerydetectionandprocessestoefficiently
and effectivelydetectAI-genereatedimages (includingthosedevelopedusingGANs).
8 CONCLUSION
Inthisarticle,wereviewedGAN-variantsbasedonperformanceimprovementofferedintermsof
higherimagequality,morediverseimagesandstabilityoftraining.Wereviewedthecurrentstate
of GAN-related research from both an architecture and a loss basis. More complex architectures
withlargerbatchsizeareassociatedwithanincreaseinbothimagequalityandimagediversity,i.e.,
BigGAN.However,limitedGPUmemorycouldbeanissueforprocessinglargebatchesofimages.
As an alternative the progressive training strategy used in PROGAN can increase image quality
without requiring very large batches of images. In terms of image diversity, adding self-attention
mechanisms to both the generator and the discriminator has achieved exciting results with the
SAGAN demonstrating compelling performance using the ImageNet dataset. In terms of training
stability, the loss function plays an important role here and different types of loss functions have
been proposed to deal with this challenge. Having reviewed different types of loss functions, we
find that spectral normalization has good generalization qualities, i.e., it can be applied to every
GAN, is easy to implement and has very low computational cost. Current state-of-the-art GANs
modelssuchasBigGANandPROGANareabletoproducehighqualityimagesanddiverseimages
in the computer vision field. However, research that has applied GANs to the more challenging
scenario of video is limited. Moreover, GAN-related research in other areas such as time-series
generationandnaturallanguageprocessinglagsthatforcomputervisionintermsofperformance
andcapability.Weconcludethatthereareclearlyopportunitiesforfutureresearchandapplication
in thesefields in particular.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors appreciate informative and insightful comments provided by anonymous reviewers,
whichsignificantlyimprove thequalityof thissurvey.
REFERENCES
[1] DariusAfchar,VincentNozick,JunichiYamagishi,andIsaoEchizen.2018.MesoNet:Acompactfacialvideoforgery
detection network. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security
(WIFS’18) . IEEE, 1–7.
[2] JeongyounAhnandJ.S.Marron.2010.Themaximaldatapilingdirectionfordiscrimination. Biometrika 97,1(2010),
254–259.
[3] MartinArjovskyandLéonBottou.2017.TowardsPrincipledMethodsforTrainingGenerativeAdversarialNetworks.
arXiv:1701.04862 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.04862 .
[4] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. 2017. Wasserstein GAN. arXiv:1701.07875 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875 .
[5] LarryArmijo.1966.MinimizationoffunctionshavingLipschitzcontinuousfirstpartialderivatives. Pac.J.Math. 16,
1(1966),1–3.
[6] MathieuAubry,DanielMaturana,AlexeiA.Efros,BryanC.Russell,andJosefSivic.2014.Seeing3Dchairs:Exemplar
part-based2D-3DalignmentusingalargedatasetofCADmodels.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputer
Vision andPattern Recognition . IEEE, 3762–3769.
[7] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2016. Layer Normalization. arXiv:1607.06450 . Retrieved
fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450 .
[8] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu, Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2016. An Actor-critic Algorithm for Sequence Prediction. arXiv:1607.07086 . Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/1607.07086 .
[9] Connelly Barnes, Eli Shechtman, Adam Finkelstein, and Dan B. Goldman. 2009. PatchMatch: A randomized corre-
spondencealgorithm forstructural imageediting. ACMTrans. Graph. 28,3(2009),24.
[10] ShaneBarrattandRishiSharma.2018.ANoteontheInceptionScore. arXiv:1801.01973 .Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.
org/abs/1801.01973 .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 33 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:33
[11] David Berthelot, Thomas Schumm, and Luke Metz. 2017. BEGAN: Boundary Equilibrium Generative Adversarial
Networks. arXiv:1703.10717 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10717 .
[12] Ali Borji. 2019.Pros and cons of GANevaluationmeasures. Comput.Vis.Image Understand. 179(2019),41–65.
[13] AndrewBrock,JeffDonahue,andKarenSimonyan.2018.LargeScaleGANTrainingforHighFidelityNaturalImage
Synthesis. arXiv:1809.11096 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.11096 .
[14] Andrew Brock, Theodore Lim, James M. Ritchie, and Nick Weston. 2016. Neural Photo Editing with Introspective
Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1609.07093 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.07093 .
[15] EoinBrophy,ZhengweiWang,andTomasE.Ward.2019.QuickandEasyTimeSeriesGenerationwithEstablished
Image-basedGANs. arXiv:1902.05624 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05624 .
[16] Peter Burt and Edward Adelson. 1983. The laplacian pyramid as a compact image code. IEEE Trans. Commun. 31, 4
(1983),532–540.
[17] Iain Carmichael and J. S. Marron. 2017. Geometric Insights into Support Vector Machine Behavior Using the KKT
Conditions. arXiv:1704.00767 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00767 .
[18] Tong Che, Yanran Li, Athul Paul Jacob, Yoshua Bengio, and Wenjie Li. 2016. Mode Regularized Generative Adver-
sarial Networks. arXiv:1612.02136 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.02136 .
[19] Ting Chen, Xiaohua Zhai, Marvin Ritter, Mario Lucic, and Neil Houlsby. 2019. Self-supervised GANs via auxiliary
rotation loss. In Proceedings of theIEEEConferenceonComputer Visionand PatternRecognition (CVPR’19) .
[20] XiChen,YanDuan,ReinHouthooft,JohnSchulman,IlyaSutskever,andPieterAbbeel.2016.InfoGAN:Interpretable
representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems .2172–2180.
[21] Zeyuan Chen, Shaoliang Nie, Tianfu Wu, and Christopher G. Healey. 2018. High Resolution Face Comple-
tion with Multiple Controllable Attributes via Fully End-to-end Progressive Generative Adversarial Networks.
arXiv:1801.07632 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07632 .
[22] JunsukChoe,SongPark,KyungminKim,JooHyunPark,DongseobKim,andHyunjungShim.2017.Facegeneration
for low-shot learning using generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision .1940–1948.
[23] Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. 2018. StarGAN: Unified
generativeadversarialnetworksformulti-domainimage-to-imagetranslation.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8789–8797.
[24] A.Clark,J.Donahue,andK.Simonyan.2019.AdversarialVideoGenerationonComplexDatasets. arXiv:1907.06571 .
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.0657 .
[25] Adam Coates, Andrew Ng, and Honglak Lee. 2011. An analysis of single-layer networks in unsupervised feature
learning.In Proceedings ofthe14th International Conferenceon Artificial Intelligence andStatistics . 215–223.
[26] Antonia Creswell, Tom White, Vincent Dumoulin, Kai Arulkumaran, Biswa Sengupta, and Anil A. Bharath. 2018.
Generativeadversarialnetworks: An overview. IEEESign. Process.Mag. 35,1(2018),53–65.
[27] Quanyu Dai, Qiang Li, Jian Tang, and Dan Wang. 2018. Adversarial network embedding. In Proceedings of the 32nd
AAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence .
[28] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Fan Yang, William W. Cohen, and Ruslan R. Salakhutdinov. 2017. Good semi-supervised
learningthatrequires a badGAN. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .6510–6520.
[29] GiannisDaras,AugustusOdena,HanZhang,andAlexandrosG.Dimakis.2020.YourlocalGAN:Designingtwodi-
mensionallocalattentionmechanismsforgenerativemodels.In ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’20) .
[30] JiaDeng,WeiDong,RichardSocher,Li-JiaLi,KaiLi,andLiFei-Fei.2009.ImageNet:Alarge-scalehierarchicalimage
database.In Proceedings ofthe2009 IEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . IEEE, 248–255.
[31] EmilyL.Denton,SoumithChintala,RobFergus,etal.2015.Deepgenerativeimagemodelsusingalaplacianpyramid
of adversarial networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .1486–1494.
[32] Carl Doersch. 2016. Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders. arXiv:1606.05908 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
1606.05908 .
[33] BrianDolhanskyandCristianCantonFerrer.2018.Eyein-paintingwithexemplargenerativeadversarialnetworks.
InProceedings of theIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 7902–7911.
[34] Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. 2018. Synthesizing Audio with Generative Adversarial Net-
works.arXiv:1802.04208 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.orb/abs/1802.04208 .
[35] Jeff Donahue, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Trevor Darrell. 2016. Adversarial Feature Learning. arXiv:1605.09782 . Re-
trieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.0978 .
[36] Tzanko Donchev and Elza Farkhi. 1998. Stability and euler approximation of one-sided lipschitz differential inclu-
sions.SIAMJ.Contr.Optim. 36,2(1998),780–796.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 34 ====
37:34 Z.Wanget al.
[37] HaoDong,SimiaoYu,ChaoWu,andYikeGuo.2017.Semanticimagesynthesisviaadversariallearning.In Proceed-
ings of theIEEEInternational Conference onComputerVision .5706–5714.
[38] Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel M. Roy, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2015. Training Generative Neural Networks
viaMaximumMeanDiscrepancyOptimization. arXiv:1505.03906 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.03906 .
[39] Cristóbal Esteban, Stephanie L. Hyland, and Gunnar Rätsch. 2017. Real-valued (Medical) Time Series Generation
withRecurrent ConditionalGANs. arXiv:1706.02633 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02633 .
[40] William Fedus, Ian Goodfellow, and Andrew M. Dai. 2018. MaskGAN: Better Text Generation via Filling in the _.
arXiv:1801.07736 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07736 .
[41] Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. 2011. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In Proceedings of
the14th International Conferenceon Artificial Intelligenceand Statistics .315–323.
[42] A.A. Goldstein.1977.Optimizationof Lipschitz continuous functions. Math.Program. 13,1(1977),14–22.
[43] XinyuGong,ShiyuChang,YifanJiang,andZhangyangWang.2019.AutoGAN:Neuralarchitecturesearchforgen-
erativeadversarialnetworks. In Proceedings of theIEEEInternational Conference onComputerVision(ICCV’19) .
[44] Ian Goodfellow. 2016. NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1701.00160 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.orb/abs/1701.00160 .
[45] IanGoodfellow,JeanPouget-Abadie,MehdiMirza,BingXu,DavidWarde-Farley,SherjilOzair,AaronCourville,and
YoshuaBengio.2014.Generativeadversarialnets.In AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems .2672–2680.
[46] Arthur Gretton, Karsten M. Borgwardt, Malte J. Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. 2012. A kernel
two-sampletest. J.Mach. Learn.Res. 13,1 (Mar.2012),723–773.
[47] IshaanGulrajani,FarukAhmed,MartinArjovsky,VincentDumoulin,andAaronC.Courville.2017.Improvedtrain-
ingof wasserstein GANs.In Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems . 5767–5777.
[48] Kay Gregor Hartmann, Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, and Tonio Ball. 2018. EEG-GAN: Generative Adversarial Net-
worksforElectroencephalographicBrainSignals. arXiv:1806.01875 .Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01875 .
[49] MartinHeusel,HubertRamsauer,ThomasUnterthiner,BernhardNessler,andSeppHochreiter.2017.GANstrained
by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.6626–6637.
[50] Jean-Baptiste Hiriart-Urruty and Claude Lemaréchal. 2012. Fundamentals of Convex Analysis . Springer Science &
Business Media.
[51] Saifuddin Hitawala. 2018. Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1801.04271 (2). Retrieved
fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04271 .
[52] Yongjun Hong, Uiwon Hwang, Jaeyoon Yoo, and Sungroh Yoon. 2019. How generative adversarial networks and
their variantswork: An overview. ACMComput.Surv. 52,1(2019),10.
[53] Chih-Chung Hsu, Chia-Yen Lee, and Yi-Xiu Zhuang. 2018. Learning to detect fake face images in the wild. In Pro-
ceedings of the2018 International Symposium on Computer, ConsumerandControl(IS3C’18) . IEEE, 388–391.
[54] Jia-BinHuang,SingBingKang,NarendraAhuja,andJohannesKopf.2014.Imagecompletionusingplanarstructure
guidance. ACMTrans.Graph. 33,4(2014),1–10.
[55] Satoshi Iizuka, Edgar Simo-Serra, and Hiroshi Ishikawa. 2017. Globally and locally consistent image completion.
ACMTrans.Graph. 36,4(2017),107.
[56] DanielJiwoongIm,HeMa,GrahamTaylor,andKristinBranson.2018.QuantitativelyEvaluatingGANswithDiver-
gencesProposed forTraining. arXiv:1803.01045 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.01045 .
[57] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing
InternalCovariateShift. arXiv:1502.03167 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167 .
[58] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros. 2017. Image-to-image translation with conditional
adversarialnetworks.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .1125–1134.
[59] Nikolay Jetchev, Urs Bergmann, and Roland Vollgraf. 2016. Texture Synthesis with Spatial Generative Adversarial
Networks. arXiv:1611.08207 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.08207 .
[60] Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau. 2018. The Relativistic Discriminator: A Key Element Missing from Standard GAN.
arXiv:1807.00734 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00734 .
[61] EmmanuelKahembweandSubramanianRamamoorthy.2019.LowerDimensionalKernelsforVideoDiscriminators.
arXiv:1912.08860 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.08860 .
[62] TakuhiroKaneko,YoshitakaUshiku,andTatsuyaHarada.2019.Label-noiserobustgenerativeadversarialnetworks.
InProceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . 2467–2476.
[63] Animesh Karnewar and Oliver Wang. 2020. MSG-GAN: Multi-scale gradients for generative adversarial networks.
InProceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . 7799–7808.
[64] TeroKarras,TimoAila,SamuliLaine,andJaakkoLehtinen.2017.ProgressiveGrowingofGANsforImprovedQual-
ity,Stability,andVariation. arXiv:1710.10196 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10196 .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 35 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:35
[65] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. 2018. A Style-based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial
Networks. arXiv:1812.04948 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.04948 .
[66] TaeksooKim,MoonsuCha,HyunsooKim,JungKwonLee,andJiwonKim.2017.Learningtodiscovercross-domain
relationswithgenerativeadversarialnetworks.In Proceedingsofthe34thInternationalConferenceonMachineLearn-
ing, Volume 70.1857–1865.
[67] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-encoding Variational Bayes. arXiv:1312.6114 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 .
[68] Naveen Kodali, Jacob Abernethy, James Hays, and Zsolt Kira. 2017. On Convergence and Stability of GANs.
arXiv:1705.07215 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07215 .
[69] Jean Kossaifi, Linh Tran, Yannis Panagakis, and Maja Pantic. 2018. GANGAN: Geometry-aware generative adver-
sarial networks. In Proceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . 878–887.
[70] AlexKrizhevskyandGeoffreyHinton.2009. LearningMultipleLayersofFeaturesfromTinyImages .TechnicalReport.
Citeseer.
[71] Karol Kurach, Mario Lucic, Xiaohua Zhai, Marcin Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly. 2018. The GAN Landscape: Losses,
Architectures,Regularization,andNormalization. arXiv:1807.04720 .Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04720 .
[72] Christoph Lassner, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Peter V. Gehler. 2017. A generative model of people in clothing. In Pro-
ceedings oftheIEEEInternational ConferenceonComputer Vision .853–862.
[73] YannLeCun,LéonBottou,YoshuaBengio,PatrickHaffner,etal.1998.Gradient-basedlearningappliedtodocument
recognition. Proc. IEEE 86,11(1998),2278–2324.
[74] Christian Ledig, Lucas Theis, Ferenc Huszár, Jose Caballero, Andrew Cunningham, Alejandro Acosta, Andrew
Aitken, Alykhan Tejani, Johannes Totz, Zehan Wang, et al. 2017. Photo-realistic single image super-resolution us-
ing a generative adversarial network. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . IEEE, 105–114.
[75] Dan Li, Dacheng Chen, Lei Shi, Baihong Jin, Jonathan Goh, and See-Kiong Ng. 2019. MAD-GAN: Multivariate
Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1901.04997 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.04997 .
[76] JiweiLi,WillMonroe,AlanRitter,MichelGalley,JianfengGao,andDanJurafsky.2016.DeepReinforcementLearn-
ing forDialogueGeneration. arXiv:1606.01541 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01541 .
[77] Yijun Li, Sifei Liu, Jimei Yang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 2017. Generative face completion. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 3911–3919.
[78] Yujia Li, Alexander Schwing, Kuan-Chieh Wang, and Richard Zemel. 2017. Dualing GANs. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems .5606–5616.
[79] Yujia Li, Kevin Swersky, and Rich Zemel. 2015. Generative moment matching networks. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conferenceon Machine Learning . 1718–1727.
[80] JaeHyunLimandJongChulYe.2017.GeometricGAN. arXiv:1705.02894 .Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.
02894.
[81] Cheng-LinLiu,FeiYin,Da-HanWang,andQiu-FengWang.2013.Onlineandofflinehandwrittenchinesecharacter
recognition: Benchmarking onnew databases. Pattern Recogn. 46,1(2013),155–162.
[82] Ming-YuLiu,ThomasBreuel,andJanKautz.2017.Unsupervisedimage-to-imagetranslationnetworks.In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems . 700–708.
[83] Ming-Yu Liu and Oncel Tuzel. 2016. Coupled generative adversarial networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems .469–477.
[84] ZiweiLiu,PingLuo,XiaogangWang,andXiaoouTang.2018.Deeplearningfaceattributesinthewild.In Proceedings
of International ConferenceonComputer Vision(ICCV’15) .
[85] JonathanLong,EvanShelhamer,andTrevorDarrell.2015.Fullyconvolutionalnetworksforsemanticsegmentation.
InProceedings of theIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 3431–3440.
[86] PaulineLuc,CamilleCouprie,SoumithChintala,andJakobVerbeek.2016.SemanticSegmentationUsingAdversarial
Networks. arXiv:1611.08408 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.08408 .
[87] Yonghong Luo, Xiangrui Cai, Ying Zhang, Jun Xu, et al. 2018. Multivariate time series imputation with generative
adversarial networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .1596–1607.
[88] Sebastian Lutz, Konstantinos Amplianitis, and Aljosa Smolic. 2018. AlphaGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks
for NaturalImageMatting. arXiv:1807.10088 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10088 .
[89] LiqianMa,XuJia,QianruSun,BerntSchiele,TinneTuytelaars,andLucVanGool.2017.Poseguidedpersonimage
generation.In Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems . 406–416.
[90] Shuang Ma, Jianlong Fu, Chang Wen Chen, and Tao Mei. 2018. DA-GAN: Instance-level image translation by deep
attention generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 5657–5666.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 36 ====
37:36 Z.Wanget al.
[91] Dwarikanath Mahapatra, Behzad Bozorgtabar, and Rahil Garnavi. 2019. Image super-resolution using progressive
generativeadversarial networks for medicalimageanalysis. Comput.Med. Imag. Graph. 71(2019),30–39.
[92] Dwarikanath Mahapatra, Behzad Bozorgtabar, Sajini Hewavitharanage, and Rahil Garnavi. 2017. Image super res-
olution using generative adversarial networks and local saliency maps for retinal image analysis. In Proceedings of
theInternational ConferenceonMedical Image Computing and Computer-AssistedIntervention .Springer,382–390.
[93] DevrajMandal,SanathNarayan,SaiKumarDwivedi,VikramGupta,ShuaibAhmed,FahadShahbazKhan,andLing
Shao. 2019. Out-of-distribution detection for generalized zero-shot action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conferenceon Computer Vision andPattern Recognition . 9985–9993.
[94] XudongMao,QingLi,HaoranXie,RaymondY.K.Lau,ZhenWang,andStephenPaulSmolley.2017.Leastsquares
generativeadversarial networks. In Proceedings ofthe 2017 IEEE International Conference onComputer Vision . IEEE,
2813–2821.
[95] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond Y. K. Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. 2018. On the ef-
fectiveness of least squares generative adversarial networks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 41, 12 (2018),
2947–2960.
[96] James Stephen Marron, Michael J. Todd, and Jeongyoun Ahn. 2007. Distance-weighted discrimination. J. Am. Stat.
Assoc.102,480(2007),1267–1271.
[97] Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. 1989. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential
learningproblem.In Psychology ofLearning and Motivation .Vol. 24.Elsevier,109–165.
[98] Luke Metz, Ben Poole, David Pfau, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. 2016. Unrolled Generative Adversarial Networks.
arXiv:1611.02163 . Retrievedfrom http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.02163 .
[99] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets. arXiv:1411.1784 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784 .
[100] TakeruMiyato,ToshikiKataoka,MasanoriKoyama,andYuichiYoshida.2018.SpectralNormalizationforGenerative
Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1802.05957 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05957 .
[101] Alfred Müller. 1997. Integral probability metrics and their generating classes of functions. Adv. Appl. Probab. 29, 2
(1997),429–443.
[102] Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2011. Reading digits in
natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature
Learning.
[103] Frank Nielsen and Richard Nock. 2013. On the chi square and higher-order chi distances for approximating f-
divergences. IEEESign. Process.Lett. 21,1(2013),10–13.
[104] Sebastian Nowozin, Botond Cseke, and Ryota Tomioka. 2016. f-GAN: Training generative neural samplers using
variationaldivergenceminimization.In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .271–279.
[105] Augustus Odena. 2016. Semi-supervised Learning with Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1606.01583 . Re-
trievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01583 .
[106] AugustusOdena,ChristopherOlah,andJonathonShlens.2017.Conditionalimagesynthesiswithauxiliaryclassifier
gans.InProceedings ofthe34th International ConferenceonMachine Learning , Vol.70.2642–2651.
[107] Junting Pan, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Kevin McGuinness, Noel E. O’Connor, Jordi Torres, Elisa Sayrol, and Xavier
Giro-i Nieto. 2017. SalGAN: Visual Saliency Prediction with Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1701.01081 .
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.01081 .
[108] SungWooParkandJunseokKwon.2019.Spheregenerativeadversarialnetworkbasedongeometricmomentmatch-
ing.InProceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition (CVPR’19) .
[109] PascalPaysan,ReinhardKnothe,BrianAmberg,SamiRomdhani,andThomasVetter.2009.A3Dfacemodelforpose
andilluminationinvariantfacerecognition.In Proceedingsofthe20096thIEEEInternationalConferenceonAdvanced
Videoand Signal Based Surveillance . IEEE, 296–301.
[110] Ben Poole, Alexander A. Alemi, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Anelia Angelova. 2016. Improved Generator Objectives
forGANs. arXiv:1612.02780 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.02780 .
[111] Guo-Jun Qi. 2017. Loss-sensitive Generative Adversarial Networks on Lipschitz Densities. arXiv:1701.06264 . Re-
trievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06264 .
[112] Zhaofan Qiu, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei. 2017. Deep semantic hashing with generative adversarial net-
works. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. ACM,225–234.
[113] AlecRadford,LukeMetz,andSoumithChintala.2015.UnsupervisedRepresentationLearningwithDeepConvolu-
tionalGenerativeAdversarial Networks. arXiv:1511.06434 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434 .
[114] Scott Reed,ZeynepAkata, Xinchen Yan,LajanugenLogeswaran,Bernt Schiele, andHonglak Lee.2016.Generative
Adversarial Textto ImageSynthesis. arXiv:1605.05396 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.05396 .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 37 ====
Generative Adversarial Networks inComputer Vision:A Survey andTaxonomy 37:37
[115] YossiRubner,CarloTomasi,andLeonidasJ.Guibas.2000.Theearthmover’sdistanceasametricforimageretrieval.
Int.J.Comput. Vis. 40,2 (2000),99–121.
[116] Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. 2016. Progressive Neural Networks. arXiv:1606.04671 . Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/1606.04671 .
[117] TimSalimans,IanGoodfellow,WojciechZaremba,VickiCheung,AlecRadford,andXiChen.2016.Improvedtech-
niques fortrainingGANs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .2234–2242.
[118] TimSalimansandDurkP.Kingma.2016.Weightnormalization:Asimplereparameterizationtoacceleratetraining
of deep neuralnetworks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .901–909.
[119] HanulShin,JungKwonLee,JaehongKim,andJiwonKim.2017.Continuallearningwithdeepgenerativereplay.In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .2990–2999.
[120] Konstantin Shmelkov, Cordelia Schmid, and Karteek Alahari. 2018. How good is my GAN? In Proceedings of the
European ConferenceonComputer Vision(ECCV’18) .213–229.
[121] JiamingSongandStefanoErmon.2019.BridgingtheGapbetween f-GANsandWassersteinGANs. arXiv:1910.09779 .
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09779 .
[122] Nasim Souly, Concetto Spampinato, and Mubarak Shah. 2017. Semi supervised semantic segmentation using gen-
erativeadversarial network.In Proceedings oftheIEEEInternational ConferenceonComputer Vision .5688–5696.
[123] BharathK.Sriperumbudur,KenjiFukumizu,ArthurGretton,BernhardSchölkopf,andGertR.G.Lanckriet.2009.On
Integral Probability Metrics, ϕ-divergences and Binary Classification. arXiv:0901.2698 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.
org/abs/0901.2698 .
[124] Lucas Theis, Aäron van den Oord, and Matthias Bethge. 2015. A Note on the Evaluation of Generative Models.
arXiv:1511.01844 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.01844 .
[125] Matteo Tomei, Marcella Cornia, Lorenzo Baraldi, and Rita Cucchiara. 2018. Art2Real: Unfolding the Reality of Art-
works via Semantically-aware Image-to-image Translation. arXiv:1811.10666 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
1811.10666 .
[126] SergeyTulyakov,Ming-YuLiu,XiaodongYang,andJanKautz.2018.MoCoGAN:Decomposingmotionandcontent
for video generation.In Proceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer Visionand PatternRecognition . 1526–1535.
[127] Alan M.Turing. 2009.Computingmachinery andintelligence.In Parsing theTuring Test .Springer,23–65.
[128] MehmetOzgurTurkoglu,LuukSpreeuwers,WilliamThong,andBerkayKicanaoglu.2019.Alayer-basedsequential
frameworkfor scenegeneration withGANs.In Proceedings of the33rd AAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence .
[129] AshishVaswani,NoamShazeer,NikiParmar,JakobUszkoreit,LlionJones,AidanN.Gomez,ŁukaszKaiser,andIllia
Polosukhin. 2017.Attentionis allyou need.In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .5998–6008.
[130] CarlVondrick,HamedPirsiavash,andAntonioTorralba.2016.Generatingvideoswithscenedynamics.In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems . 613–621.
[131] Kunfeng Wang, Chao Gou, Yanjie Duan, Yilun Lin, Xinhu Zheng, and Fei-Yue Wang. 2017. Generative adversarial
networks: Introduction andoutlook. IEEE/CAAJ.Autom.Sin. 4,4(2017),588–598.
[132] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2018. High-resolution
image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional GANs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8798–8807.
[133] XintaoWang,KeYu,ShixiangWu,JinjinGu,YihaoLiu,ChaoDong,YuQiao,andChenChangeLoy.2018.ESRGAN:
Enhancedsuper-resolutiongenerativeadversarialnetworks.In ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputer
VisionWorkshop .
[134] Zhengwei Wang, Graham Healy, Alan F. Smeaton, and Tomas E. Ward. 2020. Use of neural signals to evaluate the
qualityofgenerativeadversarialnetworkperformanceinfacialimagegeneration. Cogn.Comput. 12,1(2020),13–24.
[135] ZhengweiWang,QiShe,AlanF.Smeaton,TomasE.Ward,andGrahamHealy.2020.Synthetic-neuroscore:Usinga
neuro-ai interfacefor evaluatinggenerativeadversarialnetworks. Neurocomputing 405(2020),26–36.
[136] HuikaiWu,ShuaiZheng,JungeZhang,andKaiqiHuang.2017.GP-GAN:TowardsRealisticHigh-resolutionImage
Blending. arXiv:1703.07195 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07195 .
[137] YuanboXiangli,YubinDeng,BoDai,ChenChangeLoy,andDahuaLin.2020.RealorNotReal,ThatIstheQuestion.
arXiv:2002.05512 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05512 .
[138] Qiantong Xu, Gao Huang, Yang Yuan, Chuan Guo, Yu Sun, Felix Wu, and Kilian Weinberger. 2018. An Empirical
Study on Evaluation Metrics of Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1806.07755 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.
org/abs/1806.07755 .
[139] ChaoYang,XinLu,ZheLin,EliShechtman,OliverWang,andHaoLi.2017.High-resolutionimageinpaintingusing
multi-scaleneuralpatchsynthesis.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .
6721–6729.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

==== Page 38 ====
37:38 Z.Wanget al.
[140] Jimei Yang, Brian Price, Scott Cohen, Honglak Lee, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 2016. Object contour detection with a
fullyconvolutionalencoder-decodernetwork.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPattern
Recognition . 193–202.
[141] Zhilin Yang, Junjie Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and William Cohen. 2017. Semi-supervised QA with generative
domain-adaptive nets. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume1: LongPapers) .1040–1050.
[142] Raymond A. Yeh, Chen Chen, Teck Yian Lim, Alexander G. Schwing, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, and Minh N. Do.
2017. Semantic image inpainting with deep generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision andPattern Recognition . 5485–5493.
[143] Zili Yi, Hao Zhang, Ping Tan, and Minglun Gong. 2017. DualGAN: Unsupervised dual learning for image-to-image
translation.In Proceedings oftheIEEEInternational ConferenceOnComputer Vision .2849–2857.
[144] Yuichi Yoshida and Takeru Miyato. 2017. Spectral Norm Regularization for Improving the Generalizability of Deep
Learning. arXiv:1705.10941 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.10941 .
[145] Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. 2015. Lsun: Construction
of a Large-scale Image Dataset Using Deep Learning with Humans in the Loop. arXiv:1506.03365 . Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03365 .
[146] JiahuiYu,ZheLin,JimeiYang,XiaohuiShen,XinLu,andThomasS.Huang.2018.GenerativeImageInpaintingwith
ContextualAttention. arXiv:1801.07892 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07892 .
[147] LantaoYu,WeinanZhang,JunWang,andYongYu.2017.SeqGAN:Sequencegenerativeadversarialnetswithpolicy
gradient.In Proceedings ofthe31stAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence .
[148] Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. 2014. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In Proceedings of
theEuropean ConferenceonComputerVision .Springer, 818–833.
[149] Han Zhang, Ian Goodfellow, Dimitris Metaxas, and Augustus Odena. 2018. Self-attention Generative Adversarial
Networks. arXiv:1805.08318 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.08318 .
[150] HanZhang,TaoXu,HongshengLi,ShaotingZhang,XiaogangWang,XiaoleiHuang,andDimitrisN.Metaxas.2017.
Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of
theIEEEInternational ConferenceonComputerVision .5907–5915.
[151] Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. 2016. Energy-based Generative Adversarial Network.
arXiv:1609.03126 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03126 .
[152] Jun-YanZhu,PhilippKrähenbühl,EliShechtman,andAlexeiA.Efros.2016.Generativevisualmanipulationonthe
naturalimagemanifold.In Proceedings of theEuropean ConferenceonComputerVision .Springer, 597–613.
[153] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. 2017. Unpaired Image-to-image Translation Using
Cycle-consistent Adversarial Networks. arXiv:1703.10593v6 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10593v6 .
[154] Jun-YanZhu,RichardZhang,DeepakPathak,TrevorDarrell,AlexeiA.Efros,OliverWang,andEliShechtman.2017.
Towardmultimodalimage-to-imagetranslation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .465–476.
[155] WentaoZhu,XiangXiang,TracD.Tran,andXiaohuiXie.2016.AdversarialDeepStructuralNetworksforMammo-
graphicMass Segmentation. arXiv:1612.05970 . Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05970 .
Received November 2019; revised September 2020; accepted November 2020
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 2,Article 37.Publicationdate:February 2021.

