==== Page 1 ====
1
Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving Random
Forest Proximities
Jake S. Rhodes, Adele Cutler, and Kevin R. Moon
Abstract —Random forests are considered one of the best out-of-the-box classiﬁcation and regression algorithms due to their high
level of predictive performance with relatively little tuning. Pairwise proximities can be computed from a trained random forest and
measure the similarity between data points relative to the supervised task. Random forest proximities have been used in many
applications including the identiﬁcation of variable importance, data imputation, outlier detection, and data visualization. However,
existing deﬁnitions of random forest proximities do not accurately reﬂect the data geometry learned by the random forest. In this paper,
we introduce a novel deﬁnition of random forest proximities called Random Forest-Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving proximities
(RF-GAP). We prove that the proximity-weighted sum (regression) or majority vote (classiﬁcation) using RF-GAP exactly matches the
out-of-bag random forest prediction, thus capturing the data geometry learned by the random forest. We empirically show that this
improved geometric representation outperforms traditional random forest proximities in tasks such as data imputation and provides
outlier detection and visualization results consistent with the learned data geometry.
Index Terms —Random Forests; Proximities; Supervised Learning
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
RANDOM forests [1] are well-known, powerful pre-
dictors comprised of an ensemble of binary recursive
decision trees. Random forests are easily adapted for both
classiﬁcation and regression, are trivially parallelizable, can
handle mixed variable types (continuous and categorical),
are unaffected by monotonic transformations, are insensi-
tive to outliers, scale to small and large datasets, handle
missing values, are capable of modeling non-linear inter-
actions, and are robust to noise variables [1], [2]. Random
forests are simple to use, produce good results with little
to no tuning, and can be applied to a wide variety of
ﬁelds. Citing some recent examples, Benali et al. [3] demon-
strated superior solar radiation prediction using random
forests over neural networks. The work of [4] showed that
random forests produced the best results with the lowest
standard errors in classifying error types in rotating ma-
chinery when compared with more commonly used models
in this application, such as the SVM and neural networks.
Other recent successes include patient health prediction
after exposure to COVID-19 [5], spatio-temporal COVID-
19 case estimation [6], landslide susceptibility mapping [7],
infectious diarrhea forecasting [8], cardiovascular disease
prediction [9], deforestation rate prediction [10], nanoﬂuid
viscosity estimation [11], rural credit assessment [12], RNA
pseudouridine site prediction [13], wearable-sensor activity
classiﬁcation [14], heavy metal distribution estimation in
agricultural soils [15], and cell type classiﬁcation via Raman
spectroscopy [16].
In addition to their high predictive power, random
forests have a natural extension to produce pair-wise prox-
imity (similarity) measures determined by the partitioning
Jake S. Rhodes is with Idaho State University
Adele Cutler and Kevin R. Moon are with Utah State University
Email: jakerhodes@isu.edu, adele.culter@usu.edu, kevin.moon@usu.eduspace of the decision trees which comprise them. The ran-
dom forest proximity measure between two observations
was ﬁrst deﬁned by Leo Breiman as the proportion of
trees in which the observations reside in the same terminal
node [17]. As splitting variable values are found to optimize
partitioning according to the supervised task, these proxim-
ities encode a supervised similarity measure.
Many machine learning methods depend on some mea-
sure of pairwise similarity (which is usually unsupervised)
including dimensionality reduction methods [18], [19], [20],
[21], [22], [23], [24], spectral clustering [25], and any method
involving the kernel trick such as SVM [26] and kernel
PCA [27]. Random forest proximities can be used to extend
many unsupervised problems to a supervised setting and
have been used for data visualization [28], [29], [30], [31],
[32], outlier detection [31], [33], [34], [35], and data imputa-
tion [36], [37], [38], [39]. See Section 2 for further discussion
of random forest proximity applications.
Unlike unsupervised similarity measures, random forest
proximities incorporate variable importance relative to the
supervised task as these variables are more likely to be
used in determining splits in the decision trees [2]. Ideally,
random forest proximities should deﬁne a data geometry
that is consistent with the learned random forest; that is,
the random forest predictive ability should be recoverable
from the proximities. In this case, applications involving
random forest proximities, such as data visualization, can
lead to improved interpretability of the random forests
speciﬁcally, and more generally the data geometry relative
to the supervised task.
One way to test if the proximity-deﬁned geometry is
consistent with the learned random forest is to compute
a proximity-weighted predictor where a data point’s pre-
dicted label consists of a proximity-weighted sum of the
labels of all other points. This predictor should match the
random forest’s predictions if the proximities are capturingarXiv:2201.12682v2  [stat.ML]  28 Feb 2023

==== Page 2 ====
2
the random forest’s learning. In particular, matching the
random forest’s out-of-bag predictions is a good indication
that the proximities capture the random forest’s learned data
geometry in an unbiased fashion as the out-of-bag samples
were not used to construct the tree. Under Breiman’s orig-
inal deﬁnition, the proximity-weighed predictions do not
match the random forest’s out-of-bag predictions when ap-
plied to the training data (see Section 5). Thus, this deﬁnition
does not capture the data geometry learned by the random
forest, limiting its potential for improved interpretability
of the random forest. Indeed, this inconsistency negatively
affects random forest proximity applications such as data
visualization and imputation.
We deﬁne a new random forest proximity measure
called Random Forest-Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving
proximities (RF-GAP) that deﬁnes a data geometry such
that the proximity-weighted predictions exactly match those
of the random forest for both regression and classiﬁcation
problems. Under our deﬁnition, an out-of-bag observation’s
proximities are computed via in-bag (training) observations.
That is, the sample used to generate a decision tree also
generates the proximities of out-of-bag observations.
RF-GAP is purposefully designed to match the random
forest predictions and follows the same schema for a classi-
ﬁcation or regression learning problem. Random forests use
in-bag observations or “voting points” [40] within terminal
nodes to make predictions. For our deﬁnition, the prox-
imities between out-of-bag observations are weights gen-
erated using the counts of in-bag observations sharing the
same terminal node. We prove the equivalence between the
proximity-weighted predictions with those of the random
forest and demonstrate this empirically. In this sense, RF-
GAP proximities preserve the data geometry as viewed by
the random forest’s learning. We compare RF-GAP prox-
imities with existing random forest proximities in common
applications: data imputation, visualization, and outlier de-
tection. In these applications, RF-GAP outperforms existing
deﬁnitions, empirically showing clear beneﬁts from the im-
proved random forest geometry representation.
2 R ANDOM FOREST PROXIMITY APPLICATIONS
Random forest proximities have been used in many appli-
cations such as visualization via dimensionality reduction
or clustering. Unsupervised random-forest clustering was
introduced by Shi and Horvath in [41]. In this paper, they
applied both classical and metric multi-dimensional scaling
(MDS) to a number of datasets. Pouyan et al. used un-
supervised random forest proximity matrices to generate
2D plots for visualization using t-SNE [28]. This approach
was used to visualize two Mass cytometry data sets and
provided clearer visual results over other compared distance
metrics (Euclidean, Chebyshev, and Canberra). Similarly,
[30] used an unsupervised random forest for clustering
tumor proﬁlings and showed improvement over other com-
mon clustering algorithms with microarray data. Random
forest proximities have also been used in the supervised
setting for visualizing the data via dimensionality reduction,
typically via MDS [31], [42], but other approaches have
been used [32]. However, these approaches use a proximity
deﬁnition that does not match the data geometry learned bythe random forest. Thus the visualizations do not give an
accurate representation of the random forest’s learning.
Random forest proximities have also been used in outlier
detection in a supervised setting. An observation’s outlier
score is typically deﬁned to be inversely proportional to
its average within-class proximity measure (see Section 6.3
for details). This approach was used to achieve better ran-
dom forest error rates in both classiﬁcation and regres-
sion in pathway analysis [31]. Nesa et al. demonstrated
the superiority of random forests for detecting errors and
events across the internet of things (IoT) device sensors
over other multivariate outlier detection methods [43]. The
random forest outlier detection algorithm has been effective
in other contexts such as modeling species distribution [44],
detecting food adulteration via infrared spectroscopy [45],
predicting galaxy spectral measurements [46], and detecting
network anomalies [47].
Another application of random forest proximities is data
imputation. This is accomplished by replacing missing val-
ues of a given variable with a proximity-weighted sum of
non-missing values. Pantanowitz and Marwala used this
approach to impute missing data in the context of HIV
seroprevalence [38]. They compared their results with ﬁve
additional imputation methods, including neural networks,
and random forest-neural network hybrids, and concluded
that random forest imputation produced the most accurate
results with the lowest standard errors. Shah et al. compared
random forest imputation with multivariate imputation by
chained equations (MICE [48]) on cardiovascular health
records data [39]. They showed that random forest imputa-
tion methods typically produced more accurate results and
that in some circumstances MICE gave biased results under
default parameterization. In [36] it was similarly shown that
random forests produced the most accurate imputation in a
comprehensive metabolomics imputation study.
Variable importance assessment is another application
of random forest proximities. One approach is to use dif-
ferences in proximity measures as a criterion for assessing
variable permutation importance [49]. Variable selection
criteria were compared across various data sets and some
improvement over existing variable importance measures
was achieved. In [50], feature contributions to the random
forest decision space (deﬁned by proximities) are explored.
While many measures of variable importance are generally
computed at a global level, the authors propose a bitwise,
permutation-based feature importance which captures both
the contribution (inﬂuence of the feature in the decision
space) and closeness (position in the decision space rela-
tive to the in- and out-class), giving further insight to the
contribution of each feature at the terminal node level.
Multi-modal/multiview problems can also be ap-
proached using random forest proximities. Gray et al. ad-
ditively combined random forest proximities from different
modalities or views (FDG-PET and MR imaging) of persons
with Alzheimer’s disease or with mild cognitive impair-
ment. They applied MDS to the combined proximities to
create an embedding used for classiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation
on the multi-modal embedding showed signiﬁcantly better
results than classiﬁcation on both modes separately [29].
Cao, Bernard, Sabourin, and Heutte explored variations of
proximity-based classiﬁcation techniques in the context of

==== Page 3 ====
3
multi-view radiomics problems [51]. They compared with
the work from [29] and joined proximity matrices using
linear combinations. The authors explored random forest
parameters to determine the quality of the proximity matri-
ces. They concluded that a large number of maximum-depth
trees produced the best quality proximities, quantiﬁed using
a one-nearest neighbor classiﬁer. Using our proposed ran-
dom forest proximity measure which accurately reﬂects the
random forest predictions from each view may add to the
success of this method, thus creating a truer forest ensemble
for multi-view learning.
Seoane et al. proposed the use of random forest proximi-
ties to measure gene annotations with some improvement in
precision over other existing methods [52]. Zhao et al. pre-
sented two matching methods for observational studies, one
propensity-based and the other random forest-proximity-
based [53]. For the random forest approach, subjects of
different classes were iteratively matched according to the
nearest proximity values. They showed that proximity-
based matching was superior to propensity matching in
addition to other existing matching techniques.
All of these applications used existing deﬁnitions of
random forest proximities that do not match the data ge-
ometry learned by the random forest. In contrast, RF-GAP
accurately reﬂects this geometry. Thus, the applications pre-
sented here should show improvement using our deﬁnition.
Indeed, we show experimentally in Section 5 that using
RG-GAP gives data visualizations that more accurately
represent the geometry learned from the random forests,
outlier scores that are more reﬂective of the random forest’s
learning, and improved random forest imputations.
3 R ANDOM FOREST PROXIMITIES
Here we provide several existing deﬁnitions of random
forest proximities followed by RF-GAP which preserves
the geometry learned by the random forest. Let M=
f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);(xN; yN)gbe the training data where
eachxi2X , is ad-dimensional vector of predictor variables
with corresponding response, yi2Y.
The strength of the random forest is highly dependent
on the predictive power of the individual decision trees
(base learners) and on the low correlation between the
decision trees [17], [54]. To decrease the correlation between
the decision trees, a bootstrap sample of the training data
is used to train each decision tree t. Each decision tree
tin a random forest is grown by recursively partitioning
(splitting) the bootstrap sample into nodes, where splits are
determined across a subset of feature variables to maximize
purity (classiﬁcation) or minimize the mean squares of the
residuals (regression) in the resulting nodes. This process
repeats until a stopping criterion is met. For classiﬁcation,
splits are typically continued until nodes are pure (one
class). For regression, a common stopping criterion is a
predetermined minimum node size (e.g., 5). The trees in
random forests are typically not pruned.
In addition to bootstrap sampling, further correlational
decrease between trees is ensured by selecting a random
subset of predictor variables at each node for split optimiza-
tion. The number of variables to be considered is designated
Fig. 1. An example of a random forest and notation with regards to a
particular observation x1. The red-encircled trees are those in which x1
is out of bag, making up the set of trees S1. A particular tree in S1is
exhibited. The out-of-bag indices for the tree are given in red (i2O(t)),
while the in-bag indices (i2B(t))are shown in black. The indices of
observations residing in the same terminal node as x1are given by the
setv1(t).J1(t)gives the in-bag observation indices in the terminal node
v1(t), while M1(t)provides the corresponding multiset. c4(t)denotes
the number of repetitions of observation x4in the tree t.
by the parameter mtry in some random forest packages
(e.g., randomForest [55] and ranger [56]).
We will use the following notation to deﬁne random
forest proximities (see Figure 1 for a visual example):
Tis the set of decision trees in a random forest trained
onMwithjTj=T.
B(t)is the multiset of indices in the bootstrap sample
of the training data that is randomly selected to train
the tree t2T . Thus B(t)contains the indices of the
in-bag observations.
O(t) =fi= 1; : : : ; nji =2B(t)g. Thus O(t)is the set
of indices of the training data that are not contained in
B(t).O(t)is often referred to as the out-of-bag (OOB)
sample.
Si=ft2Tji2O(t)g. This is the set of trees in which
theith observation is OOB.
vi(t)contains the indices of all observations that end
up in the same terminal node as xiin tree t.
Ji(t) =vi(t)\B(t). This is the set of indices in vi(t)
that correspond with the in-bag observations of t. I.e.,

==== Page 4 ====
4
these are the observations that are in-bag and end up in
the same terminal node as xi.
Mi(t)is the multiset of in-bag indices in the terminal
node shared with the ith observation in tree tincluding
multiplicities.
cj(t)is the in-bag multiplicity of the observation j
in tree t.cj(t) := 0 if observation jis OOB. Thus,PN
j=1cj(t) =N.
The terminal nodes of a random forest partition the input
spaceX. This partition is often used in deﬁning random
forest proximities as in Breiman’s original deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 1 (Original Random Forest Proximity [17]) .The
random forest proximity between observations iandjis given by:
pOr(i; j) =1
TTX
t=1I(j2vi(t));
where Tis the number of trees in the forest, vi(t)contains the
indices of observations that end up in the same terminal node
asxiin tree t, and I(:)is the indicator function. That is, the
proximity between observations iandjis the proportion of trees
in which they reside in the same terminal node, regardless of
bootstrap status.
Deﬁnition 1 (the original deﬁnition) does not capture the
data geometry learned by the random forest as it does not
take an observation’s bootstrap status (whether or not the
observation was used in the training of any particular tree)
into account in the proximity calculation: both in-bag and
out-of-bag samples are used and equally weighted. In-bag
observations of different classes will necessarily terminate
in different nodes (as trees are grown until pure). Thus
this produces an over-exaggerated class separation in the
proximity values.
Despite these weaknesses, this deﬁnition has been used
for outlier detection, data imputation, and visualization.
However, these applications may produce misleading re-
sults as this deﬁnition tends to overﬁt the training data,
quantiﬁed by low error rates as proximity-weighted pre-
dictors. One attempt to overcome this issue redeﬁnes the
proximity measure between observations iandjusing
only trees in which both observations are out-of-bag (OOB
proximities):
Deﬁnition 2 (OOB Proximity [55], [57]) .The OOB proximity
between observations with indices iandjis given by:
pOOB(i; j) =P
t2SiI(j2O(t)\vi(t))P
t2SiI(j2O(t));
where O(t)denotes the set of indices of the observations that are
out-of-bag in tree t, andSiis the set of trees for which observation
iis out-of-bag. In other words, this proximity measures the
proportion of trees in which observations iandjreside in the
same terminal node, both being out-of-bag.
Deﬁnition 2 [57] is currently used in the
randomForest [55] package by Liaw and Wiener in
theRprogramming language [58]. It may have been
inadvertently used in papers that used this package
but, none made explicit mention of the use of OOB
observations in building proximities. However, we ﬁndthat this deﬁnition also does not characterize the random
forest predictions and generally produces higher error
rates as a proximity-weighted predictor when compared
to the random forest’s OOB error rate (see Section 5). The
reason that the results do not match is two-fold. First,
this deﬁnition does not directly use in-bag observations.
A classiﬁcation or regression forest trains on a training
set (in-bag set) and predicts on an unseen test set (OOB
observations). Thus the OOB proximities are missing a
key factor in the random forest behavior. Second, random
forest predictions are made by voting or averaging in-bag
labels. In contrast, the OOB proximities are generated
without regard to the number of observations within a
given terminal node.
Several alternative random forest proximity measures
beyond Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 have been proposed. In each
case, source code has not been provided. In [59], the authors
deﬁne a proximity-based kernel (PBK) that accounts for the
number of branches between observations in each decision
tree, deﬁning the proximity between iandjaspPBK(i; j) =
1
TPT
t=11
ewgijt, where Tis the number of trees in the forest,
wis a user-deﬁned parameter, and gijtis the number of
branches between observations iandjin tree t.gis deﬁned
to be 0 if the observations reside in the same terminal node.
The proximity quality was quantiﬁed using the classiﬁcation
accuracy when applied as a kernel in a support-vector
machine. This deﬁnition showed some improvement over
the original deﬁnition (Deﬁnition 1) only when considering
very small numbers of trees (5 or 10). It should be noted
that this kernel is an attempt to improve random-forest-
based similarity measures and not necessarily to explain the
random forest. However, PBK is computationally expensive
as all pair-wise branch distances must be computed within
each tree. This is not an issue for small numbers of trees,
but typically the number of trees in a random forest is
measured in hundreds ( randomForest [55] has a default
of 500 trees). Additionally, this method adds a user-deﬁned,
tunable parameter which adds to its complexity.
The authors in [60] describe an approach for computing
random forest proximities in the context of a larger class
of Random Partitioning Kernels. While most random forest
proximities are determined primarily through associations
within terminal nodes, this approach selects a random tree
height and partitions the data based on this higher-level
splitting. The authors do not compare with other proximity
deﬁnitions nor do they frame their work in the context
of random forest proximities, but they do compare this
random forest kernel to other typical kernels (linear, RBF,
etc.) using a log-likelihood test. The random forest kernel
outperformed the others in most cases and the authors
visually demonstrated their kernel using 2D PCA plots. The
code for this approach is not publicly available.
Cao et al. introduced two random forest dissimilarity
measures that were used in the context of multi-view
classiﬁcation [61]. The ﬁrst measure (denoted RFDisNC)
weights the proximity values by the proportion of correctly-
classiﬁed observations within each node, accounting for
both in- and out-of-bag observations. The second (RFDisIH)
is based on instance hardness. Euclidean distances between
observations at each terminal node are calculated using
only feature variables that were used as splitting variables

==== Page 5 ====
5
leading to the terminal node to avoid the curse of dimen-
sionality. These distances are then used as weights as a part
of the dissimilarity measure. Given this distance, they use
k-Disagreeing Neighbors (DN) in the formulation of the
dissimilarity measure:
dt(xi;xj) =kDN (xj);ifvi(t) =vj(t)
1; otherwise;
where
kDN (xi) =jfxj:xj2kNN (xi); yj6=yigj
k;
where kNN (xi)is the set of the k-nearest neighbors of xi
in the training data.
The use of k-DN gives a notion of difﬁculty in classi-
fying a particular observation. In the multiview problem,
the dissimilarities from different views are averaged before
classiﬁcation. The authors showed that RFDisIH performed
better overall on classiﬁcation tasks compared with other
multi-view methods. However, RFDisIH was not compared
with other random forest proximities in their commonly-
used applications (e.g., visualization or imputation). A sim-
ilarity measure can be constructed from RFDisIH as RF-
ProxIH = 1 RFDisIH. RFProxIH (adapted from RFDisIH)
is also not speciﬁcally intended to explain the random
forest’s learning but uses the partitioning space to attempt
to improve a forest-derived similarity measure.
While these alternative deﬁnitions have shown promise
in their respective applications, their connection to the data
geometry learned by the random forest is not clear. In
contrast, we present a new deﬁnition of random forest
proximities that exactly characterizes the random forest per-
formance. In short, our new proximities provide a similarity
measure that keeps the integrity of the forest.
Deﬁnition 3 (Random Forest-Geometry- and Accuracy-P-
reserving Proximities (RF-GAP)) .LetB(t)be the multiset of
(potentially repeated) indices of bootstrap (in-bag) observations.
We deﬁne Ji(t)to be the set of in-bag observations which share the
terminal node with observation iin tree t, orJi(t) =B(t)\vi(t),
andJi(t)Mi(t), which is the multiset including in-bag
repetitions. Let cj(t)be the multiplicity of the index jin the
bootstrap sample. Then, for given observations iandj, their
proximity measure is deﬁned as:
pGAP(i; j) =1
jSijX
t2Sicj(t)I(j2Ji(t))
jMi(t)j:
That is, the proximity between an observation i, and an observa-
tionjis constructed using a weighted average of the counts of j
with the reciprocal of the number of in-bag observations in each
shared terminal node serving as weights.
This proposed deﬁnition is, in part, inspired by the work
of Lin and Jeon [40], who showed that random forests be-
have as nearest-neighbor predictors with an adaptive band-
width. To see this, ﬁrst consider that for kernel methods,
such as the SVM, the prediction for the ith observation can
be written as
^yi(p) =nX
j=1p(i; j)yj;
where p(i; j)is some (potentially weighted) kernel func-
tion. A kernel function induces an inner product, and thusdeﬁnes a similarity or proximity measure. Hence, Lin and
Jeon proposed to use a proximity measure derived from the
random forest for pas their kernel.
The three main proximity measures deﬁned here ( pOr;
pOOB , and pGAP ) can be obtained by weighting the in- and
out-of-bag observations differently in the prediction of ^yi.
pOrequally weights in- and out-of-bag examples. Because
the nodes in each tree of a random forest are typically
grown to purity, the proximity measure pOroveremphasizes
class separation compared to the actual random forest when
using the proximity weighted prediction ^ypOr. In this sense,
this proximity-weighted prediction is a biased estimate of
the random forest prediction function.
On the other hand, pOOB doesn’t use any of the in-bag
observations, which are required to produce the random
forest predictions. Thus the OOB proximities are also biased
in the sense that the proximity-weighted prediction does not
match the random forest prediction function. This is true
even for large sample sizes (see Figures A.1 and A.2).
In contrast, pGAP appropriately weights both in-bag
and OOB samples such that the proximity-weighted pre-
diction matches the random forest OOB predictions for all
sample sizes. Thus using pGAP in the proximity-weighted
prediction gives an unbiased estimate of the random forest
prediction function.
OOB samples are commonly used to provide an unbi-
ased estimate of the forest’s generalization error rate [1].
Thus, we use the forest’s OOB predictions to assess the
quality of our proximities. We show in Section 4 that the
random forest OOB prediction (and thus the generalization
error rate) is reproducible as a weighted sum (for regression)
or a weighted-majority vote (for classiﬁcation) using the
proximities in Deﬁnition 3 as weights. Additionally, RF-GAP
proximity-weighted predictions of test points match those
of the random forest. Thus, this deﬁnition characterizes the
random forest’s predictions, keeping intact the learned data
geometry. Subsequently, applications using this proximity
deﬁnition will provide results that are truer to the random
forest from which the proximities are derived.
We note, however, that the RF-GAP proximities do not
form a proper similarity measure as they are not symmetric.
This is easily addressed in applications requiring symmetry
by averaging pGAP(i; j)andpGAP(j; i). This was done in
our experiments involving multi-dimensional scaling. In
Figure A.3, we also demonstrate that the RF-GAP prox-
imities become more symmetric as the number of trees
increases.
4 R ANDOM FORESTS AS PROXIMITY -WEIGHTED
PREDICTORS
Here we show that the random forest OOB and test predic-
tions are reproducible using RF-GAP proximities as weights
in a weighted sum (for regression) or a weighted-majority
vote (for classiﬁcation). We ﬁrst show that for a given
observation, the proximities are non-negative and sum to
one.
Note that for each observation, i, the RF-GAP deﬁnition
assigns the value pGAP(i; i) = 0 . This is important when
using the proximities as a predictor as an observation should
not be used in the prediction of its own label. However, as a

==== Page 6 ====
6
similarity measure, setting pGAP(i; i) = 0 is not meaningful.
Thus, for other proximity-based applications, we construct
the main diagonal entries of the RF-GAP proximity matrix
by passing through the random forest a duplicate, identical
observation assigned out-of-bag status.
Proposition 1. Deﬁning pGAP(i; i) = 0 , the RF-GAP proxim-
ities are non-negative andPN
j=1pGAP(i; j) = 1 .
Proof: It is clear from the deﬁnition that pGAP(i; j)
0for all i,j. The sum-to-one property falls directly from the
deﬁnition:
NX
j=1pGAP(i; j) =NX
j=11
jSijX
t2Sicj(t)I(j2Ji(t))
jMi(t)j
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jNX
j=1cj(t)I(j2Ji(t))
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jjMi(t)j
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
= 1:
This proposition allows us to directly use RF-GAP as
weights for classiﬁcation or regression. In contrast, other
proximities must be row-normalized to serve as weights.
We show that the RF-GAP proximity-weighted prediction
matches the random forest OOB prediction, giving the same
OOB error rate in both the classiﬁcation and regression
settings. The OOB error rate is typically used to estimate
the forest’s generalization error and quantify its goodness
of ﬁt, this indicates that RF-GAP accurately represents the
geometry learned by the random forest.
Theorem 1 (Proximity-Weighted Regression) .For a given
training data setS=f(x1; y1): : :(xN; yN)g, with yi2R,
the random forest OOB regression prediction can be reconstructed
using the proximity-weighted sum with RF-GAP proximities as
weights (Deﬁnition 3).
Proof: For a given tree, t, and i2O(t), the decision
tree predictor of yiis the mean response of the in-bag
observations in the appropriate terminal node. That is,
^yi(t) =1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)yj
The random forest prediction, ^yi, is the mean response
over all trees for which iis out of bag. That is,
^yi=1
jSijX
t2Si^yi(t)
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)yj:
The proximity-weighted predictor, ^yp
i, is simply the
weighted sum of responses, fyjgj6=i.^yp
i=NX
j=1pGAP(i; j)yj
=NX
j=18
<
:1
jSijX
t2Sicj(t)I(j2Ji(t))
jMi(t)j9
=
;yj
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jNX
j=1cj(t)I(j2Ji(t))yj
=1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)yj
= ^yi:
Theorem 2 (Proximity-Weighted Classiﬁcation) .For a given
training data set S=f(x1; y1): : :(xN; yN)g, with yi2
f1;; Kgfor all i2f1;; Ng, the random forest OOB clas-
siﬁcation prediction can be reconstructed by a weighted-majority
vote using RF-GAP proximities (Deﬁnition 3) as weights.
Proof: Given the training set f(x1; y1): : :(xN; yN)g,
with yi2 f1: : : Kg, for a given tree tand observation
i2O(t), the decision tree prediction of the label yiis
determined by the majority vote among in-bag observations
within the shared terminal node:
^yi(t) = arg max
l=1;:::;KX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=l):
Thus, the random forest classiﬁcation prediction, ^yi, is
the most popular predicted class across all t2Si:
^yi= arg max
k=1;:::;KX
t2SiI(^yi(t) =k)
= arg max
k=1;:::;KX
t2SiI0
@8
<
:arg max
l=1;:::;KX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=l)9
=
;=k1
A
We show equivalence with the proximity-weighted pre-
dictor. The proximity-weighted predictor predicts the class
with the largest proximity-weighted vote:
^yp
i= arg max
k=1;:::;KNX
j=1pGAP (i; j)I(yj=k)
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:NX
j=10
@1
jSijX
t2Sicj(t)I(j2Ji(t))
jMi(t)j1
AI(yj=k)9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)j0
@NX
j=1cj(t)I(j2Ji(t); yj=k)1
A9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:1
jSijX
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=k)9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:X
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=k)9
=
;:
The last line holds as jSijdoes not depend on kand just
rescales the summations. As classiﬁcation trees in a random
forest are grown until terminal (leaf) nodes are pure, all
in-bag observations belong to the same class. Denote the

==== Page 7 ====
7
common class for any observation j2Mi(t)asyi;t. Then
the single tree predictor is given by
^yi(t) = arg max
l=1;:::;KX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=l)
=yi;t:
and the random forest predictor is
^yi= arg max
k=1;:::;KX
t2SiI(yi;t=k):
The proximity-weighted predictor is thus
^yp
i= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:X
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yj=k)9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:X
t2Si1
jMi(t)jX
j2Ji(t)cj(t)I(yi;t=k)9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;K8
<
:X
t2Si1
jMi(t)jjMi(t)jI(yi;t=k)9
=
;
= arg max
k=1;:::;KX
t2SiI(yi;t=k)
= ^yi:
We note that the proof for the proximity-weighted
classiﬁcation problem requires that the trees in the forest
are grown until the terminal nodes are pure. We show
empirically, however, that RF-GAP proximity predictions
more closely match the random forest’s predictions than the
other proximities even when trees are pruned. See Figure 2
for a comparison. Here we compared proximity-weighted
predictions using minimum node sizes of 1, 5, 10, 20, and
50. For regression problems, RF-GAP proximity predictions
match those of the random forest perfectly, while this isn’t
always the case for classiﬁcation. The difference increases
with node size as ties become more likely. We also note
that the random forest and proximity-weighted predictions
produce higher error rates with the increase in minimum
node size (Figure A.4).
5 E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION OF PROXIMITY -
WEIGHED PREDICTION
To demonstrate that the RF-GAP proximities preserve the
random-forest learned data geometry, we empirically vali-
date Theorems 1 and 2 from Section 4, demonstrating that
the random forest predictions are preserved in the proximity
construction. We also compare to the proximity-weighted
predictor using the original random forest proximity def-
inition (Deﬁnition 1), the OOB adaptation (Deﬁnition 2),
PBK [59], and RFProxIH [61].
We compared proximity-prediction results on 24 datasets
as described in Table B.1. Each dataset was randomly par-
titioned into training (70%) and test (30%) sets. For each
dataset, the same trained random forest was used to pro-
duce all compared proximities. Tables A.1 and A.2 show
the differences between the random forest predictions and
the proximity-weighted predictions for test and training
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
0.00.10.20.3
1 5 10 20 50
Minimum Node Size|RF Error − Proximity Error|Classification
0.000.250.500.751.001.25
1 5 10 20 50
Minimum Node Size|RF Error − Proximity Error|RegressionFig. 2. Random forest predictions are compared here with the proximity-
weighted predictions for both regression and classiﬁcation problems. For
each of the datasets listed in supplemental Table B.1, the differences
were calculated across ﬁve random seeds. For classiﬁcation, the RF-
GAP prediction variations tend to increase with node size, although they
are still more similar to the RF predictions when compared with the other
proximities. For regression, RF-GAP predictions perfectly match the RF
predictions regardless of node size. Note that RFProxIH is incompatible
with regression tasks.
sets, respectively. The proximity-weighted error rates using
RF-GAP proximities nearly exactly match the random for-
est OOB error rates; discrepancies are due to random tie-
breaking. In contrast, the original deﬁnition, PBK, and RF-
ProxIH typically produce much lower training error rates,
suggesting overﬁtting. The OOB proximities (Deﬁnition 2)
produce training error rates that are sometimes lower and
sometimes higher than the random forest OOB error rate.
The RF-GAP proximities also generally produce the
lowest test errors. This can be seen in Figure 3, which
plots the training versus test error rates using the different
proximity measures. Table 1 gives the regression slope for
each proximity deﬁnition. From here it is clear that the

==== Page 8 ====
8
0.00.10.20.30.40.5
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Error Using Training SetTest ErrorProximity
RF−GAP
Original
OOB
PBK
RFProxIH
RF
Fig. 3. Training vs. test error of the proximity-weighted predictions 24
datasets described in the supplemental Table B.1. Errors were aver-
aged across ﬁve runs. We see that the original proximities, PBK, and
RFProxIH, tend to overﬁt the training data, as demonstrated by points
above the line y=x. The random forest errors and RF-GAP nearly
perfectly align in most cases and are each well-described by the line.
original proximities, PBK, and RFProxIH overﬁt the training
data. This is corroborated in Figure 4, which plots the
difference between the random forest out-of-bag error rates
and the proximity-weighted errors across the same datasets,
demonstrating that the RF-GAP predictions nearly perfectly
match those of the random forest for both training and
tests sets. It is clear that the original deﬁnition, PBK, and
RFProxIH generally overﬁt the training data in contrast. We
re-emphasize that PBK and RFProxIH were not intended to
demonstrate the forest’s learning but to use the forest as a
means to construct a similarity measure.
It is well-established that increasing the number of trees
increases the random forest generalization error rate for
standard measures of error [1], [62], while the typical ran-
dom forest default of 500 trees is generally sufﬁcient [55],
[56]. We compared proximity-based predictions for smaller
numbers of trees (5, 10, 50, 100, 250) and demonstrated
that RF-GAP predictions still most accurately match those
of the random forest regardless of forest size. However, for
classiﬁcation problems, tie breaks are more often required
with a small number of trees. Results can be found in
Figure A.5.
In addition to comparing proximity-weighted predic-
tions to the random forest predictions, we compared predic-
tions across the proximity deﬁnitions. Generally, RF-GAP
predictions differed the most from the other proximity-
weighted predictions, especially when using the training
set. This is not surprising as the RF-GAP proximities are
deﬁned to match the random forest OOB predictions. See
more details in Figure A.6.TABLE 1
The regression slopes of each proximity type corresponding to the
points in Figure 3. RF-GAP does not exhibit bias towards the training
data as they have a slope close to one, while the larger slope of the
other proximity deﬁnitions indicates they are overﬁtting the training data.
Type Slope
RF-GAP 1.040
Original 2.434
OOB 1.543
PBK 2.287
RFProxIH 2.147
RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Proportion of Non−Matching OOB Predictions
RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Proportion of Non−Matching Test Predictions
Fig. 4. These boxplots show the proportion of proximity-weighted OOB
and test predictions which do not match the respective random forest
predictions. Proximity-based training predictions were compared with
the RF out-of-bag errors. RF-GAP proximity predictions most nearly
match the random forest predictions for both the training (top) and
test (bottom) data, thus, best preserving the geometry learned by the
random forest. Datasets were split into 70% training and 30% test data.
Errors were averaged across 5 runs. The dataset details can be found
in Table B.1.

==== Page 9 ====
9
6 C OMPARISON OF COMMON PROXIMITY -BASED
APPLICATIONS
In this section, we demonstrate that using RF-GAP in mul-
tiple applications leads to improved performance relative to
the other random forest proximity measures. We compare
scatterplots generated by applying MDS to the proximities
for visualization in Section 6.1, data imputation in Sec-
tion 6.2, and outlier detection in Section 6.3. Random forest
proximities have already been established as successful
in these applications (see Section 2). Thus, we focus our
comparisons in these applications on existing random forest
proximity deﬁnitions to show that the improved represen-
tation of the random forest geometry in RF-GAP leads to
improved performance. In each comparative experiment,
we train the random forests using default hyperparameters.
Each set of proximities is constructed using the same forest
to ensure differences are attributed entirely to the proximity
deﬁnition and not to the inherent randomness of the forest.
Additional results beyond those presented here are given in
Appendix A.
6.1 Visualization using Multi-Dimensional Scaling
Leo Breiman [1], [17] ﬁrst introduced the use of multi-
dimensional scaling on random forest proximities to visual-
ize the forest’s learning. Since then, MDS with random forest
proximities has been used in many applications including
tumor proﬁling [30], visualizing biomarkers [42], pathway
analysis [31], multi-view learning [29], [51], and unsuper-
vised learning [41]. Here, we compare visualizations using
the ﬁve different proximities. In each case, metric MDS was
applied top1 prox to produce two-dimensional visual-
izations.
Figure 5 gives an example of MDS applied to the classic
Sonar dataset from UCI [63] with an OOB error rate was
14.9%. RF-GAP proximities (Figure 5) show two class group-
ings with misclassiﬁed observations between the groups or
within the opposing class. The original proximities, PBK,
and RFProxIH show a fairly clear separation between the
two classes. For these proximities, they appear nearly lin-
early separable which does not accurately reﬂect the data
nor the geometry learned by the random forest given an
error rate of nearly 15%. Deﬁnition 2 has a similar effect as
the RF-GAP deﬁnition, but with a less clear boundary and
seemingly misplaced observations that are deep within the
wrong class. These results suggest that RF-GAP can lead
to improved supervised visualization and dimensionality
reduction techniques. See Appendix A.7 for similar exper-
iments.
6.2 Imputation
In [36], experimental results showed that, out of nine com-
pared imputation methods across seven different missing
mechanisms (missing at random, missing completely at ran-
dom, etc.), random forest-based imputation was generally
the most accurate. This has been corroborated by [37], [38],
[39]. Here we describe the algorithm for random forest
imputation and compare results using various proximity
deﬁnitions.
To impute missing values of variable j:(1) If variable jis continuous, initialize the imputation
with the median of the in-class values of variable j;
otherwise, initialize it with the most frequent in-class
value. In the regression context, the median or most
frequent values are computed across all observations
without missing values in variable j.
(2) Train a random forest using the imputed dataset and
(3) construct the proximity matrix from the forest.
(4) If variable jis continuous, replace the missing values
with the proximity-weighted sum of the non-missing
values. If categorical, replace the missing values with
the proximity-weighed majority vote.
(5) Repeat steps 2 - 4 as required. In many cases, a single
iteration is sufﬁcient.
We show empirically that random forest imputation is
generally improved using the RF-GAP proximity deﬁnition.
For our experiment, we selected datasets that are described
in Table B.1 and for each dataset, we removed 5%, 10%,
25%, 50%, and 75% of values at random (that is, the val-
ues are missing completely at random, or MCAR), using
themissMethods [64]Rpackage. Two comparisons were
made: 1) we computed the mean MSE across 100 repetitions
using a single iteration, and 2) we computed the mean MSE
(across 5 repetitions) at each of 10 iterations. An example
using 10 iterations is given in Figure 6.
A summary of performance rankings is given in Table 2.
Across all compared proximity deﬁnitions (RF-GAP , OOB,
original, and RFProxIH), RF-GAP achieved the best impu-
tation rankings across all percentages of missing values.
For full results, see Table A.3 which gives the average
MSE across 100 repetitions using a single iteration of the
above-described algorithm. The number of observations and
variables for each dataset are also provided in the table.
TABLE 2
The average ranks of the imputation scores across the various UCI
datasets and various percentages of missing values. Each imputation
experiment was repeated 100 times with different random initialization.
RF-GAP generally produces the best imputations across all
percentages of missing values. See Table A.3 for the full imputation
results.
5% 10% 25% 50% 75%
RF-GAP 1.10 1.20 1.15 1.35 1.65
Original 2.55 2.70 2.65 2.60 2.35
OOB 2.50 2.55 2.45 2.40 2.30
RFProxIH 3.20 3.33 3.33 3.40 3.20
Figures A.13, A.14, and A.15 compare imputation results
across 17 datasets1, using 10 iterations in each experiment
with the mean MSE and standard errors recorded for each
of the repetitions. The value recorded at iteration 0 is the
MSE given the median- or majority-imputed datasets. In
many cases, the imputation appears to converge quickly
with relatively few iterations. Generally, the RF-GAP prox-
imities outperformed the other deﬁnitions at each number
of iterations. These results suggest that RF-GAP can be used
to improve random forest imputation. For high percentages
of missing values (at least 75%), or for small datasets,
the random forest imputation does not always converge
1. Large datasets were not used as RFProxIH is computationally
inefﬁcient. Also, datasets already missing values were not used.

==== Page 10 ====
10
Group M, Correct M, Incorrect R, Correct R, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. 5. Here is a comparison of MDS embeddings using different RF proximity deﬁnitions. Proximities were constructed from a random forest
trained on the two-class Sonar dataset (208 observations of 60 variables) from the UCI repository which gave an OOB error rate of 14.9%. Multi-
dimensional scaling (MDS) was applied top1 prox using RF-GAP proximities, the original proximities, OOB proximities (Deﬁnition 2), PBK [59],
and RFProxIH [61]. Using RF-GAP proximities, the visualization depicts a good representation of the forest’s classiﬁcation problem. For correctly-
classiﬁed points (dots), there are two clear groupings, while misclassiﬁed points (squares) are generally located between the groupings or found
within the opposite class cluster, albeit closer to the decision boundary than not. The original deﬁnition, PBK, and RFProxIH over-exaggerate
the separation between classes. This is apparent in examples in the ﬁgure as the two classes appear nearly linearly separable which does not
accurately depict the random forest’s performance on the dataset. Using only OOB samples to generate the proximities improves upon those three
but seems to add some noise to the visualization. There are still two major class clusters, but some correctly classiﬁed points are found farther
inside the opposite class’ cluster compared to the RF-GAP visualization. More examples can be found in Appendix A.7.
MCAR 5% MCAR 10% MCAR 25% MCAR 50% MCAR 75%
012345678910012345678910 01234567891001234567891001234567891072747678
5456586062
37.540.042.545.0
242628
1617181920
IterationOptdigits − Mean NormType
OOB
Original
RF−GAP
RFProxIH
Fig. 6. Imputation of values MCAR of the optical digits dataset [63]. The experiment was repeated over 5 runs and across 10 iterations. RF-GAP
proximities produced the most accurate imputations.
and performance may actually decrease as the number of
iterations increases.
6.3 Outlier Detection
Random forests can be used to detect outliers in the data.
In the classiﬁcation setting, outliers may be described as
observations with measurements that signiﬁcantly differ
from those of other observations within the same class. In
some cases, these outliers may be similar to observations
in a different class, or perhaps they may distinguish them-
selves from observations in all known classes. In either case,
outlying observations may negatively impact the training
of many classiﬁcation and regression algorithms, although
random forests themselves are rather robust to outliers in
the feature variables [2].
Random forest proximity measures can be used to detect
within-class outliers as outliers are likely to have small prox-
imity measures with other observations within the same
class. Thus, small average within-class proximity values
may be used as an outlier measure. We describe the algo-
rithm as follows:
(1) For each observation, i, compute the raw outlier mea-
sure score asP
j2class (i)n
prox2(i;j).(2) Within each class, determine the median and mean
absolute deviation of the raw scores.
(3) Subtract the median from the raw score and divide the
result by the mean absolute deviation.
The outlier detection measure may be used in con-
junction with MDS for visualization. See Figure 7 for an
example using the Gene Expression Cancer dataset from
UCI [63] which has 5 classes across 801 observations and
20531 variables. Here, the point sizes of the scatter plot
are proportionally scaled to the outlier measure. From the
ﬁgure, it is clear that points outside of their respective
class clusters have higher outlier measures. That the outlier
measure is inversely proportional to the average proximity
to within-class observations is clear in the case of RF-GAP
proximities and is not very clear in the cases of the original
deﬁnition and RFProxIH. This suggests that RF-GAP can be
used to improve random forest outlier detection.
Figures 8 shows the RF-GAP outlier scores for the
MNIST dataset. From this plot, outliers may be visually
identiﬁed as the datapoints with substantially higher outlier
scores compared to their class. Figure 9 shows some of the
outlying images, some of which may be difﬁcult for humans
to distinguish. Appendix A.7 contains further experiments.

==== Page 11 ====
11
GroupBRCA, Correct
COAD, CorrectKIRC, Correct
KIRC, IncorrectLUAD, Correct
LUAD, IncorrectPRAD, Correct
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. 7. MDS applied to the random forest proximities computed from the Gene Expression Cancer dataset from UCI [63]. The point sizes are
inversely proportional to the average proximity of a given observation to all other within-class observations. The misclassiﬁcations in RF-GAP , and
OOB, are understandable based on the distance from their respective clusters. The original proximities and RFProxIH do not clearly account for the
misclassiﬁed points. The outlier measure scaling in RF-GAP gives a clear reﬂection of the distance of points to their respective clusters.
Fig. 8. A sorted plot of the outlier measures for the MNIST dataset
as provided by RF-GAP . The vertical axis is the outlier measure as
described in Section 6.3. The top seven outlying images are labeled
with an index and shown in Figure 9.
Index: 2136
Label: 6Index: 6652
Label: 0Index: 4202
Label: 1Index: 1248
Label: 9
Index: 4177
Label: 2Index: 2190
Label: 9Index: 1774
Label: 1
Fig. 9. The top seven outlying digits per RF-GAP (see Figure 8). Some
of these digits may even be difﬁcult for a human to classify, corroborating
the RF-GAP outlier score.7 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a new deﬁnition of random
forest proximities called RF-GAP that characterizes the ran-
dom forest out-of-bag prediction results using a weighted
nearest neighbor predictor. We proved that the performance
of the proximity-weighted predictor exactly matches the
out-of-bag prediction results of the trained random forest
and also demonstrated this relationship empirically. Thus,
RF-GAP proximities capture the random forest-learned data
geometry which provides empirical improvements over
other existing deﬁnitions in applications such as proximity-
weighted prediction, missing data imputation, outlier detec-
tion, and visualization.
Additional random forest proximity applications can be
explored in future works, including quantifying outlier de-
tection performance, comparing with non-tree-based meth-
ods, assessing variable importance, and applying RF-GAP to
multi-view learning. This latter application shows promise
as classiﬁcation accuracy was greatly increased after com-
bining proximities in [29], [51] using other deﬁnitions. An
interesting visualization application was introduced in [32]
which may see improvements using geometry-preserving
proximities. Multi-view learning may also be paired with
this approach in some domains to visualize and assess con-
tributions from the various modes or to perform manifold
alignment.
An additional area of improvement is scalability. Our
approach is useful for datasets with a few thousand obser-
vations, but we can expand its capabilities by implementing
a sparse version of RF-GAP . Further adaptations may make
random forest proximity applications accessible for even
larger datasets.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn. , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
32, Oct. 2001.
[2] A. Cutler, D. R. Cutler, and J. R. Stevens, Random Forests . Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2012, pp. 157–175.
[3] L. Benali, G. Notton, A. Fouilloy, C. Voyant, and R. Dizene, “Solar
radiation forecasting using artiﬁcial neural network and random
forest methods: Application to normal beam, horizontal diffuse
and global components,” Renewable Energy , vol. 132, pp. 871–884,
2019.

==== Page 12 ====
12
[4] T. Han, D. Jiang, Q. Zhao, L. Wang, and K. Yin, “Comparison
of random forest, artiﬁcial neural networks and support vector
machine for intelligent diagnosis of rotating machinery,” Trans.
Inst. Meas. Control , vol. 40, pp. 2681 – 2693, 2018.
[5] C. Iwendi et al. , “Covid-19 patient health prediction using boosted
random forest algorithm,” Front. Public Health , vol. 8, p. 357, 2020.
[6] C. M. Yes ¸ilkanat, “Spatio-temporal estimation of the daily cases
of covid-19 in worldwide using random forest machine learning
algorithm,” Chaos, Solitons Fractals , vol. 140, p. 110210, 2020.
[7] V . Nhu et al. , “Shallow landslide susceptibility mapping by ran-
dom forest base classiﬁer and its ensembles in a semi-arid region
of iran,” Forests , vol. 11, no. 4, 2020.
[8] X. Fang et al. , “Forecasting incidence of infectious diarrhea using
random forest in jiangsu province, china,” BMC Infect. Dis. , vol. 20,
no. 1, p. 222, Mar 2020.
[9] L. Yang et al. , “Study of cardiovascular disease prediction model
based on random forest in eastern china,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 10, no. 1,
p. 5245, Mar 2020.
[10] S. Saha, M. Saha, K. Mukherjee, A. Arabameri, P . T. T. Ngo,
and G. C. Paul, “Predicting the deforestation probability using
the binary logistic regression, random forest, ensemble rotational
forest, reptree: A case study at the gumani river basin, india,” Sci.
Total Environ. , vol. 730, p. 139197, 2020.
[11] M. Gholizadeh, M. Jamei, I. Ahmadianfar, and R. Pourrajab, “Pre-
diction of nanoﬂuids viscosity using random forest (rf) approach,”
Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. , vol. 201, p. 104010, 2020.
[12] C. Rao, M. Liu, M. Goh, and J. Wen, “2-stage modiﬁed random
forest model for credit risk assessment of p2p network lending to
“three rurals” borrowers,” Appl. Soft Comput. , vol. 95, p. 106570,
2020.
[13] Z. Lv, J. Zhang, H. Ding, and Q. Zou, “Rf-pseu: A random forest
predictor for rna pseudouridine sites,” Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. ,
vol. 8, pp. 134–134, Feb 2020.
[14] S. Badar ud din Tahir, A. Jalal, and M. Batool, “Wearable sensors
for activity analysis using smo-based random forest over smart
home and sports datasets,” in 2020 3rd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Sci.
(ICACS) , 2020, pp. 1–6.
[15] K. Tan, H. Wang, L. Chen, Q. Du, P . Du, and C. Pan, “Estimation of
the spatial distribution of heavy metal in agricultural soils using
airborne hyperspectral imaging and random forest,” J. Hazard.
Mater. , vol. 382, p. 120987, 2020.
[16] W. Zhang, J. S. Rhodes, A. Garg, J. Y. Takemoto, X. Qi, S. Harihar,
C.-W. Tom Chang, K. R. Moon, and A. Zhou, “Label-free
discrimination and quantitative analysis of oxidative stress
induced cytotoxicity and potential protection of antioxidants
using raman micro-spectroscopy and machine learning,” Anal.
Chim. Acta , vol. 1128, pp. 221–230, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2020.06.074
[17] L. Breiman and A. Cutler, “Random forests,” https://www.stat.
berkeley.edu/breiman/RandomForests/cc home.htm#prox,
(Accessed on 04/15/2020).
[18] J. Kruskal and M. Wish, Multidimensional Scaling . Sage Publica-
tions, 1978.
[19] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[20] K. R. Moon et al. , “Visualizing structure and transitions in high-
dimensional biological data,” Nat. Biotechnol. , vol. 37, no. 12, pp.
1482–1492, Dec 2019.
[21] A. F. Duque, G. Wolf, and K. R. Moon, “Visualizing high dimen-
sional dynamical processes,” in MLSP , 2019.
[22] A. F. Duque, S. Morin, G. Wolf, and K. Moon, “Extendable and
invertible manifold learning with geometry regularized autoen-
coders,” in 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data) , 2020, pp. 5027–
5036.
[23] J. B. Tenenbaum, V . Silva, and J. C. Langford, “A global geometric
framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” Science , vol.
290, no. 5500, pp. 2319–2323, 2000.
[24] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform manifold
approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” arXiv ,
vol. abs/1802.03426, 2018.
[25] A. Ng, M. Jordan, and Y. Weiss, “On spectral clustering: Analysis
and an algorithm,” Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. , vol. 14, pp. 849–
856, 2001.
[26] C. Cortes and V . Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn. ,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273–297, Sep 1995.[27] B. Scholkopf, A. Smola, and K. M ¨uller, “Kernel principal com-
ponent analysis,” in Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning . MIT Press, 1999, pp. 327–352.
[28] M. B. Pouyan, J. Birjandtalab, and M. Nourani, “Distance metric
learning using random forest for cytometry data,” in 2016 38th
Annu. Int. Conf. of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC) , 2016, pp. 2590–2590.
[29] K. R. Gray, P . Aljabar, R. A. Heckemann, A. Hammers, and
D. Rueckert, “Random forest-based manifold learning for classiﬁ-
cation of imaging data in dementia,” in Machine Learning in Medical
Imaging , K. Suzuki, F. Wang, D. Shen, and P . Yan, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 159–166.
[30] T. Shi, D. Seligson, A. S. Belldegrun, A. Palotie, and S. Horvath,
“Tumor classiﬁcation by tissue microarray proﬁling: random forest
clustering applied to renal cell carcinoma,” Mod. Pathol. , vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 547–557, Apr 2005.
[31] H. Pang et al. , “Pathway analysis using random forests classiﬁca-
tion and regression,” Bioinformatics , vol. 22, no. 16, pp. 2028–2036,
06 2006.
[32] J. S. Rhodes, A. Cutler, G. Wolf, and K. R. Moon, “Random forest-
based diffusion information geometry for supervised visualization
and data exploration,” in 2021 IEEE Stat. Signal Process. Workshop
(SSP) , 2021, pp. 331–335.
[33] J. Zhang, M. Zulkernine, and A. Haque, “Random-forests-based
network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern., Part C (Applications and Reviews) , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 649–659,
2008.
[34] P . O. Gislason, J. A. Benediktsson, and J. R. Sveinsson, “Random
forests for land cover classiﬁcation,” Pattern Recognit. Lett. , vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 294 – 300, 2006, pattern Recognition in Remote Sensing
(PRRS 2004).
[35] V . L. Narayana, A. P . Gopi, S. R. Khadherbhi, and V . Pavani,
“Accurate identiﬁcation and detection of outliers in networks
using group random forest methodoly,” J. Crit. Rev. , vol. 7, no. 6,
pp. 381–384, 2020.
[36] M. Kokla, J. Virtanen, M. Kolehmainen, J. Paananen, and K. Han-
hineva, “Random forest-based imputation outperforms other
methods for imputing lc-ms metabolomics data: a comparative
study,” BMC Bioinf. , vol. 20, no. 1, p. 492, Oct 2019.
[37] B. Ramosaj and M. Pauly, “Predicting missing values: a compara-
tive study on non-parametric approaches for imputation,” Comput.
Stat. , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1741–1764, Dec 2019.
[38] A. Pantanowitz and T. Marwala, “Missing data imputation
through the use of the random forest algorithm,” in Advances in
Computational Intelligence , W. Yu and E. N. Sanchez, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 53–62.
[39] A. D. Shah, J. W. Bartlett, J. Carpenter, O. Nicholas, and H. Hem-
ingway, “Comparison of random forest and parametric impu-
tation models for imputing missing data using mice: a caliber
study,” Am. J. Epidemiol. , vol. 179, no. 6, pp. 764–774, Mar 2014.
[40] Y. Lin and Y. Jeon, “Random forests and adaptive nearest neigh-
bors,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc. , vol. 101, no. 474, pp. 578–590, 2006.
[41] T. Shi and S. Horvath, “Unsupervised learning with random forest
predictors,” J. Comput. Graphical Stat. , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 118–138,
2006.
[42] E. J. Finehout, Z. Franck, L. H. Choe, N. Relkin, and K. H.
Lee, “Cerebrospinal ﬂuid proteomic biomarkers for Alzheimer’s
disease,” Ann. Neurol. , vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 120–129, Feb. 2007.
[43] N. Nesa, T. Ghosh, and I. Banerjee, “Outlier detection in sensed
data using statistical learning models for iot,” in IEEE Wirel.
Commun. Netw. (WCNC) , 2018, pp. 1–6.
[44] C. Liu, M. White, and G. Newell, “Detecting outliers in species
distribution data,” J. Biogeogr. , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 164–176, 2018.
[45] F. B. de Santana, W. Borges Neto, and R. J. Poppi, “Random
forest as one-class classiﬁer and infrared spectroscopy for food
adulteration detection,” Food Chem. , vol. 293, pp. 323–332, 2019.
[46] D. Baron and D. Poznanski, “The weirdest SDSS galaxies: results
from an outlier detection algorithm,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. , vol.
465, no. 4, pp. 4530–4555, 11 2016.
[47] V . Narayana, A. Gopi, S. Khadherbhi, and V . Pavani, “Accurate
identiﬁcation and detection of outliers in networks using group
random forest methodoly,” J. Crit. Rev. , vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 381–384,
2020.
[48] S. van Buuren and K. Groothuis-Oudshoorn, “mice: Multivariate
imputation by chained equations in r,” J. Stat. Softw. , vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 1–67, 2011.

==== Page 13 ====
13
[49] Q. Zhou, W. Hong, L. Luo, and F. Yang, “Gene selection using ran-
dom forest and proximity differences criterion on dna microarray
data,” J. Convergence Inf. Technol. , vol. 5, pp. 161–170, 2010.
[50] L. S. Whitmore, A. George, and C. M. Hudson, “Explicating
feature contribution using random forest proximity distances,”
2018.
[51] H. Cao, S. Bernard, R. Sabourin, and L. Heutte, “Random forest
dissimilarity based multi-view learning for radiomics applica-
tion,” Pattern Recognit. , vol. 88, pp. 185 – 197, 2019.
[52] J. A. Seoane, I. N. M. Day, J. P . Casas, C. Campbell, and T. R.
Gaunt, “A random forest proximity matrix as a new measure for
gene annotation,” in 22th European Symposium on Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks, ESANN 2014, Bruges, Belgium, April 23-25, 2014 , 2014.
[53] P . Zhao, X. Su, T. Ge, and J. Fan, “Propensity score and proximity
matching using random forest,” Contemp. Clin. Trials , vol. 47, pp.
85–92, Mar 2016.
[54] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman, The elements of statisti-
cal learning: Data mining, inference, and prediction . Springer Open,
2017.
[55] A. Liaw and M. Wiener, “Classiﬁcation and regression by random-
forest,” R News , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 18–22, 2002.
[56] M. N. Wright and A. Ziegler, “ranger: A fast implementation of
random forests for high dimensional data in C++ and R,” J. Stat.
Softw. , vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2017.
[57] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, Random Forests . New
York, NY: Springer New York, 2009, pp. 587–604.
[58] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Com-
puting , R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,
2019.
[59] C. Englund and A. Verikas, “A novel approach to estimate prox-
imity in a random forest: An exploratory study,” Expert Syst. Appl. ,
vol. 39, no. 17, p. 13046–13050, Dec. 2012.
[60] A. Davies and Z. Ghahramani, “The random forest kernel and
other kernels for big data from random partitions,” 2014.
[61] H. Cao, S. Bernard, R. Sabourin, and L. Heutte, “A novel random
forest dissimilarity measure for multi-view learning,” ArXiv , vol.
abs/2007.02572, 2020.
[62] P . Probst and A.-L. Boulesteix, “To tune or not to tune the number
of trees in random forest,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 18, no. 1, p.
6673–6690, jan 2017.
[63] D. Dua and C. Graff, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2017.
[64] T. Rockel, missMethods: Methods for Missing Data , 2022, r package
version 0.4.0. [Online]. Available: https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=missMethods
Jake S. Rhodes is an assistant professor at
Idaho State University. He earned his Ph.D. at
Utah State University (USU). He has a B.S.
Degree in Applied Mathematics from Weber
State University (2017) and a B.A. Degree in
Finance and Economics from Utah State Univer-
sity (2015). During the last year of his doctoral
program, he participated in the National Security
Internship Program (NSIP) at Paciﬁc Northwest
National Laboratory, where he worked in areas
of vision and robust deep-learning models. His
research interests include machine learning (supervised and unsuper-
vised), deep learning, and dimensionality reduction.
Adele Cutler is a professor emerita in the De-
partment of Mathematics and Statistics at Utah
State University (USU) and the Interim Associate
Dean of Faculty and Research in the College of
Science at USU. She holds a B.Sc. (Hons) de-
gree in Mathematics from the University of Auck-
land and an M.S. and Ph.D. in Statistics from the
University of California, Berkeley. She is one of
the pioneering researchers in the development
of random forests and archetypal analysis. Her
research interests are in statistical learning, sta-
tistical computing, random forests, and archetypal analysis.
Kevin R. Moon is an assistant professor in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at
Utah State University (USU). He holds a B.S.
and M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from
Brigham Y oung University and an M.S. degree
in Mathematics and a Ph.D. in Electrical Engi-
neering from the University of Michigan. Prior
to joining USU in 2018, he was a postdoctoral
scholar (2016-2018) in the Genetics Department
and the Applied Mathematics Program at Y ale
University. His research interests are in the de-
velopment of theory and applications in machine learning, information
theory, deep learning, and manifold learning. More speciﬁcally, he is in-
terested in dimensionality reduction, data visualization, ensemble meth-
ods, nonparametric estimation, information theoretic functionals, neural
networks, and applications in biomedical data, ﬁnance, engineering, and
ecology.

==== Page 14 ====
14
APPENDIX A
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Here we present additional experimental results using RF-GAP .
A.1 Empirical Validation of Theorems 1 and 2
Here we present the full results for the experiments described in Section 5. The RF-GAP error rates match those of the RF.
TABLE A.1
The random forest test average MSE (for continuously labeled data) and error rates (for categorically labeled data) of the random forest are
presented in the RF column. The other columns represent the differences between the random forest and proximity-weighted predictions for
regression and the proportion of mismatched predictions for classiﬁcation. The RF-GAP proximity predictions nearly perfectly match the random
forest predictions. Each experiment was repeated ﬁve times. The same random forest was used to construct each proximity for each random seed.
RFProxIH cannot be used when categorical variables are present or for regression problems. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Dataset RF RF-GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Arrhythmia 0.039 (0.07) 0.004 (0.00) 0.084 (0.01) 0.069 (0.01) 0.079 (0.01) (NA)
Auto-Mpg 0.004 (0.00) 0.001 (0.00) 0.005 (0.00) 0.009 (0.00) 0.007 (0.00) (NA)
Balance Scale 0.156 (0.01) 0.004 (0.00) 0.061 (0.02) 0.061 (0.02) 0.062 (0.02) 0.070 (0.02)
Banknote 0.008 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.012 (0.01) 0.013 (0.01) 0.029 (0.01) 0.009 (0.00)
Breast Cancer 0.033 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.016 (0.01) 0.016 (0.01) 0.018 (0.00) 0.013 (0.01)
Car 0.043 (0.01) 0.011 (0.00) 0.028 (0.01) 0.033 (0.01) 0.080 (0.02) (NA)
Diabetes 0.236 (0.02) 0.001 (0.00) 0.052 (0.02) 0.072 (0.01) 0.057 (0.01) 0.064 (0.01)
E. Coli 0.129 (0.03) 0.004 (0.01) 0.065 (0.03) 0.083 (0.02) 0.077 (0.02) 0.057 (0.00)
Glass 0.228 (0.05) 0 (0.00) 0.094 (0.03) 0.103 (0.03) 0.109 (0.02) 0.112 (0.02)
Heart Disease 0.435 (0.05) 0 (0.00) 0.101 (0.04) 0.136 (0.03) 0.116 (0.05) (NA)
Hill Valley 0.444 (0.02) 0 (0.00) 0.134 (0.04) 0.230 (0.04) 0.155 (0.04) 0.126 (0.02)
Ionosphere 0.065 (0.01) 0.002 (0.00) 0.051 (0.01) 0.053 (0.02) 0.053 (0.01) 0.036 (0.01)
Iris 0.031 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.004 (0.01) 0.009 (0.01) 0.013 (0.01) 0.013 (0.01)
Liver 0.284 (0.03) 0.003 (0.00) 0.098 (0.03) 0.153 (0.04) 0.106 (0.04) (NA)
Lymphography 0.164 (0.05) 0.005 (0.01) 0.050 (0.04) 0.064 (0.05) 0.068 (0.06) 0.041 (0.02)
Optical Digits 0.024 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.020 (0.00) 0.021 (0.00) 0.023 (0.00) 0.012 (0.00)
Parkinsons 0.078 (0.04) 0 (0.00) 0.068 (0.02) 0.078 (0.02) 0.075 (0.02) 0.047 (0.02)
RNASeq 0.005 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.002 (0.00) 0.003 (0.00) 0.003 (0.00) 0.002 (0.00)
Seeds 0.057 (0.03) 0 (0.00) 0.027 (0.01) 0.027 (0.01) 0.030 (0.02) 0.017 (0.01)
Sonar 0.174 (0.04) 0.003 (0.01) 0.071 (0.04) 0.097 (0.02) 0.081 (0.04) 0.077 (0.04)
Tic-Tac-Toe 0.063 (0.02) 0.002 (0.00) 0.059 (0.01) 0.059 (0.01) 0.072 (0.01) (NA)
Titanic 0.185 (0.03) 0.010 (0.01) 0.049 (0.01) 0.055 (0.01) 0.057 (0.01) (NA)
Waveform 0.143 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 0.030 (0.00) 0.035 (0.00) 0.030 (0.00) 0.047 (0.01)
Wine 0.023 (0.02) 0 (0.00) 0.011 (0.02) 0.011 (0.02) 0.019 (0.02) 0.011 (0.02)
TABLE A.2
This table represents the differences in proximity-weighted predictions using the training set. These predictions were compared with the random
forest OOB predictions. RF-GAP predictions most reliably match the random forest predictions.
Dataset RF RF-GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Arrhythmia 0.064 (0.00) 0.006 (0.00) 0.078 (0.00) 0.066 (0.00) 0.074 (0.00) (NA)
Auto-Mpg 0.005 (0.00) 0.001 (0.00) 0.021 (0.00) 0.012 (0.00) 0.017 (0.00) (NA)
Balance Scale 0.150 (0.02) 0.010 (0.01) 0.077 (0.01) 0.069 (0.01) 0.079 (0.01) 0.080 (0.01)
Banknote 0.006 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.004 (0.00) 0.014 (0.00) 0.019 (0.01) 0.003 (0.00)
Breast Cancer 0.033 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.015 (0.00) 0.021 (0.00) 0.018 (0.00) 0.011 (0.00)
Car 0.043 (0.01) 0.010 (0.00) 0.023 (0.00) 0.022 (0.01) 0.058 (0.01) (NA)
Diabetes 0.243 (0.01) 0.002 (0.00) 0.151 (0.01) 0.081 (0.02) 0.129 (0.01) 0.151 (0.01)
E. Coli 0.140 (0.02) 0.003 (0.00) 0.071 (0.01) 0.071 (0.02) 0.076 (0.01) 0.078 (0.01)
Glass 0.215 (0.03) 0.003 (0.00) 0.137 (0.02) 0.119 (0.02) 0.123 (0.03) 0.141 (0.03)
Heart Disease 0.417 (0.02) 0.008 (0.00) 0.301 (0.02) 0.221 (0.01) 0.270 (0.02) (NA)
Hill Valley 0.419 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 0.331 (0.02) 0.213 (0.02) 0.298 (0.02) 0.317 (0.02)
Ionosphere 0.070 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.030 (0.00) 0.054 (0.01) 0.030 (0.00) 0.029 (0.00)
Iris 0.065 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.038 (0.02) 0.010 (0.01) 0.034 (0.01) 0.044 (0.01)
Liver 0.296 (0.02) 0.001 (0.00) 0.224 (0.03) 0.149 (0.03) 0.200 (0.03) (NA)
Lymphography 0.160 (0.02) 0.004 (0.01) 0.113 (0.02) 0.062 (0.02) 0.092 (0.02) 0.096 (0.01)
Optical Digits 0.020 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.011 (0.00) 0.020 (0.00) 0.011 (0.00) 0.012 (0.00)
Parkinsons 0.094 (0.01) 0.003 (0.00) 0.040 (0.01) 0.078 (0.01) 0.065 (0.03) 0.040 (0.01)
RNAseq 0.003 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0.003 (0.00) 0.005 (0.00) 0.002 (0.00) 0.003 (0.00)
Seeds 0.078 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 0.045 (0.01) 0.027 (0.01) 0.043 (0.01) 0.053 (0.01)
Sonar 0.184 (0.02) 0.004 (0.01) 0.163 (0.03) 0.104 (0.03) 0.156 (0.03) 0.171 (0.03)
Tic-Tac-Toe 0.067 (0.00) 0.004 (0.00) 0.047 (0.00) 0.032 (0.01) 0.024 (0.00) (NA)
Titanic 0.182 (0.01) 0.011 (0.01) 0.076 (0.01) 0.070 (0.01) 0.074 (0.01) (NA)
Waveform 0.145 (0.00) 0.002 (0.00) 0.104 (0.00) 0.038 (0.01) 0.099 (0.00) 0.117 (0.00)
Wine 0.019 (0.01) 0 (0.00) 0.019 (0.01) 0.006 (0.00) 0.018 (0.01) 0.019 (0.01)

==== Page 15 ====
15
A.2 Proximity-Weighted Predictions and Sample Size
Proximity RF−GAP Original OOB
0.000.050.100.150.200.25
100 200 50010002000 500010000
Sample SizeProportion of Unmatched LabelsUnmatched OOB Labels
0.000.050.100.150.200.25
100 200 50010002000 500010000
Sample SizeUnmatched Test Labels
Fig. A.1. In this ﬁgure, we assess the effects of sample size on the proportion of proximity-weighted predictions which match the random forest’s
predictions on a synthetic dataset. The experiment was repeated 20 times. On the left, proximity-weighted training predictions are compared with
the random forest’s OOB predictions. The means and standard errors are presented in the plot. While the Original and OOB proximity predictions
match the random forest predictions as the same size increases, the difference does not appear to be approaching zero. In contrast, RF-GAP
matches the random forest predictions (up to tie breaks) regardless of the sample size.
0.1500.1750.2000.2250.2500.275
100 200 50010002000 500010000
Sample SizeError RateError Type
Test
TrainRandom Forest Errors by Sample Size
Fig. A.2. The random forest OOB and Test errors using the simulated datasets used in Figure A.1. As expected, both error rates tend to decrease
with the sample size. This decrease may partially explain the higher proportion of proximity-weighted prediction matches for the OOB and Original
proximities in Figure A.1.
Here we assess the effects of sample size on the random forest proximity-weighted predictions. Due to the com-
putational complexity of PBK and RFProxIH, we only compared the Original, OOB, and RF-GAP proximities. For this
experiment, we generated synthetic datasets with binary class labels and sample sizes of 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000,
and 10000. Each dataset had ten normally-distributed variables. For class 0, each of the ten variables followed a standard
normal distribution. For class 1, the means of the normally distributed variables were linearly spaced between 0 and 1,

==== Page 16 ====
16
each with a variance of 1. This setup provides a range of variables with varying importance for determining class. The
experiment was repeated 20 times.
The results are shown in Figure A.1. The overall random forest prediction errors are found in Figure A.2. The Original
and OOB proximity predictions more closely match the random forest predictions as the sample size increases, but
this difference does not appear to tend toward zero. It is interesting to note that the original proximities are better
approximations for the random forest test predictions than the OOB proximities, although the reverse is true when
matching the RF OOB predictions. The OOB proximity test and training predictions both appear to be converging to
the same proportion of unmatched random forest predictions for the sample sizes considered. In contrast, the RF-GAP
predictions match the random forest predictions (up to tie breaks) regardless of the sample size.
A.3 RF-GAP and Symmetry
Although the RF-GAP proximities are not symmetric, we show that their symmetry increases with the number of trees
in the forest. We used the same synthetic dataset described in Section A.2 using 500 observations. The experiment was
replicated 10 times. The results are shown in Figure A.3.
5.0e−067.5e−061.0e−05
100 5001000 50001000020000 50000
Number of TreesMSE Between all p(i, j) and p(j, i)Symmetry of RF−GAP
Fig. A.3. Here we show that RF-GAP proximities become more symmetric as the number of trees increases. The data used here had 500
observations with binary class labels and 10 normally-distributed features, as described in Section A.2. The MSE between the proximity matrix
and its transpose was computed across each run. The mean and standard deviations are provided in the scatter plot.
A.4 Minimum Node Size
We show in Figure A.4 that both the random forest and proximity-weighted training errors tend to increase with the
minimum node size. See Section 4 for further discussion.
A.5 Number of Trees
We show to what extent proximity-weighted predictions match the random forest predictions when considering different
sizes of forests. It has been shown that larger forests produce more accurate predictions [1], [62], but there is a consideration
for computational complexity. For all other experiments in this paper, we used the default value of 500 trees to train each
forest. Here, we show that the RF-GAP predictions still match the random forest predictions with small numbers of trees (5,
10, 50, 100, 250). Figure A.5 shows the results compiled across the same 24 datasets described in Table B.1. In the regression
context, the matches are exact. In the classiﬁcation context, we see a decrease in matches as the number of trees decreases.
This is due to an increased need for tie-breaking, which is not needed for regression.
A.6 Agreement Between Proximities
In addition to comparing proximity-weighted predictions with the random forest predictions, we also compared the level
of agreement from proximity to proximity. The proximity-weighted test predictions varied less across proximities, but the
largest differences were found comparing RF-GAP to the others. The original, OOB, and PBK deﬁnitions had the highest
level of agreement for the test predictions, as seen in Figure A.6. Larger discrepancies were found when predicting training
examples. In particular, RF-GAP proximities differed the most from each of the other proximities as their predictions match
the random forest out-of-bag predictions while the others do not.

==== Page 17 ====
17
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
0.00.10.20.30.4
1 5 10 20 50
Minimum Node SizeProximity−Weighted Prediction ErrorClassification
51015
1 5 10 20 50
Minimum Node SizeMSE of Proximity PredictionsRegression
Fig. A.4. Here we display the distributions of errors corresponding to the proximity-weighted training predictions across the minimum node sizes
1, 5, 10, 20, and 50. Predictions were made using ﬁve random seeds and each of the datasets listed in Table B.1. The errors presented are
proximity-weighted training errors. Each of the errors tends to increase as the minimum node size increases.
A.7 Multidimensional Scaling and Outlier Detection
Here we provide additional examples of MDS applied to the various random forest proximities. In Figure A.7, we compare
the plotted MDS embeddings on the Ionosphere data from the UCI [63]. It is clear from the images that the random forest’s
misclassiﬁed points are typically found on the border between the two class clusters in the RF-GAP embeddings while
this is not always the case for the other proximity measures. Additional ﬁgures (A.8, A.9, and A.10) are given to display
MDS applied to the proximities on other datasets. In Figure A.8 we see similar patterns which were displayed in Figure 5;
exaggerated separation in the original and RFProxIH and excess noise in OOB. RF-GAP seems to accurately portray why
the misclassiﬁcations are made in the context of proximity-weighed predictions.
Figures A.10, A.11, and A.12 give additional examples of proximity-based outlier scores. Points that are farther from
their respective class clusters can be viewed as outliers and are often misclassiﬁed. The point size is proportional to the
outlier measure in the ﬁgure. This, however, may not be as clear when two or three points are far from their respective
cluster but near to each other.

==== Page 18 ====
18
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
0.00.10.20.30.4
5 10 100 250
Number of TreesProportion of Non−Matching Preds.Classification
0.00.51.01.52.0
5 10 100 250
Number of Trees|RF OOB Error − Proximity Error|Regression
Fig. A.5. Proximity-weighted prediction matches using varying numbers of trees. Generally, RF-GAP produces predictions that match those of the
random forest except for tie-break cases. For regression, the matches are exact. Each proximity deﬁnition tends to match better with an increased
number of trees.
1 ( 0 )
0.92 ( 0.013 )
0.94 ( 0.013 )
0.92 ( 0.014 )
0.92 ( 0.013 )0.92 ( 0.013 )
1 ( 0 )
0.93 ( 0.014 )
0.99 ( 0.008 )
0.99 ( 0.006 )0.94 ( 0.013 )
0.93 ( 0.014 )
1 ( 0 )
0.94 ( 0.014 )
0.93 ( 0.013 )0.92 ( 0.014 )
0.99 ( 0.008 )
0.94 ( 0.014 )
1 ( 0 )
0.98 ( 0.007 )0.92 ( 0.013 )
0.99 ( 0.006 )
0.93 ( 0.013 )
0.98 ( 0.007 )
1 ( 0 ) RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
0.920.940.960.981.00valueProportion of Train Prediction Matches
1 ( 0 )
0.96 ( 0.022 )
0.94 ( 0.022 )
0.95 ( 0.023 )
0.96 ( 0.018 )0.96 ( 0.022 )
1 ( 0 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
0.97 ( 0.016 )0.94 ( 0.022 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
1 ( 0 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
0.96 ( 0.02 )0.95 ( 0.023 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
0.99 ( 0.012 )
1 ( 0 )
0.96 ( 0.02 )0.96 ( 0.018 )
0.97 ( 0.016 )
0.96 ( 0.02 )
0.96 ( 0.02 )
1 ( 0 ) RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
0.950.960.970.980.991.00valueProportion of Test Prediction Matches
Fig. A.6. The proportions of proximity-weighted prediction agreements for the train (left) and test (right) sets across categorical-labeled datasets as
found in Table B.1. RF-GAP agrees less often with the others, while the original, PBK, and RFProxIH tend to agree most often for the training data.
The original, OOB, and PBK proximities tend to agree the most often for the test data.
A.8 Data Imputation
Here we show extended results on data imputation using random forest proximities. Table A.3 shows the average
imputation results for 100 trials across 17 datasets from Table B.12from the UCI repository [63] using four of the proximity
2. Larger datasets were not compared here as the PBK and RFProxIH proximities are computationally inefﬁcient. Datasets that were already
missing values were also not used.

==== Page 19 ====
19
Group b, Correct b, Incorrect g, Correct g, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.7. MDS applied to various random forest proximities on the Ionosphere dataset [63]. This binary classiﬁcation problem predicts whether or
not returned radar signals are representative of a structure (good) or not (bad). We see a similar pattern here regarding the MDS embeddings as
in Figure 5. The class separations are somewhat exaggerated for the original, PBK, and RFProxIH proximities, while points clearly susceptible to
misclassiﬁcation are identiﬁable in the RF-GAP and OOB plots.
Group 0, Correct 0, Incorrect 1, Correct 1, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.8. MDS applied to various random forest proximities on the Parkinson’s dataset [63], which tests whether machine learning algorithms can
discriminate between healthy and unhealthy speech signals recorded from people with Parkinson’s disease. From the RF-GAP embeddings, it
is clear that misclassiﬁed points are on the borders or edges of the main clusters. This provides an example where random forest predictions
correspond to proximity-weighted predictions. This is not always clear in the other embeddings. For example, the original MDS embeddings show a
misclassiﬁed 1 (in the bottom right of the ﬁgure) which is surrounded by observations of the same class. RFProxIH shows a nearly perfectly linear
separation between classes, which is unreasonable with a random forest error rate of 9.7%.
Groupcp, Correct
cp, Incorrect
im, Correctim, Incorrect
imL, Incorrect
imS, IncorrectimU, Correct
imU, Incorrect
om, Correctom, Incorrect
omL, Correct
omL, Incorrectpp, Correct
pp, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.9. The E. coli dataset from the UCI repository with eight classes after applying MDS to the random forest proximities. RF-GAP and OOB
show looser clusters compared with the others. This is suggestive of less overﬁtting of the training data.

==== Page 20 ====
20
TABLE A.3
Extended imputation results. For each dataset, values were removed completely at random in the amounts of 5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, and 75%. The
two numbers directly below each dataset designate the number of observations and number of variables, respectively, for the listed dataset. The
average mean-squared errors (MSE) between the original and imputed values were recorded along with the standard deviations. RF-GAP
generally outperforms the other deﬁnitions. Average rankings can be found in Table 2.
Dataset Proximity 5% 10% 25% 50% 75%
Arrhythmia RF-GAP 0.637 (0.05) 0.913 (0.06) 1.463 (0.06) 2.142 (0.06) 2.783 (0.06)
452 Original 0.665 (0.05) 0.950 (0.06) 1.512 (0.06) 2.188 (0.06) 2.792 (0.05)
279 OOB 0.674 (0.05) 0.964 (0.06) 1.532 (0.06) 2.205 (0.06) 2.766 (0.05)
RFProxIH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Auto-Mpg RF-GAP 0.230 (0.05) 0.338 (0.06) 0.587 (0.06) 0.941 (0.06) 1.484 (0.20)
392 Original 0.226 (0.05) 0.334 (0.05) 0.584 (0.06) 0.938 (0.06) 1.400 (0.10)
8 OOB 0.232 (0.05) 0.342 (0.06) 0.595 (0.06) 0.955 (0.06) 1.425 (0.10)
RFProxIH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Balance Scale RF-GAP 3.240 (0.22) 4.581 (0.22) 7.288 (0.23) 10.278 (0.24) 12.553 (0.26)
645 Original 3.287 (0.22) 4.649 (0.22) 7.385 (0.23) 10.336 (0.24) 12.561 (0.27)
4 OOB 3.318 (0.22) 4.686 (0.22) 7.432 (0.23) 10.382 (0.24) 12.609 (0.27)
RFProxIH 3.305 (0.23) 4.674 (0.23) 7.414 (0.23) 10.351 (0.25) 12.571 (0.27)
Banknote RF-GAP 1.372 (0.12) 1.965 (0.12) 3.211 (0.13) 4.798 (0.12) 6.176 (0.12)
1372 Original 1.427 (0.12) 2.048 (0.12) 3.361 (0.12) 4.986 (0.11) 6.313 (0.12)
5 OOB 1.443 (0.12) 2.065 (0.12) 3.379 (0.12) 4.994 (0.12) 6.319 (0.12)
RFProxIH 1.420 (0.12) 2.042 (0.12) 3.357 (0.12) 4.985 (0.12) 6.314 (0.12)
Breast Cancer RF-GAP 2.816 (0.20) 4.027 (0.22) 6.479 (0.20) 9.362 (0.20) 11.737 (0.23)
699 Original 2.903 (0.20) 4.154 (0.23) 6.670 (0.21) 9.563 (0.22) 11.848 (0.23)
16 OOB 2.891 (0.20) 4.125 (0.23) 6.604 (0.21) 9.483 (0.21) 11.800 (0.23)
RFProxIH 2.921 (0.20) 4.183 (0.23) 6.713 (0.22) 9.601 (0.22) 11.869 (0.23)
Diabetes RF-GAP 0.710 (0.20) 0.960 (0.16) 1.591 (0.17) 2.328 (0.15) 2.932 (0.14)
678 Original 0.713 (0.19) 0.973 (0.15) 1.622 (0.17) 2.364 (0.16) 2.941 (0.14)
8 OOB 0.713 (0.19) 0.971 (0.15) 1.616 (0.17) 2.360 (0.15) 2.941 (0.14)
RFProxIH 0.715 (0.19) 0.977 (0.15) 1.628 (0.17) 2.367 (0.16) 2.942 (0.14)
E. Coli RF-GAP 0.862 (0.14) 1.235 (0.12) 1.991 (0.11) 2.873 (0.13) 3.673 (0.14)
336 Original 0.886 (0.14) 1.267 (0.12) 2.031 (0.12) 2.909 (0.14) 3.706 (0.17)
8 OOB 0.898 (0.14) 1.286 (0.12) 2.059 (0.12) 2.955 (0.14) 3.782 (0.23)
RFProxIH 0.831 (0.23) 1.156 (0.36) 1.774 (0.67) 2.170 (1.26) 2.146 (1.80)
Glass RF-GAP 0.064 (0.02) 0.093 (0.02) 0.161 (0.02) 0.251 (0.12) 0.479 (0.49)
214 Original 0.067 (0.02) 0.098 (0.02) 0.169 (0.03) 0.248 (0.03) 0.325 (0.02)
10 OOB 0.068 (0.02) 0.099 (0.02) 0.169 (0.03) 0.246 (0.03) 0.323 (0.02)
RFProxIH 0.067 (0.02) 0.099 (0.02) 0.171 (0.03) 0.250 (0.03) 0.326 (0.02)
Heart Disease RF-GAP 0.314 (0.07) 0.487 (0.11) 0.757 (0.09) 1.116 (0.08) 1.411 (0.09)
303 Original 0.317 (0.07) 0.491 (0.11) 0.764 (0.09) 1.121 (0.08) 1.405 (0.08)
13 OOB 0.316 (0.07) 0.489 (0.11) 0.761 (0.09) 1.116 (0.08) 1.399 (0.08)
RFProxIH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Hill Valley RF-GAP 1.418 (0.20) 4.093 (0.43) 9.971 (0.65) 15.307 (0.75) 19.586 (0.88)
606 Original 2.052 (0.29) 5.304 (0.39) 10.656 (0.60) 16.134 (0.76) 20.568 (0.92)
101 OOB 1.673 (0.26) 4.996 (0.42) 10.526 (0.59) 15.984 (0.75) 20.489 (0.92)
RFProxIH 2.232 (0.30) 5.512 (0.38) 10.716 (0.59) 16.161 (0.76) 20.578 (0.92)
Ionosphere RF-GAP 4.472 (0.23) 6.522 (0.23) 10.560 (0.29) 15.636 (0.34) 20.092 (0.39)
351 Original 4.782 (0.22) 6.991 (0.23) 11.291 (0.27) 16.406 (0.30) 20.501 (0.35)
34 OOB 4.745 (0.22) 6.933 (0.23) 11.184 (0.27) 16.299 (0.31) 20.446 (0.35)
RFProxIH 4.800 (0.22) 7.021 (0.23) 11.344 (0.27) 16.449 (0.30) 20.519 (0.35)
Iris RF-GAP 0.211 (0.04) 0.300 (0.04) 0.494 (0.04) 0.716 (0.04) 0.935 (0.05)
150 Original 0.219 (0.04) 0.310 (0.04) 0.509 (0.04) 0.727 (0.04) 0.934 (0.05)
4 OOB 0.217 (0.04) 0.307 (0.04) 0.503 (0.04) 0.722 (0.04) 0.937 (0.05)
RFProxIH 0.221 (0.04) 0.312 (0.05) 0.512 (0.04) 0.730 (0.04) 0.936 (0.05)
Liver RF-GAP 0.315 (0.16) 0.501 (0.23) 0.828 (0.24) 1.168 (0.23) 1.491 (0.20)
345 Original 0.322 (0.16) 0.512 (0.22) 0.847 (0.23) 1.192 (0.22) 1.503 (0.19)
7 OOB 0.321 (0.16) 0.510 (0.22) 0.844 (0.24) 1.190 (0.22) 1.503 (0.19)
RFProxIH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Lymphography RF-GAP 1.046 (0.14) 1.521 (0.13) 2.480 (0.13) 3.599 (0.12) 4.569 (0.12)
148 Original 1.065 (0.15) 1.551 (0.14) 2.529 (0.14) 3.650 (0.13) 4.568 (0.12)
18 OOB 1.065 (0.14) 1.549 (0.13) 2.524 (0.13) 3.644 (0.13) 4.568 (0.13)
RFProxIH 1.076 (0.15) 1.567 (0.14) 2.551 (0.14) 3.670 (0.13) 4.579 (0.12)
Optical Digits RF-GAP 15.774 (0.17) 22.572 (0.17) 37.003 (0.19) 55.369 (0.21) 71.456 (0.26)
3823 Original 17.222 (0.20) 24.612 (0.19) 40.138 (0.20) 58.897 (0.22) 73.616 (0.27)
64 OOB 17.199 (0.19) 24.549 (0.18) 39.904 (0.20) 58.569 (0.21) 73.442 (0.27)
RFProxIH 17.303 (0.20) 24.732 (0.19) 40.336 (0.20) 59.062 (0.22) 73.681 (0.27)
Parkinsons RF-GAP 0.400 (0.18) 0.600 (0.20) 0.968 (0.19) 1.471 (0.16) 1.841 (0.15)
197 Original 0.411 (0.18) 0.613 (0.20) 0.988 (0.18) 1.484 (0.16) 1.846 (0.15)
23 OOB 0.408 (0.18) 0.610 (0.20) 0.979 (0.19) 1.475 (0.16) 1.836 (0.15)
RFProxIH 0.412 (0.18) 0.616 (0.20) 0.994 (0.18) 1.489 (0.16) 1.851 (0.15)
Seeds RF-GAP 0.204 (0.04) 0.283 (0.04) 0.476 (0.04) 0.703 (0.04) 0.895 (0.04)
210 Original 0.223 (0.05) 0.308 (0.04) 0.506 (0.04) 0.730 (0.04) 0.911 (0.04)
7 OOB 0.218 (0.05) 0.300 (0.04) 0.494 (0.04) 0.715 (0.04) 0.897 (0.04)
RFProxIH 0.226 (0.05) 0.313 (0.04) 0.512 (0.04) 0.737 (0.04) 0.917 (0.04)
Sonar RF-GAP 3.044 (0.13) 4.551 (0.13) 7.278 (0.14) 10.879 (0.16) 13.923 (0.18)
208 Original 3.246 (0.13) 4.834 (0.14) 7.631 (0.15) 11.174 (0.16) 14.055 (0.18)
60 OOB 3.211 (0.13) 4.778 (0.13) 7.544 (0.15) 11.101 (0.16) 14.011 (0.18)
RFProxIH 3.264 (0.14) 4.864 (0.14) 7.673 (0.15) 11.200 (0.16) 14.069 (0.18)
Titanic RF-GAP 0.409 (0.22) 0.609 (0.23) 1.067 (0.26) 1.600 (0.22) 1.991 (0.16)
712 Original 0.416 (0.21) 0.621 (0.23) 1.096 (0.26) 1.639 (0.22) 2.010 (0.16)
7 OOB 0.415 (0.21) 0.620 (0.23) 1.093 (0.26) 1.637 (0.22) 2.010 (0.16)
RFProxIH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Wine RF-GAP 0.236 (0.08) 0.345 (0.07) 0.579 (0.07) 0.825 (0.07) 1.044 (0.08)
178 Original 0.236 (0.08) 0.344 (0.08) 0.577 (0.07) 0.822 (0.07) 1.038 (0.08)
13 OOB 0.240 (0.08) 0.353 (0.07) 0.585 (0.07) 0.829 (0.07) 1.043 (0.08)
RFProxIH 0.237 (0.08) 0.343 (0.08) 0.577 (0.07) 0.823 (0.07) 1.040 (0.07)

==== Page 21 ====
21
Group setosa, Correct versicolor, Correct versicolor, Incorrect virginica, Correct virginica, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.10. Fisher’s Iris dataset [63] with MDS applied to the random forest proximities. Here, the point size is proportional to the outlier score
provided by each method. In each case, observations with high outlier scores corresponded to misclassiﬁed points.
Group1, Correct
1, Incorrect2, Correct
2, Incorrect3, Correct
3, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.11. The seeds dataset compares three varieties of wheat seeds using geometric properties (e.g., width, length) as features. The OOB
and RF-GAP proximities produce more cluster-like structures, vs. the branching seen by the other deﬁnitions. RF-GAP clearly shows why the
misclassiﬁcations are taking place.
measures with a single iteration. For each dataset, values were removed completely at random in amounts of 5%, 10%, 25%,
50%, and 75%. The PBK proximities were omitted from this study due to their slow computational complexity. Additionally,
some datasets were not compatible with RFProxIH due to continuous responses or categorical features.
Missing values were imputed using the three proximity deﬁnitions and only a single iteration. The experiment was
repeated 100 times for each dataset. For each repetition, the same missing data was used across each of the three
proximity types. The mean squared error (MSE) is almost universally lower when using RF-GAP for imputation. Even
when outperformed, RF-GAP usually ranks second place. Refer to the ranking summary in Table 2. The Banknote,
Ionosphere, Optical Digits, Sonar, and Waveform datasets particularly show good examples of RF-GAP for imputation.
In these examples, RF-GAP outperforms each of the other deﬁnitions and the error decreases monotonically.
Figures A.13, A.14, and A.15 show imputation results across multiple iterations. Each experiment was repeated 5 times
Group 1, Correct 1, Incorrect 2, Correct 2, Incorrect 3, Correct
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.12. The wine dataset consists of three classes (corresponding to locations of cultivation) and 13 features. The tight clusters of each class
using the original, PBK, and RFProxIH proximities suggests overﬁtting to the training data. It seems RF-GAP may show more sensitivity to outliers.

==== Page 22 ====
22
Type OOB Original RF−GAP RFProxIH
MCAR 5% MCAR 10% MCAR 25% MCAR 50% MCAR 75%
1.21.41.61.8
0.70.80.91.01.11.2
0.50.60.70.80.9
0.20.30.40.5
0.20.30.4Auto−Mpg
2.752.802.852.902.95
2.12.22.3
1.451.501.551.60
0.900.951.00
0.650.700.75Arrhythmia
12.212.412.612.813.013.213.4
10.210.510.811.1
7.07.58.0
4.504.755.005.25
3.03.23.43.63.8Balance Scale
6.26.36.46.56.66.7
4.44.64.85.05.2
2.83.03.23.43.6
1.71.92.12.32.5
1.21.41.6Banknote
11.5011.7512.0012.2512.5012.75
9.49.69.810.010.2
6.506.757.007.25
4.24.44.64.8
2.62.83.03.2Breast Cancer
0123456789100123456789100123456789100123456789100123456789102.93.03.13.23.3
2.42.62.8
1.51.61.71.8
0.91.01.1
0.50.60.70.8
IterationDiabetes
Fig. A.13. Additional imputation results. See Figure A.15 for more details.
across 10 iterations. In general, RF-GAP outperforms the other proximity-weighted imputations although the imputation
tends to be much noisier for smaller datasets (see Balance Scale, Iris, Seeds, and Wine, for example) and less reliable for
large percentages of missing values. This is particularly prominent when 75% of the data is missing.

==== Page 23 ====
23
Type OOB Original RF−GAP RFProxIH
MCAR 5% MCAR 10% MCAR 25% MCAR 50% MCAR 75%
0.300.350.40
0.230.240.250.260.27
0.130.140.150.160.170.18
0.070.080.090.10
0.050.060.070.080.090.100.11Glass
101520
5101520
510
2468
246Hill Valley
19.520.020.521.021.5
15.015.516.016.517.0
10.511.011.512.0
6.57.07.58.0
4.54.85.1Ionosphere
0.9500.9751.0001.0251.050
0.7250.7500.7750.8000.825
0.500.520.540.56
0.340.360.38
0.200.220.240.26Iris
4.44.64.85.05.2
3.63.73.83.94.0
2.42.52.62.72.82.9
1.51.61.71.8
1.01.11.2Lymphography
0123456789100123456789100123456789100123456789100123456789101.901.952.002.05
1.31.41.51.6
1.11.21.3
0.50.6
0.300.350.400.45
IterationParkinsons
Fig. A.14. Additional imputation results. See Figure A.15 for more details.

==== Page 24 ====
24
Type OOB Original RF−GAP RFProxIH
MCAR 5% MCAR 10% MCAR 25% MCAR 50% MCAR 75%
0.9000.9250.9500.975
0.7250.7500.7750.800
0.480.500.520.54
0.340.360.380.40
0.170.190.210.230.25Seeds
14.014.414.8
10.511.011.5
7.07.58.0
4.254.504.755.005.25
3.03.23.43.6Sonar
1.051.10
0.840.880.920.96
0.600.640.68
0.3000.3250.3500.3750.400
0.200.240.28Wine
72747678
5456586062
37.540.042.545.0
242628
1617181920Optdigits
01234567891001234567891001234567891001234567891001234567891028.829.229.6
22.523.023.524.0
15.616.016.416.817.2
10.010.5
6.757.007.257.50
IterationWaveform
Fig. A.15. This ﬁgure, Figure A.13 and A.14 give the mean-squared error (MSE) between the original and imputed values using four random forest
proximity measures. All data variables were scaled from 0 to 1 for comparison. The scores were compared using 1 to 10 imputation iterations as
described in Section 6.2 and each experiment was conducted over 5 repetitions using the original proximities, OOB proximities, RF-GAP proximities,
and RFProxIH (PBK was too inefﬁcient for comparison). Iteration 0 provides the MSE for the median-ﬁlled imputation. Five different percentages of
values missing completely at random (MCAR) were used (5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, and 75%) across several datasets found in Table B.1. In general,
RF-GAP usually outperforms the other proximity-weighted imputations. See additional results in Table A.3.
APPENDIX B
DATASET DESCRIPTIONS
The majority of datasets used in this paper come directly from the UCI repository. See a full list of dataset descriptions in
Table B.1.

==== Page 25 ====
25
TABLE B.1
Descriptions of the datasets used in the experiments for this paper. The number of observations accounts for the removal of any observations
which had missing values. The number of columns accounts for the removal of any uniquely-identifying variables (i.e., variables which are distinct
for each observation).
Data Label Type No. Obs. No Vars. Missing Values? Source
Arrhythmia Continuous 452 279 No UCI
Auto-MPG Continuous 392 8 Yes UCI
Balance Scale Categorical 645 4 No UCI
Banknote Categorical 1372 5 No UCI
Breast Cancer Categorical 699 16 Yes UCI
Car Categorical 1728 6 No UCI
Diabetes Categorical 678 8 No UCI
E. Coli Categorical 336 8 No UCI
Glass Categorical 214 10 No UCI
Heart Disease Categorical 303 13 Yes UCI
Hill Valley Categorical 606 101 No UCI
Ionosphere Categorical 351 34 No UCI
Iris Categorical 150 4 No UCI
Liver Categorical 345 7 No UCI
Lymphography Categorical 148 18 No UCI
Optical Digits Categorical 3823 64 No UCI
Parkinson’s Categorical 197 23 No UCI
RNA-Seq (Gene Expression) Categorical 801 20531 No UCI
Seeds Categorical 210 7 No UCI
Sonar (Connectionist Bench) Categorical 208 60 No UCI
Tic-Tac-Toe Categorical 958 9 No UCI
Titanic Categorical 712 7 Yes Kaggle
Waveform Categorical 5000 21 No UCI
Wine Categorical 178 13 No UCI

