==== Page 1 ====
GNNExplainer: Generating Explanations
for Graph Neural Networks
Rex YingyDylan Bourgeoisy,zJiaxuan YouyMarinka ZitnikyJure Leskovecy
yDepartment of Computer Science, Stanford University
zRobust.AI
frexying, dtsbourg, jiaxuan, marinka, jure g@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful tool for machine learning on
graphs. GNNs combine node feature information with the graph structure by
recursively passing neural messages along edges of the input graph. However, in-
corporating both graph structure and feature information leads to complex models
and explaining predictions made by GNNs remains unsolved. Here we propose
GNNEXPLAINER , the ﬁrst general, model-agnostic approach for providing inter-
pretable explanations for predictions of any GNN-based model on any graph-based
machine learning task. Given an instance, GNNEXPLAINER identiﬁes a compact
subgraph structure and a small subset of node features that have a crucial role in
GNN’s prediction. Further, GNNEXPLAINER can generate consistent and concise
explanations for an entire class of instances. We formulate GNNEXPLAINER as an
optimization task that maximizes the mutual information between a GNN’s predic-
tion and distribution of possible subgraph structures. Experiments on synthetic and
real-world graphs show that our approach can identify important graph structures
as well as node features, and outperforms alternative baseline approaches by up to
43.0% in explanation accuracy. GNNEXPLAINER provides a variety of beneﬁts,
from the ability to visualize semantically relevant structures to interpretability, to
giving insights into errors of faulty GNNs.
1 Introduction
In many real-world applications, including social, information, chemical, and biological domains,
data can be naturally modeled as graphs [ 9,41,49]. Graphs are powerful data representations but
are challenging to work with because they require modeling of rich relational information as well
as node feature information [ 45,46]. To address this challenge, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have emerged as state-of-the-art for machine learning on graphs, due to their ability to recursively
incorporate information from neighboring nodes in the graph, naturally capturing both graph structure
and node features [16, 21, 40, 44].
Despite their strengths, GNNs lack transparency as they do not easily allow for a human-intelligible
explanation of their predictions. Yet, the ability to understand GNN’s predictions is important and
useful for several reasons: (i) it can increase trust in the GNN model, (ii) it improves model’s
transparency in a growing number of decision-critical applications pertaining to fairness, privacy and
other safety challenges [ 11], and (iii) it allows practitioners to get an understanding of the network
characteristics, identify and correct systematic patterns of mistakes made by models before deploying
them in the real world.
While currently there are no methods for explaining GNNs, recent approaches for explaining other
types of neural networks have taken one of two main routes. One line of work locally approximates
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
GNN model training and predictions Explaning GNN’s predictions
GNNExplainer
Figure 1: GNNEXPLAINER provides interpretable explanations for predictions made by any GNN model on any
graph-based machine learning task. Shown is a hypothetical node classiﬁcation task where a GNN model is
trained on a social interaction graph to predict future sport activities. Given a trained GNN and a prediction ^yi
= “Basketball” for person vi,GNNEXPLAINER generates an explanation by identifying a small subgraph of the
input graph together with a small subset of node features (shown on the right) that are most inﬂuential for ^yi.
Examining explanation for ^yi, we see that many friends in one part of vi’s social circle enjoy ball games, and so
the GNN predicts that viwill like basketball. Similarly, examining explanation for ^yj, we see that vj’s friends
and friends of his friends enjoy water and beach sports, and so the GNN predicts ^yj= “Sailing.”
models with simpler surrogate models, which are then probed for explanations [ 25,29,30]. Other
methods carefully examine models for relevant features and ﬁnd good qualitative interpretations of
high level features [ 6,13,27,32] or identify inﬂuential input instances [ 23,38]. However, these
approaches fall short in their ability to incorporate relational information, the essence of graphs.
Since this aspect is crucial for the success of machine learning on graphs, any explanation of GNN’s
predictions should leverage rich relational information provided by the graph as well as node features.
Here we propose GNNEXPLAINER , an approach for explaining predictions made by GNNs. GNNEX-
PLAINER takes a trained GNN and its prediction(s), and it returns an explanation in the form of a small
subgraph of the input graph together with a small subset of node features that are most inﬂuential for
the prediction(s) (Figure 1). The approach is model-agnostic and can explain predictions of any GNN
on any machine learning task for graphs, including node classiﬁcation, link prediction, and graph
classiﬁcation. It handles single- as well as multi-instance explanations. In the case of single-instance
explanations, GNNEXPLAINER explains a GNN’s prediction for one particular instance ( i.e., a node
label, a new link, a graph-level label). In the case of multi-instance explanations, GNNEXPLAINER
provides an explanation that consistently explains a set of instances ( e.g., nodes of a given class).
GNNEXPLAINER speciﬁes an explanation as a rich subgraph of the entire graph the GNN was
trained on, such that the subgraph maximizes the mutual information with GNN’s prediction(s).
This is achieved by formulating a mean ﬁeld variational approximation and learning a real-valued
graph mask which selects the important subgraph of the GNN’s computation graph. Simultaneously,
GNNEXPLAINER also learns a feature mask that masks out unimportant node features (Figure 1).
We evaluate GNNEXPLAINER on synthetic as well as real-world graphs. Experiments show that
GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations of GNN’s predictions. On synthetic
graphs with planted network motifs, which play a role in determining node labels, we show that
GNNEXPLAINER accurately identiﬁes the subgraphs/motifs as well as node features that determine
node labels outperforming alternative baseline approaches by up to 43.0% in explanation accuracy.
Further, using two real-world datasets we show how GNNEXPLAINER can provide important domain
insights by robustly identifying important graph structures and node features that inﬂuence a GNN’s
predictions. Speciﬁcally, using molecular graphs and social interaction networks, we show that
GNNEXPLAINER can identify important domain-speciﬁc graph structures, such as NO2chemical
groups or ring structures in molecules, and star structures in Reddit threads. Overall, experiments
demonstrate that GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations for GNN-based
models for different machine learning tasks on graphs.
2 Related work
Although the problem of explaining GNNs is not well-studied, the related problems of interpretability
and neural debugging received substantial attention in machine learning. At a high level, we can
group those interpretability methods for non-graph neural networks into two main families.
2

==== Page 3 ====
, , , ...A BFigure 2: A.GNN computation graph Gc(green and orange) for making prediction ^yat node v. Some edges
inGcform important neural message-passing pathways (green), which allow useful node information to be
propagated across Gcand aggregated at vfor prediction, while other edges do not (orange). However, GNN
needs to aggregate important as well as unimportant messages to form a prediction at node v, which can dilute the
signal accumulated from v’s neighborhood. The goal of GNNEXPLAINER is to identify a small set of important
features and pathways (green) that are crucial for prediction. B.In addition to GS(green), GNNEXPLAINER
identiﬁes what feature dimensions of GS’s nodes are important for prediction by learning a node feature mask.
Methods in the ﬁrst family formulate simple proxy models of full neural networks. This can be done
in a model-agnostic way, usually by learning a locally faithful approximation around the prediction,
for example through linear models [ 29] or sets of rules, representing sufﬁcient conditions on the
prediction [ 3,25,47]. Methods in the second family identify important aspects of the computation, for
example, through feature gradients [ 13,43], backpropagation of neurons’ contributions to the input
features [ 6,31,32], and counterfactual reasoning [ 19]. However, the saliency maps [ 43] produced
by these methods have been shown to be misleading in some instances [ 2] and prone to issues like
gradient saturation [ 31,32]. These issues are exacerbated on discrete inputs such as graph adjacency
matrices since the gradient values can be very large but only on very small intervals. Because of that,
such approaches are not suitable for explaining predictions made by neural networks on graphs.
Instead of creating new, inherently interpretable models, post-hoc interpretability methods [ 1,14,15,
17,23,38] consider models as black boxes and then probe them for relevant information. However, no
work has been done to leverage relational structures like graphs. The lack of methods for explaining
predictions on graph-structured data is problematic, as in many cases, predictions on graphs are
induced by a complex combination of nodes and paths of edges between them. For example, in some
tasks, an edge is important only when another alternative path exists in the graph to form a cycle, and
those two features, only when considered together, can accurately predict node labels [ 10,12]. Their
joint contribution thus cannot be modeled as a simple linear combinations of individual contributions.
Finally, recent GNN models augment interpretability via attention mechanisms [ 28,33,34]. However,
although the learned edge attention values can indicate important graph structure, the values are the
same for predictions across all nodes. Thus, this contradicts with many applications where an edge is
essential for predicting the label of one node but not the label of another node. Furthermore, these
approaches are either limited to speciﬁc GNN architectures or cannot explain predictions by jointly
considering both graph structure and node feature information.
3 Formulating explanations for graph neural networks
LetGdenote a graph on edges Eand nodesVthat are associated with d-dimensional node features
X=fx1;:::;x ng,xi2Rd. Without loss of generality, we consider the problem of explaining a
node classiﬁcation task (see Section 4.4 for other tasks). Let fdenote a label function on nodes
f:V7!f1;:::;Cgthat maps every node in Vto one ofCclasses. The GNN model is optimized
on all nodes in the training set and is then used for prediction, i.e., to approximate fon new nodes.
3.1 Background on graph neural networks
At layerl, the update of GNN model involves three key computations [ 4,45,46]. (1) First, the
model computes neural messages between every pair of nodes. The message for node pair (vi;vj)is a
function MSGofvi’s andvj’s representations hl 1
iandhl 1
jin the previous layer and of the relation
rijbetween the nodes: ml
ij=MSG(hl 1
i;hl 1
j;rij):(2) Second, for each node vi, GNN aggregates
3

==== Page 4 ====
messages from vi’s neighborhoodNviand calculates an aggregated message Mivia an aggregation
method AGG[16,35]:Ml
i=AGG(fml
ijjvj2Nvig);whereNviis neighborhood of node viwhose
deﬁnition depends on a particular GNN variant. (3) Finally, GNN takes the aggregated message Ml
i
along withvi’s representation hl 1
ifrom the previous layer, and it non-linearly transforms them to
obtainvi’s representation hl
iat layerl:hl
i=UPDATE (Ml
i;hl 1
i):The ﬁnal embedding for node vi
afterLlayers of computation is zi=hL
i. Our GNNEXPLAINER provides explanations for any GNN
that can be formulated in terms of M SG, AGG, and U PDATE computations.
3.2 G NNEXPLAINER : Problem formulation
Our key insight is the observation that the computation graph of node v, which is deﬁned by the
GNN’s neighborhood-based aggregation (Figure 2), fully determines all the information the GNN
uses to generate prediction ^yat nodev. In particular, v’s computation graph tells the GNN how to
generatev’s embedding z. Let us denote that computation graph by Gc(v), the associated binary
adjacency matrix by Ac(v)2f0;1gnn, and the associated feature set by Xc(v) =fxjjvj2Gc(v)g.
The GNN model learns a conditional distribution P(YjGc;Xc), whereYis a random variable
representing labels f1;:::;Cg, indicating the probability of nodes belonging to each of Cclasses.
A GNN’s prediction is given by ^y= (Gc(v);Xc(v)), meaning that it is fully determined by the
model , graph structural information Gc(v), and node feature information Xc(v). In effect, this
observation implies that we only need to consider graph structure Gc(v)and node features Xc(v)
to explain ^y(Figure 2A). Formally, GNNEXPLAINER generates explanation for prediction ^yas
(GS;XF
S), whereGSis a small subgraph of the computation graph. XSis the associated feature of
GS, andXF
Sis a small subset of node features (masked out by the mask F,i.e.,XF
S=fxF
jjvj2
GSg) that are most important for explaining ^y(Figure 2B).
4 G NNEXPLAINER
Next we describe our approach GNNEXPLAINER . Given a trained GNN model and a prediction
(i.e., single-instance explanation, Sections 4.1 and 4.2) or a set of predictions ( i.e., multi-instance
explanations, Section 4.3), the GNNEXPLAINER will generate an explanation by identifying a
subgraph of the computation graph and a subset of node features that are most inﬂuential for the
model ’s prediction. In the case of explaining a set of predictions, GNNEXPLAINER will aggregate
individual explanations in the set and automatically summarize it with a prototype. We conclude this
section with a discussion on how GNNEXPLAINER can be used for any machine learning task on
graphs, including link prediction and graph classiﬁcation (Section 4.4).
4.1 Single-instance explanations
Given a node v, our goal is to identify a subgraph GSGcand the associated features XS=
fxjjvj2GSgthat are important for the GNN’s prediction ^y. For now, we assume that XSis a
small subset of d-dimensional node features; we will later discuss how to automatically determine
which dimensions of node features need to be included in explanations (Section 4.2). We formalize
the notion of importance using mutual information MIand formulate the GNNEXPLAINER as the
following optimization framework:
max
GSMI(Y;(GS;XS)) =H(Y) H(YjG=GS;X=XS): (1)
For nodev,MI quantiﬁes the change in the probability of prediction ^y= (Gc;Xc)whenv’s
computation graph is limited to explanation subgraph GSand its node features are limited to XS.
For example, consider the situation where vj2Gc(vi);vj6=vi. Then, if removing vjfromGc(vi)
strongly decreases the probability of prediction ^yi, the nodevjis a good counterfactual explanation
for the prediction at vi. Similarly, consider the situation where (vj;vk)2Gc(vi);vj;vk6=vi. Then,
if removing an edge between vjandvkstrongly decreases the probability of prediction ^yithen the
absence of that edge is a good counterfactual explanation for the prediction at vi.
Examining Eq. (1), we see that the entropy term H(Y)is constant because is ﬁxed for a trained
GNN. As a result, maximizing mutual information between the predicted label distribution Yand
4

==== Page 5 ====
explanation (GS;XS)is equivalent to minimizing conditional entropy H(YjG=GS;X=XS),
which can be expressed as follows:
H(YjG=GS;X=XS) = EYjGS;XS[logP(YjG=GS;X=XS)]: (2)
Explanation for prediction ^yis thus a subgraph GSthat minimizes uncertainty of when the GNN
computation is limited to GS. In effect,GSmaximizes probability of ^y(Figure 2). To obtain a
compact explanation, we impose a constraint on GS’s size as:jGSjKM;so thatGShas at most
KMnodes. In effect, this implies that GNNEXPLAINER aims to denoise Gcby takingKMedges
that give the highest mutual information with the prediction.
GNNEXPLAINER ’s optimization framework. Direct optimization of GNNEXPLAINER ’s objective
is not tractable as Gchas exponentially many subgraphs GSthat are candidate explanations for ^y. We
thus consider a fractional adjacency matrix1for subgraphs GS,i.e.,AS2[0;1]nn, and enforce the
subgraph constraint as: AS[j;k]Ac[j;k]for allj;k. This continuous relaxation can be interpreted
as a variational approximation of distribution of subgraphs of Gc. In particular, if we treat GSG
as a random graph variable, the objective in Eq. (2) becomes:
min
GEGSGH(YjG=GS;X=XS); (3)
With convexity assumption, Jensen’s inequality gives the following upper bound:
min
GH(YjG=EG[GS];X=XS): (4)
In practice, due to the complexity of neural networks, the convexity assumption does not hold.
However, experimentally, we found that minimizing this objective with regularization often leads to a
local minimum corresponding to high-quality explanations.
To tractably estimate EG, we use mean-ﬁeld variational approximation and decompose Ginto a
multivariate Bernoulli distribution as: PG(GS) =Q
(j;k)2GcAS[j;k]. This allows us to estimate the
expectation with respect to the mean-ﬁeld approximation, thereby obtaining ASin which (j;k)-th
entry represents the expectation on whether edge (vj;vk)exists. We observed empirically that this
approximation together with a regularizer for promoting discreteness [ 40] converges to good local
minima despite the non-convexity of GNNs. The conditional entropy in Equation 4 can be optimized
by replacing the EG[GS]to be optimized by a masking of the computation graph of adjacency matrix,
Ac(M), whereM2Rnndenotes the mask that we need to learn, denotes element-wise
multiplication, and denotes the sigmoid that maps the mask to [0;1]nn.
In some applications, instead of ﬁnding an explanation in terms of model’s conﬁdence, the users care
more about “why does the trained model predict a certain class label”, or “how to make the trained
model predict a desired class label”. We can modify the conditional entropy objective in Equation 4
with a cross entropy objective between the label class and the model prediction2. To answer these
queries, a computationally efﬁcient version of GNNEXPLAINER ’s objective, which we optimize using
gradient descent, is as follows:
min
M CX
c=11[y=c] logP(Y=yjG=Ac(M);X=Xc); (5)
The masking approach is also found in Neural Relational Inference [ 22], albeit with different
motivation and objective. Lastly, we compute the element-wise multiplication of (M)andAcand
remove low values in Mthrough thresholding to arrive at the explanation GSfor the GNN model’s
prediction ^yat nodev.
4.2 Joint learning of graph structural and node feature information
To identify what node features are most important for prediction ^y,GNNEXPLAINER learns a feature
selectorFfor nodes in explanation GS. Instead of deﬁning XSto consists of all node features, i.e.,
1For typed edges, we deﬁne GS2[0;1]Cennwhere Ceis the number of edge types.
2The label class is the predicted label class by the GNN model to be explained, when answering “why does
the trained model predict a certain class label”. “how to make the trained model predict a desired class label”
can be answered by using the ground-truth label class.
5

==== Page 6 ====
XS=fxjjvj2GSg,GNNEXPLAINER considersXF
Sas a subset of features of nodes in GS, which
are deﬁned through a binary feature selector F2f0;1gd(Figure 2B):
XF
S=fxF
jjvj2GSg; xF
j= [xj;t1;:::;x j;tk]forFti= 1; (6)
wherexF
jhas node features that are not masked out by F. Explanation (GS;XS)is then jointly
optimized for maximizing the mutual information objective:
max
GS;FMI(Y;(GS;F)) =H(Y) H(YjG=GS;X=XF
S); (7)
which represents a modiﬁed objective function from Eq. (1) that considers structural and node feature
information to generate an explanation for prediction ^y.
Learning binary feature selector F.We specifyXF
SasXSF, whereFacts as a feature mask
that we need to learn. Intuitively, if a particular feature is not important, the corresponding weights in
GNN’s weight matrix take values close to zero. In effect, this implies that masking the feature out
does not decrease predicted probability for ^y:Conversely, if the feature is important then masking it
out would decrease predicted probability. However, in some cases this approach ignores features that
are important for prediction but take values close to zero. To address this issue we marginalize over
all feature subsets and use a Monte Carlo estimate to sample from empirical marginal distribution for
nodes inXSduring training [ 48]. Further, we use a reparametrization trick [ 20] to backpropagate
gradients in Eq. (7) to the feature mask F. In particular, to backpropagate through a d-dimensional
random variable Xwe reparametrize Xas:X=Z+ (XS Z)Fs.t.P
jFjKF, whereZ
is ad-dimensional random variable sampled from the empirical distribution and KFis a parameter
representing the maximum number of features to be kept in the explanation.
Integrating additional constraints into explanations. To impose further properties on the explana-
tion we can extend GNNEXPLAINER ’s objective function in Eq. (7) with regularization terms. For
example, we use element-wise entropy to encourage structural and node feature masks to be discrete.
Further, GNNEXPLAINER can encode domain-speciﬁc constraints through techniques like Lagrange
multiplier of constraints or additional regularization terms. We include a number of regularization
terms to produce explanations with desired properties. We penalize large size of the explanation by
adding the sum of all elements of the mask paramters as the regularization term.
Finally, it is important to note that each explanation must be a valid computation graph. In particular,
explanation (GS;XS)needs to allow GNN’s neural messages to ﬂow towards node vsuch that
GNN can make prediction ^y. Importantly, GNNEXPLAINER automatically provides explanations that
represent valid computation graphs because it optimizes structural masks across entire computation
graphs. Even if a disconnected edge is important for neural message-passing, it will not be selected
for explanation as it cannot inﬂuence GNN’s prediction. In effect, this implies that the explanation
GStends to be a small connected subgraph.
4.3 Multi-instance explanations through graph prototypes
The output of a single-instance explanation (Sections 4.1 and 4.2) is a small subgraph of the input
graph and a small subset of associated node features that are most inﬂuential for a single prediction.
To answer questions like “How did a GNN predict that a given set of nodes all have label c?”, we
need to obtain a global explanation of class c. Our goal here is to provide insight into how the
identiﬁed subgraph for a particular node relates to a graph structure that explains an entire class.
GNNEXPLAINER can provide multi-instance explanations based on graph alignments and prototypes.
Our approach has two stages:
First, for a given class c(or, any set of predictions that we want to explain), we ﬁrst choose a
reference node vc, for example, by computing the mean embedding of all nodes assigned to c. We
then take explanation GS(vc)for reference vcand align it to explanations of other nodes assigned to
classc. Finding optimal matching of large graphs is challenging in practice. However, the single-
instance GNNEXPLAINER generates small graphs (Section 4.2) and thus near-optimal pairwise graph
matchings can be efﬁciently computed.
Second, we aggregate aligned adjacency matrices into a graph prototype Aprotousing, for example, a
robust median-based approach. Prototype Aproto gives insights into graph patterns shared between
nodes that belong to the same class. One can then study prediction for a particular node by comparing
explanation for that node’s prediction ( i.e., returned by single-instance explanation approach) to the
prototype (see Appendix for more information).
6

==== Page 7 ====
4.4 G NNEXPLAINER model extensions
Any machine learning task on graphs. In addition to explaining node classiﬁcation, GNNEX-
PLAINER provides explanations for link prediction and graph classiﬁcation with no change to its
optimization algorithm. When predicting a link (vj;vk),GNNEXPLAINER learns two masks XS(vj)
andXS(vk)for both endpoints of the link. When classifying a graph, the adjacency matrix in Eq. (5)
is the union of adjacency matrices for all nodes in the graph whose label we want to explain. However,
note that in graph classiﬁcation, unlike node classiﬁcation, due to the aggregation of node embed-
dings, it is no longer true that the explanation GSis necessarily a connected subgraph. Depending on
application, in some scenarios such as chemistry where explanation is a functional group and should
be connected, one can extract the largest connected component as the explanation.
Any GNN model. Modern GNNs are based on message passing architectures on the input graph. The
message passing computation graphs can be composed in many different ways and GNNEXPLAINER
can account for all of them. Thus, GNNEXPLAINER can be applied to: Graph Convolutional
Networks [ 21], Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks [ 26], Jumping Knowledge Networks [ 36],
Attention Networks [ 33], Graph Networks [ 4], GNNs with various node aggregation schemes [ 7,5,18,
16, 40, 39, 35], Line-Graph NNs [8], position-aware GNN [42], and many other GNN architectures.
Computational complexity. The number of parameters in GNNEXPLAINER ’s optimization depends
on the size of computation graph Gcfor nodevwhose prediction we aim to explain. In particular,
Gc(v)’s adjacency matrix Ac(v)is equal to the size of the mask M, which needs to be learned
byGNNEXPLAINER . However, since computation graphs are typically relatively small, compared
to the size of exhaustive L-hop neighborhoods ( e.g., 2-3 hop neighborhoods [ 21], sampling-based
neighborhoods [ 39], neighborhoods with attention [ 33]),GNNEXPLAINER can effectively generate
explanations even when input graphs are large.
5 Experiments
We begin by describing the graphs, alternative baseline approaches, and experimental setup. We then
present experiments on explaining GNNs for node classiﬁcation and graph classiﬁcation tasks. Our
qualitative and quantitative analysis demonstrates that G NNEXPLAINER is accurate and effective in
identifying explanations, both in terms of graph structure and node features.
Synthetic datasets. We construct four kinds of node classiﬁcation datasets (Table 1). (1) In BA-
SHAPES , we start with a base Barab ´asi-Albert (BA) graph on 300 nodes and a set of 80 ﬁve-node
“house”-structured network motifs, which are attached to randomly selected nodes of the base graph.
The resulting graph is further perturbed by adding 0:1Nrandom edges. Nodes are assigned to 4
classes based on their structural roles. In a house-structured motif, there are 3 types of roles: the top,
middle and bottom node of the house. Therefore there are 4 different classes, corresponding to nodes
at the top, middle, bottom of houses, and nodes that do not belong to a house. (2) BA-C OMMUNITY
dataset is a union of two BA-S HAPES graphs. Nodes have normally distributed feature vectors and
are assigned to one of 8 classes based on their structural roles and community memberships. (3)
InTREE-CYCLES , we start with a base 8-level balanced binary tree and 80 six-node cycle motifs,
which are attached to random nodes of the base graph. (4) TREE-GRIDis the same as TREE-CYCLES
except that 3-by-3 grid motifs are attached to the base tree graph in place of cycle motifs.
Real-world datasets. We consider two graph classiﬁcation datasets: (1) MUTAG is a dataset of
4;337molecule graphs labeled according to their mutagenic effect on the Gram-negative bacterium S.
typhimurium [10]. (2) REDDIT -BINARY is a dataset of 2;000graphs, each representing an online
discussion thread on Reddit. In each graph, nodes are users participating in a thread, and edges
indicate that one user replied to another user’s comment. Graphs are labeled according to the type of
user interactions in the thread: r/IAmA andr/AskReddit contain Question-Answer interactions, while
r/TrollXChromosomes andr/atheism contain Online-Discussion interactions [37].
Alternative baseline approaches. Many explainability methods cannot be directly applied to graphs
(Section 2). Nevertheless, we here consider the following alternative approaches that can provide
insights into predictions made by GNNs: (1) GRAD is a gradient-based method. We compute gradient
of the GNN’s loss function with respect to the adjacency matrix and the associated node features,
similar to a saliency map approach. (2) ATTis a graph attention GNN (GAT) [ 33] that learns attention
weights for edges in the computation graph, which we use as a proxy measure of edge importance.
While ATTdoes consider graph structure, it does not explain using node features and can only explain
GAT models. Furthermore, in ATTit is not obvious which attention weights need to be used for edge
7

==== Page 8 ====
BA-Shap es
Base
Motif
Node Features None Nonewhere    = comm unity ID
Graph structureGraph structure
Node feature informationExplanation
content
Explanation accuracy  
Att
Grad
GNNExplainerCommunity 1 Community 0BA-Comm unity Tree-Cycles
NoneTree-Grid
Graph structure Graph structure
0.9250.8820.815 0.739
0.750
0.8360.824
0.905
0.9480.612
0.667
0.875Table 1: Illustration of synthetic datasets (refer to “Synthetic datasets” for details) together with performance
evaluation of G NNEXPLAINER and alternative baseline explainability approaches.
ABAB
BA-Shapes
BA-Community
Tree-Cycles
Tree-Grid
Computation graphGradGround TruthAttComputation graphGradAttGround Truth
GNNExplainerGNNExplainer
Figure 3: Evaluation of single-instance explanations. A-B. Shown are exemplar explanation subgraphs for node
classiﬁcation task on four synthetic datasets. Each method provides explanation for the red node’s prediction.
importance, since a 1-hop neighbor of a node can also be a 2-hop neighbor of the same node due to
cycles. Each edge’s importance is thus computed as the average attention weight across all layers.
Setup and implementation details. For each dataset, we ﬁrst train a single GNN for each dataset,
and use GRAD and GNNEXPLAINER to explain the predictions made by the GNN. Note that
theATTbaseline requires using a graph attention architecture like GAT [ 33]. We thus train a
separate GAT model on the same dataset and use the learned edge attention weights for explanation.
Hyperparameters KM;KFcontrol the size of subgraph and feature explanations respectively, which
is informed by prior knowledge about the dataset. For synthetic datasets, we set KMto be the
size of ground truth. On real-world datasets, we set KM= 10 . We setKF= 5 for all datasets.
We further ﬁx our weight regularization hyperparameters across all node and graph classiﬁcation
experiments. We refer readers to the Appendix for more training details (Code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/RexYing/gnn-model-explainer).
Results. We investigate questions: Does GNNEXPLAINER provide sensible explanations? How
do explanations compare to the ground-truth knowledge? How does GNNEXPLAINER perform on
various graph-based prediction tasks? Can it explain predictions made by different GNNs?
1) Quantitative analyses. Results on node classiﬁcation datasets are shown in Table 1. We have
ground-truth explanations for synthetic datasets and we use them to calculate explanation accuracy for
all explanation methods. Speciﬁcally, we formalize the explanation problem as a binary classiﬁcation
task, where edges in the ground-truth explanation are treated as labels and importance weights given
by explainability method are viewed as prediction scores. A better explainability method predicts
MutagReddit-BinaryOnline-Discussion
MutagReddit-BinaryQuestion-AnswerComputation graphGradGround TruthAttComputation graphGradAttGround TruthGNNExplainerGNNExplainer
AB
TopicreactionsRingstructureNO  group2
Experts answeringmultiple questions 
Figure 4: Evaluation of single-instance explanations. A-B. Shown are exemplar explanation subgraphs for graph
classiﬁcation task on two datasets, M UTAG and R EDDIT -BINARY .
8

==== Page 9 ====
Graph classification  Node classification A B
COClHNFBrSPINaKLiCa
Not applicable Not applicableMolecular
graph with nodefeaturesComputationgraph of red node with nodefeatures
Input to
GNN
Node ’s structural role Molecule’s mutagenicityGNN’s
Prediction
Ground T ruth
Feature Importance
GNNExplainer
Grad
AttFigure 5: Visualization of features that are important
for a GNN’s prediction. A.Shown is a representative
molecular graph from MUTAG dataset (top). Impor-
tance of the associated graph features is visualized
with a heatmap (bottom). In contrast with baselines,
GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes features that are
important for predicting the molecule’s mutagenicity,
i.e.C, O, H, and N atoms. B.Shown is a computation
graph of a red node from BA-C OMMUNITY dataset
(top). Again, GNNEXPLAINER successfully identiﬁes
the node feature that is important for predicting the
structural role of the node but baseline methods fail.
high scores for edges that are in the ground-truth explanation, and thus achieves higher explanation
accuracy. Results show that GNNEXPLAINER outperforms alternative approaches by 17.1% on
average. Further, GNNEXPLAINER achieves up to 43.0% higher accuracy on the hardest TREE-GRID
dataset.
2) Qualitative analyses. Results are shown in Figures 3–5. In a topology-based prediction task with
no node features, e.g.BA-S HAPES andTREE-CYCLES ,GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes network
motifs that explain node labels, i.e.structural labels (Figure 3). As illustrated in the ﬁgures, house,
cycle and tree motifs are identiﬁed by GNNEXPLAINER but not by baseline methods. In Figure 4,
we investigate explanations for graph classiﬁcation task. In MUTAG example, colors indicate node
features, which represent atoms (hydrogen H, carbon C, etc).GNNEXPLAINER correctly identiﬁes
carbon ring as well as chemical groups NH 2andNO2, which are known to be mutagenic [10].
Further, in R EDDIT -BINARY example, we see that Question-Answer graphs (2nd row in Figure 4B)
have 2-3 high degree nodes that simultaneously connect to many low degree nodes, which makes
sense because in QA threads on Reddit we typically have 2-3 experts who all answer many different
questions [ 24]. Conversely, we observe that discussion patterns commonly exhibit tree-like patterns
(2nd row in Figure 4A), since a thread on Reddit is usually a reaction to a single topic [ 24]. On the
other hand, GRAD andATTmethods give incorrect or incomplete explanations. For example, both
baseline methods miss cycle motifs in MUTAG dataset and more complex grid motifs in TREE-GRID
dataset. Furthermore, although edge attention weights in ATTcan be interpreted as importance scores
for message passing, the weights are shared across all nodes in input the graph, and as such ATTfails
to provide high quality single-instance explanations.
An essential criterion for explanations is that they must be interpretable, i.e., provide a qualitative
understanding of the relationship between the input nodes and the prediction. Such a requirement
implies that explanations should be easy to understand while remaining exhaustive. This means
that a GNN explainer should take into account both the structure of the underlying graph as well as
the associated features when they are available. Figure 5 shows results of an experiment in which
GNNEXPLAINER jointly considers structural information as well as information from a small number
of feature dimensions3. While GNNEXPLAINER indeed highlights a compact feature representation
in Figure 5, gradient-based approaches struggle to cope with the added noise, giving high importance
scores to irrelevant feature dimensions.
6 Conclusion
We present GNNEXPLAINER , a novel method for explaining predictions of any GNN on any graph-
based machine learning task without requiring modiﬁcation of the underlying GNN architecture or
re-training. We show how GNNEXPLAINER can leverage recursive neighborhood-aggregation scheme
of graph neural networks to identify important graph pathways as well as highlight relevant node
feature information that is passed along edges of the pathways. While the problem of explainability of
machine-learning predictions has received substantial attention in recent literature, our work is unique
in the sense that it presents an approach that operates on relational structures—graphs with rich
node features—and provides a straightforward interface for making sense out of GNN predictions,
debugging GNN models, and identifying systematic patterns of mistakes.
3Feature explanations are shown for the two datasets with node features, i.e.,MUTAG andBA-C OMMUNITY .
9

==== Page 10 ====
Acknowledgments
Jure Leskovec is a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub investigator. We gratefully acknowledge the support
of DARPA under FA865018C7880 (ASED) and MSC; NIH under No. U54EB020405 (Mobilize);
ARO under No. 38796-Z8424103 (MURI); IARPA under No. 2017-17071900005 (HFC), NSF
under No. OAC-1835598 (CINES) and HDR; Stanford Data Science Initiative, Chan Zuckerberg
Biohub, JD.com, Amazon, Boeing, Docomo, Huawei, Hitachi, Observe, Siemens, UST Global.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or rec-
ommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the
views, policies, or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of DARPA, NIH, ONR, or the U.S.
Government.
References
[1]A. Adadi and M. Berrada. Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey on Explainable Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access , 6:52138–52160, 2018.
[2]J. Adebayo, J. Gilmer, M. Muelly, I. Goodfellow, M. Hardt, and B. Kim. Sanity checks for
saliency maps. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[3]M. Gethsiyal Augasta and T. Kathirvalavakumar. Reverse Engineering the Neural Networks for
Rule Extraction in Classiﬁcation Problems. Neural Processing Letters , 35(2):131–150, April
2012.
[4] Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zam-
baldi, Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner,
et al. Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv:1806.01261 , 2018.
[5]J. Chen, J. Zhu, and L. Song. Stochastic training of graph convolutional networks with variance
reduction. In ICML , 2018.
[6]Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin J Wainwright, and Michael I Jordan. Learning to explain: An
information-theoretic perspective on model interpretation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07814 ,
2018.
[7]Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, and Cao Xiao. Fastgcn: fast learning with graph convolutional networks
via importance sampling. In ICLR , 2018.
[8]Z. Chen, L. Li, and J. Bruna. Supervised community detection with line graph neural networks.
InICLR , 2019.
[9]E. Cho, S. Myers, and J. Leskovec. Friendship and mobility: user movement in location-based
social networks. In KDD , 2011.
[10] A. Debnath et al. Structure-activity relationship of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic
nitro compounds. correlation with molecular orbital energies and hydrophobicity. Journal of
Medicinal Chemistry , 34(2):786–797, 1991.
[11] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim. Towards A Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning.
2017. arXiv: 1702.08608.
[12] D. Duvenaud et al. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In
NIPS , 2015.
[13] D. Erhan, Y . Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent. Visualizing higher-layer features of a deep
network. University of Montreal , 1341(3):1, 2009.
[14] A. Fisher, C. Rudin, and F. Dominici. All Models are Wrong but many are Useful: Variable
Importance for Black-Box, Proprietary, or Misspeciﬁed Prediction Models, using Model Class
Reliance. January 2018. arXiv: 1801.01489.
[15] R. Guidotti et al. A Survey of Methods for Explaining Black Box Models. ACM Comput. Surv. ,
51(5):93:1–93:42, 2018.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[16] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
NIPS , 2017.
[17] G. Hooker. Discovering additive structure in black box functions. In KDD , 2004.
[18] W.B. Huang, T. Zhang, Y . Rong, and J. Huang. Adaptive sampling towards fast graph represen-
tation learning. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[19] Bo Kang, Jefrey Lijfﬁjt, and Tijl De Bie. Explaine: An approach for explaining network
embedding-based link predictions. arXiv:1904.12694 , 2019.
[20] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In NeurIPS , 2013.
[21] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks.
InICLR , 2016.
[22] Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. Neural
relational inference for interacting systems. In ICML , 2018.
[23] P. W. Koh and P. Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂuence functions. In ICML ,
2017.
[24] Srijan Kumar, William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky. Community interaction
and conﬂict on the web. In WWW , pages 933–943, 2018.
[25] H. Lakkaraju, E. Kamar, R. Caruana, and J. Leskovec. Interpretable & Explorable Approxima-
tions of Black Box Models, 2017.
[26] Y . Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural networks.
arXiv:1511.05493 , 2015.
[27] S. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Uniﬁed Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions. In NIPS ,
2017.
[28] D. Neil et al. Interpretable Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Inference on Noisy
Knowledge Graphs. In ML4H Workshop at NeurIPS , 2018.
[29] M. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin. Why should i trust you?: Explaining the predictions of
any classiﬁer. In KDD , 2016.
[30] G. J. Schmitz, C. Aldrich, and F. S. Gouws. ANN-DT: an algorithm for extraction of decision
trees from artiﬁcial neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 1999.
[31] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje. Learning Important Features Through Propagating
Activation Differences. In ICML , 2017.
[32] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan. Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks. In ICML ,
2017.
[33] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li `o, and Y . Bengio. Graph attention
networks. In ICLR , 2018.
[34] T. Xie and J. Grossman. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an accurate and
interpretable prediction of material properties. In Phys. Rev. Lett. , 2018.
[35] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks? In ICRL ,
2019.
[36] K. Xu, C. Li, Y . Tian, T. Sonobe, K. Kawarabayashi, and S. Jegelka. Representation learning on
graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In ICML , 2018.
[37] Pinar Yanardag and SVN Vishwanathan. Deep graph kernels. In KDD , pages 1365–1374. ACM,
2015.
[38] C. Yeh, J. Kim, I. Yen, and P. Ravikumar. Representer point selection for explaining deep neural
networks. In NeurIPS , 2018.
11

==== Page 12 ====
[39] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec. Graph convolutional
neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In KDD , 2018.
[40] Z. Ying, J. You, C. Morris, X. Ren, W. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec. Hierarchical graph
representation learning with differentiable pooling. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[41] J. You, B. Liu, R. Ying, V . Pande, and J. Leskovec. Graph convolutional policy network for
goal-directed molecular graph generation. 2018.
[42] J. You, Rex Ying, and J. Leskovec. Position-aware graph neural networks. In ICML , 2019.
[43] M. Zeiler and R. Fergus. Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional Networks. In ECCV .
2014.
[44] M. Zhang and Y . Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. In NIPS , 2018.
[45] Z. Zhang, Peng C., and W. Zhu. Deep Learning on Graphs: A Survey. arXiv:1812.04202 , 2018.
[46] J. Zhou, G. Cui, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. Graph Neural Networks: A Review of
Methods and Applications. arXiv:1812.08434 , 2018.
[47] J. Zilke, E. Loza Mencia, and F. Janssen. DeepRED - Rule Extraction from Deep Neural
Networks. In Discovery Science . Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[48] L. Zintgraf, T. Cohen, T. Adel, and M. Welling. Visualizing deep neural network decisions:
Prediction difference analysis. In ICLR , 2017.
[49] M. Zitnik, M. Agrawal, and J. Leskovec. Modeling polypharmacy side effects with graph
convolutional networks. Bioinformatics , 34, 2018.
12

