==== Page 1 ====
Gradient Surgery for Multi-Task Learning
Tianhe Yu1, Saurabh Kumar1, Abhishek Gupta2, Sergey Levine2,
Karol Hausman3,Chelsea Finn1
Stanford University1, UC Berkeley2, Robotics at Google3
tianheyu@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
While deep learning and deep reinforcement learning (RL) systems have demon-
strated impressive results in domains such as image classiﬁcation, game playing,
and robotic control, data efﬁciency remains a major challenge. Multi-task learning
has emerged as a promising approach for sharing structure across multiple tasks to
enable more efﬁcient learning. However, the multi-task setting presents a number
of optimization challenges, making it difﬁcult to realize large efﬁciency gains com-
pared to learning tasks independently. The reasons why multi-task learning is so
challenging compared to single-task learning are not fully understood. In this work,
we identify a set of three conditions of the multi-task optimization landscape that
cause detrimental gradient interference, and develop a simple yet general approach
for avoiding such interference between task gradients. We propose a form of gradi-
ent surgery that projects a task’s gradient onto the normal plane of the gradient of
any other task that has a conﬂicting gradient. On a series of challenging multi-task
supervised and multi-task RL problems, this approach leads to substantial gains
in efﬁciency and performance. Further, it is model-agnostic and can be combined
with previously-proposed multi-task architectures for enhanced performance.
1 Introduction
While deep learning and deep reinforcement learning (RL) have shown considerable promise in
enabling systems to learn complex tasks, the data requirements of current methods make it difﬁcult to
learn a breadth of capabilities, particularly when all tasks are learned individually from scratch. A
natural approach to such multi-task learning problems is to train a network on all tasks jointly, with
the aim of discovering shared structure across the tasks in a way that achieves greater efﬁciency and
performance than solving tasks individually. However, learning multiple tasks all at once results is a
difﬁcult optimization problem, sometimes leading to worse overall performance and data efﬁciency
compared to learning tasks individually [ 42,50]. These optimization challenges are so prevalent that
multiple multi-task RL algorithms have considered using independent training as a subroutine of the
algorithm before distilling the independent models into a multi-tasking model [ 32,42,50,21,56],
producing a multi-task model but losing out on the efﬁciency gains over independent training. If we
could tackle the optimization challenges of multi-task learning effectively, we may be able to actually
realize the hypothesized beneﬁts of multi-task learning without the cost in ﬁnal performance.
While there has been a signiﬁcant amount of research in multi-task learning [ 6,49], the optimization
challenges are not well understood. Prior work has described varying learning speeds of different
tasks [ 8,26] and plateaus in the optimization landscape [ 52] as potential causes, whereas a range of
other works have focused on the model architecture [ 40,33]. In this work, we instead hypothesize
that one of the main optimization issues in multi-task learning arises from gradients from different
tasks conﬂicting with one another in a way that is detrimental to making progress. We deﬁne two
gradients to be conﬂicting if they point away from one another, i.e., have a negative cosine similarity.
We hypothesize that such conﬂict is detrimental when a) conﬂicting gradients coincide with b) high
positive curvature and c) a large difference in gradient magnitudes.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
Figure 1: Visualization of PCGrad on a 2D multi-task optimiza-
tion problem. (a) A multi-task objective landscape. (b) & (c)
Contour plots of the individual task objectives that comprise (a).
(d) Trajectory of gradient updates on the multi-task objective using
the Adam optimizer. The gradient vectors of the two tasks at the
end of the trajectory are indicated by blue and red arrows, where
the relative lengths are on a log scale.(e) Trajectory of gradient
updates on the multi-task objective using Adam with PCGrad. For
(d) and (e), the optimization trajectory goes from black to yellow.As an illustrative example, consider the
2D optimization landscapes of two task
objectives in Figure 1a-c. The opti-
mization landscape of each task con-
sists of a deep valley, a property that
has been observed in neural network
optimization landscapes [ 22], and the
bottom of each valley is characterized
by high positive curvature and large
differences in the task gradient mag-
nitudes. Under such circumstances,
the multi-task gradient is dominated
by one task gradient, which comes at
the cost of degrading the performance
of the other task. Further, due to high
curvature, the improvement in the dominating task may be overestimated, while the degradation in
performance of the non-dominating task may be underestimated. As a result, the optimizer struggles
to make progress on the optimization objective. In Figure 1d), the optimizer reaches the deep valley of
task 1, but is unable to traverse the valley in a parameter setting where there are conﬂicting gradients ,
high curvature , and a large difference in gradient magnitudes (see gradients plotted in Fig. 1d). In
Section 5.3, we ﬁnd experimentally that this tragic triad also occurs in a higher-dimensional neural
network multi-task learning problem.
The core contribution of this work is a method for mitigating gradient interference by altering the
gradients directly, i.e. by performing “gradient surgery.” If two gradients are conﬂicting, we alter the
gradients by projecting each onto the normal plane of the other, preventing the interfering components
of the gradient from being applied to the network. We refer to this particular form of gradient
surgery as projecting conﬂicting gradients (PCGrad). PCGrad is model-agnostic, requiring only a
single modiﬁcation to the application of gradients. Hence, it is easy to apply to a range of problem
settings, including multi-task supervised learning and multi-task reinforcement learning, and can
also be readily combined with other multi-task learning approaches, such as those that modify the
architecture. We theoretically prove the local conditions under which PCGrad improves upon standard
multi-task gradient descent, and we empirically evaluate PCGrad on a variety of challenging problems,
including multi-task CIFAR classiﬁcation, multi-objective scene understanding, a challenging multi-
task RL domain, and goal-conditioned RL. Across the board, we ﬁnd PCGrad leads to substantial
improvements in terms of data efﬁciency, optimization speed, and ﬁnal performance compared to
prior approaches, including a more than 30% absolute improvement in multi-task reinforcement
learning problems. Further, on multi-task supervised learning tasks, PCGrad can be successfully
combined with prior state-of-the-art methods for multi-task learning for even greater performance.
2 Multi-Task Learning with PCGrad
While the multi-task problem can in principle be solved by simply applying a standard single-task
algorithm with a suitable task identiﬁer provided to the model, or a simple multi-head or multi-output
model, a number of prior works [ 42,50,53] have found this learning problem to be difﬁcult. In this
section, we introduce notation, identify possible causes for the difﬁculty of multi-task optimization,
propose a simple and general approach to mitigate it, and theoretically analyze the proposed approach.
2.1 Preliminaries: Problem and Notation
The goal of multi-task learning is to ﬁnd parameters of a modelfthat achieve high average
performance across all the training tasks drawn from a distribution of tasks p(T). More formally, we
aim to solve the problem: min
ETip(T)[Li()], whereLiis a loss function for the i-th taskTithat
we want to minimize. For a set of tasks, fTig, we denote the multi-task loss as L() =P
iLi(),
and the gradients of each task as gi=rLi()for a particular . (We drop the reliance on in the
notation for brevity.) To obtain a model that solves a speciﬁc task from the task distribution p(T),
we deﬁne a task-conditioned model f(yjx;zi), with inputx, outputy, and encoding zifor taskTi,
which could be provided as a one-hot vector or in any other form.
2

==== Page 3 ====
2.2 The Tragic Triad: Conﬂicting Gradients, Dominating Gradients, High Curvature
We hypothesize that a key optimization issue in multi-task learning arises from conﬂicting gradients,
where gradients for different tasks point away from one another as measured by a negative inner
product. However, conﬂicting gradients are not detrimental on their own. Indeed, simply averaging
task gradients should provide the correct solution to descend the multi-task objective. However, there
are conditions under which such conﬂicting gradients lead to signiﬁcantly degraded performance.
Consider a two-task optimization problem. If the gradient of one task is much larger in magnitude
than the other, it will dominate the average gradient. If there is also high positive curvature along the
directions of the task gradients, then the improvement in performance from the dominating task may
be signiﬁcantly overestimated, while the degradation in performance from the dominated task may
be signiﬁcantly underestimated. Hence, we can characterize the co-occurrence of three conditions
as follows: (a) when gradients from multiple tasks are in conﬂict with one another (b) when the
difference in gradient magnitudes is large, leading to some task gradients dominating others, and (c)
when there is high curvature in the multi-task optimization landscape. We formally deﬁne the three
conditions below.
Deﬁnition 1. We deﬁneijas the angle between two task gradients giandgj. We deﬁne the
gradients as conﬂicting when cosij<0.
Deﬁnition 2. We deﬁne the gradient magnitude similarity between two gradients giandgjas
(gi;gj) =2kgik2kgjk2
kgik2
2+kgjk2
2:
When the magnitude of two gradients is the same, this value is equal to 1. As the gradient magnitudes
become increasingly different, this value goes to zero.
Deﬁnition 3. We deﬁne multi-task curvature asH(L;;0) =R1
0rL()Tr2L(+a(0 
))rL()da;which is the averaged curvature of Lbetweenand0in the direction of the multi-task
gradientrL().
When H(L;;0)> C for some large positive constant C, for model parameters and0at the
current and next iteration, we characterize the optimization landscape as having high curvature.
We aim to study the tragic triad and observe the presence of the three conditions through two examples.
First, consider the two-dimensional optimization landscape illustrated in Fig. 1a, where the landscape
for each task objective corresponds to a deep and curved valley with large curvatures (Fig. 1b and 1c).
The optima of this multi-task objective correspond to where the two valleys meet. More details
on the optimization landscape are in Appendix D. Particular points of this optimization landscape
exhibit the three described conditions, and we observe that, the Adam [ 30] optimizer stalls precisely
at one of these points (see Fig. 1d), preventing it from reaching an optimum. This provides some
empirical evidence for our hypothesis. Our experiments in Section 5.3 further suggest that this
phenomenon occurs in multi-task learning with deep networks. Motivated by these observations,
we develop an algorithm that aims to alleviate the optimization challenges caused by conﬂicting
gradients, dominating gradients, and high curvature, which we describe next.
2.3 PCGrad: Project Conﬂicting Gradients
Our goal is to break one condition of the tragic triad by directly altering the gradients themselves
to prevent conﬂict. In this section, we outline our approach for altering the gradients. In the next
section, we will theoretically show that de-conﬂicting gradients can beneﬁt multi-task learning when
dominating gradients and high curvatures are present.
To be maximally effective and widely applicable, we aim to alter the gradients in a way that allows
for positive interactions between the task gradients and does not introduce assumptions on the form
of the model. Hence, when gradients do not conﬂict, we do not change the gradients. When gradients
do conﬂict, the goal of PCGrad is to modify the gradients for each task so as to minimize negative
conﬂict with other task gradients, which will in turn mitigate under- and over-estimation problems
arising from high curvature.
To deconﬂict gradients during optimization, PCGrad adopts a simple procedure: if the gradients
between two tasks are in conﬂict, i.e. their cosine similarity is negative, we project the gradient
of each task onto the normal plane of the gradient of the other task. This amounts to removing
the conﬂicting component of the gradient for the task, thereby reducing the amount of destruc-
tive gradient interference between tasks. A pictorial description of this idea is shown in Fig. 2.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Algorithm 1 PCGrad Update Rule
Require: Model parameters , task minibatchB=
fTkg
1:gk rLk()8k
2:gPC
k gk8k
3:forTi2B do
4: forTjuniformly BnT iin random order do
5: ifgPC
igj<0then
6: // Subtract the projection of gPC
iontogj
7: Set gPC
i=gPC
i gPC
igj
kgjk2gj
8:return update =gPC=P
igPC
i
Figure 2: Conﬂicting gradients and PCGrad. In (a),
tasksiandjhave conﬂicting gradient directions, which
can lead to destructive interference. In (b) and (c), we
illustrate the PCGrad algorithm in the case where gradi-
ents are conﬂicting. PCGrad projects task i’s gradient
onto the normal vector of task j’s gradient, and vice
versa. Non-conﬂicting task gradients (d) are not altered
under PCGrad, allowing for constructive interaction.
Suppose the gradient for task Tiisgi, and the gradient for task Tjisgj. PCGrad proceeds as follows:
(1) First, it determines whether giconﬂicts with gjby computing the cosine similarity between
vectors giandgj, where negative values indicate conﬂicting gradients. (2) If the cosine similarity
is negative, we replace giby its projection onto the normal plane of gj:gi=gi gigj
kgjk2gj. If the
gradients are not in conﬂict, i.e. cosine similarity is non-negative, the original gradient giremains
unaltered. (3) PCGrad repeats this process across all of the other tasks sampled in random order from
the current batchTj8j6=i, resulting in the gradient gPC
ithat is applied for task Ti. We perform
the same procedure for all tasks in the batch to obtain their respective gradients. The full update
procedure is described in Algorithm 1 and a discussion on using a random task order is included in
Appendix H.
This procedure, while simple to implement, ensures that the gradients that we apply for each task
per batch interfere minimally with the other tasks in the batch, mitigating the conﬂicting gradient
problem, producing a variant on standard ﬁrst-order gradient descent in the multi-objective setting.
In practice, PCGrad can be combined with any gradient-based optimizer, including commonly used
methods such as SGD with momentum and Adam [ 30], by simply passing the computed update to the
respective optimizer instead of the original gradient. Our experimental results verify the hypothesis
that this procedure reduces the problem of conﬂicting gradients, and ﬁnd that, as a result, learning
progress is substantially improved.
2.4 Theoretical Analysis of PCGrad
In this section, we theoretically analyze the performance of PCGrad with two tasks:
Deﬁnition 4. Consider two task loss functions L1:Rn!RandL2:Rn!R. We deﬁne
the two-task learning objective as L() =L1() +L2()for all2Rn, where g1=rL1(),
g2=rL2(), andg=g1+g2.
We ﬁrst aim to verify that the PCGrad update corresponds to a sensible optimization procedure under
simplifying assumptions. We analyze convergence of PCGrad in the convex setting, under standard
assumptions in Theorem 1. For additional analysis on convergence, including the non-convex setting,
with more than two tasks, and with momentum-based optimizers, see Appendices A.1 and A.4
Theorem 1. AssumeL1andL2are convex and differentiable. Suppose the gradient of LisL-
Lipschitz with L>0. Then, the PCGrad update rule with step size t1
Lwill converge to either (1)
a location in the optimization landscape where cos(12) = 1or (2) the optimal value L().
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
Theorem 1 states that application of the PCGrad update in the two-task setting with a convex and
Lipschitz multi-task loss function Lleads to convergence to either the minimizer of Lor a potentially
sub-optimal objective value. A sub-optimal solution occurs when the cosine similarity between the
gradients of the two tasks is exactly  1, i.e. the gradients directly conﬂict, leading to zero gradient
after applying PCGrad. However, in practice, since we are using SGD, which is a noisy estimate
of the true batch gradients, the cosine similarity between the gradients of two tasks in a minibatch
is unlikely to be 1, thus avoiding this scenario. Note that, in theory, convergence may be slow if
cos(12)hovers near 1. However, we don’t observe this in practice, as seen in the objective-wise
learning curves in Appendix B.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Now that we have checked the sensibility of PCGrad, we aim to understand how PCGrad relates to
the three conditions in the tragic triad. In particular, we derive sufﬁcient conditions under which
PCGrad achieves lower loss after one update. Here, we still analyze the two task setting, but no
longer assume convexity of the loss functions.
Deﬁnition 5. We deﬁne the multi-task curvature bounding measure (g1;g2) = (1 
cos212)kg1 g2k2
2
kg1+g2k2
2:
With the above deﬁnition, we present our next theorem:
Theorem 2. SupposeLis differentiable and the gradient of Lis Lipschitz continuous with constant
L>0. LetMTandPCGradbe the parameters after applying one update to withgand PCGrad-
modiﬁed gradient gPCrespectively, with step size t>0. Moreover, assume H(L;;MT)`kgk2
2
for some constant `L, i.e. the multi-task curvature is lower-bounded. Then L(PCGrad)L(MT)
if(a)cos12 (g1;g2),(b)`(g1;g2)L, and (c)t2
` (g1;g2)L:
Proof. See Appendix A.2.
Intuitively, Theorem 2 implies that PCGrad achieves lower loss value after a single gradient update
compared to standard gradient descent in multi-task learning when (i) the angle between task gradients
is not too small, i.e. the two tasks need to conﬂict sufﬁciently ( condition (a) ), (ii) the difference
in magnitude needs to be sufﬁciently large ( condition (a) ), (iii) the curvature of the multi-task
gradient should be large ( condition (b) ), (iv) and the learning rate should be big enough so that
large curvature would lead to overestimation of performance improvement on the dominating task
and underestimation of performance degradation on the dominated task ( condition (c) ). These ﬁrst
three points (i-iii) correspond to exactly the triad of conditions outlined in Section 2.2, while the
latter condition (iv) is desirable as we hope to learn quickly. We empirically validate that the ﬁrst
three points, (i-iii), are frequently met in a neural network multi-task learning problem in Figure 4 in
Section 5.3. For additional analysis, including complete sufﬁcient and necessary conditions for the
PCGrad update to outperform the vanilla multi-task gradient, see Appendix A.3.
3 PCGrad in Practice
We use PCGrad in supervised learning and reinforcement learning problems with multiple tasks or
goals. Here, we discuss the practical application of PCGrad to those settings.
In multi-task supervised learning, each task Tip(T)has a corresponding training dataset Di
consisting of labeled training examples, i.e. Di=f(x;y)ng. The objective for each task in this
supervised setting is then deﬁned as Li() =E(x;y)Di[ logf(yjx;zi)], whereziis a one-hot
encoding of taskTi. At each training step, we randomly sample a batch of data points Bfrom the whole
datasetS
iDiand then group the sampled data with the same task encoding into small batches denoted
asBifor eachTirepresented inB. We denote the set of tasks appearing in BasBT. After sampling,
we precompute the gradient of each task in BTasrLi() =E(x;y)Bi[ rlogf(yjx;zi)].
Given the set of precomputed gradients rLi(), we also precompute the cosine similarity between
all pairs of the gradients in the set. Using the pre-computed gradients and their similarities, we
can obtain the PCGrad update by following Algorithm 1, without re-computing task gradients nor
backpropagating into the network. Since the PCGrad procedure is only modifying the gradients of
shared parameters in the optimization step, it is model-agnostic and can be applied to any architecture
with shared parameters. We empirically validate PCGrad with multiple architectures in Section 5.
For multi-task RL and goal-conditioned RL, PCGrad can be readily applied to policy gradient methods
by directly updating the computed policy gradient of each task, following Algorithm 1, analogous to
the supervised learning setting. For actor-critic algorithms, it is also straightforward to apply PCGrad:
we simply replace task gradients for both the actor and the critic by their gradients computed via
PCGrad. For more details on the practical implementation for RL, see Appendix C.
4 Related Work
Algorithms for multi-task learning typically consider how to train a single model that can solve a
variety of different tasks [ 6,2,49]. The multi-task formulation has been applied to many different
settings, including supervised learning [ 63,35,60,53,62] and reinforcement-learning [ 17,58], as
well as many different domains, such as vision [ 3,39,31,33,62], language [ 11,15,38,44] and
robotics [ 45,59,25]. While multi-task learning has the promise of accelerating acquisition of large
5

==== Page 6 ====
task repertoires, in practice it presents a challenging optimization problem, which has been tackled in
several ways in prior work.
A number of architectural solutions have been proposed to the multi-task learning problem based
on multiple modules or paths [19, 14, 40, 51, 46, 57, 46], or using attention-based architectures [33,
37]. Our work is agnostic to the model architecture and can be combined with prior architectural
approaches in a complementary fashion. A different set of multi-task learning approaches aim to
decompose the problem into multiple local problems, often corresponding to each task, that are
signiﬁcantly easier to learn, akin to divide and conquer algorithms [ 32,50,42,56,21,13]. Eventually,
the local models are combined into a single, multi-task policy using different distillation techniques
(outlined in [ 27,13]). In contrast to these methods, we propose a simple and cogent scheme for
multi-task learning that allows us to learn the tasks simultaneously using a single, shared model
without the need for network distillation.
Similarly to our work, a number of prior approaches have observed the difﬁculty of optimization in
multi-task learning [ 26,29,52,55]. Our work suggests that the challenge in multi-task learning may
be attributed to what we describe as the tragic triad of multi-task learning (i.e., conﬂicting gradients,
high curvature, and large gradient differences), which we address directly by introducing a simple and
practical algorithm that deconﬂicts gradients from different tasks. Prior works combat optimization
challenges by rescaling task gradients [ 53,9]. We alter both the magnitude and direction of the
gradient, which we ﬁnd to be critical for good performance (see Fig. 3). Prior work has also used
the cosine similarity between gradients to deﬁne when an auxiliary task might be useful [ 16] or
when two tasks are related [ 55]. We similarly use cosine similarity between gradients to determine
if the gradients between a pair of tasks are in conﬂict. Unlike Du et al. [16], we use this measure
for effective multi-task learning, instead of ignoring auxiliary objectives. Overall, we empirically
compare our approach to a number of these prior approaches [ 53,9,55], and observe superior
performance with PCGrad.
Multiple approaches to continual learning have studied how to prevent gradient updates from adversely
affecting previously-learned tasks through various forms of gradient projection [ 36,7,18,23]. These
methods focus on sequential learning settings, and solve for the gradient projections using quadratic
programming [ 36], only project onto the normal plane of the average gradient of past tasks [ 7], or
project the current task gradients onto the orthonormal set of previous task gradients [ 18]. In contrast,
our work focuses on positive transfer when simultaneously learning multiple tasks, does not require
solving a QP, and iteratively projects the gradients of each task instead of averaging or only projecting
thecurrent task gradient. Finally, our method is distinct from and solves a different problem than
the projected gradient method [ 5], which is an approach for constrained optimization that projects
gradients onto the constraint manifold.
5 Experiments
The goal of our experiments is to study the following questions: (1) Does PCGrad make the optimiza-
tion problems easier for various multi-task learning problems including supervised, reinforcement,
and goal-conditioned reinforcement learning settings across different task families? (2) Can PCGrad
be combined with other multi-task learning approaches to further improve performance? (3) Is the
tragic triad of multi-task learning a major factor in making optimization for multi-task learning
challenging? To broadly evaluate PCGrad, we consider multi-task supervised learning, multi-task RL,
and goal-conditioned RL problems. We include the results on goal-conditioned RL in Appendix F.
During our evaluation, we tune the parameters of the baselines independently, ensuring that all
methods were fairly provided with equal model and training capacity. PCGrad inherits the hyperpa-
rameters of the respective baseline method in all experiments, and has no additional hyperparameters.
For more details on the experimental set-up and model architectures, see Appendix J. The code is
available online1.
5.1 Multi-Task Supervised Learning
To answer question (1) in the supervised learning setting and question (2), we perform experiments on
ﬁve standard multi-task supervised learning datasets: MultiMNIST, CityScapes, CelebA, multi-task
CIFAR-100 and NYUv2. We include the results on MultiMNIST and CityScapes in Appendix E.
1Code is released at https://github.com/tianheyu927/PCGrad
6

==== Page 7 ====
#P. Architecture WeightingSegmentation Depth Surface Normal
(Higher Better) (Lower Better)Angle Distance Within t
(Lower Better) (Higher Better)
mIoU Pix Acc Abs Err Rel Err Mean Median 11.25 22.5 30
Equal Weights 14.71 50.23 0.6481 0.2871 33.56 28.58 20.08 40.54 51.97
3 Cross-StitchzUncert. Weights15.69 52.60 0.6277 0.2702 32.69 27.26 21.63 42.84 54.45
DWAy,T= 2 16.11 53.19 0.5922 0.2611 32.34 26.91 21.81 43.14 54.92
Equal Weights 17.72 55.32 0.5906 0.2577 31.44 25.37 23.17 45.65 57.48
1.77 MTANyUncert. Weights17.67 55.61 0.5927 0.2592 31.25 25.57 22.99 45.83 57.67
DWAy,T= 2 17.15 54.97 0.5956 0.2569 31.60 25.46 22.48 44.86 57.24
1.77 MTANy+ PCGrad (ours) Uncert. Weights20.17 56.65 0.5904 0.2467 30.01 24.83 22.28 46.12 58.77
Table 1: Three-task learning on the NYUv2 dataset: 13-class semantic segmentation, depth estimation, and
surface normal prediction results. #P shows the total number of network parameters. We highlight the best
performing combination of multi-task architecture and weighting in bold. The top validation scores for each task
are annotated with boxes. The symbols indicate prior methods:: [28],y: [33],z: [40]. Performance of other
methods as reported in Liu et al. [33].
% accuracy
task speciﬁc, 1-fc [46] 42
task speciﬁc, all-fc [46] 49
cross stitch, all-fc [40] 53
routing, all-fc + WPL [47] 74.7
independent 67.7
PCGrad (ours) 71
routing-all-fc + WPL + PCGrad (ours) 77.5
Table 2: CIFAR-100 multi-task results. When com-
bined with routing networks, PCGrad leads to a large
improvement.For CIFAR-100, we follow Rosenbaum et al.
[46] to treat 20 coarse labels in the dataset as
distinct tasks, creating a dataset with 20 tasks,
with 2500 training instances and 500 test in-
stances per task. We combine PCGrad with a
powerful multi-task learning architecture, rout-
ing networks [ 46,47], by applying PCGrad only
to the shared parameters. For the details of this
comparison, see Appendix J.1. As shown in
Table 2, applying PCGrad to a single network
achieves 71% classiﬁcation accuracy, which out-
performs most of the prior methods such as
cross-stitch [ 40] and independent training, sug-
gesting that sharing representations across tasks is conducive for good performance. While routing
networks achieve better performance than PCGrad on its own, they are complementary: combining
PCGrad with routing networks leads to a 2:8%absolute improvement in test accuracy.
We also aim to use PCGrad to tackle a multi-label classﬁcation problem, which is a commonly
used benchmark for multi-task learning. In multi-label classiﬁcation, given a set of attributes, the
model needs to decide whether each attribute describes the input. Hence, it is essentially a binary
classiﬁcation problem for each attribute. We choose the CelebA dataset [ 34], which consists of 200K
face images with 40 attributes. Since for each attribution, it is a binary classﬁcation problem and thus
we convert it to a 40-way multi-task learning problem following [53]. We use the same architecture
as in [53].
We use the binary classiﬁcation error averaged across all 40tasks to evaluate the performance as
in [53]. Similar to the MultiMNIST results, we compare PCGrad to Sener and Koltun [53] by
rerunning the open-sourced code provided in [ 53]. As shown in Table 3, PCGrad outperforms Sener
and Koltun [53], suggesting that PCGrad is effective in multi-label classiﬁcation and can also improve
multi-task supervised learning performance when the number of tasks is high.
average classiﬁcation error
Sener and Koltun [53] 8.95
PCGrad (ours) 8.69
Table 3: CelebA results. We show the average classiﬁcation error across all 40 tasks in CelebA. PCGrad
outperforms the prior method Sener and Koltun [53] in this dataset.
Finally, we combine PCGrad with another state-of-art multi-task learning algorithm, MTAN [ 33],
and evaluate the performance on a more challenging indoor scene dataset, NYUv2, which contains 3
tasks: 13-class semantic segmentation, depth estimation, and surface normal prediction. We compare
MTAN with PCGrad to a list of methods mentioned in Appendix J.1, where each method is trained
with three different weighting schemes as in [ 33], equal weighting, weight uncertainty [ 28], and
DWA [ 33]. We only run MTAN with PCGrad with weight uncertainty as we ﬁnd weight uncertainty
7

==== Page 8 ====
Figure 3: For the two plots on the left, we show learning curves on MT10 and MT50 respectively. PCGrad
signiﬁcantly outperforms the other methods in terms of both success rates and data efﬁciency. In the rightmost
plot, we present the ablation study on only using the magnitude and the direction of gradients modiﬁed by
PCGrad and a comparison to GradNorm [ 8]. PCGrad outperforms both ablations and GradNorm, indicating the
importance of modifying both the gradient directions and magnitudes in multi-task learning.
as the most effective scheme for training MTAN. The results comparing Cross-Stitch, MTAN and
MTAN + PCGrad are presented in Table 1 while the full comparison can be found in Table 8 in the
Appendix J.4. MTAN with PCGrad is able to achieve the best scores in 8 out of the 9 categories
where there are 3 categories per task.
Our multi-task supervised learning results indicate that PCGrad can be seamlessly combined with
state-of-art multi-task learning architectures and further improve their results on established super-
vised multi-task learning benchmarks. We include more results of PCGrad combined with more
multi-task learning architectures in Appendix I.
5.2 Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
To answer question (2) in the RL setting, we ﬁrst consider the multi-task RL problem and evaluate our
algorithm on the recently proposed Meta-World benchmark [ 61]. In particular, we test all methods
on the MT10 and MT50 benchmarks in Meta-World, which contain 10and50manipulation tasks
respectively shown in Figure 10. in Appendix J.2.
The results are shown in left two plots in Figure 3. PCGrad combined with SAC learns all tasks
with the best data efﬁciency and successfully solves all of the 10tasks in MT10 and about 70% of
the50tasks in MT50. Training a single SAC policy and a multi-head policy is unable to acquire
half of the skills in both MT10 and MT50, suggesting that eliminating gradient interference across
tasks can signiﬁcantly boost performance of multi-task RL. Training independent SAC agents is able
to eventually solve all tasks in MT10 and 70% of the tasks in MT50, but requires about 2millions
and15millions more samples than PCGrad with SAC in MT10 and MT50 respectively, implying
that applying PCGrad can result in leveraging shared structure among tasks that expedites multi-task
learning. As noted by Yu et al. [61], these tasks involve distinct behavior motions, which makes
learning all tasks with a single policy challenging as demonstrated by poor baseline performance.
The ability to learn these tasks together opens the door for a number of interesting extensions to
meta-learning and generalization to novel task families.
Since the PCGrad update affects both the gradient direction and the gradient magnitude, we perform
an ablation study that tests two variants of PCGrad: (1) only applying the gradient direction corrected
with PCGrad while keeping the gradient magnitude unchanged and (2) only applying the gradient
magnitude computed by PCGrad while keeping the gradient direction unchanged. We further run a
direction comparison to GradNorm [ 8], which also scales only the magnitudes of the task gradients.
As shown in the rightmost plot in Figure 3, both variants and GradNorm perform worse than PCGrad
and the variant where we only vary the gradient magnitude is much worse than PCGrad. This
emphasizes the importance of the orientation change, which is particularly notable as multiple prior
works only alter gradient magnitudes [ 8,53]. We also notice that the variant of PCGrad where only
the gradient magnitudes change achieves comparable performance to GradNorm, which suggests that
it is important to modify both the gradient directions and magnitudes to eliminate interference and
achieve good multi-task learning results. Finally, to test the importance of keeping positive cosine
similarities between tasks for positive transfer, we compare PCGrad to a recently proposed method
in [55] that regularizes cosine similarities of different task gradients towards 0. PCGrad outperforms
Suteu and Guo [55] by a large margin. We leave details of the comparison to Appendix G.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Figure 4: An empirical analysis of the theoretical conditions discussed in Theorem 2, showing the ﬁrst 100
iterations of training on two RL tasks, reach and press button top. Left: The estimated value of the multi-task
curvature. We observe high multi-task curvatures exist throughout training, providing evidence for condition (b)
in Theorem 2. Middle : The solid lines show the percentage gradients with positive cosine similarity between
two task gradients, while the dotted lines and dashed lines show the percentage of iterations in which condition
(a) and the implication of condition (b) ( (g1;g2)1) in Theorem 2 are held respectively, among iterations
when the cosine similarity is negative. Right : The average return of each task achieved by SAC and SAC
combined with PCGrad. From the plots in the Middle and on the Right , we can tell that condition (a) holds
most of the time for both Adam and Adam combined with PCGrad when they haven’t solved Task 2 and as soon
as Adam combined PCGrad starts to learn Task 2, the percentage of condition (a) held starts to decline. This
observation suggests that condition (a) is a key factor for PCGrad excelling in multi-task learning.
5.3 Empirical Analysis of the Tragic Triad
Finally, to answer question (1), we compare the performance of standard multi-task SAC and the
multi-task SAC with PCGrad. We evaluate each method on two tasks, reach and press button top,
in the Meta-World [ 61] benchmark. As shown in the leftmost plot in Figure 4, we plot the multi-
task curvature, which is computed as H(L;t;t+1)=2
L(t+1) L(t) rtL(t)T(t+1 t)
by
Taylor’s Theorem where Lis the multi-task loss, and tandt+1are the parameters at iteration
tandt+ 1. During the training process, the multi-task curvature stays positive and is increasing
for both Adam and Adam combined PCGrad, suggesting that condition (b) in Theorem 2 that the
multi-task curvature is lower bounded by some positive value is widely held empirically. To further
analyze conditions in Theorem 2 empirically, we plot the percentage of condition (a) (i.e. conﬂicting
gradients) and the implication of condition (b) ( (g1;g2)1) in Theorem 2 being held among the
total number of iterations where the cosine similarity is negative in the plot in the middle of Figure 4.
Along with the plot on the right in Figure 4, which presents the average return of the two tasks during
training, we can see that while Adam and Adam with PCGrad haven’t received reward signal from
Task 2, condition (a) and the implication of condition (b) stay held and as soon as Adam with PCGrad
begins to solve Task 2, the percentage of condition (a) and the implication of condition (b) being held
start to decrease. Such a pattern suggests that conﬂicting gradients, high curvatures and dominating
gradients indeed produce considerable challenges in optimization before multi-task learner gains any
useful learning signal, which also implies that the tragic triad may indeed be the determining factor
where PCGrad can lead to better performance gain over standard multi-task learning in practice.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we identiﬁed a set of conditions that underlies major challenges in multi-task optimiza-
tion: conﬂicting gradients, high positive curvature, and large gradient differences. We proposed a
simple algorithm (PCGrad) to mitigate these challenges via “gradient surgery.” PCGrad provides
a simple solution to mitigating gradient interference, which substantially improves optimization
performance. We provide simple didactic examples and subsequently show signiﬁcant improvement
in optimization for a variety of multi-task supervised learning and reinforcement learning problems.
We show that, when some optimization challenges of multi-task learning are alleviated by PCGrad,
we can obtain hypothesized beneﬁts in efﬁciency and asymptotic performance of multi-task settings.
While we studied multi-task supervised learning and multi-task reinforcement learning in this work,
we suspect the problem of conﬂicting gradients to be prevalent in a range of other settings and
applications, such as meta-learning, continual learning, multi-goal imitation learning [ 10], and
multi-task problems in natural language processing applications [ 38]. Due to its simplicity and
model-agnostic nature, we expect that applying PCGrad in these domains to be a promising avenue
for future investigation. Further, the general idea of gradient surgery may be an important ingredient
for alleviating a broader class of optimization challenges in deep learning, such as the challenges in
the stability challenges in two-player games [ 48] and multi-agent optimizations [ 41]. We believe this
work to be a step towards simple yet general techniques for addressing some of these challenges.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Broader Impact
Applications and Beneﬁts. Despite recent success, current deep learning and deep RL methods
mostly focus on tackling a single speciﬁc task from scratch. Prior methods have proposed methods
that can perform multiple tasks, but they often yield comparable or even higher data complexity
compared to learning each task individually. Our method enables deep learning systems that mitigate
inferences between differing tasks and thus achieves data-efﬁcient multi-task learning. Since our
method is general and simple to apply to various problems, there are many possible real-world
applications, including but not limited to computer vision systems, autonomous driving, and robotics.
For computer vision systems, our method can be used to develop algorithms that enable efﬁcient
classiﬁcation, instance and semantics segmentation and object detection at the same time, which
could improve performances of computer vision systems by reusing features obtained from each task
and lead to a leap in real-world domains such as autonomous driving. For robotics, there are many
situations where multi-task learning is needed. For example, surgical robots are required to perform a
wide range of tasks such as stitching and removing tumour from the patient’s body. Kitchen robots
should be able to complete multiple chores such as cooking and washing dishes at the same time.
Hence, our work represents a step towards making multi-task reinforcement learning more applicable
to those settings.
Risks. However, there are potential risks that apply to all machine learning and reinforcement
learning systems including ours, including but not limited to safety, reward speciﬁcation in RL
which is often difﬁcult to acquire in the real world, bias in supervised learning systems due to the
composition of training data, and compute/data-intensive training procedures. For example, safety
issues arise when autonomous driving cars fail to generalize to out-of-distribution data, which leads
to crashing or even hurting people. Moreover, reward speciﬁcation in RL is generally inaccessible in
the real world, making RL unable to scale to real robots. In supervised learning domains, learned
models could inherit the bias that exists in the training dataset. Furthermore, training procedures of
ML models are generally compute/data-intensive, which cause inequitable access to these models.
Our method is not immune to these risks. Hence, we encourage future research to design more robust
and safe multi-task RL algorithms that can prevent unsafe behaviors. It is also important to push
research in self-supervised and unsupervised multi-task RL in order to resolve the issue of reward
speciﬁcation. For supervised learning, we recommend researchers to publish their trained multi-task
learning models to make access to those models equitable to everyone in ﬁeld and develop new
datasets that can mitigate biases and also be readily used in multi-task learning.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The authors would like to thank Annie Xie for reviewing an earlier draft of the paper, Eric Mitchell
for technical guidance, and Aravind Rajeswaran and Deirdre Quillen for helpful discussions. Tianhe
Yu is partially supported by Intel Corporation. Saurabh Kumar is supported by an NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship and the Stanford Knight Hennessy Fellowship. Abhishek Gupta is supported by
an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. Chelsea Finn is a CIFAR Fellow in the Learning in Machines
and Brains program.
References
[1]Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Segnet: A deep convolutional
encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 39(12), 2017.
[2]Bart Bakker and Tom Heskes. Task clustering and gating for bayesian multitask learning. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. , 2003.
[3]Hakan Bilen and Andrea Vedaldi. Integrated perception with recurrent multi-task neural
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2016.
[4]Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization . Cambridge university press,
2004.
[5]Paul H Calamai and Jorge J Mor ´e. Projected gradient methods for linearly constrained problems.
Mathematical programming , 39(1), 1987.
[6] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine Learning , 1997.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[7]Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efﬁcient
lifelong learning with a-gem. arXiv:1812.00420 , 2018.
[8]Zhao Chen, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Chen-Yu Lee, and Andrew Rabinovich. Gradnorm: Gradient
normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask networks. arXiv:1711.02257 , 2017.
[9]Zhao Chen, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Chen-Yu Lee, and Andrew Rabinovich. Gradnorm: Gra-
dient normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask networks. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , 2018.
[10] Felipe Codevilla, Matthias Miiller, Antonio L ´opez, Vladlen Koltun, and Alexey Dosovitskiy.
End-to-end driving via conditional imitation learning. In International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) , 2018.
[11] Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. A uniﬁed architecture for natural language processing: Deep
neural networks with multitask learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
2008.
[12] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
urban scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 3213–3223, 2016.
[13] Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Grzegorz
Swirszcz, and Max Jaderberg. Distilling policy distillation. In International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS , 2019.
[14] Coline Devin, Abhishek Gupta, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Learning
modular neural network policies for multi-task and multi-robot transfer. CoRR , abs/1609.07088,
2016.
[15] Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and Haifeng Wang. Multi-task learning for multi-
ple language translation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , 2015.
[16] Yunshu Du, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Razvan Pascanu, and Balaji
Lakshminarayanan. Adapting auxiliary losses using gradient similarity. CoRR , abs/1812.02224,
2018.
[17] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, R ´emi Munos, Karen Simonyan, V olodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward,
Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
IMPALA: scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018.
[18] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for
continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07104 , 2019.
[19] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Charles Blundell, Yori Zwols, David Ha, Andrei A. Rusu,
Alexander Pritzel, and Daan Wierstra. Pathnet: Evolution channels gradient descent in super
neural networks. CoRR , abs/1701.08734, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.
08734 .
[20] William Fulton. Eigenvalues, invariant factors, highest weights, and schubert calculus. Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society , 37(3):209–249, 2000.
[21] Dibya Ghosh, Avi Singh, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Divide-and-
conquer reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/1711.09874, 2017.
[22] Ian J Goodfellow, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew M Saxe. Qualitatively characterizing neural
network optimization problems. arXiv:1412.6544 , 2014.
[23] Yunhui Guo, Mingrui Liu, Tianbao Yang, and Tajana Rosing. Improved schemes for episodic
memory-based lifelong learning, 2020.
[24] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. International Conference
on Machine Learning , 2018.
[25] Karol Hausman, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Ziyu Wang, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
Learning an embedding space for transferable robot skills. 2018.
11

==== Page 12 ====
[26] Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33, 2019.
[27] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[28] Alex Kendall, Yarin Gal, and Roberto Cipolla. Multi-task learning using uncertainty to weigh
losses for scene geometry and semantics. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018.
[29] Alex Kendall, Yarin Gal, and Roberto Cipolla. Multi-task learning using uncertainty to weigh
losses for scene geometry and semantics. In CVPR , 2018.
[30] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[31] Iasonas Kokkinos. Ubernet: Training a universal convolutional neural network for low-, mid-,
and high-level vision using diverse datasets and limited memory. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2017.
[32] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(1), 2016.
[33] Shikun Liu, Edward Johns, and Andrew J. Davison. End-to-end multi-task learning with
attention. CoRR , abs/1803.10704, 2018.
[34] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in
the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages
3730–3738, 2015.
[35] Mingsheng Long and Jianmin Wang. Learning multiple tasks with deep relationship networks.
arXiv:1506.02117 , 2, 2015.
[36] David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[37] Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis, Ilija Radosavovic, and Iasonas Kokkinos. Attentive single-tasking of
multiple tasks. CoRR , abs/1904.08918, 2019.
[38] Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. The natural
language decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering. arXiv:1806.08730 , 2018.
[39] Ishan Misra, Abhinav Shrivastava, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert. Cross-stitch networks
for multi-task learning. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016.
[40] Ishan Misra, Abhinav Shrivastava, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert. Cross-stitch networks
for multi-task learning. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR ,
2016.
[41] Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent opti-
mization. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 54(1), 2009.
[42] Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and
transfer reinforcement learning. arXiv:1511.06342 , 2015.
[43] Boris T Polyak. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods. USSR
Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics , 4(5):1–17, 1964.
[44] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog , 1(8), 2019.
[45] Martin Riedmiller, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, Michael Neunert, Jonas Degrave, Tom
Van de Wiele, V olodymyr Mnih, Nicolas Heess, and Jost Tobias Springenberg. Learning by
playing-solving sparse reward tasks from scratch. arXiv:1802.10567 , 2018.
[46] Clemens Rosenbaum, Tim Klinger, and Matthew Riemer. Routing networks: Adaptive selec-
tion of non-linear functions for multi-task learning. International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2018.
[47] Clemens Rosenbaum, Ignacio Cases, Matthew Riemer, and Tim Klinger. Routing networks and
the challenges of modular and compositional computation. arXiv:1904.12774 , 2019.
12

==== Page 13 ====
[48] Kevin Roth, Aurelien Lucchi, Sebastian Nowozin, and Thomas Hofmann. Stabilizing training
of generative adversarial networks through regularization. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2017.
[49] Sebastian Ruder. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. arXiv:1706.05098 ,
2017.
[50] Andrei A. Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, C ¸aglar G ¨ulc ¸ehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James
Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy
distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR , 2016.
[51] Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick,
Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks.
arXiv:1606.04671 , 2016.
[52] Tom Schaul, Diana Borsa, Joseph Modayil, and Razvan Pascanu. Ray interference: a source of
plateaus in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1904.11455 , 2019.
[53] Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[54] Yuekai Sun. Notes on ﬁrst-order methods for minimizing smooth func-
tions, 2015. https://web.stanford.edu/class/msande318/notes/
notes-first-order-smooth.pdf .
[55] Mihai Suteu and Yike Guo. Regularizing deep multi-task networks using orthogonal gradients.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06844 , 2019.
[56] Yee Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech M Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia Hadsell,
Nicolas Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[57] Simon Vandenhende, Bert De Brabandere, and Luc Van Gool. Branched multi-task networks:
Deciding what layers to share. CoRR , abs/1904.02920, 2019.
[58] Aaron Wilson, Alan Fern, Soumya Ray, and Prasad Tadepalli. Multi-task reinforcement learning:
a hierarchical bayesian approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2007.
[59] Markus Wulfmeier, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Roland Hafner, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Michael
Neunert, Tim Hertweck, Thomas Lampe, Noah Siegel, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
Regularized hierarchical policies for compositional transfer in robotics. arXiv:1906.11228 ,
2019.
[60] Yongxin Yang and Timothy M Hospedales. Trace norm regularised deep multi-task learning.
arXiv:1606.04038 , 2016.
[61] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and
Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta-reinforcement
learning. arXiv:1910.10897 , 2019.
[62] Amir R Zamir, Alexander Sax, William Shen, Leonidas J Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio
Savarese. Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2018.
[63] Zhanpeng Zhang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Facial landmark detection by
deep multi-task learning. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 2014.
13

