==== Page 1 ====
sustainability
Perspective
Green Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Towards an Efﬁcient, Sustainable
and Equitable Technology for Smart Cities and Futures
Tan Yigitcanlar1,2,*
, Rashid Mehmood3
and Juan M. Corchado4,5,6
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Yigitcanlar, T.;
Mehmood, R.; Corchado, J.M. Green
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Towards an
Efﬁcient, Sustainable and Equitable
Technology for Smart Cities and
Futures. Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
su13168952
Academic Editor: Marc A. Rosen
Received: 24 May 2021
Accepted: 9 August 2021
Published: 10 August 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1School of Architecture and Built Environment, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George Street,
Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
2School of Technology, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Campus Universitario,
Florianopolis, SC 88040-900, Brazil
3High Performance Computing Center, King Abdulaziz University, Al Ehtifalat St, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia;
rmehmood@kau.edu.sa
4BISITE Research Group, University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain; corchado@usal.es
5Air Institute, IoT Digital Innovation Hub, 37188 Salamanca, Spain
6Department of Electronics, Information and Communication, Faculty of Engineering,
Osaka Institute of Technology, Osaka 535-8585, Japan
*Correspondence: tan.yigitcanlar@qut.edu.au or tan.yigitcanlar@ufsc.br; Tel.: +61-7-3138-2418
Abstract: Smart cities and artificial intelligence (AI) are among the most popular discourses in urban
policy circles. Most attempts at using AI to improve efficiencies in cities have nevertheless either
struggled or failed to accomplish the smart city transformation. This is mainly due to short-sighted,
technologically determined and reductionist AI approaches being applied to complex urbanization
problems. Besides this, as smart cities are underpinned by our ability to engage with our environments,
analyze them, and make efficient, sustainable and equitable decisions, the need for a green AI approach
is intensified. This perspective paper, reflecting authors’ opinions and interpretations, concentrates on
the “green AI” concept as an enabler of the smart city transformation, as it offers the opportunity to
move away from purely technocentric efficiency solutions towards efficient, sustainable and equitable
solutions capable of realizing the desired urban futures. The aim of this perspective paper is two-fold:
first, to highlight the fundamental shortfalls in mainstream AI system conceptualization and practice,
and second, to advocate the need for a consolidated AI approach—i.e., green AI—to further support
smart city transformation. The methodological approach includes a thorough appraisal of the current
AI and smart city literatures, practices, developments, trends and applications. The paper informs
authorities and planners on the importance of the adoption and deployment of AI systems that address
efficiency , sustainability and equity issues in cities.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence (AI); green AI; sustainable AI; responsible AI; ethical AI; explainable
AI; AI regulation; green sensing; sustainable development goals; smart cities
1. Introduction: AI in the Smart City Context
The second digital and fourth industrial revolutions cultivated an innovation culture
for the ﬂourishing of many technological developments and breakthroughs [ 1,2]. For
instance, the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)—deﬁned as algorithms that mimic the
cognitive functions of the human mind to make decisions without being supervised [ 3]—
has undergone remarkable exponential growth over the last couple of decades [ 4]. Today,
AI is undoubtedly an in-trend, disruptive technology with countless applications, and
even more prospects, for all industry sectors and areas of life—ranging from health to
agriculture, engineering to ﬁnance, gaming to transportation, and so on [ 5]. Besides this,
AI is one of the fundamental drivers of the global smart city movement [6].
Smart cities are widely seen as locations whereat digital technology and data are
widely applied to generate efﬁciencies for economic growth, quality of life, and sus-
tainability [ 7]. Today, in many urban policy circles and debates, concerning smart city
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13168952 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 2 of 14
transformation, AI has become a subject of debate, particularly among urban policymakers
and planners who search for technocentric solutions to alarming urbanization problems [ 8].
This popularity is due to the increasing recognition of technocentric solutions as a potential
panacea to the complex and complicated urbanization challenges—ranging from quality of
life to climate change, and safety and security to mobility and accessibility [ 9]. The effective
use of big data, AI-powered smart urban technologies and platforms is predicted to beneﬁt
urban infrastructure and service efﬁciency, and to address or at least signiﬁcantly ease
these challenges [10,11].
As stated by Wang and Cao [ 12], technological advancements have generated an era
wherein large volumes of data—i.e., big data—are collected via smart sensors deployed
in cities, and are made available via various commercial and public channels. Due to the
recent advances in AI techniques and ubiquitous computing, these data now feed into
the services that improve quality of life, city operation systems, and the environment. In
the context of cities, AI has various applications in areas that aim to create efﬁciencies
in urban infrastructure and services [ 13]. The following are among the most prevalent
AI-powered examples:
 Automated algorithmic urban decision-making (e.g., identiﬁcation and penalization
of trafﬁc offences and tax evasions through smart sensors and machine learning-based
data analytics) [14];
 Automated urban infrastructure assessment (e.g., monitoring urban infrastructure health
through automated aerial mapping and deep-learning characterizations) [15–17];
 Autonomous urban post-disaster reconnaissance (e.g., detecting disaster damage and
impact through synergistic use of deep learning and 3D point cloud features) [18];
 Autonomous and connected urban mobility (e.g., offering increased urban mobility
through shared autonomous vehicles and autonomous shuttle bus ﬂeets) [19,20];
 Urban descriptive, diagnostic, predictive and prescriptive analytics (e.g., gathering
and interpreting urban air pollution data to describe what is the pollution level,
why it happened, when it may occur again, and actions to inﬂuence future desired
outcomes) [21];
 Urban security, safety, rescue and maintenance robots (e.g., emergency services op-
erating rescue robots in risky and dangerous environments, such as natural disaster
events, mining accidents and building collapses and ﬁres) [22];
 Urban service agent chatbots (e.g., offering improved customer experiences with
reduced waiting times to access services in different languages related to taxation,
health services, public transport, family services, job opportunities and so on) [23].
In an attempt to generate the required efﬁciencies and proﬁciencies, many govern-
ments across the globe have started to deploy various AI system initiatives at the national,
state and local levels [ 24,25]. The following are among the most common AI-driven appli-
cations [26]:
 AI process automation systems;
 AI-based knowledge management software;
 Chatbots/virtual agents;
 Cognitive robotics and autonomous systems;
 Cognitive security analytics and threat intelligence;
 Identity analytics;
 Intelligent digital assistants;
 Predictive analytics and data visualization;
 Recommendation systems;
 Speech analytics.
Despite the efforts made to adopt and deploy AI in the public sector, almost all of
these initiatives have either struggled, failed, or lacked the adequate potential to generate
ethical, responsible and sustainable solutions [ 27,28]. This is also the case for the smart city
domain—the existing purely technocentric or algorithmic AI perspectives could not play a

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 3 of 14
prominent role in smart city transformation [ 26]. Toronto Sidewalk, Masdar and Songdo
are among the major smart city initiatives that have resulted in project cancellations or
failures in living up to their smart urban future promises [29].
The main reason behind this failure is that AI system adoption practices are heavily
technologically determined and reductionist in nature, and do not envisage and develop
long-term, ethical, responsible and sustainable solutions [ 30]. Most government AI ap-
proaches have also overlooked urban, human and social complexities; subsequently, this
has created conditions for new forms of societal control, and boosted inequality and
marginalization among the layers of our societies [ 31]. Thus, the current practice of AI has
generated as many constraints as prospects, where, at times, the constraints outweigh the
prospects [32].
Against this backdrop, this perspective paper highlights the fundamental shortfalls
in current AI system conceptualization and practice, and points to a novel approach—
i.e., green AI that also accommodates green sensing—that moves away from short-term
efﬁciency solutions to focus on a long-term ethical, responsible and sustainable AI practice
that will help build sustainable urban futures for all through smart city transformation.
Here, we note that, as this is a perspective piece reﬂecting the authors’ opinions and
interpretations of the topic, the methodological approach of the paper is not systematic;
rather, the paper uses the literature to support the claims and views related to AI and smart
city discourses, practices, developments, trends and applications.
2. Prospects and Constraints of AI for Smart City Transformation
The utilization of smart and innovative digital technologies has become a common
approach to tackling urban crises—whether they are related to climate, pandemics, natural
disasters or socioeconomic factors [ 33,34]. In recent years, advancements in AI—as one of
the most prominent technologies of our time, with signiﬁcant implications for our economy,
society, environment and governance—have resulted in invaluable opportunities for cities
to increase their infrastructural efﬁciencies and predictive analytic capabilities, and hence,
to a degree, to improve the quality of life and sustainability in cities under the smart city
brand [ 35]. According to Ullah et al. [ 36], today, AI is rapidly becoming a critical smart city
element that helps in achieving necessary efﬁciencies and automation in order to deliver
urban infrastructures, services and amenities.
Especially when coupled with other smart urban technologies, AI applications—e.g.,
chatbots and virtual agents, cognitive robotics and autonomous systems, cognitive security
analytics, expert systems, identity analytics, intelligent digital assistants, knowledge man-
agement systems, predictive analytics and data visualization, process automation systems,
recommendation systems, speech analytics, threat intelligence—provide new capabilities
and directions for our cities, such as building the next generation smart cities, i.e., the
“Artiﬁcially Intelligent Cities” of the future [ 37]. There is a vast array of literature on the
prospects of AI for smart cities [38].
Nonetheless, as much as creating beneﬁts—for instance, generating operational in-
frastructure or service efﬁciencies—AI technology also involves substantial risks and
disruptions for cities and citizens, through the opaque decision-making processes and the
privacy violations that are related to it; e.g., automating inequality, generating algorithmic
bias due to bad or limited data and training, removing or limiting human responsibility,
and lacking an adequate level of transparency and accountability [ 39]. Additionally, in
comparison to the other technologies, AI involves some unique data-related challenges
that include data acquisition, the large volume and the streaming of data, heterogeneous
data, complex dependencies among the data, noisy and incomplete data, distributed data
storage and processing, training data, and data privacy [12].
Some examples of AI mishaps that impact society, and that also diminish public trust
in the AI solutions implemented as part of smart city projects, include, but are not limited
to, the following:

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 4 of 14
 AI misdiagnosis of child maltreatment and the prescription of inappropriate solutions
in Pittsburgh, PA, USA [40];
 Amazon’s AI recruiting tool, which took biased decisions towards women [41];
 Bias towards people of color in the decisions made by AI algorithms used in US
hospitals [42];
 Clearview AI’s scandalous facial recognition image database developed with images
from social media, which got hacked in 2020, leaving citizens of democratic countries
with privacy threats, and citizens of autocratic regimes under a situation akin to an
Orwellian nightmare [43];
 The malfunctioning of the Australian government’s automated debt recovery program,
called Robodebt, resulting in a scandal, as it had unlawfully taken AUD 721M from
over 400,000 Australians [44].
One of the main reasons behind the failure of AI systems relates to the development
and integration stages of AI in urban and public services. Pasquinelli [ 45] linked the
underlying issues of AI—or in broader terms, how machines learn—to the development
of AI systems when operators engage in training data, learning algorithms and model
application stages. In these stages, operators could encounter three types of bias, namely:
 Just-world bias (e.g., a cognitive bias that assumes people get what they deserve,
leading to failures in helping or feeling compassion for others or disadvantaged
groups, such as poor or homeless people);
 Data bias (e.g., an error caused by certain elements of data being more heavily rep-
resented or weighted than other elements, leading to wrong decisions or inequity
issues—such as for women, people of color or minorities);
 Algorithmic bias (e.g., a lack of fairness, originating from the output of an algorithmic
system, with consequential unfavorable decisions, actions or externalities—such as a
credit score algorithm denying a loan).
When an AI system containing such bias is integrated with an urban or public service,
the failure of the service, or dissatisfaction with the service, is inevitable [46].
The growing concern over negative AI externalities and service failures, particularly in
smart cities, proves the need for more ethical and regulated AI systems [ 47]. Subsequently,
in recent years, attempts to provide a more holistic perspective on AI have resulted in
a number of new AI conceptualizations [ 48]. These include “responsible AI”, “ethical
AI”, “explainable AI”, “sustainable AI”, “green AI” and the like, the aim of which is to
ensure the ethical, transparent and accountable use of AI applications in a manner that is
consistent with user expectations, organizational values, environmental conservation and
societal laws and norms [ 49]. It is also argued that such renewed approaches to AI will
help maximize the desired smart city outcomes and positive impacts for all citizens, while
minimizing the negative consequences [50].
3. The Green AI Approach for the Flourishing of Humans and the Planet
The effects of human activity—e.g., unsustainable and rapidly growing popula-
tions, urbanization, industrialization and consumerism—since the industrial revolution
of 1850s, and particularly during the last ﬁve decades, have taken their toll on the
environment [ 51–53]. As presented by Hunter and Hewson [ 54], the most catastrophic
threats humanity is facing today include the following:
 Chemical pollution of the earth system, including the atmosphere and oceans;
 Collapse of ecosystems and loss of biodiversity;
 Decline of natural resources, particularly water;
 Global warming and human-induced climate change;
 Human population growth beyond the Earth’s carrying capacity;
 National and global failures to understand and act preventatively on these risks;
 Nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction;
 Pandemics of new and untreatable diseases;

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 5 of 14
 Rising food insecurity and failing nutritional quality;
 The advent of powerful, uncontrolled new technology.
Among these threats, “national and global failure to understand and act preventatively
on these risks” is the most important. This is the incapability of the governments [ 55]
and the public [ 56] to understand and take actions against threats that are most likely
to, or deﬁnitely, lead to a catastrophe. This issue is the root cause of the failure of AI
solutions—even if they target sustainability [ 57]—as they are mainly used to improve
business efﬁciency and economic productivity in our cities [ 58] rather than actually tackling
the aforementioned global threats that are mostly anthropogenic in origin [59].
The flourishing of humankind over the last 10,000 years in the Holocene is a consequence
of the planet’s beneficial conditions, that is, the perfect climate and ecosystem [ 60]. As such,
investigating the ways in which AI can help establish conditions in which humans and the
planet can thrive in the Anthropocene has been the subject of much recent scholarly work [ 61].
For example, Vinuesa et al. [ 62] explored the role of AI in achieving the UN’s sus-
tainable development goals (SDGs). Their study found that “AI may act as an enabler on
134 targets (79%) across all SDGs, generally through a technological improvement, which
may allow to overcome certain present limitations. However, 59 targets (35%, also across
all SDGs) may experience a negative impact from the development of AI”. In another
study, Gupta et al. [ 63] assessed whether AI is an enabler or an inhibitor of sustainability,
measured via SDGs. Their study disclosed that “when SDGs related to Society, Economy,
and Environment were analyzed, it was observed that the Environment category has the
highest potential, with 93% of the targets being positively affected, whereas Society has the
largest negative effect with 38% of the targets exhibiting a negative interaction with AI”.
Likewise, Goranski and Tan [64] examined the role of AI in accelerating the progress
of SDGs. Their investigation revealed that “AI can generate data for more intelligent
targeting of intervention, reduce waste and losses in production and consumption, create
new applications that will transform entire industries and professions, and provide the
necessary improvements in connectivity and cost reductions that brings the beneﬁts of the
rapid pace of technological development to many people worldwide”. While AI represents
an opportunity for achieving the SDGs, as stated by Dwivedi et al. [ 65], an AI-supported
delivery of SDGs will “require signiﬁcant investment from governments and industry
together with collaboration at an international level to effect governance, standards and
security”. Figure 1 shows the 17 SDGs.
Additionally, in recent years, we have witnessed an increase in academic literature
reporting the outcomes of AI technology applications for social good, and in tackling social
and environmental issues [ 66]. The environmental areas in which AI applications are
utilized range from air pollution monitoring [ 67] to wastewater treatment [ 68], from en-
dangered species protection [ 69,70] to climate change detection [ 71], from natural disaster
prediction [ 27] to ecosystem service assessment [ 72], and other applications in environmen-
tal sciences [73].
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 15 
 
prediction [27] to ecosystem service assessmen t [72], and other applications in environ-
mental sciences [73]. 
 
Figure 1. Sustainable development goals [74]. Source: 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/news/com munications-material/ (accessed on 9 August 2021). 
While the existing and potential benefits of AI for the environment have been pre-
sented in the abovementioned studies, said studies also underlined the critical im-
portance of addressing the risks involved. For instance, studies emphasized the critical 
importance of: 
• Being supported by the necessary regulatory insight and oversight for AI-based 
technologies to enable sustainable develo pment, and avoid gaps in transparency, 
safety and ethical standards [62]; 
• Going beyond the development of AI in sect orial areas, so as to understand the im-
pacts AI might have across societal, en vironmental and economic outcomes [63]; 
• Offering a constructive, rather than opti mistic or pessimistic, outlook on AI for 
promoting desired sustai nable outcomes [75]. 
The most common negative effects of AI on the environment include increases in 
electricity usage (computation and transmis sion power consumption) and the resulting 
carbon emissions, along with errors in critical  decisions due to user and data bias [76–78]. 
Given that global technology uptake is growing at an exponential rate, the impact of 
these externalities is expected to be immense [79]. Just to give an example, cryptocur-
rency mining in recent years has led to  increased energy consumption globally. 
As stated by Cuen [80], the bitcoin electric ity consumption index of the University of 
Cambridge indicates that “bitcoin mine rs are expected to consume roughly 130 
Terawatt-hours of energy (TWh), which is roughly 0.6% of global electricity consump-
tion. This puts the bitcoin economy on par with the CO 2 emissions of a small developing 
nation like Sri Lanka or Jordan”. 
These undesired externalities call for a sust ainable approach to AI that adopts a 
green-based technological perspective, incl uding switching to a sustainable AI infra-
structure [81–85]. In their study on the clim ate cost of global computation, Dobbe and 
Whittaker [86] made the following recommendations for tech-aware climate policy and 
climate-aware tech policy: 
• Account for the entire tech ecosystem; 
• Address AI’s impact on climate refugees; 
• Curb the use of AI to extract fossil fuels; 
• Integrate tech and climate policy; 
• Make non-energy policy a standard practice; 
• Mandate transparency; 
• Watch for rebound effects. 
Making AI green and sustainable, i.e., th e green AI approach, requires a bias-free 
(besides a reasonable environmental bias or positive discrimination), inclusive, trust-
worthy, explainable, ethical and responsible approach to technology that aims to allevi-
ate the developmental challenges of the planet in a sustainable way [30,87]. This ap-
Figure 1. Sustainable development goals [ 74]. Source: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/news/
communications-material/ (accessed on 9 August 2021).
While the existing and potential beneﬁts of AI for the environment have been pre-
sented in the abovementioned studies, said studies also underlined the critical impor-

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 6 of 14
tance of addressing the risks involved. For instance, studies emphasized the critical
importance of:
 Being supported by the necessary regulatory insight and oversight for AI-based
technologies to enable sustainable development, and avoid gaps in transparency,
safety and ethical standards [62];
 Going beyond the development of AI in sectorial areas, so as to understand the impacts
AI might have across societal, environmental and economic outcomes [63];
 Offering a constructive, rather than optimistic or pessimistic, outlook on AI for pro-
moting desired sustainable outcomes [75].
The most common negative effects of AI on the environment include increases in
electricity usage (computation and transmission power consumption) and the resulting
carbon emissions, along with errors in critical decisions due to user and data bias [ 76–78].
Given that global technology uptake is growing at an exponential rate, the impact of these
externalities is expected to be immense [ 79]. Just to give an example, cryptocurrency
mining in recent years has led to increased energy consumption globally.
As stated by Cuen [ 80], the bitcoin electricity consumption index of the University of
Cambridge indicates that “bitcoin miners are expected to consume roughly 130 Terawatt-
hours of energy (TWh), which is roughly 0.6% of global electricity consumption. This puts
the bitcoin economy on par with the CO 2emissions of a small developing nation like Sri
Lanka or Jordan”.
These undesired externalities call for a sustainable approach to AI that adopts a green-
based technological perspective, including switching to a sustainable AI infrastructure [ 81–85].
In their study on the climate cost of global computation, Dobbe and Whittaker [ 86] made the
following recommendations for tech-aware climate policy and climate-aware tech policy:
 Account for the entire tech ecosystem;
 Address AI’s impact on climate refugees;
 Curb the use of AI to extract fossil fuels;
 Integrate tech and climate policy;
 Make non-energy policy a standard practice;
 Mandate transparency;
 Watch for rebound effects.
Making AI green and sustainable, i.e., the green AI approach, requires a bias-free
(besides a reasonable environmental bias or positive discrimination), inclusive, trustworthy,
explainable, ethical and responsible approach to technology that aims to alleviate the
developmental challenges of the planet in a sustainable way [ 30,87]. This approach—using
AI to solve sustainability challenges and using AI in a more sustainable way—will also
serve as an enabler of smart city transformation [88,89].
4. Green Sensing, Communications and Computing
Now that we have discussed a number of policy and high-level issues related to green
AI, we will deﬁne and discuss issues that relate to the development of digital infrastructure
for green AI. Our intention is to discuss these infrastructural issues here, together with
the high-level issues, and to provide a holistic overview such that different communities
working in policy and infrastructure research can understand the cross-disciplinary issues,
and collaboratively devise holistic and globally optimum solutions.
Sensing, communications, and computing have never been so interdependent as they
are now due to the emergence and convergence of technologies, including the miniaturiza-
tion of sensors, Internet-of-Things (IoT), data-driven methods, AI-driven optimizations,
and cloud, fog and edge computing. The whole ecosystem of smart applications and
systems is converging due to the need for these applications to be intrinsically collaborative
and distributed.
These smart applications and systems require a certain level of smartness that enhances
our ability to engage, sense and act on our environments, analyze them, and make timely,

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 7 of 14
effective and sustainable decisions [ 90]. The trend is an increase in the number of IoT
devices, expected to reach 25 billion by 2030 [ 91], which in turn increases the requirements
for data pre-processing, storage, communications, and processing. AI provides the brain of
the smartness, i.e., it undertakes the analyses and the decision-making processes. AI, while
requiring signiﬁcant computational resources (storage, communications and processing),
has the capability to improve the efﬁciency of the whole infrastructural ecosystem via the
holistic analysis and optimization of the system.
To aid in the development of green AI, both at the policy and the infrastructure level,
we herein introduce and define the concept of “green sensing” as physical and virtual green
sensing to enable triple bottom line (social, environmental and economic) sustainability . The
definition proposes the development of methods and technologies to sense and measure
social, environmental and economic sustainability. Sustainability is affected by challenges
such as security, privacy, the safety of people, ethical standards and compliance, and so on,
and therefore these are included in our definition of green sensing. These methods and
technologies should be green in terms of their efficiency and energy usage.
What are the potential examples of green sensing methods and technologies in the
broader sense of the term green sensing, as we have deﬁned it above? A physical sensor
to measure the sustainability of urban infrastructure and environmental pollution can
be considered a green sensor [ 92,93]. A virtual sensor, such as that using big data or
social media data to detect congestion on the road, can be considered a green sensor for
environmental sustainability, in the sense that it detects the environmental pollution that
may be caused by a high intensity of pollution in the geographical area where congestion
is happening [94].
The same can also be considered a green sensor for social sustainability (or a social sus-
tainability sensor) because it can detect people’s anguish, and the potential health-related
harms to the people living in or travelling through said geographical area [ 95]. AI-based
virtual sensors can be developed by analyzing various literature, news media, or govern-
ment regulations in order to understand their economic impacts and sustainability. The
possibilities are almost endless. Sensors ﬁt into two broad types: the ones that measure the
impact of phenomena directly (e.g., the power or gas/petrol consumption of a community,
or real-time or future crowd detection in public spaces) [ 96,97], and those that measure the
impact indirectly (e.g., via social media) [98,99].
The concept of green sensing used here is different from and much broader than
the earlier usage of this term, which refers to the methods used to save energy in the
sensing process. The earlier use of the term mostly appeared in the context of wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) [ 100]. A range of methods and technologies have been developed
under the umbrella of wireless sensor networks to reduce the energy usage of sensors.
These techniques have been naturally extended to the IoT paradigm. WSNs and IoTs have
been used for many applications, including for environmental monitoring and protection,
such as forest ﬁre detection, ambience monitoring, and so on. The main motivation for
developing these techniques has been to reduce the energy required by the sensing devices,
which are typically wirelessly connected and battery powered.
The techniques to save energy include duty cycling (periodically turning the radio
on/off to save energy), wake-up radio (on-demand radio on/off), sensor selection or
scheduling (selection or scheduling of a subset of sensors instead of all the sensors),
adaptive sampling (adapting the selection of sensors based on the context and application),
and more. These green sensing techniques can not only reduce the energy required for
sensing, but they also reduce the generated data, reducing the energy needed for data
storage or pre-processing. Energy harvesting techniques by all, or a selection of, sensors
using renewable energies or electric signals have also been proposed to make the sensing
process greener [101].
The data sensed through IoT and other media are usually transferred to a central loca-
tion, such as a master node or a cloud computing center, for their analysis. An astonishingly
large amount of energy is required to transfer data across networks. Naturally, a range

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 8 of 14
of techniques have been developed to reduce data communication energy and improve
network efﬁciency. In addition to reducing data generation through the various green
sensing techniques mentioned earlier, various data pruning methods have been developed,
such as using data compression to reduce communication and bandwidth requirements.
Probably the most important development in this respect is fog and edge computing-
based solutions, which reduce the data transfer and bandwidth requirements of smart
applications by processing data at the edge or fog layers, near the sensors and devices, while
offering other beneﬁts such as data security and privacy. Several works have investigated
the energy efﬁciency and other beneﬁts of fog- and edge-based solutions [102].
For instance, Janbi et al. [ 103] developed a framework for the provision of distributed
AI as a service (DAIaaS) in future environments. The framework divides “the actual
training and inference computations of AI workﬂow into smaller computations that are
executed in parallel according to the level and capacity of resources available with cloud,
fog, and edge layers” [ 103]. They consider “multiple provisioning scenarios for DAIaaS
in three case studies comprising nine applications and AI delivery models and 50 distinct
sensor and software modules”, and report the energy consumption and other beneﬁts of
edge- and fog-based AI delivery solutions.
Mohammed et al. [ 104] proposed the UbiPriSEQ framework, which aims to holistically
and adaptively optimize energy efﬁciency, security, privacy, and quality of service (QoS).
They reported an implementation of the proposed framework using deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), which allows for devising policies and making decisions related to impor-
tant parameters, such as transmit power, the speciﬁc fog nodes to be selected for ofﬂoading
data and computation, and so on.
A number of key technological developments are shaping the development of high-
speed and low-latency networks, such as ﬁfth-generation networks (5G), which offer a
powerful system for ubiquitous environments with advanced sensing and processing
capabilities, along with IoT [ 104]. The requirements of next-generation societies are un-
derpinned by the need to ubiquitously deliver smart services (AI and data-driven) and to
increase the numbers of sensors, and these requirements are expected to be met by 6G, the
next generation of cellular networks [103–106].
The 6G networks are expected to meet these requirements by use of higher-spectrum
and multiple communication technologies [ 107], ultra-dense heterogeneous network-
ing [ 106], terrestrial and non-terrestrial communications [ 108], and the use of AI to optimize
service-oriented network operations [ 109,110]. An important feature of the 6G networks
would be their support of ubiquitous AI services. More importantly, energy efﬁciency is
considered the critical requirement of 6G, and this feature is expected to be ten to a hundred
times better than that of 5G, achieved using novel antenna designs, zero-energy nodes, and
other technologies related to low-rate sensing applications [105,111].
Energy efﬁciency is a grand challenge in the design of large-scale computing systems,
such as supercomputers and computational clouds. For example, the system that is
currently ranked number one on the list of the top 500 supercomputers, Fugaku, has over
seven million cores and requires 28.3MW of power for its operation. While AI algorithms
consume large amounts of power, they can be used to reduce the energy requirements of
computations while optimizing performance [ 112], thus allowing for the concept of green
(virtual) sensing and optimizations to be introduced into computing systems.
5. Final Remarks: Policy Directions for Making AI Greener and Cities Smarter
This perspective paper generally contributes to the growing AI literature by underlin-
ing the fundamental shortfalls in mainstream AI system conceptualizations and practices,
and by advocating the need for a green AI approach to further support smart city transfor-
mation and SDGs.
The paper also provides a perspective on the green AI concept. It deﬁnes and elabo-
rates on the concept, and discusses why a consolidated effort is needed in the area, including
the beneﬁts of a strengthened green AI approach. The elaborations are supported by the

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 9 of 14
literature from diverse disciplines, including computer, environmental and social sciences,
and urban studies. The paper also discusses issues that relate to the development of digital
infrastructure for green AI. The intention is to discuss these infrastructural issues together
with other high-level issues, and to provide a holistic overview such that different com-
munities working in policy and infrastructure research can understand cross-disciplinary
issues and collaboratively devise holistic and globally optimum solutions.
Moreover, in order to aid in the development of green AI, both at the policy and
infrastructural levels, the paper introduces and deﬁnes the concept of “green sensing”
as physical and virtual green sensing to enable triple bottom line (social, environmental
and economic) sustainability. This paper also highlights the importance of, and advocates
the need for, the development of methods and technologies to sense and measure social,
environmental and economic sustainability.
This perspective piece makes an invaluable contribution to the emerging ﬁeld of green
AI, as there is no scholarly literature that discusses the policy and infrastructural issues of
the given topic in an abstracted way. Our approach here allows readers to gain a holistic
understanding of the issues related to green AI via a relatively succinct perspective piece,
and presents prospective research and development directions.
We conclude the paper with the following remarks, as it is highly important to have
timely, effective and efﬁcient government policy in place for making AI greener and our
cities smarter.
Firstly, we underline that the ﬁeld of AI is growing rapidly; technological advance-
ments are exponential, and applications are disruptive [ 113,114]. In such a situation,
without appropriate government intervention, the business-as-usual scenario will create
extended negative risks and consequences for our society and the planet [ 115]. Unfortu-
nately, these risks and consequences have not yet been fully understood by governments,
which means they do not act upon them or take preventative measures [116].
Secondly, as evidenced in the literature, there are colossal policy challenges in the
way of making AI green [ 117]. Perhaps the most critical one is the need for governments
to develop legal and ethical frameworks for AI and its use [ 118]. Expanding on this
issue, Dwivedi et al. [ 65] listed fairness and equity, accountability and legal issues, ethics,
misuse protection, transparency and auditing, and digital divides and data deﬁcits as the
fundamental public and environmental policy challenges of AI. Another study, by Jobin
et al. [ 119], disclosed “the primary AI ethical principles as follows: transparency, justice
and fairness, non-maleﬁcence, responsibility, privacy, beneﬁcence, freedom and autonomy,
trust, sustainability, dignity, and solidarity”. These principles are critical to AI projects’
ability to deliver the desired outcomes to all.
Thirdly, up until now, no country has passed an AI law yet, and only a small number
of countries have attempted to introduce AI ethical frameworks and regulation guidelines—
such as the European Union’s AI ethics guidelines, intended to inform future regulation,
and other examples include AI ethical frameworks in Australia, Germany, Singapore
and the UK [ 120]. The most popular existing practice for most governments seems to
be adopting a “wait-and-see” approach to AI ethics and regulations [ 121]. Furthermore,
as stated by Hagendorff [ 122], in most cases, the existing ethics frameworks fail to serve
their purposes, as they lack any reinforcement mechanisms—in other words, there are no
consequences if these ethical principles are not followed.
Furthermore, having no regulation at present does not mean that the AI domain will
not be regulated in the near future—in this regard, we note the EU’s recently released
pioneering AI regulation [ 123]. It is very likely that, as has happened in cases of sharing
economy applications, e.g., Uber and AirBnB [ 124,125]—governments will eventually
regulate the AI practice to alleviate its undesired consequences [ 126]. As stated by Yara
et al. [ 87], “with the development of technology, changes are needed in the legal regulation
of AI so that the consequences of its use become useful for the whole society. Market forces
with their own resources will not ensure successful development for the whole population.
Thus, legal regulation of AI is inevitable.”

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 10 of 14
Lastly, there is a critical role to be played by all stakeholders, e.g., public and private
sectors, academia and the public, to make sure that forthcoming AI plans, ethics and
regulations also bring efﬁciency, sustainability and equity perspectives to the technology
domain, which will ultimately help in achieving SDGs [ 127,128]. This renewed green
AI approach and capacity will also consolidate the efforts made to transform our cities
into smart ones, and support the smart and sustainable development of our cities and
communities [ 129]. In other words, as also indicated by Fisher [ 130], we need to put our
best effort into making AI an efﬁcient, sustainable and equitable technology for establishing
smart cities and sustainable futures.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, investigation, and writing—original draft
preparation, T.Y.; investigation, and writing—review and editing, R.M. and J.M.C. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable as the study did not involve humans
or animals.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable as the study did not involve humans or animals.
Data Availability Statement: The paper did not use any data beyond the literature, where cited and
quoted literature pieces are listed at the Refences.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank the managing editor and anonymous referees for their
constructive comments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the study reported.
References
1. Morrar, R.; Arman, H.; Mousa, S. The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): A social innovation perspective. Technol. Innov.
Manag. Rev. 2017 ,7, 12–20. [CrossRef]
2. Lee, M.; Yun, J.; Pyka, A.; Won, D.; Kodama, F.; Schiuma, G.; Park, H.; Jeon, J.; Park, K.; Jung, K.; et al. How to respond to the
fourth industrial revolution, or the second information technology revolution? Dynamic new combinations between technology,
market, and society through open innovation. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 2018 ,4, 21. [CrossRef]
3. Kirwan, C.; Fu, Z. Smart Cities and Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Convergent Systems for Planning, Design, and Operations ; Elsevier: Oxford,
UK, 2020.
4. Shukla, A.; Janmaijaya, M.; Abraham, A.; Muhuri, P . Engineering applications of artiﬁcial intelligence: A bibliometric analysis of
30 years (1988–2018). Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2019 ,85, 517–532. [CrossRef]
5. Cugurullo, F. Urban artiﬁcial intelligence: From automation to autonomy in the smart city. Front. Sustain. Cities 2020 ,2, 1–14.
[CrossRef]
6. Singh, S.; Sharma, P .; Yoon, B.; Shojafar, M.; Cho, G.; Ra, I. Convergence of blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence in IoT network for
the sustainable smart city. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020 ,63, 102364. [CrossRef]
7. Mora, L.; Deakin, M.; Reid, A. Strategic principles for smart city development: A multiple case study analysis of European best
practices. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2019 ,142, 70–97. [CrossRef]
8. Kassens-Noor, E.; Hintze, A. Cities of the future? The potential impact of artiﬁcial intelligence. AI2020 ,1, 192–197. [CrossRef]
9. Yigitcanlar, T.; Kankanamge, N.; Regona, M.; Maldonado, M.; Rowan, R.; Ryu, A.; Desouza, K.; Corchado, J.; Mehmood, R.; Li, R.
Artiﬁcial intelligence technologies and related urban planning and development concepts: How are they perceived and utilized
in Australia? J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 2020 ,6, 187. [CrossRef]
10. Yu, Y.; Zhang, N. Does smart city policy improve energy efﬁciency? Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment in China. J. Clean.
Prod. 2019 ,229, 501–512. [CrossRef]
11. Corchado, J.M.; Chamoso, P .; Hern ández, G.; Gutierrez, A.S.R.; Camacho, A.R.; Gonz ález-Briones, A.; Pinto-Santos, F.;
Goyenechea, E.; Garcia-Retuerta, D.; Alonso-Miguel, M.; et al. Deepint. net: A rapid deployment platform for smart ter-
ritories. Sensors 2021 ,21, 236. [CrossRef]
12. Wang, S.; Cao, J. AI and deep learning for urban computing. In Urban Informatics ; Shi, W., Goodchild, M., Batty, M., Kwan, M.,
Zhang, A., Eds.; Springer Nature: Singapore, 2021.
13. Ortega-Fern ández, A.; Mart ín-Rojas, R.; Garc ía-Morales, V . Artiﬁcial intelligence in the urban environment: Smart cities as models
for developing innovation and sustainability. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 7860. [CrossRef]

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 11 of 14
14. Gutberlet, T. Data-driven smart sustainable cities: Highly networked urban environments and automated algorithmic decision-
making processes. Geopolit. Hist. Int. Relat. 2019 ,11, 55–61.
15. Erkal, B.G.; Hajjar, J.F. Laser-based surface damage detection and quantiﬁcation using predicted surface properties. Autom. Constr.
2017 ,83, 285–302. [CrossRef]
16. Mohammadi, M.E.; Watson, D.P .; Wood, R.L. Deep learning-based damage detection from aerial SfM point clouds. Drones 2019 ,3,
68. [CrossRef]
17. Nasimi, R.; Moreu, F. Development and implementation of a laser–camera–UAV System to measure total dynamic transverse
displacement. J. Eng. Mech. 2021 ,147, 4021045. [CrossRef]
18. Ghosh Mondal, T.; Jahanshahi, M.R.; Wu, R.T.; Wu, Z.Y. Deep learning-based multi-class damage detection for autonomous
post-disaster reconnaissance. Struct. Control. Health Monit. 2020 ,27, e2507. [CrossRef]
19. Faisal, A.; Kamruzzaman, M.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Currie, G. Understanding autonomous vehicles: A systematic literature review on
capability, impact, planning and policy. J. Transp. Land Use 2019 ,12, 45–72. [CrossRef]
20. Dennis, S.; Paz, A.; Yigitcanlar, T. Perceptions and attitudes towards the deployment of autonomous and connected vehicles:
Insights from Las Vegas, Nevada. J. Urban. Technol. 2021 . [CrossRef]
21. Allam, Z.; Dey, G.; Jones, D. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) provided early detection of the coronavirus (COVID-19) in China and will
inﬂuence future urban health policy internationally. AI2020 ,1, 156–165. [CrossRef]
22. Tiddi, I.; Bastianelli, E.; Daga, E.; d’Aquin, M.; Motta, E. Robot–city interaction: Mapping the research landscape—A survey of
the interactions between robots and modern cities. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 2020 ,12, 299–324. [CrossRef]
23. Ashfaq, M.; Yun, J.; Yu, S.; Loureiro, S. I, Chatbot: Modeling the determinants of users’ satisfaction and continuance intention of
AI-powered service agents. Telemat. Inform. 2020 ,54, 101473. [CrossRef]
24. Engin, Z.; Treleaven, P . Algorithmic government: Automating public services and supporting civil servants in using data science
technologies. Comput. J. 2019 ,62, 448–460. [CrossRef]
25. Wirtz, B.; Weyerer, J.; Geyer, C. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the public sector: Applications and challenges. Int. J. Public Adm. 2019 ,
42, 596–615. [CrossRef]
26. Yigitcanlar, T.; Corchado, J.; Mehmood, R.; Li, R.; Mossberger, K.; Desouza, K. Responsible urban innovation with local
government artiﬁcial intelligence: A conceptual framework and research agenda. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 2021 ,
7, 71. [CrossRef]
27. Sun, W.; Bocchini, P .; Davison, B. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence for disaster management. Nat. Hazards 2020 ,103, 2631–2689.
[CrossRef]
28. Desouza, K.; Dawson, G.; Chenok, D. Designing, developing, and deploying artiﬁcial intelligence systems: Lessons from and for
the public sector. Bus. Horiz. 2020 ,63, 205–213. [CrossRef]
29. Yigitcanlar, T.; Han, H.; Kamruzzaman, M.; Ioppolo, G.; Sabatini-Marques, J. The making of smart cities: Are Songdo, Masdar,
Amsterdam, San Francisco and Brisbane the best we could build? Land Use Policy 2019 ,88, 104187. [CrossRef]
30. Yigitcanlar, T.; Cugurullo, F. The sustainability of artiﬁcial intelligence: An urbanistic viewpoint from the lens of smart and
sustainable cities. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 8548. [CrossRef]
31. Valentine, S. Impoverished algorithms: Misguided governments, ﬂawed technologies, and social control. Urban. Law J. 2019 ,46,
364–427.
32. Nishant, R.; Kennedy, M.; Corbett, J. Artiﬁcial intelligence for sustainability: Challenges, opportunities, and a research agenda.
Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2020 ,53, 102104. [CrossRef]
33. Shin, D. Ubiquitous city: Urban technologies, urban infrastructure and urban informatics. J. Inf. Sci. 2009 ,35, 515–526. [CrossRef]
34. Yigitcanlar, T.; Kamruzzaman, M. Smart cities and mobility: Does the smartness of Australian cities lead to sustainable commuting
patterns? J. Urban. Technol. 2019 ,26, 21–46. [CrossRef]
35. Batty, M. Artiﬁcial intelligence and smart cities. Environ. Plan. B Urban. Anal. City Sci. 2018 . [CrossRef]
36. Ullah, Z.; Al-Turjman, F.; Mostarda, L.; Gagliardi, R. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning in smart cities.
Comput. Commun. 2020 ,154, 313–323. [CrossRef]
37. Yigitcanlar, T.; Butler, L.; Windle, E.; Desouza, K.; Mehmood, R.; Corchado, J. Can building ‘artiﬁcially intelligent cities’ protect
humanity from natural disasters, pandemics and other catastrophes? An urban scholar0s perspective. Sensors 2020 ,20, 2988.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Zhang, Y.; Geng, P .; Sivaparthipan, C.; Muthu, B. Big data and artiﬁcial intelligence based early risk warning system of ﬁre hazard
for smart cities. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 2021 ,45, 100986.
39. Yigitcanlar, T.; Desouza, K.; Butler, L.; Roozkhosh, F. Contributions and risks of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in building smarter
cities: Insights from a systematic review of the literature. Energies 2020 ,13, 1473. [CrossRef]
40. Eubanks, V . A Child Abuse Prediction Model Fails Poor Families. 2018. Available online: https://www.wired.com/story/
excerpt-from-automating-inequality (accessed on 27 April 2021).
41. Cooper, Y. Amazon Ditched AI Recruiting Tool that Favored Men for Technical Jobs. 2018. Available online: https://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2018/oct/10/amazon-hiring-ai-gender-bias-recruiting-engine (accessed on 27 April 2021).
42. Ledford, H. Millions of Black People Affected by Racial Bias in Health-Care Algorithms. 2019. Available online: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-03228-6 (accessed on 27 April 2021).

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 12 of 14
43. Hill, K. The Secretive Company That Might End Privacy as We Know It. 2020. Available online: https://www.nytimes.com/2020
/01/18/technology/clearview-privacy-facial-recognition.html (accessed on 27 April 2021).
44. Whiteford, P . Robodebt Was a Fiasco with a Cost We Have Yet to Fully Appreciate. 2020. Available online: https://theconversation.
com/robodebt-was-a-ﬁasco-with-a-cost-we-have-yet-to-fully-appreciate-150169 (accessed on 27 April 2021).
45. Pasquinelli, M. How a machine learns and fails. Spheres J. Digit. Cult. 2019 ,5, 1–17.
46. Kuziemski, M.; Misuraca, G. AI governance in the public sector: Three tales from the frontiers of automated decision-making in
democratic settings. Telecommun. Policy 2020 ,44, 101976. [CrossRef]
47. Allam, Z.; Dhunny, Z. On big data, artiﬁcial intelligence and smart cities. Cities 2019 ,89, 80–91. [CrossRef]
48. Floridi, L.; Cowls, J.; Beltrametti, M.; Chatila, R.; Chazerand, P .; Dignum, V .; Luetge, C.; Madelin, R.; Pagallo, U.; Rossi, F.; et al.
AI4People—An ethical framework for a good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds Mach.
2018 ,28, 689–707. [CrossRef]
49. Wearn, O.; Freeman, R.; Jacoby, D. Responsible AI for conservation. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2019 ,1, 72–73. [CrossRef]
50. Falco, G. Participatory AI: Reducing AI bias and developing socially responsible AI in smart cities. In Proceedings of the 2019
IEEE International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering and IEEE International Conference on Embedded and
Ubiquitous Computing, New York, NY, USA, 1–3 August 2019; pp. 154–158.
51. Metaxiotis, K.; Carrillo, F.J.; Yigitcanlar, T. Knowledge-Based Development for Cities and Societies: Integrated Multi-Level Approaches:
Integrated Multi-Level Approaches ; IGI Global: Hersey, PA, USA, 2010.
52. Yigitcanlar, T.; Kamruzzaman, M. Planning, development and management of sustainable cities: A commentary from the guest
editors. Sustainability 2015 ,7, 14677–14688. [CrossRef]
53. Dizdaroglu, D.; Yigitcanlar, T. Integrating urban ecosystem sustainability assessment into policy-making: Insights from the Gold
Coast city. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 2016 ,59, 1982–2006. [CrossRef]
54. Hunter, A.; Hewson, J. There Are 10 Catastrophic Threats Facing Humans Right Now, and Coronavirus Is Only One of Them. 2020.
Available online: https://theconversation.com/there-are-10-catastrophic-threats-facing-humans-right-now-and-coronavirus-
is-only-one-of-them-136854 (accessed on 28 April 2021).
55. Copland, S. Anti-politics and global climate inaction: The case of the Australian carbon tax. Crit. Sociol. 2020 ,46, 623–641.
[CrossRef]
56. Hornsey, M.; Fielding, K. Understanding (and reducing) inaction on climate change. Soc. Issues Policy Rev. 2020 ,14, 3–35.
[CrossRef]
57. Yun, J.; Lee, D.; Ahn, H.; Park, K.; Lee, S.; Yigitcanlar, T. Not deep learning but autonomous learning of open innovation for
sustainable artiﬁcial intelligence. Sustainability 2016 ,8, 797. [CrossRef]
58. Sharma, G.; Yadav, A.; Chopra, R. Artiﬁcial intelligence and effective governance: A review, critique and research agenda. Sustain.
Futures 2020 ,2, 100004. [CrossRef]
59. Mortoja, M.; Yigitcanlar, T. Local drivers of anthropogenic climate change: Quantifying the impact through a remote sensing
approach in Brisbane. Remote. Sens. 2020 ,12, 2270. [CrossRef]
60. Shockley, K. The great decoupling: Why minimizing humanity’s dependence on the environment may not be cause for celebration.
J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 2018 ,31, 429–442. [CrossRef]
61. Stahl, B.; Andreou, A.; Brey, P .; Hatzakis, T.; Kirichenko, A.; Macnish, K.; Laulh éShaelou, S.; Patel, A.; Ryan, M.; Wright, D.
Artiﬁcial intelligence for human ﬂourishing: Beyond principles for machine learning. J. Bus. Res. 2021 ,124, 374–388. [CrossRef]
62. Vinuesa, R.; Azizpour, H.; Leite, I.; Balaam, M.; Dignum, V .; Domisch, S.; Felländer, A.; Langhans, S.D.; Tegmark, M.; Nerini,
F.F. The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in achieving the sustainable development goals. Nat. Commun. 2020 ,11, 1–10. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
63. Gupta, S.; Langhans, S.; Domisch, S.; Fuso-Nerini, F.; Felländer, A.; Battaglini, M.; Tegmark, M.; Vinuesa, R. Assessing whether
artiﬁcial intelligence is an enabler or an inhibitor of sustainability at indicator level. Transp. Eng. 2021 ,4, 100064. [CrossRef]
64. Goralski, M.; Tan, T. Artiﬁcial intelligence and sustainable development. Int. J. Manag. Educ. 2020 ,18, 100330. [CrossRef]
65. Dwivedi, Y.; Hughes, L.; Ismagilova, E.; Aarts, G.; Coombs, C.; Crick, T.; Duan, Y.; Dwivedi, R.; Edwards, J.; Eirug, A.; et al.
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research,
practice and policy. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019 ,57, 101994. [CrossRef]
66. Wamba, S.; Bawack, R.; Guthrie, C.; Queiroz, M.; Carillo, K. Are we preparing for a good AI society? A bibliometric review and
research agenda. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2021 ,164, 120482. [CrossRef]
67. Ye, Z.; Yang, J.; Zhong, N.; Tu, X.; Jia, J.; Wang, J. Tackling environmental challenges in pollution controls using artiﬁcial
intelligence: A review. Sci. Total. Environ. 2020 ,699, 134279. [CrossRef]
68. Zhao, L.; Dai, T.; Qiao, Z.; Sun, P .; Hao, J.; Yang, Y. Application of artiﬁcial intelligence to wastewater treatment: A bibliometric
analysis and systematic review of technology, economy, management, and wastewater reuse. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 2020 ,133,
169–182. [CrossRef]
69. Jothiswaran, V .; Velumani, T. Jayaraman, R. Application of artiﬁcial intelligence in ﬁsheries and aquaculture. Biot. Res. Today 2020 ,
2, 499–502.
70. Corcoran, E.; Denman, S.; Hamilton, G. Evaluating new technology for biodiversity monitoring: Are drone surveys biased? Ecol.
Evol. 2021 . [CrossRef]

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 13 of 14
71. Huntingford, C.; Jeffers, E.; Bonsall, M.; Christensen, H.; Lees, T.; Yang, H. Machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence to aid
climate change research and preparedness. Environ. Res. Lett. 2019 ,14, 124007. [CrossRef]
72. Pelorosso, R.; Gobattoni, F.; Geri, F.; Leone, A. PANDORA 3.0 plugin: A new biodiversity ecosystem service assessment tool for
urban green infrastructure connectivity planning. Ecosyst. Serv. 2017 ,26, 476–482. [CrossRef]
73. Haupt, S.; Pasini, A.; Marzban, C. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Methods in the Environmental Sciences ; Springer Science & Business Media:
Singapore, 2008.
74. United Nations. The 17 Goals, Sustainable Development. 2015. Available online: https://sdgs.un.org/goals (accessed on
24 May 2021).
75. Bjørlo, L.; Moen, Ø.; Pasquine, M. The role of consumer autonomy in developing sustainable AI: A conceptual framework.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 2332. [CrossRef]
76. Jin, L.; Duan, K.; Tang, X. What is the relationship between technological innovation and energy consumption? Empirical analysis
based on provincial panel data from China. Sustainability 2018 ,10, 145. [CrossRef]
77. MacCarthy, M.; Kenneth, K. Machines Learn that Brussels Writes the Rules: The EU0s New AI Regulation. 2021. Available
online: https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/05/04/machines-learn-that-brussels-writes-the-rules-the-eus-new-
ai-regulation (accessed on 24 May 2021).
78. Unwin, T. Digital Technologies are Part of the CLIMATE change Problem. 2020. Available online: https://www.ictworks.org/
digital-technologies-climate-change-problem/#.YJDJ9S0RpYs (accessed on 5 May 2021).
79. Ritchie, H.; Roser, M. Technology Adoption (2017). Available online: https://ourworldindata.org/technology-adoption (accessed
on 4 May 2021).
80. Cuen, L. The Debate about Cryptocurrency and Energy Consumption. 2021. Available online: https://techcrunch.com/2021/03/
21/the-debate-about-cryptocurrency-and-energy-consumption (accessed on 4 May 2021).
81. Song, M.; Cao, S.; Wang, S. The impact of knowledge trade on sustainable development and environment-biased technical
progress. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2019 ,144, 512–523. [CrossRef]
82. Dhar, P . The carbon impact of artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2020 ,2, 423–425. [CrossRef]
83. Schwartz, R.; Dodge, J.; Smith, N.; Etzioni, O. Green AI. Commun. ACM 2020 ,63, 54–63. [CrossRef]
84. Yang, X.; Hua, S.; Shi, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, J.; Letaief, K. Sparse optimization for green edge AI inference. J. Commun. Inf. Netw.
2020 ,5, 1–15.
85. Candelieri, A.; Perego, R.; Archetti, F. Green machine learning via augmented Gaussian processes and multi-information source
optimization. Soft Comput. 2021 . [CrossRef]
86. Dobbe, R.; Whittaker, M. AI and Climate Change: How They0re Connected, and What We Can Do about It. 2019. Available
online: https://medium.com/@AINowInstitute/ai-and-climate-change-how-theyre-connected-and-what-we-can-do-about-
it-6aa8d0f5b32c (accessed on 4 May 2021).
87. Yara, O.; Brazheyev, A.; Golovko, L.; Bashkatova, V . Legal regulation of the use of artiﬁcial intelligence: Problems and development
prospects. Eur. J. Sustain. Dev. 2021 ,10, 281. [CrossRef]
88. Gould, S. Green AI: How Can AI Solve Sustainability Challenges? 2020. Available online: https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/
blog/experience-analytics/2020/green-ai-how-can-ai-solve-sustainability-challenges.html (accessed on 4 May 2021).
89. Yigitcanlar, T.; Foth, M.; Kamruzzaman, M. Towards post-anthropocentric cities: Reconceptualizing smart cities to evade urban
ecocide. J. Urban. Technol. 2019 ,26, 147–152. [CrossRef]
90. Alotaibi, S.; Mehmood, R.; Katib, I.; Rana, O.; Albeshri, A. Sehaa: A big data analytics tool for healthcare symptoms and diseases
detection using Twitter, Apache Spark, and Machine Learning. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 1398. [CrossRef]
91. Holst, A. IoT Connected Devices Worldwide 2019–2030. 2021. Available online: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1183457/
iot-connected-devices-worldwide (accessed on 24 May 2021).
92. Lee, S.H.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Han, J.H.; Leem, Y.T. Ubiquitous urban infrastructure: Infrastructure planning and development in
Korea. Innovation 2008 ,10, 282–292. [CrossRef]
93. Bibri, S.E. The IoT for smart sustainable cities of the future: An analytical framework for sensor-based big data applications for
environmental sustainability. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018 ,38, 230–253. [CrossRef]
94. Alomari, E.; Katib, I.; Albeshri, A.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Mehmood, R. Iktishaf+: A big data tool with automatic labeling for road trafﬁc
social sensing and event detection using distributed machine learning. Sensors 2021 ,21, 2993. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Trettin, C.; L ăzăroiu, G.; Grecu, I.; Grecu, G. The social sustainability of citizen-centered urban governance networks: Sensor-based
big data applications and real-time decision-making. Geopolit. Hist. Int. Relat. 2019 ,11, 27–33.
96. Arshad, R.; Zahoor, S.; Shah, M.A.; Wahid, A.; Yu, H. Green IoT: An investigation on energy saving practices for 2020 and beyond.
IEEE Access 2017 ,5, 15667–15681. [CrossRef]
97. Garcia-Retuerta, D.; Chamoso, P .; Hern ández, G.; Guzm án, A.S.R.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Corchado, J.M. An efﬁcient management
platform for developing smart cities: Solution for real-time and future crowd detection. Electronics 2021 ,10, 765. [CrossRef]
98. Wang, S.; Paul, M.J.; Dredze, M. Social media as a sensor of air quality and public response in China. J. Med. Internet Res. 2015 ,
17, e22. [CrossRef]
99. Hayes, J.L.; Britt, B.C.; Evans, W.; Rush, S.W.; Towery, N.A.; Adamson, A.C. Can social media listening platforms0artiﬁcial
intelligence be trusted? Examining the accuracy of Crimson Hexagon0s (Now Brandwatch Consumer Research0s) AI-driven
analyses. J. Advert. 2021 ,50, 81–91. [CrossRef]

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 8952 14 of 14
100. Gupta, V .; Tripathi, S.; De, S. Green sensing and communication: A step towards sustainable IoT systems. J. Indian Inst. Sci. 2020 ,
100, 383–398. [CrossRef]
101. Gabrys, J. Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and the Making of a Computational Planet ; University of Minnesota Press:
Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2016.
102. Kumar, N.; Rodrigues, J.J.; Guizani, M.; Choo, K.K.; Lu, R.; Verikoukis, C.; Zhong, Z. Achieving energy efﬁciency and sustainability
in edge/fog deployment. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2018 ,56, 20–21. [CrossRef]
103. Janbi, N.; Katib, I.; Albeshri, A.; Mehmood, R. Distributed artiﬁcial intelligence-as-a-service (DAIaaS) for smarter IoE and 6G
environments. Sensors 2020 ,20, 5796. [CrossRef]
104. Mohammed, T.; Albeshri, A.; Katib, I.; Mehmood, R. UbiPriSEQ: Deep reinforcement learning to manage privacy, security, energy,
and QoS in 5G IoT hetnets. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 7120. [CrossRef]
105. Latva-aho, M.; Leppänen, K.; Clazzer, F.; Munari, A. Key Drivers and Research challenges for 6G Ubiquitous Wireless Intelligence
(2020). Available online: https://elib.dlr.de/133477 (accessed on 24 May 2021).
106. Giordani, M.; Polese, M.; Mezzavilla, M.; Rangan, S.; Zorzi, M. Towards 6G networks: Use cases and technologies. IEEE Commun.
Mag. 2020 ,58, 55–61. [CrossRef]
107. Docomo, N. 5G Evolution and 6G. 2021. Available online: https://www.nttdocomo.co.jp/nglish/binary/pdf/corporate/
technology/whitepaper_6g/DOCOMO_6G_White_PaperEN_v3.0.pdf (accessed on 24 May 2021).
108. Zhang, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Ma, Z.; Xiao, M.; Ding, Z.; Lei, X.; Karagiannidis, G.K.; Fan, P . 6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements,
architecture, and key technologies. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 2019 ,14, 28–41. [CrossRef]
109. Letaief, K.B.; Chen, W.; Shi, Y.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, Y.J. The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks. IEEE Commun. Mag.
2019 ,57, 84–90. [CrossRef]
110. Gui, G.; Liu, M.; Tang, F.; Kato, N.; Adachi, F. 6G: Opening new horizons for integration of comfort, security, and intelligence.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2020 ,27, 126–132. [CrossRef]
111. Khan, L.U.; Yaqoob, I.; Imran, M.; Han, Z.; Hong, C.S. 6G wireless systems: A vision, architectural elements, and future directions.
IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 147029–147044. [CrossRef]
112. Usman, S.; Mehmood, R.; Katib, I.; Albeshri, A.; Altowaijri, S.M. ZAKI: A smart method and tool for automatic performance
optimization of parallel SpMV computations on distributed memory machines. Mob. Netw. Appl. 2019 . [CrossRef]
113. Lauterbach, A. Artiﬁcial intelligence and policy: Quo vadis? Digit. Policy Regul. Gov. 2019 ,21, 238–263. [CrossRef]
114. Camillus, J.; Baker, J.; Daunt, A.; Jang, J. Strategies for transcending the chaos of societal disruptions. Vilakshan–XIMB J. Manag.
2020 ,17, 5–14. [CrossRef]
115. Girasa, R. Artiﬁcial Intelligence as a Disruptive Technology: Economic Transformation and Government Regulation ; Springer Nature:
Singapore, 2020.
116. Smuha, N. From a ‘race to AI’ to a ‘race to AI regulation’: Regulatory competition for artiﬁcial intelligence. Law Innov. Technol.
2021 ,13, 57–84. [CrossRef]
117. Toll, D.; Lindgren, I.; Melin, U.; Madsen, C.Ø. Values, beneﬁts, considerations and risks of AI in government: A study of AI
policies in Sweden. JeDEM-eJournal eDemocracy Open Gov. 2020 ,12, 40–60. [CrossRef]
118. Margetts, H.; Dorobantu, C. Rethink government with AI. Nature 2019 ,568, 163–165. [CrossRef]
119. Jobin, A.; Ienca, M.; Vayena, E. The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2019 ,1, 389–399. [CrossRef]
120. Floridi, L. Establishing the rules for building trustworthy AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2019 ,1, 261–262. [CrossRef]
121. Walch, K. AI Laws Are Coming. 2020. Available online: https://www.forbes.com/sites/cognitiveworld/2020/02/20/ai-laws-
are-coming/?sh=2a12fe00a2b4 (accessed on 5 May 2021).
122. Hagendorff, T. The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines. Minds Mach. 2020 ,30, 99–120. [CrossRef]
123. McNally, A. Creating Trustworthy AI for the Environment: Transparency, Bias, and Beneﬁcial Use. 2020. Available on-
line: https://www.scu.edu/environmental-ethics/resources/creating-trustworthy-ai-for-the-environment-transparency-bias-
and-beneﬁcial-use (accessed on 4 May 2021).
124. Leshinsky, R.; Schatz, L. I don0t think my landlord will ﬁnd out: Airbnb and the challenges of enforcement. Urban. Policy Res.
2018 ,36, 417–428. [CrossRef]
125. Stein, E.; Head, B. Uber in Queensland: From policy fortress to policy change. Aust. J. Public Adm. 2020 ,79, 462–479. [CrossRef]
126. De Almeida, P .; dos Santos, C.; Farias, J. Artiﬁcial intelligence regulation: A framework for governance. Ethics Inf. Technol. 2021 .
[CrossRef]
127. Di Vaio, A.; Palladino, R.; Hassan, R.; Escobar, O. Artiﬁcial intelligence and business models in the sustainable development goals
perspective: A systematic literature review. J. Bus. Res. 2020 ,121, 283–314. [CrossRef]
128. Fatima, S.; Desouza, K.; Dawson, G.; Denford, J. Analyzing Artiﬁcial Intelligence Plans in 34 Countries. 2021. Available online:
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/05/13/analyzing-artiﬁcial-intelligence-plans-in-34-countries (accessed on 24
May 2021).
129. Zhou, Y.; Kankanhalli, A. AI regulation for smart cities: Challenges and principles. In Smart Cities and Smart Governance: Towards
the 22nd Century Sustainable City ; Estevez, E., Pardo, T., Scholl, H., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2021; pp. 101–118.
130. Fisher, D.H. Computing and AI for a Sustainable Future. IEEE Intell. Syst. 2011 ,26, 14–18. [CrossRef]

