==== Page 1 ====
HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for
Efﬁcient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis
Jungil Kong
Kakao Enterprise
henry.k@kakaoenterprise.comJaehyeon Kim
Kakao Enterprise
jay.xyz@kakaoenterprise.com
Jaekyoung Bae
Kakao Enterprise
storm.b@kakaoenterprise.com
Abstract
Several recent work on speech synthesis have employed generative adversarial
networks (GANs) to produce raw waveforms. Although such methods improve the
sampling efﬁciency and memory usage, their sample quality has not yet reached
that of autoregressive and ﬂow-based generative models. In this work, we propose
HiFi-GAN, which achieves both efﬁcient and high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis. As
speech audio consists of sinusoidal signals with various periods, we demonstrate
that modeling periodic patterns of an audio is crucial for enhancing sample quality.
A subjective human evaluation (mean opinion score, MOS) of a single speaker
dataset indicates that our proposed method demonstrates similarity to human quality
while generating 22.05 kHz high-ﬁdelity audio 167.9 times faster than real-time
on a single V100 GPU. We further show the generality of HiFi-GAN to the mel-
spectrogram inversion of unseen speakers and end-to-end speech synthesis. Finally,
a small footprint version of HiFi-GAN generates samples 13.4 times faster than
real-time on CPU with comparable quality to an autoregressive counterpart.
1 Introduction
V oice is one of the most frequent and naturally used communication interfaces for humans. With
recent developments in technology, voice is being used as a main interface in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) voice assistant services such as Amazon Alexa, and it is also widely used in automobiles, smart
homes and so forth. Accordingly, with the increase in demand for people to converse with machines,
technology that synthesizes natural speech like human speech is being actively studied.
Recently, with the development of neural networks, speech synthesis technology has made a rapid
progress. Most neural speech synthesis models use a two-stage pipeline: 1) predicting a low resolution
intermediate representation such as mel-spectrograms (Shen et al., 2018, Ping et al., 2017, Li et al.,
2019) or linguistic features (Oord et al., 2016) from text, and 2) synthesizing raw waveform audio
from the intermediate representation (Oord et al., 2016, 2018, Prenger et al., 2019, Kumar et al.,
2019). The ﬁrst stage is to model low-level representations of human speech from text, whereas the
second stage model synthesizes raw waveforms with up to 24,000 samples per second and up to 16
bit ﬁdelity. In this work, we focus on designing a second stage model that efﬁciently synthesizes high
ﬁdelity waveforms from mel-spectrograms.
Various work have been conducted to improve the audio synthesis quality and efﬁciency of second
stage models. WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016) is an autoregressive (AR) convolutional neural network that
demonstrates the ability of neural network based methods to surpass conventional methods in quality.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
However, because of the AR structure, WaveNet generates one sample at each forward operation; it is
prohibitively slow in synthesizing high temporal resolution audio. Flow-based generative models are
proposed to address this problem. Because of their ability to model raw waveforms by transforming
noise sequences of the same size in parallel, ﬂow-based generative models fully utilize modern
parallel computing processors to speed up sampling. Parallel WaveNet (Oord et al., 2018) is an
inverse autoregressive ﬂow (IAF) that is trained to minimize its Kullback-Leibler divergence from a
pre-trained WaveNet called a teacher. Compared to the teacher model, it improves the synthesis speed
to 1,000 times or more, without quality degradation. WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019) eliminates the
need for distilling a teacher model, and simpliﬁes the learning process through maximum likelihood
estimation by employing efﬁcient bijective ﬂows based on Glow (Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018). It
also produces high-quality audio compared to WaveNet. However, it requires many parameters for its
deep architecture with over 90 layers.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which are one of the most
dominant deep generative models, have also been applied to speech synthesis. Kumar et al. (2019)
proposed a multi-scale architecture for discriminators operating on multiple scales of raw waveforms.
With sophisticated architectural consideration, the MelGAN generator is compact enough to enable
real-time synthesis on CPU. Yamamoto et al. (2020) proposed multi-resolution STFT loss function to
improve and stabilize GAN training and achieved better parameter efﬁciency and less training time
than an IAF model, ClariNet (Ping et al., 2018). Instead of mel-spectrograms, GAN-TTS (Bi ´nkowski
et al., 2019) successfully generates high quality raw audio waveforms from linguistic features through
multiple discriminators operating on different window sizes. The model also shows fewer FLOPs
compared to Parallel WaveNet. Despite the advantages, there is still a gap in sample quality between
the GAN models and AR or ﬂow-based models.
We propose HiFi-GAN, which achieves both higher computational efﬁciency and sample quality
than AR or ﬂow-based models. As speech audio consists of sinusoidal signals with various periods,
modeling the periodic patterns matters to generate realistic speech audio. Therefore, we propose
a discriminator which consists of small sub-discriminators, each of which obtains only a speciﬁc
periodic parts of raw waveforms. This architecture is the very ground of our model successfully
synthesizing realistic speech audio. As we extract different parts of audio for the discriminator, we
also design a module that places multiple residual blocks each of which observes patterns of various
lengths in parallel, and apply it to the generator.
HiFi-GAN achieves a higher MOS score than the best publicly available models, WaveNet and
WaveGlow. It synthesizes human-quality speech audio at speed of 3.7 MHz on a single V100 GPU.
We further show the generality of HiFi-GAN to the mel-spectrogram inversion of unseen speakers
and end-to-end speech synthesis. Finally, the tiny footprint version of HiFi-GAN requires only
0.92M parameters while outperforming the best publicly available models and the fastest version of
HiFi-GAN samples 13.44 times faster than real-time on CPU and 1,186 times faster than real-time on
single V100 GPU with comparable quality to an autoregressive counterpart.
Our audio samples are available on the demo web-site1, and we provide the implementation as open
source for reproducibility and future work.2
2 HiFi-GAN
2.1 Overview
HiFi-GAN consists of one generator and two discriminators: multi-scale and multi-period discrimina-
tors. The generator and discriminators are trained adversarially, along with two additional losses for
improving training stability and model performance.
2.2 Generator
The generator is a fully convolutional neural network. It uses a mel-spectrogram as input and
upsamples it through transposed convolutions until the length of the output sequence matches the
temporal resolution of raw waveforms. Every transposed convolution is followed by a multi-receptive
1https://jik876.github.io/hiﬁ-gan-demo/
2https://github.com/jik876/hiﬁ-gan
2

==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1: The generator upsamples mel-spectrograms up to jkujtimes to match the temporal resolution
of raw waveforms. A MRF module adds features from jkrjresidual blocks of different kernel sizes
and dilation rates. Lastly, the n-th residual block with kernel size kr[n]and dilation rates Dr[n]in a
MRF module is depicted.
ﬁeld fusion (MRF) module, which we describe in the next paragraph. Figure 1 shows the architecture
of the generator. As in previous work (Mathieu et al., 2015, Isola et al., 2017, Kumar et al., 2019),
noise is not given to the generator as an additional input.
Multi-Receptive Field Fusion We design the multi-receptive ﬁeld fusion (MRF) module for our
generator, which observes patterns of various lengths in parallel. Speciﬁcally, MRF module returns
the sum of outputs from multiple residual blocks. Different kernel sizes and dilation rates are selected
for each residual block to form diverse receptive ﬁeld patterns. The architectures of MRF module
and a residual block are shown in Figure 1. We left some adjustable parameters in the generator; the
hidden dimension hu, kernel sizes kuof the transposed convolutions, kernel sizes kr, and dilation
ratesDrof MRF modules can be regulated to match one’s own requirement in a trade-off between
synthesis efﬁciency and sample quality.
2.3 Discriminator
Identifying long-term dependencies is the key for modeling realistic speech audio. For example,
a phoneme duration can be longer than 100 ms, resulting in high correlation between more than
2,200 adjacent samples in the raw waveform. This problem has been addressed in the previous
work (Donahue et al., 2018) by increasing receptive ﬁelds of the generator and discriminator. We
focus on another crucial problem that has yet been resolved; as speech audio consists of sinusoidal
signals with various periods, the diverse periodic patterns underlying in the audio data need to be
identiﬁed.
To this end, we propose the multi-period discriminator (MPD) consisting of several sub-discriminators
each handling a portion of periodic signals of input audio. Additionally, to capture consecutive patterns
and long-term dependencies, we use the multi-scale discriminator (MSD) proposed in MelGAN
(Kumar et al., 2019), which consecutively evaluates audio samples at different levels. We conducted
simple experiments to show the ability of MPD and MSD to capture periodic patterns, and the results
can be found in Appendix B.
Multi-Period Discriminator MPD is a mixture of sub-discriminators, each of which only accepts
equally spaced samples of an input audio; the space is given as period p. The sub-discriminators
are designed to capture different implicit structures from each other by looking at different parts
of an input audio. We set the periods to [2, 3, 5, 7, 11] to avoid overlaps as much as possible. As
shown in Figure 2b, we ﬁrst reshape 1D raw audio of length Tinto 2D data of height T=p and width
pand then apply 2D convolutions to the reshaped data. In every convolutional layer of MPD, we
restrict the kernel size in the width axis to be 1 to process the periodic samples independently. Each
sub-discriminator is a stack of strided convolutional layers with leaky rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
activation. Subsequently, weight normalization (Salimans and Kingma, 2016) is applied to MPD. By
reshaping the input audio into 2D data instead of sampling periodic signals of audio, gradients from
MPD can be delivered to all time steps of the input audio.
3

==== Page 4 ====
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2: (a) The second sub-discriminator of MSD. (b) The second sub-discriminator of MPD with
period 3.
Multi-Scale Discriminator Because each sub-discriminator in MPD only accepts disjoint samples,
we add MSD to consecutively evaluate the audio sequence. The architecture of MSD is drawn from
that of MelGAN (Kumar et al., 2019). MSD is a mixture of three sub-discriminators operating on
different input scales: raw audio, 2 average-pooled audio, and 4 average-pooled audio, as shown
in Figure 2a. Each of the sub-discriminators in MSD is a stack of strided and grouped convolutional
layers with leaky ReLU activation. The discriminator size is increased by reducing stride and adding
more layers. Weight normalization is applied except for the ﬁrst sub-discriminator, which operates on
raw audio. Instead, spectral normalization (Miyato et al., 2018) is applied and stabilizes training as it
reported.
Note that MPD operates on disjoint samples of raw waveforms, whereas MSD operates on smoothed
waveforms.
For previous work using multi-discriminator architecture such as MPD and MSD, Bi ´nkowski et al.
(2019)’s work can also be referred. The discriminator architecture proposed in the work has resem-
blance to MPD and MSD in that it is a mixture of discriminators, but MPD and MSD are Markovian
window-based fully unconditional discriminator, whereas it averages the output and has conditional
discriminators. Also, the resemblance between MPD and RWD (Bi ´nkowski et al., 2019) can be
considered in the part of reshaping input audio, but MPD uses periods set to prime numbers to
discriminate data of as many periods as possible, whereas RWD uses reshape factors of overlapped
periods and does not handle each channel of the reshaped data separately, which are different from
what MPD is aimed for. A variation of RWD can perform a similar operation to MPD, but it is also
not the same as MPD in terms of parameter sharing and strided convolution to adjacent signals. More
details of the architectural difference can be found in Appendix C.
2.4 Training Loss Terms
GAN Loss For brevity, we describe our discriminators, MSD and MPD, as one discriminator
throughout Section 2.4. For the generator and discriminator, the training objectives follow LS-
GAN (Mao et al., 2017), which replace the binary cross-entropy terms of the original GAN objec-
tives (Goodfellow et al., 2014) with least squares loss functions for non-vanishing gradient ﬂows.
The discriminator is trained to classify ground truth samples to 1, and the samples synthesized from
the generator to 0. The generator is trained to fake the discriminator by updating the sample quality
to be classiﬁed to a value almost equal to 1. GAN losses for the generator Gand the discriminator D
are deﬁned as
LAdv(D;G) =E(x;s)"
(D(x) 1)2+ (D(G(s)))2#
(1)
LAdv(G;D) =Es"
(D(G(s)) 1)2#
(2)
4

==== Page 5 ====
, wherexdenotes the ground truth audio and sdenotes the input condition, the mel-spectrogram of
the ground truth audio.
Mel-Spectrogram Loss In addition to the GAN objective, we add a mel-spectrogram loss to
improve the training efﬁciency of the generator and the ﬁdelity of the generated audio. Referring to
previous work (Isola et al., 2017), applying a reconstruction loss to GAN model helps to generate
realistic results, and in Yamamoto et al. (2020)’s work, time-frequency distribution is effectively
captured by jointly optimizing multi-resolution spectrogram and adversarial loss functions. We used
mel-spectrogram loss according to the input conditions, which can also be expected to have the effect
of focusing more on improving the perceptual quality due to the characteristics of the human auditory
system. The mel-spectrogram loss is the L1 distance between the mel-spectrogram of a waveform
synthesized by the generator and that of a ground truth waveform. It is deﬁned as
LMel(G) =E(x;s)"
jj(x) (G(s))jj1#
(3)
, whereis the function that transforms a waveform into the corresponding mel-spectrogram. The
mel-spectrogram loss helps the generator to synthesize a realistic waveform corresponding to an input
condition, and also stabilizes the adversarial training process from the early stages.
Feature Matching Loss The feature matching loss is a learned similarity metric measured by
the difference in features of the discriminator between a ground truth sample and a generated
sample (Larsen et al., 2016, Kumar et al., 2019). As it was successfully adopted to speech synthe-
sis (Kumar et al., 2019), we use it as an additional loss to train the generator. Every intermediate
feature of the discriminator is extracted, and the L1 distance between a ground truth sample and
a conditionally generated sample in each feature space is calculated. The feature matching loss is
deﬁned as
LFM(G;D) =E(x;s)"TX
i=11
NijjDi(x) Di(G(s))jj1#
(4)
, whereTdenotes the number of layers in the discriminator; DiandNidenote the features and the
number of features in the i-th layer of the discriminator, respectively.
Final Loss Our ﬁnal objectives for the generator and discriminator are as
LG=LAdv(G;D) +fmLFM(G;D) +melLMel(G) (5)
LD=LAdv(D;G) (6)
, where we set fm= 2andmel= 45 . Because our discriminator is a set of sub-discriminators of
MPD and MSD, Equations 5 and 6 can be converted with respect to the sub-discriminators as
LG=KX
k=1"
LAdv(G;Dk) +fmLFM(G;Dk)#
+melLMel(G) (7)
LD=KX
k=1LAdv(Dk;G) (8)
, whereDkdenotes thek-th sub-discriminator in MPD and MSD.
3 Experiments
For fair and reproducible comparison with other models, we used the LJSpeech dataset (Ito, 2017) in
which many speech synthesis models are trained. LJSpeech consists of 13,100 short audio clips of a
single speaker with a total length of approximately 24 hours. The audio format is 16-bit PCM with a
sample rate of 22 kHz; it was used without any manipulation. HiFi-GAN was compared against the
best publicly available models: the popular mixture of logistics (MoL) WaveNet (Oord et al., 2018)
5

==== Page 6 ====
implementation (Yamamoto, 2018)3and the ofﬁcial implementation of WaveGlow (Valle, 2018b)
and MelGAN (Kumar, 2019). We used the provided pretrained weights for all the models.
To evaluate the generality of HiFi-GAN to the mel-spectrogram inversion of unseen speakers, we
used the VCTK multi-speaker dataset (Veaux et al., 2017), which consists of approximately 44,200
short audio clips uttered by 109 native English speakers with various accents. The total length of the
audio clips is approximately 44 hours. The audio format is 16-bit PCM with a sample rate of 44 kHz.
We reduced the sample rate to 22 kHz. We randomly selected nine speakers and excluded all their
audio clips from the training set. We then trained MoL WaveNet, WaveGlow, and MelGAN with the
same data settings; all the models were trained until 2.5M steps.
To evaluate the audio quality, we crowd-sourced 5-scale MOS tests via Amazon Mechanical Turk.
The MOS scores were recorded with 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI). Raters listened to the test
samples randomly, where they were allowed to evaluate each audio sample once. All audio clips were
normalized to prevent the inﬂuence of audio volume differences on the raters. All quality assessments
in Section 4 were conducted in this manner, and were not sourced from other papers.
The synthesis speed was measured on GPU and CPU environments according to the recent research
trends regarding the efﬁciency of neural networks (Kumar et al., 2019, Zhai et al., 2020, Tan et al.,
2020). The devices used are a single NVIDIA V100 GPU and a MacBook Pro laptop (Intel i7
CPU 2.6GHz). Additionally, we used 32-bit ﬂoating point operations for all the models without any
optimization methods.
To conﬁrm the trade-off between synthesis efﬁciency and sample quality, we conducted experi-
ments based on the three variations of the generator, V1,V2, andV3while maintaining the same
discriminator conﬁguration. For V1, we sethu= 512 ,ku= [16;16;4;4],kr= [3;7;11], and
Dr= [[1;1];[3;1];[5;1]]3].V2is simply a smaller version of V1, which has a smaller hidden
dimensionhu= 128 but with exactly the same receptive ﬁelds. To further reduce the number of
layers while maintaining receptive ﬁelds wide, the kernel sizes and dilation rates of V3were selected
carefully. The detailed conﬁgurations of the models are listed in Appendix A.1. We used 80 bands
mel-spectrograms as input conditions. The FFT, window, and hop size were set to 1024, 1024, and
256, respectively. The networks were trained using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter,
2017) with1= 0:8,2= 0:99, and weight decay = 0:01. The learning rate decay was scheduled
by a0:999factor in every epoch with an initial learning rate of 210 4.
4 Results
4.1 Audio Quality and Synthesis Speed
To evaluate the performance of our models in terms of both quality and speed, we performed the
MOS test for spectrogram inversion, and the speed measurement. For the MOS test, we randomly
selected 50 utterances from the LJSpeech dataset and used the ground truth spectrograms of the
utterances which were excluded from training as input conditions.
For easy comparison of audio quality, synthesis speed and model size, the results are compiled and
presented in Table1. Remarkably, all variations of HiFi-GAN scored higher than the other models.
V1has 13.92M parameters and achieves the highest MOS with a gap of 0.09 compared to the ground
truth audio; this implies that the synthesized audio is nearly indistinguishable from the human voice.
In terms of synthesis speed, V1is faster than WaveGlow and MoL WaveNet. V2also demonstrates
similarity to human quality with a MOS of 4.23 while signiﬁcantly reducing the memory requirement
and inference time, compared to V1. It only requires 0.92M parameters. Despite having the lowest
MOS among our models, V3can synthesize speech 13.44 times faster than real-time on CPU and
1,186 times faster than real-time on single V100 GPU while showing similar perceptual quality with
MoL WaveNet. As V3efﬁciently synthesizes speech on CPU, it can be well suited for on-device
applications.
3In the original paper (Oord et al., 2018), an input condition called linguistic features was used, but this
implementation uses mel-spectrogram as the input condition as in the later paper (Shen et al., 2018).
6

==== Page 7 ====
Table 1: Comparison of the MOS and the synthesis speed. Speed of nkHz means that the model can
generaten1000 raw audio samples per second. The numbers in () mean the speed compared to
real-time.
Model MOS (CI)Speed on CPU
(kHz)Speed on GPU
(kHz)# Param
(M)
Ground Truth 4.45 ( 0.06)      
WaveNet (MoL) 4.02 ( 0.08)   0.07 (0:003) 24.73
WaveGlow 3.81 ( 0.08) 4.72 ( 0:21) 501 (22:75) 87.73
MelGAN 3.79 ( 0.09) 145.52 ( 6:59) 14,238 (645:73) 4.26
HiFi-GANV1 4.36 (0.07) 31.74 ( 1.43) 3,701 ( 167.86) 13.92
HiFi-GANV2 4.23 (0.07) 214.97 ( 9.74) 16,863 ( 764.80) 0.92
HiFi-GANV3 4.05 (0.08) 296.38 (13.44) 26,169 ( 1,186.80) 1.46
4.2 Ablation Study
We performed an ablation study of MPD, MRF, and mel-spectrogram loss to verify the effect of each
HiFi-GAN component on the quality of the synthesized audio. V3that has the smallest expressive
power among the three generator variations was used as a generator for the ablation study, and the
network parameters were updated up to 500k steps for each conﬁguration.
The results of the MOS evaluation are shown in Table 2, which show all three components contribute
to the performance. Removing MPD causes a signiﬁcant decrease in perceptual quality, whereas
the absence of MSD shows a relatively small but noticeable degradation. To investigate the effect
ofMRF , one residual block with the widest receptive ﬁeld was retained in each MRF module. The
result is also worse than the baseline. The experiment on the mel-spectrogram loss shows that it
helps improve the quality, and we observed that the quality improves more stably when the loss is
applied.
To verify the effect of MPD in the settings of other GAN models, we introduced MPD in MelGAN.
MelGAN trained with MPD outperforms the original one by a gap of 0.47 MOS, which shows
statistically signiﬁcant improvement.
We experimented with periods of powers of 2 to verify the effect of periods set to prime num-
bers. While the period 2 allows signals to be processed closely, it results in statistically signiﬁcant
degradation with a difference of 0.20 MOS from the baseline.
Table 2: Ablation study results. Comparison of the effect of each component on the synthesis quality.
Model MOS (CI)
Ground Truth 4.57 ( 0.04)
Baseline (HiFi-GAN V3) 4.10 (0.05)
w/o MPD 2.28 ( 0.09)
w/o MSD 3.74 ( 0.05)
w/o MRF 3.92 ( 0.05)
w/o Mel-Spectrogram Loss 3.25 ( 0.05)
MPDp=[2,4,8,16,32] 3.90 ( 0.05)
MelGAN 2.88 ( 0.08)
MelGAN with MPD 3.35 ( 0.07)
4.3 Generalization to Unseen Speakers
We used 50 randomly selected utterances of nine unseen speakers in the VCTK dataset that were
excluded from the training set for the MOS test. Table 3 shows the experimental results for the
mel-spectrogram inversion of the unseen speakers. The three generator variations scored 3.77, 3.69,
and 3.61. They were all better than AR and ﬂow-based models, indicating that the proposed models
7

==== Page 8 ====
generalize well to unseen speakers. Additionally, the tendency of difference in MOS scores of the
proposed models is similar with the result shown in Section 4.1, which exhibits generalization across
different datasets.
Table 3: Quality comparison of synthe-
sized utterances for unseen speakers.
Model MOS (CI)
Ground Truth 3.79 ( 0.07)
WaveNet (MoL) 3.52 ( 0.08)
WaveGlow 3.52 ( 0.08)
MelGAN 3.50 ( 0.08)
HiFi-GANV1 3.77 (0.07)
HiFi-GANV2 3.69 (0.07)
HiFi-GANV3 3.61 (0.07)Table 4: Quality comparison for end-to-end speech
synthesis.
Model MOS (CI)
Ground Truth 4.23 ( 0.07)
WaveGlow (w/o ﬁne-tuning) 3.69 ( 0.08)
HiFi-GANV1(w/o ﬁne-tuning) 3.91 ( 0.08)
HiFi-GANV2(w/o ﬁne-tuning) 3.88 ( 0.08)
HiFi-GANV3(w/o ﬁne-tuning) 3.89 ( 0.08)
WaveGlow (ﬁnd-tuned) 3.66 ( 0.08)
HiFi-GANV1(ﬁnd-tuned) 4.18 (0.08)
HiFi-GANV2(ﬁnd-tuned) 4.12 ( 0.07)
HiFi-GANV3(ﬁnd-tuned) 4.02 ( 0.08)
Figure 3: Pixel-wise difference in the mel-spectrogram domain between generated waveforms and a
mel-spectrogram from Tacotron2. Before ﬁne-tuning, HiFi-GAN generates waveforms corresponding
to input conditions accurately. After ﬁne-tuning, the error of the mel-spectrogram level increased, but
the perceptual quality increased.
4.4 End-to-End Speech Synthesis
We conducted an additional experiment to examine the effectiveness of the proposed models when
applied to an end-to-end speech synthesis pipeline, which consists of text to mel-spectrogram andmel-
spectrogram to waveform synthesis modules. We herein used Tacotron2 (Shen et al., 2018) to generate
mel-spectrograms from text. Without any modiﬁcation, we synthesized the mel-spectrograms using
the most popular implementation of Tacotron2 (Valle, 2018a) with the provided pre-trained weights.
We then fed them as input conditions into second stage models, including our models and WaveGlow
used in Section 4.1.4
The MOS scores are listed in Table 4. The results without ﬁne-tuning show that all the proposed
models outperform WaveGlow in the end-to-end setting, while the audio quality of all models are
unsatisfactory compared to the ground truth audio. However, when the pixel-wise difference in the
mel-spectrogram domain between generated waveforms and a mel-spectrogram from Tacotron2 are
4MelGAN and MoL WaveNet were excluded from comparison for their differences in pre-processing such as
frequency clipping. Mismatch in the input representation led to producing low quality audio when combined
with Tacotron2.
8

==== Page 9 ====
investigated as demonstrated in Figure 3, we found that the difference is insigniﬁcant, which means
that the predicted mel-spectrogram from Tacotron2 was already noisy. To improve the audio quality
in the end-to-end setting, we applied ﬁne-tuning with predicted mel-spectrograms of Tacotron2 in
teacher-forcing mode (Shen et al., 2018) to all the models up to 100k steps. MOS scores of all the
ﬁne-tuned proposed models over 4, whereas ﬁne-tuned WaveGlow did not show quality improvement.
We conclude that HiFi-GAN adapts well on the end-to-end setting with ﬁne-tuning.
5 Conclusion
In this work, we introduced HiFi-GAN, which can efﬁciently synthesize high quality speech audio.
Above all, our proposed model outperforms the best performing publicly available models in terms of
synthesis quality, even comparable to human level. Moreover, it shows a signiﬁcant improvement in
terms of synthesis speed. We took inspiration from the characteristic of speech audio that consists
of patterns with various periods and applied it to neural networks, and veriﬁed that the existence of
the proposed discriminator greatly inﬂuences the quality of speech synthesis through the ablation
study. Additionally, this work presents several experiments that are signiﬁcant in speech synthesis
applications. HiFi-GAN shows excellent ability to generalize unseen speakers and synthesize speech
audio comparable to human quality from noisy inputs in an end-to-end setting. In addition, our
small footprint model demonstrates comparable sample quality with the best publicly available
autoregressive counterpart, while generating samples in an order-of-magnitude faster than real-time
on CPU. This shows progress towards on-device natural speech synthesis, which requires low latency
and memory footprint. Finally, our experiments show that the generators of various conﬁgurations
can be trained with the same discriminators and learning mechanism, which indicates the possibility
of ﬂexibly selecting a generator conﬁguration according to the target speciﬁcations without the need
for a time-consuming hyper-parameter search for the discriminators.
We release HiFi-GAN as open source. We envisage that our work will serve as a basis for future
speech synthesis studies.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Broader Impact
Speech synthesis technology has been developed for a long time, and recently, it has reached the level
of producing speech at human level by applying neural networks. However, although the quality of
synthesized audio is very high, there are several limitations for applying the neural network based
speech synthesis technology in real production due to the high computation cost and slow synthesis
speed. Speech synthesis models that perform high speed synthesis have also been studied, but the
quality of these models needed to be improved compared to that of human.
Our work addressed these problems, and showed that the proposed model achieves both high quality
and fast speech synthesis. This could bring advantages to service providers who provide voice
interfaces. Service providers can improve user satisfaction by providing natural and higher quality
speech audio allows listeners to understand content more quickly and accurately. In addition, the
high computational efﬁciency obtained in our work could reduce the usage of computing devices
such as GPUs and CPUs, which can contribute to the cost savings of the service providers. It could
also enable on-device operation of neural network based speech synthesis, which could lower the
service latency and computation cost on servers.
Meanwhile, the high efﬁciency and quality of the speech samples that our work is capable of
generating can accompany certain adverse effects. First, the demand for recordings of professional
voice actors may be reduced. In many applications such as subway announcements, recordings of
professional voice actors are embedded. So, when a new announcement is needed, a professional
voice actor will record the utterance for the announcement. However, if the neural network based
speech synthesis model is capable of producing natural speech like humans, it can replace the
work of professional voice actors. This could be considered an inevitable change in the job due to
technological advancements. However, we need to devise a way such as contracts for the use of voice,
not the cost of recording, to mitigate the sudden impact on our society.
Furthermore, high-performance speech synthesis technology can be used for criminal activities such
as voice phishing. If a neural network based speech synthesis model was trained with a dataset
consisting of speaker characteristics that give someone conﬁdence, such as those of news anchors, it
might be used for making people feel secure in the deceptions. In addition, our work has shown that it
is possible to generate high-quality speech audio with extremely fast inference speed, which could be
used for voice phishing attackers to generate response in real-time during conversation with targets.
By combining the speaker characteristics and fast speech synthesis, it might result in increasing the
success rate of the voice phishing attacks.
The unintended abuse of voice in datasets could also be a problem. Since the speech synthesis models
based on neural networks are trained with audio clips of real human speech, the synthesized audio is
also very similar to the voice of a speaker who recorded audio clips in the training data. It would not
be a problem if the trained model is only to be used in a controlled environment. However, if the
model is stolen by a malicious person or if the speech synthesis model is released as a service to allow
synthesizing any utterances without restrictions, it could be abused regardless of the original intention
of the voice owners or the model owner. Therefore, we believe that institutes and companies that
study and use speech synthesis models should pay particular attention to the security of the models
and the training datasets.
The results of our model failure could be audio clips with noise, distortion, or inaccurate or missing
pronunciation. These issues might be acceptable in most cases, but could be a problem when the
model is applied to critical tasks such as emergencies or applications designed to listen to audio only
once. As is known, most neural network based models are not fully controllable. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to guarantee that it works 100% robust under any conditions. We believe that neural network
based speech synthesis technology should be carefully applied in mission critical domains.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We would like to thank Bokyung Son, Sungwon Kim, Yongjin Cho and Sungwon Lyu.
All resources used for this work were provided by Kakao Enterprise.
10

==== Page 11 ====
References
Mikołaj Bi ´nkowski, Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Aidan Clark, Erich Elsen, Norman Casagrande,
Luis C Cobo, and Karen Simonyan. High ﬁdelity speech synthesis with adversarial networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11646 , 2019.
Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. Adversarial audio synthesis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.04208 , 2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems , pages 2672–2680, 2014.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 1125–1134, 2017.
Keith Ito. The lj speech dataset. https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/ , 2017.
Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative ﬂow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 10215–10224, 2018.
Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault de Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei Zhen Teoh, Jose Sotelo,
Alexandre de Brébisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C Courville. Melgan: Generative adversarial
networks for conditional waveform synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32 , pages 14910–14921, 2019.
Rithesh Kumar. descriptinc/melgan-neurips. https://github.com/descriptinc/
melgan-neurips , 2019.
Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Hugo Larochelle, and Ole Winther. Autoen-
coding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric. In International conference on machine
learning , pages 1558–1566. PMLR, 2016.
Naihan Li, Shujie Liu, Yanqing Liu, Sheng Zhao, and Ming Liu. Neural speech synthesis with
transformer network. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33,
pages 6706–6713, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017.
Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond YK Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. Least
squares generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision , pages 2794–2802, 2017.
Michael Mathieu, Camille Couprie, and Yann LeCun. Deep multi-scale video prediction beyond
mean square error. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05440 , 2015.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization for
generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05957 , 2018.
Aaron Oord, Yazhe Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
George Driessche, Edward Lockhart, Luis Cobo, Florian Stimberg, et al. Parallel wavenet: Fast
high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3918–3926.
PMLR, 2018.
Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw
audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang, Jonathan
Raiman, and John Miller. Deep voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolutional sequence
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.07654 , 2017.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, and Jitong Chen. Clarinet: Parallel wave generation in end-to-end text-to-
speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.07281 , 2018.
Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro. Waveglow: A ﬂow-based generative network for
speech synthesis. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 3617–3621. IEEE, 2019.
Tim Salimans and Durk P Kingma. Weight normalization: A simple reparameterization to accelerate
training of deep neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
901–909, 2016.
Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng
Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, et al. Natural tts synthesis by conditioning
wavenet on mel spectrogram predictions. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 4779–4783. IEEE, 2018.
Mingxing Tan, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc V Le. Efﬁcientdet: Scalable and efﬁcient object detection.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
10781–10790, 2020.
Rafael Valle. Nvidia/tacotron2. https://github.com/NVIDIA/tacotron2 , 2018a.
Rafael Valle. Nvidia/waveglow. https://github.com/NVIDIA/waveglow , 2018b.
Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, Kirsten MacDonald, et al. Cstr vctk corpus: English multi-
speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit. University of Edinburgh. The Centre for Speech
Technology Research (CSTR) , 2017.
Ryuichi Yamamoto. wavenet vocoder. https://github.com/r9y9/wavenet_vocoder/ , 2018.
Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. Parallel wavegan: A fast waveform generation
model based on generative adversarial networks with multi-resolution spectrogram. In ICASSP
2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) ,
pages 6199–6203. IEEE, 2020.
Bohan Zhai, Tianren Gao, Flora Xue, Daniel Rothchild, Bichen Wu, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Kurt
Keutzer. Squeezewave: Extremely lightweight vocoders for on-device speech synthesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.05685 , 2020.
12

