==== Page 1 ====
11HiGAN+: Handwriting Imitation GAN with Disentangled
Representations
JIGAN,Chongqing University of Posts andTelecommunications and University of ChineseAcademy of Sciences
WEIQIANGWANG ,University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
JIAXULENG andXINBOGAO ,Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Fig. 1. Humans can quickly learn handwriting imitation with the ability of hallucination, while this task may be challenging for machines. Our goal is to
teachmachines tomimicsuchhallucinations,sothattheymaywritediverseandrealistictextsaswellashumansafterlearningfromlimited handwriti ng
scripts.
Humans remain far better than machines at learning, where humans re-
quire fewer examples to learn new concepts and can use those concepts
in richer ways. Take handwriting as an example, after learning from very
limited handwriting scripts, a person can easily imagine what the hand-
written texts would like with other arbitrary textual contents (even for
This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant No. 61976201, No. 62036007, No. 62101084, and No. 62102057; in part
by the NSFC Key Projects of International (Regional) Cooperation and Exchanges
under Grant No. 61860206004, the Special Project on Technological Innovation and
Application Development under Grant No. cstc2020jscx-dxwtB0032, and Chongqing
ExcellentScientist Projectunder Grant No.cstc2021ycjh-bgzxm0339.
Authors’ addresses: J. Gan, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing 400065, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; email:
ganji15@mails.ucas.ac.cn;J.LengandX.Gao(correspondingauthor),ChongqingUni-
versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China; emails: {lengjx,
gaoxb}@cqupt.edu.cn;W.Wang(correspondingauthor),UniversityofChineseAcad-
emy of Sciences,Beijing101408, China;email: wqwang@ucas.ac.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tiononthefirstpage.Copyrightsforcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthan
ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orre-
publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
©2022 Associationfor ComputingMachinery.
0730-0301/2022/09-ART11 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3550070unseen words or texts). Moreover, humans can also hallucinate to imitate
calligraphic styles from just a single reference handwriting sample (that
even have never seen before). Humans can do such hallucinations, per-
haps because they can learn to disentangle the textual contents and cal-
ligraphic styles from handwriting images. Inspired by this, we propose a
novelhandwritingimitationgenerativeadversarialnetwork(HiGAN+)for
realistichandwrittentextsynthesisbasedondisentangledrepresentations.
The proposed HiGAN+ can achieve a precise one-shot handwriting style
transfer by introducing the writer-specific auxiliary loss and contextual
loss, and it also attains a good global & local consistency by refining local
detailsofsynthetichandwritingimages.Extensiveexperiments,including
human evaluations, on the benchmark dataset validate our superiority in
terms of visual quality, scalability, compactness, and style transferability
comparedwiththe state-of-the-art GANsfor handwrittentextsynthesis.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Image representa-
tions;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Handwriting imitation, handwritten
textgeneration,generativeadversarial networks,machinelearning
ACM Referenceformat:
JiGan,WeiqiangWang,JiaxuLeng,andXinboGao.2022.HiGAN+:Hand-
writing Imitation GAN with Disentangled Representations. ACM Trans.
Graph.42,1,Article 11(September2022),17pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3550070
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.


==== Page 2 ====
11:2 • J.Gan et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
Although machines can easily recognize humans’ handwriting
scripts with recent advanced techniques, it still remains chal-
lenging for machines to synthesize realistic handwriting images.
Hence, it will step closer to high-level artificial intelligence if we
can teach machines/robotics to write texts as realistic as humans.
Generally, handwriting imitation (HI) aims at (1) synthesizing
diverseandrealistichandwritingimagesconditionedonarbitrary
textual contents and (2) imitating the calligraphic styles of refer-
ence handwriting images (e.g., the character shape, stroke thick-
ness, writing slant, and ligature). As shown in Figure 1, humans
canquicklylearnsuchHIwiththeabilityofhallucination.Specifi-
cally,afterlearningfromverylimitedhandwritingscripts,humans
caneasilyvisualize(orimagine)whatthehandwrittentextswould
looklikewiththeotherarbitrarytextualcontents.Moreover,after
providing a reference handwriting sample, humans can also hal-
lucinate novel handwriting images of similar calligraphic styles
yetwithdifferenttextualcontents.Lastly,humansalsoareableto
writearbitrarilylongwords andeven completesentences or para-
graphs.Byrethinkinghumans’learningability,thereasonwhyhu-
manscandosuchadvancedhallucinationsisperhapsthattheycan
learn to disentangle calligraphic styles and textual contents from
handwriting images (rather than simply memorizing the training
samples).Therefore,ifwecanteachmachinestomimicthislearn-
ingprocess,they maylearnHI as wellas humans.
It has witnessed many great achievements in the field of image
generation with the recent advances in generative adversarial
networks (GANs)[Goodfellowetal. 2014]andvariationalauto-
encoders (VAEs) [Kingma and Welling 2013]. By integrating the
advantages of GANs and VAEs, computers nowadays are capable
ofsynthesizingdiverseandrealisticnatureimagesoroilpaintings,
andtheycanevenperformimage-to-imagetranslationbylearning
the mapping between different visual domains. However, a signif-
icant observation is that HI as a special image synthesis task has
not been fully explored yet. Particularly, we demonstrate that HI
is substantially different from the conventional image genera-
tion(CIG)studiedinpreviousworks,mainlyduetothefollowing
aspects:
(1)Variable-Sized Outputs . CIG mainly focuses on producing
fixed-sized images, while HI requires generating variable-
sized images since handwritten texts can be arbitrarily long
(e.g., handwritten sentences typically are longer than hand-
written words). Therefore, the generator for HI should be
specifically designedfor variable-sized outputs.
(2)ArbitraryTextualContents .CIGcanonlygenerateimages
conditioned on predefined classes and thus is impossible to
produce images for other unseen classes. However, HI re-
quires textual contents to be more precise (i.e., exact char-
acters in desired orders), which is expected to generate ar-
bitrary handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contentsthatareunconstrainedtoanypre-definedcorpusor
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words (i.e., the words that have
never been seen duringtraining).
(3)Different Style Transfer . CIG aims at synthesizing nature
images or oil paintings, whose styles can be modeled as
dense textures (which can be effectively captured by GramTable 1. Feature-by-Feature ComparisonofGANsfor
Handwritten TextGeneration
Method Text
LengthStyleTransferRefine
DetailSize↓
(MB)Quality
FID↓ Shot Acc.↑
ScrabbleGAN Arbitrary ××× 81.8 26.78
TS-GAN Arbitrary One 0.05 ×172.1 33.90
GANwriting Short Few 0.16 ×135.8 20.55
HWT Arbitrary Few 0.17 ×131.3 19.69
HiGAN Arbitrary One 0.33 ×59.1 18.30
HiGAN+ Arbitrary One 0.42√21.7 5.95
In thetable,↑indicates that higher values are better, and vice versa.
Boldindicates thebest result.
matrices). In contrast, handwriting images contain little tex-
tures since they mainly consist of a sparse set of continuous
graphical elements (i.e., handwriting strokes and cursive
ligatures). Moreover, humans’ handwriting can be very
arbitrary, and thus handwriting images may not be perfectly
spatiallyalignedeventhoughtheirstylesarevisuallysimilar.
What is worse, HI has stronger semantic constraints, under
whichthegeneratedimagesmaycontaincompletelydifferent
textual contents with different spatial sizes. Therefore, it
poses challenges for traditional style transfer methods based
on pixel correspondence (e.g., Pix2Pix [Isola et al. 2017]a n d
CycleGAN [Kim et al. 2017]).
Those characteristics make HI could be more challenging than
CIG.
Recently, several efforts have been made for handwritten text
synthesis based on GANs, while none of them have success-
fully solved the aforementioned difficulties at the same time.
Specifically, Alonso et al. [ 2019] first proposed to adopt GANs
for synthesizing handwritten text images conditioned on the
whole embeddings of entire words. However, this method can
only synthesize fixed-sized images and also produce low visual
qualitiesforOOVwords.Fogeletal.[ 2020]proposedanimproved
methodcalledScrabbleGAN,whichcansynthesizearbitrarilylong
handwrittentextsbyconcatenatingalltheletter-tokens.However,
the major limitation is that ScrabbleGAN cannot imitate the
calligraphic styles of reference samples and thus fails to control
the styles of synthetic images. Furthermore, Kang et al. [ 2020]
proposed a few-shot style-conditioned handwritten word gener-
ation GAN, i.e., GANwriting. However, GANwriting is limited to
synthesizing short words (e.g., less than 10 letters) rather than
long texts due to its inferior architectural design. Moreover, Bhu-
nia et al. [ 2021] proposed HWT to synthesize handwritten texts
withTransformers.However,bothGANwritingandHWTrequire
multiple reference samples for extracting reliable calligraphic
featuresduringtraining,thusexhibitinglowvisualqualitieswhen
only one reference sample is available in inference. Recently,
Davis et al. [ 2020]p r o p o s e d text and style conditioned GAN
(TS-GAN) for handwritten text synthesis. TS-GAN can learn to
extract styles from images based on the pixel-to-pixel reconstruc-
tion loss, while it fails to correctly imitate styles of reference
samplesinmostcases.Thisisbecausehandwritingimagesarenot
spatiallyalignedandcontainfewtextures,whichmakespixelcor-
respondence ineffective to model calligraphic styles. In summary,
the state-of-the-artGANs have not entirelysolved HI yet.
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 3 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:3
To address the above challenges, in our previous conference
work[GanandWang 2021],wehaveproposedanovel handwrit-
ingimitationGAN (HiGAN)forHI,whichcangeneratediverse
and realistic handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents(thatareunconstrainedtoanypredefinedcorpusorOOV
words) and calligraphic styles (that are disentangled from refer-
ence samples). However, HiGAN may produce blurred and dis-
torted characters, exhibiting low visual qualities of synthetic im-
ages. The presented HiGAN+ not only significantly improves the
visual qualities of synthetic images but also achieves a more ac-
curate handwriting style transfer with desired properties. Table 1
shows a feature-by-feature comparison between different GANs
forhandwritten text generation.
Overall, the presented work supposes a significantly extended
version of our previousconference paper. Specifically,
(1) WeenhanceourpriorHiGANwithseveralnewtechnicalcon-
tributions,including:
— The contextual loss is introduced to improve the style con-
sistencyandachieves a better calligraphic styletransfer.
— The local patch refinement is proposed to improve the
local consistency of synthetic images with higher visual
qualities.
— We derive a more compact and effective architecture by
reusingthewriteridentifier forstyleencoding.
(2) We propose comprehensive metrics to fully measure the
performance of GANs for variable-length handwritten text
synthesis. Particularly, the newly proposed writer identifi-
cation error rate (WIER) can quantitatively measure the
handwriting style transferability of GANs, which has never
been investigatedbefore.
(3) We conduct more extensive experiments (including Turning
tests)onbenchmarkstofullycomparetheproposedHiGAN+
with other state-of-the-art GANs for HI, where HiGAN+
achieves the best performance in terms of visualquality,
scalability,compactness,andstyletransferability.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 HandwritingSynthesis
Traditional approaches for handwritten text generation not only
involveexpensivemanualinterventionforclippingglyphsandtag-
ging individual characters, but they also require a strong domain-
specific knowledge for modeling glyph layouts and rendering lig-
atures and background textures. For example, Haines et al. [ 2016]
proposed such an algorithm that can render desired English texts
in a specific writer’s handwriting. Similarly, Lin and Wan [ 2007]
proposed to compute features from individual glyphs and words
based on geometric statistics and further learn to synthesize com-
plete words/sentences with hand-crafted hierarchical rules. Of
course, such manual interventions are extremely expensive, and
their generalization and scalability are also limited due to the
domain-specific knowledge andhierarchical rules.
With the great successes of deep learning techniques in com-
puter vision and machine learning, artificial neural networks
have been gradually used for handwriting synthesis. Specifically,
Graves [ 2013] first proposed to synthesize online handwrit-
ing trajectories of English texts based on recurrent neuralnetworks (RNNs),whichcanpredictthefuturestrokepointswith
Gaussian mixture models. Moreover, Ha and Eck [ 2018]p r o p o s e d
SketchRNN for synthesizing hand-drawn sketches. Furthermore,
Zhang et al. [ 2018] successfully adopted this architecture to draw
realistic online handwritten Chinese characters of thousands of
categories.Morerecently,Kotanietal.[ 2020]proposedthedecou-
pled style descriptor model for handwriting, which factors both
character-andwriter-levelstylesandthussynthesizesmorerealis-
tic handwriting trajectories. However, such an RNN-based model
is hard to learn long-range dependencies of long sequences, and
also their generation is time-consuming since RNNs remain less
amenable to parallelization. More lethally, it is challenging to col-
lectmassivetrajectoriesinanaturalsetting,sincetheirrecordings
require unique equipment like stylus pens and touch screens. In-
stead,itismucheasiertocollecthandwritingimageswithubiqui-
touscamerasandscannersinourreallives.Hence,itismoreprac-
ticaltosynthesizehandwriting images rather thantrajectories.
GANs have achieved much progress in many image synthe-
sistasks,includinghandwrittencharactergeneration.Specifically,
Goodfellow et al. [ 2014] proposed to generate realistic handwrit-
ten digits by introducing the adversarial loss, and Kingma and
Welling [ 2013] proposed a VAE instead. Furthermore, Mirza and
Osindero [ 2014]p r o p o s e d conditional GANs (cGANs)t oc o n -
strain the handwriting generation conditioned on desired class la-
bels. Moreover, Chen et al. [ 2016] proposed InfoGANs to address
the model collapse and Radford et al. [ 2013]p r o p o s e d deep con-
volutional GANs (DCGANs ) to improve the generation capa-
bility, thus producing more diverse and realistic images. Particu-
larly, Chang et al. [ 2018] successfully adopted CycleGANs [Kim
et al.2017] for synthesizing handwritten Chinese characters of
thousands of categories. Moreover, many researches also adopted
GANs for the glyph font generation [Azadi et al. 2018; Jiang et al.
2019; Cha et al. 2020;P a r ke ta l . 2021], which aims at generating
fixed-sizedandisolatedglyphfontcharacters(insteadoflongtext
strings) with desired styles. Overall, existing works mainly focus
on synthesizing fixed-sized handwritten digits/characters, while
handwrittentext synthesisis rarelyexplored.
As an emerging research topic, only a few efforts have been
made for synthesizing handwritten text images. Specifically,
Alonso et al. [ 2019] first proposed a GAN-based model to syn-
thesize handwritten words conditioned on the whole embeddings
of input texts, while their model is limited to generating fixed-
sized images and also produces low visual qualities for OOV
words.Moreover,Fogeletal.[ 2020]proposedScrabbleGANwhich
can generate arbitrary-length handwritten texts by concatenat-
ing letter-tokens together but fails to imitate calligraphic styles
of reference samples. Furthermore, Kang et al. [ 2020]p r o p o s e d
GANwritingthatcangeneratehandwrittenwordsconditionedon
extracted calligraphic features in a few-shot setting and tex-
tual contents of a pre-defined text length. In their follow-up
work [Kang et al. 2021], they further demonstrated that the use
of realistic synthetic texts at training is useful for improving the
handwrittentextrecognitionperformance.Moreover,Bhuniaetal.
[2021] proposed to synthesize handwritten texts with Transform-
ers.Recently,Davisetal.[ 2020]proposedaTS-GANforhandwrit-
ten text synthesis, which learns to extract styles based on pixel-
to-pixel reconstruction loss. However, TS-GAN fails to correctly
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 4 ====
11:4 • J.Gan et al.
imitate styles of reference samples most of the time. In our prior
work[GanandWang 2021],weproposedHiGANthatcansynthe-
size variable-sized handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary-
length texts and disentangled styles, while it sometimes produces
blurred textures and distorted characters. Nevertheless, the state-
of-the-art GANs have not entirely solved the text- and style-
conditioned handwrittentext synthesisyet.
2.2 GAN-Based Style Transfer
Computers nowadays can solve many image translation tasks by
combining the conceptions of GANs and VAEs, and those tasks
aim at transferring the style characteristics of a style image to a
content image. Specifically, Isola et al. [ 2017] proposed a cGAN
(i.e.,pix2pix)forimage-to-imagetranslation,andZhuetal.[ 2017]
proposed BicycleGAN to enable more diversified outputs. Never-
theless,those methods all requirepaired trainingdata. To address
thisproblem,manyworksrelaxthedependencyonpaireddataby
leveragingthecycleconsistency,e.g.,CycleGAN[Kimetal. 2017],
DIRT [Lee et al. 2018], MUNIT [Huang et al. 2018], and StarGAN
[Choi et al. 2018]. Moreover, Mao et al. [ 2019] proposed the mode
seeking regularization to ensure the output diversity, and Iizuka
et al. [2017] proposed to refine local details of images. Essentially,
this kind of style transfer is achieved by minimizing differences
between the generated and target images, where pixel-to-pixel
reconstruction is utilized for spatial alignments and Gram matri-
ces for texture statistics. Similar techniques have been extended
to related applications such as font synthesis [Gao et al. 2019],
scene texts [Wu et al. 2019], caricature [Cao et al. 2018], and face
editing [Portenieret al. 2018].
2.3 GlyphFont Synthesis
Glyphfontsynthesisaimsatdesigningandgeneratingglyphfont
images automatically, and it has witnessed great achievements in
recent years [Azadi et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019;
Cha et al. 2020;W a n ge ta l . 2020;P a r ke ta l . 2021]. However, we
demonstratethattheglyphfontsynthesisislargelydifferentfrom
HI in thefollowingaspects:
(1)Annotation Difficulty: The font style transfer requires
laboriousannotationsforsupervision,suchaspairedtraining
samples (i.e., the input images and corresponding pixel-level
aligned ground-truth images) or even attribute annotations
for attribute editing [Wang et al. 2020]. Instead, HI only
imposes writers’ identities to specify the calligraphic styles,
whichavoidslaboriousannotations.Thistasklearnsthestyle
transfer moreimplicitlythan font generation.
(2)Characters vs. Strings: Previous font generation can only
generate single isolated characters; however, HI aims at syn-
thesizing long handwritten text strings with variable-sized
outputsandarbitrarytextualcontentsthatareunconstrained
toany predefined corpusand OOV words.
(3)Style Variations: Font generation aims at designing fonts
for the industry, and the glyph fonts have very small intra-
categoryvariations(i.e.,thefontofthespecificcharacterclass
and style always has a standard template); instead, humans’
handwriting is very arbitrary and their writing styles vary
significantly (e.g., a person even is hard to write the exactlysame sentences twice with pixel-to-pixel correspondence).
Different from glyph fonts with limited styles, a thousand
people have a thousanddifferent handwritingstyles.
Indeed, the research on glyph font generation may bring some in-
spiration forHI.
2.4 Differences between thePrior andPresented Works
HI is a new research topic, and the state-of-the-art GANs have
not entirely solved this challenging problem yet. In our previous
work [Gan and Wang 2021], we have proposed a novel HiGAN
for HI, which can generate handwriting images conditioned on
arbitrary-lengthtextsandanycalligraphicstylesofreferencesam-
ples. However, the prior work is very preliminary, still leaving a
big room forimprovement. Specifically,
(1)GenerationQuality: ThepriorHiGANsometimesmaypro-
duce blurred and distorted characters, exhibiting low visual
qualities of synthetic images. In HiGAN+, we introduce a lo-
cal patch loss (LPL) to refine the local details of synthetic
images,whichsignificantlyimprovesthelocalconsistencyof
synthetic images. This strategy effectively prevents HiGAN+
from producing blurred patches or distorted characters, thus
leadingtomuchhighervisualqualitiesofsynthetichandwrit-
ten texts. Moreover, considering the characteristics of hand-
writingimages,weintroducethecontextuallossdedicatedto
HiGAN+toeffectivelymodelcalligraphicstyles,whichsignif-
icantly improves the style consistency and achieves a better
handwriting styletransfer.
(2)Model Compactness: The prior HiGAN requires training
twoindividualmodules(i.e.,thewriteridentifierandstyleen-
coder).Instead,HiGAN+derivesamorecompactandmoreef-
fectivearchitecturebyrethinkingtherolesofindividualmod-
ulesinthecurrentframework,i.e.,reusingtheearlylayersof
thewriteridentifierforstyleencoding.Incontrasttoexisting
works, this strategy can avoid using a huge pre-trained VGG
backbone or trainingan additional styleencoder.
(3)ComprehensiveEvaluation: Theevaluationsofpriorwork
areweakandinsufficientinsomeaspects,sinceitonlyevalu-
atestheFréchetInceptionDistance (FID)andworderror
rate(WER)scoresofHiGAN,GANwritingandScrabbleGAN.
Instead,thepresentedworkproposescomprehensivemetrics
for HI, including (a) Inception Score (IS), FID,Kernel
Inception Distance (KID),Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
(PSNR), andMean Structural Similarity (MSSIM)f o r
visual quality, (b) WER for readability, and (c) the newly pro-
posed WIER for style transferability. Especially, none of the
previous works have ever attempted to quantitatively evalu-
atethehandwritingstyletransferabilitybefore.Furthermore,
more extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark
datasets to demonstrate the superiority of HiGAN+ over
many other state-of-the-art GANs (including ScrabbleGAN,
GANwriting, TS-GAN, HWT, and HiGAN). Moreover, the
presented workeven conducts Turingtestsfor HI.
(4)State-of-The-ArtPerformance: Experimentalresultsshow
that the presented framework significantly outperforms
the prior work, and the proposed HiGAN+ achieves the
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 5 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:5
state-of-the-art performance for HI in terms of visual
quality,scalability,compactness,andstyletransferability
compared with the state-of-the-art GANs for handwritten
text generation.
Overall, the presented HiGAN+ not only significantly improves
the visual qualities of prior HiGAN but also achieves the more ac-
curate handwriting style transfer with desired properties, suppos-
ingasignificantlyextended versionof ourprior work.
3 METHODOLOGY
3.1 Problem Formulation
We aim at teaching machines to synthesize diverse and realis-
tic handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual content
y=[y1,...,yL]( w i t hal e n g t ho f L) and any calligraphic style s,
i.e.,ˆx=G(y,s),whereGisthegenerator.Notably,thetextualcon-
tentyfor handwriting generation can be very arbitrary, which is
unconstrainedtoanypredefinedcorpusorOOVwords.Moreover,
theconditionedcalligraphicstyle scanbeeither(1)randomlysam-
pled from a prior normal distribution N(0,1)or (2) disentangled
fromthereferenceimage x,i.e.,s=E(x),whereEdenotesthestyle
encoder. As a result, our generative model can not only generate
arbitrary handwritten texts with randomized styles, but it also is
abletoimitatethecalligraphicstylesofreferencesamples.Figure 2
illustratestheoverview of theproposedHiGAN+.
3.2 Network Architecture
3.2.1 Style-Controlled Handwritten Text Generator. Different
fromconventionalimagesynthesistasks,handwrittentextsynthe-
sis needs to generate variable-length images (instead of fix-sized
ones) conditioned on arbitrary textual contents (even for unseen
texts and OOV words). By revisiting humans’ handwriting pro-
cess, one major observation is that handwriting essentially is a
local process (which is firstly introduced by ScrabbleGAN [Fogel
etal.2020]).Morespecifically,humanstypicallyfinishahandwrit-
ing text by writing its letters sequentially and individually, under
which the character shapes and cursive ligatures are mostly influ-
encedbytheirneighborcharactersinalocalrange.Inspiredbythis,
ourgeneratorisdesignedtomimicsuchawritingprocess.Briefly,
rather than generating handwriting based on a single embedding
oftheentiretext,thegeneratorconvertsthetextintocharacterem-
beddingsindividuallyandthenconcatenatesthoselocalcharacter
patchestogetherintoacompletehandwrittentext,wherethecon-
volutions are utilized to learn the overlaps and transitions among
characters. Overall, the style-controlled handwritten text genera-
toris designed withthefollowingtwo strategies:
Textual Content Embedding. Instead of encoding the entire tex-
tualcontent yintoafixed-sizedrepresentation,weprefertolearn
thecharacter-levelembeddingsof yandconcatenateletter-tokens
into a complete text. The reason for doing this is to improve the
generalization ability of the generative model, under which the
generation can be conditioned on arbitrary texts that are uncon-
strained to the training corpus or any OOV words (e.g., words
that have never been seen during training). Specifically, let A
be the alphabet and F={fc|c∈A }be the set of character
filter maps (where fcis the embedding of the character c). Toachieve the character-level embedding, the given textual content
y=[y1,...,yL]( w i t hal e n g t h L) will be individually embedded
intomultiplefiltermapsas F(y)=[fy1,...,fyL].Moreover,each
filtermapcanbefurthermodulatedwithaconsistentrandomized
noise vector ϵto introduce subtle distortions for characters, i.e,
F(y,ϵ)=[fy1⊗ϵ,...,fyL⊗ϵ]. Lastly, those filter maps are con-
catenated horizontally into a variable-sized text map M, which
can beregarded as astyle-invariant embedding of y.
CalligraphicStyleRendering. Giventhestyle-invarianttextmap
M,thegenerator Gwillup-sampleitsspatialresolutionandsimul-
taneously render the calligraphic styles. Particularly, the condi-
tional batch normalization (CBN) [Vries et al. 2017] is utilized
to inject the style feature sinto the generator, thus explicitly af-
fectingthecalligraphicstylesofsyntheticimages(suchasthetext
slant,charactershape,andstrokethickness).Moreover,thegener-
atorfollowsafullyconvolutionalstructuretoensurethevariable-
length outputs. Due to the merits of convolutions, the generator
can automatically learn the overlaps between adjacent characters
and create smooth transitions (i.e., natural ligatures) if necessary.
This eventually leads to the generator being able to synthesize ar-
bitrarily long handwritten texts conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents withcontrollable calligraphic styles.
3.2.2 Other Components. To achieve precise HI, we further in-
troducethefollowingkeycomponentstoassistinthetrainingpro-
cess of HiGAN+:
GlobalDiscriminator. Theglobaldiscriminator Dlearnsabinary
classification to determine whether an input image xis the real
image from the training data or the fake image produced by the
generator G.Bygradingthewholeimage,thediscriminator Dcan
verifythefidelityof syntheticimages fromaglobal perspective.
Patch Discriminator. The patch discriminator Pcan justify
whether a given patch ψxis the one cropped from real images or
fakeimages.Insteadofgradingthewholeimage,itwillhelprefine
thelocaltexturedetailsofsyntheticimagesbyverifyingthepatch
fidelity.
StyleEncoder. Thestyleencoder Eissupposedtodisentanglethe
calligraphicstylesfromarbitraryhandwritingimagesbutwithout
explicitly accessing extra clues including the writer identities and
text labels. Additionally, the encoder Ecan map arbitrary-length
handwriting images into fixed-sized latent vectors (i.e., the calli-
graphicstylefeatures) for HI.
Writer Identifier. The writer identifier Ican distinguish which
writer the input handwriting image xbelongs to, and it aims to
guidethegeneratortosynthesizehandwritingimagesconditioned
on specific calligraphic styles. Notably, the identifier Ican only
identifyhandwritingimagesofseenwritersintrainingdata,while
it cannot classifythat of unseen writersat testtime.
Text Recognizer. The text recognizer Rshould correctly predict
thetextlabel yofanyhandwritingimage x.Particularly,although
the recognizer Ris only trained on real, labeled, handwriting im-
ages, it is supposed to guide the generator Gto produce arbitrary
readable handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents.
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 6 ====
11:6 • J.Gan et al.
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed HiGAN+. During training, the model simultaneously (a) learns to synthesize handwritten texts based on disentangled
styles, (b) is regularized based on reconstruction, and (c) lastly refines the local details of synthetic images for improving visual qualities. At t he test time,
the model can either (d) generate diverse handwritten texts by randomly sampling styles from a prior normal distribution or (e) imitate the calligraph ic
styles thatdisentangled from reference samples.Notably, eachmoduleshares its parameters at different training stages.
3.3 Objective Functions
To train HiGAN+ for HI, it requires a multi-writer handwriting
dataset which consists of the sets of handwriting images X, their
labeledtextsY,andthecorrespondingwriteridentities W.Since
the handwritten text generation is not limited to the training cor-
pus or OOV words, a large open corpus Cis utilized to yield arbi-
trary textual contents during training, where Y⊂C.A ss h o w n
inFigure 2,weillustratetheoverviewofthetrainingprocess,and
the details of different lossesareformulatedbelow.
3.3.1 HI withDisentangled Representations.
Adversarial Loss. Following the paradigm of GANs, the genera-
tivemodelistrainedviaamin-maxadversarialgame.Duringtrain-
ing, the generator Gtakes arbitrary textual content ˜y∈Cand a
stylefeature sasinputsandthenlearnstosynthesizeafakeimage
G(˜y,s)that is indistinguishable (by the discriminator D)f r o mt h e
real onex∈Xviatheadversarial loss,i.e.,
Ladv=Ex[logD(x)]+E˜y,s[log(1−D(G(˜y,s)))],(1)
where the style feature sis either (1) randomly sampled from a
prior normal distribution N(0,1)or (2) disentangled from the ref-
erenceimage x,i.e.,s=E(x).Notably,theadversariallossonlypro-
motesthegeneralvisualappearanceofgeneratedimagestomake
them look realistic, while it does not consider preserving either
textual contents or calligraphic styles.Text Recognition Loss. Despite visual appearances, the genera-
torGis supposed to synthesize realistic readable handwriting im-
ageswithpreservingdesiredtextualcontents.Tothisend,ahand-
writing recognizer Ris introduced to guide Gtoward producing
handwritingimageswithspecifictextualcontents.Specifically,the
recognizer Risfirstoptimizedbytheoreticallymaximizingthelike-
lihoodsforeachpair {x∈X,y∈Y}fromthetrainingdata(where
the connectionist temporal classification loss [Graves et al. 2006]
is empirically adopted in HiGAN+) as
LD
ctc=Ex,y[−ylogR(x)], (2)
when maximizing the adversarial loss. This ensures that Rcan
correctly predict the text labels of given handwriting images. Al-
though the recognizer Ris only trained with real, labeled, hand-
writing images, it is supposed to guide the generator Gto synthe-
sizereadablehandwritingconditioningtoarbitrarytextualcontent
˜y∈Cas
LG
ctc=E˜y,s[−˜ylogR(G(˜y,s))], (3)
wheretheparametersof Rkeepfixedwhenminimizingtheadver-
sarialloss.
Writer Identification Loss. The primary objective of HiGAN+ is
toexactly disentanglethecalligraphicstylesfromreferencehand-
writing images and further imitate generating different images of
similarstylesbutwithothertextualcontents.However,onemajor
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 7 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:7
concern is that we actually do not have the exact labels for writ-
ingstyles(includingthestrokethickness,charactershape,andtext
slant)toformthestyleconsistencyregularization.Toavoidexpen-
sive manual annotations, we impose the writer identity to specify
the calligraphic style. The reason for doing this is based on a sim-
ple assumption that the writing style of each individual is unique
and almost consistent. Therefore, the writer identifier Iis intro-
duced to guide the encoder Ein disentangling calligraphic styles
fromreferencesamples.
Specifically,theidentifier Iisoptimizedbyminimizingthecross-
entropy lossfor each pair {x∈X,w∈W}fromtrainingdata as
LD
id=Ex,w[−wlogI(x)], (4)
when maximizing the adversarial loss. This ensures that Ican
identify which writer the reference image xbelongs to. To guide
the encoder Eto exactly disentangle calligraphic styles from
reference samples, we enforce the style-conditioned synthetic
imagesG(˜y,E(x))to retain a remarkably similar style with the
reference image x, i.e.,
LG
id=Ex,w,˜y[−wlogI(G(˜y,E(x)))], (5)
whereIkeepsitsparametersfixedwhenminimizingtheadversar-
ialloss,andthetextualcontent ˜y∈Cisnotlimitedtothetraining
corpus. It is worth noting that the identifier Iis only trained on
the training set and thus it is unable to identify the writers that
have never been seen during training (i.e., the writers in the test
set).
3.3.2 Regularization withReconstruction.
Style Reconstruction Loss. To encourage an invertible mapping
between synthetic images and style features, we apply a style re-
construction losssimilartoChen et al.[ 2016]a s
Lstyle=E˜y,s[||s−E(G(˜y,s))||1], (6)
where the style feature sis sampled from the prior normal distri-
butionN(0,1). This regularization loss essentially exhibits two
advantages: (1) It guarantees that the style feature scan explic-
itly affect calligraphic styles of synthetic handwriting images; (2)
It encourages the diversified outputs and thus helps avoid model
collapses of thegenerative network.
Content Reconstruction Loss. To improve the content and style
consistency of synthetic images, we adopt a self-reconstruction
losstofacilitate thetraining,i.e.,
Lrecn=Ey,x[||x−G(y,E(x))||1], (7)
wherey∈Yis the labeled text of image x. Following this auto-
encodingtrainingscheme,itmayregularizethegenerativemodel
toachieve a morerobusthandwritingstyletransfer.
KL-Divergence Loss. To ensure a meaningful stochastic style
samplingininference,wefurtherexplicitlyregularizetheencoded
latent space tomatchthe priornormaldistributionas
Lkl=Ex[DKL(E(x)||N(0,1))], (8)
whereDKLdenotes the KL-divergence [Zhu et al. 2017]. This is a
crucialregularizationtechniqueinmanystyletransfertasks[Zhu
et al.2017; Lee et al. 2018].3.3.3 Local Detail Refinement.
Contextual Loss. Conventional style transfer is achieved by syn-
thesizing an image to match both the contents and styles of tar-
get images, which commonly compares images in two aspects:
(1) the pixel-to-pixel loss that compares pixel values at the same
spatialcoordinates;(2)theGramlossthatcompareshighlayerfea-
turesandtextureinformationovertheentireimage.Thismethodis
very effective for nature images or oil paintings, since their styles
are modeled as texture features. In contrast, handwriting images
contain little textures and their styles are modeled as the charac-
ter shape, thickness, and slant. Moreover, humans’ handwriting
can be very arbitrary and the synthetic handwriting may not be
exactly spatially aligned with the ground-truth images, and thus
handwriting images with similar styles may produce a large re-
construction loss. What is worse, the synthetic handwriting and
reference samples may have completely different textual contexts
and spatial sizes. Therefore, the conventional style transfer strat-
egyis unsuitablefor HI.
To address this problem, we introduce the contextual
loss [Mechrez et al. 2018] to measure the similarity of two
handwriting images, requiring no spatial alignment. The key
idea of contextual loss is to treat an image as a collection of
features, and the similarity between images is measured based
on the similarity between their high-level features, ignoring
the spatial positions of the features. This loss focuses more on
high-level style features and allows the generated images to be
slightly spatially deformed with respect to ground-truth images.
Moreover,thecontextuallossisnotoverlyglobalanditcompares
featuresinlocalregionsbasedonsemantics.Let A={a1,...,aN}
andB={b1,...,bN}be two sets of features, the contextual
similaritybetween them isdefined as
CX(A,B)=1
N/summationdisplay
jmax
iCXij, (9)
whereCX ijdenotesthesimilaritybetweenfeatures aiandbj,and
CXijis calculated by normalizing all the cosine distances dijbe-
tweenany aiandbjasMechrezetal.[ 2018].Inourtask,weapply
thecontextual losstoachieve better HI,i.e.,
Lctx=/summationdisplay
l−loдCX/parenleftBig
Φl(x),Φl(G(˜y,E(x)))/parenrightBig
,(10)
whereΦl(·)denotesthehigh-levelfeaturesextractedfromthe lth
layer of the writer identifier I,a n dC X(·,·)denotes the aforemen-
tionedcontextual similaritybetween twofeaturesets.
Local Patch Loss. Handwritten text images can be arbitrarily
long,andthustheycanberegardedashigh-resolutionimages.Al-
thoughitcanachieveagoodglobalconsistency(i.e.,asyntheticim-
ageisgloballyvisuallyplausible)bygradingthewholeimagefrom
a global perspective, such a strategy may lead to poor local con-
sistency (i.e., the synthetic handwriting image may contain many
blurred patches and distorted characters). Therefore, it is crucial
torefine thelocal texturedetails of synthetic handwritingimages.
Despiteclassifyingthewholeimageasfakeorreal,wefurthersplit
each image into patches and then justify the patch fidelity by in-
troducing an extra patch discriminator. The introduced patch dis-
criminatorcanpenalizethelocalstructuresandthushelpachieve
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 8 ====
11:8 • J.Gan et al.
goodlocalconsistency.Let {ψx
i|i=1···M}and{ψ˜y,s
i|i=1···M}
be the patches of real image xand generated one G(˜y,s)respec-
tively, thelocal details of syntheticimages arerefinedas
Lpatch=1
MM/summationdisplay
i=1/braceleftbigg
Ex[logP(ψx
i)]+E˜y,s[log(1−P(ψ˜y,s
i))]/bracerightbigg
,
(11)
wherePisthepatchdiscriminator.Itisworthnotingthatourpatch
discriminatorreceivesimagepatchesasinputsratherthantheen-
tireimage,andthusitisnotlimitedtothesimpleandspecificnet-
workdesignofPatchGAN[Isolaetal. 2017].Asaresult,ourpatch
discriminatorcanbemoreflexibleandcomplexthanthatofPatch-
GAN,whicheventuallymayleadtobettersynthesisperformance.
3.3.4 Overall Objectives. Finally, our model is trained by play-
ingamin-maxadversarialgame,wherethefullobjectivefunctions
can be summarizedas follows.
Whenmaximizingtheadversarialloss,theglobaldiscriminator
D,patchdiscriminator P,textrecognizer R,andwriteridentifier I
are individuallyoptimized as
LD=−Ladv,LP=−Lpatch,LR=LD
ctc,LI=LD
id.(12)
When minimizing the adversarial loss, the generator Gand style
encoderEarejointlyoptimized as
LG,E=Ladv+Lpatch (13)
+λctcLG
ctc+λidLG
id+λctxLctx (14)
+λstyleLstyle+λrecnLrecn+λklLkl,(15)
whereλsare the hyper-parameters to control the importance of
different loss terms.
3.4 TrainingStrategies
3.4.1 Pre-TrainingtheWriterIdentifierandTextRecognizer. For
the writer identifier Iand text recognizer R, their optimization
actually can be separated from the adversarial training process.
Specifically,wecanbenefitfromsuchapre-trainingintwoaspects:
(1) Wecanobtainmorepowerfulandrobust IandRbyintroduc-
ingdataaugmentationandextrahandwritingsamplesduring
pre-training,sincetheiroptimizationisseparatedfromthead-
versarialtrainingprocess.
(2) Once theIandRare pre-trained,theadversarial trainingof
HiGAN+ can be further accelerated. Moreover, we can avoid
retrainingnewIandRwhen traininga different HiGAN+.
Finally, pre-training both IandRwill not hurt the performance
of HiGAN+ empirically.
3.4.2 Reusing Writer Identifier as Style Encoder. By rethinking
theroleofeachcomponentofHiGAN+forHI,weproposetoreuse
the writer identifier as the style encoder as shown in Figure 3.
Specifically, if we check the relations between the style encoder
and writer identifier, their functions are almost consistent. Basi-
cally, to correctly identify handwriting images, the writer identi-
fiershouldextracttheircalligraphicstylesbutignorethesemantic
textual contents; Similarly, the style encoder is exactly designed
to disentangle styles from handwriting images. Upon this moti-
vation, it is intuitive to reuse the writer identifier for encoding
Fig. 3. Reusingwriter identifier as style encoder.
styles. However, most previous works for handwriting synthesis
simplyusethehugeVGGbackboneasthestyleencoder,andthey
also train two separated modules (i.e., the writer identifier and
styleencoder)ratherthanmergingthemasours.Thoseeventually
make their model more parameter-redundant and computation-
expensive than HiGAN+. In summary, such reusing exhibits two-
foldadvantages:
(1) We achieve a more compact architecture, since the style en-
coder and writer identifier share a large number of parame-
ters. Moreover, this strategy can benefit the training proce-
dureofHiGAN+,sincelotsofparametersofthestyleencoder
arewellpre-trainedandthusitcanextractmorereliablestyle
features at theearly stage.
(2) We avoid using a huge VGG backbone for style encoding,
which is pre-trained on nature images instead of handwrit-
ingimages.Incontrast,ourwriteridentifierisspecificallyde-
signed for handwriting identification, which is more suitable
forextractingcalligraphicstylesandalsoattainsamorecom-
pact model than theVGG backbone.
During training, the shared parameters of the style encoder keep
fixed andonly theindependent part isoptimized.
3.4.3 Optimization with Gradient Balancing. The loss function
of HiGAN+ for optimization involves quite a few terms, and the
relative weighting of different loss terms will affect the synthesis
results.Moreover,italsotakeslotsoftimetofullyoptimizetheHi-
GAN+ for handwriting synthesis. Therefore, it may be difficult to
find an optimal setting of those hyper-parameters λs for HiGAN+
withthenaivegridsearch.Toaddressthisissue,weadoptthegradi-
entbalancingstrategytodynamicallyadjustthehyper-parameters
λsofHiGAN+,thusbalancingthegradientofeachlosstermtosta-
bilize thetrainingprocedure andreach asatisfiedlocal optimum.
Specifically, the gradient of Ladvwarped on the synthetic im-
ageˆxis firstcalculated as
∇adv=∂Ladv
∂ˆx. (16)
TakeLctcfor example, its gradient can be balanced [Alonso et al.
2019]b y
∇ctc←δ(∇adv)
δ(∇ctc)[∇ctc−μ(∇ctc)]+μ(∇adv),(17)
whereμ(∇ctc)denotes the mean of ∇ctcandδ(∇adv)denotes
the standard deviation. To avoid changing the sign of the gradi-
ent∇ctc,weadoptasimplerstrategysimilartoFogeletal.[ 2020],
i.e.,
∇ctc←δ(∇adv)
δ(∇ctc)∇ctc. (18)
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 9 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGANwith Disentangled Representations • 11:9
Therefore, the weight of Lctcis adjusted as λctc=δ(∇adv)
δ(∇ctc)and
other hyper-parameterscan be calculated in the sameway.
3.5 Evaluation of GANs forHI
HI is different from CIG due to its variable-sized outputs, arbi-
trary textual contents, and different style transfer. Hence, it is
essentialtoquantitativelymeasurethequalitiesofsynthetichand-
writingimagesfromdifferentaspects.Therefore,weproposecom-
prehensivemetricstofullyevaluate theperformanceof GANs for
variable-length handwritten text synthesis.Specifically,
—Visual Quality: Synthetic handwriting images should first
deceive the human eyes visually and be realistic as far as
possible. Therefore, we adopt several commonly used met-
rics to evaluate the visual quality of handwriting images, in-
cludingIS[Salimans et al. 2016],FID[Heusel et al. 2017],
KID[Binkowski et al. 2018],PSNR,a n dMSSIM. Particularly,
IS is used to measure the realism and diversity of generated
images,FIDandKIDaimtomeasurethedistancebetweendis-
tributions of the generated images and real samples, MSSIM
measures the structural similarity between them, and PSNR
measures thereconstruction error.
—Readability: Differentfromnaturalimages,handwritingim-
ages convey specific semantic information that can be read
and understood by humans. Therefore, we use the WERto
evaluate the readability of synthetic texts, which is the num-
ber of word recognition errors divided by that of total words.
Particularly, the word recognition can be done by humans or
apre-trainedhandwritingrecognizer.
—Style Transferability: Besides the realism and readabil-
ity, the calligraphic styles of synthetic images should be
consistent with the reference samples as much as possible.
Therefore, we propose to use the WIERto measure the style
transferabilityofGANsforHI,whichisthenumberofwriter
identification errors divided by that of the total words. It is
worthnotingthatnoneofthepreviousworkshaveeverquan-
titativelyevaluated thestyletransferabilityof GANs for HI.
Since the handwritten texts are variable-length instead of fixed-
sized,wereplacetheaveragingpoolingofIncepetionV3with Tem-
poralPyramidPooling (TPP)whencalculatingIS,FID,andKID
(similar to Kang et al. [ 2021]), and we also use the global averag-
ing pooling in the CNN backbone of the writer identifier when
calculating WIER. In our settings, all GANs are trained using the
trainingsetimagesandallevaluationsareconductedontestsetim-
ages. However, since the writers in test set have never been seen
in training set, we need to train an additional writer identifier us-
ing the test images to evaluate the WIER. Such a writer identifier
is entirely independent of the presented framework and thus can
fairlyevaluate thestyletransferabilityof different GANs for HI.
4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Experimental Settings
4.1.1 Datasets. To evaluate the performance of handwriting
generation, we use the IAMdataset [Marti and Bunke 2002]a s
thebenchmarkdataset.TheIAMdatasetconsistsof63Khandwrit-
tenEnglishwords,writtenby500differentwriters.Itprovidesonetraining set, one test set, and two validation sets. It is worth not-
ingthathandwrittenwordsofallsetsaremutuallyexclusive,thus
each writer only contributes to one set. In our experiments, only
thetrainingsetandvalidationsetsareusedfortrainingGANs,and
thetest setis onlyusedfor qualityevaluation.
4.1.2 Implementation Details. Our experiments are conducted
onaDellworkstationwithanIntel(R)Xeon(R)Bronze3204CPU@
1.90GHz,48GBRAM,andGeForceRTX3090GPU24GB.Forfast
training, the batch size is set to 8 and the model is trained for 70
epochs.Furthermore,weutilizetheAdam[DiederikandBa 2015]
algorithm to optimize the GAN model, where the initial learning
rate is 0.0001 and ( β1,β2) = (0.5, 0.999). Moreover, we begin to lin-
earlydecaythelearningrateatthe25thepoch.WhentrainingHi-
GAN+,weempiricallyset λkl=0.0001,λctx=5.0,andtherest λs
aredynamicallyadjustedduringtrainingwiththegradientbalanc-
ing strategy. The training time is less than three days on a single
GeForce RTX 3090 with our implementation in PyTorch [Paszke
et al.2019].
4.1.3 Competitors. Previous works mainly focus on handwrit-
ten character/digit generation, while handwritten text generation
has not been fully explored. In our experiments, we can only
compare our method with several recently proposed handwrit-
ten text generation approaches, i.e., ScrabbleGAN [Fogel et al.
2020],GANwriting [Kangetal. 2020],TS-GAN [Davisetal. 2020],
HTW[Bhunia et al. 2021], andHiGAN[Gan and Wang 2021]
(where Table 1gives a detailed feature-by-feature comparison ).
Weusetheofficialimplementationofthosemodelsprovidedbythe
authors,wherewedirectlyusethedefaultsettingsandpre-trained
modelsifavailable.Notably,wealsoretrainHiGANwithournew
network configurations, which can generate handwriting images
with a fixed height of 64 pixels rather than 32 pixels. In our ex-
periments,allsynthetichandwritingimagesareresizedtohave64
pixel height while preserving the original aspect ratios. For a fair
comparison,allevaluationsareconductedontestsetimages.More
specifically, we optimize all GANs with training set images and
then usethosegenerative models toreconstruct testset images.
4.2 Qualitative Analysis
In this subsection, we first conduct the qualitative analysis of Hi-
GAN+ for arbitraryhandwritten text generation.
4.2.1 Latent-GuidedSynthesis. TheproposedHiGAN+cangen-
erate arbitrary handwritten English words of diverse calligraphic
styles with high visual quality. For latent-guided synthesis, differ-
ent styles of synthetic images are simply randomly sampled from
thepriornormaldistribution.Specifically,weshowsomeselected
synthetic images in Figure 4, where each row presents images of
thesamestylesandeachcolumnofthesametexts.Itisworthnot-
ingthatallgeneratedhandwrittenwordsarehuman-readable,and
they are unconstrained to the predefined corpus or OOV words.
Moreover, we observe that HiGAN+ can successfully render cur-
sive ligatures among adjacent characters of handwritten words if
necessary.
4.2.2 Reference-Guided Synthesis. For reference-guided syn-
thesis, our HiGAN+ can precisely disentangle calligraphic styles
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 10 ====
11:10 • J. Gan et al.
Fig. 4. Latent-guided synthesis.
Fig. 5. Reference-guided synthesis.
from reference samples, and it further imitates generating other
handwriting images of similar calligraphic styles. As shown
in Figure 5, we show some selected handwritten words under
reference-guided synthesis. We can observe that HiGAN+ can
successfully imitate the calligraphic styles of reference samples
(such as the writing slant, thickness, and character shape), while
strictly preserving the desired textual contents. Overall, Our
HiGAN+ can achieve preciseone-shot handwritingstyletransfer.
4.2.3 Arbitrary-Length Text Synthesis. The proposed HiGAN+
can generate variable-sized images conditioned on arbitrary-
length texts, which are unconstrained to any predefined corpus
or OOV words. As shown in Figure 6,w es h o ws o m es e l e c t e d
long synthetic handwritten texts. Particularly, since handwritten
English sentence generation can be easily accomplished by word
generation, we omit all spaces of the provided textual content to
form an extremely long text string for handwriting synthesis in
Figure6. Rather than generating handwriting images conditioned
on a single embedding of the entire word/text, HiGAN+ will con-
vertthetextintocharacterembeddingsindividuallyandthencon-
catenate them together. Moreover, the generator with a fully con-
volutionalnetworkstructurewillautomaticallylearnoverlapsand
ligatures among adjacent characters. Notably, HiGAN+ can even
Fig.6. Arbitrary-lengthtextsynthesis.Notably,allspacesoftheprovided
textualcontent areomitted to form along textstring.
Fig. 7. Handwritten paragraph synthesis.
disentangle styles from short words to generate arbitrary-length
text images of similar styles.
4.2.4 Handwritten Paragraph Synthesis. Despite words and
texts, HiGAN+ can even generate complete handwritten para-
graphs with its ability of one-shot style transfer for handwriting
images.Figure 7illustratestheoriginalhandwrittenparagraphand
the one reconstructed with HiGAN+, where each reconstructed
word is synthesized based on the disentangled representations of
the corresponding real word. We observe that HiGAN+ can suc-
cessfully imitate calligraphic styles and preserve the original tex-
tual contents of most handwritten words. This eventually results
inthatthegeneratedhandwrittenparagraphslookextremelyreal-
istic and mostly indistinguishable from the real ones. Overall, our
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 11 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGAN with DisentangledRepresentations • 11:11
Fig. 8. Handwriting styleinterpolation.
Fig.9. Handwriting text editing.
resultsdemonstratethatHiGAN+canperformpreciseone-shotHI
withhighvisualqualities.
4.3 Generalization Analysis
We further investigate whether the generative model can imi-
tate handwriting as humans, rather than simply memorizing the
ground-truthimages.
4.3.1 Style Interpolation. To better analyze the learned latent
style space, we perform the linear interpolation between two ran-
domcalligraphicstylesandgeneratethecorrespondinghandwrit-
ingimagesasshowninFigure 8.Wecanobservethatthesynthetic
handwriting images continuously change their calligraphic styles
(such as the thickness, character shape, and writing slant), while
strictlypreservingtheoriginaltextualcontents.Thoseresultsval-
idate the continuity of the latent style space, thus demonstrating
that HiGAN+ generalizes in the distribution rather than simply
memorizing trivialvisual appearances of trainingdata.
4.3.2 Text Editing. Despite the latent style space, we also per-
form the interpolation in the text space to further validate the
generalization of HiGAN+. In contrast to the continuous nature
of the style distribution, the textual content space essentially
is discrete. Therefore, we simply perform the handwriting text
editing by following a “word ladder” puzzle game as shown in
Figure9, where we change the source word into the target one
byreplacingonlyonecharacteratatime.Wecanobservethatthe
synthetic handwriting images continuously change their textual
contents, while strictly preserving the original calligraphic styles.
Moreover, HiGAN+ not only draws the natural ligatures when re-
placingthespecificletterbutalsosuccessfullygeneratestheOOV
words (e.g., “kitty”, “dicer”, and “dicey”). The interpolation results
validatethatHiGAN+cangeneratenovelhandwritingimagesthat
Fig.10. TheUMAPvisualizationofthelatentvectorsextractedbytheen-
coder, where the shape and coloridentify the author.
unconstrainedtoanyOOVwords(ratherthansimplycopyingthe
trainingsamples).
4.3.3 Style Embeddings. To further verify the generalization
abilityofHiGAN+,weshowtheUMAPvisualizationofthelatent
vectors extracted from both (a) test images and (b) reconstructed
images of HiGAN+. As shown in Figure 10(a), the latent distri-
butions (i.e., style features) of images from the same writer are
clustered, while that of different writers are separated from each
other.ThisdemonstratesthatHiGAN+canclusterembeddingsfor
handwritingimagesofsimilarstylesanddiversifyembeddingsfor
that of different styles, thus disentangling meaningful styles from
handwriting images. Furthermore, we can also observe a similar
phenomenon on the reconstruction images in Figure 10(b), which
indicates that HiGAN+ can achieve aprecise HI.
4.4 Ablation Studies
Inthissubsection,weconductanablationstudytojustifythecon-
tributionofeachkeycomponentinHiGAN+.AsshowninTable 2,
wegivethequantitativecomparisonofdifferentconfigurationsfor
handwrittentextsynthesis,whereeachcomponentiscumulatively
added on top of thebaseline model.
Specifically,thebaselineconfiguration(A)(withonlytheadver-
sarial loss and CTC loss) corresponds to the basic setup of Scrab-
bleGAN[Fogeletal. 2020],whichcanonlygeneratereadablehand-
writtentextswithrandomizedstyles.Asshowninthefirstrowof
Figures11and12, the baseline model (A) fails to imitate the cal-
ligraphic styles of reference images, since it lacks a style encoder
to disentangle handwriting styles. Moreover, the visual quality of
syntheticimagesispoor,wheresomecharactersareevendistorted
andblurredas shownin Figure 11.
Wefirstimprovethebaselinemodel(A)byregularizingthegen-
eratorwithreconstructingoriginalimagecontents,i.e.,theconfig-
uration (B) which is equivalent to the TS-GAN [Davis et al. 2020].
Additionally, we introduce the KL-Divergence loss to regularize
the encoded latent space to match the prior normal distribution.
With the explicit spatial alignment between synthetic images and
ground-truthimages,wewishthestyleencodercanextractmean-
ingfulstyleembeddingsfromreferenceimagesandthusisableto
generate novel handwritten texts of similar styles. However, the
WIERofconfiguration(B)isveryhighasshowninTable 2,which
indicatesthatsuchanauto-encodingschemecannothelpthegen-
erative model to achieve precise HI. As shown in the second row
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 12 ====
11:12 • J. Gan et al.
Table2. Quantitative ComparisonofDifferent Configurations forHandwritten Text Synthesis
ID Method IS ↑FID↓KID↓PSNR↑MSSIM↑WIER↓WER↓
ALadv+Lctc 1.2975 24.3985 2.2173 11.6510 0.2078 1.0000 0.0243
BA +Lrecn+Lkl1.3356 25.2118 2.0649 11.3832 0.2452 0.9751 0.0080
CB +Lid+Lstyle 1.3298 18.3095 1.6688 11.7609 0.2459 0.6747 0.0085
DC +Lctx 1.3694 10.6346 0.7752 11.9286 0.2981 0.6116 0.0085
ED +Dpatch 1.4059 5.9510 0.3709 12.3391 0.3322 0.5821 0.0186
Ground Truth 1.4390 0.1105 0.1820
“↑”denotes thathigher values are better, and “ ↓”denotes thatlowervalues are better.
Boldindicates thebest result.
Fig. 11. Ablation studyforhandwritten words.
Fig. 12. Ablation studyfor long handwritten texts.
ofFigures 11and12,themodel(B)failstoimitatethecalligraphic
styles of reference images.
To achieve precise handwriting style transfer, we further intro-
duce the writer identification loss Lidand style reconstruction
lossLstyle, i.e., the configuration (C) which corresponds to Hi-
GAN [Gan and Wang 2021]. Specifically, the term Lidcan guar-
antee that the input style code can explicitly affect the styles of
generated images. Furthermore, with the help of the writer iden-
tifier, the termLidenforces the generator to synthesize images
conditioned on a particular writer identity, e.g., that of reference
images.Therefore,wecanexplicitlyguidethegeneratortomimic
the calligraphic styles of reference images. As shown in Table 2,
the model (C) achieves much lower WIER and higher FID scores,whichindicatesthatthemodelachievesmoreaccuratecalligraphic
style transfer and significantly improves the visual quality of syn-
thetic images.
Wefurtherimprovethestyleconsistencyofsyntheticimagesby
introducing the contextual loss Lctxon top of the model (C), i.e.,
theconfiguration(D).Sincehumans’handwritingisveryarbitrary,
it may be challenging to spatially align the synthetic handwriting
imagesandground-truthones.Furthermore,incontrasttonature
images, handwriting images contain little textures. Therefore, it
may be insufficient to achieve precise handwriting style transfer
withtheconventionalpixel-to-pixelreconstructionandGramloss
(thatisdesignedforcapturingtextualfeatures).However,thecon-
textual loss can measure the style similarity between two images
based on high-level feature map collections, requiring no spatial
alignments. As shown in Table 2, the values of evaluation metrics
clearly demonstratetheeffectiveness of thecontextual loss.
Lastly, we introduce the local patch loss Lpatchon top of the
model (D) to further refine the local texture details of synthetic
images, i.e., the configuration (E) which corresponds to the pro-
posed HiGAN+. Notably, handwritten text images can be arbitrar-
ily long, and thus it cannot guarantee the local details for such
high-resolution images. Instead of grading the whole image, we
split each image into patches and then introduce another discrim-
inator to justify the patch fidelity. As shown in Figures 11and12,
thegenerativemodelwithouttheLPLwillproduceblurredcharac-
ters, and theLpatchterm ensures that the generated images pre-
serve better style consistency (e.g., grey textures in backgrounds).
Finally, the results in Table 2demonstrate that HiGAN+ signifi-
cantlyimprovesthevisualqualityandachievesamoreprecisecal-
ligraphic styletransfer.
4.5 Comparison between PatchGAN andLPL
Although PatchGAN accepts the whole image and computes
patches in parallel, its discriminator is limited to the specific shal-
lowarchitecturestosimulatethepatchprocessing.Forexample,to
simulate a patch processing with a path size of 32 ×32 and patch
stride of 8, the deepest discriminator is limited to “ Conv2D(k=
3,s=2)→Conv2D(k=3,s=2)→Conv2D(k=3,s=
2)→Conv2D(k=3,s=1)”( w h e r e“ k” is the kernel size and
“s”isthestride);however,adeeperCNNwillleadtoalargerrecep-
tive filed (>32). In contrast, LPL physically splits the whole image
intoseparatedpatches,andthusitspatchdiscriminatorisnotlim-
itedtothespecificarchitecturaldesignandcanbearbitrarilycom-
plex. Therefore, LPL with a more complex and powerful discrimi-
natormayachievebetterperformancethanPatchGAN.Tovalidate
our assumption, we conduct a quantitative comparison between
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 13 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGAN with DisentangledRepresentations • 11:13
Table 3. Comparisonbetween PatchGAN and LPL
MethodPatch DiscriminatorIS↑FID↓KID↓
Type Depth Size
Scrabble
GANNone×0.00 1.2975 24.3985 2.2173
PGAN∗4 2.32 1.3367 15.2872 1.1609
LPL∗8 2.26 1.3607 13.0480 0.9890
HiGANNone×0.00 1.3298 18.3095 1.6688
PGAN∗4 2.32 1.3521 13.0448 1.0290
LPL∗8 2.26 1.4393 12.0309 0.9795
*“PGAN”is thePatchGANand “LPL”is theLPL.
PatchGAN and LPL on the IAM dataset in Table 3, where their
patch discriminators have the same number of parameters with
the patch size of 32 ×32 and patch stride of 8. Experimental re-
sultsshowthatLPLwithmorepowerfulpatchdiscriminatorsmay
outperformPatchGAN.
4.6 Imitating Handwritingin theWild
WeshowthatHiGAN+canalsoimitatecalligraphicstylesofhand-
writing images in the wild. Different from handwriting on the
whiteboard, handwriting in the wild has more extreme and di-
versecalligraphicstyles(includinglargevariationsinstrokethick-
ness/colors and many noises and distortion of characters). Specif-
ically, we have conducted experiments on a dataset for English
handwriting in the wild named GNHK [Lee et al. 2021]. In our
experiments, only the training set of GNHK is used for optimiz-
ing GANs and no other extra images are involved, and the test
setisonlyusedforevaluation.ThequalitativeresultsinFigure 13
showthatHiGAN+cansynthesizehandwritingimageswithmore
extreme handwriting styles. Lastly, we also give the quantitative
results in Table 4, which demonstrates HiGAN+ significantly out-
performsthebaselines.
4.7 Comparison with theState-of-the-Arts
We compare the proposed HiGAN+ with recent state-of-the-art
GANsforhandwrittentextsynthesis.ForallcompetingGANs,we
use the official implementation with default settings and the pre-
trained models provided by the authors. For a fair comparison,
we utilize all GANs to reconstruct the test set images of the IAM
dataset.
4.7.1 Visual Comparison. As shown in Figures 14and15,w e
make a qualitative comparison between different GANs for hand-
writing synthesis to intuitively reflect their synthetic visual quali-
ties.Notably,theoriginalimplementationsofScrabbleGAN,HTW,
and HiGAN can only produce images with 32-pixel height, while
GANwriting, TS-GAN, and HiGAN+ can produce images with
64-pixel height.
Although ScrabbleGAN can generate readable handwritten
text images, it fails to imitate the calligraphic styles of reference
samples. This is because ScrabbleGAN lacks a style encoder to
disentangle calligraphic styles from images. Moreover, the visual
qualities of its synthetic images are poor as many characters in
handwrittentexts aredistortedandblurred.
Both GANwriting and HWT can control the calligraphic styles
of synthetic handwriting images. For GANwriting, since it only
Fig. 13. Handwritten text synthesis in wild.
Table 4. Quantitative Results ofHandwritten Text Synthesis
in Wild onGNHK
Method IS ↑FID↓MSSIM↑WIER↓WER↓
ScrabbleGAN 1.4993 44.3732 0.2931 1.0000 0.2524
HiGAN 1.5291 26.8190 0.2940 0.7111 0.1751
HiGAN+ 1.6255 9.6546 0.3695 0.4480 0.1237
Ground Truth 1.7592 0.0175 0.3602
encodeslimited-lengthwordstofixed-sizedvectors,itcannotgen-
erate arbitrarily long handwritten texts (i.e., no more than 10 let-
ters).AsshowninFigure 15,GANwritingfailstocompletethepro-
videdtextualcontents.ForHTW,itutilizesthevisionTransformer
tocapturetheglobalandlocalstylesofhandwritingimages.How-
ever, both HWT and GANwriting require multiple reference sam-
ples toextract reliable stylefeatures for HI.
ForTS-GAN,itfollowsanauto-encoderarchitecture,whichim-
plicitly learns HI by reconstructing original images. Although TS-
GAN successfully mimics thicknesses and text slants, it fails to
mimic character shapes and texture backgrounds. Therefore, its
ability for handwriting style transfer is limited, which demon-
strates that the pixel-to-pixel reconstruction is insufficient for
handwritingstyletransfer.
ForHiGAN,itnotonlygeneratesrealistichandwrittentextsbut
also successfully imitates calligraphic styles of reference samples.
This is because HiGAN further introduces a writer-specific auxil-
iary loss to constrain the handwriting generation conditioned on
particularwriteridentities.However,HiGANsometimesproduces
a few distorted and blurred characters, since it only grades the
wholeimageduringtrainingbutfailstoconsiderthelocaltexture
details.
For HiGAN+, we first introduce the contextual loss to improve
thestyleconsistencyofHiGAN,whichenhancesthestylesimilar-
ityofimagesbasedonhigh-levelfeaturemapcollectionsextracted
by the writer identifier. Furthermore, we also refine the local
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 14 ====
11:14 • J. Gan et al.
Fig. 14. Qualitative results ofdifferent GANs for handwritten paragraphs.
Fig. 15. Qualitative results ofdifferent GANs for longhandwritten texts.
texturedetailsofsyntheticimagesbyintroducingapatchdiscrimi-
natortoverifythepatchfidelity.Thosestrategieseventuallymake
HiGAN+ attain a good global & local consistency. As shown in
Figures14and15, HiGAN+ produces clearer handwriting images
and achieves amoreprecise HI.4.7.2 QuantitativeEvaluation. Togiveahigher-levelindication
of visual quality on the whole test set, we further conduct a quan-
titative evaluation between different GANs for handwriting syn-
thesis as shown in Table 5. Moreover, we also have evaluated the
metrics between the generated and real samples in different set-
tings (in Table 6) including (1) in vocabulary and seen style (I-
S), (2) in vocabulary and unseen style (I-U), (3) OOV and seen
style (O-S), and (4) OOV and unseen style (O-U). We can ob-
serve that both ScrabbleGAN and ST-GAN obtain high FID and
WIER, which indicates that they suffer from the poor visual qual-
ity andalso failtoimitate the calligraphic styles of reference sam-
ples. Moreover, although HiGAN slightly outperforms GANwrit-
ing in terms of visual quality, it achieves more precise HI (i.e.,
lower WIER) and its synthetic images are much more readable
(i.e., lower WER). Furthermore, the quantitative results in Table 5
clearly demonstrate that HiGAN+ largely outperforms the other
state-of-the-art GANs for HI in terms of visual quality and it also
achievesamorepreciseone-shothandwritingstyletransfer.Lastly,
we list the model storages of different GANs in Table 7,a n dw e
can observe that the proposed HiGAN+ attains the most com-
pact model for handwritten text synthesis compared with other
state-of-the-art GANs. This is because HiGAN+ employs a com-
pact style encoder (that is specifically designed for extracting
handwriting styles) rather than using a huge pre-trained VGG
backbone.
4.8 Failure Case Analysis
To investigate the weakness and limitation of the proposed Hi-
GAN+,weconductthefailurecaseanalysisasshowninFigure 16.
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 15 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGAN with DisentangledRepresentations • 11:15
Table 5. Quantitative ComparisonofDifferent GANs forHandwritten Text Synthesis
Method IS ↑FID↓KID↓PSNR↑MSSIM↑WIER↓WER↓
ScrabbleGAN 1.3268 26.7758 2.9479 11.2562 0.1950 1.0000 0.0740
ST-GAN 1.2443 33.9069 3.1314 12.0345 0.1845 0.9741 0.1968
GANwriting 1.3267 20.5539 1.3927 10.8045 0.2038 0.8455 0.2143
HWT 1.3620 19.6938 1.8003 10.7518 0.2319 0.8320 0.1032
HiGAN 1.3298 18.3095 1.6688 11.7609 0.2459 0.6747 0.0085
HiGAN+ 1.4059 5.9510 0.3709 12.3391 0.3322 0.5821 0.0186
Ground Truth 1.4390 0.1105 0.1820
Table 6. ComparisonofDifferent GANs in Different Settings for Handwritten TextSynthesis
IS↑ FID↓ WIER↓ WER↓
Method I-S I-U O-S O-U I-S I-U O-S O-U I-S I-U O-S O-U I-S I-U O-S O-U
ScrabbleGAN 1.327 1.309 1.193 1.184 26.95 27.48 30.62 33.86 0.996 0.986 0.997 0.986 0.052 0.041 0.117 0.119
ST-GAN 1.277 1.237 1.159 1.277 37.71 37.89 40.79 43.76 0.994 0.986 0.994 0.994 0.174 0.173 0.217 0.227
GANwriting 1.345 1.347 1.213 1.322 19.50 21.28 26.67 25.40 0.877 0.843 0.888 0.862 0.177 0.106 0.428 0.439
HWT 1.352 1.326 1.278 1.36918.87 20.76 25.15 24.47 0.856 0.826 0.847 0.822 0.059 0.043 0.159 0.162
HiGAN 1.374 1.335 1.241 1.204 17.83 18.61 17.53 24.02 0.665 0.669 0.727 0.721 0.004 0.003 0.061 0.061
HiGAN+ 1.468 1.416 1.352 1.2965.81 6.17 12.62 11.42 0.494 0.528 0.642 0.659 0.008 0.005 0.092 0.086
Table 7. Comparisonof Different GANs
in Terms ofModel Storage
MethodSize (MB)
Gen. Enc. Total
ScrabbleGAN 81.8 ×81.8
GANwriting 95.6 76.5 172.1
ST-GAN 8.3127.5 135.8
HWT 80.7 50.6 131.3
HiGAN∗38.6∗20.5∗59.1
HiGAN+ 15.0 6.7 21.7
TrainingData 496.8
*Conferenceversion.
In thetable,“Gen.” denotes thegenerator and
“Enc.”denotes thestyleencoder.
Ourmodelsometimesfailsingeneratingsatisfactoryhandwriting
images in thefollowing twosituations:
(1) HiGAN+isdifficulttosynthesizerealisticpunctuationmarks
and digits. This is probably because that different characters
andsymbolsintrainingdatafollowalong-taileddistribution,
where the punctuation marks and digits are particularly rare
in ground-truth samples. Therefore, HiGAN+ is good at syn-
thesizing English characters rather than punctuation marks
anddigits.
(2) HiGAN+mayfailtogenerateextremelyscribbledcharacters,
while it prefers to generate neat and readable handwriting
images. This is because the recognizer will penalize HiGAN+
during training if the model generates scribbled handwritten
texts. This may be fixed by tuning the hyper-parameter λctc
of thetext recognition loss Lctcduringtraining.
Overall, humans’ handwriting can be very arbitrary and thus the
proposedHiGAN+essentiallyhaslimitsforsynthesizingmeaning-
fulhandwritingimages.
Fig. 16. Failure caseanalysis ofHiGAN+.
4.9 Human Evaluation
Due to the subjective nature of images, we also conduct human
evaluations (i.e., Turing tests) to verify the performance of differ-
ent generative models forhandwritten text synthesis.Specifically,
we have conducted two user studies on a professional data plat-
form Credamo with 100 randomly selected trustable participants
whocan recognize handwritten Englishtexts.
4.9.1 User Plausibility Study. We first conduct a user plausibil-
itystudytotestwhetherthesyntheticimagesofHiGAN+areactu-
allyindistinguishablefromrealonesbyhumanjudgements.Inthis
study, we show each participant 50 random handwriting images
(half genuine and half generated), where the participant can only
viewasingleimageatatimeandthenisaskedwhethertheimage
is written by humans or artificially generated by machines. After
ensuringtheparticipant’sreliability,thereare5,000responsescon-
tributing to the final evaluation. As shown in Table 8, the study
revealsthatourgenerativemodelisclearlyperceivedasplausible.
4.9.2 User Preference Study. We also conduct a user prefer-
ence study to justify whether HiGAN+ outperforms the com-
peting GANs for handwritten text synthesis in terms of visual
quality. In this study, we first randomly generate fake images of
differentGANsconditionedontheidentifiedtextualcontentsand
calligraphic styles (where each GAN model generates one image
at a time), and we repeat this procedure 25 times. After that, each
participantisshownthoseimagesinarandomorder(sidebyside
on the same screen) and then asked to choose the most preferred
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 16 ====
11:16 • J. Gan et al.
Table8. UserPlausibility Study
ActualPredicted Overall
AccuracyReal Fake
Genuine 0.3172 0.18280.5004Generated 0.3168 0.1832
Table 9. User Preference Study
Methods Scrabble
GANGAN
writingST-
GANHWT HiGAN HiGAN+
Prefers 0.0918 0.0542 0.1027 0.1686 0.2102 0.3725
one. In total, there are 2,500 responses contributing to the final
evaluation. As shown in Table 9, our HiGAN+ obtains the major-
ityofvotesinallinstances,whichdemonstratesthesuperiorityof
HiGAN+overthecompetingGANsforhandwrittentextsynthesis.
5 CONCLUSION
Inthisarticle,wehaveproposedanovelgenerativemodelHiGAN+
for HI based on disentangled representations. The proposed Hi-
GAN+ can generate diverse and realistic handwritten texts con-
ditionedonarbitrarytextualcontentsandcalligraphicstyles(that
aredisentangledfromreferenceimagesorrandomlysampledfrom
apriornormaldistribution).Sinceconventionalstyletransfertech-
niques based on pixel correspondences may be unsuitable for HI,
we further introduce the contextual loss to significantly improve
thestyleconsistencyofsyntheticimages.Moreover,toavoidmany
artifacts produced by existing GANs, we further refine the local
details of synthetic handwriting images with an LPL. Lastly, we
propose to reuse the early layers of the writer identifier for style
encoding, thus deriving a more compact and effective architec-
ture. Extensive experiments, including human evaluations, on the
benchmark dataset demonstrate the superiority of HiGAN+ in
termsofvisualquality,scalability,compactness,andstyletransfer-
abilityoverthestate-of-the-artGANsforhandwrittentextsynthe-
sis. It is worth noting that humans’ handwriting is very arbitrary
and thus HiGAN+ indeed has limits for synthesizing meaningful
handwriting images. Nevertheless, it is interesting to teach ma-
chines/roboticstowritetextsasrealisticashumans,whichtakesa
closer step to high-level artificial intelligence. The source code of
HiGAN+ isavailable at https://github.com/ganji15/HiGANplus .
REFERENCES
Eloi Alonso, Bastien Moysset, and Ronaldo Messina. 2019. Adversarial generation of
handwrittentextimagesconditionedonsequences.In ProceedingsoftheInterna-
tional Conference on Document Analysisand Recognition . 481–486.
S.Azadi,M.Fisher,V.Kim,Z.Wang,E.Shechtman,andT.Darrell.2018.Multi-content
GANforfew-shotfontstyletransfer.In Proceedingsofthe2018IEEE/CVFConfer-
ence onComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 7564–7573.
AnkanKumarBhunia,SalmanKhan,HishamCholakkal,RaoMuhammadAnwer,Fa-
had Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah. 2021. Handwriting transformers. In Pro-
ceedingsof theInternational Conference on ComputerVision .1086–1094.
Mikolaj Binkowski, Danica J. Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. 2018.
Demystifying MMD GANs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
LearningRepresentations .
Kaidi Cao, Jing Liao, and Lu Yuan. 2018. CariGANs: Unpaired photo-to-caricature
translation. ACM TransactionsonGraphics 37, 6 (2018), 244:1–244:14.
Junbum Cha, Sanghyuk Chun, Gayoung Lee, Bado Lee, Seonghyeon Kim, and Hwal-
sukLee.2020.Few-shotcompositionalfontgenerationwithdualmemory.In Pro-
ceedingsof theEuropeanConference onComputerVision . 735–751.Bo Chang, Qiong Zhang, Shenyi Pan, and Lili Meng. 2018. Generating handwritten
ChinesecharactersusingCycleGAN.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEWinterConference
onApplications of ComputerVision . 199–207.
XiChen,YanDuan,ReinHouthooft,JohnSchulman,IlyaSutskever,andPieterAbbeel.
2016.InfoGAN:Interpretablerepresentationlearningbyinformationmaximizing
generativeadversarialnets.In Proceedingsofthe30thInternationalConferenceon
NeuralInformationProcessingSystems .2172–2180.
Yunjey Choi, Min-Je Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul
Choo.2018.StarGAN:Unifiedgenerativeadversarialnetworksformulti-domain
image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Visionand PatternRecognition . 8789–8797.
B. Davis, C. Tensmeyer, B. Price, C. Wigington, B. Morse, and R. Jain. 2020.
Text and style conditioned GAN for generation of offline handwriting lines.
arXiv:2009.00678. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00678 .
KingmaP.DiederikandJimmyBa.2015.Adam:Amethodforstochasticoptimization.
InProceedingsof theInternationalConference for LearningRepresentations .
SharonFogel,HadarAverbuch-Elor,SarelCohen,ShaiMazor,andRoeeLitman.2020.
ScrabbleGAN: Semi-supervised varying length handwritten text generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
4324–4333.
Ji Gan and Weiqiang Wang. 2021. HiGAN: Handwriting imitation conditioned on
arbitrary-length texts and disentangled styles. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ferenceon ArtificialIntelligence . 7484–7492.
Yue Gao, Yuan Guo, Zhouhui Lian, Yingmin Tang, and Jianguo Xiao. 2019. Artis-
tic glyph image synthesis via one-stage few-shot learning. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 38, 6 (2019), 185:1–185:12.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial
nets.InProceedingsofthe27thInternationalConferenceonNeuralInformationPro-
cessingSystems .2672–2680.
Alex Graves. 2013. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks.
arXiv:1308.0850. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.0850 .
AlexGraves,SantiagoFernández,andFaustinoGomez.2006.Connectionisttemporal
classification: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning . 369–
376.
DavidHaandDouglasEck.2018.Aneuralrepresentationofsketchdrawings.In Pro-
ceedingsof theInternational Conference on LearningRepresentations .
Tom S. F. Haines, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Gabriel J. Brostow. 2016. My text in your
handwriting. ACM TransactionsonGraphics 35, 3 (2016), 26:1–26:18.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
Hochreiter.2017.GANstrainedbyatwotime-scaleupdateruleconvergetoalo-
calnashequilibrium.In Proceedingsofthe31stInternationalConferenceonNeural
InformationProcessingSystems .6626–6637.
Xun Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, Serge J. Belongie, and Jan Kautz. 2018. Multimodal unsu-
pervised image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the European Conference
onComputerVision . Vol.11207, 179–196.
Satoshi Iizuka, Edgar Simo-Serra, and Hiroshi Ishikawa. 2017. Globally and locally
consistent image completion. ACM Transactions on Graphics 36, 4 (2017), 107:1–
107:14.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros. 2017. Image-to-image
translationwithconditionaladversarialnetworks.In ProceedingsoftheIEEECon-
ferenceon ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition . 5967–5976.
Yue Jiang, Zhouhui Lian, Yingmin Tang, and Jianguo Xiao. 2019. SCFont: Structure-
guided Chinese font generation via deep stacked networks. In Proceedings of the
AAAIConference on ArtificialIntelligence . Vol. 33, 4015–4022.
Lei Kang, Pau Riba, Yaxing Wang, Marçal Rusiñol, Alicia Fornés, and Mauricio Ville-
gasy. 2020. GANwriting: Content-conditioned generation of styled handwritten
wordimages. In Proceedings of the EuropeanConference on ComputerVision .
Lei Kang, Pau Riba, Marcal Rusinol, Alicia Fornes, and Mauricio Villegas. 2021. Con-
tent and style aware generation of text-line images for handwriting recogni-
tion.IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence .EarlyAccess.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3122572
Taeksoo Kim, Moonsu Cha, Hyunsoo Kim, Jung Kwon Lee, and Jiwon Kim. 2017.
Learning to discover cross-domain relations with generative adversarial net-
works. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning . 1857–
1865.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv:1312.6114. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 .
Atsunobu Kotani, Stefanie Tellex, and James Tompkin. 2020. Generating handwrit-
ing via decoupled style descriptors. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
ComputerVision .Vol. 12357, 764–780.
Alex W. C. Lee, Jonathan Chung, and Marco Lee. 2021. GNHK: A dataset for English
handwriting in the wild. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Docu-
ment Analysis and Recognition . Josep Lladós, Daniel Lopresti, and Seiichi Uchida
(Eds.), Springer, Cham, 399–412.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan
Yang.2018.Diverseimage-to-imagetranslationviadisentangledrepresentations.
InProceedingsof theEuropeanConference on ComputerVision .Vol.11205, 36–52.
ACMTransactionson Graphics,Vol.42, No.1,Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

==== Page 17 ====
HiGAN+: Handwriting ImitationGAN with DisentangledRepresentations • 11:17
ZhouchenLinandLiangWan.2007. Style-preservingEnglishhandwritingsynthesis.
PatternRecognition 40, 7 (2007), 2097–2109.
QiMao,Hsin-YingLee,Hung-YuTseng,SiweiMa,andMing-HsuanYang.2019.Mode
seeking generative adversarial networks for diverse image synthesis. In Proceed-
ingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .1429–1437.
ZU-V.MartiandHorstBunke.2002.TheIAM-Database:AnEnglishsentencedatabase
for offline handwriting recognition. International Journal on Document Analysis
and Recognition 5, 1 (2002), 39–46.
Roey Mechrez, Itamar Talmi, and Lihi Zelnik-Manor. 2018. The contextual loss for
imagetransformationwithnon-aligneddata.In ProceedingsoftheEuropeanCon-
ference onComputerVision . Vol.11218, 800–815.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional generative adversarial nets.
arXiv:1411.1784. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784 .
Song Park, Sanghyuk Chun, Junbum Cha, Bado Lee, and Hyunjung Shim. 2021. Few-
shotfontgenerationwithlocalizedstylerepresentationsandfactorization.In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAIConference on ArtificialIntelligence .
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban
Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan
Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith
Chintala.2019.PyTorch:Animperativestyle,high-performancedeeplearningli-
brary. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information
ProcessingSystems .8024–8035.
Tiziano Portenier, Qiyang Hu, Attila Szabó, Siavash Arjomand Bigdeli, Paolo Favaro,
and Matthias Zwicker. 2018. Faceshop: Deep sketch-based face image editing.
ACM TransactionsonGraphics 37, 4 (2018), 99:1–99:13.Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. 2013. Unsupervised repre-
sentation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks.
arXiv:1511.06434. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434 .
Tim Salimans, Ian J. Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford,
and Xi Chen. 2016. Improved techniques for training GANs. In Proceedings
of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
2226–2234.
Harm-de Vries, Florian Strub, Jeremie Mary, Hugo Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin, and
AaronC.Courville.2017.Modulatingearlyvisualprocessingbylanguage.In Pro-
ceedingsofthe31stInternationalConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSys-
tems.6594–6604.
Yizhi Wang, Yue Gao, and Zhouhui Lian. 2020. Attribute2Font: Creating fonts you
want from attributes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 4, Article 69 (2020),
15 pages.
Liang Wu, Chengquan Zhang, Jiaming Liu, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and
Xiang Bai. 2019. Editing text in the wild. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia .1500–1508.
X. Y. Zhang, F. Yin, Y. M. Zhang, C. L. Liu, and Y. Bengio. 2018. Drawing and recog-
nizing Chinese characters with recurrent neural network. IEEE Transactions on
PatternAnalysisand Machine Intelligence 40, 4 (2018), 849–862.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Deepak Pathak, Trevor Darrell, Alexei A. Efros, Oliver
Wang,andEliShechtman.2017.Towardmultimodalimage-to-imagetranslation.
InProceedingsofthe31stInternationalConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessing
Systems.465–476.
ReceivedJuly 2021;revised April 2022;acceptedJuly 2022
ACMTransactionsonGraphics,Vol.42, No.1, Article11. Publicationdate: September 2022.

