==== Page 1 ====
HoloGAN: Unsupervised Learning of 3D Representations From Natural Images
Thu Nguyen-Phuoc1Chuan Li2Lucas Theis3Christian Richardt1Y ong-Liang Y ang1
1University of Bath2Lambda Labs3Twitter
Figure 1. HoloGAN learns to separate pose from identity (sha pe and appearance) only from unlabelled 2D images without sa crificing the visual
fidelity of the generated images. All results shown here are sampled from HoloGAN for the same identities in each row but i n different poses.
Abstract
We propose a novel generative adversarial network (GAN) for the
task of unsupervised learning of 3D representations from na tural
images. Most generative models rely on 2D kernels to generat e
images and make few assumptions about the 3D world. These
models therefore tend to create blurry images or artefacts i n tasks
that require a strong 3D understanding, such as novel-view s ynthe-
sis. HoloGAN instead learns a 3D representation of the world , and
to render this representation in a realistic manner . Unlike other
GANs, HoloGAN provides explicit control over the pose of gen er-
ated objects through rigid-body transformations of the lea rnt 3D
features. Our experiments show that using explicit 3D featu res en-
ables HoloGAN to disentangle 3D pose and identity, which is f ur-
ther decomposed into shape and appearance, while still bein g able
to generate images with similar or higher visual quality tha n other
generative models. HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end from u nla-
belled 2D images only. In particular , we do not require pose l abels,
3D shapes, or multiple views of the same objects. This shows t hat
HoloGAN is the first generative model that learns 3D represe n-
tations from natural images in an entirely unsupervised man ner .
1. Introduction
Learning to understand the relationship between 3D objects and
2D images is an important topic in computer vision and comput er
graphics. In computer vision, it has applications in fields such as
robotics, autonomous vehicles or security. In computer gra phics, it
benefits applications in both content generation and manip ulation.This ranges from photorealistic rendering of 3D scenes or
sketch-based 3D modelling, to novel-view synthesis or reli ghting.
Recent generative image models, in particular, generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs), have achieved impressive results i n gener-
ating images of high resolution and visual quality [ 1,5,27,28,62],
while their conditional versions have achieved great progr ess in
image-to-image translation [ 23,50], image editing [ 11,12,60] or
motion transfer [ 6,30]. However, GANs are still fairly limited in
their applications, since they do not allow explicit contro l over at-
tributes in the generated images, while conditional GANs ne ed la-
bels during training (Figure 2left), which are not always available.
Even when endowed with labels like pose information,
current generative image models still struggle in tasks tha t
require a fundamental understanding of 3D structures, such as
novel-view synthesis from a single image. For example, usin g 2D
kernels to perform 3D operations, such as out-of-plane rota tion
to generate novel views, is very difficult. Current methods
either require a lot of labelled training data, such as multi -view
images or segmentation masks [ 41,52], or produce blurry
results [ 13,14,33,54,57]. Although recent work has made
efforts to address this problem by using 3D data [ 40,64], 3D
ground-truth data are very expensive to capture and reconst ruct.
Therefore, there is also a practical motivation to directly learn
3D representations from unlabelled 2D images.
Motivated by these observations, we focus on designing
a novel architecture that allows unsupervised learning of 3 D
representations from images, enabling direct manipulatio n of view,
shape and appearance in generative image models (Figure 1). The
key insight of our network design is the combination of a stro ng
inductive bias about the 3D world with deep generative model s to
1
7588


==== Page 2 ====
learn better representations for downstream tasks. Conven tional
representations in computer graphics, such as voxels and me shes,
areexplicit in 3D and easy to manipulate via, for example, rigid-
body transformations. However, they come at the cost of memo ry
inefficiency or ambiguity in how to discretise complex obje cts.
As a result, it is non-trivial to build generative models wit h such
representations directly [ 43,46,49].Implicit representations, such
as high-dimensional latent vectors or deep features, are fa voured
by generative models for being spatially compact and semant ically
expressive. However, these features are not designed to wor k with
explicit 3D transformations [ 9,14,20,25,45], which leads to
visual artefacts and blurriness in tasks such as view manipu lation.
We propose HoloGAN, an unsupervised generative image
model that learns representations of 3D objects that are not only
explicit in 3D but also semantically expressive. Such repre senta-
tions can be learnt directly from unlabelled natural images . Unlike
other GAN models, HoloGAN employs both 3D and 2D features
for generating images. HoloGAN first learns a 3D representa tion,
which is then transformed to a target pose, projected to 2D
features, and rendered to generate the final images (Figure 2
right). Different from recent work that employs hand-craft ed
differentiable renderers [ 18,22,29,34,36,51,64], HoloGAN
learns perspective projection and rendering of 3D features from
scratch using a projection unit [ 40]. This novel architecture en-
ables HoloGAN to learn 3D representations directly from nat ural
images for which there are no good hand-crafted differentia ble
renderers. To generate new views of the same scene, we direct ly
apply 3D rigid-body transformations to the learnt 3D featur es, and
visualise the results using the neural renderer that is join tly trained.
This has been shown to produce sharper results than performi ng
3D transformations in high-dimensional latent vector spac e [40].
HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end in an unsupervised
manner using only unlabelled 2D images, without any supervi sion
of poses, 3D shapes, multiple views of objects, or geometry p riors
such as symmetry and smoothness over the 3D representation
that are common in this line of work [ 3,26,45]. To the best
of our knowledge, HoloGAN is the first generative model that
can learn 3D representations directly from natural images in a
purely unsupervised manner. In summary, our main technical
contributions are:
• A novel architecture that combines a strong inductive bias
about the 3D world with deep generative models to learn
disentangled representations (pose, shape, and appearanc e) of
3D objects from images. The representation is explicit in 3D
and expressive in semantics.
• An unconditional GAN that, for the first time, allows nativ e
support for view manipulation without sacrificing visual i mage
fidelity.
•An unsupervised training approach that enables disentangl ed
representation learning without using labels.
2. Related work
HoloGAN is at the intersection of GANs, structure-aware ima ge
synthesis and disentangled representation learning. In th is section,
we review related work in these areas.
Z
 Z
θ 
θ 
Conv2D
 Conv3D 3D TransformationG
DG
D
fake
realfake
realHoloGAN Conditional GAN
Projection unit
 Observed ground truth dataFigure 2. Comparison of generative image models. Data given to the
discriminator are coloured purple. Left: In conditional GANs, the pose
is observed and the discriminator is given access to this inf ormation.
Right: HoloGAN does not require pose labels during training and the
discriminator is not given access to pose information.
2.1. Generative adversarial networks
GANs learn to map samples from an arbitrary latent distribut ion
to data that fool a discriminator network into categorising them
as real data [ 16]. Most recent work on GAN architectures has
focused on improving training stability or visual fidelity of
the generated images, such as multi-resolution GANs [ 27,61],
or self-attention generators [ 1,62]. However, there is far less
work on designing GAN architectures that enable unsupervis ed
disentangled representation learning which allows contro l over
attributes of the generated images. By injecting random noi se and
adjusting the “style” of the image at each convolution, Styl eGAN
[28] can separate fine-grained variation (e.g., hair, freckle s) from
high-level features (e.g., pose, identity), but does not pr ovide
explicit control over these elements. A similar approach pr oposed
by Chen et al. [ 8] shows that this network design also achieves
more training stability. The success of these approaches in dicates
that network architecture can be more important for trainin g
stability and image fidelity than the specific choice of GAN loss.
Therefore, we also focus on architecture design for HoloGAN , but
with the goal of learning to separate pose, shape and appeara nce,
and to enable direct manipulation of these elements.
2.2. 3D­aware neural image synthesis
Recent work in neural image synthesis and novel-view synthe sis
has found success in improving the fidelity of the generated im-
ages with 3D-aware networks. Work that uses geometry templa tes
achieves great improvements in image fidelity [ 15,32], but does
not generalise well to complex datasets that cannot be descr ibed
by a template. RenderNet [ 40] introduces a differentiable renderer
using a convolutional neural network (CNN) that learns to re n-
der 2D images directly from 3D shapes. However, RenderNet
requires 3D shapes and their corresponding rendered images dur-
ing training. Other approaches learn 3D embeddings that can be
used to generate new views of the same scene without any 3D
supervision [ 48,51]. However, while Sitzmann et al. [51]require
multiple views and pose information as input, Rhodin et al. [48]
require supervision from paired images, background segmen tation
and pose information. Aiming to separate geometry from text ure,
visual object networks (VONs) [ 64] first sample 3D objects from
a 3D generative model, render these objects using a hand-cra fted
differentiable layer to normal, depth and silhouette maps, and
finally apply a trained image-to-image translation networ k. How-
7589


==== Page 3 ====
PROJECTION
UNIT
Z
AdaINConv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
Conv3D   3x3x3
LReluConst 4x4x4x512
MLPCamera pose
θAdaINConv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
MLP MLP
AdaIN
LReluConv2D   3x3
MLP MLP
Conv3D   3x3x3
LRelu
3D 
TRANSFORM
Figure 3. HoloGAN’s generator network: we employ 3D convolu tions, a 3D rigid-body transformation, the projection unit and 2D convolutions.
We also remove the traditional input layer from z, and start from a learnt constant 4D tensor. The latent vecto rzis instead fed through multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) to map to the affine transformation para meters for adaptive instance normalisation (AdaIN). Input s are coloured gray.
ever, VONs need explicit 3D data for training, and only work f or
single-object images with a simple white background. Our Ho lo-
GAN also learns a 3D representation and renders it to produce a
2D image but without seeing any 3D shapes, and works with real
images containing complex backgrounds and multi-object sc enes.
The work closest to ours is Pix2Scene [ 45], which learns an
implicit 3D scene representation from images, also in an uns uper-
vised manner. However, this method maps the implicit repres en-
tation to a surfel representation for rendering, while Holo GAN
uses an explicit 3D representation with deep voxels. Additi onally,
using a hand-crafted differentiable renderer, Pix2Scene c an only
deal with simple synthetic images (uniform material and lig hting
conditions). HoloGAN, on the other hand, learns to render fr om
scratch, and thus works for more complex natural images.
2.3. Disentangled representation learning
The aim of disentangled representation learning is to learn a fac-
torised representation, in which changes in one factor only affect
the corresponding elements in the generated images, while b eing
invariant to other factors. Most work in disentangled learn ing lever-
ages labels provided by the dataset [ 2,47,55] or benefits from
set supervision (e.g., videos or multiple images of the same scene;
more than two domains with the same attributes) [ 10,14,33].
Recent efforts in unsupervised disentangled representati on
learning, such as β-V AE [ 20] or InfoGAN [ 9,24], have focused
mostly on designing loss functions. However, these models
are sensitive to the choice of priors, provide no control ove r
what factors are learned, and do not guarantee that the learn t
disentangled factors are semantically meaningful. Moreov er,
β-V AE comes with a trade-off between the quality of the
generated images and the level of disentanglement. Finally , these
two methods struggle with more complicated datasets (natur al
images with complex backgrounds and lighting). In contrast , by
redesigning the architecture of the generator network, Hol oGAN
learns to successfully separate pose, shape and appearance , as well
as providing explicit pose control and enables shape/appea rance
editing even for more complex natural image datasets.
3. Method
To learn 3D representations from 2D images without labels,
HoloGAN extends traditional unconditional GANs by introdu cing
a strong inductive bias about the 3D world into the generatornetwork. Specifically, HoloGAN generates images by learni ng
a 3D representation of the world and to render it realistical ly such
that it fools the discriminator. View manipulation therefo re can
be achieved by directly applying 3D rigid-body transformat ions
to the learnt 3D features. In other words, the images created
by the generator are a view-dependent mapping from a learnt
3D representation to the 2D image space. This is different fr om
other GANs which learn to map a noise vector zdirectly to 2D
features to generate images.
Figure 3illustrates the generator architecture of HoloGAN:
HoloGAN first learns a 3D representation (assumed to be in a
canonical pose) using 3D convolutions (Section 3.1), transforms
this representation to a certain pose, projects and compute s visibil-
ity using the projection unit (Section 3.2), and computes shaded
colour values for each pixel in the final images with 2D convo lu-
tions. HoloGAN shares many rendering insights with RenderN et
[40], but works with natural images, and needs neither pre-trai ning
of the neural renderer nor paired 3D shape–2D image training data.
During training, we sample random poses from a uniform
distribution and transform the 3D features using these pose s be-
fore rendering them to images. We assume every image has a
corresponding single global pose, and show that this assump tion
still works with images of multiple objects. This random pos e
perturbation pushes the generator network to learn a disent angled
representation that is suitable for both 3D transformation and gen-
erating images that can fool the discriminator. While pose t ransfor-
mation could be learnt from data, we provide this operation, which
is differentiable and straightforward to implement, expli citly to
HoloGAN. Using explicit rigid-body transformations for no vel-
view synthesis has been shown to produce sharper images with
fewer artefacts [ 40]. More importantly, this provides an inductive
bias towards representations that are compatible with explicit 3D
rigid-body transformations. As a result, the learnt repres entations
are explicit in 3D and disentangled between pose and identit y.
Kulkarni et al. [ 33] categorize the learnt disentangled repre-
sentation into intrinsic andextrinsic elements. While intrinsic
elements describe shape, appearance, etc., extrinsic elem ents de-
scribe pose (elevation, azimuth) and lighting (location, i ntensity).
The design of HoloGAN naturally lends itself to this separat ion
by using more inductive biases about the 3D world: the adopti on
of a native 3D transformation, which controls the pose (show n as
θin Figure 3) directly, to the learnt 3D features, which control the
identity (shown as zin Figure 3).
7590


==== Page 4 ====
3.1. Learning 3D representations
HoloGAN generates 3D representations from a learnt constan t
tensor (see Figure 3). The random noise vector zinstead is treated
as a “style” controller, and mapped to affine parameters for adap-
tive instance normalization (AdaIN) [ 21] after each convolution
using a multilayer perceptron (MLP) f:z→γ(z),σ(z).
Given some features Φlat layerlof an image xand the noise
“style” vector z, AdaIN is defined as:
AdaIN(Φl(x),z)=σ(z)/parenleftbiggΦl(x)−µ(Φl(x))
σ(Φl(x))/parenrightbigg
+γ(z). (1)
This can be viewed as generating images by transformation of
a template (the learnt constant tensor) using AdaIN to match
the mean and standard deviation of the features at different
levelsl(which are believed to describe the image “style”) of the
training images. Empirically, we find this network archite cture
can disentangle pose and identity much better than those tha t
feed the noise vector zdirectly to the first layer of the generator.
HoloGAN inherits this style-based strategy from StyleGAN
[28] but is different in two important aspects. Firstly, Holo-
GAN learns 3D features from a learnt 4D constant tensor (size
4×4×4×512, where the last dimension is the feature channel)
before projecting them to 2D features to generate images, wh ile
StyleGAN only learns 2D features. Secondly, HoloGAN learns a
disentangled representation by combining 3D features with rigid-
body transformations during training, while StyleGAN inje cts
independent random noise into each convolution. StyleGAN, as a
result, learns to separate 2D features into different level s of detail,
depending on the feature resolution, from coarse (e.g., pos e, iden-
tity) to more fine-grained details (e.g., hair, freckles). We observe a
similar separation in HoloGAN. However, HoloGAN further se pa-
rates pose (controlled by the 3D transformation), shape (co ntrolled
by 3D features), and appearance (controlled by 2D features) .
It is worth highlighting that to generate images at 128 ×128
(same as VON), we used a deep 3D representation of size up
to 16×16×16×64. Even with such limited resolution, HoloGAN
can still generate images with competitive quality and more com-
plex backgrounds than other methods that use full 3D geometr y
such as VON’s voxel grid of resolution 128 ×128×128×1 [64].
3.2. Learning with view­dependent mappings
In addition to adopting 3D convolutions to learn 3D features ,
during training, we introduce more bias about the 3D world
by transforming these learnt features to random poses befor e
projecting them to 2D images. This random pose transformati on
is crucial to guarantee that HoloGAN learns a 3D representat ion
that is disentangled and can be rendered from all possible vi ews,
as also observed by Tran et al. [ 55] in DR-GAN. However,
HoloGAN performs explicit 3D rigid-body transformation, w hile
DR-GAN performs this using an implicit vector representati on.
Rigid-body transformation We assume a virtual pinhole
camera that is in the canonical pose (axis-aligned and place d along
the negative z-axis) relative to the 3D features being rende red.
We parameterise the rigid-body transformation by 3D rotati on,
scaling followed by trilinear resampling. Although transl ation isinherently supported by our framework, we did not use it in th is
work. Assuming the up-vector of the object coordinate syste m
is the global y-axis, rotation comprises rotation around th e y-axis
(azimuth) and the x-axis (elevation). Details on ranges for pose
sampling are included in the supplemental document.
Projection unit In order to learn meaningful 3D representa-
tions from just 2D images, HoloGAN learns a differentiable
projection unit [ 40] that reasons over occlusion. In particular, the
projection unit receives a 4D tensor (3D features), and retu rns
a 3D tensor (2D features).
Since the training images are captured with different
perspectives, HoloGAN needs to learn perspective projecti on.
However, as we have no knowledge of the camera intrinsics, we
employ two layers of 3D convolutions (without AdaIN) to morp h
the 3D representation into a perspective frustum (see Figur e3)
before their projection to 2D features.
The projection unit is composed of a reshaping layer that
concatenates the channel dimension with the depth dimensio n,
thus reducing the tensor dimension from 4D ( W×H×D×C) to
3D (W×H×(D·C)), and an MLP with a non-linear activation
function (leakyReLU [ 37] in our experiments) to learn occlusion.
3.3. Loss functions
Identity regulariser To generate images at higher resolution
(128×128 pixels), we find it beneficial to add an identity regu-
lariserLidentity that ensures a vector reconstructed from a generated
image matches the latent vector zused in the generator G. We find
that this encourages HoloGAN to only use zfor the identity to
maintain the object’s identity when poses are varied, helpi ng the
model learn the full variation of poses in the dataset. We int roduce
an encoder network Fthat shares the majority of the convolution
layers of the discriminator, but uses an additional fully-c onnected
layer to predict the reconstructed latent vector. The ident ity loss is:
Lidentity(G)=Ez/bardblz−F(G(z))/bardbl2. (2)
Style discriminator Our generator is designed to match the
“style” of the training images at different levels, which ef fectively
controls image attributes at different scales. Therefore, in addi-
tion to the image discriminator that classifies images as re al or
fake, we propose multi-scale style discriminators that perform
the same task but at the feature level. In particular, the sty le
discriminator tries to classify the mean µ(Φl)and standard devi-
ationσ(Φl), which describe the image “style” [ 21]. Empirically,
the multi-scale style discriminator helps prevent mode col lapse
and enables longer training. Given a style discriminator Dl(x)=
/tildewideDl(µ(Φl(x)),σ(Φl(x)))for layerl, the style loss is defined as:
Ll
style(G)=Ez[−logDl(G(z))]. (3)
The total loss can be written as:
Ltotal(G)=LGAN(G)+λi·Lidentity(G)+λs·/summationdisplay
lLl
style(G). (4)
We useλi=λs=1.0for all experiments. We use the GAN loss
from DC-GAN [ 44] forLGAN.
7591


==== Page 5 ====
4. Experiment settings
Data We train HoloGAN using a variety of datasets: Basel Face
[42], CelebA [ 35], Cats [ 63], Chairs [ 7], Cars [ 58], and LSUN
bedroom [ 59]. We train HoloGAN on resolutions of 64 ×64 pixels
for Cats and Chairs, and 128 ×128 pixels for Basel Face, CelebA,
Cars and LSUN bedroom. More details on the datasets and
network architecture can be found in the supplemental docum ent.
Note that only the Chairs dataset contains multiple views of the
same object; all other datasets only contain unique single v iews.
For this dataset, because of the limited number of ShapeNet [ 7]
3D chair models (6778 shapes), we render images from 60 ran-
domly sampled views for each chair. During training, we ensu re
that each batch contains completely different types of chai rs to
prevent the network from using set supervision, i.e., looki ng at the
same chair from different viewpoints in the same batch, to ch eat.
Implementation details We use adaptive instance normal-
ization [ 21] for the generator, and a combination of instance
normalization [ 56] and spectral normalization [ 39] for the
discriminator. See our supplemental document for details.
We train HoloGAN from scratch using the Adam solver [ 31].
To generate images during training, we sample z∼U(−1,1), and
also sample random poses from a uniform distribution (more
details on pose sampling can be found in the supplemental
document). We use |z|=128 for all datasets, except for Cars
at 128×128, where we use |z|=200 . Our code is available at
https://github.com/thunguyenphuoc/HoloGAN .
5. Results
We first show qualitative results of HoloGAN on datasets wit h
increasing complexity (Section 5.1). Secondly, we provide
quantitative evidence that shows HoloGAN can generate imag es
with comparable or higher visual fidelity than other 2D-bas ed
GAN models (Section 5.2). We also show the effectiveness
of using our learnt 3D representation compared to explicit 3 D
geometries (binary voxel grids) for image generation (Sect ion
5.3). We then show how HoloGAN learns to disentangle shape
and appearance (Section 5.4). Finally, we perform an ablation
study to demonstrate the effectiveness of our network desig n and
training approach (Section 5.5).
5.1. Qualitative evaluation
Figures 1,4,6and7b show that HoloGAN can smoothly
vary the pose along azimuth and elevation while keeping the
same identities for multiple different datasets. Note that the
LSUN dataset contains a variety of complex layouts of multip le
objects. This makes it a very challenging dataset for learni ng to
disentangle pose from object identity.
In the supplemental document, we show results for the Basel
Face dataset. We also perform linear interpolation with the
noise vectors while keeping the poses the same, and show that
HoloGAN can smoothly interpolate the identities between tw o
samples. This demonstrates that HoloGAN correctly learns a n ex-
plicit deep 3D representation that disentangles pose from i dentity,
despite not seeing any pose labels or 3D shapes during traini ng.
Azimuth
Elevation
Figure 4. For the Chairs dataset with high intra-class varia tion, HoloGAN
can still disentangle pose (360° azimuth, 160° elevation) a nd identity.InfoGAN HoloGAN
Figure 5. We compare HoloGAN to InfoGAN (images adapted from
Chen et al. [9]) on CelebA (64 ×64) in the task of separating identity and
azimuth. Note that we cannot control what can be learnt by Inf oGAN.
Comparison to InfoGAN [ 9]We compare our approach to
InfoGAN on the task of learning to disentangle identity from
pose on the CelebA dataset [ 35] at a resolution of 64 ×64 pixels.
Due to the lack of publicly available code and hyper-paramet ers
for this dataset1, we use the CelebA figure from the published
paper. We also tried the official InfoGAN implementation wi th
the Cars dataset, but were unable to train the model successf ully
as InfoGAN appears to be highly sensitive to the choice of pri or
distributions and the number of latent variables to recover .
Figure 5shows that HoloGAN successfully recovers and
provides much better control over the azimuth while still
maintaining the identity of objects in the generated images .
HoloGAN can also recover elevation (Figure 6b, right) despite
the limited variation in elevation in the CelebA dataset, wh ile
InfoGAN cannot. Most importantly, there is no guarantee tha t
InfoGAN always recovers factors that control object pose, w hile
HoloGAN explicitly controls this via rigid-body transform ation.
5.2. Quantitative results
To evaluate the visual fidelity of generated images, we use t he
Kernel Inception Distance (KID) by Bi ´nkowski et al. [4]2. KID
computes the squared maximum mean discrepancy between
feature representations (computed from the Inception mode l [53])
of the real and generated images. In contrast to FID [ 19], KID
1The official code repository at https://github.com/openai/InfoGAN only
works with the MNIST dataset.
2https://github.com/mbinkowski/MMD-GAN
7592


==== Page 6 ====
a) Cats (64  x 64) b) CelebA (128 x 128) c) LSUN (128  x 128)
Figure 6. HoloGAN supports changes in both azimuth (range: 1 00°) and elevation (range: 35 °). However, the available range depends on the dataset.
For CelebA, for example, few photos in the dataset were taken from above or below.
has an unbiased estimator. The lower the KID score, the bette r
the visual quality of generated images. We compare HoloGAN
with other recent GAN models: DCGAN [ 44], LSGAN [ 38],
and WGAN-GP [ 17], on 3 datasets in Table 1. Note that KID
does not take into account feature disentanglement, which i s one
of the main contributions of HoloGAN.
We use a publicly available implementation3and use the same
hyper-parameters (that were tuned for CelebA) provided wit h this
implementation for all three datasets. Similarly, for Holo GAN,
we use the same network architecture and hyper-parameters4for
all three datasets. We sample 20,000 images from each model
to calculate the KID scores shown below.
Table 1shows that HoloGAN can generate images with compet-
itive (for CelebA) or even better KID scores on more challeng ing
datasets: Chairs, which has high intra-class variability, and Cars,
which has complex backgrounds and lighting conditions. Thi s
also shows that the HoloGAN architecture is more robust and c an
consistently produce images with high visual fidelity acro ss dif-
ferent datasets with the same set of hyper-parameters (exce pt for
azimuth ranges). We include visual samples for these models in
the supplemental document. More importantly, HoloGAN lear ns
a disentangled representation that allows manipulation of the
generated images. This is a great advantage compared to meth ods
such asβ-V AE [ 20], which has to compromise between the image
3https://github.com/LynnHo/DCGAN-LSGAN-WGAN-WGAN-GP-
Tensorflow
4Except for ranges for sampling the azimuth: 100° for CelebA s ince face
images are only taken from frontal views, and 360° for Chairs and Cars.Method CelebA 64×64 Chairs 64×64 Cars 64×64
DCGAN [ 44] 1.81 ±0.09 6.36 ±0.16 4.78 ±0.11
LSGAN [ 38] 1.77 ±0.06 6.72 ±0.19 4.99 ±0.13
WGAN-GP [ 17] 1.63±0.09 9.43±0.24 15.57 ±0.29
HoloGAN (ours) 2.87 ±0.09 1.54±0.07 2.16 ±0.09
Table 1. KID [ 19] between real images and images generated by Holo-
GAN and other 2D-based GANs (lower is better). We report KID
mean×100±std.×100. The table shows that HoloGAN can achieve
competitive or higher KID score with other methods, while pr oviding
explicit control of objects in the generated images (not mea sured by KID).
quality and the level of disentanglement of the learnt featu res.
5.3. Deep 3D representation vs. 3D geometry
Here we compare our method to the state-of-the-art visual ob ject
networks (VON) [ 64] on the task of generating car images. We
use the trained model and code provided by the authors. Altho ugh
VON also takes a disentangling approach to generating image s,
it relies on 3D shapes and silhouette masks during training, while
HoloGAN does not. Figure 7b shows that our approach can
generate images of cars with complex backgrounds, realisti c
shadows and competitive visual fidelity. Note that to gener ate
images at 128 ×128, VON uses the full binary voxel geometry at
128×128×128×1 resolution, while HoloGAN uses a deep voxel
representation of up to 16 ×16×16×64 resolution, which is more
spatially compact and expressive since HoloGAN also genera tes
complex backgrounds and shadows. As highlighted in Figure
7593


==== Page 7 ====
ElevationAzimuth
a) VON b) HoloGAN
Figure 7. a)Car images generated by VON for an azimuth range of 360 °. Despite using 3D shapes and silhouette masks during traini ng, VON can
only generate images with a simple white background, and str uggles for certain frontal views (highlighted in red) and re ar views (highlighted in blue).
b)HoloGAN generates car images with complex backgrounds and v arying azimuth (range: 360 °) and elevation (range: 35 °) from unlabelled images.
7a, VON also tends to change the identity of the car such as
changing colours or shapes at certain views (highlighted), while
HoloGAN maintains the identity of the car in all views. Moreo ver,
HoloGAN can generate car images in full 360 °views (Figure 7),
while VON struggles to generate images from the back views.
Traditional voxel grids can be very memory intensive.
HoloGAN hints at the great potential of using explicit deep v oxel
representations for image generation, as opposed to using t he full
3D geometry in the traditional rendering pipeline. For exam ple,
in Figure 6c, we generate images of the entire bedroom scene
using a 3D representation of only 16 ×16×16×64 resolution.
5.4. Disentangling shape and appearance
Here we show that in addition to pose, HoloGAN also learns to f ur-
ther divide identity into shape and appearance. We sample tw o la-
tent codes, z1andz2, and feed them through HoloGAN. While z1
controls the 3D features (before perspective morphing and p rojec-
tion),z2controls the 2D features (after projection). Figure 8shows
the generated images with the same pose, same z1, but with a dif-
ferentz2at each row. As can be seen, while the 3D features control
objects’ shapes, the 2D features control appearance (textu re and
lighting). This shows that by using 3D convolutions to learn 3D
representations and 2D convolutions to learn shading, Holo GAN
learns to separate shape from appearance directly from unla belledimages, allowing separate manipulation of these factors. I n the
supplemental document, we provide further results, in whic h we
use different latent codes for 3D features at different reso lutions,
and show the separation between features that control the ov erall
shapes and more fine-grained details such as gender or makeu p.
5.5. Ablation studies
We now conduct a series of studies to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our network design and training approach.
Training without random 3D transformations Randomly
rotating the 3D features during training is crucial for Holo GAN, as
it encourages the generator to learn a disentangled represe ntation
between pose and identity. In Figure 9, we show results with and
without 3D transformation during training. For the model tr ained
without 3D transformation, we generate images of rotated ob jects
by manually rotating the learnt 3D features after the model i s
trained. As can be seen, this model can still generate images with
good visual fidelity, but when the pose is changed, it comple tely
fails to generate meaningful images, while HoloGAN can easi ly
generate images of the same objects in different poses. We be lieve
that the random transformation during training forces the g enerator
to learn features that meaningfully undergo geometric tran sforma-
tions, while still being able to generate images that can foo l the
discriminator. As a result, our training strategy encourag es Holo-
7594


==== Page 8 ====
z2z1
z2z1
z2z1
z2
Figure 8. Combinations of different latent vectors z1(for 3D features)
andz2(for 2D features). While z1influences objects’ shapes, z2
determines appearance (texture and lighting). Best viewed in colour.
GAN to learn a disentangled representation of identity and p ose.
Training with traditional zinput By starting from a learnt
constant tensor and using the noise vector zas a “style” controller
at different levels, HoloGAN can better disentangle pose fr om
identity. Here we perform another experiment, in which we fe edz
to the first layer of the generator network, like other GAN mo dels.
Figure 9shows that the model trained with this traditional input
is confused between pose and identity. As a result, the model
also changes the object’s identity when it is being rotated, while
HoloGAN can smoothly vary the pose along the azimuth and
keep the identity unchanged.
An additional ablation study showing the effectiveness of t he
identity regulariser is included in the supplemental docum ent.
6. Discussion and conclusion
While HoloGAN can successfully learn to separate pose from
identity, its performance depends on the variety and distri bution of
poses included in the training dataset. For example, for the CelebA
and Cats dataset, the model cannot recover elevation as well as
azimuth (see Figure 6a,b), since most face images are taken at
eye level and thus contain limited variation in elevation. U sing the
HoloGAN w/o 3D transform w. traditional Z input
Azimuth
Figure 9. Ablation study showing images with changing azimu ths (from
left to right). Top: Our approach. Middle: Our approach without using
random 3D transformations during training fails to rotate o bjects. Bot-
tom: Our approach with a traditional input layer mapped from zinstead
of a learnt constant tensor fails to disentangle object pose and identity.
wrong pose distribution might also lead to angles being mapp ed
incorrectly. Currently, during training, we sample random poses
from a uniform distribution. Future work therefore can expl ore
learning the distribution of poses from the training data in an un-
supervised manner to account for uneven pose distributions . Other
directions to explore include further disentanglement of o bjects’
appearances, such as texture and illumination. Finally, it will be
interesting to combine HoloGAN with training techniques su ch
as progressive GANs [ 27] to generate higher-resolution images.
In this work, we presented HoloGAN, a generative image
model that learns 3D representation from natural images in a n
unsupervised manner by adopting strong inductive biases ab out
the 3D world. HoloGAN can be trained end-to-end with only un-
labelled 2D images, and learns to disentangle challenging f actors
such as 3D pose, shape and appearance. This disentanglement
provides control over these factors, while being able to gen erate
images with similar or higher visual quality than 2D-based G ANs.
Our experiments show that HoloGAN successfully learns mean -
ingful 3D representations across multiple datasets with va rying
complexity. We are therefore convinced that explicit deep 3 D rep-
resentations are a crucial step forward for both the interpr etability
and controllability of GAN models, compared to existing exp licit
(meshes, voxels) or implicit [ 14,45] 3D representations.
Acknowledgements We received support from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme und er
the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 665992, the
EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Digital Entertainmen t
(EP/L016540/1), RCUK grant CAMERA (EP/M023281/1), an
EPSRC-UKRI Innovation Fellowship (EP/S001050/1), and an
NVIDIA Corporation GPU Grant. We thank Lambda Labs for
GPU cloud credits and a travel grant.
7595


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1]Y oussef Alami Mejjati, Christian Richardt, James Tompkin, Darren
Cosker, and Kwang In Kim. Unsupervised attention-guided im age-
to-image translation. In NeurIPS , pages 3693–3703, 2018. 1,2
[2]Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Houqiang Li, and Gang Hua.
Towards open-set identity preserving face synthesis. In CVPR ,
2018. 3
[3] Jonathan T Barron and Jitendra Malik. Shape, illuminati on, and
reflectance from shading. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 37(8):1670–1687, 2015. 2
[4] Mikołaj Bi ´nkowski, Dougal J. Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and
Arthur Gretton. Demystifying MMD GANs. In ICLR , 2018. 5
[5]Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale
GAN training for high fidelity natural image synthesis. In ICLR ,
2019. 1
[6]Caroline Chan, Shiry Ginosar, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efr os.
Everybody dance now. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07371 , 2018. 1
[7]Angel X. Chang, Thomas A. Funkhouser, Leonidas J. Guibas, Pa t
Hanrahan, Qi-Xing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis
Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, Li Yi, and
Fisher Y u. ShapeNet: An information-rich 3D model reposito ry.
arXiv:1512.03012, 2015. 5
[8]Ting Chen, Mario Lucic, Neil Houlsby, and Sylvain Gelly. On s elf
modulation for generative adversarial networks. In ICLR , 2019. 2
[9] Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya
Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. InfoGAN: Interpretable repr esen-
tation learning by information maximizing generative adve rsarial
nets. In NIPS , pages 2172–2180, 2016. 2,3,5
[10] Emily L Denton and Vighnesh Birodkar. Unsupervised learnin g
of disentangled representations from video. In NIPS , pages
4414–4423, 2017. 3
[11] Hui Ding, Kumar Sricharan, and Rama Chellappa. ExprGAN :
Facial expression editing with controllable expression in tensity.
InAAAI , 2018. 1
[12] Garoe Dorta, Sara Vicente, Neill D. F. Campbell, and Ivor Sim pson.
The GAN that warped: Semantic attribute editing with unpair ed
data. arXiv:1811.12784, 2018. 1
[13] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jost Springenberg, Maxim Tatarchenko , and
Thomas Brox. Learning to generate chairs, tables and cars wi th
convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 39(4):692–705, 2017. 1
[14] S. M. Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Bess e,
Fabio Viola, Ari S. Morcos, Marta Garnelo, Avraham Ruderman ,
Andrei A. Rusu, Ivo Danihelka, Karol Gregor, David P . Reiche rt,
Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Oriol Vinyals, Dan Rosenbau m,
Neil Rabinowitz, Helen King, Chloe Hillier, Matt Botvinick , Daan
Wierstra, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Demis Hassabis. Neural sc ene
representation and rendering. Science , 360(6394):1204–1210,
2018. 1,2,3,8
[15] Jiahao Geng, Tianjia Shao, Y ouyi Zheng, Y anlin Weng, and Kun
Zhou. Warp-guided GANs for single-photo facial animation.
ACM Transactions on Graphics , 37(6):231:1–12, 2018. 2
[16] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu,
David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Y o shua
Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS , pages 2672–2680,
2014. 2
[17] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vince nt
Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. Improved training of
Wasserstein GANs. In NIPS , pages 5767–5777, 2017. 6[18] Paul Henderson and Vittorio Ferrari. Learning to gener ate and
reconstruct 3D meshes with only 2D supervision. In BMVC , 2018. 2
[19] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernh ard
Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. GANs trained by a two time-sca le
update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In NIPS , pages
6626–6637, 2017. 5,6
[20] Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Bur gess,
Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed, and
Alexander Lerchner. β-V AE: Learning basic visual concepts with
a constrained variational framework. In ICLR , 2017. 2,3,6
[21] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in
real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In ICCV , 2017. 4,5
[22] Eldar Insafutdinov and Alexey Dosovitskiy. Unsupervised l earning
of shape and pose with differentiable point clouds. In NeurIPS ,
2018. 2
[23] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros.
Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
InCVPR , pages 5967–5976, 2017. 1
[24] Insu Jeon, Wonkwang Lee, and Gunhee Kim. IB-GAN:
Disentangled representation learning with information bo ttleneck
GAN. https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryljV2A5KX , 2019. 3
[25] Danilo Jimenez Rezende, S. M. Ali Eslami, Shakir Mohame d,
Peter Battaglia, Max Jaderberg, and Nicolas Heess. Unsuper vised
learning of 3D structure from images. In NIPS , pages 4996–5004,
2016. 2
[26] Angjoo Kanazawa, Shubham Tulsiani, Alexei A. Efros, an d
Jitendra Malik. Learning category-specific mesh reconstr uction
from image collections. In ECCV , 2018. 2
[27] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtin en.
Progressive growing of GANs for improved quality, stabilit y, and
variation. In ICLR , 2018. 1,2,8
[28] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based gene rator
architecture for generative adversarial networks. In CVPR , 2019.
1,2,4
[29] Hiroharu Kato, Y oshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. N eural
3D mesh renderer. In CVPR , 2018. 2
[30] Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu ,
Justus Thies, Matthias Nießner, Patrick Pérez, Christian R ichardt,
Michael Zollhöfer, and Christian Theobalt. Deep video port raits.
ACM Transactions on Graphics , 37(4):163:1–14, 2018. 1
[31] Diederik P . Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In ICLR , 2015. 5
[32] Jean Kossaifi, Linh Tran, Yannis Panagakis, and Maja Pa ntic.
GAGAN: Geometry-aware generative adverserial networks. I n
CVPR , 2018. 2
[33] Tejas D Kulkarni, William F. Whitney, Pushmeet Kohli, and Jo sh
Tenenbaum. Deep convolutional inverse graphics network. I n
NIPS , pages 2539–2547, 2015. 1,3
[34] Tzu-Mao Li, Miika Aittala, Fredo Duran, and Jaakko Leht inen.
Differentiable monte carlo ray tracing through edge sampli ng.
ACM Transactions on Graphic , 37(6):162:1–11, 2018. 2
[35] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Dee p
learning face attributes in the wild. In ICCV , 2015. 5
[36] Matthew M. Loper and Michael J. Black. OpenDR: An approx -
imate differentiable renderer. In ECCV , pages 154–169, 2014. 2
[37] Andrew L. Maas, Awni Y . Hannun, and Andrew Y . Ng. Rectifier
nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models. In ICML
Workshops , 2013. 4
[38] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond Y .K. Lau, Zhen
Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley. Least squares generative
adversarial networks. In ICCV , 2017. 6
7596


==== Page 10 ====
[39] Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Y uich i
Y oshida. Spectral normalization for generative adversari al
networks. In ICLR , 2018. 5
[40] Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Stephen Balaban, and Y ongliang
Y ang. RenderNet: A deep convolutional network for differen tiable
rendering from 3D shapes. In NeurIPS , pages 7902–7912, 2018.
1,2,3,4
[41] Eunbyung Park, Jimei Yang, Ersin Y umer, Duygu Ceylan, a nd
Alexander C. Berg. Transformation-grounded image generat ion
network for novel 3D view synthesis. In CVPR , pages 702–711,
2017. 1
[42] Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhan i,
and Thomas V etter. A 3D face model for pose and illumination i n-
variant face recognition. In International Conference on Advanced
Video and Signal Based Surveillance , pages 296–301, 2009. 5
[43] Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Gui bas.
PointNet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point se ts in
a metric space. In NIPS , pages 5099–5108, 2017. 2
[44] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervise d
representation learning with deep convolutional generati ve
adversarial networks. In ICLR , 2016. 4,6
[45] Sai Rajeswar, Fahim Mannan, Florian Golemo, David
V azquez, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Aaron Courville.
Pix2Scene: Learning implicit 3D representations from imag es.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJeem3C9F7 , 2019. 2,3,8
[46] Anurag Ranjan, Timo Bolkart, Soubhik Sanyal, and Micha el J.
Black. Generating 3D faces using convolutional mesh autoen coders.
InECCV , pages 725–741, 2018. 2
[47] Scott Reed, Kihyuk Sohn, Y uting Zhang, and Honglak Lee.
Learning to disentangle factors of variation with manifold
interaction. In ICML , 2014. 3
[48] Helge Rhodin, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. Unsupervis ed
geometry-aware representation for 3D human pose estimatio n. In
ECCV , 2018. 2
[49] Gernot Riegler, Ali Osman Ulusoy, and Andreas Geiger. OctNe t:
Learning deep 3D representations at high resolutions. In CVPR ,
2017. 2
[50] Patsorn Sangkloy, Jingwan Lu, Chen Fang, Fisher Y u, and Jame s
Hays. Scribbler: Controlling deep image synthesis with ske tch
and color. In CVPR , 2017. 1
[51] Vincent Sitzmann, Justus Thies, Felix Heide, Matthias Nießner,
Gordon Wetzstein, and Michael Zollhöfer. DeepV oxels: Lear ning
persistent 3D feature embeddings. In CVPR , 2019. 2
[52] Shao-Hua Sun, Minyoung Huh, Y uan-Hong Liao, Ning Zhang, and
Joseph J. Lim. Multi-view to novel view: Synthesizing novel views
with self-learned confidence. In ECCV , pages 162–178, 2018. 1
[53] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Y angqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott
Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent V anhoucke ,
and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
CVPR , 2015. 5
[54] Maxim Tatarchenko, Alexei Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Bro x.
Multi-view 3D models from single images with a convolutiona l
network. In ECCV , 2016. 1
[55] Luan Tran, Xi Yin, and Xiaoming Liu. Representation lea rning
by rotating your faces. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 2018. 3,4
[56] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea V edaldi, and Victor S. Lempitsk y.
Improved texture networks: Maximizing quality and diversi ty in
feed-forward stylization and texture synthesis. In CVPR , 2017. 5[57] Xinchen Yan, Jimei Y ang, Ersin Y umer, Yijie Guo, and Honglak
Lee. Perspective transformer nets: Learning single-view 3 D object
reconstruction without 3D supervision. In NIPS , pages 1696–1704,
2016. 1
[58] Linjie Yang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang.
A large-scale car dataset for fine-grained categorization and
verification. In CVPR , pages 3973–3981, 2015. 5
[59] Fisher Y u, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Ari Seff, and Jianx iong
Xiao. LSUN: Construction of a large-scale image dataset usi ng
deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv:1506.03365, 20 15.5
[60] Gang Zhang, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen.
Generative adversarial network with spatial attention for face
attribute editing. In ECCV , 2018. 1
[61] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaoga ng
Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris Metaxas. StackGAN: Text t o
photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative a dversarial
networks. In ICCV , 2017. 2
[62] Han Zhang, Ian Goodfellow, Dimitris Metaxas, and Augus tus
Odena. Self-attention generative adversarial networks. I nICML ,
pages 7354–7363, 2019. 1,2
[63] Weiwei Zhang, Jian Sun, and Xiaoou Tang. Cat head detect ion
– how to effectively exploit shape and texture features. In ECCV ,
2008. 5
[64] Jun-Yan Zhu, Zhoutong Zhang, Chengkai Zhang, Jiajun Wu ,
Antonio Torralba, Josh Tenenbaum, and Bill Freeman. Visual
object networks: Image generation with disentangled 3D
representations. In NeurIPS , pages 118–129, 2018. 1,2,4,6
7597


