==== Page 1 ====
09 February 2025
 
Alma Mater Studiorum Università di Bologna
Archivio istituzionale della ricerca
Prati E.,  Peruzzini M.,  Pellicciari M.,  Raffaeli R. (2021). How to include User eXperience in the design of
Human-Robot Interaction. ROBOTICS AND COMPUTER-INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING, 68, 1-14
[10.1016/j.rcim.2020.102072].Published Version:How to include User eXperience in the design of Human-Robot Interaction
Published:
DOI: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2020.102072
Terms of use:
(Article begins on next page)Some rights reserved. The terms and conditions for the reuse of this version of the manuscript are
specified in the publishing policy. For all terms of use and more information see the publisher's website.Availability:
This version is available at: https://hdl.handle.net/11585/949558 since: 2024-02-09This is the final peer-reviewed author’s accepted manuscript (postprint) of the following publication:
This item was downloaded from IRIS Università di Bologna (https://cris.unibo.it/).
When citing, please refer to the published version.

==== Page 2 ====
This item was downloaded from IRIS Università di Bol ogna ( https://cris.unibo.it/ ) 
When citing, please refer to the published version.  
  
 
 
 
This is the final peer -reviewed accepted manuscript of:  
 
 
 
Elisa Prati, Margherita Peruzzini, Marcello Pellicciari, Roberto Raffaeli,  How to 
include User eXperience in the design of Human -Robot Interaction,  Robotics and 
Computer -Integrated Manufacturing,  Volume 68,  2021,  102072,  ISSN 0736- 5845.  
The final published version is available online at:  
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2020.102072  
 
Terms of use : 
Some rights reserved.  The terms and conditions for the reuse of this version of the manuscript are 
specified in the publishing policy. For all terms of use and more information see the publisher's 
website.   
 

==== Page 3 ====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rcim 
Proof
How to include User eXperience in the design of Human-Robot Interaction 
Elisa Pratia, Margherita Peruzzinia,⁎, Marcello Pellicciarib, Roberto Raffaelib
a Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy 
b Department of Sciences and Methods for Engineering, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy  
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords: 
Human-Robot Collaboration 
Human-Robot Interaction 
Industrial Ergonomics 
User eXperience Human Factors ABSTRACT
In recent years Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) has become a strategic research field, considering the 
emergent need for common collaborative execution of manufacturing tasks, shared between humans and robots within the modern factories. However, the majority of the research focuses on the technological aspects and 
enabling technologies, mainly directing to the robotic side, and usually neglecting the human factors. This work 
deals with including the needs of the humans interacting with robots in the design in human-robot interaction (HRI). In particular, the paper proposes a user experience (UX)-oriented structured method to investigate the 
human-robot dialogue to map the interaction with robots during the execution of shared tasks, and to finally 
elicit the requirements for the design of valuable HRI. The research adopted the proposed method to an in
-
dustrial case focused on assembly operations supported by collaborative robots and AGVs (Automated Guided 
Vehicles). A multidisciplinary team was created to map the HRI for the specific case with the final aim to define 
the requirements for the design of the system interfaces. The novelty of the proposed approach is the inclusion of typically interaction design tools focusing in the analysis of the UX into the design of the system components, without merely focusing on the technological issues. Experimental results highlighted the validity of the pro
-
posed method to identify the interaction needs and to drive the interface design.   
1. Introduction
In 
the context of Industry 4.0 (I4.0), machines are becoming “in -
telligent” and more and more robots are being added to the workforce 
to improve the process quality and productivity. In fact, robots re -
present one of the nine pillars of I4.0 [1]. 
However, humans are still 
necessary to guarantee high process flexibility and to proactively re -
spond to the evolving market needs and to ever-increasing requests for product customization. In this context, smart factories need not only 
robots but also a strong collaboration between robots and humans. 
Based on this, the so-called Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) is one of 
the main topics of research for the new smart factory. Indeed, in 
modern smart factories humans and robots have to coexist in a common 
workplace: robots can complement the humans’ sensory, physical and 
cognitive characteristics, while humans can take care about the more 
delicate and cognitive tasks. Moreover, robots should be designed to 
properly assist human workers in performing a certain task in order to 
obtain greater efficiency and effectiveness. 
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has emerged as a specific research 
field during the early 1990s. It is based on understanding, designing, 
and evaluating robotic systems for use by or with humans, to finally 
understand and shape the interactions between one or more humans and one or more robots, as defined by Goodrich and Schultz in [2]. 
 HRI 
is also the science of studying how people interact with robots, focusing on their behaviour and attitudes towards robots in relationship to the 
physical, technological and interactive features of the robots [3]. In a 
nutshell, the final aim of HRI is to develop not only time efficient ro
-
bots, but also robots acceptable to people, able to meet the social and 
emotional needs of their individual users as well as respecting human 
values. For this purpose, HRI covers several research areas such as 
engineering, technology, psychology, design, anthropology, sociology, 
philosophy [4,43
]. All these disciplines are important to develop a 
successful human-robot interaction, considering the technological lim -
itations and respecting the humans’ needs. Each discipline faces the 
topic in a different way and analyzes different aspects of the human- 
robot interaction. 
Nowadays, interaction and collaboration between humans and ro -
bots are open issues in any application context (from industry to 
healthcare, surgery, urban search and rescue, defense, until personal 
services), but particularly in the manufacturing area. Indeed, there are 
numerous advantages linked to the evolution of manufacturing pro -
cesses with the introduction of robots and the collaboration with hu -
mans. The first reason to include robots in manufacturing is to lighten human physical and cognitive efforts. For this purpose, the operator's 
⁎Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: margherita.peruzzini@unimore.it (M. Peruzzini).Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing xx (20xx) xxxxxxx
T

==== Page 4 ====
activities should be re-organized in order to assign more cognitive and 
control tasks to humans, and to assign repetitive tasks and all opera -
tions that require greater accuracy, speed and repeatability to robots  [5]. 
Roughly 
speaking, most of the industrial and scientific research on 
HRI and HRC is today strongly “robot-centered”, focusing mainly on 
technical issues and technological solutions, without reasoning on the 
human perspective. Some works deal with the technical design of 
specific collaborative robots’ applications [6], or of physical compo -
nents of the robot to allow visual communication [7], 
others on new 
intelligent programming methods (e.g. walk-through programming [8], 
programming by demonstration [7]). Human safety is often taken into 
consideration, mainly facing the issues linked to the human-robot co -
existence in a cell [9]. 
Moreover, a recent study concerns how to adapt 
the robot's behavior to lighten the burden on the operator and to 
comply to his/her needs [10]. 
Conversely, this research focuses on the human side of human-robot 
collaboration and put the humans at the center of the human-robot 
system design, according to the Human-Centered Design (HCD) ap -
proach. Regardless of the specific task performed, robots are designed 
to support humans. Thus, it is not possible speaking of robots without 
considering them in relation with humans. As a consequence, Human 
Factors should be taken into consideration throughout the in human- 
robot interaction design process. The adoption of the human's point of 
view allows to foresee the user's needs, behavior and sensations during 
the interaction with robots, with the final aim to build up a solid 
knowledge about the user to design a better user experience. 
The paper adopts a human-centred approach and presents a struc -
tured methodology for the design of the HRI, primarily focused on the 
detailed knowledge of the communication exchange between humans 
and robots. The first aim of this research is to demonstrate how a 
human-centered design approach can be effectively applied on HRI. 
Moreover, this research aims to identify a set of guidelines for the de -
sign of human-robot interfaces, with particular attention for the man -
ufacturing sector. 
2.
Related works
2.1. 
HRI in manufacturing
Collaboration 
between humans and robots includes interaction and 
all related actions that create a direct communication flow and a 
common understanding between humans and robots, jointly per -
forming a certain task. It is defined also as a state where human beings (operators or simple users) cooperate with purposely designed robots to 
work together within a defined workspace. In particular, Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI) is a general term to refer to all forms of interaction 
between human and robot [11]. 
As a consequence, Human-Robot Col -
laboration (HRC) can be considered as a subcategory of HRI, as it takes 
place into a specific collaborative workspace, as the space within the 
operating space where robots and humans can perform tasks con -
currently. According to Thrun, collaborative robotic technologies can 
be grouped into three main categories: industrial robotics, professional 
service robotics, and personal service robotics [12]. 
In contrast to robot 
manipulators, which are mainly passive and do not employ sensors and actuators, collaborative robotics is made up of flexible and “intelligent” 
devices to allow a direct interaction with the user, creating a sort of 
“dialogue” with him/her to support the human activity using different 
kind of technologies (e.g. sensors, actuators and data processing) [13]. 
HRI is today applied in many contexts, from industry to healthcare, 
defense, until personal services. In particular, the manufacturing con
-
text offers many situations of co-presence of humans with robots. The 
relationship of humans and robots in a shared work environment is a 
many-faceted phenomenon which is classified according to a number of 
different viewpoints, also according to the specific context of applica -
tion. As far as industrial applications are concerned, four criteria can be defined for decomposing human-robot interactions, according to [14]: 
workspace, working time, aim, and contact. The workspace could be 
collocated or non-collocated as the working time could be synchronous 
or asynchronous [9,15]. In the same way, also the aim of operator and 
robot can be shared or not, and contact between humans and robots can 
take place or not [15]. The classification of the human-robot relation -
ship can also consider other parameters such as shared resources (i.e. 
physical, cognitive or computational) and the presence of multiple ro -
bots and humans, considering also their respective role [16]. On this 
basis, numerous combinations of the human and robotic agents are 
possible. The highest level is the so-called symbiotic collaboration, 
which takes place when human and robots coexist in a physical space to 
interact with each other so as to solve hard tasks requiring a significant 
mental and computational effort [16]. 
On the basis of the above-mentioned criteria, HRI has been classi -
fied into three areas, adapted from [14]:    
-
Human-Robot Coexistence (common workspace and time, se -
quential tasks on common resources or simultaneous tasks on
different 
resources between humans and robots);
-
Human-Robot Cooperation (common workspace, time and shared
aim, 
tasks can be sequential or simultaneous on same resources
without 
a direct contact);
-
Human-Robot Collaboration (common workspace, time, for a
shared 
aim, tasks can be sequential or simultaneous on same re -
sources with a direct physical contact).
This 
classification is valid also in those contexts where multiple 
humans or multiple robots are involved. 
As a consequence, the substantial difference of HRC with respect to 
HRI is the sharing a common goal and having a direct contact. It implies 
that humans and robots have to share their skills to solve a specific task, in a collaborative way. The ISO 10218-1 defines Collaborative Robots 
as robots designed to physically interactions with humans in a shared 
workspace [17]. 
The potential of HRC is the combination of the robot 
features (e.g. adaptability, accuracy, speed) with the properties of the 
human cognitive skills (e.g. problem solving). To facilitate this colla -
boration, humans has to work and interact with the robot safely. Fur -
thermore, the robot must adapt to the human behavior and foresee the 
humans’ needs. 
In any cases, collaboration implies a deeper interaction between 
humans and robots. In this context, interfaces play a central role, as the 
main communication channel between the two entities involved (i.e., 
humans and robots). A key aspect in collaboration is interaction. 
Talking about interactions also means talking about interfaces. A high- 
quality Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) requires intuitive user inter -
faces. On one hand, the operator can give to robot inputs in a simple way, without any distraction from his/her main task; on the other hand, 
the robot provides clearer information to the user, generating an im
-
mediate comprehension and data interpretation. Adopting intuitive interfaces becomes even more important in the case of a close colla
-
boration between robots and humans. In a HRC scenario, humans and robots combine their respective skills to carry out a common task in the 
most efficient and effective way. Based on this, the human-robot com
-
munication should be natural and spontaneous as between humans. For 
this purpose, a detailed knowledge on human-centred interface design 
is required. 
Interfaces can, indeed, generate different kind of communication: 
from graphical language to voice-based communication, until gesture- 
based dialogue. Also, the types of interfaces consequently change. For 
instance, graphical communication can take place either using specific 
devices (e.g., monitor, touchscreen), while voice-based communication 
can use Natural Language Interfaces (NLI) and gesture-based commu -
nication can use proper cameras to track the human's hands [8]. 
Ac-
cording to the communication typology, human-robot interfaces can be E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
2

==== Page 5 ====
classified into four main categories [18]:  
-
Visual displays (e.g. graphical user interfaces, augmented reality
interfaces);
-
Gestures (e.g. hand and facial movements);
-
Speech and natural language (e.g. auditory speech and text-based
responses);
-
Physical and haptics interactions.
Such 
interfaces can be also related to the level of interaction pro -
vided. In particular, the first level of interaction (coexistence) can be 
usually satisfied by graphical interfaces. The second level of interaction 
(cooperation) usually requires more advanced interfaces, such as 
speech and gesture interfaces. Finally, the third level of interaction 
(collaboration) can require also a direct physical or haptic interaction in 
order to be effective and natural at the same time. Fig. 1 shows the 
framework to classify Human-Robot Interaction, considering the three 
levels of interaction and the relations to different interface types. 
As far as interfaces is concerned, the industrial sector is actually 
more inclined to use visual interfaces. This is probably due to the 
multiplicity of information options provided to the robot and, conse -
quently, the variety of feedbacks received from the robot. Moreover, 
they simply offer a clear and unequivocal representation of the work 
status to the operator. Natural language interfaces have been poorly 
investigated in industrial context, while they have been already applied 
for interaction with social robots, such as facial expressions, gaze 
tracking, proxemics and kinesics, haptic [8]. In some cases, a multi -
modal interface may be useful. For example, a natural interface can be 
used for simpler or more frequent communications, while a visual in -
terface is reserved for complex and less frequent information exchange. Moreover, interfaces should be intuitive so as not to hinder the human 
work. This means that the interface must be highly usable even by 
novices and people without a particular knowledge on the use of the 
technology. For this purpose, human-robot interfaces should allow easy 
situation control, intuitive giving commands, and clear understanding 
of feedback sent by robots. 2.2. Human Factors for the study of HRI 
From the analysis of the literature review, the research about in
-
dustrial HRI and HRC poorly includes a human-centred approach so far. 
It can be stated that human factors have been included mainly by fo -
cusing on safety, such as the lightening the burden of work. For this reason, the majority of the researchers focused on developing tech
-
nologies that allow a side by side interaction between robots and hu -
mans, to facilitate their work, without a real, close collaboration be -
tween them. A specific line of research about interface is directed 
towards gesture recognition [19] and gesture data set identification  
[20] for 
human-robot communication. Another recent line of research
is 
about affective robotics to study the adaptation of robot behavior
according 
to the operator's cognitive workload, detected by monitoring
the 
human physiological parameters (e.g. electrodermal activity, eye
gaze, 
facial expression) [21,22]. For instance, [23] proposes to re -
cognize the user's heart rate (index of stress, anxiety or fear) using a
smartwatch 
and consequently to adapt the level of robot's autonomy. In
addition, 
Virtual Reality (VR) technology can be used to simulate the
HRI 
scenario during the design phase thanks to the development of a
digital 
twin. Recent studies propose to use VR to verify the effectiveness
of 
the human-robot collaboration [24] or to perform virtual user
testing, 
avoiding dangerous situations [25].
Actually, 
collaborative robots that work alongside humans without 
a fence must respect the ISO safety standards [13,17,26]: these stan -
dards establish a set of precise rules about the robot behavior, like the 
reduction of the speed and the power, based on the distance of the 
operator from the robot. Based on these standards, collaborative robots 
are classified into: Safety Monitored Stop (SMS), Hand Guiding (HG), 
Speed and Separation, Monitoring (SSM), Power and Force Limiting 
(PFL) [27]. However, such standards do not focus on interfaces, that are 
the item that allows the communication and the development of a common understanding between humans and robots. 
As far as interfaces, adopting a Human Factor perspective is ne
-
cessary to design the most proper communication strategies in order to 
allow an intuitive and effective cooperation and collaboration between 
Fig. 1. Framework to classify Human-Robot Interaction: levels of interaction and relations to different interface types  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
3

==== Page 6 ====
humans and robots. Authors suggest to apply three different views in 
industrial HRI, similarly to the model proposed in social robots field  
[28], in particular:  
-
Robot-centred view,
-
Robot cognition-centred view,
-
Human-centred view.
Merging 
the human-centred view with the traditional robot-centred
views 
means including human factors and main principles from Human- 
Computer Interactions (HCI) and Human-Machine Interaction (HMI) to 
this specific context, as traditionally human-centred disciplines. Indeed, 
HRC research cannot focus on technological development without in -
vestigating if the result will be good for the human interaction. As 
stated by the International Ergonomics Associations (IEA), human fac -
tors “encompasses not only physical safety and health, but also the 
cognitive and psychosocial aspects of living and working” [3]. 
As a 
consequence, strengthening the inclusion of human factors in HRI 
should allow reducing both physical fatigue and cognitive effort. In 
fact, cognitive factors, including topics such as communication and 
perception, can greatly benefits HRI in general, and manufacturing 
applications in particular [29]. A key aspect for successful HRI is fo -
cusing on the User eXperience (UX), defined by ISO as “a person's perceptions and responses that result from the use or anticipated use of 
a product, system or service" [30]. 
In this context, research on social 
robots has recently recognized the role of UX design to ensure a positive 
interaction. Indeed, a negative experience could prevent taking ad -
vantage from the robots' features or worse from refusing interaction 
with them [31]. 
Only the accurate study of UX from the early design 
stage can ensure an acceptable and pleasant human-robot interaction, able to improve also efficiency and effectiveness of interaction. An 
example of social features applied to industrial robots is Baxter by 
Rethink Robotics. It has a screen on which "his eyes" are displayed and these give humans the impression of being able to create eye contact 
with the robot and to create a natural communication channel. 
About the inclusion of UX in robotics, four trends about the UX 
consideration during the design of socially interactive robots (from 
level 1 with high consideration, to level 4 low consideration have been 
pointed out [32]. Up to now, the UX consideration level in the in
-
dustrial robot design may be placed at the third level, due to the fre -
quent omission of UX aspects in favour of robot-related aspects. How -
ever, considering the way the operator interacts with the robot and understanding his/her UX is hard, especially in the industrial sector [8]. 
In 
order to overcome this issue, a structured human-centred approach 
has to be adopted to support designers to solve the technical questions 
looking at the user's needs and abilities, using UX-based techniques. 
According to UX principles, the quality of interaction can be mea -
sured by mainly evaluating the use of interfaces and the input/output 
information exchange between the human user, the interface, and the 
robot. One of the most common tools in UX is usability assessment, 
widely adopted to assess the quality of interaction with any interactive 
systems. It considers three indicators (i.e., effectiveness, efficiency and 
satisfaction) and proper metrics (e.g., execution time, errors, informa -
tion request) to measure the user performance [32]. 
However, there are 
no specific standard techniques for assessing the human-robot interac -
tion [33], 
even though they are strongly expected tin many studies  
[34]. 
In this context, an in-depth picture of interface evaluation methods 
is provided by [35]. In HRI evaluation, two types on methodologies can 
be defined: the first type of methods looks more at the robot perfor -
mance and behavior, while the second type on the user's feels. User 
testing should be performed under the actual conditions of use, there -
fore involving end-users, performing real tasks in the real use scenario. 
In case of tests on prototypes, it is recommended to recreate the op -
erative context as likely as possible: conditions have to be replicated as 
much as possible, only the type of data to collect will change. Some examples can be found in the recent literature. An interesting approach 
has been presented by Steinfeld et al. [33] that assess HRI considering 
human and robot as a team and studying how they effectively accom -
plish a task. They consider also the system in its complexity, not only 
humans and robots, and anything that can affect the task performance 
(e.g. communication delay, robot update rate, human personnel fac -
tors). Diversely, Olsen et al. [36] addressed HRI considering the au -
tonomy of the robot to understand how much the user attention is re -
quired. Moreover, Crandall et al. [35] try to understand how many 
robots the operator can manage. 
Other set of evaluation techniques investigates more closely the 
user's behavior and perception. According to Lindblom and Andreasson  
[31], 
useful evaluation techniques could derive from HCI field and 
could be adapted to HRI. For example, usability tests can be mainly 
divided into quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative tests do not give 
indications on how to solve usability problems but carry out measure -
ments (e.g. execution time, number of errors, number of tasks com -
pleted) therefore allow to collect data. These data can be collected 
during the observation of users while performing a specific task. These 
tests can be more useful for example to compare two types of interface. 
Quantitative methods also include questionnaires. The questionnaires 
are useful for gathering a large number of opinions in a short time, as 
well as being adaptable to multiple application areas. More specifically, 
Bartneck et al. developed five questionnaires to measure the users' 
perception of social robots [34]. 
Among these, the "Perceived safety" 
questionnaire could also be taken as a reference in the manufacturing 
sector. 
In addition, physiological measurements represent another group of 
objective measurement tool. These techniques allow to investigate in 
real time the level of cognitive load and stress of the operator during the 
interaction. Among quantitative techniques, there is the monitoring of 
human parameters, such as the measurement of the heart rate (HV), the 
breathing rate (RBR) or pupil dilation (PD). Examples of adoption of these tools in manufacturing is provided by [37]. A different approach 
is used in qualitative tests, which aim to collect useful insights to im
-
prove interaction, using user observation or interview. In this way, the 
expert can collect data about the interaction modalities, user experi -
ence, and his/her perception and feelings. Qualitative tests are usually performed on fewer participants, since they require more time and 
more active user participation. 
From the analysis of the existing literature, researchers seem to be 
aware that the introduction of robots significantly affect the human 
work. However, the approach to HRI design does not seem to take it 
into consideration yet. Especially in the manufacturing sector, the in
-
troduction of robots into industries is not just a replacement of previous 
machinery. Moreover, the introduction of robots introduces a sub -
stantial change in human behaviors. For this reason, there is the need to 
develop a structured methodology that allows to face a HRI project 
starting from the analysis of human needs and requirements, according 
to a human-centred approach. It means designing having clear from the 
beginning the operator's needs in terms of communication and in -
formation exchange with the robot. Only in this way, also complex 
industrial projects can succeed, achieving all the potential benefits. 
3.
The research methodology
3.1. 
The UX-based approach
The 
proposed approach is aimed at introducing a set of UX techni -
ques to support the design of human-robot interface to build up HRI- 
HRC applications. Indeed, UX is often taken for granted but, contrarily, 
a positive UX has to be systematically designed [29]. 
According to the 
human-centered approach, end-users should be involved in the whole design process, from the first research stage until the final evaluation. 
The first step to proceed with a UX approach is the creation of a 
multidisciplinary team. Such a method can guarantee a proper E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
4

==== Page 7 ====
information sharing and combination of knowledge from different 
disciplines in order to detail the usage scenario and have a clear view 
on the final result. Specifically, teamwork allows an easier identifica -
tion of the human-robot information exchange in terms of: information typology, physical location, frequency and temporal location, and en
-
vironment of interaction. Besides, it would provide a shared metho -
dology for the analysis of all case studies. 
After that, the user is put on the center of the design process during 
the so-called “user understanding” phase [38]. 
It consists of a deep, 
accurate user analysis based on context research and user analysis, to be carried out in a more or less invasive way. The main UX techniques 
adopted for user understanding are: user observation, focus group and 
interview [39]. User observations is frequently used for the context 
analysis and preliminary user analysis, since it allows to observe user in 
their natural environment without affecting their normal behaviours 
and performance. Diversely, focus groups and interviews provide a 
more active participation of the user to collect, in different ways, 
qualitative data about user needs, expectations or fears. Usually per
-
sonas and usage scenarios are defined to represent the results of the analysis. 
In addition, different kinds of mapping tools can be used in UX 
design to describe various aspects of interaction and processes asso
-
ciated. In particular, task analysis allows to define the steps that the user must take in order to complete a goal. In case of collaborative 
tasks, it can depict the actions taken by the different users (or some 
systems/robots) to help them achieve their goals. It is useful to have a 
unique overview of the process activities and to review the all process, 
minimizing the number of actions that a user has to undertake, ana
-
lyzing the information exchange or eliminating unnecessary steps. Also, link analysis can be useful to evaluate relationships and connections 
between users and systems efficiently in a graphical way. Link analysis 
has been used for user investigation in different field, from criminal 
activity to computer security analysis, 
until market research [40]. 
Moreover, other techniques can be adopted to graphically represent the 
results of the user analysis [39]. Hereafter some examples are provided  
[41]. Empathy maps show the user's perspective regarding the tasks and are frequently used to articulate the knowledge about a particular type 
of user, helping the design team to understand the user's mindset. They 
graphically externalize the user knowledge in order to create a shared 
understanding and to support decision-making. Journey maps focus on 
a specific customer's interaction with a product or service, visualizing 
the process that a user goes through in order to accomplish a task. They 
are generally used for understanding and addressing customer/user 
needs and pain points. Finally, service blueprints are counterparts to 
customer journey maps, focused on the employees. They visualize the 
relationships between different service or process components (in
-
cluding people, machines, any physical or digital evidence), reflecting 
on the organization's perspective with a particular focus on the service 
provider and employees. The UX-based workflow is schematized in  
Fig. 2. 
When 
the design is completed, users are involved in the project 
evaluation phase to test the real efficiency, effectiveness and satisfac -
tion during the use of the final design. In this phase, the involvement of end-users can highlight if there are aspects that had not been con
-
sidered by the design team. A powerful mean for solution prototype and user testing is represented by the use of Virtual Reality (VR) simula
-
tions. Indeed, VR environments enable to directly involve users in task simulation and test the UX about layout, coordination of activities, and 
interactions with robots or other actors involved. 
This research focuses on industrial applications, with particular at
-
tention for the manufacturing sector. In this sector, the potential use 
cases are almost unlimited thanks to the extreme adaptability of robots 
and the large number of applications that can include both humans and 
robot, collaborating and cooperating. For this reason, the proposed 
approach is general-purposes and largely adaptable to different cases. 
Each use case will than adapt the proposed method to its specific particularities and scopes. 
3.2. The UX-based specific tools 
According to the proposed approach, the research selected a set of 
UX specific tools to support the human-robot interface design. The 
adopted tools are as follows:  
-
User analysis (observation, focus groups, interview);
-
Task analysis;
-
User/Task Matrix (new tool);
-
Experience Maps (new tool).
These 
tools allow to carry about a robust, human-centred user re -
quirement analysis, that is the main issue to guarantee a good UX de -
sign. After that, the design phase will define the main features of both robots and workplace. The use of prototypes is useful to check if the 
solution identified is the right one. Also in this phase, it is possible to 
involve users to collect their opinions and first impressions. This will 
make it easier to solve some problems encountered. 
A HRI design flow has been defined according to a UX-based 
workflow. It is made up of 4 steps as follows:  
1.
Requirement gathering:
1.1
Creation of a multidisciplinary team (e.g. involving system en -
gineers, IT engineers, User Interface and UX designers, system
developers, 
system integrators);
1.2 
User analysis (using observations, focus groups and interviews);
1.3 
Activity analysis (using task analysis);
1.4 
Interaction visualization (using User/Task Matrix and
Experience 
Maps);  
2.
Interface Design;
3. Prototyping;
4.
UX assessment (based on user testing).
Like 
all design cycles, the process may be nonlinear but rather
iterative, 
requiring many cycles through the process. 
The main novelty is the introduction of typical UX-based tools in the 
requirement gathering phase, to focus on human factors. In particular, 
interaction analysis and visualization represent the key-points of the 
entire process. Experience maps generalize the concept of customer- 
journey maps across different user types and products. They represent a 
synthetic visualization of an entire end-to-end experience that a “gen -
eric” user goes through in order to accomplish a certain goal. They are used for understanding a general human behavior, as opposed to 
journey maps that are more specific and focused on related to a specific 
business. This tool is better presented hereafter. 
The User/Task Matrix is used to synthesize all information about 
users and tasks, and operational conditions into a table. An example of 
its structured is shown in Fig. 3. 
The matrix organization, indeed, al -
lows to collect a set of information and data into a structured way, to clearly describe the process interaction and to easily compare different 
scenarios. In particular, the Matrix contains all the necessary data to 
guide the choice of the interface type, which is largely influenced by 
multiple aspects [42]. 
First of all, the Matrix considers the tasks to be 
performed, their temporal sequence and the temporal relations among 
different activities. Secondly, it maps who performs the different ac -
tions (e.g., operator, robots). Thirdly, it describes the specific working 
conditions, such as environmental conditions (e.g., noisy, small, dusty) 
or the use of personal equipment (e.g., gloves, goggles, helmet). This 
information is useful to guide the choice of the most proper interface, 
excluding or preferring some types of interfaces to others. Once these 
factors have been clarified, information about the actors involved are 
collected. Finally, also the situations in which errors occur and how to 
solve them can be useful to design the interface. For example, under 
normal conditions, human-robot communications could be limited to E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
5

==== Page 8 ====
simple feedback through the use of lights, but in case of problematic 
situations, the user may have to view the data, therefore a graphical 
interface would be more suitable. Such a model considers the interac -
tions in term of information exchange from the user perspective, like commands given by the user or feedback received from the robot. It 
does not take into account physical interactions (e.g. hand-guiding) or emotional aspects. 
Fig. 3 shows the template for the User/Task Matrix proposed in this 
study. On the rows, the tasks are listed, directly taken from the task 
analysis. On the columns, the Matrix considers the following items:  
-
Tasks (e.g., cycle tasks, monitoring/control tasks, and any activity
Fig. 2. The UX design workflow as proposed for HRI  
Fig. 3. Template for User/Task Matrix to study HRI as proposed in the research  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
6

==== Page 9 ====
carried out from operator/s or robot/s);
-
Actors (e.g., operator/s, robot/s)
-
Communication between the actors involved (e.g., operator to
robot, 
robot to operator, operator to operator);
-
Cycle time (expressed in seconds);
-
Critical situations and possible solutions (e.g., difficulties or trouble
situations, 
possible solutions and interventions by the operator);
-
Working conditions (e.g., related to the environment and related to
the operator/s).
The 
User/Task Matrix synthetically describes the interaction and
supports 
designers in the definition of the most proper interfaces. This 
tool should be dynamic: it should be compiled by the multidisciplinary 
team at the beginning of the design process, and regularly updated as 
the project continues, with an increasing level of detail as soon as the 
interaction scenario becomes more defined. 
In order to fill in the matrix correctly, some recommendations are 
proposed to stimulate a proper reflection on the above-mentioned 
items:  
•Tasks and Duration: it provides a list of the tasks, differentiating
between 
cycle or monitoring/control activities, and the chron -
ological order of each of them;
•Actors: it associates each task to the actor/s performing the specific
action;
•Communications: it refers to the individual tasks, think about the
specific 
type of input or feedback that the operator should give to
the 
robot or vice versa, in different moments (before, during and
after 
task execution). Some guiding questions:
-
What information or command must the operator provide to the
robot?
-
What information and feedback must the robot provide to the
operator 
(e.g. completion of activities)?
-
Cam fast commands be useful for the operator to dialogue with the
robot 
/ s (e.g. stop, slow down)?
-
What inputs might the operator need to provide in case of error /
problem?
•Cycle time: it indicates the duration of each task (e.g., in seconds)
and 
reports at least 2 activity cycles to understand the succession of
production cycles.
•Critical situations and possible solutions: for each activity, it pro -
vides a list of possible difficulties and predicts the critical situations
that 
could arise (e.g., lack of material, difficulty of the operator in
carrying 
out his task, low control on the process). Some guiding
questions:-
Does the operator encounter difficulties in carrying out his tasks?
What 
are his/her needs?
-
What critical situations could arise?
-
How should the operator intervene to solve the problem? What
does 
he/she need (e.g. instructions, data, specific information)?
•Working conditions: for each task, it indicates the specific en -
vironmental conditions (e.g., if the environment is noisy, restricted
or 
with dust) and indicate whether the operator wears personal
protective 
equipment (e.g., gloves, helmet, glasses).
4.
Experimental validation on industrial cases
A 
set of industrial use cases have been identified to validate the
proposed 
method. They have been developed within an Italian Research 
project in the field of Smart Factories. In particular, the paper describes 
the experimental results obtained on one use case, focusing on the as -
sembly of two counter-rotating shafts by a collaborative robot and an oil pump on a crankcase by a human operator, both supported by two 
AGVs (Automated Guided Vehicles). Such use case is quite complex 
since it involves different actors (e.g., human operator, collaborative 
robots and AGVs). Each actor has a specific role and must be coordinated with the others. In fact, both human-robot and robot-robot collaboration take place. Furthermore, the use case is a valuable ex
-
ample of how the human-robot communication is fundamental for a broad reasoning on interface design. 
4.1. Use case analysis 
The use case described in the paper considers five different actors:  
-
1 human operator;
-
2 collaborative robots, in particular anthropomorphic robots (re -
spectively a KUKA robot and a FRANKA robot);  
-
2 AGV lines (each line is considered as an actor).
More 
specifically, AGVs operate on two lines: the Kit Line and the
Motor 
Line. On the Kit Line the AGVs move on-bound and transport the 
assembly components (i.e., counter-rotating shafts, oil pump, and ne -
cessary small parts). These AGVs make two stops (firstly on position A 
and secondly on position C) to allow the picking of the components. 
Each AGV working on this line is defined as Kit AGV. On the Motor 
Line, the AGVs carry the crankcase and move in the opposite direction. 
These AGVs make two stops (firstly on position C and secondly on 
position A) to allow the placing of the components. The human operator 
stays on position A and performs the double task of inspecting the kit 
transported by the AGVs, and then picking up and positioning the oil 
pump on the crankcase (positioned on an AGV of the motor line). Each 
AGV working on this line is defined as Motor AGV. 
One of the two collaborative robots (R1) moves on a linear rail 
(from position C to position B) for continuously assembling the two 
counter-rotating shafts (one for discharge and another for suction) on 
the crankcase (positioned on an AGV of the Motor Line). Instead, the 
second robot (R2) remains fixed in position C to pick the two counter- 
rotating shafts from the AGV on the Kit Line and pass them to robot R1.  
Fig. 4 shows the use case actors and work cell layout. 
Task Analysis allowed to study the process activities and to analyze 
the interactions on the three positions (A, B and C). A consequence, 
operations can be described also with respect to the place where they 
take place (A, B and C) as follows:  
•Position A:
-
Kit AGV operating on the Kit Line stops (first stop);
-
Motor AGV stops (second stop);
-
Operator checks the assembly components, picks up the oil pump
and 
positions it properly on the crankcase, located on the Motor
AGV;
•Position B:
-
Robot R1 completes the placing of the second counter-rotating
shaft 
while it's moving in parallel with the Motor AGV;
Fig. 4. The use case actors and work cell layout  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
7

==== Page 10 ====
•Position C:
-
Kit AGV stops (second stop);
-
Robot R2 picks the two counter-rotating shafts up and passes them
to 
Robot R1;
-
Motor AGV stops (first stop);
-
Robot R1 places the first counter-rotating shaft of the crankcase,
located 
on the Motor AGV.
4.2. 
Results and discussion 
As a result of the UX-based analysis, the User/Task Matrix was 
completed and the Experience Map was defined to fully describe the 
interaction. 
About the User/Task Matrix, all tasks performed in the cycle were 
related to the actors (i.e., operator, Robot R1, Robot R2, Kit AGV, Motor 
AGV) and were reported in a temporal sequence. Such preliminary 
analysis was initially useful to clearly recognize that some tasks occur 
simultaneously and to understand with actors are involved in each 
specific task. Moreover, all the information related to the interaction 
modalities, communication needs, and working conditions were col -
lected and formalized. The main tasks analyzed are listed below, in -
dicating the position where they take place:     
-
Kit AGV: Move to the first stop (A);
-
Operator: Control of the two counter-rotating shafts, the oil pump
and 
the assembly components (A);
-
Operator: Pick-up the screws and the oil pump (A)
-
Kit AGV: Move to pick-up location (C)
-
Robot R2: Pick-up the first counter-rotating shaft from Kit AGV
and 
positioning in exchange area for transfer with Robot R1 (C)
-
Motor AGV: Move to the first stop (C)
-
Robot R1: Move to the exchange area for picking up the first
counter-rotating 
shaft from Robot R2;
-
Robot R1: Insert of the first counter-rotating shaft on the crank -
case;
-
Robot R2: Move back and pick up the second counter-rotating
shaft (C);
-
Robot R1: Move to exchange area and pick up the second counter- 
rotating shaft from Robot R2 (C);
-
Robot R2: Return back (C);
-
Motor AGV: Move to position B;
-
Robot R1: Insert the second counter-rotating shaft on the crank -
case in continuous moving up (B);
-
Motor AGV: Move to the next stop (A);-
Operator: Mount screws and oil pump on the crankcase (A).
The 
complete analysis carried out for the use case is described in the
compiled 
User/Task Matrix reported in Appendix A. 
From the analysis of the User/Task Matrix, a lot of useful informa -
tion about the number of tasks, their type and duration, and the com -
munication needs can be retrieved into a unique, overall view. In par -
ticular, it helps to understand how complex the global activity is. The 
execution of multiple tasks simultaneously provides an image of the 
movement of the actors involved and therefore also gives an idea of the 
presence of noise or total confusion. These, for example, can make the 
operator feel stressed or uncomfortable in this context. The list of in -
formation necessary for both the operator and the robot allows to un -
derstand the frequency of human-robot interactions, how complex they 
are and how long they take. It is possible to better understand how 
much the interactions affect the execution of the activity. In addition, 
such a matrix allows to easily look beyond the mere data and provide a 
more in-depth view reading the global interaction scenario, especially 
about how the operator will feel inside it. 
Finally, the Experience Map was defined after a carefully study of 
the process, on the basis of the User/Task Matrix, and by focus groups. 
Indeed, if the User/Task Matrix describes the entire process, the 
Experience Map focuses on the human operator experience and map 
his/her “journey” along the process. This tool refers to the experience of 
interaction between the user and the surrounding environment, and it is 
strictly linked to the performed activities. In this context emotions and 
subjected feelings are not included. The set of activities and interactions 
certainly are affected by emotions, which however are difficult to predict at an early stage of the project. Emotions also depend on the 
specific users that are unknown at this stage. The Experience Map, 
however, is also suitable for adding references to the user's mood at a 
later date. 
For the specific use case, the global UX can be summed up into five 
steps on regular conditions, as indicated in Fig. 5. It sums up the tasks 
that the operator has to accomplish (on the green line) and the main interaction points with robots and AGVs (on the orange line). Moreover,  
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 provide the UX maps in case of robot error and AGV 
error respectively. 
From the UX analysis, the interaction types and communication 
needs can be easily detected and studied. For instance, the maps highlighted that in regular conditions the operator only interacts with 
the two AGVs and not with the collaborative robots. But it does not 
mean that attention should be paid only on communication with AGVs. 
Indeed, the operator has to have also a complete control of the overall 
process and to take care also of the tasks carried out from the two 
Fig. 5. Experience map for the use case - regular conditions  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
8

==== Page 11 ====
collaborative robots. Instead, the map elicits the two different types of 
interaction in the two cases: with AGVs interaction is mostly related to 
start/stop commands and controlling their proper positioning; while 
with collaborative robots the operator needs to have a timely feedback 
on their status and progress of the different activities. Furthermore, the 
maps helped the understanding of interaction also when errors could 
occur, to finally identify the user's needs and interaction requirements. 
The application of the proposed UX-based tools to the specific use 
case also supported the validation of the method for the definition of interface design guidelines. In particular, a first analysis of the User/ 
Task Matrix was useful to create a general situation awareness of what 
happens within the workstation. After that, a more careful analysis was 
necessary to better understand the most proper type of interface in 
relation to the specific interaction issues, interface features and posi -
tioning in the workplace, and finally the preferred access modality considering also the most suitable device. This second analysis con
-
sidered firstly generic information and secondly more detailed data. For instance, it started from the analysis of the Working conditions 
Fig. 6. Experience map for the use case - robot error  
Fig. 7. Experience map for the use case - AGV error  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
9

==== Page 12 ====
(referring to firstly the operator and then the workspace). This column 
gave indications on which types of interfaces should be adopted in the 
specific context of use. In the use case, there were no particular working 
conditions to exclude some interface types (e.g., gesture, speech), but 
observing the operator conditions (i.e., wearing gloves) suggested to 
exclude touch interfaces specifically. However, visual interfaces could 
be adopted but input devices were carefully chosen. The second aspect 
to consider is Communications. This column provided useful indica -
tions about the direction of communication (i.e., from operator to 
robot, from robot to operator, both), the moment of communication, 
the frequency of information exchange, and the information com -
plexity. More specifically, the level of complexity was determined by the combination of the level of detail required and the variety of 
communications. On one hand, if communications are simple (e.g., 
stop, slow down), natural interfaces can be successfully implemented by 
gesture or speech interfaces. However, if messages to be shared are 
simple but also frequent and numerous, the operator could difficulty 
memorize them. On the other hand, if communications are complex and 
based on long sequences, natural interfaces are not suitable since they 
poorly support message composition and decoding, and do not guide 
the user in the correct interpretation. Considering the complexity of the 
contents to be transmitted, also data indicated on the columns about 
critical situations and solutions were used. Indeed, interface dialogue 
must be particularly effective in critical situations. In those cases, where 
standard communications and critical situation communications have a 
very different level of complexity, it may be useful to provide two 
different types of interfaces: the former for regular communications 
(frequently accessed), and the latter for problematic situations (poorly 
accessed). 
Observing the task timeline also supported understanding when the 
communications took place and in what conditions the operator pro
-
vided inputs or received feedbacks. Time analysis as well as commu -
nication frequency analysis helped to define also the type of use (e.g., co-located, remote, ubiquitous), the size of the interface, and their most 
proper positioning. In case of very frequent communications, handheld 
interfaces should be preferred to guarantee an easy and ubiquitous 
access whatever the user position. 
Looking at the information collected of the use case, it was possible 
to define the following design guidelines for interface design:  
-
the workplace conditions allowed the use of theoretically any type
of interfaces;
-
in case of using visual interfaces, the operator conditions suggested
to 
adopt physical devices (e.g., buttons, mouse, knobs) or touch
screens 
able to recognize the touch with gloves (e.g., projected ca -
pacitive touch screens);
-
communications was bidirectional, from operator to robot and vice
versa, 
and was characterized by medium-frequent exchange and low
complexity, 
so that ubiquitous and/or wearable interfaces could be
considered. 
Moreover, multiple interfaces could be used to received
different 
kinds of feedback: for example, a light switch, a short
sound, 
a vibration of a wearable device or a visual pop-up on the
screen 
could be used to provide different types of information,
simplifying 
the comprehension process on the user mind. At the
same 
time, the operator could inform the systems about his/her
activity 
by a speech interface (e.g., using the keyword "Go!"), hand
gestures 
(e.g., open hand or fist);
-
communications did not overlap with other activities, therefore the
operator 
could devote attention to both receiving communications
from 
the robot and sending commands;
-
communications during critical situations were characterized by a
higher 
level of complexity, but a lower frequency. For these pur -
poses, physical or digital commands / buttons could be used. For
example, 
stopping the entire cycle could be carried out by simplypushing 
a physical or digital button, clearly dedicated to extra -
ordinary situations (e.g., red color and more distant position from 
those used for other activities). Similarly, in case of incorrect or 
absent kit components, the operator should communicate the spe -
cific problem by a visual interface, that is the easier way to refer a 
problem and call for assistance. 
Such analysis provides an example of how the combination of all 
information retrieved from the UX tools can practically guide the in -
terfaces design. The proposed analysis supported the definition of the 
interface and the main design issues, but also prototype assessment 
using the User/Task Matrix to verify the satisfaction of the user re -
quirements, and the Experience Map to validate the effective UX on the prototype. 
This method requires a good sensitivity of the design team and a 
good level of expertise to interpret the collected data and relate them in 
order to obtain useful information for the design. Moreover, time spent 
to analyze interactions is then saved during the design phase and leads 
to better results as well as preventing problems in the more advanced 
design phases. 
Finally, both the User/Task Matrix and the Experience Map can be 
customized and expanded according to the specific needs of the project. 
5. Conclusions
The 
paper deals with the design of interface in Human-Robot
Collaboration 
(HRC), when modern robots collaboratively execute tasks 
supporting humans within the modern factories. The research motiva -
tion arises from the need of extending the current research, mainly 
focusing on technological aspects on the robotic side, towards the 
human side. In particular, this work proposed a UX design cycle as a 
methodology to include human factors in human-robot interface design, 
with the final aim to elicit the needs of human beings interacting with 
robots. The paper provided also a set of UX-based tools to investigate 
the human-robot dialogue, to map the UX and the interaction with 
robots during the execution of shared tasks, and to finally elicit the 
design requirements for designing usable and effective interfaces. The 
research validated the application of the proposed tools on an industrial 
case focusing on assembly operations, where humans collaborate with 
anthropomorphic robots and AGVs (Automated Guided Vehicles). A 
multidisciplinary design team was created to map the interaction and 
define the design requirements using User/Task Matrix and Experience 
Maps. The novelty of the proposed approach is the inclusion of UX- 
based design tools in HRC design. Results demonstrated the validity of 
the proposed tools to understand the human-robot interaction, describe 
the communication issues, and define the main interface features to 
support the following interface design activity. 
Disclosure statement 
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ -
ence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to acknowledge the ICOSAF project (PON R&I 
2014-2020).   E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
10

==== Page 13 ====
Appendix A 
Figs. 8-9. 
Fig. 8. User/Task Matrix for the use case - part 1  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
11

==== Page 14 ====
Fig. 9. User/Task Matrix for the use case - part 2  E. P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
12

==== Page 15 ====
References 
[1]M. Rüßmann, et al., Industry 4.0: The future of productivity and growth in man -
ufacturing industries, Bost. Consult. Gr. 9 (1) (2015) 54–89. 
[2]M.A. 
Goodrich, A.C. Schultz, Human–robot interaction: a survey, Found. Trends® 
Human–Computer Interact. 1 (3) (2008) 203–275. 
[3]K. Dautenhahn, R.F. Soegaard, M. Dam (Eds.), Ed., The Encyclopedia of Human- 
Computer Interaction, Aarhus, Denmark, 2013. 
[4] Bartneck, C., Belpaeme, T., Eyssel, F., Kanda, T., Keijsers, M., & Sabanovic S., 
Human-Robot Interaction – An Introduction. Cambridge, 2019.</bib>. 
[5] L. Probst, L. Frideres, B. Pedersen, C. Caputi, and PwC Luxembourg, “Service 
Innovation for Smart Industry - Human-robot collaboration,” 2015. 
[6]J. Saenz, N. Elkmann, O. Gibaru, P. Neto, Survey of methods for design of colla -
borative robotics applications-why safety is a barrier to more widespread robotics 
uptake, Proceedings of the 2018 4th International Conference on Mechatronics and 
Robotics Engineering, 2018, pp. 95–101. 
[7]G. 
Tang, P. Webb, J. Thrower, The development and evaluation of Robot Light Skin: 
A novel robot signalling system to improve communication in industrial hu -
man–robot collaboration, Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 56 (2019) 85–94. 
[8]F. 
Ferraguti, C.T. Landi, C. Secchi, C. Fantuzzi, M. Nolli, M. Pesamosca, Walk- 
through programming for industrial applications, Procedia Manuf 11 (2017) 31–38. 
[9]E. Magrini, F. Ferraguti, A.J. Ronga, F. Pini, A. De Luca, F. Leali, Human-robot 
coexistence and interaction in open industrial cells, Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 
61 (2020) 101846. 
[10] A. Cherubini, R. Passama, A. Crosnier, A. Lasnier, P. Fraisse, Collaborative manu -
facturing with physical human–robot interaction, Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 40 
(2016) 1–13. 
[11] D. 
Bortot, Ergonomic Human-Robot Coexistence in the Branch of Production 
(2014). 
[12] S. Thrun, Toward a Framework for Human-Robot Interaction, Human–Computer 
Interact 19 (1–2) (Jun. 2004) 9–24, https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2004. 
9667338. 
[13] International Organization for Standardization, “ISO/TS 10566:2016,” 2016. 
[14] J. Schmidtler, V. Knott, C. Hölzel, K. Bengler, Human Centered Assistance 
Applications for the working environment of the future, Occup. Ergon. 12 (3) 
(2015) 83–95. 
[15] A. Bauer, D. Wollherr, M. Buss, Human-robot collaboration: A survey, International Journal of Humanoid Robotics 5 (1) (2008) 47–66. 
[16] L. Wang, et al., Symbiotic human-robot collaborative assembly, CIRP Ann 68 (2) (2019) 701–726. 
[17] International Organization for Standardization, “UNI EN ISO 10218-1:2012 - 
Robots and robotic devices — Safety requirements for industrial robots — Part 1: Robots,” 2012. 
[18] M.A. Goodrich, A.C. Schultz, Human-Robot Interaction: A Survey, Found. Trends® 
Human–Computer Interact. Human-Computer Interact. 1 (3) (2007) 203–275, https://doi.org/10.1561/1100000005. 
[19] N. Mendes, J. Ferrer, J. Vitorino, M. Safeea, P. Neto, Human behavior and hand 
gesture classification for smart human-robot interaction, Procedia Manuf 11 (2017) 
91–98. 
[20] P. Neto, M. Simão, N. Mendes, M. Safeea, Gesture-based human-robot interaction 
for human assistance in manufacturing, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 101 (1–4) 
(2019) 119–135. 
[21] V. Villani, B. Capelli, C. Secchi, C. Fantuzzi, L. Sabattini, Humans interacting with 
multi-robot systems: a natural affect-based approach, Auton. Robots 44 (3) (2020) 
601–616, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-019-09889-6. 
[22] M. Peruzzini, F. Grandi, M. Pellicciari, Exploring the potential of Operator 4.0 interface and monitoring, Comput. Ind. Eng. 139 (2020) 105600. 
[23] V. Villani, L. Sabattini, C. Secchi, C. Fantuzzi, A framework for affect-based natural human-robot interaction, 2018 27th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and 
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2018, pp. 1038–1044. 
[24] E. Matsas, G.-C. Vosniakos, D. Batras, Prototyping proactive and adaptive techni
-
ques for human-robot collaboration in manufacturing using virtual reality, Robot. 
Comput. Integr. Manuf. 50 (2018) 168–180. 
[25] J.O. 
Oyekan, et al., The effectiveness of virtual environments in developing colla -
borative strategies between industrial robots and humans, Robot. Comput. Integr. 
Manuf. 55 (2019) 41–54. 
[26]
International Organization for Standardization, “UNI EN ISO 10218-2:2011 - Robots and robotic devices - Safety requirements for industrial robots - Part 2: 
Robot systems and integration,” 2011. 
[27] A. Hentout, M. Aouache, A. Maoudj, Key challenges and open issues of industrial 
collaborative robotics, 2018 The 27th IEEE International Symposium on Workshop 
on Human-Robot Interaction: from Service to Industry (HRI-SI2018) at Robot and 
Human Interactive Communication. Proceedings, IEEE, 2018. 
[28] K. Dautenhahn, Socially intelligent robots: dimensions of human–robot interaction, vol. 
362, no. 1480. The Royal Society London, 2007. 
[29] International Ergonomics Associations, “What is Ergonomics?” [Online]. 
Available:https://www.iea.cc/whats/. [Accessed: 25-Feb-2020]. 
[30] International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 9241-210 - Ergonomics of 
human-system interaction - Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive sys
-
tems,” 2019. 
[31] J. Lindblom, R. Andreasson, Current challenges for UX evaluation of human-robot 
interaction, Advances in ergonomics of manufacturing: Managing the enterprise of 
the future, Springer, 2016, pp. 267–277. 
[32] B. 
Alenljung, J. Lindblom, R. Andreasson, T. Ziemke, User experience in social 
human-robot interaction, Rapid Automation: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and 
Applications, IGI Global, 2019, pp. 1468–1490. 
[33] A. Steinfeld, et al., Common metrics for human-robot interaction, Proceedings of 
the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART conference on Human-robot interaction, 2006, pp. 
33–40. 
[34] C. Bartneck, D. Kulić, E. Croft, S. Zoghbi, Measurement instruments for the an -
thropomorphism, animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived safety 
of robots, Int. J. Soc. Robot. 1 (1) (2009) 71–81. 
[35] J.W. 
Crandall, M.A. Goodrich, D.R. Olsen, C.W. Nielsen, Validating human-robot 
interaction schemes in multitasking environments, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. A Syst. Humans 35 (4) (2005) 438–449. 
[36] D. R. Olsen and M. A. Goodrich, “Metrics for Evaluating Human-Robot 
Interactions.”. 
[37] M. Peruzzini, F. Grandi, M. Pellicciari, Benchmarking of tools for user experience analysis in industry 4.0, Procedia Manuf 11 (2017) 806–813. 
[38] International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 13407,” 1999. 
[39] B. Still, K. Crane, Fundamentals of user-centered design: A practical approach, CRC 
Press, 2017. 
[40] M. Yu, “Understanding User Interactions Through Link Analysis in Social Networks, 
” 2017. 
[41] J. Kalbach, Mapping experiences: A complete guide to creating value through 
journeys, blueprints, and diagrams, O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2016. 
[42] J.T. Hackos, J. Redish, User and task analysis for interface design 1 Wiley, New 
York, 1998. 
[43] C. Bartneck, T. Belpaeme, F. Eyssel, T. Kanda, M. Keijsers, S. Šabanović, Human- 
Robot Interaction – An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, 2020, https://doi. 
org/10.1017/9781108676649
.E. 
P, et al. Robotics and Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
13

