==== Page 1 ====
International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Communication
How Big Data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Can Help
Better Manage the COVID-19 Pandemic
Nicola Luigi Bragazzi1,2,*
, Haijiang Dai1
, Giovanni Damiani3,4,5
, Masoud Behzadifar6
,
Mariano Martini2and Jianhong Wu1,*
1Laboratory for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (LIAM), Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada; daihaijiang2013@gmail.com
2Postgraduate School of Public Health, Department of Health Sciences (DISSAL), University of Genoa,
16132 Genoa, Italy; mariano.yy@gmail.com
3Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA;
dr.giovanni.damiani@gmail.com
4Clinical Dermatology, I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, 20161 Milan, Italy
5Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy
6Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical Sciences,
Khorramabad 6813833946, Iran; masoudbehzadifar@gmail.com
*Correspondence: bragazzi@yorku.ca (N.L.B.); wujh@yorku.ca (J.W.)
Received: 10 March 2020; Accepted: 30 April 2020; Published: 2 May 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: SARS-CoV2 is a novel coronavirus, responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic declared
by the World Health Organization. Thanks to the latest advancements in the ﬁeld of molecular
and computational techniques and information and communication technologies (ICTs), artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) and Big Data can help in handling the huge, unprecedented amount of
data derived from public health surveillance, real-time epidemic outbreaks monitoring, trend
now-casting /forecasting, regular situation brieﬁng and updating from governmental institutions and
organisms, and health facility utilization information. The present review is aimed at overviewing
the potential applications of AI and Big Data in the global e ort to manage the pandemic.
Keywords: viral outbreak; public health; epidemiology; artiﬁcial intelligence; Big Data
1. The Currently Ongoing COVID-19 Outbreak
From the currently available knowledge, in late December 2019, a number of cases due to an
emerging virus responsible for a pneumonia of unknown cause and respiratory symptoms was
observed in a cluster of patients, some of whom had visited a wet market, namely the “Huanan Seafood
Wholesale Market” in the city of Wuhan, province of Hubei, located in the southern part of the People’s
Republic of China [1].
The novel virus was initially termed as “2019 novel coronavirus” (2019-nCoV) and, subsequently,
as “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus type 2” (SARS-CoV-2). It was ﬁrst isolated on
7 January 2020 . Since then, the virus has spread worldwide, reaching, as of 25 April 2020, 210 countries
and infecting more than 3,000,000 patients globally, causing 200,000 deaths.
Patients infected by the virus may either be asymptomatic or symptomatic, with mild (such as
fever, sore throat, and cough) to severe clinical symptoms (like pneumonia, respiratory failure and,
ultimately, death) [ 2]. The communicable disorder caused by SARS-CoV-2 is named “coronavirus
disease” (COVID-19) [3].
From a molecular perspective, the SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, single-stranded, positive-sense
RNA virus and represents the eighth coronavirus that can be transmitted from human to human [ 4].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176; doi:10.3390 /ijerph17093176 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijerph

==== Page 2 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 2 of 8
Bats, which are reservoir hosts of various zoonotic viruses, including the Hendra and Nipah viruses,
have been indicated as putative key reservoirs of coronavirus in China [ 5]. From a genomic standpoint,
the SARS-CoV-2 shares approximately 50% and 79% of its genetic sequence with the MERS-CoV and
the SARS-CoV , respectively. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 shares a receptor-binding domain structure
with SARS-CoV [6].
Thanks to the latest advancements in the ﬁeld of computational techniques and information and
communication technologies (ICTs), artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and Big Data can help handle the huge,
unprecedented amount of data derived from public health surveillance, real-time epidemic outbreaks
monitoring, trend now-casting /forecasting, regular situation brieﬁng and updating from governmental
institutions and organisms, and health resources utilization information [7].
Big Data have been classically deﬁned by three Vs: (i) velocity (in terms of the unprecedented
speed of data acquisition, processing and manipulation; in this regard, Big Data are known also as
“fast data”); (ii) volume (in terms of the high amount of information available); and (iii) variety (in
terms of the number of the di erent sources and channels that can produce and release Big Data) [ 8,9].
There are various types of Big Data, based on their sources: (i) molecular Big Data (obtained by
means of wet-lab techniques and OMICS-based approaches, such as genomics, and post-genomics
specialties, including proteomics, and interactomics); (ii) imaging-based Big Data (like radiomics or
the massive data-mining approach to extract clinically meaningful, high-dimensional information
from images); (iii) sensor-based Big Data (wearable sensors); and (iv) digital and computational Big
Data (with an incredible wealth of data produced by the internet, smart phones, and other mobile
devices) [10–13].
In the remaining part of this paper, we will overview some of the major possible applications of
AI and Big Data for the management of COVID-19.
2. Short-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: A Quick and E ective
Pandemic Alert
Big Data can enable monitoring of the disease outbreak in real-time. With respect to previous
epidemics and pandemics outbreaks, COVID-19 is unprecedented in that open-access datasets
containing daily numbers of new infections broken down by country, and, in some cases, even cities, are
widely available. Combined with the information we have about the movement of people, it represents
the perfect dataset to combine mathematical modeling and AI.
Blue Dot, a Toronto-based start-up that uses an AI-enhanced surveillance system, seems to have
been the ﬁrst to detect the epidemic outbreak, several hours after its insurgence in the ﬁrst reported
epicenter of Wuhan, well ahead of the Chinese authorities and other international institutions and
agencies [14].
Computational techniques enable us to visualize in real-time the spreading of the virus, such as
the application designed at the John Hopkins University, USA. Furthermore, social Big Data, collected
from social networks and other related non-conventional data streams, enable us to reconstruct
early epidemiological story of the outbreak. For instance, Sun and colleagues [ 15] performed a
population-level observational study, monitoring healthcare related websites, social networks and
news reports, between 13th January and 31st January 2020, in mainland China. Authors concluded
that non-classical datasets can help researchers understanding the spreading of an outbreak, in terms
of health literacy, healthcare-seeking behaviors, and health resources’ utilization. Especially in the
early stages of the outbreak, non-classical datasets and data streams can inform the design and
implementation of e ective public health measures.
Similarly, Qin and coworkers [ 16] exploited Big Data to predict the number of new COVID-19
cases, either suspected or conﬁrmed. In more detail, authors utilized a lagged series of “Social media
search indexes” (SMSI) for various keywords, including COVID-19 clinical symptoms (such as dry
cough, fever, chest distress, and pneumonia). Authors found that, by employing techniques such as

==== Page 3 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 3 of 8
subset selection method, new COVID-19 suspected and conﬁrmed cases could be detected 6–9 and
10 days in advance, respectively.
Yang and colleagues [ 17] utilized population migration data to populate a dynamic transmission,
compartmental “Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed” (SEIR) model, combined with an AI
approach, trained on the SARS data, in order to predict the COVID-19 pandemic curve. Authors
demonstrated that a ﬁve-day delay in the implementation of the stringent public health measures
adopted by the Chinese authorities would have resulted in an epidemic size increased by three times.
Loosening /lifting the lock-down intervention would cause a second peak in the Hubei province by
mid-March until late April.
Concerning another coronavirus, Song and coworkers [ 18] investigated online di usion of
information, spread of fear, and perceived risk of contracting MERS infection during the MERS
outbreak in South Korea in May-June of 2015. Buzz conveying negative feelings was found to be
more prevalent in online discussion boards, Twitter, and online cafes than news sites and blogs.
News buzz, but not rumor buzz, correlated with positive emotions and the mention of taking
immunity-boosting food.
However, a particular aspect to which public health authorities should pay attention is another
V of the three Vs of Big Data: V of veracity, that is to say, the accuracy and reliability of the data
collected. The processing and modeling of Big Data should incorporate such uncertainty and deal with
it, ensuring robustness of the ﬁndings. To date, this is still an open challenge.
3. Short-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Tracking and Diagnosing
COVID-19 Cases
Having a reliable, sensitive and speciﬁc diagnostic test is of paramount importance in the
prevention and control of infectious disorders. Researchers have succeeded in establishing a molecular
kit able to quickly and accurately capture the proper diagnosis and distinguish between COVID-19 and
SARS-CoV . Salivary diagnostics seems to hold great promise in e ectively detecting the virus. Together
with molecular assays and tests, ether multiplex nucleic acid ampliﬁcation or microarray-based,
high-resolution CT of the chest is fundamental for monitoring the disease course and its evolution in
terms of severity and response to treatment. Currently ongoing research is also trying to identify early
radiological predictors of prognosis, which would be extremely helpful in stratifying patients with
COVID-19 and in their clinical management [7,14,19].
AI can facilitate the diagnosis of COVID-19 cases. For instance, Infervision is a start-up that
employs deep learning medical imaging platforms for facilitating quick diagnosis of COVID-19 cases
via the recognition of speciﬁc lung features [7,14].
Furthermore, block-chain technology is a unique decentralized system of recording, verifying and
approving data and carrying out a series of transactions. It is characterized by a high level of security
and enables the delivery of patient-centered healthcare services, enhanced public health surveillance,
management of outbreaks and a quick and e ective decision-making process [ 20–22]. A low-cost
block-chain and AI-coupled self-testing and tracking system has been proposed for managing the
COVID-19 pandemics, in developed settings (to avoid overwhelming and straining public health
capacity and healthcare /laboratory infrastructure) and in developing, resource-limited contexts [20].
4. Medium-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Identifying a Potential
Pharmacological Treatment
Currently, no o cially approved therapeutic options exist for the treatment of COVID-19.
Physicians should provide patients with supportive management and screen their nutritional status
before administering any drugs.
Due to the emergency situation, since it would be time- and resource-consuming to develop ad
hoc speciﬁc therapeutics, scientists are exploring three major approaches: (i) the feasibility of utilizing
already existing broad-spectrum anti-viral drugs, (ii) the possibility of modifying /adapting them,

==== Page 4 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 4 of 8
taking into account the biochemical and biophysical features of the novel virus, and (iii) exploiting
available pharmaceutics (either belonging to Western or Chinese traditional medicine) for other
therapeutic purposes (drug repositioning or repurposing) [2].
These strategies are aimed at targeting the virus by (i) interfering directly with it, or by (ii)
blocking /inhibiting its related biological process and events (such as viral entry and replication),
or targeting human immune system, by (iii) enhancing it [ 2]. Advancements in the genomic and
post-genomic ﬁelds enable to quickly scrutinize genome sequences, looking for similarity with other
genomes and discovering potential druggable targets.
Candidate drugs against COVID-19 include neuraminidase inhibitors such as Oseltamivir
and Peramivir, anti-retroviral protease inhibitors like Ritonavir /Lopinavir, nucleotide analogs as
Remdesivir, nucleoside inhibitors as Ribavirin, inﬂuenza hemagglutinin-mediated fusion inhibitors
like Arbidol /Umifenovir and anti-malarials as Chloroquine, among others.
Most patients with COVID-19 are being treated with Oseltamivir, despite some recent Cochrane
reviews questioning its e ectiveness in the management of inﬂuenza. Oseltamivir has been shown to
result in small clinically relevant e ects, with a remarkable occurrence of side e ects. Data concerning
Peramivir are even more limited, with few randomized clinical trials (RCTs) available, thus hindering a
comparison between the two neuraminidase inhibitors. Moreover, in-vitro testing assays have failed to
show the inhibition of cytopathic e ects of SARS-CoV [ 2], demonstrating, on the contrary, the e cacy
of some commercially available interferons. However, to date, these have been less utilized for the
clinical management of patients with COVID-19.
The usage of Ribavirin, a pro-drug of ribavirin triphosphate and a competitive inhibitor of the
enzyme inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, which is crucial for the biosynthesis of guanosine and
nucleic acids synthesis, is neither supported by cellular nor clinical data, with several studies reporting,
instead, contrasting ﬁndings and clinically relevant toxicities that may result in discontinuation of
therapy [ 2]. For Arbidol, limited data exist [ 2] and generally its use in treating severe acute respiratory
infections is not recommended. In SARS patients, Lopinavir /Ritonavir, besides exerting in-vitro
anti-viral activities, has contributed to sparing steroid doses, reducing hospitalizations and nosocomial
infections, resulting in a decreased viral load and increased peripheral lymphocyte count [2].
Few patients are being treated with gancivlovir, an acyclovir analogue and inhibitor of the
Herpesvirus family including cytomegalovirus (CMV). Ganciclovir is approved for the treatment of
complications arising from AIDS-associated CMV infection, but in-vitro assays have not shown any
inhibition of the cytopathic e ects of SARS-CoV [2].
Furthermore, some physicians administer corticosteroids, the evidence of which in terms of clinical
outcomes and complications /death prevention is moderate according to the Cochrane reviews. In a
systematic review of the treatment e ects of candidate drugs against SARS-CoV , 25 out of 29 studies
assessed mentioning steroid, its use was found to be inconclusive, with four of them showing potential
harm to patients’ health [ 23]. Similarly, the e ectiveness of antibiotics in the treatment of viral
pneumonia appears to be limited [2].
In conclusion, an e ective treatment for COVID-19 is still lacking.
AI can help quickly identify potential therapeutics and candidate vaccines. For instance,
a collaboration between an AI start-up, BenevolentAI, and a university institution, the Imperial
College London, UK, has led to the discovery that baricitinib, a biologic used for the treatment of
moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis in adults, inhibitor of the janus kinases JAK1 and
JAK2, may exert anti-viral e ects [ 24], whereas another start-up, Insilico Medicine, located in Hong
Kong, has reported to have found six new drugs that may inhibit viral replication [14].
Concerning traditional Chinese medicine, by employing network pharmacology analysis,
Zhang and coauthors [ 25] systematically screened natural compounds used in Chinese treatment, and
found 13 of them to exert potential anti-COVID-19 e ects in terms of the regulation of viral replication,
modulation of immune and inﬂammatory pathways and hypoxia cascade.

==== Page 5 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 5 of 8
5. Medium-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Facilitating the
Implementation of Public Health Interventions
During an outbreak, resources are limited and can be quickly consumed. As such, to avoid
wasting resources and to better allocate those available, the Chinese government has supplemented
classical data collection methods with sophisticated computational systems and advanced techniques
that have helped identify at-risk subjects.
A start-up, Megvii, has announced the development of sophisticated body and face detection
and dual sensing via infrared cameras and visible light, as thermal scanners for rapidly screening
subjects transiting in a crowded place and identifying fever and high temperature, potentially related
to COVID-19.
Ant Financial Services Group, formerly known as Alipay, of the Alibaba group, have devised
AI-based applications, based on parameters like self-reported health status, history of travels and
contacts, that can identify COVID-19 cases. This system has been implemented in the county of Shizhu,
located in Chongqing, in the southwestern part of the People’s Republic of China, to monitor the ﬂow
of people during the Chinese Lunar New Year holiday, which has favored the spreading of the virus.
Based on this tool, it has been possible to inform the measure of quarantine. Similarly, in the provinces
of Zhejiang, Sichuan and Hainan, advanced data analyses have been exploited to reconstruct social
interactions and perform contact tracing.
Srinivasa Rao and Vazquez [ 26] have described a framework based on an AI algorithm that
would enable a quick identiﬁcation of infected cases, performing a risk assessment and evaluation
according to the symptoms and signs related to the novel coronavirus. This would be done via a web-
or mobile-based survey. Further, depending on the replies, the algorithm is able to send alerts to clinics
or mobile health units, for health visits and conﬁrmation of the case.
6. Long-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Building Smart, Health,
Resilient Cities
In recent years, profound societal phenomena, including globalization and rapid urbanization
together with population explosion and demographic changes, have deeply modiﬁed our lifestyles.
Approximately more than half of humanity dwell in urban areas and settlements, with this ﬁgure being
expected to signiﬁcantly increase up to two-thirds of the global population by 2050. In the Western
countries, whereas, at the beginning of the 20th century, less than half of the population lived in urban
areas, this percentage had doubled at the beginning of the new century and it can be anticipated that it
will further rise in the coming decades.
“Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”, was ambitiously
declared by the eleventh Sustainable Development Goal (SDG-11) of the United Nations, and has been
rearmed during the 2016 United Nations Habitat III on housing and sustainable urban development
in Ecuador (the “New Urban Agenda”). It is becoming more and more imperative. Environmental
(pollution, waste disposal, climate change) and health (communicable diseases, such as food- or
vector-borne infections) challenges represent serious concerns that may threaten citizens’ livability and
quality of life [27].
All this requires a multi-disciplinary approach to be properly and e ectively addressed by all the
stakeholders (urban designers and planners, workers in the ﬁeld of public health), also incorporating
citizens in the planning of a sustainable urban management and empowering them. A highly integrated
systems approach is of crucial importance, in that a healthy city is like a living, dynamic organism.
Smart interconnected devices, wearable sensors and other innovative technologies like smart phones,
telecommunications, networks and GPS, enable to collect an incredible wealth of data in real time
that are user-centered and technology-driven, allowing: (1) quality monitoring, transparency and
accountability, (2) resource allocation optimization, (3) citizen participation and inclusion, and 4)
resilience and adaptation to exogenous events.

==== Page 6 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 6 of 8
In recent years, several cities and communities in Spain, New Zealand, United States,
United Kingdom, Canada and United Arab Emirates have launched initiatives and challenges
with the aim of promoting research and innovation in the ﬁeld.
According to a recent systematic review of the literature, smart cities can enable population-wide
surveillance, counteract ageing, by promoting active ageing, socialization and healthy lifestyles, include
disabled and marginalized people, and provide quick and e ective responses to emergencies and
disasters such as outbreaks [27].
However, despite the importance of such a topic, there is a dearth of mathematical models, as
stated by Grindrod and colleagues [ 28]. The ﬁeld of “mathematics of smart cities” is particularly
challenging in that modeling communities is not a trivial task in terms of city boundaries and their
relationship with the surrounding environments. Capturing the time-dependency of interactions
among the di erent components of a smart city is rather demanding.
In the aftermath of disasters, the risk of communicable disorders is high. Designing and
implementing policies for properly managing disasters and emergencies should be holistic and
multi-level, incorporating prevention, defense, mitigation, preparation, response and recovery.
Current policies su er from gaps, in that, instead of being multi-criteria, broader and highly
integrated, foreseeing future events based on risk-assessment scenarios and planning in advance, focus
mainly on disaster resistance and are based on contingent evaluations based on administrative and
political pressures.
AI and Big Data can provide local decision- and policy-makers with informed, evidence-based
predictions. Allam and Jones [ 29] have investigated the COVID-19 outbreak adopting an urban
standpoint, showing how smart cities and smart networks can exploit high-quality, enhanced
standardized protocols for data sharing during emergencies, to better manage such situations.
However, di erently from the previous sections, this section still remains highly speculative,
with applications currently being experimental.
7. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data for COVID-19: Conclusions and Future Prospects
The potential applications of AI and Big Data for the management of COVID-19 are summarized
in Table 1.
Table 1. Possible applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data for the management of the ongoing
COVID-19 outbreak.
Time-Scale Possible Application Example
Short-term (weeks)Rapid identiﬁcation of an ongoing
outbreakAI can facilitate real-time epidemiological data collection,
risk-assessment, decision-making processes, and
design /implementation of public health interventions
Diagnosis and prognosis of
COVID-19 casesRecognition of speciﬁc diagnostic and prognostic features
Medium-term (months)Identiﬁcation of a potential
therapeutic optionIdentify already existing drugs /discovering new molecules
Long-term (decades)Enhancing cities and favoring the
development of healthy, smart,
resilient citesDesign new standardized protocols for sharing data and
information during emergencies
AI and Big Data appear to have enormous potential for the management of COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and their role is anticipated to increase in the future. AI and Big Data can be used to
track the spread of the virus in real time, and plan and lift public health interventions accordingly,
monitor their e ectiveness, repurpose old compounds and discover new drugs, as well as identify
potential vaccine candidates and enhance the response of communities and territories to the ongoing
pandemic. These emerging approaches can be exploited together with classical surveillance: whilst
the latter enables data analysis and interpretation, the former uncovers hidden trends and patterns,
which can be used to build predictive models.

==== Page 7 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 7 of 8
As maintained by Hua and Shaw [ 30], despite the initial delay from Chinese authorities in
responding to the outbreak, “a unique combination of strong governance, strict regulation, strong
community vigilance and citizen participation, and wise use of big data and digital technologies”
have been among the major factors of the success of the People’s Republic of China in the e orts
of containing COVID-19. Further research is warranted to explore how to apply such sophisticated
technologies preserving human rights and privacy, whilst, at the same time, ensuring high standards.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.L.B. and J.W.; methodology, N.L.B.; software, N.L.B.; validation,
N.L.B. and J.W.; formal analysis, N.L.B.; investigation, N.L.B. and J.W.; resources, N.L.B. and J.W.; data curation,
N.L.B.; writing—original draft preparation, N.L.B., H.D. and J.W.; writing—review and editing, G.D., M.B. and
M.M.; visualization, N.L.B.; supervision, J.W.; project administration, N.L.B. and J.W.; funding acquisition, N.L.B.
and J.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding. N.L.B. is partially supported by the Canadian Institute of
Health Research (CIHR) 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) rapid research program. H.D. is partially supported
by the Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) rapid research program.
J.W. is partially supported by the Canada Research Chair Program (grant number: 230720), by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Grant number: 105588-2011), and the Canadian Institute of Health
Research (CIHR) 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) rapid research program.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Brüssow, H. The Novel Coronavirus—A Snapshot of Current Knowledge. Microb. Biotechnol. 2020 ,13,
607–612. [CrossRef]
2. Perrella, A.; Carannante, N.; Berretta, M.; Rinaldi, M.; Maturo, N.; Rinaldi, L. Novel Coronavirus 2019
(Sars-CoV2): A global emergency that needs new approaches? Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 2020 ,24,
2162–2164. [PubMed]
3. Kannan, S.; Shaik Syed Ali, P .; Sheeza, A.; Hemalatha, K. COVID-19 (Novel Coronavirus 2019)-recent trends.
Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 2020 ,24, 2006–2011. [PubMed]
4. Li, X.; Zai, J.; Zhao, Q.; Nie, Q.; Li, Y.; Foley, B.T.; Chaillon, A. Evolutionary history, potential intermediate
animal host, and cross-species analyses of SARS-CoV-2. J. Med. Virol. 2020 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Yang, Y.; Peng, F.; Wang, R.; Guan, K.; Jiang, T.; Xu, G.; Sun, J.; Chang, C. The deadly coronaviruses: The
2003 SARS pandemic and the 2020 novel coronavirus epidemic in China. J. Autoimmun. 2020 . [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
6. Ashour, H.M.; Elkhatib, W.F.; Rahman, M.M.; Elshabrawy, H.A. Insights into the Recent 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in Light of Past Human Coronavirus Outbreaks. Pathogens 2020 ,9, 186.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Wong, Z.S.Y.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, Q. Artiﬁcial Intelligence for infectious disease Big Data Analytics. Infect. Dis.
Health 2019 ,24, 44–48. [CrossRef]
8. Bragazzi, N.L.; Damiani, G.; Martini, M. From Rheumatology 1.0 to Rheumatology 4.0 and beyond: The
contributions of Big Data to the ﬁeld of rheumatology. Mediterr. J. Rheumatol. 2019 ,30, 3–6. [CrossRef]
9. Dini, G.; Bragazzi, N.L.; Montecucco, A.; Toletone, A.; Debarbieri, N.; Durando, P . Big Data in occupational
medicine: The convergence of -omics sciences, participatory research and e-health. Med. Lav. 2019 ,110,
102–114.
10. Bragazzi, N.L.; Guglielmi, O.; Garbarino, S. SleepOMICS: How Big Data Can Revolutionize Sleep Science.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019 ,16, 291. [CrossRef]
11. Gianfredi, V .; Bragazzi, N.L.; Nucci, D.; Martini, M.; Rosselli, R.; Minelli, L.; Moretti, M. Harnessing Big
Data for Communicable Tropical and Sub-Tropical Disorders: Implications from a Systematic Review of the
Literature. Front. Public Health 2018 ,6, 90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Bragazzi, N.L.; Gianfredi, V .; Villarini, M.; Rosselli, R.; Nasr, A.; Hussein, A.; Martini, M.;
Behzadifar, M. Vaccines Meet Big Data: State-of-the-Art and Future Prospects. From the Classical 3Is
(“Isolate-Inactivate-Inject”) Vaccinology 1.0 to Vaccinology 3.0, Vaccinomics, and Beyond: A Historical
Overview. Front. Public Health 2018 ,6, 62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 8 ====
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 8 of 8
13. Bragazzi, N.L.; Dini, G.; Toletone, A.; Brigo, F.; Durando, P . Leveraging Big Data for Exploring Occupational
Diseases-Related Interest at the Level of Scientiﬁc Community, Media Coverage and Novel Data Streams:
The Example of Silicosis as a Pilot Study. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0166051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. McCall, B. COVID-19 and artiﬁcial intelligence: Protecting health-care workers and curbing the spread.
Lancet Digit. Health 2020 ,2, e166–e167. [CrossRef]
15. Sun, K.; Chen, J.; Viboud, C. Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak based
on crowdsourced data: A population-level observational study. Lancet Digit. Health 2020 . [CrossRef]
16. Qin, L.; Sun, Q.; Wang, Y.; Wu, K.F.; Chen, M.; Shia, B.C.; Wu, S.Y. Prediction of Number of Cases of 2019
Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Using Social Media Search Index. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17,
2365. [CrossRef]
17. Yang, Z.; Zeng, Z.; Wang, K.; Wong, S.S.; Liang, W.; Zanin, M.; Liu, P .; Cao, X.; Gao, Z.; Mai, Z.; et al. Modiﬁed
SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in China under public health interventions. J.
Thorac. Dis. 2020 ,12, 165–174. [CrossRef]
18. Song, J.; Song, T.M.; Seo, D.C.; Jin, D.L.; Kim, J.S. Social Big Data Analysis of Information Spread and
Perceived Infection Risk During the 2015 Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Outbreak in South Korea.
Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 2017 ,20, 22–29. [CrossRef]
19. Ai, T.; Yang, Z.; Hou, H.; Zhan, C.; Chen, C.; Lv, W.; Tao, Q.; Sun, Z.; Xia, L. Correlation of Chest CT and
RT-PCR Testing in Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China: A Report of 1014 Cases. Radiology 2020 .
[CrossRef]
20. Mashamba-Thompson, T.P .; Crayton, E.D. Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology for Novel
Coronavirus Disease-19 Self-Testing. Diagnostics 2020 ,10, 198. [CrossRef]
21. Bhattacharya, S.; Singh, A.; Hossain, M.M. Strengthening public health surveillance through blockchain
technology. AIMS Public Health 2019 ,6, 326–333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Chattu, V .K.; Nanda, A.; Chattu, S.K.; Kadri, S.M.; Knight, A.W. The Emerging Role of Blockchain Technology
Applications in Routine Disease Surveillance Systems to Strengthen Global Health Security. Big Data Cogn.
Comput. 2019 ,3, 25. [CrossRef]
23. Stockman, L.J.; Bellamy, R.; Garner, P . SARS: Systematic review of treatment e ects. PLoS Med. 2006 ,3, e343.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Richardson, P .; Gri n, I.; Tucker, C.; Smith, D.; Oechsle, O.; Phelan, A.; Stebbing, J. Baricitinib as potential
treatment for 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease. Lancet 2020 ,395, e30–e31. [CrossRef]
25. Zhang, D.H.; Wu, K.L.; Zhang, X.; Deng, S.Q.; Peng, B. In silico screening of Chinese herbal medicines
with the potential to directly inhibit 2019 novel coronavirus. J. Integr. Med. 2020 ,18, 152–158. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
26. Pacheco Rocha, N.; Dias, A.; Santinha, G.; Rodrigues, M.; Queir ós, A.; Rodrigues, C. Smart Cities and
Healthcare: A Systematic Review. Technologies 2019 ,7, 58. [CrossRef]
27. Rao, A.S.R.S.; Vazquez, J.A. Identiﬁcation of COVID-19 Can be Quicker through Artiﬁcial Intelligence
framework using a Mobile Phone-Based Survey in the Populations when Cities /Towns Are Under Quarantine.
Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2020 . [CrossRef]
28. Grindrod, P .; Higham, D.J.; MacKay, R.S. Opportunities at the Mathematics /Future Cities Interface. arXiv
2014 , arXiv:1409.1831. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1409.1831.pdf (accessed on 10 March 2020).
29. Allam, Z.; Jones, D.S. On the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak and the Smart City Network: Universal
Data Sharing Standards Coupled with Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) to Beneﬁt Urban Health Monitoring and
Management. Healthcare 2020 ,8, 46. [CrossRef]
30. Hua, J.; Shaw, R. Corona Virus (COVID-19) “Infodemic” and Emerging Issues through a Data Lens: The Case
of China. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 2309. [CrossRef]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

