==== Page 1 ====
applied  
sciences 
Article
How Deeply to Fine-T une a Convolutional
Neural Network: A Case Study Using a
Histopathology Dataset
Ibrahem Kandel * and Mauro Castelli
Nova Information Management School (NOVA IMS), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Campolide,
1070-312 Lisboa, Portugal; mcastelli@novaims.unl.pt
*Correspondence: D20181143@novaims.unl.pt
Received: 3 December 2019; Accepted: 8 May 2020; Published: 12 May 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Accurate classiﬁcation of medical images is of great importance for correct disease diagnosis.
The automation of medical image classiﬁcation is of great necessity because it can provide a second
opinion or even a better classiﬁcation in case of a shortage of experienced medical sta . Convolutional
neural networks (CNN) were introduced to improve the image classiﬁcation domain by eliminating
the need to manually select which features to use to classify images. Training CNN from scratch
requires very large annotated datasets that are scarce in the medical ﬁeld. Transfer learning of CNN
weights from another large non-medical dataset can help overcome the problem of medical image
scarcity. Transfer learning consists of ﬁne-tuning CNN layers to suit the new dataset. The main
questions when using transfer learning are how deeply to ﬁne-tune the network and what di erence
in generalization that will make. In this paper, all of the experiments were done on two histopathology
datasets using three state-of-the-art architectures to systematically study the e ect of block-wise
ﬁne-tuning of CNN. Results show that ﬁne-tuning the entire network is not always the best option;
especially for shallow networks, alternatively ﬁne-tuning the top blocks can save both time and
computational power and produce more robust classiﬁers.
Keywords: convolutional neural network; image classiﬁcation; transfer learning; medical images;
deep learning; ﬁne-tuning
1. Introduction
Medical images play a very crucial role in patient treatment; however, usually, the shortage of
manpower, the time required to reach a decision, and the need for a second opinion are factors that
greatly impact the process. Correctly and more quickly classifying images is an absolute need for
certain medical images ﬁelds, like pathology. Histopathology images are very important for detecting
certain kinds of diseases like cancer or even determining the kind of cancer itself to see if it is benign or
malignant and its degree. Histopathology is deﬁned as examining a tissue sample taken by a biopsy to
diagnose certain diseases microscopically [ 1]. It plays a very important role in the detection of diseases,
enabling doctors to carefully create a treatment plan. The physician who is responsible for classifying
histopathology images is called a pathologist. The image-examining process is extremely di cult
and requires an experienced pathologist with years of experience. In the United States, the number
of active pathologists dropped 17.5% in the last decade while the workload increased by 41% [ 2],
which indicates a real need for assisting the pathologists in their work by providing them with an
autonomous classiﬁer that is able to classify histopathology images with a high level of accuracy.
A recent breakthrough in the artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁeld is machine learning, in which an algorithm
can be developed that will be able to extract image features automatically. When the algorithm used is
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359; doi:10.3390 /app10103359 www.mdpi.com /journal /applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 2 of 20
a neural network with more than one hidden layer, it is called deep learning. Deep learning can be
implemented in the image classiﬁcation domain in which a feed-forward convolutional neural network
(CNN) [ 3] can be used to classify images automatically. Making the CNN able to classify images is
called training; in training, the CNN’s weights will be adjusted to suit the image dataset under study.
The main point of CNN is that it is able to map important features of images that can be used to
classify those images without the CNN’s being explicitly programmed to do so. CNN has been proven
to work with great accuracy in the classiﬁcation of many medical domains like diabetic retinopathy
detection and classiﬁcation [ 4,5], Alzheimer’s disease detection [ 6,7], and skin lesion detection [ 8,9],
among others.
Image classiﬁcation, which is deﬁned as grouping images into successive predeﬁned labels, plays
a very important role in many areas, like the medical ﬁeld. Deep learning algorithms can detect
important features of images without any manual feature engineering, which can be thought of as
using autonomous algorithms that can learn by themselves how to di erentiate between distinct image
classes. The earliest attempt to construct an automatic classiﬁer that could learn how to di erentiate
between classes was introduced by LeCun [ 3], who was inspired by the work of Fukushima et al. [ 10]
and Hubel and Wiesel [ 11], and was named convolutional neural networks (CNN), but this attempt
was limited because of the size of datasets and the computational power available then. In 2012,
Krizhevsky et al. [ 12] introduced their CNN architecture that was named AlexNet and won ﬁrst place
in the ILSVRC competition [ 13], with an error rate of 16% compared to the second place winner’s 25%,
and since then, CNN has become a state-of-the-art image classiﬁer. CNN is considered a feed-forward
artiﬁcial neural network that has at least one convolution layer. A diagram of CNN is shown in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 20 
A recent breakthrough in the artificial intelligence field is machine learning, in which an 
algorithm can be developed that will be able to  extract image features automatically. When the 
algorithm used is a neural network with more than one hidden layer, it is called deep learning. Deep 
learning can be implemented in the image classification domain in which a feed-forward 
convolutional neural network (CNN) [3] can be used to classify im ages automatically. Making the 
CNN able to classify images is called training; in training, the CNN’s weights will be adjusted to suit 
the image dataset under study. The main point of CNN is that it is able to map important features of 
images that can be used to classify those images  without the CNN’s being explicitly programmed to 
do so. CNN has been proven to work with great accuracy in the classification of many medical 
domains like diabetic retinopathy detection and cl assification [4,5], Alzheimer’s disease detection 
[6,7], and skin lesion dete ction [8,9], among others. 
Image classification, which is defined as grouping images into successive predefined labels, 
plays a very important role in many areas, like the medical field. Deep learning algorithms can detect important features of images without any manual feature engineering, which can be thought of as 
using autonomous algorithms that can learn by th emselves how to differentiate between distinct 
image classes. The earliest attempt to construct an automatic classifier that could learn how to 
differentiate between classes was introduced by LeCun [3], who was inspired by the work of 
Fukushima et al. [10] and Hubel and Wiesel [11] , and was named convolutional neural networks 
(CNN), but this attempt was limited because of th e size of datasets and the computational power 
available then. In 2012, Krizhevsky et al. [12] in troduced their CNN architecture that was named 
AlexNet and won first place in the ILSVRC competitio n [13], with an error rate of 16% compared to 
the second place winner’s 25%, and since then, CNN has become a state-of-the-art image classifier. 
CNN is considered a feed-forward artificial neural network that has at least one convolution layer. A 
diagram of CNN is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Convolutional neural ne twork (CNN) diagram. 
To accurately train CNN and to overcome the ov erfitting issues associated with feed-forward 
neural networks, usually, hundreds of thousands or  even millions of images  are needed [14], which 
can limit the usage of CNN to certain domains, like na ture images, for classification. Transfer learning 
is a novel domain that has been introduced to help overcome the before-mentioned issues in CNN training, where instead of initializing the network weights from scratch, the weights of a previous 
network that was trained on a different large data set can be used. The medical field could benefit a 
lot from the usage of CNN for image classification, but the main drawback is the number of images available for training, and that is where transfer learning can be used. Using transfer learning for 
medical images has been successfully applied in References[4,6,8]. As pointed out by Chollet [15] , 
transfer learning uses two main te chniques: fine-tuning, wherein the original weights will be re-tuned 
to suit the new dataset, or feature extraction, in  which the original weights will be fixed and the 
original layers will serve for featur e extraction only. Both techniques can help a lot based on the size 
of the dataset, as pointed out by Yo sinski et al. [16]. If the dataset is  large enough, the original layers 
can be fine-tuned, while if the dataset is small, the original layers can serve in feature extraction. Also, 
the similarity between the original dataset and the target dataset can play a very important role. For 
this study, we opted for fine-tuning instead of feature extraction because of the following reasons: (1) the large number of images contained in the data set used, and (2) the huge difference (with respect 
Figure 1. Convolutional neural network (CNN) diagram.
To accurately train CNN and to overcome the overﬁtting issues associated with feed-forward
neural networks, usually, hundreds of thousands or even millions of images are needed [ 14], which can
limit the usage of CNN to certain domains, like nature images, for classiﬁcation. Transfer learning is a
novel domain that has been introduced to help overcome the before-mentioned issues in CNN training,
where instead of initializing the network weights from scratch, the weights of a previous network that
was trained on a di erent large dataset can be used. The medical ﬁeld could beneﬁt a lot from the usage
of CNN for image classiﬁcation, but the main drawback is the number of images available for training,
and that is where transfer learning can be used. Using transfer learning for medical images has been
successfully applied in References [ 4,6,8]. As pointed out by Chollet [ 15], transfer learning uses two
main techniques: ﬁne-tuning, wherein the original weights will be re-tuned to suit the new dataset,
or feature extraction, in which the original weights will be ﬁxed and the original layers will serve for
feature extraction only. Both techniques can help a lot based on the size of the dataset, as pointed out
by Yosinski et al. [ 16]. If the dataset is large enough, the original layers can be ﬁne-tuned, while if the
dataset is small, the original layers can serve in feature extraction. Also, the similarity between the
original dataset and the target dataset can play a very important role. For this study, we opted for
ﬁne-tuning instead of feature extraction because of the following reasons: (1) the large number of
images contained in the dataset used, and (2) the huge di erence (with respect to the domain of the
images) between the ImageNet dataset and the histopathology dataset taken into account.

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 3 of 20
Fine-tuning an entire CNN architecture can take hours and requires certain hardware, and the
eect of each block can play a very important role. Fine-tuning the entire network does not always
guarantee to yield the best performance. The main purpose of this study is to determine the e ect
of ﬁne-tuning a CNN block-wise to assess the performance gained by training each block. Three
state-of-the-art CNN architectures with three learning rates are used in this study. The performance
measure used is the AUC of the ROC curve. A separate unlabeled test set is used to evaluate the
performance of the CNN architectures. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a brief
literature review about using transfer learning in histopathology is given. In Section 3, the proposed
methodology is discussed. In Section 4, the results obtained are stated. In Section 5, a brief overview of
the ﬁndings is discussed. In Section 6, the conclusion is stated.
2. Literature Review
The usage of deep learning techniques for medical image classiﬁcation is a sore subject right now
because of the need to assist pathologists and give them a second opinion.
Sharma and Mehra [ 17] investigated the e ect of CNN transfer learning on the performance of
three CNN architectures, namely VGG16, VGG19, and ResNet50. The authors used the BreakHis
dataset [ 18], which consists of 7909 breast cancer histopathology images. The authors opted for binary
classiﬁcation, and the original last classiﬁcation layer of all the architectures was removed and replaced
by a logistic regression classiﬁer. The authors used the AUC of the ROC curve, accuracy, precision,
recall, F1 score, and APS as evaluation criteria. The authors tried three di erent splitting techniques,
namely 90% and 10% for training and testing respectively, 80% and 20%, and 70% and 30%. The best
result reported by the authors was found using the VGG16 architecture, which achieved an AUC of
95.65% for the ﬁrst splitting technique, followed by the VGG19 architecture, which achieved an AUC of
91.85% for the ﬁrst splitting technique as well. The ResNet architecture’s performance did not improve
by using transfer learning.
Kassani et al. [ 19] proposed a novel model to classify histopathology images. The authors used four
datasets, namely PatchCamelyon [ 20,21], BreakHis [ 18], Bach [ 22], and BioImaging [ 23], to train and
validate their model. The authors proposed a novel binary-classiﬁcation ensemble model composed of
three CNN architectures, namely, VGG19 [ 24], MobileNet [ 25], and DenseNet [ 26]. The accuracy results
reported by the authors were 98.13%, 95%, 94.64%, and 83.10% for datasets BreakHis [ 18], Bach [ 22],
PatchCamelyon, and BioImaging, respectively. Di erent image augmentation techniques were used
to increase the size of the training dataset to make the CNN models more robust against overﬁtting.
Some of the augmentation techniques applied were ﬂipping the images horizontally and vertically,
increasing the zoom range, and rotating the images. The authors opted for an Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.0001 , and the batch size used was 32. All of the images were resized to 224224pixels ,
and all of the models were trained for 1000 epochs. The authors claimed that by using the three-model
ensemble, the accuracy of the BreakHis dataset increased from 97.42% for the best single classiﬁer to
98.13%, for the PatchCamelyon dataset, it increased from 90.84% to 94.64% for the best single classiﬁe;
for the Bach dataset, it increased from 92% to 95%, and for the BioImaging dataset, it increased from
81.69% to 83.10%.
Vesal et al. [ 27] investigated the e ect of transfer learning on the Bach [ 22] dataset. The authors
compared two CNN architectures, namely InceptionV3 [ 28] and ResNet50 [ 29], and opted for multi-class
classiﬁcation into four categories. The batch size used was 32, and the optimizer used was stochastic
gradient descent with Nesterov momentum with a learning rate of 0.0001, with the dataset trained
for 100 epochs for both architectures. The authors reported that the ﬁne-tuned ResNet50 architecture
outperformed the InceptionV3 architecture with an accuracy of 97.50% and 91.25%, respectively.
Deniz et al. [ 30] used the BreakHis [ 18] dataset to investigate the e ect of transfer learning.
The authors opted for the AlexNet and VGG16 architectures. The authors conducted three experiments,
two of them using the AlexNet and VGG16 for feature extraction, concatenating their results then
adding the SVM classiﬁer, and the third ﬁne-tuning the AlexNet network. The optimizer authors used

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 4 of 20
was SGD with momentum, and the learning rate chosen was 0.0001. The authors set the batch size at
10. The authors reported that the ﬁne-tuned AlexNet outperformed the feature extraction of both the
AlexNet and VGG16 networks.
Ahmad et al. [ 31] investigated the e ect of transfer learning on a multiclass histopathology dataset,
using three CNN architectures, namely the AlexNet, GoogleNet, and ResNet architectures. The dataset
used was the BioImaging dataset, and the authors used image augmentation to increase the size of the
dataset from 260 images to 72,800 images. The authors reported that the ResNet network achieved the
best accuracy, at 85%. Table 1 shows a summary of the studies mentioned.
Table 1. Summary of the studies mentioned.
Paper Dataset Name Dataset SizeArchitectures
UsedClassesBest
Accuracy
Sharma et al. [17] BreakHis [18] 7909VGG16
VGG19
ResNet50Binary 92.6%
Ahmad et al. [31] BioImaging [23] 260AlexNet
GoogleNet
ResNet50Multiclass 85%
Deniz et al. [30] BreakHis [18] 7909AlexNet
VGG16Binary 91.37%
Vesal et al. [27] Bach [22] 400InceptionV3
ResNet50Multiclass 97.50%
Kassani et al. [19]PatchCamelyon [21]
BreakHis [18]
Bach [22]
BioImaging [23]327,680
7909
400
249Ensemble of:
VGG19
DenseNet
ImageNetBinary94.64%
98.13%
95%
83.10%
The above-mentioned studies did not investigate the ﬁne-tuning block-wise e ect on the CNN’s
performance, and that is where this study will come into use: where the e ect of each block in three
CNN architectures will be investigated to detect how deeply the CNN should be ﬁne-tuned given that
ﬁne-tuning a CNN is very computationally expensive.
3. Methodology
This paper focuses on ﬁne-tuning three CNN architectures’ weights from the ImageNet dataset
(non-medical) to classify histopathological images into normal or not. Below is a description of the
methods used in this research.
3.1. Convolutional Neural Networks
Formally, in supervised machine learning given a training dataset of F=(xi,yi)	N
i=1, where N
is the training dataset size and (xi,yi)is a single training example, xi2Fis the training images and
yi2Fis the respective label of each image xi,is the model parameters and ˆyiis the predicted label
using the function f(xi;). The purpose of training a machine learning classiﬁer can be described as
minimizing the loss function (1):
L=1
NNX
i=1Li(f(xi;),yi) (1)
where, in classiﬁcation problems, the loss function used is the cross-entropy loss function, which can
be formally deﬁned as in Equation (2):
L(ˆyi,yi)= NX
i=1yi(N)log ˆyi(N) (2)

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 5 of 20
given that ˆyi=f(xi;).
For binary classiﬁcation, the cross-entropy loss function can be deﬁned as in Equation (3):
LBCE(ˆyi,yi)= 1
NNX
i=1[yilog ˆyi+(1 yi)log(1 ˆyi)] (3)
The convolution operation that composes the convolution layer is a mathematical operation that
combines two signals, which can be formally deﬁned as in Equation (4):
o[u,v]=f[m,n]g[u,v]=X
mX
nf[m,n]g[u+m,v+n] (4)
where f[m,n]is the convolution ﬁlter, g[u,v]is the input image, and o[u,v]is the output feature map.
The convolution operation is shown in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 20 
𝐿(𝑦ො௜,𝑦௜)=− ෍ 𝑦 ௜(𝑁)log 𝑦ො௜(𝑁)ே
௜ୀଵ (2) 
given that 𝑦ො௜= 𝑓 (𝑥௜;𝜃). 
For binary classification, the cross-entropy loss function can be defined as in Equation (3): 
𝐿஻஼ா(𝑦ො௜,𝑦௜)=−1
𝑁෍[ 𝑦 ௜log 𝑦ො௜+(1−𝑦 ௜)log(1 − 𝑦 ො௜)]ே
௜ୀଵ  (3) 
The convolution operation that composes the conv olution layer is a mathematical operation that 
combines two signals, which can be formally defined as in Equation (4): 
𝑜[𝑢, 𝑣]=𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛 ]∗𝑔[𝑢, 𝑣]=෍ ෍ 𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛 ] ⊙𝑔 [𝑢+𝑚 ,𝑣+𝑛 ] 
௡ 
௠ (4) 
where 𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛]  is the convolution filter, 𝑔[𝑢, 𝑣]  is the input image, and 𝑜[𝑢, 𝑣] is the output feature 
map. The convolution operation is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Convolutional operation. 
The convolution layers convolve the input images with a small grid shape called the kernel, or 
convolution filter, starting from the top left corner of the image, as shown in Figure 3. The convolution 
filter is used to extract important features from the input images that will help in classifying the 
images. The weights of the convolution filter are the most important in the CNN, which will be learned from the iterative nature of the backprop agation algorithm. Many filters will be used to 
extract as many features from the images as possib le to be able to correctly classify the images. 
 
Figure 3. Convolution filter to extract features. 
The result of convolving the filter over the inpu t image will produce a matrix that is called a 
feature map, where it can be considered as a reduce d image that will be used instead of the original 
image in the subsequent layers. Many feature maps will be outputted from the filters used, every one 
of these maps will capture different features from each image, and these features will be used to 
correctly classify the images [19]. The backpropagat ion algorithm is used to tune the weights of the 
CNN by updating the weights from the last layers to  the first. To protect the CNN from vanishing or 
exploding gradients, the weights of the CNN are initialized with a certain distribution and not from 
zero. The weights of the network can be transferred from one to another to avoid initializing the 
weights from scratch. 
  
Figure 2. Convolutional operation.
The convolution layers convolve the input images with a small grid shape called the kernel, or
convolution ﬁlter, starting from the top left corner of the image, as shown in Figure 3. The convolution
ﬁlter is used to extract important features from the input images that will help in classifying the images.
The weights of the convolution ﬁlter are the most important in the CNN, which will be learned from
the iterative nature of the backpropagation algorithm. Many ﬁlters will be used to extract as many
features from the images as possible to be able to correctly classify the images.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 20 
𝐿(𝑦ො௜,𝑦௜)=− ෍ 𝑦 ௜(𝑁)log 𝑦ො௜(𝑁)ே
௜ୀଵ (2) 
given that 𝑦ො௜= 𝑓 (𝑥௜;𝜃). 
For binary classification, the cross-entropy loss function can be defined as in Equation (3): 
𝐿஻஼ா(𝑦ො௜,𝑦௜)=−1
𝑁෍[ 𝑦 ௜log 𝑦ො௜+(1−𝑦 ௜)log(1 − 𝑦 ො௜)]ே
௜ୀଵ  (3) 
The convolution operation that composes the conv olution layer is a mathematical operation that 
combines two signals, which can be formally defined as in Equation (4): 
𝑜[𝑢, 𝑣]=𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛 ]∗𝑔[𝑢, 𝑣]=෍ ෍ 𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛 ] ⊙𝑔 [𝑢+𝑚 ,𝑣+𝑛 ] 
௡ 
௠ (4) 
where 𝑓[𝑚, 𝑛]  is the convolution filter, 𝑔[𝑢, 𝑣]  is the input image, and 𝑜[𝑢, 𝑣] is the output feature 
map. The convolution operation is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Convolutional operation. 
The convolution layers convolve the input images with a small grid shape called the kernel, or 
convolution filter, starting from the top left corner of the image, as shown in Figure 3. The convolution 
filter is used to extract important features from the input images that will help in classifying the 
images. The weights of the convolution filter are the most important in the CNN, which will be learned from the iterative nature of the backprop agation algorithm. Many filters will be used to 
extract as many features from the images as possib le to be able to correctly classify the images. 
 
Figure 3. Convolution filter to extract features. 
The result of convolving the filter over the inpu t image will produce a matrix that is called a 
feature map, where it can be considered as a reduce d image that will be used instead of the original 
image in the subsequent layers. Many feature maps will be outputted from the filters used, every one 
of these maps will capture different features from each image, and these features will be used to 
correctly classify the images [19]. The backpropagat ion algorithm is used to tune the weights of the 
CNN by updating the weights from the last layers to  the first. To protect the CNN from vanishing or 
exploding gradients, the weights of the CNN are initialized with a certain distribution and not from 
zero. The weights of the network can be transferred from one to another to avoid initializing the 
weights from scratch. 
  
Figure 3. Convolution ﬁlter to extract features.
The result of convolving the ﬁlter over the input image will produce a matrix that is called a
feature map, where it can be considered as a reduced image that will be used instead of the original
image in the subsequent layers. Many feature maps will be outputted from the ﬁlters used, every
one of these maps will capture di erent features from each image, and these features will be used to
correctly classify the images [ 19]. The backpropagation algorithm is used to tune the weights of the
CNN by updating the weights from the last layers to the ﬁrst. To protect the CNN from vanishing
or exploding gradients, the weights of the CNN are initialized with a certain distribution and not
from zero. The weights of the network can be transferred from one to another to avoid initializing the
weights from scratch.

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 6 of 20
3.2. Transfer Learning
The source dataset is the dataset being used to train the CNN weights to be used for another
target dataset; usually, the source dataset contains millions of images with thousands of classes, like
the ImageNet dataset [ 32]. The following four techniques for transfer learning were introduced in
the literature:
 The ﬁrst technique is to freeze the source CNN’s weights (like ImageNet’s weights) and then
remove the original fully connected layers and add another classiﬁer, either a new fully connected
layer or any machine learning classiﬁer, like support vector machine (SVM), that is, to use the
original weights for feature extraction.
 The second technique is to ﬁne-tune the top layers of the source CNN with a very small learning
rate and freeze the bottom layers, under the assumption that the bottom layers are very generic
and can be used for any kind of image dataset [16].
 The third technique is to ﬁne-tune the entire network’s weights using a very small learning rate to
avoid losing the source weights, then remove the last fully connected layers, and add another
layer to suit the target dataset.
 The fourth technique is to use the CNN’s original architecture without importing any weights,
that is, to initialize the weights from scratch. The point of this technique is using a well-known
architecture that has been experimented with challenging datasets and proven to be good. Di erent
transfer learning techniques are shown in Figure 4.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 20 
3.2. Transfer Learning 
The source dataset is the dataset being used to  train the CNN weights to be used for another 
target dataset; usually, the source dataset contains millions of images with thousands of classes, like 
the ImageNet dataset [32]. The following four techniqu es for transfer learning were introduced in the 
literature: 
• The first technique is to freeze the source CNN’ s weights (like ImageNet’s weights) and then 
remove the original fully connected layers an d add another classifier, either a new fully 
connected layer or any machine learning classifi er, like support vector machine (SVM), that is, 
to use the original weights for feature extraction. 
• The second technique is to fine-tune the top layers  of the source CNN with a very small learning 
rate and freeze the bottom layers , under the assumption that the bottom layers are very generic 
and can be used for any kind of image dataset [16]. 
• The third technique is to fine-tune the entire ne twork’s weights using a very small learning rate 
to avoid losing the source weights, then remove  the last fully connected layers, and add another 
layer to suit the target dataset. 
• The fourth technique is to use the CNN’s original architecture without importing any weights, 
that is, to initialize the weights from scratch. The point of this technique is using a well-known 
architecture that has been experimented with challenging datasets and proven to be good. 
Different transfer learning techniques are shown in Figure 4. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 4. Cont.

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 7 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 20 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
Figure 4. This figure shows different tr ansfer learning techniques: ( a) a generic CNN trained on 
ImageNet dataset, ( b) the first technique, in which the sour ce weights are fixed and the original 
classifier layers will be replaced by new layers to suit the target dataset, ( c) the second technique, in 
which the top layers will be fine-tuned, the weights of the bottom layer will be fixed, and the last fully 
connected layers will be replaced, ( d) the third technique, in which the original classifier layers will 
be replaced and the entire netw ork will be fine-tuned, and ( e) the fourth technique, in which the 
original architecture will be used without any weig hts. The green color represents the weights learned 
from the ImageNet dataset, the blue color represen ts the fine-tuning of the ImageNet weights using 
the target dataset, and the white color means th at the weights will be initialized from scratch. 
According to Pan and Yang [33], transfer learning in the image classification domain can be 
defined given the following parameters: 𝑆: 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 , Τ: 𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 , 𝑛: 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 , 
𝑚: 𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 , 𝜙(.): objective function, 𝒟: 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 , ℱ: 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 , 
𝑃(𝑋): 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 , and 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠: 𝑋 = {𝑥 ଵ,𝑥ଶ,…,𝑥 ௡}∈ℱ , 
Υ: 𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 , 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘: Κ = {Υ, 𝜙(. )} , 𝑛≫𝑚 . 
An image domain, 𝒟, is defined as having two components: a feature space,  ℱ, and a 
probability distribution, 𝑃(𝑋) : 
𝒟 = {ℱ, 𝑃(𝑋)}   (5) 
For a source domain, 𝑆, the dataset is 𝑋ௌ=൛ 𝑥 ௌభ,𝑥ௌమ,…,𝑥 ௌ౤ൟ∈ℱ ௌ. 
The source domain data can be denoted by: 
𝒟ௌ={ ൫ 𝑥 ௌభ,𝑦ௌభ൯, ൫𝑥 ௌమ,𝑦ௌమ൯, … , ൫𝑥 ௌ೙,𝑦ௌ೙൯}  (6) 
where 𝑥ௌ೔∈ℱ ௌ is the data instance, and 𝑦ௌ೔∈Υ ௌ is the corresponding class label. 
For the target domain, Τ, the target domain can be denoted by: 
𝒟஋={ ൫ 𝑥 ஋೘,𝑦஋೘൯, ൫𝑥 ஋೘,𝑦஋೘൯, … , ൫𝑥 ஋೘,𝑦஋೘൯}  (7) 
where 𝑥஋೔∈ℱ ஋ is the data instance, and 𝑦஋೔∈Υ ஋ is the corresponding class label. 
A task, Κ, consists of two components: a label space, Υ, and an objective function, 𝜙(. ) : 
Κ={Υ, 𝜙(. )}  (8) 
given a source domain, 𝒟ௌ, and learning task, Κୗ, a target domain, 𝒟஋, and its learning task, Κ஋. 
Transfer learning aims to help improve the learning of the target predictive function 𝜙஋(. ) in Κ஋ 
using the knowledge in 𝒟ௌ and Κୗ, where 𝒟ୗ്𝒟 ஋ or Κୗ്Κ ஋. 𝒟ௌ represents the ImageNet 
Figure 4. This ﬁgure shows di erent transfer learning techniques: ( a) a generic CNN trained on
ImageNet dataset, ( b) the ﬁrst technique, in which the source weights are ﬁxed and the original classiﬁer
layers will be replaced by new layers to suit the target dataset, ( c) the second technique, in which
the top layers will be ﬁne-tuned, the weights of the bottom layer will be ﬁxed, and the last fully
connected layers will be replaced, ( d) the third technique, in which the original classiﬁer layers will be
replaced and the entire network will be ﬁne-tuned, and ( e) the fourth technique, in which the original
architecture will be used without any weights. The green color represents the weights learned from the
ImageNet dataset, the blue color represents the ﬁne-tuning of the ImageNet weights using the target
dataset, and the white color means that the weights will be initialized from scratch.
According to Pan and Yang [ 33], transfer learning in the image classiﬁcation domain can be deﬁned
given the following parameters: S:Source ,T:Target ,n:Source dataset size ,m:Target dataset size ,
(.):objective function, D:Domain ,F:f eature space ,P(X):Marginal probability distribution ,
and learning samples :X=fx1,x2,:::,xng2F,:Label space ,task : K=n
,(.)o
,nm.
An image domain, D,is deﬁned as having two components: a feature space, F,and a probability
distribution, P(X):
D=F,P(X)	(5)
For a source domain, S, the dataset is XS=n
xS1,xS2,:::,xSno
2F S.
The source domain data can be denoted by:
DS=n
xS1,yS1
,
xS2,yS2
,:::,(xSn,ySn)o
(6)
where xSi2F Sis the data instance, and ySi2Sis the corresponding class label.
For the target domain, T, the target domain can be denoted by:
DT=n
(xTm,yTm),(xTm,yTm),:::,(xTm,yTm)o
(7)
where xTi2F Tis the data instance, and yTi2Tis the corresponding class label.
A task, K, consists of two components: a label space, , and an objective function, (.):
K=n
,(.)o
(8)

==== Page 8 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 8 of 20
given a source domain, DS, and learning task, KS, a target domain, DT,and its learning task, KT.
Transfer learning aims to help improve the learning of the target predictive function T(.)inKTusing
the knowledge in DSand KS, whereDS,DTorKS,KT.DSrepresents the ImageNet dataset in our
research and its learning task, KS, where KS=n
S,S(.)o
, given that Sis the source label space,
andS(.)is the source predictive function that is used to map a new image xito its label yi.DT
represents the histopathology dataset in our research and its learning task, KT, where KT=n
T,T(.)o
.
As stated before, we want to enhance T(.)of the histopathology dataset, DT,using the ImageNet
dataset,DS, and its objective function, S(.)of K S.
3.3. CNN Architectures
Since AlexNet architecture achieved ﬁrst place in the ImageNet challenge in 2012 with an error
rate of 16%, many architectures were introduced using CNN to classify images. In 2014, VGG [ 24]
architectures, which are considerably deeper than AlexNet architecture [12], were introduced, and in
the same year, GoogLeNet architecture [ 28] was introduced as well, which is considered deeper
and wider than AlexNet. Then, in 2015, ResNet architecture [ 29] was introduced and was deeper
and contained the residual connection, and it was followed by DenseNet [ 26] in 2016. All of these
state-of-the-art CNNs were trained on the ImageNet dataset, and their weights are publicly available.
In this study, we decided to take into account three CNNs, namely, VGG16, VGG19, and InceptionV3
architectures. This choice is related to the fact that these three networks are the ones commonly used in
the Kaggle competition associated with this dataset, and, even more important, they produced better
performance with respect to the other competitors. Additionally, the choice of the architectures to
be considered is not fundamental for developing our study that focuses on understanding whether
ﬁne-tuning is a suitable approach for analyzing the histopathology dataset at hand. Below, we brieﬂy
describe the CNNs used in this paper.
3.3.1. VGG Architectures
VGG architectures [ 24] were introduced by Oxford’s Visual Geometry Group in 2014 to participate
in the ILSVRC competition, where it achieved a top-5 error rate of 7.3%. Two networks, namely
VGG16 and VGG19, were introduced, and the only di erence between the two networks is the
number of convolution layers used. VGG16 consists of 13 convolution layers, and VGG19 consists of
16 convolution layers and so is considered deeper than VGG16. Instead of using a convolution layer
with a large ﬁlter size, the authors concatenated two layers with a smaller ﬁlter size, which reduced the
number of parameters by 28%. VGG networks consist of ﬁve convolution blocks, where the ﬁrst two
blocks consist of two convolution layers each with a ﬁlter size of 33, the convolution layers in the
ﬁrst block have 64 ﬁlters each, while the convolution layers in the second block have 128 ﬁlters each.
The third block in VGG16 consists of three convolution layers, and in VGG19, it has four convolution
layers, all of the layers have 256 ﬁlters with size 33. The fourth and ﬁfth convolution blocks consist
of three convolution layers in VGG16 and four convolution layers in VGG19, and all of the layers
have 512 ﬁlters with size 33. The ﬁve blocks are separated by a maximum pooling layer. Two fully
connected layers are used as a classiﬁer for the network with 4096 neurons. VGG16 has 138 million
parameters with 23 layers’ depth, and VGG19 has 143 million parameters with 26 layers’ depth. VGG
architectures are shown in Figure 5.

==== Page 9 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 9 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 20 
dataset in our research and its learning task, Κୗ, where Κୗ={ Υ ୗ,𝜙ௌ(. )}, given that Υୗ is the source 
label space, and 𝜙ௌ(. ) is the source predictive function that is used to map a new image 𝑥௜ to its 
label 𝑦௜. 𝒟஋ represents the histopathology dataset in our research and its learning task, Κ஋, where 
Κ஋={ Υ ஋,𝜙஋(. )}. As stated before, we want to enhance 𝜙஋(. ) of the histopathology dataset, 𝒟஋, 
using the ImageNet dataset, 𝒟ௌ, and its objective function, 𝜙ௌ(. ) of Κୗ. 
3.3. CNN Architectures 
Since AlexNet architecture achieved first place in the ImageNet challenge in 2012 with an error 
rate of 16%, many architectures were introduced using CNN to classify images. In 2014, VGG [24] 
architectures, which are considerab ly deeper than AlexNet architecture [12], were introduced, and in 
the same year, GoogLeNet architecture [28] was intr oduced as well, which is considered deeper and 
wider than AlexNet. Then, in 2015, ResNet archit ecture [29] was introduced and was deeper and 
contained the residual connection, and it was followed by DenseNet [26] in 2016. All of these state-
of-the-art CNNs were trained on the ImageNet datase t, and their weights are publicly available. In 
this study, we decided to take into account th ree CNNs, namely, VGG16, VGG19, and InceptionV3 
architectures. This choice is related to the fact that these three networks are the ones commonly used 
in the Kaggle competition associated with this da taset, and, even more important, they produced 
better performance with respect to the other competit ors. Additionally, the choice of the architectures 
to be considered is not fundamental for developing  our study that focuses on understanding whether 
fine-tuning is a suitable approach for analyzing the histopathology dataset at hand. Below, we briefly 
describe the CNNs used in this paper. 
3.3.1. VGG Architectures 
VGG architectures [24] were introduced by Oxford’s Visual Geometry Group in 2014 to 
participate in the ILSVRC competition, where it ac hieved a top-5 error rate of 7.3%. Two networks, 
namely VGG16 and VGG19, were introduced, and th e only difference between the two networks is 
the number of convolution layers used. VGG16 consis ts of 13 convolution la yers, and VGG19 consists 
of 16 convolution layers and so is considered de eper than VGG16. Instead of using a convolution 
layer with a large filter size, the authors concatenated two layers with a smaller filter size, which reduced the number of parameters by 28%. VGG netw orks consist of five convolution blocks, where 
the first two blocks consist of two convolution layers each with a filter size of 3×3 , the convolution 
layers in the first block have 64 filters each, while the convolution layers in the second block have 128 
filters each. The third block in VGG16 consists of three convolution layers, and in VGG19, it has four 
convolution layers, all of the layers have 256 filters with size 3×3 . The fourth and fifth convolution 
blocks consist of three convolution layers in VGG16 and four convolution layers in VGG19, and all of the layers have 512 filters with size 3×3 . The five blocks are sepa rated by a maximum pooling 
layer. Two fully connected layers are used as a classifier for the network with 4096 neurons. VGG16 has 138 million parameters with 23 layers’ depth, and VGG19 has 143 million parameters with 26 layers’ depth. VGG architectures are shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
(a) 
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 20 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. This figure shows VGG network architectures: ( a) VGG19 architecture and ( b) VGG16 
architecture. 
3.3.2. InceptionV3 Architecture 
Inception architectures [28] were first introduced  by the authors of Reference [34] in 2014 to 
participate in the ImageNet competition, winning fi rst place with a top-5 error rate of 6.65%. They 
were designed under the hypothesis that different sc ales of the same object require different filter 
sizes to be observed correctly. The inception module starts with the same input, and then it will be 
split into different convolutional layers with different kernel sizes and one max pooling layer —these 
filters will be parallel to each other, and then th e output will concatenate to a single layer. Having 
these layers parallel to each other and not subsequent like in VGG models will save a lot of memory and will increase the model’s capacity without increasing its depth. The inception module is shown 
in Figure 6. The version used in this paper is the third. Inception architecture consists of nine 
inception modules that are sequentially arranged. InceptionV3 architecture has 23.8 million 
parameters with 159 layers’ depth. Three filter sizes, namely 1×1 , 3×3 ,  and 5×5 , are used in a 
single inception module; in the updated version, the authors replaced the 5×5  with two 3×3  
convolution layers, influenced by Reference [24]. Inception architecture is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 6. The inception module. 
  
Figure 5. This ﬁgure shows VGG network architectures: ( a) VGG19 architecture and ( b) VGG16
architecture.
3.3.2. InceptionV3 Architecture
Inception architectures [ 28] were ﬁrst introduced by the authors of Reference [ 34] in 2014 to
participate in the ImageNet competition, winning ﬁrst place with a top-5 error rate of 6.65%. They
were designed under the hypothesis that di erent scales of the same object require di erent ﬁlter sizes
to be observed correctly. The inception module starts with the same input, and then it will be split
into di erent convolutional layers with di erent kernel sizes and one max pooling layer—these ﬁlters
will be parallel to each other, and then the output will concatenate to a single layer. Having these
layers parallel to each other and not subsequent like in VGG models will save a lot of memory and
will increase the model’s capacity without increasing its depth. The inception module is shown in
Figure 6. The version used in this paper is the third. Inception architecture consists of nine inception
modules that are sequentially arranged. InceptionV3 architecture has 23.8 million parameters with
159 layers’ depth. Three ﬁlter sizes, namely 11,33,and 55, are used in a single inception module;
in the updated version, the authors replaced the 55with two 33convolution layers, inﬂuenced by
Reference [24]. Inception architecture is shown in Figure 7.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 20 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. This figure shows VGG network architectures: ( a) VGG19 architecture and ( b) VGG16 
architecture. 
3.3.2. InceptionV3 Architecture 
Inception architectures [28] were first introduced  by the authors of Reference [34] in 2014 to 
participate in the ImageNet competition, winning fi rst place with a top-5 error rate of 6.65%. They 
were designed under the hypothesis that different sc ales of the same object require different filter 
sizes to be observed correctly. The inception module starts with the same input, and then it will be 
split into different convolutional layers with different kernel sizes and one max pooling layer—these filters will be parallel to each other, and then th e output will concatenate to a single layer. Having 
these layers parallel to each other and not subsequent like in VGG models will save a lot of memory and will increase the model’s capacity without increasing its depth. The inception module is shown in Figure 6. The version used in this paper is the third. Inception architecture consists of nine inception modules that are sequentially arranged. InceptionV3 architecture has 23.8 million 
parameters with 159 layers’ depth. Three filter sizes, namely 1×1 , 3×3 ,  and 5×5 , are used in a 
single inception module; in the updated version, the authors replaced the 5×5  with two 3×3  
convolution layers, influenced by Reference [24]. Inception architecture is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 6. The inception module. 
  
Figure 6. The inception module.

==== Page 10 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 10 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 20 
 
 
Figure 7. The Inception V3 architecture. 
3.4. Datasets Used 
CNN algorithms, especially for the state-of-the-a rt architectures that are very deep, are very 
data-hungry and need hundreds of thousands of images to be accurately trained. 
Two datasets were used in this study. One very  large dataset—the ImageNet dataset, also called 
the original dataset—was used to train the CNN. Th e second dataset, the histopathology dataset, was 
the target dataset that we wanted to classify and that we used to fine-tune the weights that the ImageNet dataset learned. A brief desc ription of both datasets follows. 
3.4.1. ImageNet Dataset 
In 2010, the ImageNet challenge [32], also known as the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual 
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC), was introduced to push forward advances in the field of computer vision. ImageNet has millions of hand-labeled images using thousands of labels. The images are mainly everyday images, including animals, bridges, cars, and furniture, among others. A sample of the ImageNet dataset is shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. A sample of the ImageNet dataset. 
3.4.2. PatchCamelyon Histopathology Dataset 
The PatchCamelyon histopathology da taset [23,24] is a publicly available dataset that consists of 
220,000 labeled images and 57,000 unlabeled images and contains a 60% positive class and a 40% negative class. The positive class means the middle region of the image ( 32 × 32 ) contains tumor 
tissue. The dataset has no duplicates. The test se t can be evaluated on the Kaggle website, which 
produces the AUC of the ROC curve.  A sample of the PatchCamelyon dataset is shown in Figure 9. 
Figure 7. The Inception V3 architecture.
3.4. Datasets Used
CNN algorithms, especially for the state-of-the-art architectures that are very deep, are very
data-hungry and need hundreds of thousands of images to be accurately trained.
Two datasets were used in this study. One very large dataset—the ImageNet dataset, also called
the original dataset—was used to train the CNN. The second dataset, the histopathology dataset,
was the target dataset that we wanted to classify and that we used to ﬁne-tune the weights that the
ImageNet dataset learned. A brief description of both datasets follows.
3.4.1. ImageNet Dataset
In 2010, the ImageNet challenge [ 32], also known as the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (ILSVRC), was introduced to push forward advances in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
ImageNet has millions of hand-labeled images using thousands of labels. The images are mainly
everyday images, including animals, bridges, cars, and furniture, among others. A sample of the
ImageNet dataset is shown in Figure 8.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 20 
 
 
Figure 7. The Inception V3 architecture. 
3.4. Datasets Used 
CNN algorithms, especially for the state-of-the-a rt architectures that are very deep, are very 
data-hungry and need hundreds of thousands of images to be accurately trained. 
Two datasets were used in this study. One very  large dataset—the ImageNet dataset, also called 
the original dataset—was used to train the CNN. Th e second dataset, the histopathology dataset, was 
the target dataset that we wanted to classify and that we used to fine-tune the weights that the ImageNet dataset learned. A brief desc ription of both datasets follows. 
3.4.1. ImageNet Dataset 
In 2010, the ImageNet challenge [32], also known as the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual 
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC), was introduced to push forward advances in the field of computer vision. ImageNet has millions of hand-labeled images using thousands of labels. The images are mainly everyday images, including animals, bridges, cars, and furniture, among others. A sample of the ImageNet dataset is shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. A sample of the ImageNet dataset. 
3.4.2. PatchCamelyon Histopathology Dataset 
The PatchCamelyon histopathology da taset [23,24] is a publicly available dataset that consists of 
220,000 labeled images and 57,000 unlabeled images and contains a 60% positive class and a 40% negative class. The positive class means the middle region of the image ( 32 × 32 ) contains tumor 
tissue. The dataset has no duplicates. The test se t can be evaluated on the Kaggle website, which 
produces the AUC of the ROC curve.  A sample of the PatchCamelyon dataset is shown in Figure 9. 
Figure 8. A sample of the ImageNet dataset.
3.4.2. PatchCamelyon Histopathology Dataset
The PatchCamelyon histopathology dataset [ 23,24] is a publicly available dataset that consists
of 220,000 labeled images and 57,000 unlabeled images and contains a 60% positive class and a 40%
negative class. The positive class means the middle region of the image ( 3232) contains tumor tissue.
The dataset has no duplicates. The test set can be evaluated on the Kaggle website, which produces the
AUC of the ROC curve. A sample of the PatchCamelyon dataset is shown in Figure 9.

==== Page 11 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 11 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 20 
 
Figure 9. A sample of the PatchCamelyon dataset. 
3.5. Performance Measures 
Several performance measures have been introduced in the literature to assess the quality of the 
classifier. One of the most popular measures is the accuracy metric, wherein the classification domain 
can be defined as in Equation (9): 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 =𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁 (9) 
where 𝑇𝑃 is the true positive, in which the po sitive class is predicted as positive, 𝑇𝑁 is the true 
negative, in which the negative class was predicted as negative, 𝐹𝑃 is the false positive, in which the 
negative class is incorrectly classified as positive, and 𝐹𝑁 is the false negative, in which the positive 
class is incorrectly classified as negative. The main drawback of the accuracy metric is that it is only robust for balanced datasets; otherwise, it can be misleading. Another metric introduced was the sensitivity metric (also known as the true positive rate, or 𝑇𝑃𝑅 ), which is defined as in Equation (10): 
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 =𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁
 (10) 
which focuses on the positive classes and how accura tely they were classified. Another metric, called 
the 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦  (also known as the true negative rate, or 𝑇𝑁𝑅 ), was introduced to focus on the 
negative classes, which is de fined as in Equation (11): 
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 =𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃       (41) 
To combine the performance of both 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦  and 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 , a new metric called the receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curve was introd uced. The ROC curve was developed during the 
Second World War [35]. It is a metric that is wide ly used to measure and visualize the classifier’s 
ability to distinguish between two classes [36]. The curve plots the 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦  against the (1 −
𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦) . To represent the area under the ROC curve, a metric called the area under the curve 
(AUC) is used. The AUC of the ROC curve ranges from 0.5 to 1, 0.5 ≤ 𝐴𝑈𝐶 ≤ 1 , where an AUC equal 
to 1 means that the classifier is able to distinguis h between the positive and negative classes perfectly, 
and an AUC equal to 0.5 means that the classifier is just a random guess. 
3.6. Measures to Avoid Overfitting 
Due to the importance of any medical-images clas sifier, all of the measur es necessary should be 
taken to ensure that the image classifier is robust  against overfitting. Overfitting is defined as the 
model’s bad performance on the test dataset and pe rfect performance on the training dataset [37], 
which emphasizes the model’s genera lizability. Many regularization techniques were introduced in 
the literature to overcome the problem of classifier  overfitting by increasing the training error in 
exchange for decreasing the testing error, meaning to decrease the model variance by increasing the 
model bias [38]. The following measures aim to decr ease errors in the test dataset irrespective of 
errors in the training dataset. 
3.6.1. Early Stopping 
A technique used to control the number of traini ng epochs is early sto pping. The model training 
will stop if the accuracy of the validation dataset does not change for a predefined number of epochs, 
meaning that the training will stop if the model star ts to overfit the training dataset. Early stopping 
Figure 9. A sample of the PatchCamelyon dataset.
3.5. Performance Measures
Several performance measures have been introduced in the literature to assess the quality of the
classiﬁer. One of the most popular measures is the accuracy metric, wherein the classiﬁcation domain
can be deﬁned as in Equation (9):
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN(9)
where TPis the true positive, in which the positive class is predicted as positive, TNis the true negative,
in which the negative class was predicted as negative, FPis the false positive, in which the negative
class is incorrectly classiﬁed as positive, and FNis the false negative, in which the positive class is
incorrectly classiﬁed as negative. The main drawback of the accuracy metric is that it is only robust
for balanced datasets; otherwise, it can be misleading. Another metric introduced was the sensitivity
metric (also known as the true positive rate, or TPR ), which is deﬁned as in Equation (10):
Sensitivity =TP
TP+FN(10)
which focuses on the positive classes and how accurately they were classiﬁed. Another metric, called
theSpeci f icity (also known as the true negative rate, or TNR ), was introduced to focus on the negative
classes, which is deﬁned as in Equation (11):
Speci f icity =TN
TN+FP(11)
To combine the performance of both Sensitivity and Speci f icity , a new metric called the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve was introduced. The ROC curve was developed during the
Second World War [ 35]. It is a metric that is widely used to measure and visualize the classiﬁer’s ability
to distinguish between two classes [ 36]. The curve plots the sensitivity against the (1 speci f icity ).
To represent the area under the ROC curve, a metric called the area under the curve (AUC) is used.
The AUC of the ROC curve ranges from 0.5 to 1, 0.5AUC1, where an AUC equal to 1 means that
the classiﬁer is able to distinguish between the positive and negative classes perfectly, and an AUC
equal to 0.5 means that the classiﬁer is just a random guess.
3.6. Measures to Avoid Overﬁtting
Due to the importance of any medical-images classiﬁer, all of the measures necessary should be
taken to ensure that the image classiﬁer is robust against overﬁtting. Overﬁtting is deﬁned as the
model’s bad performance on the test dataset and perfect performance on the training dataset [ 37],
which emphasizes the model’s generalizability. Many regularization techniques were introduced
in the literature to overcome the problem of classiﬁer overﬁtting by increasing the training error in
exchange for decreasing the testing error, meaning to decrease the model variance by increasing the
model bias [ 38]. The following measures aim to decrease errors in the test dataset irrespective of errors
in the training dataset.

==== Page 12 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 12 of 20
3.6.1. Early Stopping
A technique used to control the number of training epochs is early stopping. The model training
will stop if the accuracy of the validation dataset does not change for a predeﬁned number of epochs,
meaning that the training will stop if the model starts to overﬁt the training dataset. Early stopping
saves computational power and helps the CNN from overﬁtting the training dataset by doing useless
epochs that will take a long time and decrease the network’s accuracy [ 38]. Early stopping can help
optimize the epoch’s size hyperparameter by setting the epoch size too high and then letting early
stopping automatically halt the training if no increase in accuracy occurs [39].
3.6.2. Best Model Saved
The model will be saved only if the accuracy in that epoch is larger than the largest accuracy
achieved so far. The ﬁnal model is the last saved one.
3.6.3. Dropout
Srivastava et al. [ 37] introduced dropout, which is considered a very important regularization
technique that is usually used as an ensemble technique and is similar to a bagging algorithm [ 40,41].
Every single neuron that each layer is applied to has a probability, p,to be dropped temporarily during
training, so it can construct many networks from the same single network. Dropout can make a CNN
very robust against overﬁtting [38].
3.6.4. Image Augmentation
One of the main methods to reduce overfitting is to have a huge training dataset to train the model on
every single possible image, but practically , that is impossible, which is how augmentation was introduced.
To increase the training dataset, image augmentation can be applied. Image augmentation is deﬁned
as an algorithm that can be used to create artiﬁcial images by modifying the original images through a
series of transformations, rotations, and altered brightness, among other possible modiﬁcations.
4. Results
In this study, three CNN architectures were ﬁne-tuned block-wise to determine the e ect of
ﬁne-tuning each block on the generalizability of the network. The CNN architectures used were VGG16,
VGG19, and InceptionV3. The original weights used were the ImageNet dataset weights. The dataset
used was the publicly available PatchCamelyon dataset, and the dataset size was 220,000 labeled
images for training, which consists of 60% of the positive class and 40% of the negative class. A separate
57,458 unlabeled images were provided to assess the classiﬁer’s performance, and the results of
classifying the test dataset were uploaded to the Kaggle website to determine the AUC of the ROC
curve. In all of the experiments, the Keras library was used with Python. A schematic diagram of the
proposed model is shown in Figure 10.

==== Page 13 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 13 of 20
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 20 
saves computational power and helps the CNN from ov erfitting the training dataset by doing useless 
epochs that will take a long time and decrease th e network’s accuracy [38]. Early stopping can help 
optimize the epoch’s size hyperparameter by setting  the epoch size too high and then letting early 
stopping automatically halt the training if no increase in accuracy occurs [39]. 
3.6.2. Best Model Saved 
The model will be saved only if the accuracy in that epoch is larger than the largest accuracy 
achieved so far. The final model is the last saved one. 
3.6.3. Dropout 
Srivastava et al. [37] introduced dropout, whic h is considered a very important regularization 
technique that is usually used as an ensemble tec hnique and is similar to a bagging algorithm [40,41]. 
Every single neuron that each layer is applied to has a probability,  𝑝, to be dropped temporarily 
during training, so it can construct many networks  from the same single ne twork. Dropout can make 
a CNN very robust against overfitting [38]. 
3.6.4. Image Augmentation 
One of the main methods to reduce overfitting is  to have a huge training dataset to train the 
model on every single possible image, but practicall y, that is impossible, which is how augmentation 
was introduced. To increase the training datase t, image augmentation can be applied. Image 
augmentation is defined as an algorithm that can be used to create artificial  images by modifying the 
original images through a series of transformation s, rotations, and altered brightness, among other 
possible modifications. 
4. Results 
In this study, three CNN architectures were fine-t uned block-wise to determine the effect of fine-
tuning each block on the generali zability of the network. The CNN architectures used were VGG16, 
VGG19, and InceptionV3. The original weights used  were the ImageNet dataset weights. The dataset 
used was the publicly available PatchCamelyon dataset, and the dataset size was 220,000 labeled 
images for training, which consists of 60% of the positive class and 40% of the negative class. A 
separate 57,458 unlabeled images were provided to assess the classifier’s performance, and the results of classifying the test dataset were uploaded to the Kaggle website to determine the AUC of the ROC curve. In all of the experiments, the Keras library  was used with Python. A schematic diagram of the 
proposed model is shown in Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10. A schematic diagram of the proposed model. 
Figure 10. A schematic diagram of the proposed model.
4.1. Experiment Parameters
Three CNN architectures were ﬁne-tuned block-wise. The batch size used was 64, and three
learning rates, namely 10 3,10 4, and 10 5, were applied. The Adam optimizer [ 41] was used in all of
the experiments. All of the images were kept at the original dimensions of 9696pixels . The original
fully connected layers of the architectures were removed and replaced by a dropout layer with a
probability of 50% to increase the network accuracy, and a new fully connected layer was used as
a classiﬁer. The training dataset was divided into two partitions: 80% and 20% for training and
validation, respectively. To increase the size of the training dataset and to overcome the translation of
the images, image augmentation was applied with the following parameters: horizontal and vertical
ﬂipping, 180rotation, width and height shifting, and shearing and zooming. It is worth noting that
image augmentation was applied to the training dataset only and not the validation dataset. The best
model will be saved in every epoch, and the early stopping criteria of 10 epochs were applied.
Each CNN architecture was divided into blocks based on their design. For VGG networks,
the blocks were divided based on the max-pooling layers, and for the InceptionV3 network, the blocks
were deﬁned based on the inception module, meaning that every inception module represents a block.
VGG architectures have a total of 5 blocks, and the InceptionV3 network has 13 blocks. Each network
was ﬁne-tuned backward, meaning that the ﬁrst block to be ﬁne-tuned in the VGG networks was the
5th, and the ﬁrst block to be ﬁne-tuned in the InceptionV3 network was the 13th.
4.2. Experiment Results
The results of ﬁne-tuning VGG16 with three di erent learning rates are shown in Table 2. These
results are the AUC of the ROC curve from the Kaggle website using the unlabeled dataset. The ﬁrst
block that was trained was the 5th block, and the results of the three learning rates are approximately
the same, although the highest was with the 10 3learning rate. The second block was the 4th, which
was ﬁne-tuned with the 5th layer, and the highest AUC obtained was by the 10 4learning rate followed
by the 10 3and 10 5. The AUC results did increase by ﬁne-tuning the 4th as well. The third experiment
ﬁne-tuned the blocks from the 5th to the 3rd, and the results obtained were higher than those of the
previous two experiments. The highest was obtained by using the learning rate of 10 4. The fourth
experiment ﬁne-tuned the blocks from the 5th to the 2nd, and the results show that the accuracy started
to decrease compared to the previous experiments. The ﬁfth experiment ﬁne-tuned the entire network,
and the results were higher than the previous experiment but overall lower than the third experiment.

==== Page 14 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 14 of 20
Overall, the highest AUC was 96%, which was achieved by ﬁne-tuning the last 3 blocks and using the
10 4learning rate.
Table 2. Results of the VGG16 architecture.
VGG16 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 0.9303 0.9260 0.9212
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 0.9398 0.9480 0.9382
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 0.9364 0.9603 0.9475
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 0.8893 0.9350 0.9384
Fine-Tuning ALL 0.9383 0.9310 0.9404
LR:learning rate.
The results of ﬁne-tuning the VGG19 network are shown in Table 3. The same procedure followed
to ﬁne-tune the VGG16 architecture was employed. According to the results reported in Table 3, it is
possible to see that the highest AUC was obtained by ﬁne-tuning the last three blocks, by freezing
the other blocks, and with a learning rate of 10 4. A comparable performance is obtained with a
learning rate of 10 5, while when a learning rate of 10 3was used, the best performance was obtained
by ﬁne-tuning only the last two layers.
Table 3. Results of the VGG19 architecture.
VGG19 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 0.9082 0.9028 0.9058
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 0.9268 0.9266 0.9235
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 0.9087 0.9514 0.9440
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 0.8377 0.9480 0.9254
Fine-Tuning ALL 0.8669 0.9427 0.9342
The results of ﬁne-tuning the InceptionV3 architecture are shown in Table 4. The ﬁrst experiment
conducted using the InceptionV3 architecture was to freeze the entire network and ﬁne-tune the last
block (13th block) three times using three learning rates. The results were similar across the three
learning rates, with the highest found by using the highest learning rate ( 10 3) and the lowest by using
the medium learning rate ( 10 4). This procedure (that consists of ﬁne-tuning the last nblocks and
freezing the remaining blocks) was subsequently iterated for nin the range [ 2,13] and by considering
at each iteration the three di erent learning rates. According to the results reported in Table 4, when
considering a learning rate of 10 4and 10 5, the best performance was obtained by ﬁne-tuning the
whole architecture (i.e., n=13). On the other hand, with a learning rate of 10 3, the best performance
was achieved by ﬁne-tuning the last eight blocks (from block 6 to block 13), thus freezing the ﬁrst
ﬁve blocks.
To demonstrate the potential of the ﬁne-tuning approach, we decided to compare its performance
against the one obtained by using CNNs trained from scratch, speciﬁcally for the PatchCamelyon dataset.

==== Page 15 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 15 of 20
Table 4. Results of the InceptionV3 architecture.
InceptionV3 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 13th Block 0.8250 0.8220 0.8221
Fine-Tuning 12th Block 0.8514 0.8466 0.8446
Fine-Tuning 11th Block 0.8702 0.8446 0.8274
Fine-Tuning 10th Block 0.8648 0.8675 0.8429
Fine-Tuning 9th Block 0.8526 0.8816 0.8538
Fine-Tuning 8th Block 0.8574 0.8637 0.8469
Fine-Tuning 7th Block 0.8673 0.8429 0.8907
Fine-Tuning 6th Block 0.8923 0.8468 0.8950
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 0.8680 0.8730 0.8883
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 0.8483 0.8335 0.8686
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 0.7715 0.8575 0.8641
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 0.7175 0.8636 0.8785
Fine-Tuning ALL 0.8071 0.9058 0.9280
The results of training the architectures from scratch are summarized in Table 5. The ﬁrst
experiment was to train the three CNNs from scratch using three di erent learning rates. For VGG16
architecture, using the highest learning rate, the model did not converge at all for the stopping criteria
we imposed. By using the medium learning rate, the model converged to an acceptable performance,
which is the highest in this set of experiments but was lower than the result obtained by ﬁne-tuning the
network. The lowest learning rate did not produce satisfactory performance, and performs poorer with
respect to the network trained by considering the medium learning rate value. Concerning the VGG19
architecture, it did behave the same as the VGG16 for the highest learning rate. The performance
achieved using the medium learning rate value was lower than the one achieved by using the lowest
learning rate. InceptionV3 architecture did converge for the smaller learning rate, and the best
performance was obtained by using the medium learning rate value. Overall, training the network
from scratch did not achieve better results than ﬁne-tuning the network.
Table 5. Results of di erent architectures trained from scratch.
Training from Scratch AUC Results
Networks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
VGG16 50% 90.55% 85.91%
VGG19 50% 84.77% 85.81%
InceptionV3 84.83% 87.93% 81.97%
4.3. Experiment Results on a Di erent Histopathology Dataset
To corroborate the results obtained with the PatchCamelyon dataset and to strengthen our
ﬁndings, we performed a second set of experiments using a di erent histopathology dataset, namely
the BreakHis [ 18] dataset. The BreakHis dataset consists of 7909 images split into 2480 benign images
and 5429 malignant images. To conduct our experiments, we split the dataset into 80% to train the
model, 10% to validate the model during training, and 10% to test the model on unseen data. The early
stopping was increased to 50 epochs because of the dataset size. The results of ﬁne-tuning the BreakHis
dataset using the VGG16 architecture are shown in Table 6, the results of using VGG19 are summarized
in Table 7, and lastly, the results of using InceptionV3 are shown in Table 8.

==== Page 16 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 16 of 20
Table 6. Results of the VGG16 architecture using the BreakHis dataset.
VGG16 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 89.51% 91.76% 89.73%
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 88.50% 93.58% 94.03%
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 86.21% 95.39% 95.76%
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 86.79% 94.90% 93.91%
Fine-Tuning ALL 85.04% 92.47% 93.04%
Table 7. Results of the VGG19 architecture using the BreakHis dataset.
VGG19 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 89.14% 90.11% 88.68%
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 87.41% 91.67% 93.80%
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 88.72% 96.79% 94.46%
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 50.00% 95.46% 94.39%
Fine-Tuning ALL 87.29% 95.26% 94.30%
Table 8. Results of the InceptionV3 architecture using the BreakHis dataset.
InceptionV3 Test AUC Results
Blocks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
Fine-Tuning 13th Block 55.09% 55.80% 55.26%
Fine-Tuning 12th Block 61.61% 57.78% 53.45%
Fine-Tuning 11th Block 56.92% 56.74% 62.26%
Fine-Tuning 10th Block 61.58% 54.85% 53.54%
Fine-Tuning 9th Block 59.33% 55.35% 51.61%
Fine-Tuning 8th Block 51.26% 50.79% 50.63%
Fine-Tuning 7th Block 58.38% 51.62% 50.41%
Fine-Tuning 6th Block 56.63% 50.90% 53.38%
Fine-Tuning 5th Block 56.87% 50.52% 50.64%
Fine-Tuning 4th Block 57.46% 54.39% 50.57%
Fine-Tuning 3rd Block 52.00% 50.00% 50.00%
Fine-Tuning 2nd Block 50.00% 50.00% 52.00%
Fine-Tuning ALL 85.69% 94.72% 94.41%
As one can see from the analysis of Table 6, the results obtained by ﬁne-tuning VGG16 using the
BreakHis dataset match the results obtained on the PatchCamelyon dataset. In particular, ﬁne-tuning
the top layers and using the smallest learning rates of 10 4and 10 5did achieve the highest results.
More in detail, with a learning rate of 10 3, the best performance was achieved by ﬁne-tuning only the
5th block; with a learning rate of 10 4, the best performance was obtained through the ﬁne-tuning of
blocks from the 5th to the 3rd. Finally, the overall best performance was obtained with a learning rate
of 10 5and with the ﬁne-tuning of blocks from the 5th to the 3rd.
Also, for the results obtained by ﬁne-tuning VGG19 using the BreakHis dataset (Table 7), one
can notice a similar behavior with respect to the analysis performed with the PatchCamelyon dataset:
ﬁne-tuning the top layers was su cient to produce the best results, and the smaller learning rates
yielded the best performance. More in detail, the best performance when considering a learning rate
of10 3was obtained by only ﬁne-tuning the 5th block. On the other hand, for both the remaining
learning rates of 10 4and 10 5, the best performance was achieved by ﬁne-tuning blocks from the 5th
to the 3rd.
Moving to the results obtained by ﬁne-tuning InceptionV3 using the BreakHis dataset (Table 8), it is
possible to observe the same pattern already discussed when we considered the PatchCamelyon dataset.

==== Page 17 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 17 of 20
In particular, with this architecture, ﬁne-tuning the top layers did not achieve any satisfactory results.
As for the PatchCamelyon dataset, the best results were achieved by ﬁne-tuning the entire network.
Finally, Table 9 summarizes the results obtained by training the architectures from scratch on
the BreakHis dataset. According to the results reported in Table 9, when considering the VGG16
architecture and the highest learning rate, the model did not converge at all for the stopping criteria
we imposed. By using the medium learning rate, the model converged to an acceptable performance,
which is the highest in this set of experiments but was lower than the result obtained by ﬁne-tuning the
network, it showed the lowest learning rate and performs poorer with respect to the network trained
by considering the medium learning rate value. Focusing on the VGG19 architecture, it did behave the
same as the VGG16 for all the considered learning rates. More in detail, the best performance was
obtained with a learning rate of 10 4. Considering the InceptionV3 architecture, the results follow the
same trend observed with the PatchCamelyon dataset. In particular, the training process did converge
for the smaller learning rate, and the best performance was obtained by using the medium learning
rate value. Similar to the results achieved on the PatchCamelyon dataset, Table 9 shows that training
the network from scratch did not achieve better results than ﬁne-tuning the network.
Table 9. Results of di erent architectures trained from scratch using the BreakHis dataset.
Training from Scratch AUC Results
Networks LR=10 3LR=10 4LR=10 5
VGG16 50% 90.45% 86.51%
VGG19 50% 92.02% 85.65%
InceptionV3 88.32% 92.65% 81.64%
5. Discussion
Training a CNN for a medical dataset is a very di cult process because of the scarcity of medical
images due to many reasons, and that is where transfer learning, in which the weights of another CNN
that was trained on a di erent very large dataset can be used, can be very important for the medical
ﬁeld. This process of re-training the CNN on a target dataset is called ﬁne-tuning. Fine-tuning the
entire CNN is very time-consuming and does not guarantee the best performance. As pointed out by
Yosinski et al. [ 16], for natural image datasets, the lower layers will learn more generic features, like
circles and edges, that are common to mainly all image datasets, while the top layers can learn the very
speciﬁc features of the original dataset.
In this study, we compared the block-wise e ect of ﬁne-tuning three state-of-the-art CNNs to
classify the images of two histopathology datasets using three learning rates. The results of this study
showed that ﬁne-tuning the entire network did not give the best performance for the VGG architectures;
instead, ﬁne-tuning only the top blocks yielded the best performance. For the InceptionV3 architecture,
ﬁne-tuning the entire network did increase its performance. The main argument is in regard to the
generalizability of the bottom layers, which can be used for any kind of dataset, meaning the weights
of the bottom layer can be frozen.
The results show that the learning rate should be low in order to not to mess up the original
weights of the network; also, making the learning rate very low will not increase the performance
and will slow down the learning process. From the experiments, we found out that a 0.0001 learning
rate achieved the perfect combination between training time and performance. Also, training the
architectures from scratch was compared to ﬁne-tuning techniques, and our results showed that
training the network from scratch did not achieve higher results than ﬁne-tuning the network. Also,
using higher learning rates made shallow architectures like VGGs very unstable and prevented them
from convergence.
Comparing the results that we obtained with those obtained by other authors was di cult
because the other methods used either di erent evaluation criteria or di erent datasets. For example,

==== Page 18 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 18 of 20
Kassani et al. [19] used the PatchCamelyon dataset as well and achieved accuracy of 94.64%, but the
authors did not explain how they used transfer learning or whether they ﬁne-tuned the entire networks
or not, did not state the size of their test dataset, and did not state whether or not they used the
unlabeled dataset. The highest result we achieved was done by ﬁne-tuning the VGG16 top blocks to
the 3rd block, and it was an AUC of 96%. As stated earlier, the results were obtained by predicting the
unlabeled test dataset and submitting that to the Kaggle platform; therefore, all of our results are in
the AUC of the ROC curve because that is the criteria used by Kaggle to assess the performance of
the classiﬁer.
As for other authors who used di erent histopathology datasets, Ahmad et al. [ 31] reported an
accuracy of 85% for the BioImaging dataset using a ﬁne-tuned ResNet architecture, but the authors did
not report the transfer learning technique they used to achieve this result. Sharma et al. [ 17] achieved
an accuracy of 92.6% and an AUC of 95.65% by using the VGG16 network with logistic regression as a
classiﬁer, but the authors did not investigate the role each block plays in the network performance.
Further, the authors split the dataset into two partitions to assess its accuracy using three heuristics:
the ﬁrst split the dataset into 90% and 10%, the second split the dataset into 80% and 20%, and the
last split the dataset into 70% and 30%. The authors did not use any validation algorithms like k-fold
validation. The results of the three heuristics are approximately similar to each other. Deniz et al. [ 30]
compared ﬁne-tuning with feature extraction for the BreakHis dataset, and the authors reported that
the ﬁne-tuned AlexNet outperformed the VGG16 with SVM as a feature extractor. We can conclude
from these studies that ﬁne-tuning a CNN outperformed other techniques and that encouraged us to
investigate the role of each block to further increase the CNN’s performance.
6. Conclusions
This paper concentrated on the impact of CNN architecture depth while ﬁne-tuning the network.
The architectures used, namely VGG16, VGG19, and InceptionV3, were pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset. All of the networks were ﬁne-tuned on two di erent histopathology datasets to determine the
eect of each block on the generalizability of the network. Three learning rates were used with an
Adam optimizer to determine the e ect of learning on the performance as well. Our results suggest
that for shallow networks like VGG, ﬁne-tuning the top layers can be su cient to obtain decent results,
while for deep networks like InceptionV3, ﬁne-tuning the entire network can yield better results. In all
cases, the low learning rate is highly recommended when ﬁne-tuning the network in order to not mess
up the original weights. Our recommendation in the case of a scarcity of images is that ﬁne-tuning
a pre-trained CNN can be a feasible option. The conclusions drawn from this study, concerning
ﬁne-tuning, refer to the particular application at hand. To further strengthen our ﬁnding and to
draw more general conclusions that could be applied independently from the applicative domain,
it would have been necessary to perform a study that involved dozens and dozens of datasets over
dierent domains.
In future work, we will use di erent optimizers to detect the e ect of the optimizers as well and will
use di erent datasets, including non-medical ones, to detect the block-wise e ect of ﬁne-tuning CNNs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.K. and M.C.; methodology, I.K.; software, I.K.; validation, I.K.,
M.C.; formal analysis, I.K.; investigation, I.K., M.C.; resources, M.C.; data curation, I.K.; writing—original draft
preparation, I.K.; writing—review and editing, M.C.; visualization, I.K.; supervision, M.C.; project administration,
M.C.; funding acquisition, M.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by national funds through FCT (Fundaç ão para a Ci ência e a Tecnologia) by
the project GADgET (DSAIPA /DS/0022/2018) and AICE (DSAIPA /DS/0113/2019). Mauro Castelli acknowledges
the ﬁnancial support from the Slovenian Research Agency (research core funding No. nP5-0410).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

==== Page 19 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 19 of 20
References
1. Gurcan, M.N.; Boucheron, L.E.; Can, A.; Madabhushi, A.; Rajpoot, N.; Yener, B. Histopathological Image
Analysis: A Review. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2009 ,2, 147–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Metter, D.M.; Colgan, T.J.; Leung, S.T.; Timmons, C.F.; Park, J.Y. Trends in the US and Canadian Pathologist
Workforces from 2007 to 2017. JAMA Netw. Open 2019 ,2, e194337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. LeCun, Y.; Boser, B.; Denker, J.S.; Henderson, D.; Howard, R.E.; Hubbard, W.; Jackel, L.D. Backpropagation
Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition. Neural Comput. 1989 ,1, 541–551. [CrossRef]
4. Mohammadian, S.; Karsaz, A.; Roshan, Y.M. Comparative Study of Fine-Tuning of Pre-Trained Convolutional
Neural Networks for Diabetic Retinopathy Screening. In Proceedings of the 2017 24th National and 2nd
International Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering (ICBME), Tehran, Iran, 30 November–1 December
2017; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
5. Prentaši´ c, P .; Lonˇ cari´ c, S. Detection of exudates in fundus photographs using convolutional neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2015 9th International Symposium on Image and Signal Processing and Analysis (ISPA),
Zagreb, Croatia, 7–9 September 2015; pp. 188–192. [CrossRef]
6. Khan, N.; Abraham, N.; Hon, M. Transfer learning with intelligent training data selection for prediction of
Alzheimer’s Disease. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 72726–72735. [CrossRef]
7. Farooq, A.; Anwar, S.M.; Awais, M.; Rehman, S. A deep CNN based multi-class classiﬁcation of Alzheimer’s
disease using MRI. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and
Techniques (IST), Beijing, China, 18–20 October 2017; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
8. Hosny, K.M.; Kassem, M.; Foaud, M.M. Classiﬁcation of skin lesions using transfer learning and augmentation
with Alex-net. PLoS ONE 2019 ,14, e0217293. [CrossRef]
9. Harangi, B. Skin lesion classification with ensembles of deep convolutional neural networks. J. Biomed. Inform.
2018 ,86, 25–32. [CrossRef]
10. Fukushima, K. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition
unaected by shift in position. Boil. Cybern. 1980 ,36, 193–202. [CrossRef]
11. Hubel, D.H.; Wiesel, T.N. Ferrier lecture. Functional architecture of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. Ser. B 1977 ,198, 1–59.
12. Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G.E. ImageNet Classiﬁcation with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2012 ,25. [CrossRef]
13. Russakovsky, O.; Deng, J.; Su, H.; Krause, J.; Satheesh, S.; Ma, S.; Huang, Z.; Karpathy, A.; Khosla, A.;
Bernstein, M.; et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2015 ,115,
211–252. [CrossRef]
14. Tajbakhsh, N.; Shin, J.Y.; Gurudu, S.R.; Hurst, R.T.; Kendall, C.B.; Gotway, M.B.; Liang, J. Convolutional
Neural Networks for Medical Image Analysis: Full Training or Fine Tuning? IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2016 ,
35, 1299–1312. [CrossRef]
15. Chollet, F. Deep Learning with Python , 1st ed.; Manning Publications Co.: Greenwich, CT, USA, 2017.
16. Yosinski, J.; Clune, J.; Bengio, Y.; Lipson, H. How transferable are features in deep neural networks?
In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27, Montreal, QC, Canada,
8–13 December 2014; pp. 3320–3328.
17. Sharma, S.; Mehra, D.R. Breast cancer histology images classiﬁcation: Training from scratch or transfer
learning? ICT Express 2018 ,4, 247–254. [CrossRef]
18. Spanhol, F.; Oliveira, L.S.; Petitjean, C.; Heutte, L. A Dataset for Breast Cancer Histopathological Image
Classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2015 ,63, 1455–1462. [CrossRef]
19. Kassani, S.H.; Kassani, P .H.; Wesolowski, M.J.; Schneider, K.A.; Deters, R. Classiﬁcation of Histopathological
Biopsy Images Using Ensemble of Deep Learning Networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1909.11870.
20. Veeling, B.S.; Linmans, J.; Winkens, J.; Cohen, T.; Welling, M. Rotation Equivariant CNNs for Digital Pathology.
InMedical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2018 ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg,
Germany, 2018; pp. 210–218.
21. Bejnordi, B.E.; Veta, M.; Van Diest, P .J.; Van Ginneken, B.; Karssemeijer, N.; Litjens, G.; Van Der Laak, J.A.W.M.
Diagnostic Assessment of Deep Learning Algorithms for Detection of Lymph Node Metastases in Women
with Breast Cancer. JAMA 2017 ,318, 2199–2210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 20 ====
Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 20 of 20
22. Aresta, G.; Ara újo, T.; Kwok, S.; Chennamsetty, S.S.; Safwan, M.; Alex, V .; Marami, B.; Prastawa, M.; Chan, M.;
Donovan, M.; et al. BACH: Grand challenge on breast cancer histology images. Med. Image Anal. 2019 ,56,
122–139. [CrossRef]
23. BioImaging Dataset. 2015. Available online: http: //www.bioimaging2015.ineb.up.pt /dataset.html (accessed
on 1 December 2019).
24. Simonyan, K.; Zisserman, A. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. arXiv
2014 , arXiv:1409.1556.
25. Howard, A.G.; Zhu, M.; Chen, B.; Kalenichenko, D.; Wang, W.; Weyand, T.; Andreetto, M.; Adam, H. MobileNets:
Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Applications. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1704.04861.
26. Huang, G.; Liu, Z.; Van Der Maaten, L.; Weinberger, K.Q. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks.
In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu,
HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 2261–2269. [CrossRef]
27. Vesal, S.; Ravikumar, N.; Davari, A.; Ellmann, S.; Maier, A. Classiﬁcation of Breast Cancer Histology Images
Using Transfer Learning; Image Analysis and Recognition ; Springer Nature: Berlin, Germay, 2018.
28. Szegedy, C.; Vanhoucke, V .; Io e, S.; Shlens, J.; Wojna, Z. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer
Vision. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 2818–2826. [CrossRef]
29. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June
2016; pp. 770–778. [CrossRef]
30. Deniz, E.; Sengur, A.; Kadiro˘ glu, Z.; Guo, Y.; Bajaj, V .; Budak, Ü. Transfer learning based histopathologic
image classiﬁcation for breast cancer detection. Health Inf. Sci. Syst. 2018 ,6, 18. [CrossRef]
31. Ahmad, H.M.; Ghu ar, S.; Khurshid, K. Classiﬁcation of Breast Cancer Histology Images Using Transfer
Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology
(IBCAST), Islamabad, Pakistan, 8–12 January 2019; Volume 16. [CrossRef]
32. Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.-J.; Li, K.; Li, F.-F. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.
In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA,
20–25 June 2009; pp. 248–255. [CrossRef]
33. Pan, S.J.; Yang, Q. A Survey on Transfer Learning. IEEE T rans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2010 ,22, 1345–1359. [CrossRef]
34. Szegedy, C.; Liu, W.; Jia, Y.; Sermanet, P .; Reed, S.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Vanhoucke, V .; Rabinovich, A.
Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; pp. 1–9. [CrossRef]
35. AnaSubtil, L.G.; Oliveira, M.; Bermudez, P . ROC curve estimation: An overview. Revstat Stat. J. 2014 ,
12, 1–20.
36. Fawcett, T. An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2006 ,27, 861–874. [CrossRef]
37. Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G.; Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent
Neural Networks from Overﬁtting. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2014 ,15, 1929–1958.
38. Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, Y.; Courville, A. Deep Learning ; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016.
39. Bengio, Y. Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep architectures. In Neural Networks:
Tricks of the Trade ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; Volume 7700, pp. 437–478.
40. Breiman, L. Bagging Predictors. Mach. Learn. 1996 ,24, 123–140. [CrossRef]
41. Kingma, D.; Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1412.6980.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

