==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Martini, B.; Bellisario, D.;
Coletti, P . Human-Centered and
Sustainable Artificial Intelligence in
Industry 5.0: Challenges and
Perspectives. Sustainability 2024 ,16,
5448. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su16135448
Received: 16 May 2024
Revised: 20 June 2024
Accepted: 22 June 2024
Published: 26 June 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Communication
Human-Centered and Sustainable Artificial Intelligence in
Industry 5.0: Challenges and Perspectives
Barbara Martini1
, Denise Bellisario1,*
and Paola Coletti2
1Faculty of Technological & Innovation Sciences, University of Mercatorum, 00186 Rome, Italy;
barbara.martini@unimercatorum.it
2Faculty of Society and Communication, University of Mercatorum, 00186 Rome, Italy;
paola.coletti@unimercatorum.it
*Correspondence: denise.bellisario@unimercatorum.it
Abstract: The aim of this position paper is to identify a specific focus and the major challenges related
to the human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) approach in the field of Industry 5.0 and the
circular economy. A first step towards the opening of a line of research is necessary to aggregate
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary skills to promote and take into consideration the different
aspects related to this topic, from the more technical and engineering aspects to the social ones and
the repercussions in terms of sustainability. The proposal and vision of this preliminary work is to
identify and discuss a suitable field for such interaction. This field has been identified, specifically,
within additive manufacturing (AM) in the context of Industry 5.0. Additive manufacturing (AM), is a
disruptive opportunity for more sustainable production systems that can be better optimized with AI,
becoming an ideal platform for interconnection between different levels of application and integration
of HCAI concepts, and at the same time able to prove them. In this context, two prospective areas with
a high application impact of HCAI are those of AM-oriented supply chain and product customization
in the AM field, enabled by a plethora of recently emerging technologies such as the internet of
things, cloud and edge computing, and next-generation networks (5G). The paper concludes with the
challenges HCAI poses to public policymakers, who face significant policy challenges in regulating
artificial intelligence, and addressing the socioeconomic and technological impacts. Decision-makers
are required to address these challenges by adopting some tentative policy recommendations.
Keywords: human-centered artificial intelligence; Industry 5.0; enabling technologies; additive
manufacturing; customization; regulation; public policy
1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a field of study that focuses on creating systems or
machines capable of performing tasks that require human intelligence. These tasks include
machine learning, problem-solving, pattern recognition, natural language processing, and
more. In general, AI aims to develop systems that can simulate some of the human
capabilities of learning and reasoning, such as visual perception, voice recognition, and
linguistic translation, to perform specific tasks autonomously or semi-autonomously. John
McCarthy specifically described AI as the scientific and technological competence for the
development of intelligent computer programmers [1].
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are two of the most used methods of
artificial intelligence [ 2]. These models rely on data and are used to develop predictive
models by individuals, companies, and governmental organizations. Currently, methods
of automated learning are being developed capable of handling the complexity and un-
predictability of information in various industrial sectors such as food, biomedical, and
aerospace [ 3]. By combining the principles of ML and DL with advanced optimization
techniques into industrial processes, practitioners are empowered to navigate modern
challenges with heightened precision and efficacy [4–8].
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16135448 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 2 of 17
At the industrial level, this has led to the development of advanced approaches
to cognitive computing and deep learning for automated applications such as visual
inspection, fault detection, and maintenance in manufacturing systems. Deep learning
approaches are actively used in production systems, from supply chain to manufacturing
programs, ensuring the highest quality and safety in multiple sectors [ 9], including public
policy and public administration.
AI helps to monitor and manage production processes comprehensively and not
only to replace humans in risky operations but also to support them, placing them at
the center of the process through a specific approach called human-centered. Numerous
examples include the adoption of human-centered approaches by major companies such
as Apple, Google, and Microsoft during the development of artificial intelligence soft-
ware [ 10]. Mercedes-Benz has replaced standard robots with AI-based collaborative robots
(cobots), enabling the production of customized cars more efficiently [ 11]. IBM Watson
has proposed a system that could recommend cancer treatments in line with the doctor’s
recommendations most of the time [ 12]. Furthermore, AI and sensors offer real-time tech-
nological advancements that support the shipping industry, enhancing safety, reducing
costs, thereby boosting productivity in international trade and embracing a more intelligent
and sustainable future [13,14].
This underlines the importance of a multidisciplinary approach that allows different
sectors and roles to communicate and highlight positive aspects and diverse perspectives
of AI use. This article explores the key challenges associated with the human-centered
artificial intelligence (HCAI) approach in Industry 5.0 and the circular economy, as well as
the role of decision-makers. The methodological approach will be integrative and compre-
hensive, employing qualitative methods to examine the impact and applications of HCAI
in these fields. This involves conducting an extensive literature review, critically analyzing
major challenges with a focus on smart manufacturing and the role of policymakers, and
identifying future research trends and needs. As a guiding framework for our study, we set
the following research questions (RQs):
1. What does the human-centered AI approach mean in the context of the industrial
sector, in general, and in the manufacturing sector in particular?
2. What is the associated literature of the human-centered AI approach when realizing
the vision of Industry 5.0 and the main challenge to address?
3. What role do decision-makers play in the successful adoption and implementation of
HCAI in Industry 5.0 and the circular economy?
4. How can interdisciplinary collaboration enhance the effectiveness of HCAI applica-
tions in industry?
5. What are the future directions for research and development in the field of HCAI?
The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows: the theoretical framework is outlined
in Section 2, while Section 3 details the HCAI and Industry 5.0 and provides empirical
evidence on the perspectives of HCAI for additive manufacturing (AM). Section 4 discusses
the challenges for Government 5.0 in the light of the HCAI approach. Section 5 proposes
some suggestions for further research.
2. Background
2.1. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
“Human-centered AI” or “human-centered artificial intelligence” refers to a model of
AI development and implementation that prioritizes human needs, values, and perspec-
tives. Essentially, it is an approach within the field of AI that focuses on engaging people
with active inclusion of users, stakeholders, and industry experts throughout the entire
AI development cycle, from design and development phases to practical implementation.
The aim is to understand and integrate human perspectives into the decision-making and
system creation processes of AI. Facilitating human-machine interaction aims to create AI
systems that are intuitive, understandable, and easily usable by humans, reducing the gap
and improving interaction between people and technology. The goal of human-centered AI

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 3 of 17
is to improve people’s lives; for example, through solutions that enhance efficiency, accessi-
bility to services, safety, health, and overall quality of life. A schematic representation of
the principal aspects involved in human-centered AI is reported in Figure 1.
Sustainability  2024 , 16, 5448 3 of 17 
 
making and system creation proc esses of AI. Facilitating human ‒machine interaction aims 
to create AI systems that are intuitive, under standable, and easily usable by humans, re-
ducing the gap and improving interaction between people and technology. The goal of 
human-centered AI is to improve people’s lives; for example, through solutions that en-hance efficiency, accessibility to services, safety, health, and overall quality of life. A schematic 
representation of the principal aspects involved in human-centered AI is reported in Figure 1. 
Ethics and transparency are also crucial themes in human-centered AI: human-cen-
tered AI places particular emphasis on ethics , responsibility, and transparency in the use 
of AI systems. The goal is to ensure that  algorithms are developed and used responsibly, 
respecting human values, avoi ding discrimination, and making AI decision-making pro-
cesses transparent. In summary, human-center ed AI places humans, their values, and 
their needs at the center, promoting the adoption of AI technologies in an ethical, respon-
sible, and bene ﬁcial manner for humanity. 
 
Figure 1. Human-centered AI involves di ﬀerent aspects such as techno logy, ethics and human fac-
tors (based on [15]). 
These considerations stem from the observat ion that AI has had many failures, such 
as Facebook’s chatbot, which could only co rrectly respond to 30% of its Messenger ser-
vices, and Microsoft’s AI chatbot, which learn ed racist insults within a day based on read-
ing Twitter feeds [16,17]. Although these system s may have met all functional require-
ments and technical goals, the outcome did not re ﬂect the human-centered needs of the 
users. For example, a technical goal to build a fast facial recognition system could be easily 
achieved [18]. However, the resulting system could still discriminate based on the color 
or race of users [19]. These human-centered aspects should be addressed alongside tech-
nical goals. In the context of AI, human-cent ered approaches include goals such as provid-
ing a better user experience, greater clarity and usability of information, fairness, trust, 
bias reduction, and building responsible AI [20–22]. However, today’s AI software lacks these human-centered aspects, and appropriate AI solutions need to be researched before 
including them in software systems. 
In the industrial and manufacturing sector, arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) o ﬀers tremen-
dous potential for development in terms of e ﬃciency, sustainability, and competitiveness. 
A human-centered AI approach is essential to ensure that engineering technologies and systems are safe, ethical, and bene ﬁcial for the people involved. There is a need for a sig-
niﬁcant shift in perspective within the industrial-manufacturing sector. Initially, the 
Figure 1. Human-centered AI involves different aspects such as technology, ethics and human factors
(based on [15]).
Ethics and transparency are also crucial themes in human-centered AI: human-centered
AI places particular emphasis on ethics, responsibility, and transparency in the use of AI
systems. The goal is to ensure that algorithms are developed and used responsibly, respect-
ing human values, avoiding discrimination, and making AI decision-making processes
transparent. In summary, human-centered AI places humans, their values, and their needs
at the center, promoting the adoption of AI technologies in an ethical, responsible, and
beneficial manner for humanity.
These considerations stem from the observation that AI has had many failures, such
as Facebook’s chatbot, which could only correctly respond to 30% of its Messenger services,
and Microsoft’s AI chatbot, which learned racist insults within a day based on reading
Twitter feeds [ 16,17]. Although these systems may have met all functional requirements
and technical goals, the outcome did not reflect the human-centered needs of the users.
For example, a technical goal to build a fast facial recognition system could be easily
achieved [ 18]. However, the resulting system could still discriminate based on the color or
race of users [ 19]. These human-centered aspects should be addressed alongside technical
goals. In the context of AI, human-centered approaches include goals such as provid-
ing a better user experience, greater clarity and usability of information, fairness, trust,
bias reduction, and building responsible AI [ 20–22]. However, today’s AI software lacks
these human-centered aspects, and appropriate AI solutions need to be researched before
including them in software systems.
In the industrial and manufacturing sector, artificial intelligence (AI) offers tremendous
potential for development in terms of efficiency, sustainability, and competitiveness. A
human-centered AI approach is essential to ensure that engineering technologies and
systems are safe, ethical, and beneficial for the people involved. There is a need for
a significant shift in perspective within the industrial-manufacturing sector. Initially,
the adoption of AI focused on engineering, computer science, and statistics, where the
emphasis was primarily on data management and analysis to improve production processes.

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 4 of 17
Manufacturing companies gather vast amounts of unstructured data from various sources
such as sensors in machinery, production lines, production execution systems, enterprise
resource planning systems, and systems outside production (customer feedback, supply
chain). Analyzing these data creates a competitive advantage and generates new products
and services. The ability to properly analyze and structure the collected data and derive
value from it through AI and machine learning/deep learning techniques is therefore
a challenge for the global industry and the global economy. Countries worldwide are
implementing strategies and initiatives to keep pace with change through rapid innovation
development and digitalization of production [23].
However, our recent literature review has found that most AI software systems lack
human-centered approaches during the writing and modeling of engineering requirements.
For example, it has highlighted that many initiatives primarily focus on some aspects
to include ethics, trust, and clarity, but lack the human-centered aspects adopted by the
industry, or how they should be addressed. A focus on centrality leads to the develop-
ment and processing of AI-based system requirements in a new and in-depth manner
to address human-centeredness. There are indeed engineering requirements of AI that
raise a number of challenging issues with which it is difficult to interface, such as placing
full trust in AI solutions, specifying various requirements because they are too vague,
limitations of existing techniques to manage AI requirements, as well as the emergence of
new types of requirements, such as data, clarity, transparency, compliance, and difficulties
in understanding the feasibility of AI models.
In the manufacturing industry, AI should not only focus on process optimization but
also on creating safe and ethical work environments, considering issues of privacy and data
security, and actively involving operators and workers in AI-related decisions. Therefore,
in addition to engineering, computer science, and statistical aspects, the issue needs to
be addressed from legal, social, and economic perspectives with appropriate policies and
legislation to support a new vision.
Another field of application of AI is the public sector, which represents the largest
market for AI solutions in developing countries: AI governance becomes important espe-
cially now that open government and digitalization of public services are taking root [ 24].
AI in the public sector is applied, for example, to decisions regarding public procurement,
whose spending represents up to 50% of GDP in most cases in developing countries. There-
fore, public procurement is essentially a critical bridge for the adoption of AI technologies
by the public sector [ 25,26]. However, governments of developing countries have weak
regulatory and governance mechanisms to incentivize solution developers and AI users to
adopt human-centered AI innovations that protect users from abuses, social divisions, and
government suppression.
2.2. HCAI and Industry 5.0
The European Commission proposes a vision of Industry 5.0, where well-being and
technological progress are considered jointly from a sustainability perspective with particu-
lar attention to human centrality [ 27]. The Industry 5.0 revolution requires the intervention
of more sophisticated systems such as network sensor data interoperability, cobots, and
other intelligent systems [ 28]. In this context, it is necessary to consolidate knowledge
about human-technology interaction to bridge the gap between production and societal
needs. AI is not a cold replacement for labor but an opportunity for transformation and
growth [ 29]. In this direction, human-centered AI (HCAI) advocates for a human-centered
approach in realizing the vision of Industry 5.0 to create AI systems that enhance human
capabilities rather than replacing them and ensure greater inclusivity in line with sus-
tainable development [ 30,31]. While several works in the literature show examples of AI
systems with substantial impacts on human activities, there is unanimous agreement on
the need to address all social implications of this technology and how AI can serve social
goals with the worker’s well-being placed at the center of the production process [ 32–34].
With a focus on human-machine interaction, Industry 5.0 interconnects human intelligence

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 5 of 17
with the precision and efficiency of machines using artificial intelligence in industrial pro-
duction. Industry 5.0 is developed to overcome the challenges faced by Industry 4.0 by
promoting human centrality and meeting societal needs. Europe has taken a leading role
in the green and digital transitions, which implies that workers, regions, and societies are
facing extremely rapid transformations. While these transformations create opportunities
for inclusive technological and social development, they also pose the risk of increasing
inequalities. The request from the European Commission is to focus efforts on promoting
human centrality in AI as an opportunity for transformation and growth to contribute to
achieving the goals of the Digital Decade program, which aims to lead Europe’s digital
transformation by 2030 [35].
Human-centered AI (HCAI) in Industry 5.0 is a new approach aimed at using artifi-
cial intelligence systems with a focus on the importance of collaboration and interaction
between intelligent machines and human operators. This approach learns from human
inputs and is based on collaborative principles that, in addition to technology, draw on
knowledge from human sciences (from ethics to behavioral disciplines) so that collabo-
ration and synergy between humans and AI can develop in an environment of growing
trust. Examples include machines and processes designed considering the needs, skills,
and preferences of human operators and learning from their behaviors: machines assist
and support human operators, improving productivity and workplace safety; machines
continually learn from human interactions, adapting to the evolving needs of operators
and the work environment [36].
In its policy brief on Industry 5.0, the EU not only defines what Industry 5.0 is but
also outlines the policies to be implemented to support its development. In the same
document, the EU establishes the three axes around which Industry 5.0 develops, namely
human-centricity, sustainability, and resilience [ 35]. In particular, the EU emphasizes
the importance of prioritizing research and innovation as engines for the transition to
Industry 5.0. Now more than ever, it believes it is important to invest to overcome the
economic challenges posed by the coronavirus crisis and to establish a “new normal” with
a more competitive, sustainable, and greener European industry. The role of the EU is to
lead this new wave of innovation, as reflected in the Next Generation EU and Horizon
Europe programs.
This industrial transformation requires a new type of entrepreneur. The entrepreneur
of the future will be someone sensitive to innovation, capable of identifying new opportu-
nities for sustainable business and environmental care, and actively participating within an
ecosystem of industries and public and private entities to be part of a cooperation model
aimed at implementing good practices of the circular economy.
Industry 5.0 aims to revitalize the presence of human labor in factories, where humans
and machines would work together to increase process efficiency by fully leveraging human
intellectual abilities and creativity through their integration with current intelligent systems.
Industry 5.0 includes the interoperability of network sensor data with new added func-
tionalities. Some of these include smart additive manufacturing, predictive maintenance,
hyper-customization in industry, cyber-physical cognitive systems, and the introduction of
collaborative robots. In smart factories inspired by the modern manufacturing industry,
the use of AI facilitates timely decision-making based on both real-time and historical data,
with minimal human involvement [36].
To address these challenges, it is necessary for AI to be properly understood, accepted,
and integrated, also resolving issues related to data security. If these challenges are effec-
tively overcome, they will help organizations grow Industry 5.0. This will also increase
confidence in automation and help workers perform their jobs alongside robots. Better
automation that considers human behavior and needs will help improve human produc-
tivity and contribute to providing meaningful work to humans themselves. Therefore,
Industry 5.0 offers an opportunity to conduct research, particularly in data security and
integration, considered the most significant challenge when things are integrated with the
internet, often referred to as the industrial internet of things (IIoT). In addition to personal-

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 6 of 17
ized human-machine interaction, new production and industrial processes enhanced by
interaction with AI and IoT are certainly represented by additive manufacturing. So-called
additive manufacturing (AM) is a smart technique that falls within the fundamentals of
both the fourth and fifth industrial revolutions. Artificial intelligence and machine learning
are becoming increasingly integral to the growth and applicability of AM. The potential of
this manufacturing technology is currently at the forefront of a scientific and technological
revolution. The manufacturing logic is revolutionized, as well as the human role and
human-machine interaction. This extends not only to the actual production phase but also
to pre- and post-production phases, with a complex revolution of the AM supply chain,
as well as the development of new materials, machine improvements, part design, and
workflow optimization. With increased human-machine interaction, future work can also
be done to develop intelligent control by refining current pattern recognition algorithms.
Similarly, Toth et al. have summarized the potential advantages of the human-centered
Industry 5.0 collaboration architecture: improved collaboration, enhanced decision-making,
user-oriented design, flexibility, and continuous innovation. They also identified some
challenges, such as technological complexity, the need for training and adaptation, financial
implications, and the risk of technological redundancy [37].
The core values of Industry 5.0, including human centrality, sustainability, and re-
silience, have stimulated formal and scientific discussions on the topic. Human-centered
smart manufacturing (HSM) fully exploits human flexibility, machine precision, and next-
generation computing technologies to build an ultra-intelligent, sustainable, and resilient
production system. Research on HSM is relatively lacking but is rapidly gaining ground.
For example, Zhang et al. summarized the limitations, barriers, and challenges of key
enabling technologies and the application of HSM based on two aspects: they identified
three promising Industry 4.0 technologies, such as blockchain and IIoT, human-cybernetic
fusion based on DT and AR, and data- and knowledge-assisted intelligent decision sup-
port, which can continue to support the construction and operation of HSM. On the other
hand, challenges remain related to data security in the IIoT network, the efficiency of
collaboration in HCPS (human-centric production service), and model uncertainty in the
decision-making process. Zhang et al. also report new applications in HSM and how HSM
will reshape the product’s lifecycle from the design and production to maintenance phases
of manufacturing. By placing the needs, perspectives, and involvement of human operators
at the center of decisions and processes, each stage can be optimized as described in the
following cases (Figure 2) [38].
Sustainability  2024 , 16, 5448 6 of 17 
 
referred to as the industrial  internet of things (IIoT).  In addition to personalized human ‒
machine interaction, new production and industrial processes enhanced by interaction 
with AI and IoT are certainly represented by additive manufacturing. So-called additive 
manufacturing (AM) is a smart technique that falls within the fundamentals of both the fourth and ﬁfth industrial revolutions. Arti ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning are be-
coming increasingly integral to the growth and applicability of AM. The potential of this 
manufacturing technology is currently at the forefront of a scienti ﬁc and technological 
revolution. The manufacturing logic is revolutionized, as well as the human role and hu-
man‒machine interaction. This extends not only to the actual production phase but also 
to pre- and post-production phases, with a complex revolution of the AM supply chain, 
as well as the development of new material s, machine improvements, part design, and 
work ﬂow optimization. With increased human ‒machine interaction, future work can also 
be done to develop intelligent control by re ﬁning current pa ttern recognition algorithms. 
Similarly, Toth et al. have summarized the potential advantages of the human-cen-
tered Industry 5.0 collaboration architecture: improved collaboration, enhanced decision-
making, user-oriented design, ﬂexibility, and continuous innovation. They also identi ﬁed 
some challenges, such as technological comple xity, the need for training and adaptation, 
ﬁnancial implications, and the risk of technological redundancy [37]. 
The core values of Industry 5.0, including human centrality, sustainability, and resil-
ience, have stimulated formal and scienti ﬁc discussions on the topic. Human-centered 
smart manufacturing (HSM) fully exploits human ﬂexibility, machine precision, and next-
generation computing technologies to build an ultra-intelligent, sustainable, and resilient production system. Research on HSM is relatively lacking but is rapidly gaining ground. 
For example, Zhang et al. summarized the limita tions, barriers, and challenges of key en-
abling technologies and the application of HSM based on two aspects: they identi ﬁed 
three promising Industry 4.0 technologies, such as blockchain and IIoT, human ‒cybernetic 
fusion based on DT and AR, and data- and knowledge-assisted intelligent decision sup-port, which can continue to support the construction and operation of HSM. On the other 
hand, challenges remain related to data  security in the IIoT network, the e ﬃciency of col-
laboration in HCPS (human-centric production  service), and model uncertainty in the de-
cision-making process. Zhang et al. also report new applications in HSM and how HSM 
will reshape the product’s lifecycle from the design and production to maintenance 
phases of manufacturing. By placing the needs, perspectives, and involvement of human 
operators at the center of decisions and proc esses, each stage can be optimized as de-
scribed in the following cases (Figure 2) [38]. 
 
Figure 2. Human-centered AI in smart ma nufacturing (based on [38]). 
Figure 2. Human-centered AI in smart manufacturing (based on [38]).

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 7 of 17
1. Design Phase: Enhanced decision-making capacity and a robust knowledge base,
built on real-time and historical data, can significantly benefit the design phase [ 39,40].
In the system requirement gathering, the goal is to iteratively translate customer
needs into practical and applicable solutions. For example, when designing a produc-
tion process for manufacturing automotive components using a data-driven HCAI
approach, requirement gathering can benefit from predictive analytics made about
customer needs and formalization of requirements using data mining techniques [ 41].
Additionally, design activities can be facilitated by advanced AI techniques and data
management methods to analyze collected data, identify patterns, anomalies, and
optimization opportunities in the production process, thereby detecting inefficien-
cies in operator movements or suggesting production parameter changes to enhance
quality. Furthermore, AI-based simulation models can be utilized to assess proposed
changes to the production process before their actual implementation, predicting
any potential negative impacts on performance or worker safety. Additionally, AI
algorithms and historical data can optimize raw material combinations and the ge-
ometry of AM products, accounting for various design variables and their intricate
interactions [42,43].
2. Production Phase: AI plays a crucial role in optimizing human-machine interac-
tions within industrial production settings, enhancing the production phase. Data
and knowledge-driven production systems, such as blockchain IIoT systems, deep
learning, knowledge reasoning, and visualization technologies (dashboards), enable
real-time monitoring of production flow and data collection on performance, cycle
times, and product quality. Deep learning techniques and cognitive reasoning analyze
this data to identify significant patterns and trends, facilitating rapid and informed
decision-making. For instance, data analysis may reveal that a specific configuration
of machines and optimized cycle times can significantly enhance production efficiency
while ensuring better working conditions or reducing worker burdens [ 44,45]. More-
over, workers can benefit from a more detailed and informed perception of the work
environment and production context through AI technologies like digital twins (DT)
and augmented reality (AR), improving their decision-making capacity and ability to
adapt to evolving conditions. For example, workers can wear AR devices providing
real-time information on production process details, such as assembly instructions
overlaid on the piece they are assembling, technical specifications, and safety alerts.
Additionally, collaborative robots equipped with advanced sensors and machine
learning capabilities can detect workers’ emotional, physical, and mental states and
cognitive biases to make adaptive adjustments, maximizing worker well-being and
fundamental rights protection. In terms of workplace safety, this can have significant
implications; for example, if a worker is found to be subject to stress or deficits related
to compensatory recovery, the robot can adapt its work pace to avoid overloads or
risks of accidents [46].
3. Maintenance Phase: AI can significantly enhance the maintenance phase by fostering
collaboration between human operators and intelligent machines (robots) for effec-
tive machinery upkeep. In intelligent planning, maintenance technicians, machine
operators, and engineers collaborate, with AI aiding decision-making and optimizing
maintenance activities according to human needs. Intelligent machines can perform
complex tasks or work in hazardous environments, while technicians handle more
flexible tasks. Additionally, augmented reality (AR) systems can be developed to
provide detailed instructions and virtual visualizations to guide operators through
complex maintenance procedures directly in the field, making it easier to perform
such maintenance more accurately and, above all, safely. AI can power AR systems
with updated and relevant information, improving the efficiency and accuracy of
maintenance activities performed by operators [ 47,48]. Advancements in natural
language processing and gesture recognition enhance machines’ ability to interpret
human actions, facilitating the transfer of human skills to manufacturing [ 49]. Above

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 8 of 17
all, to make human-machine collaboration more effective and safer, it is necessary
to have systems that adapt to the needs, preferences, and individual requirements
of operators, such as heart rate, operation purpose, and level of experience [ 50]. In
this regard, miniaturization and reduction of costs have increasingly enabled the
adoption of wearable sensors in the industrial context to trace workers’ conditions
and well-being; e.g., eye-trackers can be used to estimate workers’ attention [51].
AI technology is crucial in promoting manufacturing innovation, as smart manufactur-
ing processes or industrial upgrading, especially in the development of new technologies
and materials. AI technologies, once applied to process manufacturing, allow optimizing
the production cycle by automating tasks, predicting outcomes, and improving efficiency.
Specifically, they are used from optimizing the supply chain to predicting equipment fail-
ures, reducing waste, improving production times and quality. The influence of AI on
manufacturing technologies is not limited to the production process, but also to process
and design new raw materials. Papadimitriou et al. studied the recent developments in the
application of AI to materials design and discovery, including ML, deep learning (DL), and
other AI techniques [ 52]. Moreover, other AI techniques such as evolutionary algorithms
(EA) have been used in materials design to optimize the synthesis of materials [53].
Specifically, what this document focuses on is how artificial intelligence is significantly
influencing additive manufacturing (AM), which is already a smart technology in itself,
and how human-centricity plays an important role in it. The role of AI in technologies and
materials is undisputed and the subject of numerous studies
In the field of additive manufacturing, there has been a growing demand for products
and devices oriented towards human well-being, such as biomedical products for ortho-
pedics, sports, and dentistry, due to the significant level of customization required by the
manufacturing process and at the same time high-quality and cost competitiveness. The use
of AI can help overcome challenges for customizing the additive manufacturing process by
integrating AI/ML systems in the design, production, and process and product evaluation
phases [ 48,54]. Enabling AI in the product design phase offers a promising solution to
consider a variety of design variables and their complex interactions in design and thus
achieve desired performance in production. Furthermore, with the integration of AI in the
AM manufacturing and evaluation phases, the manufacturing process of human-centric
customized products can be optimized, and quality performance can be fully and efficiently
evaluated. There are still many open challenges in including AI in additive manufacturing
processes, particularly in quality control, allowing for more efficient, precise, and reliable
product production [ 50], especially in the following areas. (a) Quality prediction: using
machine learning algorithms, critical quality characteristics such as defects, geometric
deviations, and process conditions can be predicted before they actually occur during
production. (b) Prescriptive compensation and correction: AI can be used to automatically
compensate for any defects or deviations during manufacturing, ensuring that the final
product meets the required quality standards [43,55].
3. Development and Perspectives of HCAI for Sustainable Manufacturing Focusing on
Additive Manufacturing
The most recent literature review states that additive manufacturing is playing and
will play a role in the transition to greater sustainability in manufacturing, as the design
and opportunities it offers foster more sustainable production and consumption [ 56]. This
allows substantial economic and environmental benefits, and at the same time promotes
sustainable consumption yet collaborative and human-centric innovation, because they are
based on specific needs. In this way, AM is becoming a production technology tailored to
specific social, environmental, and economic needs, which are therefore the basis of more
sustainable development [ 57,58]. Although additive manufacturing (AM) has provided
unprecedented opportunities in the development of human-centered products, i.e., cus-
tomization, especially in medical applications, there are still many practical challenges

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 9 of 17
limiting broader adoption, especially in three main areas of industrial production, namely
quality assurance, design optimization, and customization.
For example, the use of AI in design optimization for AM (DfAM) implies the optimiza-
tion of the geometry of AM products to achieve the desired properties or minimize mass or
cost. AI significantly accelerates design by, for example, integrating with support vector
machine (SVM) methods to identify a subset of AM design features [ 59]. In DfAM, AI is also
included in the materials design phase; for example, to be able to modify the materials used
for traditional manufacturing techniques for AM processing [ 60]. The second fundamental
aspect of HCAI in AM is the optimization in the choice of the AM processes and of the
related process parameters. AI-based AM process optimization relies on multi-criteria
approaches such as fuzzy logic operators [ 61] and hybrid schemes integrating multiple
method selection. For optimizing AM parameters, there are several AI approaches that
are based on the chosen variables, constraints, and objective functions. For example, there
are many studies that simultaneously optimize the accuracy and mechanical properties
of the product [ 62,63]. The third aspect directly influenced using AI is quality assessment.
Fundamental, in fact, in the development of personalized human-centered products in AM,
is the assessment, which can be made according to multiple aspects such as metrology,
sustainability, dimensionality and ownership, widely explored in research [64–66].
Quality assurance is a fundamental step in industrial production; for example, in
ensuring the performance of production lines, as well as for optimizing various materials
and designs. AI-based systems can analyze data from IoT sensors within the AM process to
identify anomalies or defects and quickly correct parameters or reprint defective parts. In
design optimization, artificial intelligence can enhance AM in the design process, encourag-
ing and further developing the design for AM (DfAM) and enabling significant progress in
this regard [ 67]. AI algorithms can analyze large amounts of data to establish and adjust the
factors that most affect design. The AM process can, therefore, easily execute enhanced de-
signs that capture the exact specifications of the project. Additionally, artificial intelligence
combined with AM enables manufacturers to create customized products, especially since
AI algorithms can analyze customer data and preferences to create personalized designs,
which can be easily implemented, and 3D printed by AM systems.
In addition to incentivizing an optimized product lifecycle management, AM tech-
nologies can definitely foster better resource efficiency, enhanced supply chains, and new
business models, especially when combined with AI and the human-centered approach.
Indeed, the supply chain can benefit from real-time decision-making, predictive analytics,
and customized on-demand production towards greater sustainability and adaptability.
In [68], key elements of human-centric supply chains are highlighted, placing people at the
center of supply chain management. AI’s ability to analyze vast amounts of data ensures
more accurate forecasting and efficient logistics, while AM provides the flexibility to quickly
respond to market changes and customer demands. Through the use of technology, the
human-centric supply chain aims to create a sustainable society that prioritizes corporate so-
cial and environmental responsibility in supply chain development, while also addressing
customer preferences and requirements throughout sourcing, production, and delivery of
goods and services [ 13,69,70]. This capability not only offers new market opportunities but
also supports innovative business models where manufacturers can offer premium quality
assurance or customized services based on AI-driven insights. The aim of using AI in AM
is to provide and manage intelligent products, services, and experiences while ensuring
higher product standards and reducing waste. By providing enhanced product reliability
and operational efficiency, the manufacturer not only attracts premium clients willing to
pay for superior quality or customized products but also creates new revenue streams
and competitive advantages in the market, and also revolutionizes trade and management
practices towards more competitive and sustainable products and services [33,71].
Persistent challenges and forthcoming research prospects in these AM areas primarily
include: the development of advanced AI methods oriented towards AM to handle data
with high heterogeneity and dimensionality but low availability; the complete use of

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 10 of 17
physical knowledge of AI methods for personalized AM applications, while ensuring
process safety and data privacy, and human-machine interaction aimed at integrating
humans into the design, manufacturing, and quality control processes, through the use of
interpretable AI, and a human-machine society empowered by IoT, AR/VR, etc.
A fundamental and prominent element for enabling intelligent and connected manu-
facturing through the implementation of sensors and AI is represented by the deployment of
ideal 5G/6G networks for massive IoT implementations. These networks offer high-speed
connectivity, low latency, and reliability, essential elements to ensure optimal integration of
AI technologies in the context of data-driven additive manufacturing. They also ensure pre-
cise control of critical systems, data security, real-time automation, and adjustments, as well
as efficient human-machine collaboration that requires low-latency communication. For
example, AI-driven robots and machinery can work in collaboration with human workers,
with 5G/6G ensuring that communication between these entities is nearly instantaneous.
More importantly, 5G/6G networks are equipped with a powerful paradigm, which is
edge intelligence, a form of distributed network intelligence built cooperatively through
IoT data, wireless communications, edge computing capabilities, and artificial intelligence.
Edge computing (in addition to classic cloud computing) in manufacturing environments is
essential for (i) enabling synergy between users, personal devices, network infrastructure,
and “things” such as cobots, machinery, etc.; (ii) providing computational capabilities to
execute AI artifacts necessary for data-driven decisions and control processes.
The main challenges to address in this area, as summarized in Figure 3, include:
•Network reliability and security : Networks enabled by 5G/6G communication must
be protected and highly configurable to meet AM requirements. For example, 5G
and 6G networks extensively use network virtualization and programmability. This
programmability comes with a cost, namely the centralization of network control.
While there is the advantage that network and traffic control occur through a single
entity, the disadvantage of this approach is the presence of a “single point of vulner-
ability” that can impact network availability, which is a critical concern in the AM
network. If a controller malfunctions, it can affect the entire infrastructure, leading
to a communication blackout. Moreover, in a virtualized infrastructure, there is a
need to unify and synchronize security and access systems for both virtual network
resources (links), cloud (servers, virtual machines, containers), and data storage (disks)
to prevent malicious intrusions.
•Integration of edge computing : Artificial intelligence and AM require high data pro-
cessing activity. Although this activity can be performed using cloud computing
technologies, the bandwidth required to send data to the public or private cloud is
not negligible. To overcome this issue, preprocessing nodes can be positioned at the
edge of the network. Integrating these edge nodes and the impact they can have on
network functionalities, such as latency and security, is an open challenge.
•Deterministic latency : 5G/6G networks and programmable networks can introduce
some latency. For example, packets traversing within a network must be processed
by an entity programmed to make traffic decisions. The path between switches and
the programmed entity can be the source of unforeseen latencies, which can result in
some synchronization losses in AM applications. On the other hand, efficient, secure,
and real-time human-machine collaboration requires communication not only with
low latency but also nearly deterministic latency, meaning a delay in data transfer that
follows a predictable and constant pattern and can thus be predicted based on known
factors or specific conditions within a system. Ensuring low and deterministic latency
requires the implementation of specific network technologies and architectures and is
still an open challenge in the industrial context.

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 11 of 17
Sustainability  2024 , 16, 5448 11 of 17 
 
latency requires the implementation of speci ﬁc network technologies and architec-
tures and is still an open challenge in the industrial context. 
One possible approach to overcoming the ch allenges of AM discussed in this paper 
is to promote AM customization in the indust rial sector by optimizing IoT sensors con-
nected through high-performance, low-latency networks to improve the interaction be-
tween the customer and the ﬁnalization of the part, both from the design phase and during 
production. Speci ﬁcally, at the 5G/6G network level, the proposed approach involves the 
use of virtualization technologies and sync hronization protocols and low-latency net-
works, also through integration with industri al Ethernet networks to make the most of 
their respective characteristics. For example, to ensure security, a solution of distributed 
monitoring and recording of production data  and machine operation status can be uti-
lized. Additionally, employing a software virtualization technology, such as micro-con-
tainers or virtual machines, properly deployed in edge computing nodes, can ensure low-
latency performance. Fina lly, there must be appropriate in tegration of indu strial Ethernet 
and 5G networks, the former for ﬁxed and wired applications with time-sensitive proto-
cols that prioritize quick and timely packet  scheduling, removing non-deterministic com-
munication characteristics, and the la tter for mobile applications and real-time wireless 
communications requiring precise response times, such as advanced machinery and ro-botics control. 
 
Figure 3. HCAI main challenges in sustainable manufacturing. 
Moreover, to enhance the integration of edge nodes with high-speed networks, an 
intent-based networking approach can be em ployed, which is an advanced approach for 
conﬁguring and managing infrastructure based on de ﬁning user-desired goals and inten-
tions, rather than manually con ﬁguring individual network devices. This can be enriched 
using arti ﬁcial intelligence to address user pro ﬁling to enhance huma n-centered technical 
user‒network interaction. Additionally, data secu rity intents can also be designed to pro-
vide eﬀective yet simpli ﬁed support for network security. Similarly, blockchain technol-
ogy can undoubtedly be useful in enhancing the cryptographic security and immutability 
of data as well as controlling data access. This is crucial for protecting sensitive data re-
lated to production and intellectual property  from unauthorized access or fraudulent 
modi ﬁcations that could compromise both comput er and production systems, potentially 
leading to cybersecurity issues fo r both the systems and workers. 
Figure 3. HCAI main challenges in sustainable manufacturing.
One possible approach to overcoming the challenges of AM discussed in this paper is
to promote AM customization in the industrial sector by optimizing IoT sensors connected
through high-performance, low-latency networks to improve the interaction between the
customer and the finalization of the part, both from the design phase and during produc-
tion. Specifically, at the 5G/6G network level, the proposed approach involves the use of
virtualization technologies and synchronization protocols and low-latency networks, also
through integration with industrial Ethernet networks to make the most of their respective
characteristics. For example, to ensure security, a solution of distributed monitoring and
recording of production data and machine operation status can be utilized. Additionally,
employing a software virtualization technology, such as micro-containers or virtual ma-
chines, properly deployed in edge computing nodes, can ensure low-latency performance.
Finally, there must be appropriate integration of industrial Ethernet and 5G networks, the
former for fixed and wired applications with time-sensitive protocols that prioritize quick
and timely packet scheduling, removing non-deterministic communication characteristics,
and the latter for mobile applications and real-time wireless communications requiring
precise response times, such as advanced machinery and robotics control.
Moreover, to enhance the integration of edge nodes with high-speed networks, an
intent-based networking approach can be employed, which is an advanced approach for
configuring and managing infrastructure based on defining user-desired goals and inten-
tions, rather than manually configuring individual network devices. This can be enriched
using artificial intelligence to address user profiling to enhance human-centered technical
user-network interaction. Additionally, data security intents can also be designed to pro-
vide effective yet simplified support for network security. Similarly, blockchain technology
can undoubtedly be useful in enhancing the cryptographic security and immutability of
data as well as controlling data access. This is crucial for protecting sensitive data related to
production and intellectual property from unauthorized access or fraudulent modifications
that could compromise both computer and production systems, potentially leading to
cybersecurity issues for both the systems and workers.
Different practical approaches or methods can be used to test and confirm, through real
data and observations, the framework proposed. These include experiments, case studies,
statistical analyses, surveys, just to name a few, that allow verifying whether the developed
theories are actually reflected in reality [ 72,73]. As discussed in Section 2.2, various case

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 12 of 17
studies can be considered for validation across different manufacturing stages, while
assessing the outcomes of applying HCAI in terms of process efficiency, human-machine
collaboration, and sustainability.
4. Research Gap and Challenges for Industry 5.0 and Government 5.0
Beyond the technological challenges, another area of investigation should be devoted
to political and social studies and challenges, particularly regarding improving safety and
health in the workplace, especially in the manufacturing sector [ 74]. The development of
an AI-based policy paradigm aligned with circular economy practices to adapt to Industrial
Revolution 5.0 is critical, to steer the manufacturing sector in a sustainable, equitable, and
unbiased direction.
Industry 5.0 needs Government 5.0 [ 75,76]. There is a significant discrepancy in the
pace of change between businesses and the public sector. The uncertainty, instability, and
rapid advancement of technologies require the public sector to respond with strategic
agility. Just as businesses can achieve systemic transformation in short periods, so too
must the public sector prepare adequate and timely decision-making tools. Given the
complexity and scope of the revolution brought about by AI, it has become crucial to
establish regulations and guidelines to govern its use. This involves issues such as ethics in
AI, model transparency, legal responsibility, privacy protection, and security. In this regard,
it may be necessary to establish standards and protocols for the evaluation and certification
of AI to ensure compliance with ethical, regulatory, and security rules [77,78].
To increase the impact of the proposed solutions, efforts should be directed towards
ensuring greater attention to sector regulation, which cannot be based on outdated and
inflexible tools in the tradition of “command and control”, with a regulatory state imposing
strict limits dictated by norms. New tools are associated with better quality regulation,
such as adaptive and experimental regulation and regulatory sandboxing. In this sense,
regulation should aim to improve how AI can be used to serve social objectives (e.g., reduce
environmental impacts, create a healthy work environment) with the well-being of workers
placed at the center of the production process. That is, AI is now also used to regulate
and improve government oversight of businesses, focusing on their ability to prevent or
mitigate the risk of worker incidents. The economic challenges in implementing HCAI can
be referred to the initial investment costs which can be prohibitive for many companies
and can determine a competitive gap between the bigger enterprises and the smaller ones.
Moreover, there is a growing need for a workforce skilled in both AI technologies and the
principles of human-centered design. Training such talent is both challenging and costly.
Simultaneously, it is increasingly crucial to ensure that actions effectively address the real
challenges brought about by the artificial intelligence complexity.
Decision-makers are required to address these challenges by adopting the following
policy recommendations: (1) fostering innovation and technological advancement, invest-
ing in research and development and digital infrastructure, and encouraging public-private
partnership; (2) relaunching economic policies for sustainable growth by supporting SMEs
and investing in education and training programs to equip the workforce with skills needed
for the digital economy; (3) adapting regulatory frameworks by adopting flexible regulatory
approaches; (4) involving a diverse range of stakeholder in the decision-making process to
ensure comprehensive and inclusive solutions.
5. Conclusions
The reference scenario for this study is therefore that of human-centered AI (HCAI)
centered on the smart manufacturing area in line with the concept of Industry 5.0 and
fostering the essence of the circular economy. Specifically, the focus is on the environment
of data-driven additive manufacturing (AM), aiming to prioritize the well-being of workers
and users through product customization, integration of humans in the production and
quality control process, and improvement of regulations in this area.

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 13 of 17
Specifically, among the key technologies for achieving personalized and high-quality
production, AM plays a fundamental role in modern industrial contexts, especially when
combined with IoT and AI systems to pursue advanced intelligent production in line with
the concept of HCAI towards Industry 5.0 scenarios. Together, IoT and AI technologies
combined with AM can reshape traditional production into a more agile, human-centered,
and data-driven process. Indeed, IoT can play a crucial role by serving as a data infras-
tructure that enhances AM processes, promoting superior quality, reducing material waste,
and enabling rapid and safe production in AM processes. AM is a game-changer for
sustainable production due to its inherent ability to produce almost clean shapes, with very
high efficiency in the use of materials, as well as the customized and flexible production
of complex objects on demand. AM processes integrate AI in different ways, primarily
AI-enabled human-centric AM in terms of each individual phase, i.e., starting from design
customization, optimization of different AM processes, and evaluation of quality. Moreover,
intelligent systems can support humans to enhance the user experience and ensure worker
well-being in the manufacturing sector. A key and significant element in enabling intelligent
and connected production by IoT and AI systems is the contribution of 5G/6G networks:
5G/6G networks provide essential high-speed, low-latency connectivity and reliability for
the seamless integration of AI technologies for data-driven AM, while ensuring precise
control of critical systems, data security, real-time automation and regulation, and collabo-
rative efficiency. There are many application scenarios for the presented approach; specific
focuses have been identified that exemplify and are the subject of further investigation.
The first focus concerns applications in the logistics and supply chain sector, which has
already been greatly impacted by the AM production approach, and where HCAI systems
can completely change the approach and type of human work in such supply flows. A
second focus is on the optimization and especially the customization of AM processes
aimed at bioprinting, both in the biomedical and food sectors. At the same time, specific
challenges need to be addressed, requiring advanced research activities in both the AM field
and the enabling technologies of 5G/6G networks and edge computing. Furthermore, these
challenges are reflected in the corresponding challenges of the 5G/6G network to ensure
the high availability and low-latency data transmission and massive data computation
required by advanced automation and artificial intelligence algorithms.
The latter require computational capabilities to support automated control processes
based on the timely processing of large amounts of data. Therefore, solutions need to be
proposed for network reliability and security, minimal and deterministic latency, network,
and edge computing integration.
In the context of the above challenges, the deployment of private 5G networks can
offer interesting opportunities by providing advanced solutions to address challenges and
improve operational efficiency. Private 5G networks enable dedicated radio coverage,
targeted and guaranteed use of network resources aimed at the offered radio service, and
the ability to use customer cloud infrastructures to realize an effective edge architecture
within a specific production installation or manufacturing plant. These private 5G net-
works are independent of public networks and are created to meet the specific needs and
challenges of advanced manufacturing applications, which represent the most widespread
area of interest.
Looking at Government 5.0, policymaking is a highly intricate process that takes place
in a dynamic environment, influencing the three pillars of sustainable development: society,
economy, and environment. Decision-making processes encompass complex scenarios,
which take place in rapidly changing and uncertain environments, and involve conflicts
among various interests [ 79]. Every political decision triggers social reactions, impacts
economic and financial factors, and has significant environmental consequences. Enhancing
decision-making in this context can lead to substantial benefits across all these areas. In
this sense, the role of public institutions, and their ability to respond to challenges arising
from innovation, represents a focal point to ensure that private actors have an adaptive
and non-burdensome regulatory environment capable of meeting the needs dictated by AI

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 14 of 17
development, as well as the definition of standards and protocols for the evaluation and
certification of AI to ensure compliance with ethical, regulatory, and safety rules.
Finally, promoting effective communication and cooperation between different fields
to advance human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) involves several strategies and
practices. Some key approaches can be highlighted: cross-disciplinary research projects
should include representatives from diverse disciplines, shared platforms and tools must
facilitate collaboration and communication, and policy and governance initiatives should
ensure that policymaking bodies and regulatory committees include representatives from
various disciplines to create balanced and comprehensive regulations for HCAI. By im-
plementing these strategies, communication and cooperation between different fields can
be significantly enhanced, leading to more comprehensive and effective advancements in
human-centered artificial intelligence.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.B. and B.M.; methodology, P .C.; investigation, D.B. and
P .C.; resources, B.M.; writing—original draft preparation, P .C. and B.M.; writing—review and editing,
D.B. and P .C.; project administration, B.M.; funding acquisition, B.M. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the University Project “HUMan centered and SustAinable
artificial iNtelligence in InduSTry 5.0 era” financed by Universitas Mercatorum. A pre-publication
version of this manuscript has been reviewed by the Chambers of Commerce Center.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We wish to acknowledge the extensive discussion and feedback provided by G.
Corasaniti (University of Mercatorum) in the preparation of this work.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Kumar, Y.; Kaur, K.; Singh, G. Machine Learning Aspects and its Applications Towards Different Research Areas, International
Conference on Computation. In Proceedings of the Automation and Knowledge Management (ICCAKM), Dubai, United Arab
Emirates, 9–10 January 2020; pp. 150–156. [CrossRef]
2. Goodfellow, J.I.; Bengio, Y.; Courville, A. Deep learning. Genet. Program. Evolvable Mach. 2018 ,19, 305–307. [CrossRef]
3. Negi, A.; Rajesh, K. A review of AI and ML applications for computing systems. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering and Technology—Signal and Information Processing (ICETET-SIP-19), Nagpur,
India, 1–2 November 2019; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
4. Yang, S.; Guo, C.; Meng, D.; Guo, Y.; Guo, Y.; Pan, L.; Zhu, S.P . MECSBO: Multi-strategy enhanced circulatory system-based
optimisation algorithm for global optimisation and reliability-based design optimisation problems. IET Collab. Intell. Manuf. 2024 ,
6, e12097. [CrossRef]
5. Hong, L.; Li, H.; Fu, J. A novel surrogate-model based active learning method for structural reliability analysis. Comput. Methods
Appl. Mech. Eng. 2022 ,394. [CrossRef]
6. Meng, D.; Yang, S.; De Jesus, A.M.P .; Fazeres-Ferradosa, T.; Zhu, S.P . A novel hybrid adaptive Kriging and water cycle algorithm
for reliability-based design and optimization strategy: Application in offshore wind turbine monopile. Comput. Methods Appl.
Mech. Eng. 2023 ,412, 116083. [CrossRef]
7. Teng, D.; Feng, Y.W.; Lu, C.; Liu, J.Q.; Chen, J.Y. Vectorial generative adversarial surrogate modeling reliability evaluation
framework for engineering structural systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2024 ,247, 110076. [CrossRef]
8. Zhu, C.Y.; Li, Z.A.; Dong, X.W.; Wang, M.; Li, W.K. Adaptive optimization deep neural network framework of reliability
estimation for engineering structures. Structure 2024 ,64, 106621. [CrossRef]
9. Hebbar, N. Freshness of food detection using IoT and machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on
Emerging Trends in Information Technology and Engineering (ic-ETITE), Vellore, India, 24–25 February 2020; pp. 1–3.
10. Microsoft. Guidelines for Human-AI Interaction. 2022. Available online: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/
guidelines-for-human-ai-interaction-design/ (accessed on 15 May 2024).
11. Wilson, H.J.; Daugherty, P .R. Collaborative intelligence: Humans and AI are joining forces. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2018 ,96, 114–123.

==== Page 15 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 15 of 17
12. Jiang, F.; Jiang, Y.; Zhi, H.; Dong, Y.; Li, H.; Ma, S.; Wang, Y.; Dong, Q.; Shen, H.; Wang, Y. Artificial intelligence in healthcare: Past,
present and future Stroke. Vasc. Neurol. 2017 ,2, 230–24318. [CrossRef]
13. Noto, S.; Gharbaoui, M.; Falcitelli, M.; Martini, B.; Castoldi, P .; Pagano, P . Experimental Evaluation of an IoT-Based Platform for
Maritime Transport Services. Appl. Syst. Innov. 2023 ,6, 58. [CrossRef]
14. Xiao, G.; Yang, D.; Xu, L.; Li, J.; Jiang, Z. The Application of Artificial Intelligence Technology in Shipping: A Bibliometric Review.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2024 ,12, 624. [CrossRef]
15. Xu, W.; Dainoff, M.J.; Ge, L.; Gao, Z. Transitioning to human interaction with AI systems: New challenges and opportunities for
HCI professionals to enable human-centered AI. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2021 ,39, 494–518. [CrossRef]
16. Andrew Orlowski, F. Facebook Scales Back AI Flagship After Chatbots Hit 70% F-AI-Lure Rate. Register 2017 ,14, 2019.
17. Price, R. Microsoft is deleting its AI chatbot’s incredibly racist tweets. Bus. Insid. 2016 ,24. Available online: https://www.
businessinsider.com/microsoft-deletes-racist-genocidal-tweets-from-ai-chatbot-tay-2016-3 (accessed on 15 May 2024).
18. Maguire, M. Methods to support human-centred design. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 2001 ,55, 587–634. [CrossRef]
19. Whittle, J. Is your software valueless? IEEE Softw. 2019 ,36, 112–115. [CrossRef]
20. Amershi, S.; Cakmak, M.; Knox, W.B.; Kulesza, T. Power to the people: The role of humans in interactive machine learning. AI
Mag. 2014 ,35, 105–120. [CrossRef]
21. Miller, T.; Howe, P .; Sonenberg, L. Explainable AI: Beware of inmates running the asylum or: How I learnt to stop worrying and
love the social and behavioural sciences. In Proceedings of the IJCAI 2017 Workshop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) ; IJCAI:
Santa Clara County, CA, USA, 2017; pp. 36–42.
22. Dignum, V . Responsible artificial intelligence: Designing AI for human values. ITU J. 2017 ,1, 1–8.
23. Zeba, G.; Dabi´ c, M.; ˇCiˇ cak, M.; Daim, T.; Yalcin, H. Technology mining: Artificial intelligence in manufacturing. Technol. Forecast.
Soc. Chang. 2021 ,171, 120971. [CrossRef]
24. Hao, K. The future of AI research Is in Africa. MIT Technology Review. 21/06/2019. Available online: https://www.
researchdatashare.org/sites/default/files/artifacts/media/pdf/www-technologyreview-com-2019-06-21-134820-ai-africa-
machine-learning-ibm-google-.pdf (accessed on 15 May 2024).
25. Naud é, W.; Dimitri, N. Public Procurement and Innovation for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, IZA Discussion Paper No.
14021. 2021. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3762891 (accessed on 15 May 2024).
26. UK Gov. Report. Guidelines for AI Procurement. 2020. Available online: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
guidelines-for-ai-procurement (accessed on 3 May 2024).
27. Breque, M.; De Nul, L.; Petridis, A. Industry 5.0: Towards a Sustainable, Human-Centric and Resilient European Industry.
2021. Available online: https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/knowledge-publications-tools-and-data/publications/
all-publications/industry-50-towards-sustainable-human-centric-and-resilient-european-industry_en (accessed on 3 May 2024).
28. Nahavandi, S. Industry 5.0—A human-centric solution. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 4371. [CrossRef]
29. Leng, J.; Sha, W.; Wang, B.; Zheng, P .; Zhuang, C.; Liu, Q.; Wuest, T.; Mourtzis, D.; Wang, L. Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect.
J. Manuf. Syst. 2022 ,65, 279–295. [CrossRef]
30. Shneiderman, B. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence: Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2020 ,36,
495–504.
31. Mhlanga, D. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence: The Superlative Approach to Achieve Sustainable Development Goals in
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 7804. [CrossRef]
32. Rong, G.; Mendez, A.; Assi, E.B.; Zhao, B.; Sawan, M. Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare: Review and Prediction Case Studies.
Engineering 2020 ,6, 291–301. [CrossRef]
33. Di Vaio, A.; Palladino, R.; Hassan, R.; Escobar, O. Artificial intelligence and business models in the sustainable development goals
perspective: A systematic literature review. J. Bus. Res. 2020 ,121, 283–314. [CrossRef]
34. Vinuesa, R.; Azizpour, H.; Leite, I.; Balaam, M.; Dignum, V .; Domisch, S.; Felländer, A.; Langhans, S.D.; Tegmark, M.; Fuso Nerini,
F. The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nat. Commun. 2020 ,11, 23. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Renda, A.; Schwaag Serger, S.; Tataj, D.; Morlet, A.; Isaksson, D.; Martins, F.; Giovannini, E. Industry 5.0, a transformative vision
for europe: Governing systemic transformations towards a sustainable industry. Eur. Comm. Dir. Gen. Res. Innov. 2022 ,1, 100020.
36. Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Pham, Q.V .; Prabadevi, N.; Deepa, K.; Dev, T.R.; Gadekallu, R.; Ruby, M.L. Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling
technologies and potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 2022 ,26, 100257. [CrossRef]
37. Tóth, A.; Nagy, L.; Kennedy, R.; Bohuš, B.; Abonyi, J.; Ruppert, T. The human-centric Industry 5.0 collaboration architecture.
MethodsX 2023 ,11, 102260. [CrossRef]
38. Zhang, C.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, G.; Chang, F.; Ma, D.; Jing, Y.; Cheng, W.; Ding, K.; Zhao, D. Towards new-generation human-centric
smart manufacturing in Industry 5.0: A systematic review. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2023 ,57, 102121. [CrossRef]
39. Feng, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Zheng, H.; Li, Z.; Tan, J. Data-driven product design toward intelligent manufacturing: A review. Int. J. Adv.
Rob. Syst. 2020 ,17, 1729881420911257. [CrossRef]
40. Liu, Q.; Wang, K.; Li, Y.; Chen, C.; Li, W. A novel function-structure concept network construction and analysis method for a
smart product design system. Adv. Eng. Inf. 2022 ,51, 101502. [CrossRef]
41. Wang, Y.; Li, X. Mining product reviews for needs-based product configurator design: A transfer learning-based approach. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inf. 2020 ,17, 6192–6199. [CrossRef]

==== Page 16 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 16 of 17
42. Kollmann, H.T.; Abueidda, D.W.; Koric, S.; Guleryuz, E.; Sobh, N.A. Deep learning for topology optimization of 2D metamaterials.
Mater. Des. 2020 ,196, 109098. [CrossRef]
43. Liu, C.; Tian, W.; Kan, C. When AI meets additive manufacturing: Challenges and emerging opportunities for human-centered
products development. J. Manuf. Syst. 2022 ,64, 648–656. [CrossRef]
44. Wang, Y.; Li, X.; Mo, D. Knowledge-empowered multitask learning to address the semantic gap between customer needs and
design specifications. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 2021 ,17, 8397–8405. [CrossRef]
45. Rannertshauser, P .; Kessler, M.; Arlinghaus, J.C. Human-centricity in the design of production planning and control systems: A
first approach towards Industry 5.0. IFAC-Paper 2022 ,55, 2641–2646. [CrossRef]
46. Kessler, M.; Arlinghaus, J.C. A framework for human-centered production planning and control in smart manufacturing. J.
Manuf. Syst. 2022 ,65, 220–232. [CrossRef]
47. Wellsandt, S.; Klein, K.; Hribernik, K.; Lewandowski, M.; Bousdekis, A.; Mentzas, G.; Thoben, K.D. Hybrid-augmented
intelligence in predictive maintenance with digital intelligent assistants. Annu. Rev. Control 2022 ,53, 382–390. [CrossRef]
48. Wang, L.; Tang, D.; Liu, C.; Nie, Q.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, L. An augmented reality assisted prognostics and health management
system based on deep learning for IoT-enabled manufacturing. Sensors 2022 ,22, 6472. [CrossRef]
49. Grech, A.; Mehnen, J.; Wodehouse, A. An Extended AI-Experience: Industry 5.0 in Creative Product Innovation. Sensors 2023 ,
23, 3009. [CrossRef]
50. Eswaran, M.; Gulivindala, A.K.; Inkulu, A.K.; Bahubalendruni, M. Augmented reality-based guidance in product assembly and
maintenance/repair perspective: A state of the art review on challenges and opportunities. Expert Syst. Appl. 2023 ,213, 118983.
[CrossRef]
51. Rožanec, J.M.; Novalija, I.; Zajec, P .; Kenda, K.; Tavakoli Ghinani, H.; Suh, S.; Veliou, E.; Papamartzivanos, D.; Giannetsos, T.;
Menesidou, S.A.; et al. Human-centric artificial intelligence architecture for industry 5.0 applications. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2022 ,61,
6847–6872. [CrossRef]
52. Papadimitriou, P .; Gialampoukidis, I.; Vrochidis, S.; Kompatsiaris, I. AI methods in materials design, discovery, and manufactur-
ing: A review. Comput. Mater. Sci. 2024 ,235, 112793. [CrossRef]
53. Jennings, P .C.; Lysgaard, S.; Hummelshøj, J.S.; Vegge, T.; Bligaard, T. Genetic algorithms for computational materials discovery
accelerated by machine learning. NPJ Comput. Mater. 2019 ,5, 46. [CrossRef]
54. Siew, C.Y.; Ong, S.K.; Nee, A.Y.C. Improving maintenance efficiency and safety through a human-centric approach. Adv. Manuf.
2021 ,9, 104–114. [CrossRef]
55. Xia, C.; Pan, Z.; Polden, J.; Li, H.; Xu, Y.; Chen, S. Modelling and prediction of surface roughness in wire arc additive manufacturing
using machine learning. J. Intell. Manuf. 2022 ,33, 1467–1482. [CrossRef]
56. Agnusdei, L.; Del Prete, A. Additive manufacturing for sustainability: A systematic literature review. Sustain. Futures 2022 ,
4, 100098. [CrossRef]
57. Sánchez-Garc ía, E.; Mart ínez-Falc ó, J.; Marco-Lajara, B.; Manresa-Marhuenda, E. Revolutionizing the circular economy through
new technologies: A new era of sustainable progress. Environ. Technol. Innov. 2024 ,33, 103509. [CrossRef]
58. Despeisse, M.; Hajali, T.; Hryha, E. Sustainability in Additive Manufacturing. In Encyclopedia of Sustainable Technologies , 2nd ed.;
Abraham, M.A., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2024; pp. 533–547, ISBN 9780443222870. [CrossRef]
59. Yao, X.; Moon, S.K.; Bi, G. A hybrid machine learning approach for additive manufacturing design feature recommendation.
Rapid Prototyp. J. 2017 ,23, 983–997. [CrossRef]
60. Johnson, N.S.; Vulimiri, P .S.; To, A.C.; Zhang, X.; Brice, C.A.; Kappes, B.B.; Stebner, A.P . Invited review: Machine learning for
materials developments in metals additive manufacturing. Addit. Manuf. 2020 ,36, 101641. [CrossRef]
61. Qin, Y.; Qi, Q.; Scott, P .J.; Jiang, X. An additive manufacturing process selection approach based on fuzzy Archimedean weighted
power Bonferroni aggregation operators. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 2020 ,64, 101926. [CrossRef]
62. Silbernagel, C.; Aremu, A.; Ashcroft, I. Using machine learning to aid in the parameter optimisation process for metal-based
additive manufacturing. Rapid Prototyp. J. 2019 ,26, 625–637. [CrossRef]
63. Onler, R.; Koca, A.S.; Kirim, B.; Soylemez, E. Multi-objective optimization of binder jet additive manufacturing of Co-Cr-Mo
using machine learning. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2022 ,119, 1091–1108. [CrossRef]
64. Ribeiro, I.; Matos, F.; Jacinto, C.; Salman, H.; Cardeal, G.; Carvalho, H.; Godina, R.; Peças, P . Framework for Life Cycle
Sustainability Assessment of Additive Manufacturing. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 929. [CrossRef]
65. Schrank, E.S.; Stanhope, S.J. Dimensional accuracy of ankle-foot orthoses constructed by rapid customization and manufacturing
framework. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2011 ,48, 31–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. DebRoy, T.; Wei, H.L.; Zuback, J.S.; Mukherjee, T.; Elmer, J.W.; Milewski, J.O.; Beese, A.M.; Wilson-Heid, A.; De, A.; Zhang, W.
Additive manufacturing of metallic components – Process, structure and properties. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2018 ,92, 112–224. [CrossRef]
67. Gebisa, A.W.; Lemu, H.G. Design for manufacturing to design for Additive Manufacturing: Analysis of implications for design
optimality and product sustainability. Procedia Manuf. 2017 ,13, 724–731. [CrossRef]
68. Villar, A.; Paladini, S.; Buckley, O. Towards Supply Chain 5.0: Redesigning Supply Chains as Resilient, Sustainable, and
Human-Centric Systems in a Post-pandemic World. Oper. Res. Forum 2023 ,4, 60. [CrossRef]
69. Fornasiero, R.; Zangiacomi, A. Reshaping the supply chain for society 5.0. In Advances in Production Management Systems. Artificial
Intelligence for Sustainable and Resilient Production Systems ; IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management
Systems; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 663–670. [CrossRef]

==== Page 17 ====
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 17 of 17
70. Martinelli, E.M.; Tunisini, A. Customer integration into supply chains: Literature review and research propositions. J. Bus. Ind.
Mark. 2018 ,34, 24–38. [CrossRef]
71. Farayola, O.A.; Abdul, A.A.; Irabor, B.O.; Okeleke, E.C. Innovative Business Models Driven by AI Technologies: A Review.
Comput. Sci. IT Res. J. 2023 ,4, 85–110. [CrossRef]
72. Hartikainen, M.; Väänänen, K.; Lehtiö, A.; Ala-Luopa, S.; Olsson, T. Human-Centered AI Design in Reality: A Study of Developer
Companies’ Practices: A study of Developer Companies’ Practices. In Proceedings of the Nordic Human-Computer Interaction
Conference (NordiCHI 2’2), Aarhus, Denmark, 8–12 October 2022; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA,
2022; Volume 55, pp. 1–11. [CrossRef]
73. Flores Ituarte, I.; Kretzschmar, N.; Chekurov, S.; Partanen, J.; Tuomi, J. Additive Manufacturing Validation Methods, Technology
Transfer Based on Case Studies. In Additive Manufacturing—Developments in Training and Education ; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2019. [CrossRef]
74. Wang, Y.; Ruiz, C.; Huang, Q. Extended fabrication-aware convolution learning framework for predicting 3D shape deformation
in additive manufacturing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Seventeenth International Conference on Automation Science and
Engineering (CASE), Lyon, France, 23–27 August 2021.
75. Supriyanto, E.; Saputra, J. Big Data and Artificial Intelligence in Policy Making: A Mini-Review Approach. Int. J. Adv. Soc. Sci.
Humanit. 2022 ,1, 58–65. [CrossRef]
76. Musella, F. Amministrazione 5.0. Riv. Digit. Politics 2021 ,1, 95–112. [CrossRef]
77. Musella, F. Digital regulation: Come si cambia la Pubblica amministrazione. Riv. Digit. Politics 2022 ,2, 3–32. [CrossRef]
78. Wirtz, B.W.; Weyerer, J.C.; Geyer, C. Artificial Intelligence and the Public Sector—Applications and Challenges. Int. J. Public Adm.
2019 ,42, 596–615. [CrossRef]
79. Howlett, M.; Capano, G.; Ramesh, M. Designing for robustness: Surprise, agility and improvisation in policy design. Policy Soc.
2018 ,37, 405–421. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

