==== Page 1 ====
Human- versus Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
J. E. (Hans). Korteling*, G. C. van de Boer-Visschedijk, R. A. M. Blankendaal,
R. C. Boonekamp and A. R. Eikelboom
TNO Human Factors, Soesterberg, Netherlands
AI is one of the most debated subjects of today and there seems little common understanding
concerning the differences and similarities of human intelligence and arti ﬁcial intelligence.
Discussions on many relevant topics, such as trus tworthiness, explainability, and ethics are
characterized by implicit anthropocentric an d anthropomorphistic conceptions and, for
instance, the pursuit of human-like inte lligence as the golden standard for Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence. In order to provide more agre ement and to substantiate possible future
research objectives, this paper presents thre e notions on the similarities and differences
between human- and arti ﬁcial intelligence: 1) the fundamental constraints of human (and
artiﬁcial) intelligence, 2) human intelligence as one of many possible forms of general
intelligence, and 3) the high potential impact of multiple (integrated) forms of narrow-hybrid
AI applications. For the time being, AI systems will have fundamentally different cognitive
qualities and abilities than biological systems. For this reason, a most prominent issue is howwe can use (and “collaborate ”with) these systems as effectively as possible? For what tasks
and under what conditions, decisions are safe to leave to AI and when is human judgmentrequired? How can we capitalize on the speci ﬁc strengths of human- and arti ﬁcial intelligence?
How to deploy AI systems effectively to complement and compensate for the inherentconstraints of human cognition (and vice versa)? Should we pursue the development of AI“partners ”with human (-level) intelligence or sho uld we focus more at supplementing human
limitations? In order to answer these questi ons, humans working with AI systems in the
workplace or in policy making have to develop an adequate mental model of the underlying‘psychological ’mechanisms of AI. So, in order to obtain w ell-functioning human-AI systems,
Intelligence Awareness in humans should be addressed more v igorously. For this purpose a
ﬁrst framework for educational content is proposed.
Keywords: human intelligence, arti ﬁcial intelligence, arti ﬁcial general intelligence, human-level arti ﬁcial intelligence,
cognitive complexity, narrow arti ﬁcial intelligence, human-AI collaboration, cognitive bias
INTRODUCTION: ARTIFICIAL AND HUMAN INTELLIGENCE,
WORLDS OF DIFFERENCE
Artiﬁcial General Intelligence at the Human Level
Recent advances in information technology and in AI may allow for more coordination and
integration between of humans and technology. Therefore, quite some attention has beendevoted to the development of Human-Aware AI, which aims at AI that adapts as a “team
member ”to the cognitive possibilities and limitations of the human team members. Also
metaphors like “mate, ”“partner, ”“alter ego, ”“Intelligent Collaborator, ”“buddy ”and “mutual
understanding ”emphasize a high degree of collaboration, similarity, and equality in “hybrid
teams ”. When human-aware AI partners operate like “human collaborators ”they must be able toEdited by:
Esma Aïmeur,
Université de Montréal, Canada
Reviewed by:
Cesar Collazos,
University of Cauca, Colombia
Ranilson Oscar Araújo Paiva,
Federal University of Alagoas, Brazil
*Correspondence:
J. E. (Hans). Korteling
hans.korteling@tno.nl
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
AI for Human Learning and
Behavior Change,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
Received: 29 October 2020
Accepted: 01 February 2021
Published: 25 March 2021
Citation:
Korteling J E(H),
van de Boer-Visschedijk GC,
Blankendaal RAM, Boonekamp RC
and Eikelboom AR (2021) Human-
versus Arti ﬁcial Intelligence.
Front. Artif. Intell. 4:622364.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.622364
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 1CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
published: 25 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.622364

==== Page 2 ====
sense, understand, and react to a wide range of complex human
behavioral qualities, like attention, motivation, emotion,creativity, planning, or argumentation, (e.g. Krämer et al.,
2012 ;van den Bosch and Bronkhorst, 2018 ;van den Bosch
et al., 2019 ). Therefore these “AI partners, ”or“team mates ”
have to be endowed with human-like (or humanoid) cognitiveabilities enabling mutual understanding and collaboration (i.e.“human awareness ”).
However, no matter how intelligent and autonomous AI
agents become in certain respects, at least for the foreseeablefuture, they probably will remain unconscious machines orspecial-purpose devices that support humans in speci ﬁc,
complex tasks. As digital machines they are equipped with acompletely different operating system (digital vs biological) andwith correspondingly different cognitive qualities and abilities
than biological creatures, like humans and other animals
(Moravec, 1988 ;Klein et al., 2004 ;Korteling et al., 2018a ;
Shneiderman, 2020a ). In general, digital reasoning- and
problem-solving agents only compare very super ﬁcially to
their biological counterparts, (e.g. Boden, 2017 ;Shneiderman,
2020b ). Keeping that in mind, it becomes more and more
important that human professionals working with advancedAI systems, (e.g. in military- or policy making teams) develop aproper mental model about the different cognitive capacities ofAI systems in relation to human cognition. This issue willbecome increasingly relevant when AI systems become more
advanced and are deployed with higher degrees of autonomy.
Therefore, the present paper tries to provide some more clarityand insight into the fundamental characteristics, differences andidiosyncrasies of human/biological and arti ﬁcial/digital
intelligences. In the ﬁnal section, a global framework for
constructing educational content on this “Intelligence
Awareness ”is introduced. This can be used for the
development of education and training programs for humanswho have to use or “collaborate with ”advanced AI systems in
the near and far future.
With the application of AI systems with increasing autonomy
more and more researchers consider the necessity of vigorously
addressing the real complex issues of “human-level intelligence ”
and more broadly artiﬁcial general intelligence , or AGI, (e.g.
Goertzel et al., 2014 ). Many different de ﬁnitions of A(G)I have
already been proposed, (e.g. Russell and Norvig, 2014 for an
overview). Many of them boil down to: technology containing or
entailing (human-like) intelligence , (e.g. Kurzweil, 1990 ). This is
problematic. Most de ﬁnitions use the term “intelligence ”,a sa n
essential element of the de ﬁnition itself, which makes the
deﬁ
nition tautological. Second, the idea that A(G)I should be
human-like seems unwarranted. At least in natural environments
there are many other forms and manifestations of highly complex
and intelligent behaviors that are very different from speci ﬁc
human cognitive abilities (see Grind, 1997 for an overview).
Finally, like what is also frequently seen in the ﬁeld of biology,
these A(G)I de ﬁnitions use human intelligence as a central basis
or analogy for reasoning about the —less familiar —phenomenon
of A(G)I ( Coley and Tanner, 2012 ). Because of the many
differences between the underlying substrate and architectureof biological and arti ﬁcial intelligence this anthropocentric way ofreasoning is probably unwarranted. For these reasons we propose
a (non-anthropocentric) de ﬁnition of “intelligence ”as:“the
capacity to realize complex goals ”(Tegmark, 2017 ). These
goals may pertain to narrow, restricted tasks (narrow AI) or to
broad task domains (AGI). Building on this de ﬁnition, and on a
deﬁnition of AGI proposed by Bieger et al. (2014) and one of
Grind (1997) ,w ed e ﬁne AGI here as: “Non-biological capacities to
autonomously and ef ﬁciently achieve complex goals in a wide
range of environments ”.AGI systems should be able to identify
and extract the most important features for their operation andlearning process automatically and ef ﬁciently over a broad range
of tasks and contexts. Relevant AGI research differs from theordinary AI research by addressing the versatility and wholenessof intelligence, and by carrying out the engineering practiceaccording to a system comparable to the human mind in a
certain sense ( Bieger et al., 2014 ).
It will be fascinating to create copies of ourselves which can
learn iteratively by interaction with partners and thus becomeable to collaborate on the basis of common goals and mutualunderstanding and adaptation, (e.g. Bradshaw et al., 2012 ;
Johnson et al., 2014 ). This would be very useful, for example
when a high degree of social intelligence of AI will contribute tomore adequate interactions with humans, for example in healthcare or for entertainment purposes ( Wyrobek et al., 2008 ). True
collaboration on the basis of common goals and mutualunderstanding necessarily implies some form of humanoid
general intelligence. For the time being, this remains a goal on
a far-off horizon. In the present paper we argue why for mostapplications it also may not be very practical or necessary (andprobably a bit misleading) to vigorously aim or to anticipate onsystems possessing “human-like ”AGI or “human-like ”abilities
or qualities. The fact that humans possess general intelligencedoes not imply that new inorganic forms of general intelligenceshould comply to the criteria of human intelligence. In thisconnection, the present paper addresses the way we thinkabout (natural and arti ﬁcial) intelligence in relation to the
most probable potentials (and real upcoming issues) of AI in
the short- and mid-term future. This will provide food for
thought in anticipation of a future that is dif ﬁcult to predict
for a ﬁeld as dynamic as AI.
What Is “Real Intelligence ”?
Implicit in our aspiration of constructing AGI systems possessing
humanoid intelligence is the premise that human (general)intelligence is the “real”form of intelligence. This is even
already implicitly articulated in the term “Artiﬁcial
Intelligence ”, as if it were not entirely real, i.e., real like non-
artiﬁcial (biological) intelligence. Indeed, as humans we know
ourselves as the entities with the highest intelligence ever
observed in the Universe. And as an extension of this, we liketo see ourselves as rational beings who are able to solve a widerange of complex problems under all kinds of circumstancesusing our experience and intuition, supplemented by the rules oflogic, decision analysis and statistics. It is therefore not surprisingthat we have some dif ﬁculty to accept the idea that we might be a
bit less smart than we keep on telling ourselves, i.e., “the next
insult for humanity ”(van Belkom, 2019 ). This goes as far that the
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 2Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 3 ====
rapid progress in the ﬁeld of arti ﬁcial intelligence is accompanied
by a recurring rede ﬁnition of what should be considered “real
(general) intelligence. ”The conceptualization of intelligence, that
is, the ability to autonomously and ef ﬁciently achieve complex
goals, is then continuously adjusted and further restricted to:
“those things that only humans can do. ”In line with this, AI is
then de ﬁned as “the study of how to make computers do things at
which, at the moment, people are better ”(Rich and Knight, 1991 ;
Rich et al., 2009 ). This includes thinking of creative solutions,
ﬂexibly using contextual- and background information, the use of
intuition and feeling, the ability to really “think and understand, ”
or the inclusion of emotion in an (ethical) consideration. Theseare then cited as the speci ﬁc elements of realintelligence, (e.g.
Bergstein, 2017 ). For instance, Facebook ’s director of AI and a
spokesman in the ﬁeld, Yann LeCun, mentioned at a Conference
at MIT on the Future of Work that machines are still far from
having “the essence of intelligence. ”That includes the ability to
understand the physical world well enough to make predictionsabout basic aspects of it —to observe one thing and then use
background knowledge to ﬁgure out what other things must also
be true. Another way of saying this is that machines don ’t have
common sense (Bergstein, 2017 ), like submarines that cannot
swim ( van Belkom, 2019 ). When exclusive human capacities
become our pivotal navigation points on the horizon we maymiss some signi ﬁcant problems that may need our attention ﬁrst.
To make this point clear, we ﬁrst will provide some insight into
the basic nature of both human and arti ﬁcial intelligence. This is
necessary for the substantiation of an adequate awareness ofintelligence ( Intelligence Awareness ), and adequate research and
education anticipating the development and application of A(G)I.For the time being, this is based on three essential notions that can(and should) be further elaborated in the near future.
With regard to cognitive tasks, we are probably less smartthan we think. So why should we vigorously focus onhuman -like AGI?
Many different forms of intelligence are possible and general
intelligence is therefore not necessarily the same as humanoid
general intelligence (or “AGI on human level ”).
AGI is often not necessary; many complex problems can also
be tackled effectively using multiple narrow AI ’s.1
WE ARE PROBABLY NOT SO SMART AS
WE THINK
How intelligent are we actually? The answer to that question is
determined to a large extent by the perspective from which thisissue is viewed, and thus by the measures and criteria forintelligence that is chosen. For example, we could compare thenature and capacities of human intelligence with other animalspecies. In that case we appear highly intelligent. Thanks to ourenormous learning capacity, we have by far the most extensive
arsenal of cognitive abilities
2to autonomously solve complex
problems and achieve complex objectives. This way we can solve ahuge variety of arithmetic, conceptual, spatial, economic, socio-
organizational, political, etc. problems. The primates —which
differ only slightly from us in genetic terms —are far behind us
in that respect. We can therefore legitimately qualify humans, ascompared to other animal species that we know, as highlyintelligent.
Limited Cognitive Capacity
However, we can also look beyond this “relative interspecies
perspective ”and try to qualify our intelligence in more absolute
terms, i.e., using a scale ranging from zero to what is physicallypossible. For example, we could view the computational capacity
of a human brain as a physical system ( Bostrom, 2014 ;Tegmark,
2017 ). The prevailing notion in this respect among AI scientists is
that intelligence is ultimately a matter of information andcomputation, and (thus) not of ﬂesh and blood and carbon
atoms. In principle, there is no physical law preventing thatphysical systems (consisting of quarks and atoms, like our brain)can be built with a much greater computing power andintelligence than the human brain. This would imply thatthere is no insurmountable physical reason why machines oneday cannot become much more intelligent than ourselves in allpossible respects ( Tegmark, 2017 ). Our intelligence is therefore
relatively high compared to other animals, but in absolute terms it
may be very limited in its physical computing capacity, albeit onlyby the limited size of our brain and its maximal possible numberof neurons and glia cells, (e.g. Kahle, 1979 ).
To further de ﬁne and assess our own (biological) intelligence,
we can also discuss the evolution and nature of our biologicalthinking abilities. As a biological neural network of ﬂesh and
blood, necessary for survival, our brain has undergone anevolutionary optimization process of more than a billion years.In this extended period, it developed into a highly effective andefﬁcient system for regulating essential biological functions and
performing perceptive-motor and pattern-recognition tasks, such
as gathering food, ﬁghting and ﬂighting, and mating. Almost
during our entire evolution, the neural networks of our brain havebeen further optimized for these basic biological and perceptualmotor processes that also lie at the basis of our daily practicalskills, like cooking, gardening, or household jobs. Possiblybecause of the resulting pro ﬁciency for these kinds of tasks we
may forget that these processes are characterized by extremelyhigh computational complexity, (e.g. Moravec, 1988 ). For
example, when we tie our shoelaces, many millions of signalsﬂow in and out through a large number of different sensor
systems, from tendon bodies and muscle spindles in our
extremities to our retina, otolithic organs and semi-circularchannels in the head, (e.g. Brodal, 1981 ). This enormous
amount of information from many different perceptual-motorsystems is continuously, parallel, effortless and even without
1Narrow AI can be de ﬁned as the production of systems displaying intelligence
regarding speci ﬁc, highly constrained tasks, like playing chess, facial recognition,
autonomous navigation, or locomotion ( Goertzel et al., 2014 ).2Cognitive abilities involve deliberate, conceptual or analytic thinking (e.g.,
calculation, statistics, analysis, reasoning, abstraction)
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 3Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 4 ====
conscious attention, processed in the neural networks of our brain
(Minsky, 1986 ;Moravec, 1988 ;Grind, 1997 ). In order to achieve
this, the brain has a number of universal (inherent) workingmechanisms, such as association and associative learning ( Shatz,
1992 ;Bar, 2007 ), potentiation and facilitation ( Katz and Miledi,
1968 ;Bao et al., 1997 ), saturation and lateral inhibition ( Isaacson
and Scanziani, 2011 ;Korteling et al., 2018a ).
These kinds of basic biological and perceptual-motor
capacities have been developed and set down over manymillions of years. Much later in our evolution —actually only
very recently —our cognitive abilities and rational functions have
started to develop. These cognitive abilities, or capacities, areprobably less than 100 thousand years old, which may be quali ﬁed
as“embryonal ”on the time scale of evolution, (e.g. Petraglia and
Korisettar, 1998 ;McBrearty and Brooks, 2000 ;Henshilwood and
Marean, 2003 ). In addition, this very thin layer of human
achievement has necessarily been built on these “ancient ”
neural intelligence for essential survival functions. So, our“higher ”cognitive capacities are developed from and with
these (neuro) biological regulation mechanisms ( Damasio,
1994 ;Korteling and Toet, 2020 ). As a result, it should not be
a surprise that the capacities of our brain for performing theserecent cognitive functions are still rather limited. Theselimitations are manifested in many different ways, for instance:
-The amount of cognitive information that we can consciously
process (our working memory, span or attention) is very
limited ( Simon, 1955 ). The capacity of our working memory
is approximately 10 –50 bits per second ( Tegmark, 2017 ).
-Most cognitive tasks, like reading text or calculation, requireour full attention and we usually need a lot of time to executethem. Mobile calculators can perform millions times morecomplex calculations than we can ( Tegmark, 2017 ).
-Although we can process lots of information in parallel, wecannot simultaneously execute cognitive tasks that requiredeliberation and attention, i.e., “multi-tasking ”(Korteling,
1994 ;Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ;Rubinstein, Meyer, and
Evans, 2001 ).
-Acquired cognitive knowledge and skills of people (memory)tend to decay over time, much more than perceptual-motorskills. Because of this limited “retention ”of information we
easily forget substantial portions of what we have learned(Wing ﬁeld and Byrnes, 1981 ).
Ingrained Cognitive Biases
Our limited processing capacity for cognitive tasks is not the only
factor determining our cognitive intelligence. Except for anoverall limited processing capacity, human cognitive
information processing shows systematic distortions. These are
manifested in many cognitive biases ( Tversky and Kahneman,
1973 ,Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ). Cognitive biases are
systematic, universally occurring tendencies, inclinations, ordispositions that skew or distort information processes in waysthat make their outcome inaccurate, suboptimal, or simplywrong, (e.g. Lichtenstein and Slovic, 1971 ;Tversky and
Kahneman, 1981 ). Many biases occur in virtually the same
way in many different decision situations ( Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf,2002 ;Kahneman, 2011 ;Toet et al., 2016 ). The literature provides
descriptions and demonstrations of over 200 biases. Thesetendencies are largely implicit and unconscious and feel quitenaturally and self/evident when we are aware of these cognitive
inclinations ( Pronin et al., 2002 ;Risen, 2015 ;Korteling et al.,
2018b ). That is why they are often termed “intuitive ”(Kahneman
and Klein, 2009 )o r “irrational ”(Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf, 2002 ).
Biased reasoning can result in quite acceptable outcomes innatural or everyday situations, especially when the time cost ofreasoning is taken into account ( Simon, 1955 ;Gigerenzer and
Gaissmaier, 2011 ). However, people often deviate from
rationality and/or the tenets of logic, calculation, andprobability in inadvisable ways ( Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ;
Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf, 2002 ) leading to suboptimal decisions in
terms of invested time and effort (costs) given the available
information and expected bene ﬁts.
Biases are largely caused by inherent (or structural)
characteristics and mechanisms of the brain as a neuralnetwork ( Korteling et al., 2018a ;Korteling and Toet, 2020 ).
Basically, these mechanisms —such as association, facilitation,
adaptation, or lateral inhibition —result in a modi ﬁcation of
the original or available data and its processing, (e.g. weightingits importance). For instance, lateral inhibition is a universalneural process resulting in the magni ﬁcation of differences in
neural activity (contrast enhancement), which is very useful forperceptual-motor functions, maintaining physical integrity and
allostasis, (i.e. biological survival functions). For these functions
our nervous system has been optimized for millions of years.However, “higher ”cognitive functions, like conceptual thinking,
probability reasoning or calculation, have been developed onlyvery recently in evolution. These functions are probably less than100 thousand years old, and may, therefore, be quali ﬁed as
“embryonal ”on the time scale of evolution, (e.g. McBrearty
and Brooks, 2000
;Henshilwood and Marean, 2003 ;Petraglia
and Korisettar, 2003 ). In addition, evolution could not develop
these new cognitive functions from scratch, but instead had tobuild this embryonal, and thin layer of human achievement from
its“ancient ”neural heritage for the essential biological survival
functions ( Moravec, 1988 ). Since cognitive functions typically
require exact calculation and proper weighting of data, datatransformations —like lateral inhibition —may easily lead to
systematic distortions, (i.e. biases) in cognitive informationprocessing. Examples of the large number of biases caused bythe inherent properties of biological neural networks are:Anchoring bias (biasing decisions toward previously acquiredinformation, Furnham and Boo, 2011 ;Tversky and Kahneman,
1973 ,Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ), the Hindsight bias (the
tendency to erroneously perceive events as inevitable or more
likely once they have occurred, Hoffrage et al., 2000 ;Roese and
Vohs, 2012 ) the Availability bias (judging the frequency,
importance, or likelihood of an event by the ease with whichrelevant instances come to mind, Tversky and Kahnemann, 1973 ;
Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ), and the Con ﬁrmation bias (the
tendency to select, interpret, and remember information in a waythat con ﬁrms one ’s preconceptions, views, and expectations,
Nickerson, 1998 ). In addition to these inherent (structural)
limitations of (biological) neural networks, biases may also
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 4Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 5 ====
originate from functional evolutionary principles promoting the
survival of our ancestors who, as hunter-gatherers, lived in small,close-knit groups ( Haselton et al., 2005 ;Tooby and Cosmides,
2005 ). Cognitive biases can be caused by a mismatch between
evolutionarily rationalized “heuristics ” (“evolutionary
rationality ”:Haselton et al., 2009 ) and the current context or
environment ( Tooby and Cosmides, 2005 ). In this view, the same
heuristics that optimized the chances of survival of our ancestorsin their (natural) environment can lead to maladaptive (biased)behavior when they are used in our current (arti ﬁcial) settings.
Biases that have been considered as examples of this kind ofmismatch are the Action bias (preferring action even when thereis no rational justi ﬁcation to do this, Baron and Ritov, 2004 ;Patt
and Zeckhauser, 2000 ), Social proof (the tendency to mirror or
copy the actions and opinions of others, Cialdini, 1984 ), the
Tragedy of the commons (prioritizing personal interests over the
common good of the community, Hardin, 1968 ), and the Ingroup
bias (favoring one ’s own group above that of others, Taylor and
Doria, 1981 ).
This hard-wired (neurally inherent and/or evolutionary
ingrained) character of biased thinking makes it unlikelythat simple and straightforward methods like traininginterventions or awareness courses will be very effectiveto ameliorate biases. This dif ﬁculty of bias mitigation
seems indeed supported by the literature ( Korteling et al.,
2021 ).
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE IS NOT THE
SAME AS HUMAN-LIKE INTELLIGENCE
Fundamental Differences Between
Biological and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
We often think and deliberate about intelligence with an
anthropocentric conception of our own intelligence in mindas an obvious and unambiguous reference. We tend to usethis conception as a basis for reasoning about other, lessfamiliar phenomena of intelligence, such as other forms ofbiological and arti ﬁcial intelligence ( Coley and Tanner,
2012 ) .T h i sm a yl e a dt of a s c i n a t i n gq u e s t i o n sa n di d e a s .
An example is the discussion about how and when thepoint of “intelligence at human level ”will be achieved. For
instance, Ackermann. (2018) writes: “Before reaching
superintelligence, general AI means that a machine willhave the same cognitive capabilities as a human being ”.
So, researchers deliberate ex tensively about the point in
time when we will reach general AI, (e.g., Goertzel, 2007 ;
Müller and Bostrom, 2016 ). We suppose that these kinds of
questions are not quite on target. There are (in principle)many different possible types of (general) intelligenceconceivable of which human-like intelligence is just one ofthose. This means, for example that the development of AI isdetermined by the constraint of physics and technology, and
not by those of biological evolution. So, just as the
intelligence of a hypothetical extraterrestrial visitor of ourplanet earth is likely to have a di fferent (in-)org anic structurewith different characteristics, strengths, and weaknesses,
than the human residents this will also apply to arti ﬁcial
forms of (general) intelligence. Below we brie ﬂys u m m a r i z ea
few fundamental differences between human and arti ﬁcial
intelligence ( Bostrom, 2014 ):
-Basic structure: Biological (carbon) intelligence is based on
neural “wetware ”which is fundamentally different from
artiﬁcial (silicon-based) intelligence. As opposed to
biological wetware, in silicon, or digital, systems “hardware ”
and “software ”are independent of each other ( Kosslyn and
Koenig, 1992 ). When a biological system has learned a new
skill, this will be bounded to the system itself. In contrast, if anAI system has learned a certain skill then the constitutingalgorithms can be directly copied to all other similar digital
systems.
-Speed: Signals from AI systems propagate with almost thespeed of light. In humans, the conduction velocity of nervesproceeds with a speed of at most 120 m/s, which is extremelyslow in the time scale of computers ( Siegel and Sapru, 2005 ).
-Connectivity and communication: People cannot directlycommunicate with each other. They communicate vialanguage and gestures with limited bandwidth. This isslower and more dif ﬁcult than the communication of AI
systems that can be connected directly to each other.Thanks to this direct connection, they can also collaborate
on the basis of integrated algorithms.
-Updatability and scalability: AI systems have almost noconstraints with regard to keep them up to date or toupscale and/or re-con ﬁgure them, so that they have the
right algorithms and the data processing and storagecapacities necessary for the tasks they have to carry out.This capacity for rapid, structural expansion and immediateimprovement hardly applies to people.-In contrast, biology does a lot with a little: organic brains aremillions of times more ef ﬁcient in energy consumption than
computers. The human brain consumes less energy than a
lightbulb, whereas a supercomputer with comparable
computational performance uses enough electricity to powerquite a village ( Fischetti, 2011 ).
These kinds of differences in basic structure, speed,
connectivity, updatability, scalability, and energy consumptionwill necessarily also lead to different qualities and limitationsbetween human and arti ﬁcial intelligence. Our response speed to
simple stimuli is, for example, many thousands of times slowerthan that of arti ﬁcial systems. Computer systems can very easily
be connected directly to each other and as such can be part of one
integrated system. This means that AI systems do not have to be
seen as individual entities that can easily work alongside eachother or have mutual misunderstandings. And if two AI systemsare engaged in a task then they run a minimal risk to make amistake because of miscommunications (think of autonomousvehicles approaching a crossroad). After all, they are intrinsicallyconnected parts of the same system and the same algorithm(Gerla et al., 2014 ).
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 5Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 6 ====
Complexity and Moravec ’s Paradox
Because biological, carbon-based, brains and digital, silicon-
based, computers are optimized for completely different kindsof tasks (e.g., Moravec, 1988 ;Korteling et al., 2018b ), human and
artiﬁcial intelligence show fundamental and probably far-
stretching differences. Because of these differences it may bevery misleading to use our own mind as a basis, model or analogyfor reasoning about AI. This may lead to erroneous conceptions,for example about the presumed abilities of humans and AI toperform complex tasks. Resulting ﬂaws concerning information
processing capacities emerge often in the psychological literaturein which “complexity ”and “difﬁculty ”of tasks are used
interchangeably (see for examples: Wood et al., 1987 ;
McDowd and Craik, 1988 ). Task complexity is then assessed
in an anthropocentric way, that is: by the degree to which we
humans can perform or master it. So, we use the difﬁculty to
perform or master a task as a measure of its complexity , and task
performance (speed, errors) as a measure of skill and intelligenceof the task performer. Although this could sometimes beacceptable in psychological research, this may be misleading ifwe strive for understanding the intelligence of AI systems. For usit is much more dif ﬁcult to multiply two random numbers of six
digits than to recognize a friend on a photograph. But when itcomes to counting or arithmetic operations, computers arethousands of times faster and better, while the same systemshave only recently taken steps in image recognition (which only
succeeded when deep learning technology, based on some
principles of biological neural networks, was developed). Ingeneral: cognitive tasks that are relatively dif ﬁcult for the
human brain (and which we therefore ﬁnd subjectively
difﬁcult) do not have to be computationally complex, (e.g., in
terms of objective arithmetic, logic, and abstract operations). Andvice versa: tasks that are relatively easy for the brain (recognizingpatterns, perceptual-motor tasks, well-trained tasks) do not haveto be computationally simple. This phenomenon, that which iseasy for the ancient, neural “technology ”of people and dif ﬁcult
for the modern, digital technology of computers (and vice versa)has been termed the moravec ’s Paradox. Hans Moravec (1988)
wrote: “It is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult
level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, anddifﬁcult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old
when it comes to perception and mobility. ”
Human Superior Perceptual-Motor
Intelligence
Moravec ’s paradox implies that biological neural networks are
intelligent in different ways than arti ﬁcial neural networks.
Intelligence is not limited to the problems or goals that we as
humans, equipped with biological intelligence, ﬁnd dif ﬁcult
(Grind, 1997 ). Intelligence, de ﬁned as the ability to realize
complex goals or solve complex problems, is much more thanthat. According to Moravec (1988) high-level reasoning requires
very little computation, but low-level perceptual-motor skillsrequire enormous computational resources. If we express thecomplexity of a problem in terms of the number of elementarycalculations needed to solve it, then our biological perceptualmotor intelligence is highly superior to our cognitive intelligence.
Our organic perceptual-motor intelligence is especially good atassociative processing of higher-order invariants ( “patterns ”)i n
the ambient information. These are computationally more
complex and contain more information than the simple,
individual elements ( Gibson, 1966 ,Gibson, 1979 ). An example
of our superior perceptual-motor abilities is the Object Superiority
Effect : we perceive and interpret whole objects faster and more
effective than the (more simple) individual elements that make upthese objects ( Weisstein and Harris, 1974 ;McClelland, 1978 ;
Williams and Weisstein, 1978 ;Pomerantz, 1981 ). Thus, letters are
also perceived more accurately when presented as part of a wordthan when presented in isolation, i.e. the Word superiority effect,(e.g.Reicher, 1969 ;Wheeler, 1970 ). So, the difﬁculty of a task does
not necessarily indicate its inherent complexity .A s Moravec
(1988) puts it: “We are all prodigious Olympians in perceptual
and motor areas, so good that we make the dif ﬁcult look easy.
Abstract thought, though, is a new trick, perhaps less than 100thousand years old. We have not yet mastered it. It is not all thatintrinsically dif ﬁcult; it just seems so when we do it. ”
The Supposition of Human-like AGI
So, if there would exist AI systems with general intelligence that
can be used for a wide range of complex problems and objectives,those AGI machines would probably have a completely differentintelligence pro ﬁle, including other cognitive qualities, than
humans have ( Goertzel, 2007 ). This will be even so, if we
manage to construct AI agents who display similar behaviorlike us and if they are enabled to adapt to our way of thinking andproblem-solving in order to promote human-AI teaming. Unlesswe decide to deliberately degrade the capabilities of AI systems
(which would not be very smart), the underlying capacities andabilities of man and machines with regard to collection andprocessing of information, data analysis, probability reasoning,logic, memory capacity etc. will still remain dissimilar. Because ofthese differences we should focus at systems that effectivelycomplement us, and that make the human-AI system stronger
and more effective. Instead of pursuing human-level AI it would
be more bene ﬁcial to focus on autonomous machines and
(support) systems that ﬁll in, or extend on, the manifold gaps
of human cognitive intelligence. For instance, whereas people areforced —by the slowness and other limitations of biological
brains —to think heuristically in terms of goals, virtues, rules
and norms expressed in (fuzzy) language, AI has alreadyestablished excellent capacities to process and calculate directlyon highly complex data. Therefore, or the execution of speci ﬁc
(narrow) cognitive tasks (logical, analytical, computational),modern digital intelligence may be more effective and ef ﬁcient
than biological intelligence. AI may thus help to produce better
answers for complex problems using high amounts of data,consistent sets of ethical principles and goals, probabilistic-,and logic reasoning, (e.g. Korteling et al., 2018b ). Therefore,
we conjecture that ultimately the development of AI systemsfor supporting human decision making may appear the mosteffective way leading to the making of better choices or thedevelopment of better solutions on complex issues. So, thecooperation and division of tasks between people and AI
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 6Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 7 ====
systems will have to be primarily determinated by their mutually
speciﬁc qualities. For example, tasks or task components that
appeal to capacities in which AI systems excel, will have to be less(or less fully) mastered by people, so that less training will
probably be required. AI systems are already much better than
people at logically and arithmetically correct gathering (selecting)and processing (weighing, prioritizing, analyzing, combining)large amounts of data. They do this quickly, accurately andreliably. They are also more stable (consistent) than humans,have no stress and emotions and have a great perseverance and amuch better retention of knowledge and skills than people. As amachine, they serve people completely and without any “self-
interest ”or“own hidden agenda. ”Based on these qualities AI
systems may effectively take over tasks, or task components, frompeople. However, it remains important that people continue to
master those tasks to a certain extent, so that they can take over
tasks or take adequate action if the machine system fails.
In general, people are better suited than AI systems for a much
broader spectrum of cognitive and social tasks under a widevariety of (unforeseen) circumstances and events ( Korteling et al.,
2018b ). People are also better at the social-psychosocial
interaction for the time being. For example, it is dif ﬁcult for
AI systems to interpret human language and -symbolism. Thisrequires a very extensive frame of reference, which, at least untilnow and for the near future, is dif ﬁcult to achieve within AI. As a
result of all these differences, people are still better at responding
(as a ﬂexible team) to unexpected and unpredictable situations
and creatively devising possibilities and solutions in open and ill-deﬁned tasks and across a wide range of different, and possibly
unexpected, circumstances. People will have to make extra use oftheir speci ﬁc human qualities, (i.e. what people are relatively good
at) and train to improve relevant competencies. In addition,human team members will have to learn to deal well with theoverall limitations of AIs. With such a proper division of tasks,capitalizing on the speci ﬁc qualities and limitations of humans
and AI systems, human decisional biases may be circumventedand better performance may be expected. This means that
enhancement of a team with intelligent machines having less
cognitive constraints and biases, may have more surplus valuethan striving at collaboration between humans and AI that havedeveloped the same (human) biases. Although cooperation inteams with AI systems may need extra training in order toeffectively deal with this bias-mismatch, this heterogeneity willprobably be better and safer. This also opens up the possibility ofa combination of high levels of meaningful human control ANDhigh levels of automation which is likely to produce the mosteffective and safe human-AI systems ( Elands et al., 2019 ;
Shneiderman, 2020a ). In brief: human intelligence is not the
golden standard for general intelligence; instead of aiming at
human-like AGI, the pursuit of AGI should thus focus on
effective digital/silicon AGI in conjunction with an optimal
conﬁguration and allocation of tasks.
Explainability and Trust
Developments in relation to arti ﬁcial learning, or deep
(reinforcement) learning, in particular have beenrevolutionary. Deep learning simulates a network resemblingthe layered neural networks of our brain. Based on large
quantities of data, the network learns to recognize patternsand links to a high level of accuracy and then connect themto courses of action without knowing the underlying causal links.
This implies that it is dif ﬁcult to provide deep learning AI with
some kind of transparency in how or why it has made a particularchoice by, for example, by expressing an intelligible reasoning (forhumans) about its decision process, like we do, (e.g. Belkom,
2019 ). In addition, reasoning about decisions like humans do is a
very malleable and ad hoc process (at least in humans). Humansare generally unaware of their implicit cognitions or attitudes, andtherefore not be able to adequately report on them. It is thereforerather dif ﬁcult for many humans to introspectively analyze their
mental states, as far as these are conscious, and attach the resultsof this analysis to verbal labels and descriptions, (e.g. Nosek et al.
(2011) . First, the human brain hardly reveals how it creates
conscious thoughts, (e.g. Feldman-Barret, 2017 ). What it
actually does is giving us the illusion that its products revealits inner workings. In other words: our conscious thoughts tell usnothing about the way in which these thoughts came about. Thereis also no subjective marker that distinguishes correct reasoningprocesses from erroneous ones ( Kahneman and Klein, 2009 ). The
decision maker therefore has no way to distinguish betweencorrect thoughts, emanating from genuine knowledge andexpertize, and incorrect ones following from inappropriateneuro-evolutionary processes, tendencies, and primal
intuitions. So here we could ask the question: isn ’t it more
trustworthy to have a real black box, than to listen to aconfabulating one? In addition, according to Werkhoven et al.
(2018) demanding explainability observability, or transparency
(Belkom, 2019 ;van den Bosch et al., 2019 ) may cause arti ﬁcial
intelligent systems to constrain their potential bene ﬁt for human
society, to what can be understood by humans.
Of course we should not blindly trust the results generated by
AI. Like other ﬁelds of complex technology, (e.g. Modeling &
Simulation), AI systems need to be veri ﬁed (meeting
speci ﬁcations) and validated (meeting the systems ’goals) with
regard to the objectives for which the system was designed. In
general, when a system is properly veri ﬁed and validated, it may
be considered safe, secure and ﬁt for purpose. It therefore
deserves our trust for (logically) comprehensible and objectivereasons (although mistakes still can happen). Likewise peopletrust in the performance of aero planes and cell phones despitewe are almost completely ignorant about their complex innerprocesses. Like our own brains, arti ﬁcial neural networks are
fundamentally intransparant ( Nosek et al., 2011 ;Feldman-
Barret, 2017 ). Therefore, trust in AI should be primarily
based on its objective performance. This forms a more
important base than providing trust on the basis of subjective
(trickable) impressions, stories, or images aimed at belief andappeal to the user. Based on empirical validation research,developers and users can explicitly verify how well the systemis doing with respect to the set of values and goals for which themachine was designed. At some point, humans may want to trustthat goals can be achieved against less cost and better outcomes,when we accept solutions even if they may be less transparent forhumans ( Werkhoven et al., 2018 ).
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 7Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 8 ====
THE IMPACT OF MULTIPLE NARROW AI
TECHNOLOGY
AGI as the Holy Grail
AGI, like human general intelligence, would have many obvious
advantages, compared to narrow (limited, weak, specialized) AI.An AGI system would be much more ﬂexible and adaptive. On
the basis of generic training and reasoning processes it wouldunderstand autonomously how multiple problems in all kinds ofdifferent domains can be solved in relation to their context, (e.g.Kurzweil, 2005 ). AGI systems also require far fewer human
interventions to accommodate the various loose ends amongpartial elements, facets, and perspectives in complex situations.
AGI would really understand problems and is capable to view
them from different perspectives (as people —ideally —also can
do). A characteristic of the current (narrow) AI tools is that theyare skilled in a very speci ﬁc task, where they can often perform at
superhuman levels, (e.g. Goertzel, 2007 ;Silver et al., 2017 ). These
speciﬁc tasks have been well-de ﬁned and structured. Narrow AI
systems are less suitable, or totally unsuitable, for tasks or taskenvironments that offer little structure, consistency, rules orguidance, in which all sorts of unexpected, rare or uncommonevents, (e.g. emergencies) may occur. Knowing and followingﬁxed procedures usually does not lead to proper solutions in these
varying circumstances. In the context of (unforeseen) changes in
goals or circumstances, the adequacy of current AI is considerablyreduced because it cannot reason from a general perspective andadapt accordingly ( Lake et al., 2017 ;Horowitz, 2018 ). As with
narrow AI systems, people are then needed to supervise on thesedeviations in order to enable ﬂexible and adaptive system
performance. Therefore the quest of AGI may be consideredas looking for a kind of holy grail.
Multiple Narrow AI is Most Relevant Now!
The potential high prospects of AGI, however, do not imply thatAGI will be the most crucial factor in future AI R&D, at least forthe short- and mid-term. When re ﬂecting on the great potential
beneﬁts of general intelligence, we tend to consider narrow AI
applications as separate entities that can very well beoutperformed by a broader AGI that presumably can dealwith everything. But just as our modern world has evolvedrapidly through a diversity of speci ﬁc (limited) technological
innovations, at the system level the total and wide range of
emerging AI applications will also have a groundbreaking
technological and societal impact ( Peeters et al., 2020 ). This
will be all the more relevant for the future world of big data,in which everything is connected to everything through theInternet of Things . So, it will be much more pro ﬁtable and
beneﬁcial to develop and build (non-human-like) AI variants
that will excel in areas where people are inherently limited. Itseems not too far-fetched to suppose that the multiple variants ofnarrow AI applications also gradually get more broadlyinterconnected. In this way, a development toward an everbroader realm of integrated AI applications may be expected.In addition, it is already possible to train a language model AI
(Generative Pre-trained Transformer3, GPT-3) with a gigantic
dataset and then have it learn various tasks based on a handful ofexamples —one or few-shot learning. GPT-3 (developed by
OpenAI) can do this with language-related tasks, but there isno reason why this should not be possible with image and sound,or with combinations of these three ( Brown, 2020 ).
Besides, the moravec Paradox implies that the development of
AI“partners ”with many kinds of human (-level) qualities will be
very dif ﬁcult to obtain, whereas their added value, (i.e. beyond the
boundaries of human capabilities) will be relatively low. The mostfruitful AI applications will mainly involve supplementinghuman constraints and limitations. Given the presentincentives for competitive technological progress, multipleforms of (connected) narrow AI systems will be the majordriver of AI impact on our society for short- and mid-term.For the near future, this may imply that AI applications willremain very different from, and in many aspects almost
incomparable with, human agents. This is likely to be true
even if the hypothetical match of arti ﬁcial general intelligence
(AGI) with human cognition were to be achieved in the future inthe longer term. Intelligence is a multi-dimensional (quantitative,qualitative) concept. All dimensions of AI unfold and grow alongtheir own different path with their own dynamics. Therefore, overtime an increasing number of speci ﬁc (narrow) AI capacities may
gradually match, overtake and transcend human cognitivecapacities. Given the enormous advantages of AI, for examplein the ﬁeld of data availability and data processing capacities, the
realization of AGI probably would at the same time outclass
human intelligence in many ways. Which implies that the
hypothetical point of time of matching human- and arti ﬁcial
cognitive capacities, i.e. human-level AGI, will probably be hardto de ﬁne in a meaningful way ( Goertzel, 2007 ).
3
So when AI will truly understand us as a “friend, ”“partner, ”
“alter ego ”or“buddy, ”as we do when we collaborate with other
humans as humans, it will surpass us in many areas at the sameMoravec (1998) time. It will have a completely different pro ﬁle of
capacities and abilities and thus it will not be easy to reallyunderstand the way it “thinks ”and comes to its decisions. In
the meantime, however, as the capacities of robots expand and
move from simple tools to more integrated systems, it is important
to calibrate our expectations and perceptions toward robotsappropriately. So, we will have to enhance our awareness andinsight concerning the continuous development and progression ofmultiple forms of (integrated) AI systems. This concerns forexample the multi-facetted nature of intelligence. Different kindof agents may have different combinations of intelligences of verydifferent levels. An agent with general intelligence may for examplebe endowed with excellent abilities on the area of imagerecognition and navigation, calculation, and logical reasoningwhile at the same time being dull on the area of social
interaction and goal-oriented problem solving. This awareness
of the multi-dimensional nature of intelligence also concernsthe way we have to deal with ( and capitalize on)
anthropomorphism. That is the human tendency in human-robot interaction to characterize non-human artifacts that
3Unless of course AI will be deliberately constrained or degraded to human-level
functioning.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 8Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 9 ====
super ﬁcially look similar to us as possessing human-like traits,
emotions, and intentions, (e.g., Kiesler and Hinds, 2004 ;Fink,
2012 ;Haring et al., 2018 ). Insight into these human factors issues is
crucial to optimize the utility, performance and safety of human-AI
systems ( Peeters et al., 2020 ).
From this perspective, the question whether or not “AGI at the
human level ”will be realized is not the most relevant question for
the time being. According to most AI scientists, this will certainlyhappen, and the key question is not IF this will happen, butWHEN, (e.g., Müller and Bostrom, 2016 ). At a system level,
however, multiple narrow AI applications are likely to overtakehuman intelligence in an increasingly wide range of areas.
CONCLUSIONS AND FRAMEWORK
The present paper focused on providing some more clarity andinsight into the fundamental characteristics, differences andidiosyncrasies of human and arti ﬁcial intelligences. First we
presented ideas and arguments to scale up and differentiate ourconception of intelligence, whether this may be human orartiﬁcial. Central to this broader, multi-faceted, conception
of intelligence is the notion that intelligence in itself is a
matter of information and computation, independent of its
physical substrate. However, the nature of this physicalsubstrate (biological/carbon or digital/silicon), willsubstantially determine its po tential envelope of cognitive
abilities and limitations. Organic cognitive faculties ofhumans have been very recently developed during theevolution of mankind. These “embryonal ”faculties have
been built on top of a biological neural network apparatusthat has been optimized for allostasis and (complex) perceptualmotor functions. Human cognition is therefore characterizedby various structural limitations and distortions in its capacity
to process certain forms of non-biological information.
Biological neural networks are, for example, not very capableof performing arithmetic calculations, for which my pocketcalculator ﬁts millions of times better. These inherent and
ingrained limitations, that are due to the biological andevolutionary origin of human intelligence, may be termed“hard-wired. ”
In line with the Moravic ’s paradox , we argued that intelligent
behavior is more than what we, as homo sapiens, ﬁnd dif ﬁcult. So
we should not confuse task-dif ﬁculty (subjective,
anthropocentric) with task-complexity (objective). Instead weadvocated a versatile conceptualization of intelligence and an
acknowledgment of its many possible forms and compositions.
This implies a high variety in types of biological or other forms ofhigh (general) intelligence with a broad range of possibleintelligence pro ﬁles and cognitive qualities (which may or may
not surpass ours in many ways). This would make us better awareof the most probable potentials of AI applications for the short-and medium-term future. For example, from this perspective, ourprimary research focus should be on those components of theintelligence spectrum that are relatively dif ﬁcult for the human
brain and relatively easy for machines. This involves primarily thecognitive component requiring calculation, arithmetic analysis,statistics, probability calculation, data analysis, logical reasoning,
memorization, et cetera.
In line with this we have advocated a modest, more humble,
view of our human, general intelligence. Which also implies that
human-level AGI should not be considered as the “golden
standard ”of intelligence (to be pursued with foremost
priority). Because of the many fundamental differencesbetween natural and arti ﬁcial intelligences, human-like AGI
will be very dif ﬁcult to accomplish in the ﬁrst place (and also
with relatively limited added value). In case an AGI will beaccomplished in the (far) future it will therefore probably havea completely different pro ﬁle of cognitive capacities and abilities
than we, as humans, have. When such an AGI has come so farthat it is able to “collaborate ”like a human, it will at the same time
be likely that can in many respects already function at highly
superior levels relative to what we are able to. For the time being,
however, it will not be very realistic and useful to aim at AGI thatincludes the broad scope of human perceptual-motor andcognitive abilities. Instead, the most pro ﬁtable AI applications
for the short- and mid-term future, will probably be based onmultiple narrow AI systems. These multiple narrow AIapplications may catch up with human intelligence in anincreasingly broader range of areas.
From this point of view we advocate not to dwell too
intensively on the AGI question, whether or when AI willoutsmart us, take our jobs, or how to endow it with all kinds
of human abilities. Given the present state of the art it may be wise
to focus more on the whole system of multiple AI innovationswith humans as a crucial connecting and supervising factor. Thisalso implies the establishment and formalization of legalboundaries and proper (effective, ethical, safe) goals for AIsystems ( Elands et al., 2019 ;Aliman, 2020 ). So this human
factor (legislator, user, “collaborator ”) needs to have good
insight into the characteristics and capacities of biological andartiﬁcial intelligence (under all sorts of tasks and working
conditions). Both in the workplace and in policy making themost fruitful AI applications will be to complement and
compensate for the inherent biological and cognitive
constraints of humans. For this reason, prominent issuesconcern how to use it intelligently? For what tasks and underwhat conditions decisions are safe to leave to AI and when ishuman judgment required? How can we capitalize on thestrengths of human intelligence and how to deploy AI systemseffectively to complement and compensate for the inherentconstraints of human cognition. See ( Hoffman and Johnson,
2019
;Shneiderman, 2020a ;Shneiderman, 2020b ) for recent
overviews.
In summary: No matter how intelligent autonomous AI agents
become in certain respects, at least for the foreseeable future, they
will remain unconscious machines. These machines have afundamentally different operating system (biological vs digital)with correspondingly different cognitive abilities and qualitiesthan people and other animals. So, before a proper “team
collaboration ”can start, the human team members will have
to understand these kinds of differences, i.e., how humaninformation processing and intelligence differs from thatof–the many possible and speci ﬁc variants of —AI systems.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 9Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 10 ====
Only when humans develop a proper of these “interspecies ”
differences they can effectively capitalize on the potentialbeneﬁts of AI in (future) human-AI teams. Given the high
ﬂexibility, versatility, and adaptability of humans relative to AI
systems, the ﬁrst challenge becomes then how to ensure human
adaptation to the more rigid abilities of AI?
4In other words: how
can we achieve a proper conception the differences betweenhuman- and arti ﬁcial intelligence?
Framework for Intelligence Awareness
Training
For this question, the issue of Intelligence Awareness in human
professionals needs to be addressed more vigorously. Next tocomputer tools for the distribution of relevant awareness
information ( Collazos et al., 2019 ) in human-machine systems,
this requires better education and training on how to deal withthe very new and different characteristics, idiosyncrasies, andcapacities of AI systems. This includes, for example, a properunderstanding of the basic characteristics, possibilities, andlimitations of the AI ’s cognitive system properties without
anthropocentric and/or anthropomorphic misconceptions. Ingeneral, this “Intelligence Awareness ”is highly relevant in
order to better understand, investigate, and deal with themanifold possibilities and challenges of machine intelligence.This practical human-factors challenge could, for instance, be
tackled by developing new, targeted and easily con ﬁgurable
(adaptive) training forms and learning environments forhuman-AI systems. These ﬂexible training forms and
environments, (e.g. simulations and games) should focus atdeveloping knowledge, insight and practical skills concerningthe speci ﬁc, non-human characteristics, abilities, and limitations
of AI systems and how to deal with these in practical situations.People will have to understand the critical factors determining thegoals, performance, and choices of AI? Which may in some caseseven include the simple notion that AIs excite as much about theirperformance in achieving their goals as your refrigerator does for
keeping your milkshake well. They have to learn when and under
what conditions decisions are safe to leave to AI and when ishuman judgment required or essential? And more in general: howdoes it “think ”and decide? The relevance of this kind of
knowledge, skills and practices will only become bigger whenthe degree of autonomy (and genericity) of advanced AI systemswill grow.
What does such an Intelligence Awareness training curriculum
look like? It needs to include at least a module on the cognitivecharacteristics of AI. This is basically a subject similar to thosesubjects that are also included in curricula on human cognition.
This broad module on the “Cognitive Science of AI ”may involve
a range of sub-topics starting with a revision of the concept of"Intelligence" stripped of anthropocentric and anthropomorphicmisunderstandings. In addition, this module should focus atproviding knowledge about the structure and operation of theAI operating system or the “AI mind. ”This may be followed by
subjects like: Perception and interpretation of information by AI,AI cognition (memory, information processing, problem solving,biases), dealing with AI possibilities and limitations in the
“human ”areas like creativity, adaptivity, autonomy, re ﬂection,
and (self-) awareness, dealing with goal functions (valuation ofactions in relation to cost-bene ﬁt), AI ethics and AI security. In
addition, such a curriculum should include technical modulesproviding insight into the working of the AI operating system.Due to the enormous speed with which the AI technology andapplication develops, the content of such a curriculum is also verydynamic and continuously evolving on the basis of technologicalprogress. This implies that the curriculum and training-aids and-environments should be ﬂexible, experiential, and adaptive,
which makes the work form of serious gaming ideally suited.
Below, we provide a global framework for the development of
new educational curricula on AI awareness. These subtopics gobeyond learning to effectively “operate, ”“control ”or interact with
speciﬁc AI applications (i.e. conventional human-machine
interaction):
-Understanding of underlying system characteristics of the AI
(the “AI brain ”). Understanding the speci ﬁc qualities and
limitations of AI relative to human intelligence.-Understanding the complexity of the tasks and of theenvironment from the perspective of AI systems.
-Understanding the problem of biases in human cognition,
relative to biases in AI.-Understanding the problems associated with the control of AI,predictability of AI behavior (decisions), building trust,maintaining situation awareness (complacency), dynamictask allocation, (e.g. taking over each other ’s tasks) and
responsibility (accountability).-How to deal with possibilities and limitations of AI in the ﬁeld
of“creativity ”, adaptability of AI, “environmental awareness
”,
and generalization of knowledge.-Learning to deal with perceptual and cognitive limitations and
possible errors of AI which may be dif ﬁcult to comprehend.
-Trust in the performance of AI (possibly in spite of limitedtransparency or ability to “explain ”) based on veri ﬁcation and
validation.-Learning to deal with our natural inclination toanthropocentrism and anthropomorphism ( “theory of
mind ”) when reasoning about human-robot interaction.
-How to capitalize on the powers of AI in order to deal with theinherent constraints of human information processing (andvice versa).-Understanding the speci ﬁc characteristics and qualities of
the man-machine system and being able to decide on when,
for what, and how the integrated combination of human-and AI faculties may perform at best overall systempotential.
In conclusion: due to the enormous speed with which the
AI technology and application evolves we need a moreversatile conceptualization of intelligence and anacknowledgment of its many possible forms and
4Next to the issue of Human-Aware AI, i.e. tuning AI to the cognitive
characteristics of humans.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 10Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 11 ====
combinations. A revised conception of intelligence includes
also a good understanding of the basic characteristics,possibilities, and limitations of different (biological,artiﬁcial) cognitive system properties without
anthropocentric and/or anthropomorphic misconceptions.
This “Intelligence Awareness ”is highly relevant in order to
better understand and deal with the manifold possibilities andchallenges of machine intelligence, for instance to decidewhen to use or deploy AI in relation to tasks and theircontext. The development of educational curricula withnew, targeted, and easily con ﬁgurable training forms and
learning environments for human-AI systems are thereforerecommended. Further work should focus on training tools,methods and content that are ﬂexible and adaptive enough to
be able to keep up with the rapid changes in the ﬁe l do fA Ia n d
with the wide variety of target groups and learning goals.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The literature search, analysis, conceptual work, and the writing
of the manuscript was done by JEK. All authors listed have madesubstantial, direct, and intellectual contribution to the work andapproved it for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors want to thank J. van Diggelen, L.J.H.M. Kester fortheir useful inputs for this manuscript. The present paper was adeliverable of 1) the BIHUNT program (Behavioral Impact ofNIC Teaming, V1719) funded by the Dutch Ministry of Defenseand of the Wise Policy Making program funded by theNetherlands Organization for Applied Scienti ﬁc Research (TNO).
REFERENCES
Ackermann, N. (2018). Artiﬁcial Intelligence Framework: a visual introduction to
machine learning and AI Retrieved from: https://towardsdatascience.com/
artiﬁcial-intelligence-framework-a-visual-introduction-to-machine-learning-
and-ai-d7e36b304f87. (September 9, 2019).
Aliman, N-M. (2020). Hybrid cognitive-affective Strategies for AI safety . PhD
thesis . Utrecht, Netherlands: Utrecht University. doi:10.33540/203
Bao, J. X., Kandel, E. R., and Hawkins, R. D. (1997). Involvement of pre- and
postsynaptic mechanisms in posttetanic potentiation at Aplysia synapses.Science 275, 969 –973. doi:10.1126/science.275.5302.969Dane
Bar, M. (2007). The proactive brain: using analogies and associations to
generate predictions. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 280 –289. doi:10.1016/j.tics.
2007.05.005
Baron, J., and Ritov, I. (2004). Omission bias, individual differences, and normality.
Organizational Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 94, 74 –85. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.
2004.03.003
Belkom, R. v. (2019). Duikboten zwemmen niet: de zoektocht naar intelligente
machines. Den Haag: Stichting Toekomstbeeld der Techniek (STT).
Bergstein, B. (2017). AI isn ’t very smart yet. But we need to get moving to make sure
automation works for more people . Cambridge, MA, United States: MIT
Technology. Retrieved from: https://www.technologyreview.com/s/609318/the-great-ai-paradox/
Bieger, J. B., Thorisson, K. R., and Garrett, D. (2014). “Raising AI: tutoring
matters, ”in7th international conference, AGI 2014 quebec city, QC,
Canada, august 1 –4, 2014 proceedings . Editors B. Goertzel, L. Orseau, and
J. Snaider (Berlin, Germany: Springer). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-09274-4
Boden, M. (2017). Principles of robotics: regulating robots in the real world.
Connect. Sci. 29 (2), 124 –129.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: pathts, dangers, strategies . Oxford
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Bradshaw, J. M., Dignum, V., Jonker, C. M., and Sierhuis, M. (2012). Introduction
to special issue on human-agent-robot teamwork. IEEE Intell. Syst. 27, 8 –13.
doi:10.1109/MIS.2012.37
Brodal, A. (1981). Neurological anatomy in relation to clinical medicine . New York,
NY, United States: Oxford University Press.
Brown, T. B. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners, arXiv 2005, 14165v4.
Cialdini, R. D. (1984). Inﬂuence: the psychology of persuation . New York, NY,
United States: Harper.
Coley, J. D., and Tanner, K. D. (2012). Common origins of diverse misconceptions:
cognitive principles and the development of biology thinking. CBE Life Sci.
Educ. 11 (3), 209 –215. doi:10.1187/cbe.12-06-0074
Collazos, C. A., Gutierrez, F. L., Gallardo, J., Ortega, M., Fardoun, H. M., and
Molina, A. I. (2019). Descriptive theory of awareness for groupwaredevelopment. J. Ambient Intelligence Humanized Comput. 10, 4789 –4818.
doi:10.1007/s12652-018-1165-9Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes ’error: emotion, reason and the human brain .N e w
York, NY, United States: G. P. Putnam ’s Sons.
E l a n d s ,P . ,H u i z i n g K e s t e r ,A .L . ,O g g e r o ,S . , and Peeters, M. (2019). Governing ethical
and effective behavior of intelligent sy stems: a novel framework for meaningful
human control in a military context. Militaire Spectator 188 (6), 302 –313.
Feldman-Barret, L. (2017). How emotions are made: the secret life of the brain .
Boston, MA, United States: Houghton Mif ﬂin Harcourt.
Fink, J. (2012). “Anthropomorphism and human likeness in the design of robots
and human-robot interaction, ”inSocial robotics. ICSR 2012 .Lecture notes in
computer science . Editors S. S. Ge, O. Khatib, J. J. Cabibihan, R. Simmons, and
M. A. Williams (Berlin, Germany: Springer), 7621. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-34103-8_20
Fischetti, M. (2011). Computers vs brains. Scienti ﬁc American 175
thanniversary
issue Retreived from: https://www.scienti ﬁcamerican.com/article/computers-
vs-brains/.
Furnham, A., and Boo, H. C. (2011). A literature review of the anchoring effect. The
J. Socio-Economics 40, 35 –42. doi:10.1016/j.socec.2010.10.008
Gerla, M., Lee, E-K., and Pau, G. (2014). Internet of vehicles: from intelligent grid
to autonomous cars and vehicular clouds. WF-IoT 12, 241 –246. doi:10.1177/
1550147716665500
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception . Boston, MA,
United States: Houghton Mif ﬂin.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems . Boston, MA,
United States: Houghton Mif ﬂin.
Gigerenzer, G., and Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic decision making. Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 62, 451 –482. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-145346
Goertzel, B. (2007). Human-level arti ﬁcial general intelligence and the possibility of
a technological singularity: a reaction to Ray Kurzweil ’s the singularity is near,
and McDermott ’s critique of Kurzweil. Artif. Intelligence 171 (18), 1161 –1173.
doi:10.1016/j.artint.2007.10.011
Goertzel, B., Orseau, L., and Snaider, J., (Editors). (2014). Preface. 7th international
conference, AGI 2014 Quebec City, QC, Canada, August 1 –4, 2014 Proceedings .
Springer.
Grind, W. A. van. de. (1997). Natuurlijke intelligentie: over denken, intelligentie en
bewustzijn van mensen en andere dieren . 2nd edn. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Nieuwezijds. Retrieved from https://www.nieuwezijds.nl/boek/natuurlijke-intelligentie/. (July 9, 2019).
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. The population problem has no
technical solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality. Science 162,
1243 –1248. doi:10.1126/science.162.3859.1243
H a r i n g ,K .S . ,W a t a n a b e ,K . ,V e l o n a k i ,M . ,T o s e l l ,C .C . ,a n dF i n o m o r e ,V .
(2018). Ffab —the form function attribution bias in human-robot
interaction. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 10 (4), 843 –851. doi:10.1109/
TCDS.2018.2851569
H a s e l t o n ,M .G . ,B r y a n t ,G .A . ,W i l k e ,A . ,F r e d e r i c k ,D .A . ,G a l p e r i n ,A . ,F r a n k e n h u i s ,
W. E., et al. (2009). Adaptive rationality: an evolutionary perspective on cognitive bias.Soc. Cogn. 27, 733 –762. doi:10.1521/soco.2009.27.5.733
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 11Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 12 ====
Haselton, M. G., Nettle, D., and Andrews, P. W. (2005). “The evolution of cognitive
bias, ”inThe handbook of evolutionary psychology . Editor D.M. Buss (Hoboken,
NJ, United States: John Wiley & Sons), 724 –746.
Henshilwood, C., and Marean, C. (2003). The origin of modern human behavior.
Curr. Anthropol. 44 (5), 627 –651. doi:10.1086/377665
Hoffman, R. R., and Johnson, M. (2019). “The quest for alternatives to “levels of
automation ”and “task allocation, ”inHuman performance in automated and
autonomous systems . Editors M. Mouloua and P. A. Hancock (Boca Raton, FL,
United States: CRC Press), 43 –68.
Hoffrage, U., Hertwig, R., and Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Hindsight bias: a by-product
of knowledge updating? J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 26, 566 –581. doi:10.
1037/0278-7393.26.3.566
Horowitz, M. C. (2018). The promise and peril of military applications of arti ﬁcial
intelligence. Bulletin of the atomic scientists Retrieved from https://thebulletin.org/
militaryapplications-arti ﬁcial-intelligence/promise-and-peril-military-applications-
artiﬁcial-intelligence (Accessed March 27, 2019).
Isaacson, J. S., and Scanziani, M. (2011). How inhibition shapes cortical activity.
Neuron 72, 231 –243. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.027
Johnson, M., Bradshaw, J. M., Feltovich, P. J., Jonker, C. M., van Riemsdijk, M. B.,
and Sierhuis, M. (2014). Coactive design: designing support forinterdependence in joint activity. J. Human-Robot Interaction 3 (1), 43 –69.
doi:10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Johnson
Kahle, W. (1979). Band 3: nervensysteme und Sinnesorgane ,i nTaschenatlas de
anatomie. Stutttgart . Editors W. Kahle, H. Leonhardt, and W. Platzer (New
York, NY, United States: Thieme Verlag).
Kahneman, D., and Klein, G. (2009). Conditions for intuitive expertize: a failure to
disagree. Am. Psychol. 64, 515 –526. doi:10.1037/a0016755
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow . New York, NY, United States:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Katz, B., and Miledi, R. (1968). The role of calcium in neuromuscular facilitation.
J. Physiol. 195, 481 –492. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1968.sp008469
Kiesler, S., and Hinds, P. (2004). Introduction to this special issue on human –robot
interaction. Int J Hum-Comput. Int. 19 (1), 1 –8. doi:10.1080/07370024.2004.
9667337
Klein, G., Woods, D. D., Bradshaw, J. M., Hoffman, R. R., and Feltovich, P. J.
(2004). Ten challenges for making automation a ‘team player ’
in joint human-
agent activity. IEEE Intell. Syst. 19 (6), 91 –95. doi:10.1109/MIS.2004.74
Korteling, J. E. (1994). Multiple-task performance and aging . Bariet, Ruinen,
Netherlands: Dissertation. TNO-Human Factors Research Institute/StateUniversity Groningen https://www.researchgate.net/publication/310626711_Multiple-Task_Performance_and_Aging.
Korteling, J. E., and Toet, A. (2020). Cognitive biases. in Encyclopedia of behavioral
neuroscience . 2nd Edn (Amsterdam-Edinburgh: Elsevier Science) doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-809324-5.24105-9
Korteling, J. E., Brouwer, A. M., and Toet, A. (2018a). A neural network
framework for cognitive bias. Front. Psychol. 9, 1561. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.
2018.01561
Korteling, J. E., van de Boer-Visschedijk, G. C., Boswinkel, R. A., and Boonekamp,
R. C. (2018b). Effecten van de inzet van Non-Human Intelligent Collaboratorsop Opleiding and Training [V1719]. Report TNO 2018 R11654. Soesterberg:
TNO defense safety and security , Soesterberg, Netherlands: TNO, Soesterberg.
Korteling, J. E., Gerritsma, J., and Toet, A. (2021). Retention and transfer of
cognitive bias mitigation interventions: a systematic literature study. Front.
Psychol. 1–20. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.27981.56800
Kosslyn, S. M., and Koenig, O. (1992). Wet Mind: the new cognitive neuroscience .
New York, NY, United States: Free Press.
Krämer, N. C., von der Pütten, A., and Eimler, S. (2012). “Human-agent and
human-robot interaction theory: similarities to and differences from human-human interaction, ”inHuman-computer interaction: the agency perspective .
Studies in computational intelligence . Editors M. Zacarias and J. V. de Oliveira
(Berlin, Germany: Springer), 396, 215 –240. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-25691-2_9
Kurzweil, R. (2005). The singularity is near . New York, NY, United States: Viking
press.
Kurzweil, R. (1990). The age of intelligent machines . Cambridge, MA, United States:
MIT Press.
Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gershman, S. J. (2017). Building
machines that learn and think like people. Behav. Brain Sci. 40, e253. doi:10.
1017/S0140525X16001837Lichtenstein, S., and Slovic, P. (1971). Reversals of preference between bids and
choices in gambling decisions. J. Exp. Psychol. 89, 46 –55. doi:10.1037/
h0031207
McBrearty, S., and Brooks, A. (2000). The revolution that wasn ’t: a new
interpretation of the origin of modern human behavior. J. Hum. Evol. 39
(5), 453 –563. doi:10.1006/jhev.2000.0435
McClelland, J. L. (1978). Perception and masking of wholes and parts. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept Perform. 4, 210 –223. doi:10.1037//0096-1523.4.2.210
McDowd, J. M., and Craik, F. I. M. (1988). Effects of aging and task dif ﬁculty on
divided attention performance. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform . 14,
267–280.
Minsky, M. (1986). The Society of Mind . London, United Kingdom: Simon and
Schuster.
Moravec, H. (1988). Mind children . Cambridge, MA, United States: Harvard
University Press.
Moravec, H. (1998). When will computer hardware match the human brain? J. Evol.
Tech. 1, 1998 Retreived from https://jetpress.org/volume1/moravec.htm.
Müller, V. C., and Bostrom, N. (2016). Future progress in arti ﬁcial intelligence: a
survey of expert opinion. Fundamental issues of arti ﬁcial intelligence . Cham,
Switzerland: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26485-1
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Con ﬁrmation bias: a ubiquitous phenomenon in many
guises. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2, 175 –220. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.2.2.175
Nosek, B. A., Hawkins, C. B., and Frazier, R. S. (2011). Implicit social cognition:
from measures to mechanisms. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15 (4), 152 –159. doi:10.1016/j.
tics.2011.01.005
Patt, A., and Zeckhauser, R. (2000). Action bias and environmental decisions.
J. Risk Uncertain. 21, 45 –72. doi:10.1023/a:1026517309871
Peeters, M. M., van Diggelen, J., van Den Bosch, K., Bronkhorst, A., Neerincx, M.
A., Schraagen, J. M., et al. (2020). Hybrid collective intelligence in a human –AI
society. AI and Society 38, 217 –(238.) doi:10.1007/s00146-020-01005-y
Petraglia, M. D., and Korisettar, R. (1998). Early human behavior in global context .
Oxfordshire, United Kingdom: Routledge.
Pomerantz, J. (1981). “Perceptual organization in information processing, ”in
Perceptual organization . Editors M. Kubovy and J. Pomerantz (Hillsdale, NJ,
United States: Lawrence Erlbaum).
Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y., and Ross, L. (2002). The bias blind spot: perceptions of bias in
self versus others. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28, 369 –381. doi:10.1177/
0146167202286008
Reicher, G. M. (1969). Perceptual recognition as a function of meaningfulness of
stimulus material. J. Exp. Psychol. 81, 274 –280.
Rich, E., and Knight, K. (1991). Artiﬁcial intelligence . 2nd edition. New York, NY,
United States: McGraw-Hill.
Rich, E., Knight, K., and Nair, S. B. (2009). Articial intelligence . 3rd Edn. New Delhi,
India: Tata McGraw-Hill.
Risen, J. L. (2015). Believing what we do not believe: acquiescence to superstitious
beliefs and other powerful intuitions. Psychol. Rev. 123, 182 –207. doi:10.1037/
rev0000017
Roese, N. J., and Vohs, K. D. (2012). Hindsight bias. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7,
411–426. doi:10.1177/1745691612454303
Rogers, R. D., and Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictible switch between simple
cognitive tasks. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 124, 207e231. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.124.2.207
Rubinstein, J. S., Meyer, D. E., and Evans, J. E. (2001). Executive control of
cognitive processes in task switching. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept Perform. 27,
763–797. doi:10.1037//0096-1523.27.4.763
Russell, S., and Norvig, P. (2014). Artiﬁcial intelligence: a modern approach . 3rd ed.
Harlow, United Kingdom: Pearson Education.
Shaﬁr, E., and LeBoeuf, R. A. (2002). Rationality. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 53, 491 –517.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135213
Shatz, C. J. (1992). The developing brain. Sci. Am. 267, 60 –67. doi:10.1038/
scienti ﬁcamerican0992-60
Shneiderman, B. (2020a). Design lessons from AI ’s two grand goals: human
emulation and useful applications. IEEE Trans. Tech. Soc. 1, 73 –82. doi:10.
1109/TTS.2020.2992669
Shneiderman, B. (2020b). Human-centered arti ﬁcial intelligence: reliable, safe &
trustworthy. Int. J. Human –Computer Interaction 36 (6), 495 –504. doi:10.1080/
10447318.2020.1741118
Siegel, A., and Sapru, H. N. (2005). Essential neuroscience . Philedelphia, PA,
United States: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 12Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

==== Page 13 ====
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., et al.
(2017). Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature 550
(7676), 354. doi:10.1038/nature24270
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Q. J. Econ. 69, 99 –118.
doi:10.2307/1884852
Taylor, D. M., and Doria, J. R. (1981). Sel f-serving and group-serving bias in
attribution. J. Soc. Psychol. 113, 201 –211. doi:10.1080/00224545.1981.
9924371
Tegmark, M. (2017). Life 3.0: being human in the age of arti ﬁcial intelligence .N e w
York, NY, United States: Borzoi Book published by A.A. Knopf.
Toet, A., Brouwer, A. M., van den Bosch, K., and Korteling, J. E. (2016). Effects of
personal characteristics on susceptibility to decision bias: a literature study. Int.
J. Humanities Soc. Sci. 8, 1–17.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (2005). “Conceptual foundations of evolutionary
psychology, ”inHandbook of evolutionary psychology . Editor D.M. Buss
(Hoboken, NJ, United States: John Wiley & Sons), 5 –67.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and
biases. Science 185 (4157), 1124 –1131. doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the
psychology of choice. Science 211, 453 –458. doi:10.1126/science.7455683
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency
and probability. Cogn. Psychol. 5, 207 –232. doi:10.1016/0010-0285(73)90033-9
van den Bosch, K., and Bronkhorst, K. (2018). Human-AI cooperation to bene ﬁt
military decision making. Soesterberg, Netherlands: TNO.
van den Bosch, K., and Bronkhorst, K. (2019). Six challenges for human-AI Co-
learning. Adaptive instructional systems 11597, 572 –589. doi:10.1007/978-3-
030-22341-0_45
Weisstein, N., and Harris, C. S. (1974). Visual detection of line segments: an
object-superiority effect. Science 186, 752 –755. doi:10.1126/science.186.
4165.752Werkhoven, P., Neerincx, M., and Kester, L. (2018). Telling autonomous systems
what to do. Proceedings of the 36th European Conference on CognitiveErgonomics, ECCE 2018, Utrecht, Nehterlands, 5 –7 September, 2018, 1 –8.
doi:10.1145/3232078.3232238
Wheeler, D., (1970). Processes in word recognition Cogn. Psychol. 1, 59 –85.
Williams, A., and Weisstein, N. (1978). Line segments are perceived better in a
coherent context than alone: an object-line effect in visual perception. Mem.
Cognit 6, 85 –90. doi:10.3758/bf03197432
Wing ﬁeld, A., and Byrnes, D. (1981).
The psychology of human memory . New York,
NY, united States: Academic Press.
Wood, R. E., Mento, A. J., and Locke, E. A. (1987). Task complexity as a moderator
of goal effects: a meta-analysis. J. Appl. Psychol. 72 (3), 416 –425. doi:10.1037/
0021-9010.72.3.416
Wyrobek, K. A., Berger, E. H., van der Loos, H. F. M., and Salisbury, J. K. (2008).
Toward a personal robotics development platform: rationale and design of anintrinsically safe personal robot. Proceedinds of2008 IEEE InternationalConference on Robotics and Automation, Pasadena, CA, United States, 19-23 May 2008. doi:10.1109/ROBOT.2008.4543527
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential con ﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Korteling, van de Boer-Visschedijk, Blankendaal, Boonekamp and
Eikelboom. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the CreativeCommons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction inother forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordancewith accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 13Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence

