==== Page 1 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
1 
 Oral  Topic:  Robotics (Human -Robot Interaction)  
 
Human -Robot Interaction: Applications  
 
Abdel -Nasser Sharkawy  
Mechatronics Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Department  
Faculty of Engineering, South Valley University  
Qena 83523, Egypt  
E-mail: eng.abdelnassersharkawy@gmail.com   
 
 
Summary:  Recently, human -robot interaction (HRI) is an extensive research topic and theme which gained importance and 
significance. HRI aims at the complementary combination between the robot capabilities and human skil ls. The robots assist 
humans in terms of precision, speed, and force. The humans contribute in terms of the experience, knowledge of executing the 
task, intuition, and easy adaptation and learning, and understanding of control strategies. In this work, the  applications of 
human -robot interaction are reviewed. These applications could be industrial, medical, agricultural, servical, and educational. 
HRI can be found in industrial applications in picking and placing in the production lines, welding processes, parts assembly, 
and painting. Assistive robotics are one from the highest profile areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the mental 
challenges, the robots can provide the opportunity of interaction and therapy. In addition, HRI can be widely applie d in 
hospitals. Nowadays, HRI is very important for facing the new coronavirus (COVID -19) pandemic. In agriculture, the 
cooperation between human and the robot helps with many tasks including harvesting, seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed 
detection, haul ing, and mowing. HRI can also be found in other applications such as education, mining, and home use.  
 
Keywords:  Human -Robot Interaction , Industrial Applications , Medical and Rehabilitation Applications , Precision 
Agriculture.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
HRI is the field of the study referring to 
understanding, designing, and evaluating the robotic 
systems used by or collaborating with the human 
operator. Interaction needs the communication 
between the robots and the humans. The human 
communication with th e robot could take many forms. 
However, these forms are highly affected by whether 
the human operator closeness to the robot. Therefore, 
the communication or interaction between both the 
human and the robot is separated into two main 
categories [1], [2] : The first category is the remote 
interaction and the second is p oximate  interaction. In 
the remote one, the human does not exist in nearby the 
robot.  In a ddition, they are spatially or even 
temporarily separated. An example for this category is 
the Mars Rovers which is separated from earth in space 
and time as well. In the proximate category, the human 
and robot coexist in the same location. An example for 
this category is the service robots during their sharing 
with the humans in the same room.  
These categories can help distinguish between the 
applications requiring the mobility, physical 
interaction, or social interaction. Remote interaction 
using mobile robots refers to the tele -operation or the 
supervised control. Remote interaction using the 
physical manipulator refers to the tele -manipulation. 
Proximate interaction using the mobile robots takes the 
form of the robot assistant. Proximate interaction 
includes the physical interaction. In social interaction, 
the social and the emotive as well as the cognitive 
interaction aspects are included. In social interaction, the humans and the robots interact using the form of 
peers or companions. Importantly, socia l interactions 
with the robots take the form of proximate interaction 
rather than remote interaction.  
From these categories, this manuscript addresses 
the proximate interaction. It presents some real 
applications for HRI in industrial environment, 
medical  and rehabilitation, agriculture, education, and 
other environments. These applications show the 
importance of the interaction happening between the 
robot and human operator in our real life.  
The rest of this paper is divided as follows. section 
2 present s the industrial applications of HRI. In section 
3, the HRI in the medical and rehabilitation 
applications is presented. HRI in agriculture is 
presented in section 4, whereas section 5 illustrates 
some other applications. Section 6 concludes the main 
impor tant point of this manuscript.  
 
 
2. HRI in Industry  
HRI is widely used in industrial applications such 
as picking and placing in the production lines, welding 
processes, parts assembly, painting, and so on.  
Some examples for HRI in the industrial 
applica tion are presented from Fig. 1 to Fig. 4 . The 
robot workstation is running in the plant of BMW in 
South Carolina in which the robot helps human 
operators to perform the assembly of the final door [3] 
(see Fig. 1). In the door assembly operation, human 
operato r and robots work together. BMW plant has 
succeeded to implement and develop the direct human -

==== Page 2 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
2 
 robot cooperation and interaction in the series 
production.  
Human -robot teams are found also in the flexible 
production lines [4], [5] , as presented in Fig. 2. In this 
figure, the robotic manipulators and the human 
operators collaborate in handling of the workpieces. 
Safety is also is very important in such environments, 
since the proximity of the human operator to the robot 
that can lead to potential injuries.  
 
 
Fig. 1. The robot helps the human performing the final door 
assembly in the BMW plant [3]. 
 
 
Fig. 2. The robot and the human workers cooperate in 
handling workpieces [4], [5] . 
 
Repetitive co -manipulation tasks as shown in Fig. 
3 [6] can be performed in suitable poses of the human 
body. The poses can minimise the effects of the 
overloading joint torque. Furthermore, they can 
maximise the capacity of the manipulation of the 
human.  
For handling of heavy and bulky components in 
welding s ituations, the multi -robot system with 
collaborative functionality assists the worker [7], as 
shown in Fig.  4. Two robots help position the 
components to be joined in the welding process, at which  point the human operator carries out the welding 
task under favourable ergonomic conditions. In 
comparison with the standard welding bench, the 
human operator does not need to assume the 
uncomfortable postures or the work overhead. All 
necessary positioni ng and orientation of the 
workpieces can be performed by the robot. This also 
includes presenting of the components in the optimal 
position for the process of welding, allowing proper 
flow of the welding bead. Since the robotic 
repositioning motion is quit e fast, the handling time 
which is about one third of the total process time is 
reduced to a minimum in comparison to welding 
processes in which HRI is not implemented.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Example for the repetitive co -manipulation tasks [6].  
 
 
Fig. 4. The multi -robot system assists the worker in the 
welding process [7]. 
 
 
 
3. HRI in Rehabilitation and Medical 
Applications  
 
Assistive robotics are one of the highest profile 
areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the 
mental challenges, robots can provide the opportunity 
for the interaction and therapy. This work is explored 
with autistic children in ref. [8], [9] . Many of them 
cannot respond strongly to the social  cues but they 
respond very well to the mechanical devices. Robots 


==== Page 3 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
3 
 give the possible therapeutic role for using the 
mechanical device for improving the social 
interactions [10]. Robots are being considered also for 
different domains in which children benefit, for 
example, children with experienced trauma. The social 
dimension of huma n-robot interaction is necessary not 
only in the assistive roles, but also in many areas and 
domains of the proximate interaction [11]–[15].   
For people with physical disabilities, the robot 
embodiment provides the unique opportunities which 
are not possible with other technology forms. For 
example, the researche rs are working on the design of 
the robots which provide and give the support for the 
physical therapy. Efforts include the providing of the 
prescribed force and the movement trajectories to help 
rebuild flexibility as well as strength [16]. Other work 
for detecting the motivational state and adjusting the 
therapy in order to maximize the  benefits is pre sented 
in ref. [17]. Intelligent wheelchairs are the type of the 
robot which use the external sensors for supp orting the 
path planning and the collision avoidance for the 
person that requires the wheelchair [18], [19] . 
An example of the rehabilitation robotics was 
presented in [20], in which, a robotic system was built  
as shown in Fig. 5, that performs correctly the exercise 
for the conventional physiotherapy such as the 
shoulder flexion, in similar way to what the 
physiotherapist do during the co -manipulating with 
KUKA LWR robot. In this way, the excellent 
characterist ics of the human (the capacity of the 
decision) and the robot (the precision, the work 
capacity, and the repeatability) could be combined to 
achieve better results in the musculoskeletal 
rehabilitation of the arm. Furthermore, the second as 
well as the mai n objective was evaluating the non -
pathological shoulder behaviour while performing the 
shoulder flexion movements.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5. An Example illustrates the rehabilitation robotics 
[20]. 
 
 
Coronavirus disease (COVID -19) is the infectious 
disease which is caused by the newly discovered coronavirus. The severity of COVID -19 symptoms can 
range from mild to severe. The cooperation between 
the human and the robot help to f ight against the new 
pandemic. Two cases of the human -robot cooperation 
can be used in the hospital to fight against 
Coronavirus. The robot can add the solution to the 
nasopharyngeal swabs from the patients for detecting 
the coronavirus genetic material [21]. The positive test 
result illustrates that the patient is infected with the 
coronavirus. In that case, the samples which ar e taken 
from the patients’ mouth, nose, and throat are tested 
for the genetic material of the coronavirus in the 
laboratory. The staff of the laboratory must only load 
the samples into the tray and then the COVID -19 test 
robot takes care with the pipetting . In the second case, 
a mobile unit is provided to the manipulator. The 
mobile robot works hand in hand with the human and 
align to the workpiece with high precision. The mobile 
robot can be used for providing the patients with the 
food and medicine. In ad dition, the robot can measure 
the temperature of the patients. This would minimize 
the direct contact between the patients and medical 
staff and others, and therefore, minimizes the infection 
potential. The robot can also help the humans for 
sweeping and w ashing the floors and the walls. This 
also minimizes the virus infection.  
 
 
4. HRI in Agriculture  
 
The cooperation between human and robot in 
agriculture helps with many tasks such as harvesting, 
seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed detection, hauling, 
and mowing.  
In the precision agriculture as presented in Fig. 6 
[22], the robot helps the human -operator or farmer in 
picking the strawberry. In that case, safety between the 
human operator and the robot must be included. 
Furthermore, the robot was controlled remotely  by a 
co-located operator. Their task was to navigate the 
robot to the location of pickers when they requested it, 
allow the filled crates to be loaded onto the robot, and 
then transport these to the storage facility. In Fig. 7 
[23], intelligent robot is installed in the greenhouse to 
care and help farmers for the melon harvesting.  
In Scaffold Mode, the concept of HRI is observed 
clearly. The human operator and the robot work  as a 
collaborative unified system i n which the vehicle 
autonomously navigates along the structured trees 
rows whereas the humans on the vehicle concentrate 
on performing and doing some activities such as 1) 
thinning, 2) pruning, 3) harvesting, 4) tying trees to 
wire. Tree trimming tasks wer e presented with 
Bergerman et al. [24] and Freitas et al. [25] (see Fig.8) 
in which the humans working on the robot in the 
Scaffold Mode were able to trim trees more than twice 
as fast as humans using the traditional approach based 
on ladder.  
 
 
 
 


==== Page 4 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
4 
   
 
Fig. 6.  The Thorvald robot in the evaluation environment interacting with the pickers: (a) in the open strawberry fields, (b) 
in the polytunnel environment [22]. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.  The robot is installed in the greenhouse for helping 
the farmers for harvesting the melon [23]. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.  Human operators performing tree trimming while 
standing in a robot [24], [25] . 
 
 
 
 5. Other Applications  
 
HRI can be found in other applications, which 
include service, home use, inventory management, and 
mining. In addition, robots is used for promoting the 
education for the typical children, whether in the home 
or in the schools [26], [27] . Space exploration and 
UAVs are also some applications.  
Fig. 9 [28] shows the robot helps the human 
operator in mining industry. Using the robots increases 
the arsenal of the tools that help and support the min ers 
to work in more safe and more efficient environment.  
Caitlyn Clabaugh and her team [29], [30]  
developed the socially assistive robot (SAR) tutoring 
system  (Fig.  10) for supporting the educators efforts to 
teach the number concepts to the preschool children.  
This system was designed iteratively with the input of 
the education experts for being developmentally 
appropriate. The system was investigated and tested in 
the re al-world preschool classroom. The collected data 
were used for training personalized models of the 
number concepts learning, leveraging the multimodal 
data, domain knowledge, and also learning style.  
 
To achieve highly efficient human -robot 
cooperation fo r all applications discussed above, safety 
system should be found and implemented in the 
robotic system. In addition, adapted controllers should 
follow the human collaborator intention and the 
environment changes. Therefore, this can lead to 
human -friendly  robots.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 (b) 

==== Page 5 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
5 
  
 
 
Fig. 9.  Robot helps human in mining industry [28].  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10.  The tutoring system using robot for supporting the 
educators efforts to teach the number concepts to the 
preschool children [29], [30] .  
 
 
6. Conclusions  
 
This manuscript has summarized some real 
applications of HRI. HRI could be found in industrial 
applications in picking and placing in the production 
lines, welding processes, assembling parts, and 
painting. Assistive robotics are one of the highest 
profile area s of HRI. For people with the physical and 
the mental disabilities, robots provide the opportunity 
for the interaction and the therapy. In addition, HRI 
could be commonly be widely applied in hospitals and 
nowadays HRI is very crucial for fighting against the 
new coronavirus (COVID -19). In agriculture, HRI 
helps with many tasks such as harvesting, seeding, 
fertilizing, spraying, hauling, weed detection, and 
mowing. HRI can also be found in other applications 
such as service, home use, inventory management, 
mining, education, and space exploration.  
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ahmed 
Elsheikh , Assistant Professor, Mechanical Engineering 
Department, Faculty of Engineering, South Valley University, Qena, Egypt, for revising and checking the 
English writing of the manuscript.  
 
 
References  
 
[1] K. Dautenhahn, “Methodology & Themes of Human -
Robot Interaction : A Growing Research Field,” Int. J. 
Adv. Robot. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 103–108, 2007.  
[2] M. A. Goodrich and A. C. Schultz, “Human -Robot 
Interaction : A Survey,” Found. Trends® Human –
Computer Interact., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 203 –275, 2007.  
[3] W. Knight, “Smart Robots Can Now Work Right Next 
to Auto Workers,” MIT Technology Revi ew, 
September 17, 2013 . 
[4] J. Kruger, T. K. Lien, and A. Verl, “Cooperation of 
human and machines in assembly lines,” CIRP Ann. - 
Manuf. Technol., vol. 58, pp. 628 –646, 2009.  
[5] C. Liu and M. Tomizuka, “Algorithmic Safety 
Measures for Intelligent Industr ial Co -Robots,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
2016, 2016, pp. 3095 –3102.  
[6] L. Peternel, W. Kim, J. Babic, and A. Ajoudani, 
“Towards ergonomie control of human -robot co -
manipulation and handover,” IEEE -RAS Int. Conf. 
Humanoid  Robot., no. October, pp. 55 –60, 2017.  
[7] C. Thomas, B. Matthias, and B. Kuhlenkötter, “Human 
‐ Robot Collaboration – New Applications in Industrial 
Robotics,” in International Conference in Competitive 
Manufacturing 2016 (COMA’16), 2016, pp. 1 –7. 
[8] A. Billard, B. Robins, J. Nadel, and K. Dautenhahn, 
“Building Robota , a Mini -Humanoid Robot for the 
Rehabilitation of Children With Autism,” Assist. 
Technol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 37 –49, 2007.  
[9] B. Robins, P. Dickerson, P. Stribling, and K. 
Dautenhahn, “Rob ot-mediated joint attention in 
children with autism: A case study in robot -human 
interaction,” Interact. Stud., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 161 –198, 
2004.  
[10] W. I., D. K., O. B., and H. W., “Can Social Interaction 
Skills Be Taught by a Social Agent? The Role of a  
Robotic Mediator in Autism Therapy,” in Cognitive 
Technology: Instruments of Mind. CT 2001. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, B. M., N. C.L., and D. K., 
Eds. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001.  
[11] C. Breazeal, “Emotion and social humanoid robots,” 
Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 59, pp. 119 –155, 2003.  
[12] C. Breazeal, “Toward sociable robots,” Rob. Auton. 
Syst., vol. 42, pp. 167 –175, 2003.  
[13] K. Dautenhahn, “Socially intelligent robots : 
dimensions of human – robot interaction,” Phil. Trans. 
R. Soc.  B, vol. 362, no. 1480, pp. 679 –704, 2007.  
[14] D. Feil -seifer and M. J. Mataric, “Defining Socially 
Assistive Robotics,” in In proceedings of the 2005 IEEE 
9th International Conference on Rehabilitation 
Robotics, 2005, no. July 2005, pp. 465 –468. 


==== Page 6 ====
1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
6 
 [15] T. Kanda, T. Hirano, D. Eaton, and H. Ishiguro, 
“Interactive robots as social partners and peer tutors for 
children: a field trial,” Human -Computer Interact., vol. 
19, no. 1, pp. 61 –84, 2004.  
[16] P. S. Lum, C. G. Burgar, P. C. Shor, M. Majmundar, 
and M. Van der Loos, “Robot -Assisted Movement 
Training Compared With Conventional Therapy 
Techniques for the Rehabilitation of Upper -Limb Motor 
Function After Stroke,” Arch Phys Med Rehabil Vol, 
vol. 83, no. July, pp. 952 –959, 2002.  
[17] P. Rani, N. Sarkar, C. A. Smi th, and J. A. Adams, 
“Anxiety detection for implicit human -machine 
interaction,” in in IEEE International Conference on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2003 . 
[18] I. Moon, S. Joung, and Y. Kum, “Safe and Reliable 
Intelligent Wheelchair Robot with Human Robo t 
Interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics 8 Automation, 
2002, no. May, pp. 3595 –3600.  
[19] H. A. Yanco, “Development and Testing of a Robotic 
Wheelchair System for Outdoor Navigation,” in In 
Proceedings of the 200 1 Conference of the 
Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology 
Society of North America, 2001, pp. 1 –3. 
[20] R. G. C. Antunes, “A Robotic System for 
Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation of the Shoulder 
Biomedical Engineering,” 2016.  
[21] COVID -19 test r obot as a tireless colleague in the fight 
against the virus,  https://www.kuka.com/en -
de/press/news/2020/06/robot -helps -with-coronavirus -
tests, 2020. .  
[22] P. Baxter, G. Cielniak, M. Hanheide, and P. From, “Safe 
Human -Robot Interaction in Agriculture,” in HRI’18 
Companion, Session: Late -Breaking Reports, 2018, no. 
March.  [23] https://www.shutterstock.com/image -photo/smart -
robot -installed -inside -greenhouse -care-765510412.  
[24] M. Bergerman et al., “Robot farmers: Autonomous 
orchard vehicles help tree fruit p roduction,” IEEE 
Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 54 –63, 2015.  
[25] G. Freitas, J. Zhang, B. Hamner, M. Bergerman, and G. 
Kantor, “A low -cost, practical localization system for 
agricultural vehicles,” in Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 
7508 LNAI, no. PART 3, 2012, pp. 365 –375. 
[26] M. Cooper, D. Keating, W. Harwin, and K. 
Dautenhahn, “Robots in the classroom - tools for 
accessible edu cation,” in In: Assistive Technology on 
the Threshold of the New Millennium, Assistive 
Technology Research Series, C. Buhler and H. Knops, 
Eds. Düsseldorf, Germany: ISO Press, 1999, pp. 448 –
452. 
[27] J. Han, M. Jo, S. Park, and S. Kim, “The Educational 
Use of Home Robots for Children,” in ROMAN 2005. 
IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human 
Interactive Communication, 2005., 2005, pp. 378 –383. 
[28] https://eos.org/features/underground -robots -how-
robotics -is-changing -the-mining -industry.  
[29] C. Clabaug h, K. Tsiakas, and M. Matarić, “Predicting 
Preschool Mathematics Performance of Children with a 
Socially Assistive Robot Tutor,” in Proceedings of the 
Synergies between Learning and Interaction 
Workshop@ IROS, 2017, no. November, pp. 24 –28. 
[30] http://cai tlynclabaugh.info/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

