==== Page 1 ====
AIS T ransactions on Human-Computer Inter action AIS T ransactions on Human-Computer Inter action 
Volume 12 Issue 3 Article 1 
9-30-2020 
Human-Center ed Ar tificial Intelligence: Thr ee Fresh Ideas Human-Center ed Ar tificial Intelligence: Thr ee Fresh Ideas 
Ben Shneiderman 
Univ ersity of Mar yland , ben@cs.umd.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /aisel.aisnet.or g/thci 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Shneiderman, B. (2020). Human-Center ed Ar tificial Intelligence: Thr ee Fresh Ideas. AIS T ransactions on 
Human-Computer Inter action, 12 (3), 109-124. https:/ /doi.or g/10.17705/1thci.00131 
DOI: 10.17705/1thci.00131 
This material is br ought t o you b y the AIS Journals at AIS Electr onic Libr ary (AISeL). It has been accepted for 
inclusion in AIS T ransactions on Human-Computer Inter action b y an authoriz ed administr ator of AIS Electr onic 
Library (AISeL). F or mor e information, please contact elibr ary@aisnet.or g. 

==== Page 2 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  109  
 
Volume 12  pp.  109 – 124 Issue  3  
   Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  
Volume 12  Issue  3 
 
9-2020  
Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence:  
Three Fresh Ideas  
Ben Shneiderman  
Department of Computer Science and Human -Computer Interaction Lab, University of Maryland, College Park, ben@cs.umd.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow this and additional works at: http://aisel.aisnet.org/thci/   
Recommended Citation  
Shneiderman, B. (2020 ). Human -centered artificial intelligence: Three fresh ideas . AIS Transactions on Human -
Computer Interaction , 12(3), pp. 109-124. 
DOI: 10.17705/1thci.0013 1 
Available at  http://aisel.aisnet.org/ thci/vol12/iss3/1   


==== Page 3 ====
110 Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
   Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  
 
Research Commentary  DOI: 10.17705/1thci.0013 1 ISSN: 1944 -3900  
Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence:  
Three Fresh Ideas  
Ben Shneiderman  
Department of Computer Science and Human -Computer Interaction Lab, University of Maryland, College Park  
ben@cs.umd.edu  
 
Abstract:  
Human -Centered AI (HCAI) is a promising direction for designing AI systems that support human self -efficacy, promote  
creativity, clarify responsibility, and facilitate social participation.  These human aspirations also encourage consideration 
of privacy, security, environmental protection, social justice, and human rights. This commentary reverses  the current 
emphasis on algor ithms and AI methods, by putting  humans at the ce nter of systems design thinking, in effect , a second 
Copernican R evolution. It offer s three ideas: (1) a two -dimensional HCAI framework, which shows how it is possible to 
have  both high levels of human control AND high levels of automation, (2) a shift from emulating humans to empowering 
people with a plea to shift language, imagery, and metaphors away from portrayals of  intelligent autonomous teammates 
towards  descriptions of  powerful tool -like appliances and te le-operated devices, and (3) a three -level governance 
structure that describes how software engineering teams can develop more re liable systems, how managers can 
emphasize a safety culture across an organization , and how industry -wide certification can promote trustworthy HCAI 
systems. These ideas will be challenged by some, refined by others, extended to accommodate new technologie s, and 
validated with quantitative and qualitative research. They offer a reframe -- a chance to restart  design discussions  for 
products and services  -- which could bring greater benefits to individuals, families, communities, businesses, and 
society . 
Keywords : Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence, Human -Computer Interaction, Artificial Intelligence, design, reliable,  
safe, trustworthy, Copernican R evolution  
Fiona Nah  was the accepting senior editor for this paper.  
 
  


==== Page 4 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  111  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 1 Introduction  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) dreams and nightmares, represented in popular culture through  books, games, 
and movies,  evoke images  of startling advances as well as terrifying possibilities. The contrast is often 
between a blissful place where intelligent machines meet all human needs and a dystopian  future in which 
robots control and dominate human ity. In both cases, people  are no longer  in charge; the machines rule. 
However, there is a third possibility; an alternative future filled with computing devices that amplify human 
abilities a thousand -fold, empowering people in remarkable ways  while  ensuring human control . This 
compelling prospect, called Human -Centered AI (HCAI), enables people to see, think, create, and act in 
extraordinary ways, by combining potent user experiences with embedded AI methods to support services 
that users want ( Li, 2018; Robert et al., 2020 ; Shneiderman, 2020a).  
To counter the widespread belief that AI -driven human -like robots will take over, this paper  describes how 
to make successful technologies that augment and enhance humans rather than replace them. This shift in 
thinking  could lead  to a safer, more understandable, and more manageable future. An HCAI approach will 
reduce the  prospects for  out-of-control technologies, calm fears of robot -driven  unemployment, and  give 
users  better control of privacy and security.  
This fresh vision is m eant as a guide for researchers, educators, designers, programmers, managers, and 
policy makers in shift ing toward  language, imagery, and ideas that advance a human -centered approach. 
Putting people at the center will lead to the creation of powerful tools , convenient appliances, and well -
designed products and traditio nal services that empower people, build their self -efficacy, clarify their 
responsibility, and support their creativity.  
2 Related Work  
Numerous books celebrate  AI, and at the same time raise  fears of out -of-control robots and computers 
taking over (Figure 1), including  some by  prominent writers (Marcus & Davis, 2019; O’Neil, 2016; Russell, 
2019).  Some authors raise doubts  about overly optimistic promises, but nevertheless generally push for 
more AI and even Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) , which includes the commonsense reasoning that 
indicates full human abilities . The HCAI approach advances the goals of AI, while ensuring human control.  
 
Figure 1. A sample of the many popular AI-centered books  
 
A central issue is how to  defin e AI. I rely on a definition that suggests that AI systems and algorithms d o 
what people d o: perceive, think, decide, and act. A broade ned definition would include the capacity to 
recognize and respond to emotions, to adapt to new circumstances, and recommend or rank alternatives. 
The products and services of AI systems include pattern recognition (of images, texts , spoken words,  faces, 


==== Page 5 ====
112 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 signals, etc.), generation (of images, texts, spoken words,  faces, signals, etc.), natural language processing 
and translation , and game playing (checkers, chess, go, etc.). Other m ajor AI topics are robot design  -- 
especially in relation to social robots  -- and autonomous systems of many kinds. AI research and 
development have become major topics for businesses and governments around the world.  Business 
applications range from internal management to customer support, while government applications include 
policing and policy making.   
A second central issue is the boundary between automation and autonomy. Some researchers and 
developers believe t hat autonomous systems based on “machine learning”, “deep learning”, and “neural 
nets” enable greater capacity for AI s ystems to be adaptable, resilient, and “intelligent” as compared to 
traditional automated systems. Other researchers and developers believe that there is no clear boundary 
between automation and autonomy, and that  the unpredictability of machine autonomy has dangers.  They 
also believe in the importance of human autonomy, while preferring the language of interdependence. Since 
traditional  automated systems are likely to  be redesigned to include more autonomous features based on 
AI algorithms , the boundary b etween automated and autonomous is likely to become even fuzzier . This 
commentary address es automated and autonomous designs  as if they are  in the same category . 
3 Fresh Ideas to Reframe Old Beliefs  
Reframing old beliefs w ith a fresh vision  is among the most  powerful tools for change. It can liberate 
researchers and designers from old beliefs, allowing them to adopt a different  perspective. This paper 
suggests that  HCAI can liberate researchers and designers to realize t hat there are other ways of thinking 
about future technology. Ancient astronomers , with a few exceptions,  saw the earth a s the center of the 
solar system with the sun an d planets revolving around it. In the 16th century, C opernicus reframed 
astronomy  by ma king a convincing case for  a sun -centered model, which he showed to be  more accurate, 
thus enabling better predictions and further discoveries . Similarly, HCAI reframes AI by replacing  algorithms 
and AI systems with humans  at the center . That is why I have  termed HCAI a Second Copernican Revolution  
(Figure 2). Traditional discussions suggest that humans are “in -the-loop”  around AI , while the HCAI 
reframing suggests that AI is “in -the loop”  around humans, who are now the center of attention . 
 
 
Figure 2. A second Copernican Revolution puts humans at the center of attention  
 
The reframing to HCAI has deeper implications. In the past, researchers and developers focused on building 
AI algorithms and systems, stressing machine autonomy, measuring algorithm perfo rmance, and 
celebrating what AI systems could do. In contrast, HCAI ’s design thinking approach  puts the hum an users 


==== Page 6 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  113  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 at the center , emphasizing user experience design, measuring human performance, and celebrating the 
new powers that people have. Researchers  and developers for HCAI systems focus on user needs, 
explainable systems, and meaningful human control. People come first; serving human needs is the goal.  
Some may see this as an extreme metaphor, but it emphasizes the profound importance of providing an  
appropriate concept for future technologies that will promote human dignity.  
Putting humans a t the center of design thinking  does  not mean  that designers should  mimic  human form 
and behavior. The alternative is to  serve human needs by way of comprehensib le, predictable, and 
controllable tools, appliances, and user experiences.  Lewis Mumford’s  (1934 ) book  Technics and 
Civilization  provides a helpful guide to the evolution of new technologies. He describes “The Obstacle of 
Animism”, which is the tendency of  new technology designers to use humans or animals as a guide to 
design. A key example of the limitation of animism is the shift from using two human legs to four wheels to 
transport heavy loads. Mumford wrote that “the most ineffective kind of machine is the realistic  mechanical 
imitation of a man or other animal.”  He leaves us with an important history lesson: “for thousands of years 
animism has stood in the way of … development.”  
Mumford’s description of technology evolution accurately describes the mo ve away from human forms in 
early smiling simulated bank teller machines to our current form fill -in Automated Transaction Machines and 
the shift from intelligent tutoring machines with human faces or avatars to Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs ) with wel l-designed user interfaces that give students a clear sense of what is happening and what 
their choices are.  This reframing avoids the deception of a simulated human. It puts humans at the center 
by increasing human control, even though there are high leve ls of computer automation and AI algorithms.  
While bio -inspired designs can be helpful starting points, designers should keep in mind other possibilities 
and evaluate performance of multiple alternatives.  
Numerous psychological studies by Clifford Nass and  others (Reeves and Nass, 1996; Nass and Moon, 
2000) showed that when computers a re designed to be like humans, users respond and engage  in socially 
appropriate ways. However , other designs might lead to superior performance. Designing systems to be 
like p eople reduces the chance that designers will take advantage of unique computer features  that have 
no human analog,  including sophisticated algorithms, advanced sensors, information abundant displays, 
and powerful effectors.  
This controversy might be summarized as:  
Nass’s Fallacy:  Since many  people are willin g to respond socially to robots, it is appropriate and 
desirable to design robots to be social or human -like. 
Shneiderman’s Conjec ture:  Successful robots utilize  the distinctive features of machine s. Robots 
will become more tool -like, tele -operated, and under human supervisory control through well -
designed user interfaces that avoid  human -like features.  
Another fallacy lies in  the belief that computers should become our teammates, partners, and coll aborators. 
Psychologists point out the difficulty in accomplishing this goal because human teammates have such 
distinctive ways of coordinating with each other (Klein et al. , 2004):  
Teammate Fallacy : Humans work in teams, so computers should be designed to have the same 
behaviors as humans.  
Computers -in-the-Loop Reality : Humans work with others in teams, crews, and groups, with 
computers best designed as helpful tools that continuously provide information and carry out tasks, 
but do so under human control .  
While a majority of researchers believe that social robots and robot teammates are inevitable (Wang & Siau, 
2019), I think Mumford’s historical perspective and current design successes show that these social and 
teammate views will give way to functiona l designs.  
I belie ve it is helpful to remember that computers are not people and people are not computers. Boden et 
al. (2017) convey a similar idea: “Robots are simply not people.” Humans have legal and moral 
responsibilities over the design  of machines,  including robots . Yes, there are lessons to be learned from 
bio-inspired designs, but the value of such designs should be studied in comparison with interactive visual 
user interfaces, such as with navigation systems, and physical interfaces , such as with  drone and game 
controllers. Human -like speech communication with ap plications like Siri or Alexa has a role  when hands 
and eyes are busy , while  high information capacity of visual user interfaces has many advantages, such as 
with digital cameras or e -comm erce shopping.  

==== Page 7 ====
114 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 This bumper sticker (Figure 3 ) emphasizes  centering on the social nature of human collaboration with 
computers in the loop, available to support human efforts.  
 
 
Figure 3. Bumper sticker “Humans in the Group; Computers in the Loop”  
 
Breaking free from the old belief that computers  should be like human teammates  can liberate designers to 
more readily take advantage of the distinctive capabilities of algorithms, databases, sensors, effectors, etc. 
The U.S. Air Force emphasized the disti nction by using the term Remotely Piloted Vehicles to convey that 
a human pilot was responsible. The Mars Rovers have a whole room of human controllers at NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory to operate the Rovers, as the y perform well -designed activities on M ars. The da Vinci 
Surgical Systems website says they “don’t perform surgery. Your surgeon performs surgery with da Vinci 
by using instruments that he or she guides via a console” ( www.davincisurgery.com ).  Remember Mumford’s 
(1934 ) message that successful designs are not based on human forms.  
The challenge for designers is to understand what human -like features are useful, such as a human -like 
voice for virtual assistants like Siri, Alexa, and Cortana , which allow hands -free access to information . 
However, designers mus t also come to understand that  visual display s of long textual lists, a map, or 
diagrams, are sometimes better than a spoken response. For instance, t he information abundance of visual 
displays has many advantages over an ephemeral spoken response that could be drowned out by ambient 
noise. In addition to limiting design choices, humanizing robots can lead to three problems: mistaken usage 
based on emot ional attachment  to the systems , false expectations of robot responsibility, and incorrect 
beliefs about appropriate use of robots (Robert, 2017).  
A frequently successful strategy is to provide interactive visual interfaces that  present abundant informatio n 
in compact , spatially stable , tiled  layouts so users can maintain situational awareness. They  can interpret 
the status, formulate plans, and carry out  tasks  while monitoring performance. Modest highlights can draw 
attention to new information or time sen sitive features. Machine -generated recommendations, alerts, and 
alarms can be place d in stable position s so users can turn to them when they wish. User -controlled 
adaptation of the window  layout s, list sort orders, or featured highlight s enables users to t ailor displays to 
their needs and pass their layouts on to colleagues.  
Users may also sit near other operators so they can mutually monitor what others are doing, ask for 
assistance, and work together  easily when they need  to respond to fast moving events . NASA spacecraft 
control rooms, counter -terrorism centers, police command centers, medical workstations, air traffic control 
centers, and stock market trading rooms are common examples (Figure 4). Many variations on smaller 
interactive dashboards are incr easingly used on laptops, such as the currently common COVID dashboards, 
while  mobile device displays can also provide compact information abundant displays such as in navigation 
apps.  
 


==== Page 8 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  115  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
  
Figure 4. Bloomberg terminal for financial analysts and traders  
 
4 Three Fresh Ideas  
The three ideas, summarized in this commentary, may enable researchers, educators, designers, 
programmers, managers, and policy makers to create new possibilities for future products and services.  
High level s of human control AND  high lev els of automation are possible: The first idea is a fresh way 
to think of technology design, and breaks out of the traditional one-dimensional view that led readers to 
believe that more automat ion meant less human control. This one -dimensional view was first described by 
Sheridan and Verplank (1978), even though Sheridan (1992, 2000) continued to have  strong views about 
the need for supervisory control.  
I accepted this one -dimensional framework  as a way to understand what seemed like a necessary tradeoff .  
I described  it in the first edition of Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Human -Computer Interaction  
(Shneiderman, 1987), with a section titled “Balancing Automation and Human Control”. However, in recent 
years, I became unsettled by this view  as I came to  increasingly  value human control even with high levels 
of automation. That section is now titled: “Ensuring Human Control While Increasing Automation” 
(Shneiderman et al., 2016), whi ch at first may seem perplexing  -- but give it a chance.  
The tw o-dimensional HCAI framework (Shneiderman, 2020a) shows how creative designers can imagine 
highly automated systems that keep people in control. It separates human control (y -axis)  from comput er 
automation (x -axis) (Figure 5 ). The examples of high levels o f human control AND high levels of 
automation  include familiar devices, such as thermostats, elevators, se lf-cleaning ovens, and dishwashers , 
as well as l ife critical applications like highly automated cars and patient controlled pain relief devices. 
Smart phone  cameras exemplify this new possibility of human control and automation, in which AI algorithms 
are used for setting focus and aperture, while compensating for hand shaking movement. However, the 
user is in control of where to point the camera, what z oom level is best, and when to take the photo. They 
have control over filters before they take their photos and can edit, crop, and adjust lighting after ward . Users 
can adjust the aperture setting and exposure level by touching the image location they are interested in, but 
a further helpful user control would be to select the shutter speed to allow longer exposures for creative 
images of waterfalls or intentionally blurred images of swirling dancers.  
 


==== Page 9 ====
116 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
  
Figure 5. The HCAI two -dimensional framework for thinking of new designs, applied to pain control device 
designs  
 
The two -dimensional HCAI framework (Figure 5)  clarifies that there are situations that require  high levels of 
computer automation , such as airbag deployment and embedded pacemakers (lower rig ht quadrant) , and 
other  situations that require high levels of human control , such as piano playing or bicycl ing (upper left 
quadrant). In the case of pain control designs , the non -automated morphine drip bag (lower left) was 
improved by an automated dispe nser (lower  right). Further improvements gi ve patients a trigger to request 
limited additional morphine (upper left), while advanced designs combine a patient -guided system with a 
clinician -monitored system  (upper right). The two -dimensional HCAI framework also recognizes that there 
can be problems with excessive automation (right side), such as the Boeing 737 MAX  crashes, stock market 
flash crashes, and parole or hiring decisions based on machine learning with biased datasets. Th ere can 
also be problems with  excessive human control (top), such as drunk drivers and suicidal pilots. Improved 
systems with well-designed interlocks to prevent excesses must be part of every design process.   
Shift from emulating humans to empowering peop le: The second idea is to show how the t wo central 
goals of AI research -- emulating human behavior (AI science) and developing useful applications (AI 
engineering)  -- are both valuable, but  that designers go astray when the lessons of the first goal are p ut to 
work on the second goal. Often the emulation goal encouraged beliefs that machines should be designed 
to be like people, when the application goal might be better served by providing comprehensible, 
predictable, and controllable designs. While there is an understandable attraction for some researchers and 
designers to make computers that are intelligent, autonomous, and human -like, that desire should be 
balanced by appreciating that many users want to be in control of technologies that support their a bilities, 
raise their self -efficacy, respect their responsibility, and enable their creativity.  
Shneiderman (2020b) describ es four such design tradeoffs  that challenge designers of HCAI  applications, 
and offers combined designs that bring the best of both  (Figure 6 ): 
1. Intelligent Agent and Powerful Tool  
2. Simulated Teammate and Tele -Operated Device  
3. Autonomous System and Supervisory Control  
4. Humanoid Robot and Mechanical -like Appliance   


==== Page 10 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  117  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
  
Figure 6. Four issues raised by the Emulation and Applica tion Goals, which lead to combined designs that 
balance intelligent, autonomous, and human -like qualities with an appreciation  that many users want to be in 
control of technologies that support their self -efficacy, responsibility, and creativity  
 
For example, when thinking of how to communicate with a simulated teammate, a common approach is 
natural language spe ech generation to report status;  however,  a rescue robot would be more effective if it 
simply sent a video image with abundant continuous visual data about location, temperature, air quality, 
obstacles, and possible future routes. Similarly, humanoid rescue robots with two legs gave way to more 
reliable four wheeled or treaded devices and aerial drones that were tele -operated appliances (Murphy,  
2014) . 
Journalists, headline writers, and Hollywood producers have encouraged misleading notions about robots 
and AI, so the already active reframing proc ess could  take a generation to change attitudes and 
expectations. Using the concept  of a second Copernican Revolution  could  help designers find combined 
approaches that accelerate creation of reliable, safe, and trustworthy applications . A greater emphasis  on 
HCAI could reduce fears of AI’s existential threats and raise people’s belief that they will be able to use 
technology for their daily needs and creative explorations.  The terminology is important, but equally 
important is the imagery used. To change b eliefs, it will be valuable to shift  imagery  away from the aging 
cliché of human hands connecting with robot hands or social robots (Figure 7).  
      
Figure 7. Clich é-ridden images of humanoid robot hands and social robots  


==== Page 11 ====
118 Three Fresh  Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
  
Images of user interfaces  on appliances and tele-operated devices  are aligned with t he idea of humans 
being in control and exercising creative judgment, while emphasizin g human responsibility (Figure 8 ). 
 
     
Figure 8. Appliances and tele -operated devices are the more likely future for human -centered technologies  
 
Many applications involving machi ne and deep learning algorithms provide  post-hoc explanations of why a 
decision refused mortgage or parole requests. However, exploratory user interfaces using interactive visual 
designs offer a more likely path to successful customer adoption and acceptance (Chatzimparmpas  et al. , 
2020; Hohman et al., 2018; Nourashrafeddin et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020). Well -designed interactive visual 
interfaces will improve the work of machine le arning algorithm developers and facilitate comprehension by 
various stakeholders.  
Governance structures for HCAI: The third idea bridges the gap between widely discussed ethical 
principles of HCAI and the practical steps needed to realize them . The 15 recommendations are based on 
the HCAI framework and the combined designs from emulation and application research (Shneiderman, 
2020c).  These recommendations suggest  how to : (1)  adapt proven softw are engineering team practices,(2) 
implement organizatio n-wide management strategies  to build a safety culture , and (3) establish indepen dent 
oversight methods  (Shneiderman, 2016)  that can be applied industry -wide to improve performance  (Figure 
9).  
 
 
Figure 9. Governance structures to guide teams, organizations, and industry leaders   


==== Page 12 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  119  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
  
These new strategies guide software team leaders, business managers, and organization leaders in the 
methods to develop HCAI products and services that are driven by three goals:  
1. Reliable  systems based on proven sof tware engineering practices  with a team , 
2. Safety  culture through business management strategies  within an organization , and  
3. Trustworthy  certifi cation by independent oversight across an industry  
These three goals apply to most commercial developments, but the 15 recommendations in Shneiderman 
(2020 c) are tied to HCAI products and services  (Table 1) . These recommendations build on the HCAI 
framework by limiting the dangers of excessive automation and excessive human control, while steering 
practice to  support the goals of reliable, safe and trustworthy products and services.  
 Table 1: Recommendations for Human -Centered AI Systems for teams, organizations, and industry leaders  
 
Technical practices for teams of programmers, designers, and software engineers include audit trails to 
enable analysis of failures, just like the flight data recorders (aviation black boxes, which are really orange 
boxes) that have helped make civil aviat ion a successful industry . Recommended practices include software 
engineering workflows, verification and validation testing of algorithms, bias testing to enhance fairness for 
training data and outcomes, and explainable HCAI user interfaces to enable inqu iry and redress of 
grievances.  
Management strategies for organizations begin by creating a safety culture with leadership commitment to 
safety that leads to better hiring practices and training oriented to safety. Other organizational strategies are 
extens ive reporting of failures and near misses, internal review boards for problems and future plans, and 
alignment with industry standard practices.  These strategies are promoted by internal committees, such as GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES FOR H UMAN -CENTERED AI 
     Reliable Systems Based on Sound Software Engineering Practices for a Team  
  1.  Audit tr ails and analysis tools  
  2.  Software Engineering Workflows  
  3.  Verification and validation testing  
  4.  Bias testing to enhance fairness  
  5.  Explainable user interfaces  
 
     Safety Culture through Business Management Strategies within an Organization  
  6.  Leadership commitment to safety  
  7.  Hiring and training oriented to safety  
  8.  Extensive reporting of failures and near misses  
  9.  Internal review boa rds for problems and future plans  
10.  Alignment w ith industry standard practices  
 
     Trustworthy Certification by Independent Oversight for an Industry  
11.  Government interventions and regulation  
12.  Accounting firms c onduct external audits  
13.  Insur ance companies compensate for AI failures  
14.  Non-governmental and civil society organizations  
15.  Professional organizations and research institutes  

==== Page 13 ====
120 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 Microsoft’s Office of Responsible AI ( https://www.microsoft.com/en -ca/ai/responsible -ai), or guidelines such 
as Google’s Responsible AI Practices ( https://ai.goog le/responsibilities/responsible -ai-practices/ ).  
Trustworthy certification by industry, though subject to government interventions and regulation, can be 
done in  ways that increase innovation.  Other methods  to increase trustworthiness include  accounting fi rms 
to conduct independent audits, insurance companies to compensate for failures, non -governmental and civil 
society organizations to advance design principles, and professional organizations to develop voluntary 
standards and prudent policies.  
5 Conclusio ns 
The expansion of interest and application of AI research has triggered widespread public and government 
scrutiny of  the ethical and responsible principles to guide designers, managers, and policy makers (Fj eld et 
al., 2020; IEEE, 2019). These principles  are a useful starting point, but bridging the gap between ethics and 
practice requires realistic management processes.  
This commentary endorses  a Human -Centered AI approach for designing and developing systems that 
support s human self -efficacy, encourage creativity, clarify responsibility, and facilitate social participation. 
These foundational principles can help to guide designers  towards vital  technical  goals , including privacy, 
security, fairness, reliability, safety, and trustworthiness . 
The fresh way s of thinking  in this commentary  are based on a second Copernican R evolution that puts 
humans  at the center of systems design thinking. It offer s three ideas:  
1. High level s of human control AND  high levels of automation are possible: a two -dimensional 
HCAI framework  that illustrates  how it is possible to have high levels of human control AND high 
levels of automation . 
2. Shift from emulating h umans to empowering people: a plea to shift language, imagery, and 
metaphors away from portray als of intelligent autonom ous teammates towards descriptions of 
powerful tool -like appliances and tele -operated devices . 
3. Governance structures for HCAI:  a three -level governance structure that describes how software 
engineering teams can develop more reliable systems, how managers can emphasize a safety 
culture across an organization, and how industry -wide certification can promote trustworthy HCAI 
systems.  
Promoting these three ideas is essential , but will not be easy. The entrenched beliefs about the human -like 
abilities of AI sys tems, which are held by some researchers, developers, journalists, and policy makers, 
slow progress towards a human -centered approach to new technologies.  
The ideas in this commentary are meant to launch discussions that will advance global efforts such a s the 
17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ( https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/ ). Attaining 
these goals will require designers to combine technology devel opments with behavioral changes  in order to  
improv e healthcare and  wellness, end poverty and hunger, and protect the environment. Well -designed 
technologies can support other UN Sustainable Development Goals such as to advance  quality education, 
gender equality,  global peace , and social j ustice.  
 
Acknowledgments  
Thanks to Editor in Chief Fiona Nah for guiding the review process and offering many helpful suggestions  
on writing and content . Thanks also to Gaurav Bansal, Dennis Galletta, Harry Hochheiser, Jonathan Lazar, 
Guru Madhavan, Avi Parush, Catherine Plaisant, Jennifer Preece , Lionel P. Robert, Steven M. Rosen, 
Daniel Shank, Keng Siau, Mark S. Smith, Wei Xu , and the anonymous reviewers  for their  supportive 
comments and  thoughtful suggestions that greatly improved the  draft versions . Thanks to Chris Carroll for 
thoughtful edits.

==== Page 14 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  121  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 References  
Boden, M., Bryson, J., Caldwell, D., Dautenhahn, K., Edwards, L., Kember, S., Newman, P., Parry, V., 
Pegman, G., Rodden, T., Sorrell, T., Wallis,  M., Whitby, B., & Winﬁeld, A.  F. (2017). Principles of robotics: 
Regulating robots in the real world. Connection Science 29 (2), 124 –129.  
Chatzimparmpas, A., Martins, R. M., Jusufi, I., & Kerren, A. (2020). A survey of surveys on the use of 
visualization f or interpreting machine learning models. Information Visualization, 19 (3), 207-233.  
Fjeld, J., Achten, N., Hilligoss, H., Nagy, A., & Srikumar, M. (2020). Principled artificial intelligence: 
Mapping consensus in ethical and rights -based approaches to principles for AI. Berkman Klein Center 
Research Publication, (2020 -1). https://cyber.harvard.edu/publication/2020/principled -ai 
Hohman, F ., Park, H., Robinson, C., & Chau, D. H. P. (2019). SUMMIT: Scaling deep learning 
interpretability by visualizing activation and attribution summarizations.  IEEE Transactions on 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26 (1), 1096 -1106.  
IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems (2019). Ethically Aligned Design: 
A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well -being with Autonomous and Intelligent Systems, First Edition. IEEE. 
https://standards.ieee.org/content/ieee -standards/en/industry -connections/ec/autonomous -systems.html  
and https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/   
Klein, G., Woods, D.  D., Bradshaw, J. M., Hoffman, R. R. , & Feltovich, P. J. (2004). Ten challenges for 
making automation a “team player” in joint human -agent activity. IEEE Intelligent Systems 19(6), 91–95. 
Li, F. -F. (2018). How to make A.I. that’s good for people. The  New York Times (March 7, 2018). 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/07/opinion/artificial -intelligence -human.html    
Marcus, G., & Davis, E. (2019). Rebooting AI: Bui lding artificial intelligence we can trust. New York, NY: 
Pantheon.  
Mumford, L.  (1934). Technics and civilization . Chicago: IL: University of Chicago Press.  
Murphy, R.  R. (2014). Disaster robotics.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Nass, C., & Moon, Y. (2000). Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers.  Journal of 
Social Issues, 56 (1), 81 -103. 
Nourashrafeddin, S., Sherkat, E., Minghim, R., & Milios, E. E. (2018). A visual approach for interactive 
keyterm -based clustering. ACM Transactions on Int eractive Intelligent Systems ), 8(1), 1 -35. 
O’Neil, C.  (2016). Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens 
democracy . New York , NY: Crown Publishers . 
Reeves, B.,  & Nass, C . (1996).  How people treat computers, television, and new media like real people 
and places . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Robert, L. (2017). The  growing problem of humanizing r obots, International Robotics & Automation 
Journal, 3 (1), 247 -248. 
Robert, L. P., Bansal, G., & L ütge, C. (2020). ICIS 2019 SIGHCI Workshop Panel Report: Human – 
Computer Interaction Challenges and Opportunities for Fair, Trustworthy and Ethical Artificial Intelligence. 
AIS Transactions on  Human -Computer Interaction, 12 (2), 96-108.  
Russell, S. (2019). Human compatible: Artificial intelligence and the problem of control , New York: NY: 
Viking . 
Sheridan, T. B. (1992). Telerobotics, automation, and human supervisory control . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.  
Sheridan, T. B. (2000). Function allocation: Algorithm, alchemy or apostasy? International Journa l of 
Human -Computer Studies, 52 (2), 203 –216.  
Sheridan, T. B., & Verplank, W. L. (1978). Human and computer control of undersea teleoperators. 
Massachusetts In stitute of Technology Cambridge Man -Machine Systems Lab.  

==== Page 15 ====
122 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 Shneiderman, B. (1987). Designing the user interface: Strategies for effective human -computer 
interaction . Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley.  
Shneiderman, B. (2016). Opinion: The dangers of faulty, biased,  or malicious algorithms requires 
independent oversight. Proceedings of the Na tional Academy of Sciences, 113 (48), 13538 -13540.  
Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., Cohen, M., Jacobs, S. & Elmqvist, N. (2016). Designing the user interface: 
Strategies for effective human -computer interaction , Sixth Edition . Boston, MA: Pearson.  
Shneiderman, B., (March 2020a). Human -centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & trustworthy, 
International Journal of Human -Computer Interaction , 36(6), 495 -504. 
Shneiderman,  B. (June 2020b). Design lessons from AI’s two grand goals: Human emulation and useful 
applications, IEEE Transacti ons on Technology and Society 1( 2), 73-82. 
Shneiderman, B. (October 2020c). Bridging the gap between ethics and practice: Guidelines for reliable, 
safe, and trustworthy Human -Centered AI systems, ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems  
(to appear).  
Wang, W., &  Siau, K. (2019).  Artificia l intelligence, machine learning, automation, robotics, future of work 
and future of humanity: A review and research agenda, Journal of Database Management, 30 (1), 61 -79. 
Yang, F., Huang, Z., Scholtz, J., & Arendt, D. L. (2020, March). How do visual explan ations foster end 
users' appropriate trust in machine learning? In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference 
on Intelligent User Interfaces (pp. 189 -201).  
 
  

==== Page 16 ====
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  123  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 About the Author  
Ben Shneiderman  is an Emeritus  Distinguished University Professor in the Department of Computer 
Science, Founding Director (1983 -2000) of the Human -Computer Interaction Laboratory 
(http://hcil.umd.edu ), and a Member of the UM Institute for Advanced Computer Studies (UMIACS) at the 
Univers ity of Maryland. He is a Fellow of the AAAS, ACM, IEEE, and NAI, and a Member of the National 
Academy of Engineering, in recognition of his pioneering contributions to human -computer interaction and 
information visualization. His widely -used contributions include the clickable highlighted web -links, high-
precision touchscreen keyboards  for mobile devices , and tagging for photos. Shneiderman’s information 
visualization innovations include dynamic query sliders for Spotfire, development of treemaps  for viewin g 
hierarchical data , novel network visualizations for NodeXL, and event sequence analysis  for electronic 
health records.  He is the lead author  of Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human -
Computer Interaction  (6th ed., 2016).   
 
Photo at : http://www.cs.umd.edu/~ben/Photos/ben_6_10/5.jpg   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2019  by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on 
the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information 
Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to publish 
from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301 -2712 Attn: Reprints o r via e -mail from 
publications@aisnet.org . 

==== Page 17 ====
124 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Editor -in-Chief                https://aisel.aisnet.org/thci/  
Fiona Nah , Missouri University of Science and Technology , USA  
 
Advisory Board  
Izak Benbasat , University  of British Columbia, Canada  
John M. Carroll , Penn State University , USA  
Phillip Ein -Dor, Tel-Aviv University , Israel  
Dennis F. Galletta, University of Pittsburgh, USA  
Shirley Gregor, National Australian University, Australia  
Elena Karahanna, University of Georgia, USA  
Paul Benjamin Lowry, Virginia Tech,  USA  Jenny Preece , University  of Maryla nd, USA  
Gavriel  Salvendy, U niversity of Central Florida ., USA  
Ben Shneiderman , University of Maryland, USA  
Joe Valacich, University of Arizona, USA  
Jane Webster , Queen's University , Canada  
K.K. Wei, Singapore Institute of Management , Singapore  
Ping Zhang, Syracuse University, USA  
 
Senior Editor Board  
Torkil Clemmensen, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark  
Fred Davis , Texas Tech University , USA  
Gert-Jan de Vreede, University of South Florida, USA  
Soussan Djamasbi , Worcester Polytechnic Institute , USA  
Traci Hess , University  of Massachusetts Amherst , USA  
Shuk Ying (Susanna) Ho , Australian National University. , Australia  
Matthew Jensen, University  of Oklahoma, USA  
Jinwoo Kim , Yonsei  University , Korea  
Eleanor Loiacono , College of William & Mary , USA  
Anne Massey , University  of Massachusetts Amherst , USA  Gregory D. Moody , University  of Nevada Las Vegas, USA   
Lorne Olfman , Claremont Graduate U niversity , USA  
Heshan Sun , University  of Oklahoma, USA  
Kar Yan Tam , Hong Kong U. of Science & Technology, China  
Dov Te'eni , Tel-Aviv U niversity , Israel  
Jason Thatcher, Temple University, USA  
Noam Tractinsky , Ben-Gurion U niversity  of the Negev , Israel  
Viswanath Venkatesh , University  of Arkansas, USA  
Mun Yi , Korea Advanced Institute of Science  & Tech nology , Korea  
Dongsong Zhang, University of North Carolina Charlotte, USA  
 
Editor ial Board  
Miguel Aguirre -Urreta , Florida International U niversity , USA   
Michel Avital , Copenhagen Business School, Denmark  
Gaurav Bansal , University  of Wisconsin -Green Bay, USA  
Ricardo Buettner, Aalen University, Germany  
Langtao Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology, USA  
Christy M.K. Cheung , Hong Kong Baptist University , China   
Cecil Chua, Missouri University of Science and Technology , USA  
Michael Davern , University  of Melbourne, Australia  
Carina de Villiers , University  of Pretoria, South Africa  
Andreas Eckhardt, University of Innsbruck , Austria  
Gurpreet Dhillon, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA  
Alexandra Durcikova , University  of Oklahoma, USA  
Brenda Eschenbrenner , University  of Nebraska at Kearney, USA  
Xiaowen Fang, DePaul University, USA  
James  Gaskin, Brigham Young University, USA  
Matt Germonprez , University  of Nebraska at Omaha, USA  
Jennifer Gerow , Virginia Military Institute , USA  
Suparna Goswami , Technische U .München, Germ any 
Camille Grange, HEC Montreal, Canada  
Juho Harami, Tampere University , Finland  
Khaled  Hassanein , McMaster  University , Canada  
Milena Head , McMaster  University , Canada  
Netta Iivari , Oulu University , Finland  
Zhenhui Jack Jiang , University  of Hong Kong , China  
Richard Johnson , Washington State University , USA  
 Weiling Ke , Southern  University of Science and Technology , China  
Sherrie Komiak , Memorial U. of Newfoundland, Canada   
Na Li , Baker College, USA  
Yuan Li , University  of Tennessee , USA  
Ji-Ye Mao , Renmin University , China  
Scott McCoy , College of William and Mary, USA  
Robert F. Otondo , Mississippi State University , USA  
Lingyun Qiu , Peking University , China  
Sheizaf Rafaeli , University  of Haifa, Israel  
Rene Riedl , Johannes Kepler U niversity  Linz, Austria  
Lionel Robert , University  of Michigan, USA  
Khawaja Saeed , Wichita State University , USA  
Shu Schiller , Wright State University , USA  
Christoph Schneider , IESE, Spain  
Theresa Shaft , University  of Oklahoma, USA  
Stefan Smolnik , University  of Hagen, Germany  
Jeff Stanton , Syracuse University , USA  
Chee -Wee Tan, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark  
Horst Treiblmaier , Modul University  Vienna, Austria  
Ozgur Turetken , Ryerson University , Canada  
Weiquan Wang, City University of Hong Kong  
Dezhi Wu , University  of South Carolina, USA  
Fahri Yetim , FOM U. of Appl. Sci., Germany  
Cheng Zhang , Fudan University , China  
Meiyun Zuo , Renmin University , China  
 
Managing Editor  
Gregory D. Moody , University of Nevada Las Vegas , USA  
          
 


