==== Page 1 ====
56  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYIn early 1997, before Alexa and Siri were conceived, I 
engaged in several public debates with MIT Media Lab 
professor Pattie Maes about the future of computing and 
artiﬁcial intelligence. /T_he starting place for our disagreement 
was the question of control. Maes was advancing a vision of 
machine autonomy, of the proactive “so/f_tware agent” that 
“can take initiative because it knows what your interests 
are.” I oﬀered a diﬀerent vision: so/f_tware designs that give 
users high levels of understanding and control over their AI-
enabled devices to preserve human agency.
Although both views of AI design have their value, I 
believe that pursuing a vision of AI and technology design 
that starts with machine autonomy is dangerous for the 
future of human beings, our societies, and our environment. 
/T_he consequences of an autonomy-ﬁrst approach have begun 
to make themselves felt, in stock market ﬂash crashes, deadly 
failures of autonomous missile systems in the second Iraq 
War, fatal accidents involving self-driving cars, and the 
two Boeing 737 MAX crashes. Autonomy-ﬁrst elevates the 
dangers of hidden biases in algorithms for making decisions 
about who gets a mortgage, who gets a job, who gets paroled, 
and in the “surveillance capitalism” that turns surreptitiously 
collected private data into targeted advertising.
As AI-enabled devices proliferate in the economy and our 
daily lives, we are at a decisive moment. What will it take to BEN SHNEIDERMAN
put humanity on a path where humans steer AI to advance 
their own values and aspirations, rather than accepting 
control by autonomous decision algorithms that remain 
beyond our view and direct inﬂuence?
We should reject the idea that autonomous machines 
can exceed or replace any meaningful notion of human 
intelligence, creativity, and responsibility. /T_he clichéd 
images of a human hand shaking a robot hand or a 
humanoid robot pretending to think are archaic and 
misguided. People have remarkable abilities, and in 
contrast to future visions of humanoid robots and driverless 
cars that relieve us of our roles and responsibilities in daily 
tasks, I look forward to next-generation technologies that 
bring greater human control of ever-increasing automation.
My agenda is to help change the way we imagine, talk 
about, and design AI systems, starting with a vision of 
people working together, in charge of technology, and 
beneﬁtting from information-abundant displays that enable 
them to ask better questions and make bolder decisions. 
A growing community of AI researchers are calling this 
approach Human-Centered AI (HCAI). Our goal is to 
amplify, rather than erode, human agency.
And more. HCAI is a vision of how machines might 
augment humans, and even encourage our best impulses 
toward each other, rather than how they might replace Human-Centered 
Computer scientists should build devices to 
enhance and empower—not replace—humans.AI

==== Page 2 ====
WINTER 2021    57AI
humans with something supposedly better. To understand 
HCAI’s promise not only for our machines but for 
our lives, a good starting place is an appreciation of 
the two competing philosophies that have shaped the 
development of AI, and what those imply for the design 
of new technologies. For policymakers, comprehending 
these competing imperatives can provide a foundation 
for navigating the vast thicket of ethical dilemmas now 
arising in the machine-learning space.
Aristotle vs. da Vinci
/T_he diﬀerence between artiﬁcial intelligence and Human-
Centered AI reﬂects a historical and philosophical clash 
between two approaches to gaining knowledge about the 
world—Aristotle’s rationalism and Leonardo da Vinci’s 
empiricism.
Rationalists believe in logical thinking, which can be 
accomplished in the comfort and familiarity of your lab or 
even your living room. /T_hey believe in the perfectibility of 
rules, the strength of formal methods, and the constancy 
of well-deﬁned boundaries between diﬀerent categories 
of things—such as hot and cold or wet and dry. Aristotle 
recognized important distinctions, such as the diﬀerences 
between vertebrates and invertebrates, and the four 
classes of matter: earth, water, air, and ﬁre.
As useful as strong rules and categories are for 
allowing clarity of thought, they can limit seeing other 
options and middle grounds. Followers of rationalism 
have included Descartes, with his powerful assertion 
of the duality of mind and body, and his mechanistic 
view of nature, and, in the twentieth century, the famed 
statistician Ronald Fisher, whose overly rigid commitment 
to statistics led him to reject early data on the risks 
of smoking. Rationalism, especially as embodied in 
logical mathematical thinking, is the basis for much 
of AI research, in which algorithms are treasured for 
their elegance and measured by their eﬃciency. /T_his 
was true in the days of symbolic AI algorithms written 
by programmers, and remains true in our time of data-
driven deep learning based on neural networks.
By contrast, empiricists believe that researchers are 
enriched by the contradictions and ambiguities that 
come with real-world experiences in all their contextual 
complexity and diversity. /T_hey understand that beliefs 
have to be continuously reﬁned to respond to changing 
realities and new contexts. Da Vinci developed ﬂuid 
dynamics principles by using his keen eyesight to study 
bird ﬂight and watch water ﬂowing around obstacles. 
Galileo was following da Vinci’s method by noticing the 
rhythmic swaying of a chandelier in church, which led 
him to the formula for pendulum swing times. David 
Hume, who recognized that correlations between events 
were fallible predictors of future consequences, was another great empiricist. /T_he statistician John Tukey, 
in contrast to Ronald Fisher, believed in looking at data 
graphically, because analysts could see errors, missing data, 
anomalies, exceptional performances, and unexpected 
distributions of data. /T_his graphical view revealed 
surprising patterns and suggested fresh questions.
Empiricism, pursued through the empathic observation 
of people, is the basis for much of the HCAI community’s 
work, which assesses human performance so as to improve 
it. Empiricists question simple dichotomies and complex 
hierarchies, because these may sometimes limit thinking, 
and undermine the analysts’ capacity to see important 
nuances and nonhierarchical relationships.
/T_he rationalist viewpoint, however, is dominant in 
the AI community. It leads researchers and developers 
to emphasize data-driven solutions based on algorithms. 
Rationalism also favors the belief that statistical methods 
and machine learning algorithms are suﬃcient to achieve 
AI’s promise of matching or exceeding human intelligence 
on well-deﬁned tasks, rather than requiring deep 
engagement with domain experts who understand causal 
relationships among variables. Some AI advocates have 
gone so far as to say that theories about causal relationships 
are no longer needed for AI because the amount of data 
now available for machine learning allows for correlations 
that are strong enough to guide decisions.
Such reasoning also leads to the conclusion that machine 
learning can replace expert knowledge. And though it 
is true that machine learning can reveal patterns in the 
data used to “train” algorithms, it does not deal with 
surprising extreme cases, such as when Tesla’s self-driving 
car could not distinguish a white truck from the sky and 
drove right into it. Learning from these and hundreds of 
other incidents will lead to safer cars sooner. But standard 
approaches to machine learning do not allow adequate 
learning from such apparently exceptional events. Eﬀorts 
to develop commonsense reasoning, explainable AI, and 
causal understanding seem still shallow compared with 
what humans do when they formulate problems, ﬁnd 
innovative solutions, and—as I am doing here—raise 
challenges to existing beliefs.
Human curiosity and desire to understand the world 
mean that humans are devoted to causal explanations, 
even when there is a complex set of distant and proximate 
causes for events. Machines lack such curiosity. Algorithms 
trained via machine learning are still subject to failure in 
novel situations, because they lack the innately human 
attributes of common sense and higher cognition. For 
example, machine learning may not recognize hidden 
biases or the absence of expected patterns.
And though humans experience the passage of time and 
adjust to new realities, computers with machine learning 
repeat the past, including its mistakes. /T_he Google Flu 

==== Page 3 ====
58  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYAI
Trends project, which began in 2008, demonstrates this 
problem. It aimed to predict ﬂu outbreaks by studying 
patterns of internet search queries for items such as 
tissues and ﬂu medications. It worked for a while, but over 
time, as people used search engines in new ways, and the 
underlying search algorithms were revised in response, these 
changes led to prediction failures that were embarrassing 
enough for Google to shut down the website and project.
Human learning
My own professional journey began when, as an 
undergraduate math and physics major, I wrote 
enthusiastically about the possibilities of artiﬁcial 
intelligence from a rationalist perspective. But a/f_ter 
graduating, when I began to teach data processing 
at a community college, my views began to shi/f_t. 
Close contact with students studying programming 
and information systems gave me insight into how 
diverse people faced varied challenges in learning 
something that seemed obvious to me. If I was to help 
them learn, I had to appreciate their struggles.
My PhD research focused on optimization of data 
structures for the emerging topic of database systems. 
I was still building on the rationalist tradition, using 
quantitative methods that appealed to my sense of rigor. 
/T_hen as an assistant professor in computer science at 
Indiana University, and to the surprise of my computer 
science colleagues, I partnered with a young psychologist, 
Richard Mayer, who trained me in experimental methods 
and statistics for research on human subjects. I began to 
study human performance in laboratory-like settings, to 
improve design of programming languages and tools. I 
moved on to complement these controlled experiments 
with qualitative case studies, and a broader focus on 
research on designing technologies to empower people—
just as personal computers were emerging. I was able 
to experience the satisfaction of contributing to the 
development of a new ﬁeld: human-computer interaction.
In adopting this empiricist approach, I had come to 
see that engaging with users of technology could lead me 
to fresh insights. I used (and continue to use) naturalistic 
observations, usability studies, and repeated weeks-long 
case studies with users doing their work to complement 
the rationalist approach of controlled experiments in 
laboratory settings. /T_his work was aligned with the rise of 
the concept of design thinking, an approach to innovation 
that begins with empathy for users and pushes forward 
with humility about the limits of machines and people. 
Empathy enables designers to be sensitive to the confusion 
and frustration that users might have and the dangers to 
people when AI systems fail. Humility leads designers to 
recognize the inevitability of failure and inspires them to 
be always on the lookout for what wrongs are preventable.Humans in the group; computers in the loop
/T_he AI community’s sympathy for rationalism continues 
to lead developers to favor autonomous designs in which 
computers operate reliably without human oversight. /T_his 
approach typically brings with it an imagined future of 
intelligent machines that pretend to have emotions. Many 
developers believe that autonomous machines will seem 
less threatening to us if they act like friends or partners. 
But computers don’t have emotions; people do. Today, 
humanlike social robots remain novelties, mostly conﬁned to 
entertainment, with only voice user interfaces succeeding as a 
consumer product.
HCAI designers recognize that humans are happily and 
productively woven into social networks; for example, at work 
we are embedded in social structures of supervisors, peers, 
and staﬀ who we want to please, inspire, and respect. From 
the HCAI perspective, computers should play a supportive 
role, amplifying people’s ability to work in masterful or 
extraordinary ways.
Although a growing number of people are demanding 
that AI machines include a “human in the loop,” this phrase 
o/f_ten implies a grudging acceptance of human control panels. 
/T_hose who seek a complete and perfect system are resistant to 
the idea that there needs to be human intervention, oversight, 
and control. /T_he HCAI bumper sticker would be Humans in 
the group; computers in the loop .
I believe that progress in technology design will accelerate 
as recognition spreads that humans must have meaningful 
control of technology and are responsible for the outcomes 
of their actions. When humans depend on automation to 
get their work done, they must be able to anticipate what 
happens, because they, not the machines, are responsible. One 
eﬀective way to enable users to anticipate the consequences of 
their actions is with direct manipulation designs—the objects 
and actions are represented on the screen; humans choose 
which actions to carry out; the actions and objects are all 
visible. /T_he ﬁle drops into the trash can, you hear the clinking 
and know what’s going on. Touch screen, swipe le/f_t and right. 
Overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details on demand. 
Humans are in control; computers are predictable.
Although AI projects are o/f_ten focused on replacing 
humans, HCAI designers favor developing information-rich 
visualizations and explanations built in, rather than added 
on. Today, the vast majority of apps are giving users more 
control, not less—by showing highway navigation routes on 
maps, exercise histories in bar charts, and ﬁnancial portfolios 
in line graphs. /T_hese displays give users a clear understanding 
of what is happening and what they can do. Visual displays 
are now frequently complemented by audio interfaces based 
on speech recognition and generation, opening up new 
possibilities for diverse users to accomplish their tasks. Digital 
cameras have lots of AI embedded, but the users get to take 
the picture they want—and more advanced cameras increase, 

==== Page 4 ====
WINTER 2021    59AI
In sum, the HCAI community’s sympathy for 
empiricism leads its members to design systems with 
users at the center of attention. To get a sense of how 
HCAI can enrich human experience in ways that 
conventional AI cannot, consider its application to the 
daily life of an aging population. Conventional AI might 
lead toward home robots that clear dinner tables to ﬁll 
traditional dishwashers. I see this as eroding human 
agency. AI isn’t the answer to everything: why not have 
small dishwashers built into, under, or beside dinner 
tables so that an older person could simply slide plates, 
cups, and cutlery into the dishwasher, which washes them 
to make them readily available for the next meal. /T_his 
approach enhances self-eﬃcacy rather than waiting for 
a mobile robot to carry oﬀ the dishes to the kitchen and 
bring them back when requested.
In contrast, Human-Centered AI could promote 
community-based solutions for some problems. For 
older adults and people living with disabilities, the 
Meals on Wheels programs that deliver prepared meals 
are much appreciated, not only for the food, but for the 
social contact with the delivery person, who may bring 
the food in, check on the recipient, and maybe clear the 
table. /T_hose who deliver the meals gain satisfaction in 
helping those in need and might be celebrated in their 
communities. AI algorithms could help match interests 
and personalities of deliverers and recipients, while 
scheduling eﬃcient routes.
Social support for professional caregivers, family 
members, and helpful friends could increase the pride 
and satisfaction they get from taking compassionate care 
of homebound individuals. Smartphone applications 
could weave together networks of professional caregivers 
with income-earning strategies that give workers a better 
deal than existing gig-economy schemes. However, the 
special needs of older adults and people with disabilities 
would prioritize long-term commitments that build 
relationships, and opportunities for care recipients to rate 
the caregivers, possibly with public comments of praise 
that would raise status for caregivers. Rationalist AI treats 
caregivers, aging people, and people with disabilities as rather than decrease, the user’s control over the device.
Similarly, educational intelligent tutoring systems with 
chatty humanlike avatars have given way to widely used 
online courses where users chart their own progress, see the 
gaps in their learning, and click to decide how fast they will 
move forward. In my view, future technologies are more 
likely to be what I call supertools and active appliances, 
rather than teammates, partners, and collaborators. Tele-
operated drones, home controls, and surgical devices 
will spread, and the ambitious control rooms for NASA’s 
Mars rovers, transportation management centers, patient-
monitoring displays, and ﬁnancial management so/f_tware, 
such as Bloomberg Terminals, will become the compelling 
prototypes for still more advanced applications.
Accountable AI
/T_his human-centered empiricist-driven strategy should 
apply strongly to military applications where responsibility 
within a chain of command is a core value. Even when 
the case for autonomy in defensive systems is strong, no 
weapons systems should be fully autonomous. But the 
HCAI approach also applies to the popular notion of 
autonomous vehicles or self-driving cars, where attaining 
adequate levels of safety will require an empiricist’s outlook 
and design of eﬀective user interfaces to enable meaningful 
human control, even as the levels of automation increase. 
Self-driving  should become safety-ﬁrst  cars in which proven 
methods such as collision avoidance are improved by better 
user interfaces. /T_hen further improvements will come from 
vehicle-to-vehicle communication, improved highway 
construction, and advanced highway management centers 
that build on the strategies of air traﬃc control centers.
Devotees of autonomous design o/f_ten assume machines 
will do the right thing. But as ﬂaws such as algorithmic 
bias in AI-driven systems emerged to shatter the belief in 
the perfectibility of these systems, HCAI researchers have 
begun to take on fairness, accountability, transparency, 
explainability, and other design features that give 
human developers, managers, users, and lawyers a better 
understanding of what is happening than in the previously 
closed black boxes. Moreover, many types of AI systems 
should include logging activity to support transparent and 
retrospective review of failures and aggregate patterns of 
usage. /T_his strategy, following civil aviation’s commitment 
to continual improvement, would install the equivalent of 
a ﬂight data recorder in every robot. Adding audit trails 
or activity logs would assure appropriate accountability, 
especially in applications that have signiﬁcant consequences 
for people and organizations, in settings ranging from 
the hospital to the battleﬁeld. /T_he design goal is to enable 
retrospective analyses of failures and near misses and 
review of aggregate patterns of performance to allow 
continual design improvement.We should reject the idea that 
autonomous machines can exceed or 
replace any meaningful notion 
of human intelligence, creativity, 
and responsibility. 

==== Page 5 ====
60  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYAI
passive targets of automation; HCAI views them as people 
whose lives can be enriched through a strengthened sense 
of agency and social connectedness. 
HCAI for policymakers
Policymakers must now deal with the challenges of 
AI-driven decision processes across a vast range of 
applications, including mortgage and parole decisions, 
self-driving cars, and medical implants. Congressional 
committee and government agency staﬀers are considering 
how to regulate social media platforms to reduce fake news, 
hate speech, criminal activity, and terrorist recruitment. 
Government policymakers are working hard to understand 
and make decisions about how to deal with AI technologies 
that impact public services, such as whether to allow police 
to use facial recognition, how to limit foreign agents from 
interfering with voting, and whether to permit immigration 
agencies to screen refugees with opaque algorithms.
/T_hese policy concerns are usually viewed through an 
ethical lens, and have led to more than 400 reports about 
responsible, fair, transparent, and accountable AI. But 
building the ediﬁce of reliable, safe, and trustworthy AI 
systems requires not just attention to ethics, but actual 
design decisions that embody the HCAI approach. Ethical 
principles and design guidelines from leading companies 
such as Apple, Google, IBM, and Microso/f_t are helpful, but 
insuﬃcient to bridge the gap between ethics and practice. 
General principles such as “mitigate social biases” or “AI 
systems must be transparent and explainable” are ﬁne, but 
speciﬁc guidelines, clear examples, and assessment criteria 
are needed for so/f_tware engineers to know when they have 
done a good job.
I propose that design, development, and implementation 
of AI systems needs to adhere to these three HCAI 
guidelines:
1. Build reliable and transparent systems based on 
sound so/f_tware engineering team practices , such as 
testing so/f_tware to check AI algorithms, using visual tools 
to reveal anomalies, and testing databases to enhance 
fairness in machine learning training datasets. A big 
step forward would be to adapt the model of ﬂight data 
recording, which has contributed so much to make civil 
aviation safe, to record activity that allows retrospective 
forensic analysis a/f_ter failures and near misses. Another 
vital feature will be to support explainable AI, which 
enables users to understand AI-based decisions and seek 
redress for what they see as unfair or incorrect decisions. 
New approaches that involve visual user interfaces are 
proving to be helpful in giving designers, implementers, 
and users a better understanding of AI-based 
decisionmaking. A still better approach is to prevent the 
need for explanations by using visual control panels that 
let users understand their progress through the process.2. Pursue safety culture through eﬀective business 
management strategies , such as clear demonstrations 
by corporate leadership of their commitment to safety. 
Hiring risk-assessment professionals, allocating 
adequate budget for safety and training of staﬀ, and 
reporting all failures and near misses are key pillars 
of safety culture. Another is adherence to voluntary 
industry standards and guidelines promoted by 
professional groups such as the Robotics Industry 
Association, Underwriters Laboratory, the International 
Standards Organization, and IEEE, the largest 
engineering society. HCAI thinking suggests incident 
reporting and suggestion box schemes, such as the Food 
and Drug Administration’s Adverse Event Reporting 
System, the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aviation 
Safety Reporting System, and the Partnership on AI’s 
Incident Database, now with more than a thousand 
entries.
3. Increase trust through certiﬁcation and 
independent oversight within each industry , carried 
out by government agencies, independent accounting 
ﬁrms, insurance companies, professional societies, and 
nongovernmental organizations. An excellent model 
is the National Transportation Safety Board, whose 
investigations of airplane, ship, train, and car accidents 
are widely respected, and whose recommended 
improvements are thus taken seriously by the industries 
the board oversees. /T_hough a National Algorithms 
Safety Board is an appealing notion for independent 
oversight, a more realistic approach is for existing 
government agencies to increase their capacity to 
investigate consequential and life-critical failures in 
each industry.
Above all, HCAI oﬀers fundamental philosophical 
and design principals for addressing the challenges 
created by the diﬀusion of AI systems through society 
and the economy: start with the users. For example, if 
Facebook and other social platforms won’t give their 
users greater control of ﬁlters on what users get to see 
and what ads they are shown, then users could be assured 
such control through regulation or new legislation.
AI advocates might claim that AI regulation by 
government will slow innovation. But the history 
of automobile safety and eﬃciency requirements 
shows that they led to massive innovation and public 
beneﬁts. Regulation of drug safety has similarly 
been essential to the commercial success of the 
pharmaceutical industry. Linking the development 
of AI systems to guidelines that assure transparency 
and accountability will enhance innovation, public 
conﬁdence, societal value, and commercial value.
Government research agencies can also lead the 
way by incentivizing HCAI approaches to cutting-edge 

==== Page 6 ====
WINTER 2021    61AI
research. For example, the National Science Foundation’s 
program for National AI Research Institutes seeks to 
accelerate “research, transforming society, and growing the 
American workforce.” /T_his program’s request for proposals 
lists “Human-AI Interaction and Collaboration” as the 
ﬁrst of eight research themes. /T_he program description 
supports human-centered design by encouraging 
attention to “ethics, fairness, privacy, lack of deception, 
explainability, protection of vulnerable and protected 
populations, and participatory and inclusive design,” so as 
to produce “trustworthy and safe” AI systems.
But achieving these laudatory goals demands more than 
good intentions; it also requires institutional mechanisms 
that facilitate HCAI. Such mechanisms are compatible with 
the NSF program’s requirement that investigators address 
foundational AI research while conducting “use-inspired 
research” that “drives innovations in related sectors of 
science and engineering, segments of the economy, or 
societal needs” while working with “external stakeholders 
such as industrial partners, public policy-makers, or 
international organizations.” NSF should link these 
mechanisms with the societal goals of its AI program by 
preferentially funding projects that take human-centered 
design seriously.
/T_he encouragement for AI researchers to raise their 
emphasis on use-inspired research is aligned with the 
growing awareness of the beneﬁts of partnering with 
nonacademic organizations and researchers. When AI 
researchers partner with those who are close to real-world 
problems, the quality of foundational research is likely 
to increase, as are the beneﬁts to society. Such persistent 
interactions enhance the mutual understanding—
empathy—that underlies the HCAI approach. It also brings 
researchers closer to users, the other pillar of HCAI’s 
commitment to empiricism.
/T_hese eﬀorts are a good start, but much more needs 
to be done in educating AI researchers and practitioners 
about the philosophy, principles, and methods at the 
core of the HCAI framework. Making sure that students 
interested in AI receive a diverse education that includes humanities and social sciences will also help. When the 
traditions of rationalism and empiricism are reﬁned to 
account for the richness of modern technologies and the 
distinctions between machines and people, then I believe we 
are more likely to see an increased capacity to create reliable, 
safe, and trustworthy technologies.
AI can advance in ways that support, rather than erode, 
fundamental human aspirations. For many people, the 
desire for social connections with trusted friends, family, 
colleagues, and neighbors is strong. People seek to be 
masters of their own lives, strive to express their creative 
potentials, and with some exceptions, take responsibility 
for their actions. People are imperfect and sometimes 
malicious, but I want to support technologies that help 
people to realize their hopes, help others when they can, and 
contribute to causes they believe in. I envision a future that 
emphasizes human self-eﬃcacy, creativity, responsibility, 
and community, while promoting better education, 
business, government, health and well-being, and economic 
development. I envision a future in which technology 
innovations respect human values, rights, and dignity, 
while promoting fairness, equity, and justice. HCAI can 
illuminate the technological pathways toward these goals.
Ben Shneiderman is a distinguished university professor 
of computer science at the University of Maryland and 
a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
RECOMMENDED READING
John Markoﬀ, Machines of Loving Grace: /T_he Quest 
for Common Ground between Humans and Robots  
(New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2016).
Robin R. Murphy, Disaster Robotics  
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014).
Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big 
Data Increases Inequality and /T_hreatens Democracy 
(New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2016).
Ben Shneiderman, “Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 
Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction 36, no. 6 (2020): 495–504. 
———, “Bridging the Gap between Ethics and Practice: 
Guidelines for Reliable, Safe, and Trustworthy 
Human-Centered AI Systems,” ACM Transactions 
on Interactive Intelligent Systems 10, no. 4 (2020).
Brian Cantwell Smith, /T_he Promise of Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence: Reckoning and Judgment 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019).
Shannon Vallor, Technology and the Virtues: A 
Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting 
(New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2016).
Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and 
Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation  
(W. H. Freeman & Co., 1976).Linking the development of AI 
systems to guidelines that assure 
transparency and accountability 
will enhance innovation, public 
conﬁdence, societal value, 
and commercial value.

