==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1901.11184v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jan 2019Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Machine Learning
Mark O.Riedl
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Humansare increasingly comingintocontact withartiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning systems. Human-centered artiﬁcial in telligence is a
perspective on AI and ML that algorithms must be designed wit h aware-
ness that they are part of a larger system consisting of human s. We lay
forth an argument that human-centered artiﬁcial intellige nce can be bro-
ken down into two aspects: (1) AI systems that understand hum ans from
a sociocultural perspective, and (2) AI systems that help hu mans under-
stand them. We further argue that issues of social responsib ility such as
fairness, accountability, interpretability, and transpa rency.
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is the study and design of algorithms that perform
tasks or behaviors that a person could reasonably deem to require intelligence
if a human were to do it. Broadly construed, an intelligent system can take
many forms: a system designed to be indistinguishable from humans; a speech
assistant such as Alexa, Siri, Cortana, or Google Assistant; a self- driving car; a
recommender in an online commerce site; or a non-player character in a video
game. We referto intelligent systems as agentswhen they are capableof making
some decisions on their own based on given goals. Machine learning (ML) is
a particular approach to the design of intelligent system in which the s ystem
adapts its behavior based on data. It is the success of machine lear ning algo-
rithms in particular that have lead to recent growth in commercializat ion of
artiﬁcial intelligence.
Humans are increasingly coming into contact with artiﬁcial intelligence and
machine learning systems. At times it is evident, as in the case of Siri, A lexa,
Cortana, or Google Assistant. It is also evident in the case of self-d riving cars
or non-player characters in computer games. At times it is less evide nt, as in
the case of algorithms that work behind the scenes to recommend p roducts,
1

==== Page 2 ====
and approve bank loans. Given the potential for intelligent system t o impact
people’s lives, it is important to design intelligent systems with this in mind .
There is a growing awareness that algorithmic advances to artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and machine learning alone are insuﬃcient when considering sys tems
designed to interact with and around humans. Human-centered artiﬁcial in-
telligence is a perspective on AI and ML that intelligent systems must be de-
signed with awareness that they are part of a larger system consis ting of hu-
man stake-holders, such as users, operators, clients, and othe r people in close
proximity. Some AI researchers and practitioners have started t o use the term
human-centered AI to refer to intelligent systems that are design ed with social
responsibility in mind, such as addressing issues of fairness, accoun tability, in-
terpretability, and transparency. Those are important issues. H uman-centered
AI can encompass more than those issues and in this desiderata we lo ok at
the broader scope of what it means to have human-centered artiﬁ cial intelli-
gence, including factors that underlie our need for fairness, inter pretability, and
transparency.
At the heart of human-centered AI is the recognitionthat the way intelligent
systems solve problems—especially when using machine learning—is fun damen-
tallyaliento humans without training in computer science or AI. We are used
to interacting with other people, and we have developed powerful a bilities to
predict what other people will do any why. This is sometimes referred to as
theory of mind —we are able to hypothesize about the actions, beliefs, goals, in-
tentions, and desires of others. Unfortunately, our theory of m ind breaks down
when interacting with intelligent systems, which do not solve problems the way
we do and can and come up with unusual or unexpected solutions eve n when
working as intended. This is further exacerbated if the intelligent sy stem is a
“black box.” Black box AI and ML refers to the situations wherein the user
cannot even know what algorithms it uses, or that the system is so c omplicated
as to defy easy inspection. Regardless of whether an intelligent sys tem is a
black box or not, we are seeing more interaction between intelligent s ystems
and people who are not experts in artiﬁcial intelligence or computing s cience.
How can we design intelligent systems that are capable of helping peop le un-
derstand their decisions? Must we design intelligent systems to solve problems
more like humans, or can we augment existing algorithms? What do peo ple
need to know about an intelligent system to be able to trust its decisio ns or
be comfortable working with an intelligent system? Can the intelligent s ystem
itself convey this information to its users in a meaningful and unders tandable
manner?
Human-centered AI is also in recognition of the fact that humans ca n be
equally inscrutable to intelligent systems. When we think of intelligent s ystems
understanding humans, we mostly think of natural language and sp eech pro-
cessingwhether an intelligent system can respond appropriately to utterances.
Natural languageprocessing, speech processing, and activity re cognitionare im-
portant challenges in building useful, interactive systems. To be tru ly eﬀective,
AI and ML systems need a theory of mind about humans. Just as we u se our
commonsensereasoningto interpret and predict the actions ofot hers, intelligent
2

==== Page 3 ====
systems can beneﬁt from having commonsense understanding of w hat people do
and why they do it in particular ways; we are unconsciously inﬂuenced by our
sociocultural beliefs. Intelligent systems, however, do not “grow up” immersed
in a society and culture in the way humans do. These sociocultural be liefs and
norms provide a context surrounding everything that people do. A n intelligent
system that can model sociocultural beliefs and norms may be able t o disam-
biguate human behavior and make more educated guesses on how to anticipate
and respond to human needs. At a minimum, intelligent systems that b etter un-
derstand the sociocultural underpinnings of human behavior may b e less likely
to make mistakes about subjects that people take for granted, m aking them
safer to use and safer for them to be in close proximity to people. It may also
be possible someday for intelligent systems to evaluate their own beh aviors for
consistency with ethical norms about fairness.
In the following sections lay out arguments that AI and ML systems t hat
are human-centered (1) have an understanding of human sociocu ltural norms
as part of a theory of mind about people, and (2) are capable of pro ducing
explanations that non-expert end-users can understand. Thes e are underlying
capabilities from which much of our need for AI that contributes to s ocial good
stems.
2 Understanding Humans
Manyartiﬁcialintelligence systems that will comeinto contact with hu mans will
need to understand how humans behave and what they want. This w ill make
them more useful and also safer to use. There are at least two way s in which
understanding humans can beneﬁt intelligent systems. First, the in telligent
systemmustinferwhatapersonwants. Fortheforeseeablefutu re, wewilldesign
AI systems that receive their instructions and goals from humans. However,
people dont always say exactly what they mean. Misunderstanding a person’s
intent can lead to perceived failure. Second, going beyond simply failin g to
understand human speech or written language, consider the fact that perfectly
understood instructions can lead to failure if part of the instructio ns or goals
are unstated or implicit.
Commonsense failure goals occur when an intelligent agent does not achieve
the desired result because part of the goal, or the way the goal sh ould have
been achieved, is left unstated (this is also referred to as a corrupted goal or
corrupted reward (Everitt et al., 2017)). Why would this happen? One reasonis
that humans are used to communicating with other humans who shar e common
knowledge about how the world works and how to do things. It is easy to fail
to recognize that computers do not share this common knowledge a nd can take
speciﬁcations literally. The failure is not the fault of the AI system—it is the
fault of the human operator.
It is trivial to set up commonsense failures in in robotics and autonom ous
agents. Considerthehypotheticalexampleofaskingarobottogo toapharmacy
and pick up a prescription drug. Because the human is ill, he or she wou ld
3

==== Page 4 ====
like the robot to return as quickly as possible. If the robot goes dire ctly to
the pharmacy, goes behind the counter, grabs the drug, and ret urns home, it
will have succeeded and minimized execution time and resources (mon ey). We
would also say it robbed the pharmacy because it did not participate in the
social construct of exchanging money for the product.
One solution to avoiding commonsense goal failures is for intelligent sy stems
to possess commonsense knowledge. This can be any knowledge com monly
shared by individuals from the same society and culture. Commonsen se knowl-
edgecanbe declarative (e.g.,carsdriveontherightsideoftheroad)or procedural
(e.g., a waitperson in a restaurant will not bring the bill until it is reque sted).
While there have been several eﬀorts to create knowledge bases o f declara-
tive commonsense knowledge (CYC (Lenat, 1995), ConceptNet (L iu and Singh,
2004)), these eﬀorts are incomplete and there is a dearth of know ledge readily
available on procedural behavioral norms.
There are a number of sources from which intelligent systems might a cquire
commonknowledge,includingmachinevisionappliedtocartoons(Veda ntam et al.,
2015), images (Sadeghi et al., 2015), and video. Unsurprisingly, a lo t of com-
monsense knowledge can be inferred from what people write, includin g stories,
news, and encyclopedias such as Wikipedia (Trinh and Le, 2018). Sto ries and
writing can be particularlypowerful sources ofcommon knowledge; people write
what they know and social and cultural biases and assumptions can come out,
fromdescriptionsoftheproperprocedureforgoingtoarestaur antorweddingto
implicit assertions of right and wrong. Procedural knowledge in part icular can
be used by intelligent systems to better provide services to people b y predicting
their behavior or detect and respond to anomalous behavior. In th e same way
that predictive text completion is helpful, predicting broader patte rns of daily
life can also be helpful.
Combining commonsense procedural knowledge with behavior can yie ld in-
telligent agents that are safer. To the extent that it is impossible to enumer-
ate the “rules” of society—which is more than just the laws a society has—
commonsense procedural knowledge can help intelligent systems an d robots
follow social conventions. Social conventions often exist to help av oid hu-
mans avoid conﬂict with each other, even though they may inconven ience us.
Harrison and Riedl (2016) used the pharmacy scenario summarized above to
show that intelligent autonomous agents that use written stories a s training
demonstrations can implicitly learn to avoid behaviors that are socially unde-
sirable. This happens as a side eﬀect because stories are more ofte n than not
positive examples of behavior. Their system directly addresses the challenge
of commonsense goal failures by deriving reward information from f ollowing
commonly agreed-upon story progressions as close as possible. Th us the agent
learns not to steal the prescription drugs because most stories r efer to exchange
of money leading the agent to prefer that behavior even though it is faster
and less costly to do the opposite. The agent thus never has to be t old what
“stealing” is and why it should be avoided.
Commonsense knowledge, the procedural form of which can act as a basis
for theory of mind for when interacting with humans, can make huma n-AI
4

==== Page 5 ====
interaction more natural. Even though ML and AI decision-making alg orithms
operate diﬀerently from human decision-making, the behavior of th e system
is consequently more recognizable to people. It also makes interact ion with
people safer: it can reduce commonsense goal failures because th e agent ﬁlls
in an under-speciﬁed goal with commonsense procedural details; a nd an agent
that acts according to a persons expectations will innately avoid co nﬂict with
a person who is applying their theory of mind of human behavior to inte lligent
agents.
3 AI Systems Helping Humans Understand Them
Invariably, an intelligent system or autonomous robotic agents will m ake a mis-
take, fail, violate an expectation, or perform an action that confu ses us. Our
natural inclination is to want to ask: “Why did you do that?” Although people
will be responsible for providing goals to intelligent, autonomous syst ems, the
system is responsible for choosing and executing the details.
Neural networks, in particular, are often regardedas un-interpretable , mean-
ing that it takes a large amount of eﬀort to determine why the syste ms response
to a stimulus is what it is. We often speak of “opening the black box” to ﬁgure
out what was going on inside the autonomous system’s decision-makin gprocess.
A majority of the work to date is on visualizing the representations le arned by
neural networks (e.g., generating images that activate diﬀerent p arts of a neural
network (Zhang and Zhu, 2018)) or by tracing the eﬀects of diﬀer ent portions
of the input data on output performance. (e.g., removing or maskin g parts of
training data to see how performance is aﬀected (Ribeiro et al., 201 6)). Even
AI experts can have a hard time interpreting machine-learned mode ls and this
type of work is geared largely toward AI power-users, often for t he purposes of
debugging and improving a machine learning system.
However, if we want to achieve a vision of autonomous agents and ro bots
being used by end users and operating around people, we must cons ider non-
expert human operators. Non-experts have very diﬀerent need s when it comes
to interacting with autonomous agents and robots. Non-expert o perators are
likely not going to seek a detailed inspection of the inner workings of th e sys-
tem, but is more likely seeking remedy. Remedy is the concept that a user
should be able to correct or seek compensation for a perceived failu re. An in-
telligent agent did what it thought at the time was the right thing to do only
to have been mistaken or to appear to have made a mistake because the be-
havior violated user expectations. The ﬁrst step in remedy is gettin g enough
information to choose the appropriateremedial course ofaction. Was the failure
(or appearance of failure) due to sensor error, eﬀector error, incorrect model,
incomplete model, dataset bias, or other cause? In many cases the information
can be the remedy itself, in the form of an explanation that helps one revise
their theory of mind about the agent or as an admission of failure. Explana-
tionsare post-hoc descriptions of how a system came to a given conclusio n or
behavior. Explanations can be visual, as in highlighting the portions of sensory
5

==== Page 6 ====
input that contributed most to the output (Selvaraju et al., 2017 ), or through
natural language processing (Andreas et al., 2017).
The question of what makes a good explanation of the behavior of a m achine
learning system is an open question that has not been explored at de pth from
a human factors perspective. One option for natural language ex planation is to
generate a description of how the algorithm processes sensory inp ut. This can
be unsatisfactory because algorithms such as neural networksa nd reinforcement
learning defy easy explanation (e.g., “the action was taken because numerous
trials indicate that in situations similar to this the action has the highes t like-
lihood of maximizing future reward”).
Another option is to take inspiration from how humans respond to th e ques-
tion “why did you do that?”. Humans produce rationales —explanations after
the fact that plausibly justiﬁes their actions. People do not know ho w the exact
cascades of neural activation resulted in a decision; we invent a sto ry, consistent
with what we know about ourselves and with intent on being as informa tive as
possible. In turn, others accept these rationales knowing that th ey are not abso-
lutely accurate reﬂections on the cognitive and neural processes that produced
the behavior at the time. Rationale generation is thus the task of cr eating an
explanationcomparableto what ahuman wouldsayifhe orshe werepe rforming
the behavior that the agent was performing in the same situation. E hsan et al.
(2019) show that human-like rationales, despite being true reﬂect ions of the
internal processes of a black-box intelligent system, promote fee lings of trust,
rapport, familiarity, and comfort in non-experts operating auton omous systems
and robots.
Rationales are generated by ﬁrst collecting explanations of humans perform-
inga similartaskto that ofthe autonomoussystem. Aneuralnetwo rkistrained
to translate the internal state of an autonomous agent into the n atural language
explanations in the corpus. This results in automatically generated r ationales
that readlike humanrationales,including culturallyspeciﬁc idioms, ifpr esentin
the corpus. This leads to interesting open research questions. Wh en is explana-
tion generation by layering one black box on top of another appropr iate? How
do incorrect rationales and explanations aﬀect operator percept ions of trust?
Rationales are probably only one part of the solution—they address a high-level
need for explanation and cannot answer speciﬁc questions in which a n operator
asks for elaboration. Rationales may be used as one of a set of tech niques that
meet diﬀerent levels of need from diﬀerent types of users.
4 Conclusions
With these desiderata, we break human-centered artiﬁcial intellige nce into two
criticalcapacities: (1)understandinghumans,and(2)beingablet ohelphumans
understand the AI systems. There may be other critical capabilitie s that this
articledoesnot address. However,it seemsthatmanyoftheattr ibutes wedesire
inintelligentsystemsthatinteractwith non-expertusersandinsys temsthatare
designed for social responsibility can be derived from these two cap abilities. For
6

==== Page 7 ====
example, there is a growing awareness of the need for fairness and transparency
when it comes to deployed AI systems. Fairness is the requirement t hat all users
are treated equally and without prejudice. Right now, we make cons cious eﬀort
to collect data and build checks into our systems to prevent our sys tems from
prejudicial behavior. An intelligent system that has a model ofand c an reason
aboutsocial and cultural norms for the population it interacts with can achieve
the same eﬀect of fairness and avoid discrimination and prejudice in s ituations
not anticipated by the system’s developers. Transparency is abou t providing
some means of access to the datasets and workﬂowsinside a deploy ed AI system
to end-users. The ability to help people understand their decisions t hrough
explanations or other means accessible to non-experts will provide people with
greater sense of trust and make them more willing to continue the us e of AI
systems. Explanations may even be the ﬁrst step toward remedy, a critical
aspect of accountability.
Human-centered artiﬁcial intelligence does not mean that an artiﬁc ial intel-
ligence or machine learning algorithm must think like a human or be cognit ively
plausible. However,it doesrecognizethefactthatpeoplewhoaren on-expertsin
artiﬁcialintelligenceorcomputing science fall backona theoryofmin d designed
to facilitate their interaction with other people and draw on sociocult ural norms
that have emerged to avoid human-human conﬂict. Making intelligent systems
human-centered means building the intelligent systems to understa nd the (of-
ten culturally speciﬁc) expectations and needs of humans and to he lp humans
understand them in return. The pursuit of human-centered artiﬁ cial intelli-
gence presents a research agenda that will improve our scientiﬁc u nderstanding
of fundamental artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning while simulta neously
supporting the deployment of intelligent products and services tha t will interact
with people in everyday contexts.
References
Jacob Andreas, Anca D. Dragan, and Dan Klein. Translating neurale se. In
ACL, 2017.
UpolEhsan, PradyumnaTambwekar,LarryChan, BrentHarrison ,andMarkO.
Riedl. Automated rationalegeneration: a technique for explainableA I and its
eﬀects on human perceptions. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Intelligence User Interfaces , 2019.
Tom Everitt, Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Marcus Hutter , and Shane
Legg. Reinforcement learning with a corrupted reward channel. In IJCAI,
2017.
Brent Harrison and Mark Riedl. Towards learning from stories: An ap proach
for interactive machine learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI’16 Workshop
on Symbiotic Cognitive Systems , 2016.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Doug Lenat. Cyc: A large-scale investment in knowledge infrastruc ture.Com-
munications of the ACM , 38, 1995.
Hugo Liu and Push Singh. Conceptnet–a practicalcommonsensere asoningtool-
kit.BT Technology Journal , 22(4):211–226, 2004.
Marco T´ ulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Model-agno stic in-
terpretability of machine learning. CoRR, abs/1606.05386, 2016.
Fereshteh Sadeghi, Santosh Kumar Divvala, and Ali Farhadi. VisKE: Visual
knowledge extraction and question answeringby visual veriﬁcation of relation
phrases. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni tion
(CVPR), pages 1456–1464, 2015.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramak rishna
Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual expla nations
from deep networks via gradient-based localization. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 618–626, 2017.
Trieu H. Trinh and Quoc V. Le. A simple method for commonsense reas oning.
CoRR, abs/1806.02847, 2018.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, Xiao Lin, Tanmay Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnic k, and
Devi Parikh. Learning common sense through visual abstraction. 2015
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 2542–
2550, 2015.
Quanshi Zhang and Song-Chun Zhu. Visual interpretability for dee p learning:
a survey. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineer ing, 19:
27–39, 2018.
8

