==== Page 1 ====
- 1     - Human -Centered Ar tificial Intelligence: Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  
     Ben Shneiderman, ben@cs.umd.edu , Draft February 23, 2020 , version 29  
     University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA  
 
Abstract  
Well -designed t echnologies that offer high levels of human control and high levels of computer 
automation can increase  human performance , leading to wider adoption. The Human -Center ed 
Artificial Intelligence  (HCA I) framework  clarifies  how to  (1) design for high levels of  human 
control and high levels of computer automation so as to increase human performance , (2) 
understand  the situations in which full human control  or full computer control  are necessary, and 
(3) avoid the dangers of excessive human control or excessive  computer control . The methods of 
HCA I are more likely to produce designs that are  Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  (RST). 
Achieving these goals will dramatically increase  human performance, while supporting human 
self-efficacy, mastery, creativity, and responsi bility.   
 
Please cite as:  
Shneiderman, Ben, Human -Centered Artificial Intellig ence: Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy , 
arXiv.org  (February 23, 2020 ).  https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.04087v1   (Extract  from fo rthcoming book 
by the same  title) 
Copyright Ben Shneiderman  2020  
 
1. Introduction  
This paper opens up new possibilities by way of a two -dimensional framework  of Human -
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HCAI) that separates  levels of automation/autonomy from levels 
of human control.  The new goal is to seek high levels  of human control AND high levels of 
automation , which is more likely to produce computer applications  that are Reliable,  Safe & 
Trustworthy  (RST). Achieving this goal , especially for complex poorly understood problems,  
will dramatically increase human perform ance, while supporting human self -efficacy, mastery, 
creativity, and responsibility.   
The traditional belief in  computer  autonomy is compelling for m any artificial intelligence (AI) 
researcher s, developers, journalists, and promoters . The goal of computer  autonomy  was central 
in Sheridan and Verpl ank’s (1978)  ten levels from human control to computer  
automation /autonomy  (Table 1) . Their widely cited  one-dimensional  list continues to guide  much 
of the research and development , suggesting that increases in au tomation must come at the cost 
of lowering human control.  Shifting to  HCA I could liberate  design thinking  so as to produce 
computer application s that increase automation, while amplify ing, augment ing, enhancing , and 
empower ing people to innovatively apply systems and creatively refine the m. 

==== Page 2 ====
- 2     -  
Table 1: Summar y of the  widely cited , but mind -limiting  1-dimensional  Sheridan -Verplank levels of  
automation/a utonomy  (Parasuraman et al., 2000 ) 
 
Sheridan & Verplank’s  ten levels of automation/ autonomy have  been widely influential, but 
critics suggested refinements such as  the four  stage s of automation : (1) information acquisition, 
(2) analysis of information, (3) decision or choice of acti on, and (4) execution of action 
(Parasuraman, Sheridan &  Wickens, 2000). These stages refine discussions of each of the levels, 
but the underlying message is that the goal is full automation/autonomy.  
Even Sheridan (2000) commented with concern that “surprisingly, the level descriptions as 
published have been t aken mo re seriously than were expected ” (see Hoffman & Johnson (2019) 
for a detailed history ). However, i n spite of the many critiques, the  1-dimensional  levels of 
automation/ autonomy , which only represents situations where  increased automation must come 
with less human control , is still widely influential. For example,  the US Society of Automotive 
Engineers adopted  the unnecessary trade -off in its  six levels of  autonomy for self -driving cars  
(SAE, 2014; Brooks , 2017) (Table 2).  
 
Level        Description  
   5.     Full autonomy : equal to that of a human driver, in every driving scenario.  
   4.     High automation: Fully autonomous vehicles perform all safety -critical driving functions  
                in certain areas and under deﬁned weather conditions.  
   3.     Conditional automation: Driver shifts “safety critical functions” to the vehicle under  
     certain trafﬁc or environmental conditions.  
   2.     Partial automation:  At least one driver assistance system is automated.   
   Driver is disengaged from physically operating the vehicle  
                (hands off the steering wheel AND foot off the pedal at the same time).  
   1.     Driver assistance:  Most functions are still control led by the driver, but a speciﬁc function  
 (like steering or accelerating) can be done automatically by the car.  
   0.     No Automation:  Human driver controls all: steering, brakes, throttle, power.  
 
 Table 2: Persistent , but still misleading,  1-dimension al thinking about  levels of a utonomy  for self-driving car s 
 (SAE, 2014; Brooks, 2017 ) 


==== Page 3 ====
- 3     -  
Critics of autonomy have repeatedly discussed the ironies (Bainbridge, 1983), deadly myths 
(Bradshaw et al., 2013 ; Mindell, 2015 ), conundrums (Endsley, 2017), or paradox es (Hancock, 
2017) of autonomy.  A common point is that humans have to spend more effort monitoring 
autonomous computers  because they are unsure  of what it will do , often leading to inferior 
performance (Blackhurst et al., 2011; Strauch, 2017).  
Bradshaw et al. (2013) caution designers who “have su ccumbed to myths of autonomy that are 
not only damaging in their own right but are also damaging by their continued propagation ... 
because they engender a host of other serious misconceptions and consequences.” The U.S. 
Defense Science Board (Murphy and S hields, 2012) report describes the ten levels of 
automation/autonomy this way: “though attractive, the conceptualization of levels of autonomy 
as a scientific grounding for a developmental roadmap has been unproductive.” A later report 
described many oppor tunities and dangers (Defense Science Board 2016), while cognitive 
science researchers ( Hoffman et al. , 2016) point to the failures and  costs of autonomous 
weapons.  
The problems brought by autonomy are captured in Robin Murphy’s  Law of autonomous robots : 
“any deployment of robotic systems will fall short of the target level of autonomy, creating or 
exacerbating  a shortfall  in mechanisms  for coordination  with human problem holders ” (Woods et 
al., 2004). High -profile d isasters from excessive autonomy  in new t echnologies  include the 
Patriot missile system shooting down two friendly aircraft  during the Iraq War  (Blackhurst et al., 
2004) and the Boeing 737 MAX crashes (Nicas et al., 2019).  
Fortunately , there is growing awareness by leading artificial intelligence  researchers  and 
developers  that human -centered designs are  needed (Jordan, 2018; Li, 2018).  Equally important 
is the encouragement of creativity researchers to integrate creativity support features in 
technology (Candy, 2020; Edmonds, 2020; Edmonds and Candy, 2002).   
Section 2 discusses the strategies for achieving  Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  systems . Section 3  
lays out the novel two -dimensional HCAI framework , describing different design objectives and 
the path to high levels of human control and high levels of automati on. Section 4 provides design 
principles plus examples and Section 5 summarizes with limitations and conclusions.  
 
2. Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy Systems  
My discussion  of Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  clarifies  what leads to  high performance . These 
definition s emphasize (1) technical practices  that support reliability, (2) management strategies  
that create cultures of safety , and (3) independ ent oversight  structures that support trust . 
Reliable  (Modarres et al., 2016) systems come from appropriate  technical  practices , which 
support human responsibility  (Canadian Governmen t, 2019 ), fairness (O’Neil, 2 016), and 
explainability ( Du, Liu & H u, 2019) , such as:  
- Audit trails  and analysis tools  to review failures & near misses  

==== Page 4 ====
- 4     - - Benchmark tests , which are widely accepted  for verification & validation  
- Continuous review of  data quality & bias testing to cope with shifting contexts  of use  
- Design stra tegies to build confidence  across stakeholder communities  
Reliability is advanced by  studying past performances by way of detailed audit t rails,  often called flight 
data recorders, which have been so effective in  civil aviation.  Ample testing and analyses of training data  
promote reliable performance , as do many other common software engineerin g practices . 
Cultures of safety  (Guldenmund, 2000; Berry et al., 2016)  are cultivated by  open management 
strategies  such as  
- leadership commitment to safety  
- invitations to report problems wi thin the organization  
- reviews of failures and near misses  by internal review boards  
- public reports  of failures  to promote discussion  
- internal  oversight  boards for future plans and past practices  
all of which guide cont inuous refinement of management  strategies , training, operational 
practices , and root-cause failure analyses.  Capability Maturity Models  guide organizational 
design to supp ort saf ety, but  further discussion of these strategies is beyond this paper.  
There is a long history of discussions to  define trust such as Fukuyama ( 1995 ), who focused on 
social trust  “within a community of regular, honest, and cooperative behavior, based on 
commonly shared norms, on the part of the members of that community .” His community -based 
definition leads to raising  trust by relying on  respected independ ent oversight  structures  
(Shneiderman, 2000, 2016)  including:  
- companies with proven capacity to  build, operate, and maintain technology,  
- professional organizations  that develop effective voluntary guidelines and standards  
    (Intern ational Standa rds Organizatio n, IEEE , Robotics Ind ustry Association ) 
- government agencies that regulate  in ways that promote innovation  
    (US Food & Drug  Administration , Federal Av iation Administration,  National Highway 
Traffic Safe ty Administration ) 
- non-governmental organizations that certify companies and products  
    (Underw riters Laboratories, Better Bus iness Bureau, Consumer ’s Union)  
- accounting firms  with demonstrated value in  audit ing companies  
    (KPMG, Ernst  & Young, Deloi tte, PwC ), and  
- insurance companies that promote  trust by compensati ng for failures.  
These independ ent oversight  structures , which need much deeper discussions,  develop trust in 
products  and services  by providing  independen t review  over design, operation , and maintenance . 
Since so me systems that are trusted  may not be trustworthy , I will use the stronger  term.  
There are many components to  the supporting structures of RST systems, but the intuitive 
meanings of these terms shoul d also be clear. U sers of mature technologies such as elevators, 
cameras, home appliances,  powered wheelchairs , or medical devices know when these devices 
are trusted , reliable , and safe.  They appreciate the high levels of automation, but t hink of 

==== Page 5 ====
- 5     - themsel ves as operating these devices in ways that give them control so as to accomplish their 
goals. Designers who adopt the HCA I mindset  will emphasize  strategies for enabling diverse 
users to steer, operate , and c ontrol  their highly automated devices, while in viting users to 
exercise their creativity to refine designs.  Well -designed automation can ensure finer human 
finer control, such as in surgical robots that enable surgeons to make more precise incisions in 
difficult to reach organs.  
Succ essful  designs enab le humans to work in interdisciplinary teams, so as to coordinate and 
collaborate with managers, peers, and subordinates. Computers are not teamma tes, collaborators, 
or co-active partners , as Johnson et al.  (2014)  suggest ; computers  should  support human 
activities in ways that reduce workload, raise performance, and ensure safety . The larger design 
issues for RST systems also  promote resilience, clarify responsibility, increase quality , and 
encourage creativity  (Edmonds & Candy, 2002; Giuliani et al., 2010 ; Woods , 2017 ). Still 
broader goals are to ensure privacy, increase cybersecurity, support social justice, and protect the 
environment.  
The HCA I framework  presented in Sectio n 3 guides  designers and researchers to consider new 
possibilities that promot e Reliable , Safe & Trustworthy  systems. After all, most consumers, 
industrial supervisors, physicians, and airplane pilots  are not interested in computer  autonomy;  
what they want are RST systems  to dramatically increase human  performance , while s implifying 
their effort, so they can devote them selves to their higher aspir ations . This paper shows how 
caref ul design leads t o computer applications  that promote  human control while also prov iding 
high levels of automation .  
 
3. The Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence  for RST Systems  
The HCAI framework  in this paper steers designers and researchers to ask fresh questions and 
rethink the nature of automation/autonomy. As designers get beyond thinking of computers as 
our teammates, collaborators, or partners, they are more likely to develop technologies that 
dramatically increase  human performance  by taking advanta ge of unique computer features 
including sophisticated algorithms, advanced sensors, information abundant displays, and 
powerful effectors.  Clarifying human responsibility also guides designers to support human 
capacity to invent  creative solutions in nove l contexts with incomplete knowledge. The HCAI 
framework  clarifies that the goal of design excellence is to promote human self -efficacy, 
mastery, and responsibility, which support the Reliable , Safe & Trustworthy  systems that 
managers and users seek.  
The go als of RST are most relevant fo r life -critical systems, but  there  are many consume r and 
professional  applications : 
Recommender systems : these are widely used in advertising  services , social media platforms, 
and search engines  have brought strong benefits t o consumers ( Konstan & Riedl , 2012) . 
Consequences of m istakes by these systems are usually less serious , possibly even giving 
consumers interesting suggestions of movies, books, or restaurants. However, malicious actors 

==== Page 6 ====
- 6     - can manipulate these systems to infl uence buying habits, change election outcomes, spread 
hateful messages, and reshape attitudes about climate, vaccinations, gun control, etc. Thoughtful 
design that improves user control could  increas e consumer  satisfaction  and limit  malicious use .   
Other applications of  automation include  common user tasks, such as search query completion or 
spell checking. These tasks are carefully designed to preserve user control and avoid annoying 
disruptions, wh ile offering useful assistance.  Heer  (2018)  breaks new gr ound  by offering ways of 
using automation in support of human  control with examples from data cleaning , exploratory 
data visualization, a nd natural language translation.  
Consequ ential applications: Moving up to the middle -range of consequential applications leads 
to medical, legal, environmental, or financial systems that can bring substantial  benefits and  harm s. 
A well-documented  case is  the flawed Google Flu Trends, which was designed to predict flu 
outbreaks, enabling public health officials to assign resources more effectively  (Lazer et al., 2013) . 
The initial success did not persist and after two years , Google withdrew the website , because the 
programmers did not anticipate the ma ny changes in search algorithms, user behavior , and societal 
context . Lazer et al. describe  the harmfu l attitude of programmers as “algorithmic hubris,” 
suggesting that some programmers have unreasonable expectations of their capacity to create 
foolproof autonomous  systems, akin to what happened with the Boeing 737 MAX.  
The financial flash crashes in publi c stock markets and currency exchanges caused by high 
frequency trading algorithms triggered losses of billions of dollars in just a few minutes. 
However, with adequate logs of trades, market managers can often repair the damage. Another 
saving grace f or the middle -range  of consequential  applications  in medical care, portfolio 
management, or legal advice, is that there may be time for alert decision makers to reflect o n the 
algorithm’s  recommendation, consult with colleagues, or probe more deeply to underst and the 
recommendation . 
Life-critic al systems: Moving up to  the challenges of life -critical applications , we find the  
physical devices like self-driving  cars, pacemakers,  and implantable defibrillators, as well as 
complex systems such as military, industrial, and aviation  applicat ions. These  applications  
require  rapid actions and may have  irreversible consequences.  
The one -dimensi onal levels of automation , grew from Sheridan and Verplan k’s early paper , but 
was repeated in many articles and textbooks , including my own  (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1: One-dimensional thinking suggest that designers must choose between  human control and 
computer automation  


==== Page 7 ====
- 7     -  
Designers thought they had to choose a point on the one -dimensional line from human control to 
computer automation.  The implicit messa ge was that  more automation meant less user control.  
The decoupling of these concepts leads to a two -dimensional  HCA I framework , which suggest s 
that achieving high levels of human control and high levels of automation is possible ( yellow 
triangle in Figure 2).   
The des ired goal is often, but not always , to be in the upper right  quadrant . Most  RST systems 
are on the right side. The lower right quadrant is home to relatively well -understood and 
predictable tasks, e.g. automobile automatic transmission or skid control on n ormal highways . 
For poorly understood and complex tasks with varying contexts of use, the upper right quadrant 
is needed. These tasks involve creative decisions, making them currently at the research frontier.  
As contexts of use are standardized (e.g. ele vator shafts) these tasks can become under greater 
computer control with high levels of automation.  
 
Figure 2: Two -dimensional framework  with the goal of  Reliable , Safe  & Trustwo rthy, which is achieved 
by a high level of human cont rol and high level of automa tion (yellow triangle) . 
 
The lower right  quadrant  (Figure 3 ), with high automation and l ow hum an control, is home of 
computer  autonom y requiring rapid action , for example, airbag deployment, anti -lock brakes, 
pacemakers, implantable  defibrillators, or defe nsive weapons systems.  In these applications, 
there is no time  for human intervention or control. Because the price of failure is so high,  these 
applications require extremely careful design, extensive testing, and monitoring  during usage at 
scale  to refin e designs.  Effective and proven designs can become RST systems with higher levels 
of automation and less human supervision.  
The upper left  quadrant , with high human control and low automation, i s the home of human 
autonomy where  human mastery  is desired to  enable competence  building , free exploration , and 
creativity. Examples include bicycle riding, piano playing, baking , or playing with children. 


==== Page 8 ====
- 8     - During these activities, humans generally want to derive pleasure from seeking mastery, 
improving  their skil ls, and feeling  fully engaged. They may elect to use computer -based systems 
for trai ning, review, or guidance, but many people desire independent action to achieve mastery 
that builds self -efficacy. In these actions, the goal is in the doing and the persona l satisfaction 
that it provides, plus the poten tial for creative exploration (Calvo et al., 2020).  
The lower left quadrant is the home of simple devices such as clocks or mousetraps, as well as 
deadly d evices such as land mines.  
The take away message for des igners is that, for certain tasks, there is value in full computer  
control  or full human mastery . However, the challenge is to develop effective and proven 
designs, supported by trusted social structure, reliable practices, and cultures of safety so as to 
acquire RST recognition.  
                         
Figure 3: Regions requiring rapid action (high automation, low human  control) and  human mastery (high 
human cont rol, low automation) . 
In addition to the edge cases of full computer  and huma n autonomy, ther e are two other edge 
cases that signal danger -- excessive automation  and excessive human control . On the far right 
(Figure 4 ) is the region of excessive automation, where there are  dangers from designs such as 
the Boeing 737 MAX’s MCAS system . Over and ab ove the issues of single point of failure from 
one angle of attack sensor, t he designers believe d that their autonomous system could not fail. 
Therefore, its  existence was not described in the user manual  and the pilots were not trained in 
how to switch to  manual override . The IBM AI Guidelines wisely warns that “imperceptible AI 
is not ethical AI” (https://www.ibm.com/design/ai/fundamentals/ ). 


==== Page 9 ====
- 9     -  
 
Figure 4: Designers need to prevent the failures fr om excessive automation and excessive human 
control ( gray  areas)  
Excessive automation was cited  by the National Transportation Safety Board’s report on the 
deadly 2016 crash of a Tesla  car (2017).  That report cautioned that  “...automation ‘ because we 
can’ does not necessarily make the human -automation system work better. ... This crash is an 
example of what can happen  when automation is introduced ‘ because we can ’ without adequate 
consideration of the human element.”  The Tesla “Au topilot” system name sugges ts greater 
capability than is available. This can encourage drivers to become less vigilant, because 
designers have allowed drivers to ignore safety warnings about paying attention to road 
conditions and other vehicles.  
Similarly, excessive human control a llows people to make deadly mistakes . Automation controls, 
human factors affordances, and prevention of catastrophic failures are established strategies for 
reducing the number of deadly outcomes from “human mistakes”, which should be seen as 
design failur es (Thimbleby, 2020) .  Self-driving  car advocate s stress the goal of preventing  
human errors  that lead to accidents , but even modest  changes  to existing car designs can promote 
safety , such as collision avoidance to slow cars as they approach vehicles just  in front of their 
current position . These modest changes can then be refined and adapted in ways that increase 
safety, eventually leading to less need for driver control, with greater supervisory control from 
regional centers, akin to air -traffic control centers, that manage traffic flow of thousands of cars, 
track frequent near misses, and make changes to road speeds depending on weather and other 
conditions.  
Further ways of preventing excessive human control include car-based  ignition interlock devices 
that conduct breathalyzer tests  to prevent drivers  with high levels of alcohol in their breath  from 
turning on their cars .  Positive Train Control systems  limit engineers from going at high  speeds 
on curves or in terminal areas. Numerous interlocks in aviat ion prevent pilots from making 


==== Page 10 ====
- 10     - mistakes, for example, reverse thrust ers on jet engines can only be engaged once the strain gauge 
in the landing gear indicates that the plane is on the ground.   
Home appliances also have guards, such as the interlock on sel f-cleaning oven s to prevent 
homeowners from opening oven doors  when tempe ratures are above 600F degrees.   Poorly 
designed interlocks can be annoying, such as the overly ambitious automobile sy stems that lock 
doors too often. Software -based constraints, suc h as range checking, generalize the interlocks 
and guards, ensuring that  algorithms have permissible inputs and producing only acceptable 
outcomes.  
Interlocks or guards are helpful in preventing mistakes, but additional design and monitoring 
features are n eeds to ensure TRS designs.  T he challenging question is how to integrate  HCA I 
designs  into life-critical  systems like aviation, flexible manufacturing systems , implantable 
pacemakers, and automobiles. There is huge current interest in self -driving, driver less, or 
autonomous cars, which are sometimes described  as allowing passengers to sit back to read or 
sleep, while the car  takes them safely to their destination. This seductive vision is widely 
appealing, especially for its potential improved safety, but there is a growing realization that this 
may be an overstatement of what is possible in the next decade. Most automobile manufacturers 
are wisely proceeding cautiously .  They started  with anti -lock brakes and cruise control  decades 
ago, and now offer  featu res like lane control, parking assist, auto-braking, and collision 
avoidance.  This incremental approach supports development and refinement processes that 
eventually lead to RST designs that gain widespread acceptane.  
The notion of full car autonomy is pro ductively giving way to a human -centered approach, 
which provides appropriate controls to improve safety, while addressing the numerous special 
cases of snow -covered roads, unusual vehicles, vandalism, malicious interference, construction 
zone s, and emerge ncy guidance from police, fire, or ambulance personnel.  As car sensors, 
highway infrastructure, and car -to-car communication improve , strategies to make cars as  safe as 
elevators will  become easier to implement.  
Figure 5  shows the relative positions of 1980 cars, 2020 cars,  self-driving cars, and the proposed 
goal of Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy (RST) cars  in 2040 . 
 

==== Page 11 ====
- 11     -       
Figure 5: 1980  cars had modest automation with high levels of human control, while 2020  self-driving 
cars have high  automa tion, but inadeq uate  human control.  Achieving  Reliable , Safe  & Trust worthy  (RST) 
self-driving cars by 2040 could be done with  high automation and high human control , while avoiding 
the dangers of excessive automation or excessive human control  
 
The four quadrants may be helpf ul in suggesting differing designs for a product o r service:  
Example 1 : Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) devices (Figure 6) allow post -surgical, severe 
cancer, or hospice patients to select the amount and frequency of pain control medication. There 
are d angers and problems with young and old patients, but with good design and management 
PCA devices deliver safe and effective pain control  (Macintyre, 2001) . A simple morphine drip 
bag deaign  for the lower left quadrant (low automation and low human control)  would regularly 
deliver a fixed amount of pain control medication. A more automated design for the lower right 
quadrant (increased automation, but little human control) would provide machine selected doses 
that could vary by time of day, activity, and dat a from body sign sensors, although these do not 
assess perceived pain.  
A human -centered design for the upper left quadrant (higher human control, with low 
automation) would allow patients to squeeze a trigger to control the dosing, frequency, and total 
amount of pain control medication. However, the dangers of overdosing must be controlled by an 
interlock that prevents frequent doses, typically with lockout periods of 6 -10 minutes, and total 
dose limits over 1 -4 hour periods. Finally, a RST design for the upper right quadrant would allow 
users to squeeze a trigger to get more pain medicine, but would use sensors, and machine 
learning to cho ose appropriate doses  based on patient and disease variables , while preventing 
overdosing. Patients would be able to ge t information on why limiting pain medication is 
important with explanations of how they operate the PCA device. The RST design would include 
a hospital control center to monitor usage of hundreds of PCA devices so as to ensure safe 
practices, deal with po wer or other failures, review audit trails, and collect data to improve the 
next generation of PCA devices.  


==== Page 12 ====
- 12     -  
Figure 6 : Four approaches to p ain c ontrol designs  
 
4. Prometheus Principles and Examples  
This new goal of HCAI overcomes the 50 -year debate, lucidly  described by Markoff (2016), 
between those who sought artificial intelligence and those who sought intelligence augmentation 
(IA). This debate over AI vs IA now seems like arguing about iron horses vs horses or how many 
angels can fit on a pinhead. In fac t, IBM recently declared “There’s no AI without IA”. 
Designers can produce HCAI by integrating artificial intelligence algorithms with user interface 
designs in ways that amplify, augment, enhance, and empower people.   
The current version of the Google design guidebook ( https://pair.withgoogle.com/intro/ ) 
buys into to the need to choose: “Assess automation vs. augmentation... One large consideration 
is if you should use AI to automate a task or  to augment a person’s ability to do that task 
themselves... For AI -driven products, there’s an essential balance between automation and user 
control.”  However, the  authors of the  Google design guidebook are open to the possibility that 
“When done right, automation and augmentation work together to both simplify and improve 
the outcome of a long, complicated process.”  
Other guidelines (Horvitz, 1999; Dudley & Kristensson, 2018) paved the way for Microsoft ’s 
Guidelines for AI -Human Interaction ( https://www.microsoft.com/en -
us/research/project/guidelines -for-human -ai-interaction/ ), which  has 18 guidelines for initial use, 
normal us e, coping with problems , and  changes over time (Amershi et al., 2019) . These 
guidelines emphasize user understanding and control, while addressing ways for the system to 
“make clear why the system did what it did” and “learn from user behavior.”  
The IBM Design for AI website ( https://www.ibm.com/design/ai/fundamentals/ ) discusses issues 
more broadly, offering a high-level tutorial that covers design foundations, technology basics, 


==== Page 13 ====
- 13     - ethical concerns, accountability, explainabil ity, and fairness , but I question its suggestion that a 
system should “endear itself to the user” and “form a full emotional bond .”   
Endsley’s “Guidelines for the design of human -autonomy systems” (2018) has 20 thoughtful 
items that cover human understand ing of autonomous systems, minimizing complexity, and 
supporting situation awareness. Typical guidelines are: “ Use automated assistance for carrying 
out routine tasks rather than higher -level cognitive functions ” and “Provide automation 
transparency,” each  of which is explained in detail.  
 
Successful designs are comprehensible, predictable, and controllable, thereby increasing the 
users’ self -efficacy, leading to Reliable, Safe & Trustwor thy systems. These successes require 
careful design of the fine structure  of interaction, which emerges from validated theories, clear 
principles, and actionable guidelines. In turn, this knowledge is embedded in programming tools 
that support human control over complex processes. I’ll call these design rules the Prometheus 
Principles, after the Greek god who gave fire as a gift to humanity. These potent principles 
include:   
 
- consistent interfaces to allow users to form, express , and revise  intent,  
- continuous visual display of the objects and actions of interest,  
- rapid, increm ental, and reversible actions,  
- informative feedback to acknowledge each user action,  
- progress indicators to show status, and  
- completion reports to confirm accomplishment.   
The design decisions to craft  user interfaces  based on the Prometheus Principles  typically  
involve tradeoffs (Fischer, 2018), so careful study, creative design, and rigorous testing are 
needed. Then implemented designs must be  continuous ly monitored by domain experts  to 
understand problems and refine the designs.   
The examples that fol low clarify the key ideas of supporting users  to express their intent through 
visual interfaces (although auditory and haptic interfaces are also valuable in some situations and 
for users with disabilities) and to get informative feedback about the machine  state, with progress 
indicators  and completion reports  to let users  know status.  Many real -world designs are flawed, 
but these positive examples describe how it is possible to support both high levels of human 
control and high levels of automation:  
Exampl e 2: Simple thermostats allow residents to take better control of the temperature in their 
homes. They can see the room temperature and the current thermostat setting, clarifying what 
they should do to get a higher/lower setting. Then they can hear the hea ting system turn on/off or 
see a light to indicate that their action has produced a response. The basic idea is to give 
residents an awareness of the current state, allow them to reset the control, and then give 
informative feedback that the computer is ac ting on their intent. There may be further feedback 
as the residents see the thermometer rise in response to their action, and maybe an indication 
when their desired goal has been achieved.  Thermostats offer still further benefits – they 
continue to keep the room temperature at the new setting automatically.  In summary, while 
some thermostats may lack the features necessary that give clear feedback, well -designed 

==== Page 14 ====
- 14     - thermostats give users an understanding of how they have controlled the automation to get the  
temperature they desire in their homes. Newer programmable thermostats apply machine 
learning to allow residents to better accommodate their schedules and save energy.  
Example 3 : Small automations are part of many successful products, such as automobiles . While 
power steering and automatic transmissions are mature automations that are widely accepted, 
anti-lock brake systems apply the same principles to enable drivers to maintain traction during 
challenging road conditions. Cruise control and adaptive cru ise control are more complex, but 
they give drivers better control over the speed of their vehicles. Newer automations that augment 
human abilities to increase safety include parking assistance, lane following, and collision 
avoidance. Current technology, such as Tesla’s Autopilot, are “ designed to be able to conduct 
short and long distance trips with no action required by the person in the driver’s seat … in 
almost all situations”, but regulatory approval, independent oversight mechanisms, and 
demonstration  of safety are still needed to achieve RST status. Tesla cautions that “c urrent 
Autopilot features require active driver supervision and do not make the vehicle autonomous ” 
(https://www.tesla.com/autopilot ). The promise of advanced automation is to save lives, but critics 
have suggested that Tesla’s unfortunate choice of the term Autopilot may encourage drivers to 
lower their vigilance, thereby leading to more accidents.  
Example 4 : Home appliances, such as dis hwashers, clothes washers/dryers, and ovens allow 
users to choose settings that specify what they want, and then turn control over to sensors and 
timers to govern the process. When well -designed, these machines offer users comprehensible 
and predictable co ntrols that allow them to express their intent with controls that let them stop 
dishwashers to put in another plate or change from baking to broiling to brown their chicken. 
These automations give users better control of these appliances to ensure that the y get what they 
want.  
Example 5 : Well-designed user interfaces in  elevators enable substantial  automation while 
providing appropriate human control. Elevator users approach a simple two -button control panel 
and press up or down. The button lights to indica te that the users’ intent has been recognized. A 
display panel indicates the elevator’s current floor so users can see progress, which lets them 
know how long they will have to wait. The elevator doors open, a tone sounds, and the users can 
step in to pres s a button to indicate their choice of floors. The button lights up to indicate their 
intent is recognized and the door closes.  The floor display shows progress towards the goal. On 
arrival, a tone sounds and the door opens. The automated design which rep laced the human 
operator ensures that doors will only open while on a floor, while triply redundant safety systems 
prevent elevators from falling, even under loss of power or broken cables. Automation 
algorithms coordinate multiple elevators, automatically  adjusting their placement based on time 
of day and changing passenger loads. Override controls allow firefighters or moving crews to 
achieve their goals. There are many refinements, such as detectors to prevent doors from closing 
on passengers, so that th e overall design is Reliable , Safe & Trust worthy . 
Example 6 : Digital cameras in most cell phones display an image of what the users would get if 
they clicked on the large button. The image is updated smoothly as users adjust their position or 
zoom in. At the s ame time, the camera makes automatic adjustments to the aperture and focus, 

==== Page 15 ====
- 15     - while compensating for shaking hands, a wide range of lighting conditions (high dynamic range), 
and many other factors. Flash can be set to be on or off, or left to the camera to c hoose 
automatically. Users can choose portrait modes, panorama, and video, including slow motion and 
time lapse. Users also can set various filters and once the image is taken they can make further 
adjustments such as brightness, contrast, cropping, and re d-eye elimination. These designs give 
users high degree of control while also providing a high level of automation. Of course, there are 
mistakes, such as when the automatic focus feature puts the focus on a nearby bush, rather than 
the person standing jus t behind it. However, knowledgeable users can touch the desired focus 
point to avoid this mistake.  
The Prometheus Principles help designers develop the comprehensible, predictable, and 
controllable interfaces that support RST systems.  Many of the principl es are embedded in 
Human Interface Guidelines documents, such as Apple’s, which stipulates that “ User Control : … 
people - not apps - are in control” and “ Flexibility : … (give) users complete, fine -grained control 
over their work .” (Apple 2019). These guide lines and others (Shneiderman et al., 2016) that 
emphasize human control offer very different advice than the simplistic pursuit of computer 
autonomy. Designs based on these Prometheus Principles can lead to, what I believe is desired 
by most users: Reliable , Safe & Trust worthy  systems.   
 
5. Summary, limitations , and conclusions  
The HCA I framework  separates the issue of human control from computer automation, making it 
clear that high levels of human control and high levels of automation can be achieved by good 
design.  The design decisions give human operators a clear understanding of the machine state 
and their choices,  guided by  concerns such as the consequences and reversibility  of mistakes. 
Well -designed automation, preserves  human control where appropriate, thereby increasing 
performance  and enabling creative improvements.  
The HCA I framework  suggests w hen computer control for rapid automated action  is necessary , 
when human  desire for mastery  is paramount , and  when there are  dangers of excessive 
automation or excessive human control.  It clarifies design choices for  (1) consumer and 
professional  applications, such as widely -used recommender systems, advertising tools, social 
media platforms, and search engines, which have brought strong benefits to consumers, ( 2) 
consequential applications in medical, legal, environmental, or financial systems that can bring 
substantial benefits and harms, and (3)  life-critical applications such as  cars, airplanes, trains, 
military systems, pacemakers, or intensive care units.  
The HCAI framework  is based on the belief  that people are  different from computers.  Therefore, 
designs which  take advantage of unique computer features including sophisticated algorithms, 
advanced sensors, information abundant d isplays, and powerful effec tors are more likely to 
incre ase performance. Similarly designs and organizational structures which recognize the 
unique capabilities of humans will have advantages such as encouraging innovative use,  
supporting continuous improvement , and promoting breakt hroughs to vastly improved  designs.  

==== Page 16 ====
- 16     - An important research direction is to develop  objective measures of the  levels of control and 
autonomy , tied to diverse tasks. Such measures would  stimulate  more meaningful design 
discussions, which would lead to improv ed guidelines, evaluations, and theories.   
Human responsibility for mistakes is another powerful driver of design advancements such as the 
inclusion of detailed audit trails  and consistent informative feedback about machine state.  Then 
retraining of users and redesign of systems happens rapidly. Difficult questions remain, such as 
dealing with the de-skilling effects that undermine human skills  that may be needed when 
automation fails , and the difficulty of remaining vigilant when user actions become less f requent.   
Ethical questions , such as considerations of responsibility, fairness, and explainability, are 
helpful in developing  general princ iples.  When these general principles are combined with  deep 
knowledge and experience with the complexities of produc t and service design , they can  yield 
actionable guidelines (IEEE, 2019) .  The HC AI framework  lays a foundation for responsibility, 
fairness, and explainability,  but actionable guidelines to achieve these goals  are beyond this 
paper.   
A human -centered RST system , will be (1) reliable  because of  soun d technical practi ces, (2) safe 
because of open management  strategies  that build cultures of safety , and  (3) trust worthy because 
of well-designed  independent oversight struct ures. RST systems will evolve rapidly because 
mechanisms to monitor failures  and near misses  support  creative improvements . 
The goal of this paper is to encourage  artificial intelligence researchers and developers  who 
design  products and services  to shift from  one-dimensional thinking about  levels of 
automation/autonomy to a fresh two-dimen sional  HCA I framework . The HCA I framework  
guides researchers and  designers  in designing  technologies  to give users appropriate control, 
while providing high levels of automation . When successful  these technologies amplify, 
augment, enhance, and empower use rs, giving them dramatic  increases in their performance . 
 
Acknowledgements : Thanks to Michael Bernstein, Linda Candy, Ryan Carrier, Ernest 
Edmonds, Robert Fraser, Harry Hochheiser, Robert Hoffman , Eric Hughes,  Gary Klein, Alan 
Mackworth, Doug Oard,  Catheri ne Plaisant, Jennifer Preece , Robin Murphy, Steven M. Rosen, 
Arnon Rosenthal, Ben Sawyer, Thomas Sheridan, Mark Smith, Harold Thimbleby, Fernanda 
Viegas, Jamie Waese,  Martin Wattenberg,  and David  D. Woods  for comments on early drafts.  
 
References  
Amershi, S., Weld, D., Vorvoreanu, M., Fourney, A., Nushi, B., Collisson, P., ... & Horvitz , E. 
(2019 ). Guidelin es for human -AI interaction. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  (Paper 3, 1-13). ACM.  
 
Apple Computer, Inc., H uman Interface Guidelines, Apple, Cupertino, CA (2019). Available at 
https://developer.apple.com/design/human -interface -guidelines/ios/overview/themes/  
 

==== Page 17 ====
- 17     - Bain bridge, L. ( 1983). Ironies of automation, Automatica, 19, 6, 775-779, Pergamon.  
 
Bennett, K. B. & Hoffman, R. R. (2015). Principles for interaction design, Part 3: Spanning the 
creativity gap. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 30  (6), 82 -91. 
 
Berry , J. C., Davis , J. T., Bartman , T., Hafer , C. C., Lieb , L. M., Khan , N. & Brilli , R. J. (2016) . 
Improved safety culture and teamwork climate are associated with decreases in patient harm and 
hospital mortality across a hospital system.  Journal of Patient Safety (Jan 7  2016). 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26741790   
 
Blackhurst, J. L., Gresham, J. S., & Stone, M. O. (2011) . The autonomy paradox. Armed F orces 
Journal , 20-40. 
 
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., Rob ert R. Hoff man, David D. Woods & Matthew Johnson  (2013). The 
seven deadly myths of autonomous systems. IEEE Intelligent Systems  28, 3 , 54-61. 
 
Brooks, R. (2017). The big problem with self -driving cars is people. IEEE Spectrum: 
Technology, Engineering, and Science New s (27 Jul y 2017) . 
 
Calvo RA, Peters D. , Vold V, Ryan, RM (2020). Supporting human autonomy in AI systems: 
A framework for ethical enquiry. I n Burr, C. & Floridi, L. (Eds.) Ethics of Digital Well -Being: 
A Multidisciplinary Approach . Springer Open.  
 
Canadian Gov ernment  (2019).  Responsible use of artificial intelligence (AI) ,  
https://www.canada.ca/en/government/system/digital -government/modern -emerging -
technologies/responsible -use-ai.html  
 
Candy, L . (2020). Creating with the Digital: Tool, Medium, Mediator, Partner,  In Brooks, A. L. 
(editor)   Interactivity, Game Creation, Design,  Learning, and Innovation . Springer (to appear).  
http://lindacandy.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/12/ArtsIT -LCandy.pdf  
 
de Visser, E. J., Pak, R.  & Shaw, T. H. (2018). From ‘automation’  to ‘autonomy’: the 
importance of trust repair in human –machine interaction. Ergonomics, 61 (10), 1409 -1427.  
 
Defe nse Science Board (2016). “Summer Study on Autonomy.” Office of the Undersecretary 
for Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Department of Defense, Washington, 
DC. 
 
Du, M., Liu, N., & Hu, X. (2020 ). Techniques for interpretable machine learning.  
Communications of the ACM, 63  (1), 68 -77. 
 
Dudley, J. J., & Kristensson, P. O. (2018). A review of user interface design for interactive 
machine learning. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS),  8(2), 8.  
 
Edmonds, E. A. (2020). Computation for Creativity . In J. S. Gero and M. L Maher ( Editors ), 
Computational and Cognitive Models of Creative Design , Spring er, London, ( to appear).  

==== Page 18 ====
- 18     -  
Edmonds, E.  A. and Candy, L. (2002). Creativi ty, Art Practice and Knowledge , 
Communications of the ACM Special Section on Creativity and Interface, 45(10), 91 -95. 
 
Endsley, M. R. (2017). From here to autonomy: lessons learned from  human –automation 
research, Human Factors, 59  (1), 5 -27. 
 
Endsley,  Mica R. (2018).  Level of Automation Forms a Key Aspect of Autonomy Design,  
Journal of Cognitive E ngineering and Decision Making  12, 1 ( March 2018 ), 29-34, DOI: 
10.1177/1555343417723432  
 
Fischer, G. (2018). Design Trade -Offs for Quality of Life. ACM Interactions XXV , 1, 26 -33. 
 
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity . Free Press, New 
York.  
 
Giuliani, M., Lenz, C., Müller, T., Rickert, M., & Knoll, A. (201 0). Design principles for safety 
in human -robot interaction. International Journal of Social Robotics, 2 (3), 253 -274. 
 
Guldenmund, F. W. (2000). The nature of safety culture: a review of theory and research. Safety 
Science, 34 (1-3), 215 -257. 
 
Hancock, P.  A. (2017). Imposing limits on autonomous systems. Ergonomics, 60  (2), 284 -291. 
 
Heer , Jeffrey (2019) Agency plus automation: Designing artificial intell igence into interactive 
systems,  Proc . National Acad emy of Sciences , https://www.pnas.org/content/116/6/1844  
 
Hoffman, R. R., Cullen, T. M.  & Hawley, J. K. (2016). The myths and costs of autonomous 
weapon systems. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 72  (4), 247 -255. 
 
Hoffman, R.  R. & Johnson, M. (2019).  The quest for alternatives to "Levels of Automation" and 
"Task Allocation." In M. Mouloua & P.A. Hancock (Eds.) , Human Performance in A utoma ted 
and Autonomous S ystems . Boca Rat on, FL: CRC Press, 43 -68. 
 
Horvitz, E. (1999 ). Principles of mixed -initiative u ser interfaces. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 159 -166. 
 
IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems  (2019) . Ethically 
Aligned Design:  A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well -being with Autonomous and Intelligent 
Systems, First Edition. IEEE . https://standards.ieee.org/content/ieee -standards/en/industry -
connections/ec/a utonomous -systems.html   
 
Johnson, M., Bradshaw, J. M., & Feltovich, P. J. (2018). Tomorrow’s human –machine design 
tools: From levels of automation to interdependencies. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and 
Decision Making, 12 (1), 77 -82. 
 

==== Page 19 ====
- 19     - Johnson, M., Brad shaw, J. M., Feltovich, P. J., Jonker, C. M., Van Riemsdijk, M. B., & Sierhuis, 
M. (2014). Coactive design: Designing support for interdependence in joint activity. Journal of 
Human -Robot Interaction , 3(1), 43 -69. 
 
Jordan M. I. (2018) . Artificial intellige nce - The revolution hasn’t happene d yet.  
https://medium.com/@mijordan3/artificial -intelligence -the-revolution -hasnt -happened -yet-
5e1d5812e1 e7 
 
Kaber, D. B. (2018). Issues in human –automation interaction modeling: Presumptive aspects of 
frameworks of types and levels of automation, Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision 
Making,  12 (1), 7 -24. 
 
Klein, G., Woods, D.D., Bradshaw, J.M.,  Hoffman, R.R. &  Feltovich, P.J. (2004).  Ten 
challenges for making automation a “team player” in joint human -agent activity. IEEE 
Intelligent Systems  6, 91–95. 
 
Konstan, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2012). Recommender systems: from algorithms t ommen  
reco user experienc e. User Modeling and User -Adapted Interaction, 22 (1-2), 101 -123. 
 
Lazer, D., Kennedy, R. , King, G. & Vespignani, A. (2014). The parable of Google Flu: Traps in 
the big data analysis, Science 343  (March 14, 2014), 1203 -1205.  
 
Li, F.-F. (2018) . How to make A.I. that’s good for people. The New York Times  (March 7, 2018) . 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/07/opinion/artificial -intelligence -human.html   
 
Macintyre, P. E. (2001). Safety and ef®cacy of patient -controlled analgesia , British Journal of 
Anaesthesia 87 , 1, 36 -46. 
 
Markoff, J. (2016). Machines of Loving Grace: The Quest for Common Ground between 
Humans and R obots , HarperCollins Publishers.  
 
Mindell, D.  (2015). Our Robots, Ourselves: Robotics and the Myths of Autonomy , Viking 
Press.  
 
Modarres, M., Kaminskiy, M. P., & Krivtsov, V. (2016). Reliability Engineering and Risk 
Analysis: A Practical Guide . CRC p ress. 
 
Murphy, R. and Shields, J.  (2012).  The Role of Autonomy  in DoD Systems, Defense Science 
Board Task Force Report ( July 2012 ), Washington, DC.  
 
Nicas, J., Kitroeff, N., Gelles, D., & Glanz, J. (2019). Boeing Built Deadly Assumptions into 
737 Max, Blind to a Late Design Change. The New York Times (June 6, 2019).  
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/01/business/boeing -737-max-crash.html  
  
O’Neil , C. (2016).  Weapons of Math Destruction: How Bi g Data Increases Inequality and 
Threatens De mocracy , Crown Publishers, New York.  
 

==== Page 20 ====
- 20     - Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T. B., & Wickens, C. D. (2000). A model for types and levels of 
human interaction with automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics -Part 
A: Systems and Humans, 30 : 286 –297. 
 
Sherida n, T. B. (1992). Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control.  MIT P ress. 
 
Sheridan, T. B. (2000). Function allocation: algorithm, alchemy or apostasy?  International 
Journal of Human -Computer Studies, 52  (2), 203 -216. 
 
Sheridan, T. B., & Verplank, W. L. (1978). Human and computer control of undersea 
teleoperators. Massachusetts Inst itute of Tech nology  Cambridge Man -Machine Systems Lab.  
 
Shneiderman, B. (1983). Direct Manipulation: A Step Beyond Programming Languages. IEEE 
Computer  8, 57-69. 
 
Shneiderman, B. (1987). Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human -
Computer Interaction , Addison -Wesley Publ. Co., Reading, MA.  
 
Shneiderman, B. (2000). Designing trust into online experiences. Communications of the ACM, 
43 (12), 57 -59. 
 
Shneiderman, B. (2016). Opinion: The dangers of faulty, biased, or malicious algorithms 
requires independent oversight. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113 (48), 
13538 -13540.  
 
Shneiderman, B., Plai sant, C., Cohen, M., Jacobs, S.  & Elmqv ist, N. (May 2016). Designing the 
User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human -Computer Interaction: Sixth Edition , Pearson.  
 
Society of Automotive Engineers (2014). Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to On -
Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Sy stems. SAE Report J3016.  
https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201401/   
 
Strauch, B. (2017). Ironies of automation: Still unresolved after all these years. IEEE 
Transactions on Human -Machine Systems, 48 (5), 419 -433. 
 
Thimbleby, H. (2020). Fix IT: Stories from Healthcare IT , Oxford University Press.  
 
U.S. Nation al Transportation Safety Board  (2017). Collision Between a Car Operating With 
Automated Vehicle Control Systems and a Tractor -Semitrailer Truck Near Williston, Florida  
May 7, 2016, Report HAR1702.  
 
Woods, D. D. (2017). Essential c haracteristics of resilience.  In Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. W. , and 
Leveson, N. (editors),  Resilience E ngineering : Concepts and Precepts, Ashgate Publishing , 21-
34. 
 

==== Page 21 ====
- 21     - Woods, D. D., Tittle, J., Feil, M., & Roesler, A. (2004). Envisioning human -robot coordination 
in future operations.  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications 
and Reviews), 34 (2), 210 -218. 
 

