==== Page 1 ==== : 텍스트 추출 실패 또는 페이지가 비어 있음.

==== Page 2 ====
CATCHWORD
Hybrid Intelligence
Dominik Dellermann M.Sc. •Philipp Ebel •Matthias So ¨llner •Jan Marco Leimeister
Received: 30 October 2017 / Accepted: 7 November 2018 / Published online: 28 March 2019
/C211Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, ein Teil von Springer Nature 2019
Keywords Hybrid intelligence /C1Artiﬁcial intelligence /C1
Machine learning /C1Human-computer collaboration /C1
Machines as teammates /C1Future of work
1 Introduction
Research has a long history of discussing what is superior
in predicting certain outcomes: statistical methods or the
human brain. This debate has repeatedly been sparked off
by the remarkable technological advances in the ﬁeld of
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), such as solving tasks like object
and speech recognition, achieving signiﬁcant improve-
ments in accuracy through deep-learning algorithms
(Goodfellow et al. 2016 ), or combining various methods of
computational intelligence, such as fuzzy logic, genetic
algorithms, and case-based reasoning (Medsker 2012 ). One
of the implicit promises that underlie these advancements
is that machines will 1 day be capable of performing
complex tasks or may even supersede humans inperforming these tasks. This triggers new heated debates of
when machines will ultimately replace humans (McAfee
and Brynjolfsson 2017 ). While previous research has
proved that AI performs well in some clearly deﬁned tasks
such as playing chess, playing Go or identifying objects on
images, it is doubted that the development of an artiﬁcial
general intelligence (AGI) which is able to solve multiple
tasks at the same time can be achieved in the near future
(e.g., Russell and Norvig 2016 ). Moreover, the use of AI to
solve complex business problems in organizational con-
texts occurs scarcely, and applications for AI that solve
complex problems remain mainly in laboratory settings
instead of being implemented in practice.
Since the road to AGI is still a long one, we argue that
the most likely paradigm for the division of labor between
humans and machines in the next decades is Hybrid
Intelligence. This concept aims at using the complementary
strengths of human intelligence and AI, so that they can
perform better than each of the two could separately (e.g.,
Kamar 2016 ).
2 Conceptual Foundations and What Hybrid
Intelligence is Not
Before focusing on Hybrid Intelligence in detail, we ﬁrst
want to delineate the differences between this concept and
related but still different forms of intelligence in this
context.
2.1 Intelligence
Various deﬁnitions and dimensions (e.g., social, logical,
spatial, musical) of the term intelligence exist in multiple
research disciplines, such as psychology, cognitive science,Accepted after two revisions by Prof. Weinhardt.
D. Dellermann M.Sc. /C1Prof. Dr. J. M. Leimeister
Research Center for IS Design (ITeG), Information Systems,
University of Kassel, Pfannkuchstraße 1, 34121 Kassel,
Germany
Dr. P. Ebel /C1Prof. Dr. M. So ¨llner /C1
Prof. Dr. J. M. Leimeister ( &)
Institute of Information Management, University of St. Gallen,
Mu¨ller-Friedberg-Strasse 8, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: janmarco.leimeister@unisg.ch
Prof. Dr. M. So ¨llner
Information Systems and Systems Engineering, University of
Kassel, Henschelstraße 4, 34127 Kassel, Germany123Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2

==== Page 3 ====
neuro science, human behavior, education, or computer
science. For the purpose of our research, we use an
inclusive and generic deﬁnition to describe general intel-
ligence. It is the ability to accomplish complex goals, learn,
reason, and adaptively perform effective actions within an
environment. This can generally be subsumed with the
capacity to both acquire and apply knowledge (Gottfredson
1997 ). While intelligence is most commonly used in the
context of humans (and more recently of intelligent artiﬁ-
cial agents), it also applies to intelligent, goal-directed
behavior of animals.
2.2 Human Intelligence
The sub-dimension of intelligence that is related to the
human species deﬁnes the mental capabilities of human
beings. On the most holistic level, it covers the capacity to
learn, reason, and adaptively perform effective actions
within an environment, based on existing knowledge. This
allows humans to adapt to changing environments and act
towards achieving their goals.
While one assumption concerning intelligence is the
existence of a so-called ‘‘g-factor’’, which indicates a
measure for general intelligence (Brand 1996 ), other
research in the ﬁeld of cognitive science explores intelli-
gence in relation to the evolutionary experience of indi-
viduals. This means that, rather than having a general form
of intelligence, humans become much more effective in
solving problems that occur in the context of familiar sit-
uations (Wechsler 1964 ).
Another view on intelligence supposes that general
human intelligence can be subdivided into specialized
intelligence components, such as linguistic, logical-math-
ematical, musical, kinesthetic, spatial, social, or existential
intelligence (Gardner 2000 ).
Synthesizing those perspectives on human intelligence,
Sternberg ( 1985 ) proposes three distinctive dimensions of
intelligence: componential, contextual, and experiential.
The componential dimension of intelligence refers to some
kind of individual (general) skill set of humans. Experi-
ential intelligence refers to one /C19s ability to learn and adapt
through evolutionary experience. Finally, contextual
intelligence deﬁnes the capacity of the mind to inductively
understand and act in speciﬁc situations as well as the
ability to make choices and modify those contexts.
2.3 Collective Intelligence
Another related concept is collective intelligence.
According to Malone and Bernstein ( 2015 , p. 3), collective
intelligence refers to ‘‘[ …] groups of individuals acting
collectively in ways that seem intelligent‘‘. Even though
the term ‘‘individuals’’ leaves room for interpretation,researchers in this domain usually refer to the concept of
wisdom of crowds and, thus, a combined intelligence of
individual human agents (Woolley et al. 2010 ). This con-
cept describes that, under certain conditions, a group of
average people can outperform any individual of the group
or even a single expert (Leimeister 2010 ). Other well-
known examples of collective intelligence are phenomena
found in biology, where, for example, a school of ﬁsh
swerves to increase protection against predators (Berdahl
et al. 2013 ). These examples show that collective intelli-
gence typically refers to large groups of homogenous
individuals (i.e., humans or animals), whereas Hybrid
Intelligence combines the complementary intelligence of
heterogeneous agents (i.e., humans and machines).
2.4 Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The subﬁeld of intelligence that relates to machines is
called artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). With this term, we mean
systems that perform ‘‘[ …] activities that we associate with
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, prob-
lem solving, learning [ …]’’ (Bellman 1978 , p. 3). It gen-
erally covers the idea of creating machines that can
accomplish complex goals. The basic idea behind this
concept is, that, by applying machine learning techniques,
a system becomes capable of analyzing its environment
and adapting to new circumstances in this environment.
Examples for this are object recognition, problem solving,
or natural language processing (Russell and Norvig 2016 ).
Other streams of research in this domain perceive AI as the
‘‘[…] synthesis and analysis of computational agents that
act intelligently [ …]’’ (Poole and Mackworth 2017 , p. 3).
Moreover, AI can be described as having the general goal
to replicate the human mind by deﬁning it as ‘‘[ …] the art
of creating machines that perform functions that require
intelligence when performed by people [ …]’’ (Kurzweil
1990 , p. 117). The performance of AI in achieving human-
level intelligence can then be measured by, for instance,
the Turing test. This test asks an AI program to simulate a
human in a text-based conversation. However, due to the
multi-facetted nature of general intelligence, such capa-
bilities can be seen as a sufﬁcient but not necessary crite-
rion for artiﬁcial general intelligence (Searle 1980 ).
Synthesizing those various deﬁnitions in the ﬁeld, AI
includes elements such as the human-level ability to solve
domain-independent problems, the capability to combine
highly task-specialized and more generalized intelligence,
the ability to learn from its environment and to interact
with other intelligent systems, or human teachers, which
allows intelligent agents to improve in problem solving
through experience.
To create such a kind of AI in intelligent agents, various
approaches exist that are more or less associated with the
123638 D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)

==== Page 4 ====
understanding and replication of intelligence. For instance,
the ﬁeld of cognitive computing ‘‘[ …] aims to develop a
coherent, uniﬁed, universal mechanism inspired by the
mind’s capabilities. [ …] We seek to implement a uniﬁed
computational theory of the mind [ …] ‘‘(Modha et al.
2011 , p. 60). Therefore, interdisciplinary research teams
rely on the reverse-engineering of human learning to create
machines that ‘‘[ …] learn and think like people [ …]’’
(Lake et al. 2017 , p. 1).
3 The Complementary Beneﬁts of Human
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The general rationale behind the idea of Hybrid Intelli-
gence is that humans and computers have complementary
capabilities that can be combined to augment each other.
The tasks that can be easily done by artiﬁcial and human
intelligence are quite divergent. This fact is known as
Moravec /C19s paradox ( 1988 , p. 15), which states that ‘‘[ …] it
is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult
level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers,
and difﬁcult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-
year-old when it comes to perception and mobility [ …]’’.
This is especially true for the human common sense that is
challenging to achieve in AI (Lake et al. 2017 ).
This can be explained by the separation of two distinct
types of cognitive procedures (Kahneman 2011 ). The ﬁrst,
system 1, is fast, automatic, affective, emotional, stereo-
typic, subconscious, and it capitalizes on what one might
call human intuition. The second one, system 2, is rather
effortful, logical, and conscious, and ideally follows strict
rational rules of probability theory. In the context of
complementary capabilities of human and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, humans have proved to be superior in various
settings that require system 1 thinking. Humans are ﬂexi-
ble, creative, empathic, and can adapt to various settings.
This allows, for instance, human domain experts to deal
with so called ‘‘broken-leg’’ predictions that deviate from
the currently known probability distribution. However,
they are restricted by bound rationality that prevents them
from aggregating information perfectly and drawing con-
clusions from that. On the other hand, machines are par-
ticularly good at solving repetitive tasks that require fast
processing of huge amounts of data, at recognizing com-
plex patterns, or weighing multiple factors following con-
sistent rules of probability theory. This has been proven by
a long-standing tradition of research that shows the supe-
riority of machines in such ﬁelds of application. Even in
very simple actuarial models, they outperform human
experts in making predictions under uncertainty (Meehl
1954 ). Figure 1summarizes the two types of thinking as
well as the respective strengths of humans and machines.These complementary strengths of humans and machi-
nes (see Fig. 1) have since led to two different forms of
interplay, that is, AI is in the loop of human intelligence,
improving human decisions by providing predictions, and
human intelligence is in the loop of AI, a form which is
frequently applied to train machine learning models.
3.1 Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Loop of Human
Intelligence
Currently, in typical business contexts, AI is applied in two
areas. First, it is used in automating tasks that can be solved
by machines alone. While this is frequently associated with
the fear of machines taking over jobs and making humans
obsolete in the future, it might also allow machines to solve
tasks that humans do not want to do themselves. Second,
AI is applied to provide humans with decision support by
offering some kind of prediction. This ranges from struc-
turing data, making forecasts, for example, in ﬁnancial
markets, or even predicting the best set of hyperparameters
to train new machine learning models (e.g., AutoML). As
humans frequently act non-Bayesian by violating proba-
bilistic rules and thus making inconsistent decisions, AI has
proven to be a valuable tool to help humans in making
better decisions (Agrawal et al. 2018 ). The goal in this
context is to improve human decision effectiveness and
efﬁciency.
In settings where AI provides us with input that is then
evaluated to make a decision, humans and machines act as
teammates. For instance, by processing patient data (e.g.,
CT scans) AI can help human physicians to make predic-
tions on diseases such as cancer, thereby empowering the
doctor to learn from the additional guidance. In this con-
text, the Hybrid Intelligence approach allows human
experts to leverage the predictive power of AI while using
their own intuition and empathy to make a choice from the
predictions of the AI.
3.2 Human Intelligence in the Loop of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
On the other hand, human intelligence also has a crucial
role in the loop of machine learning and AI. In particular,
humans provide assistance in several parts of the machine
learning process to support AI in tasks that it cannot (yet)
solve alone. Here, humans are most commonly needed for
the generation of algorithms (e.g., hyperparameter set-
ting/tuning), for training or debugging models, and for
making sense of unsupervised approaches such as data
clustering.
In this case, AI systems can beneﬁt and learn from
human input. This approach allows for integrating human
domain knowledge in the AI to design, complement and
123D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019) 639

==== Page 5 ====
evaluate the capabilities of AI (Mnih et al. 2015 ). Many of
these applications are based on supervised and interactive
learning approaches and require an enormous amount of
labeled data, provided by humans (Amershi et al. 2014 ).
The basic rationale behind this approach is that humans act
as teachers who train an AI. The same machine teaching
approach can also be found in the area of reinforcement
learning that uses, for instance, human game play as input
to initially train robots. In this context, human intelligence
functions as a teacher, augmenting the AI. Hybrid Intelli-
gence allows to distribute computational tasks to human
intelligence on demand (e.g., through crowdsourcing) to
minimize shortcomings of current AI systems. Such
human-in-the-loop approaches are particularly valuable
when only little data is available. In addition, they can be
used when pre-trained models need to be adapted for
speciﬁc domains, or in contexts where human annotations
are already used.
Since human intelligence in the loop of AI is most
frequently applied in settings where models are initially set
up or in the ﬁeld of research, the goal is to make AI more
effective. Figure 2summarizes the distribution of roles in
Hybrid Intelligence.4 Deﬁning Hybrid Intelligence
Another approach is to combine human and artiﬁcial
intelligence. The basic rationale behind this is the combi-
nation of complementary heterogeneous intelligences (i.e.,
human and artiﬁcial agents) to create a socio-technological
ensemble that is able to overcome the current limitations of
(artiﬁcial) intelligence. This approach focuses neither on
human intelligence in the loop of AI nor on automating
simple tasks through machine learning. Rather, the
emphasis lies on solving complex problems using the
deliberate allocation of tasks among different heteroge-
neous algorithmic and human agents. Both the human and
the artiﬁcial agents of such systems can then co-evolve by
learning and achieve a superior outcome on the system
level.
In accordance with Dellermann et al. ( 2019 ), we call this
concept Hybrid Intelligence, which is deﬁned as the ability
to achieve complex goals by combining human and artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, thereby reaching superior results to those
each of them could have accomplished separately, and
continuously improve by learning from each other.1Sev-
eral core concepts of this deﬁnition are noteworthy:
•Collectively Hybrid Intelligence covers the fact that
tasks are performed collectively. Consequently, activ-
ities conducted by each agent are conditionally depen-
dent. However, their goals are not necessarily always
aligned to achieve the common goal such as when
humans are teaching an AI adversarial tactics in playing
games.
•Superior results This deﬁnes the idiosyncratic fact that
the socio-technical system achieves a performance in a
speciﬁc task that none of the involved agents, whether
they are human or artiﬁcial, could have achieved
without the other. The aim is, therefore, to make the
outcome (e.g., a prediction) both more efﬁcient and
effective on the level of the socio-technical system by
achieving goals that could not have been solved before.
This contrasts Hybrid Intelligence with the most
common applications of human-in-the-loop machine
learning.
•Continuous learning a central aspect of Hybrid Intel-
ligence is that, over time, this socio-technological
system improves, both as a whole and each single
component (i.e., human and artiﬁcial agents). This facet
shows that they learn from each other through expe-
rience. The performance of Hybrid Intelligence systems
can, thus, not only be measured by the superior
outcome of the whole socio-technical system alone,
but the learning (i.e., performance increase) of humanHUMAN INTELLIGENCE MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
+ Flexibility & Transfer 
+ Empathy & Crea/g415vity
+ Annotate Arbitrary Data 
+ Common Sense
INTUITIVE+ Pa/g425ern Recogni/g415on 
+ Probabilis/g415c
+ Consistency
+ Speed & Eﬃciency
ANALYTIC
Fig. 1 Complementary strengths of humans and machines
Augmented Human 
IntelligenceAugmented Machine 
Intelligence
Learner Teacher Learner 
Teacher Hybrid Intelligence
Fig. 2 Distribution of roles in hybrid intelligence1For further work on this topic see Dellermann et al. ( 2019 ).
123640 D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)

==== Page 6 ====
and machine agents that are parts of the system must
also be taken into account.
Figure 3displays the conceptual integration of Hybrid
Intelligence in related ﬁelds of research and the concepts
discussed earlier in the paper.
One recent example that provides an astonishing indi-
cator for the potential of Hybrid Intelligence is
DeepMind2/C19s AlphaGo. For training the game-playing AI,
a supervised learning approach was used that learned from
expert human moves and, thus, augment and improve the
AI through human input, which allowed AlphaGo to
achieve superhuman performance over time. During its
games against various human world-class players,
AlphaGo played several highly creative moves that previ-
ously were beyond human players /C19imagination. Conse-
quently, AlphaGo was able to augment human intelligence
as well and somehow taught expert players completely new
knowledge in a game that is one of the longest studied in
human history (Silver et al. 2016 ).
I believe players more or less have all been affected
by Professor Alpha. AlphaGo’s play makes us feel
more free and no move is impossible to play any-
more. Now everyone is trying to play in a style that
hasn’t been tried before. – Zhou Ruiyang, 9 Dan
Professional, World Champion
Solving problems through Hybrid Intelligence offers the
possibility to allocate a task between humans and artiﬁcial
agents, and deliberately achieve a superior outcome on the
socio-technical system level by aggregating the output of
its parts. Moreover, such systems can improve over time by
learning from each other through various mechanisms,
such as labeling, demonstrating, teaching adversarial
moves, criticizing, rewarding and so on. This will allow us
to augment both the human mind and the AI and extend
applications when men and machines can learn from each
other in much more complex tasks than games: for
instance, strategic decision making, managerial, political or
military decisions, science, and even AI development
leading to AI reproducing itself in the future. Hybrid
Intelligence, therefore, offers the opportunity to achieve
super-human levels of performance in tasks that so far
seem to be at the core of human intellect.
5 The Advantages of Hybrid Intelligence
This hybrid approach provides various advantages for
humans in the era of AI such as generating new knowledge
in complex domains that allow humans to learn from AIand transfer implicit knowledge from experienced experts
to novices without any kind of social interaction. On the
other hand, the human teaching approach makes it possible
to control the learning process by ensuring that the AI
makes inferences based on criteria that can be interpreted
by humans – a fact that is crucial for AI adoption in many
real-world applications and AI safety and that makes it
possible to exclude biases such as racism (Bostrom 2017 ).
Moreover, such hybrid approaches might allow for a better
customization of AI, based on learning the preferences of
humans during interaction. Finally, we argue that the co-
creation of Hybrid Intelligence services between humans
and intelligent agents might create a sense of psychological
ownership and, thus, increase acceptance and trust.
6 Future Research Directions for the BISE Community
As the technological development continues, the focus of
machine learning and Hybrid Intelligence is shifting
towards applications in real-world business contexts, but
solving complex problems will become the next challenge.
Such complex problems in managerial settings are typi-
cally time variant, dynamic, require much domain knowl-
edge and have no speciﬁc ground truth. These highly
uncertain contexts require intuitive and analytic abilities, as
well as human strengths such as creativity and empathy.
Consequently, we propose three speciﬁc but also interre-
lated directions for further development of the concept in
the ﬁeld of BISE that are focused on socio-technical system
design.
First, a lack of trust in AI is one of the most challenging
barriers to AI adoption. Furthermore, we need to keep in
mind that we should not aim at maximizing trust in AI, but
rather ﬁnd a balance between trust and distrust that makes
it possible to leverage the potentials of AI and at the same
time avoids negative effects stemming from overreliance
on AI (Lee and See 2004 ). We believe this challenge can
be overcome by researchers in the ﬁeld of Hybrid Intelli-
gence, since a key requirement for integrating human input
into an AI system is the translation of a system’s state and
needs in a way that humans can understand and process
them accordingly and vice versa. For instance, semi-au-
tonomous driving requires the AI to sense the state of the
human in order to distribute tasks between itself and the
human driver. Furthermore, it requires examining human-
centered AI architectures that balance, for instance, trans-
parency of the underlying model and its performance.
However, domain speciﬁc design guidelines for developing
user-interfaces that allow humans to understand and pro-
cess the needs of an artiﬁcial system are still missing. We,
therefore, believe that more research is needed to develop
more suitable human-AI interfaces as well as to investigate2https://deepmind.com (accessed 19 Mar 2019).
123D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019) 641

==== Page 7 ====
possible task and interface designs that allow human
helpers to teach an AI system (e.g., Simard et al. 2017 ).
Ensuring interpretability and transparency of machine
learning models while maintaining accuracy is one of the
most crucial challenges in research on Hybrid Intelligence,
since it is one key foundation for building appropriate trust
in AI. This was most recently covered by the launch of the
People ?AI Research (PAIR3) group at Google brain,
which indicates the high relevance for both academia and
practice.
Second, research in the ﬁeld of Hybrid Intelligence
might investigate what kind of governance mechanisms
can be used to train and maintain Hybrid Intelligence
systems. Such tasks frequently require domain expertise
(e.g., health care) and, thus, system designers need to focus
on explicitly matching experts with tasks, aggregating their
input and assuring quality standards. We, therefore, argue
that it might be a fruitful area of research to further
investigate which kind of governance mechanisms might
be applicable in Hybrid Intelligence systems. Moreover,
human teachers may have different motivations to con-
tribute to the system. Consequently, research in the ﬁeld
tries to shed light on the question of how to design the best
incentive structure for a predeﬁned task. Especially, when
highly educated and skilled experts are required to augment
AI systems, the question arises if traditional incentives of
micro-tasking platforms (e.g., monetary reward) or online
communities (e.g., social rewards) are sufﬁcient.
A third avenue for future research is related to digital
work mechanisms. The rise of AI is now changing the
capabilities of IS and the potential distribution of tasks
between human and IS dramatically and, hence, affects the
core of our discipline. Those changes create novel quali-
ﬁcation demands and skill sets for employees and, conse-
quently, provide promising directions for IS education.
Such research might examine the educational requirements
for democratizing the use of AI in future workspaces.Finally, Hybrid Intelligence also offers great possibilities
for novel forms of digital work such as internal crowd work
to leverage the collective knowledge of individual experts
that resides within a company across functional silos.
References
Agrawal A, Gans J, Goldfarb A (2018) Prediction machines: the
simple economics of artiﬁcial intelligence. Harvard Business
Press, Boston
Amershi S, Cakmak M, Knox WB, Kulesza T (2014) Power to the
people: the role of humans in interactive machine learning. AI
Mag 35(4):105–120
Bellman R (1978) An introduction to artiﬁcial intelligence: can
computers think?. Boyd & Fraser, San Francisco
Berdahl A, Torney CJ, Ioannou CC, Faria JJ, Couzin ID (2013)
Emergent sensing of complex environments by mobile animal
groups. Science 339(6119):574–576
Bostrom N (2017) Superintelligence. Dunod, Paris
Brand C (1996) The g factor: general intelligence and its implications.
Wiley, Hoboken
Dellermann D, Calma A, Lipusch N, Weber T, Weigel S, Ebel P
(2019) The future of human-ai collaboration: a taxonomy of
design knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems. In: Hawaii
international conference on system sciences (HICSS). Hawaii,
USA
Gardner HE (2000) Intelligence reframed: multiple intelligences for
the 21st century. Hachette, London
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A (2016) Deep learning. MIT
Press, Cambridge
Gottfredson LS (1997) Mainstream science on intelligence: an
editorial with 52 signatories, history, and bibliography. Intelli-
gence 24(1):13–23
Kahneman D (2011) Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan, London
Kamar E (2016) Hybrid workplaces of the future. XRDS 23(2):22–25
Kurzweil R (1990) The age of intelligent machines. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Lee JD, See KA (2004) Trust in automation: designing for appropriate
reliance. Hum Factor 46(1):50–80
Leimeister JM (2010) Collective intelligence. Bus Inf Syst Eng
2(4):245–248
Malone TW, Bernstein MS (2015) Handbook of collective intelli-
gence. MIT Press, Cambridge
McAfee A, Brynjolfsson E (2017) Machine, platform, crowd:
harnessing our digital future. WW Norton & Company, New
York
Medsker LR (2012) Hybrid intelligent systems. Springer, Heidelberg
Meehl PE (1954) Clinical versus statistical prediction: a theoretical
analysis and a review of the evidence. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare
MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland AK, Ostrovski G,
Petersen S, Beattie C, Sadik A, Antonoglou I, King H, Kumaran
D, Wierstra D, Legg S, Hassabis D (2015) Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518(7540):529–533
Modha DS, Ananthanarayanan R, Esser SK, Ndirango A, Sherbondy
AJ, Singh R (2011) Cognitive computing. Commun ACM
54(8):62–71
Moravec H (1988) Mind children: The future of robot and human
intelligence. Harvard University Press, CambridgeIntelligence
Collec/g415ve IntelligenceHybrid 
Intelligence
Ar/g415ﬁcial 
IntelligenceHuman 
Intelligence
Fig. 3 Conceptual integration of hybrid intelligence
3https://ai.google/research/teams/brain/pair (accessed 19 Mar 2019).
123642 D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019)

==== Page 8 ====
Poole DL, Mackworth AK (2017) Artiﬁcial intelligence: foundations
of computational agents, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Russell SJ, Norvig P (2016) Artiﬁcial intelligence: a modern
approach. Pearson Education Limited, London
Searle JR (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behav Brain Sci
3(3):417–424
Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, Guez A, Sifre L, van den Driessche
G, Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I, Panneershelvam V, Lanctot M
(2016) Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and
tree search. Nature 529(7587):484–489
Simard PY, Amershi S, Chickering DM, Pelton AE, Ghorashi S,
Meek C, Ramos G, Suh J, Verwey J, Wang M, Wernsing J(2017) Machine teaching: a new paradigm for building machine
learning systems. CoRR abs/1707.06742
Sternberg RJ (1985) Beyond IQ: a triarchic theory of human
intelligence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England
Ullman T, Tenenbaum J, Gershman SJ (2017) Building machines that
learn and think like people. Behav Brain Sci. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S0140525X16001837
Wechsler D (1964) Die Messung der Intelligenz Erwachsener. Huber,
Bern
Woolley AW, Chabris CF, Pentland A, Hashmi N, Malone TW
(2010) Evidence for a collective intelligence factor in the
performance of human groups. Science 330(6004):686–688
123D. Dellermann et al.: Hybrid Intelligence, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(5):637–643 (2019) 643

