==== Page 1 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-021-00557-w
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Hybrid design for sports data visualization using AI and big data
analytics
Aijun Liu1·Rajendra Prasad Mahapatra2·A. V. R. Mayuri3
Received: 15 July 2021 / Accepted: 24 September 2021 / Published online: 29 October 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In sports data analysis and visualization, understanding collective tactical behavior has become an integral part. Interactive
and automatic data analysis is instrumental in making use of growing amounts of compound information. In professional
team sports, gathering and analyzing sportsperson monitoring data are common practice, intending to evaluate fatigue andsucceeding adaptation responses, analyze performance potential, and reduce injury and illness risk. Data visualization
technology born in the era of big data analytics provides a good foundation for further developing ﬁtness tools based on
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Hence, this study proposed a video-based effective visualization framework (VEVF) based onartiﬁcial intelligence and big data analytics. This study uses the machine learning method to categorize the sports video by
extracting both the videos’ temporal and spatial features. Our system is based on convolutional neural networks united with
temporal pooling layers. The experimental outcomes demonstrate that the recommended VEVF model enhances the accuracyratio of 98.7%, recall ratio of 94.5%, F1-score ratio of 97.9%, the precision ratio of 96.7%, the error rate of 29.1%, theperformance ratio of 95.2%, an efﬁciency ratio of 96.1% compared to other existing models.
Keywords Sports data visualization ·Artiﬁcial intelligence ·Big data analytics ·Video classiﬁcation ·Hybrid design
Introductiontosportsdatavisualization
The primary objective of competitive sports is to achieve
greater sporting performance and eventually help win
the competitions through encouraging higher standards of
achievement, empowering physical activity, building disci-pline, teaching how to lose well/deal with disappointment,
and building camaraderie and teamwork [ 1]. The data are
the athlete and his behavior at the center of competitive
B Aijun Liu
hnust12345l@sina.com
Rajendra Prasad Mahapatra
mahapatra.rp@gmail.com
A. V . R. Mayuri
drmayuriavr@gmail.com
1School of Physical Education, Hunan University of Scienceand Technology, Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SRMInstitute of Science and Technology, Delhi NCR Campus,
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 201204, India
3School of Computing Science and Engineering, VIT Bhopal
University, Bhopal, Indiasports. Sports contain players’ physical activity, and behav-
ioral actions between athletes allow time, description, andcount data on action to be recorded [ 2]. The advent of compet-
itive data, has therefore, given fuel to research in competitive
sports and offers a platform to investigate the law of human
life and human inclinations [ 3]. The big data age has had an
unparalleled inﬂuence on sport’s development [ 4]. Mostly
connected big data services like health data, exercise, statis-
tics on training, and analysis may successfully assist athletesin creating game plans and becoming vital ways to win
contests [ 5]. Advanced big data technology has changed
the realm of sports. The increase in sports data has creatednew difﬁculties in big sports data and opportunities [ 6]. The
growth of the Internet and sports are the result of big sports
data. For all major sports, analysts may frequently extract
enormous numbers of data that media, fans, athletes, andorganizations can use [ 7]. These efforts frequently go hand
in hand with top technology providers that have realized the
enormous beneﬁts of sports analytics. The ubiquity, diver-sity, and easy accessibility of sports data make it especially
appealing to many visual researchers [ 8].
Artiﬁcial intelligence and computer vision technologies
are becoming trendy in analyzing videos in the sports ﬁeld
123

==== Page 2 ====
2970 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
[9]. A CNN or convolutional neural network-based model
has been extensively utilized to efﬁciently solve complexmachine translation, signal processing, and computer vision
tasks [ 10]. However, computer vision is presently ﬂuctuating
from mathematical methods to machine learning approachesdue to its effectiveness in extracting compound features with-out human involvement [ 11]. In this expanding ﬁeld of study,
there is a tremendous opportunity to start innovation and
development. For example, predictive analysis by artiﬁcialintelligence can be applied to enhance health and ﬁtness [ 12].
Wearable applications can offer information on player tear
and strain, reducing damage to sportspeople. In addition, AIcan discover trends in gaming tactics, plans, and weaknesses
[13].
Data are a signiﬁcant part of the sports industry for train-
ers, performers, management, sports medicine employees,and supporters [ 14]. Data analytics can aid teams to vic-
tory games, and these data can help enhances sportsperson’s
performance, reduce injuries and inspire fans to join games[15]. In addition, big data helps us to develop improved sports
strategies. Whether it is an individual or a team sport, strate-
gic management is essential for any sport. These methodsare depending upon the professional athletes and teams to
compete against their opponents. Modern coaching leverages
large data sets to develop successful tactics for individual andteam athletes [ 16]. People will indeed follow credible lead-
ers, and famous coaches have the edge over younger ones
since they have access to a far greater data bank of informa-
tion. As a coach, the most obvious application of data is in thecollection of ﬁgures and statistics. Sports industry data are
vital to players, coaches and management, and sports medical
professionals and spectators. While data analytics can assista team win games and enhance player performance, the same
numbers can also motivate spectators to attend games. Data
science enables coaches of professional teams to build hyper-personalized athlete matches and other plans for each matchplayed by the team in particular. The strategies of the team
are left unexpected yet efﬁcient [ 17].
Analyzing performance in sports helps coaches and play-
ers reach their goals by identifying activities that can guide
decision-making, maximize performance, and assist them
on their road to excellence. They often include tacticalevaluation, movement analysis, video, and statistical databas-
ing/models, and coach/player data displays. Due to the
obvious improvements in technology, data collecting, stor-age, and coaching requirements for data presentation havechanged where analysts now require a lot more knowledge
in many tracking devices and software. A video recording of
a game can help eliminate such biases and give a more impar-tial perspective of what transpired on the ﬁeld. For players
and coaches to understand what went well and what went
wrong, performance analysts collect data from all eventsoccurring on-ﬁeld.Sports like baseball, soccer, football, basketball, and
ﬁelds like fantasy have expanded players’ effectivenessand forecast future performance according to the big data
[18]. Whether it is historical data, vital scorekeeping, algo-
rithm forecasts, or clear player statistics, big data are anindispensable element of the sports industry [ 19]. Big data
permits teams and corporations to stay updated on perfor-
mance, carry out forecasts, and be big data enables teams
and organizations to stay relevant on performance, to fore-cast, and be determined in the world of sports [ 20]. Beyond
that, all parties involved in the industry, including analysts,
experts, and supporters, continuously alter data to updateplay-by-play or make predictions [ 21]. Big data analytics and
artiﬁcial intelligence have revolutionized the sports sector by
clarifying statistical information and managing quantitativeand qualitative data into understandable and stable content[22].
The ﬁrst step towards making sense of data is visualiz-
ing it. Using data visualization, users can make stories byorganizing data into a form that is simpler to grasp, high-
lighting patterns and outliers. In addition to eliminating the
noise from the data and displaying the relevant information,excellent visualizations create a story. It takes a careful bal-
ance between design and function to create an effective data
visualization. As a result, data analysts utilize a wide rangeof tools such as graphs and diagrams, and maps, among oth-ers, to translate and show data and data connections. To make
data comprehensible, the proper approach and its setup are
typically required.
The major contribution of the study is:
•Designing the VEVF model for sports data visualization
based on AI and big data analytics.
•Assessing the mathematical model of convolutional neural
network for sports video classiﬁcation.
•The numerical results have been performed. The recom-
mended model enhances classiﬁcation accuracy, precision,sports performance, and prediction ratio and reduces errorrate and computation time compared to other existing mod-
els.
The rest of the study is arranged as follows: “ Literature
survey ” discusses the existing models and frameworks of
sports data visualization and sports monitoring. Then, in
“Video-based effective visualization framework (VEVF) ”,
the proposed VEVF model design has been discussed with
signiﬁcant theoretical validation and statistical modeling.
Next, in “ Performance analysis ”, the experimental results
have been implemented with critical discussion, and ﬁnally,“Conclusion ” concludes the research paper.
123

==== Page 3 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2971
Literaturesurvey
Raﬁq et al. [ 23] suggested transfer learning (TL) for sports
video summarization from scene classiﬁcation. This paper
focused on practical implementations in existing approachesand provided a way to obtain a high-grade scene catego-rization. Cricket was considered a case study that classiﬁes
ﬁve categories, i.e., batting, bowling, bordering, crowding,
and close-up for scene categorization using the previouslytrained AlexNet. The suggested technique used encoder-like
new, completely linked layers. They increased the data by
99.26% over lesser data sets to attain high accuracy. Finally,they compared the results to basic techniques to demonstrate
the superiority of the strategy and the latest models. Their
performance results were evaluated on cricketing videos andcompared several professional learning models like InceptionV3, VGGNet16, and AlexNet. Their studies showed that the
AlexNet technique delivers superior outcomes than current
suggestions.
Li et al. [ 24] proposed the neutrosophy theory (NT) to
visualize sports news data. This paper selected two types
of large sporting events of different types and sizes andused Excel data statistics techniques, Newtonian analysis
of mechanical systems, messy dynamics, etc., to identify
and classify events in sports media, and research visualiza-tion reports on sports rules media development. Sport mediaevents have a beneﬁcial impact on the scope of sporting activ-
ities. Evolution comprises three times, such as a "beginning
period," the "high-tide period," and the "decent period," acomparable period of process and evident chaos, such as
starting values, innate randomness, fractal resemblance, etc.
Finally, the visualization of the data of the sporting newsbased on the idea of neutrosophy was applied in the news
sector.
Fenil et al. [ 25] introduced the Histogram of Oriented Gra-
dients and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (HOG-BDLSTM) for real-time violence detection in a football
stadium. A system for perceiving violence in real-time was
suggested in this work, in which vast information could beprocessed, and human intelligence simulation recognized the
aggression. The system’s input is the huge number of real-
time video feeds of diverse sources analyzed by Spark. TheSpark Frames separated the frames and extracted features
from each frame by utilizing the HOG algorithm. The frames
were then labeled based on a violent model, a model for thehuman aspect of the person, and a negative model used totrain the BDLSTM network to identify violent situations.
The output, was therefore, created in connection with infor-
mation both past and future.
Pavitt et al. [ 26] discussed the natural language processing
and conversational interfaces (NLP-CI) for supporting match
analysis and scouting through artiﬁcial intelligence. Here,they explained how sports professionals could give analyti-cal help in exploring and insight into traditional data sources
in some frequently available AI applications. In particular,they focused on leveraging natural language processing and
conversational interfaces so that users could explore their
data sets and the results derived from the analyses done onthem with a simple and time-saving toolbox. They demon-strated the beneﬁt of the presentation to domain experts of
powerful AI and analytic techniques that show the potential
for an impact on the sport’s elite, where AI and analysis areavailable, and on the more popular level, where access to
specialist resources is generally limited.
ShuttleSpace [ 27] was developed by Ye et al. to help
badminton experts in evaluating trajectory data. Sports tra-
jectory data, such as the movement of players and balls, has a
wealth of information on player behavior. As a result, coachesand analysts used it extensively to enhance the performanceof their players’. Researchers had progressively been able
to experience these 3D trajectories using immersive tech-
nologies such as virtual reality thanks to recent advances inimmersive technologies such as virtual reality.
A web server named SGDB, which stands for Sports Gene
DataBase, was built by Cao et al. [ 28] after combining eight
published gene expression datasets from human skeletal mus-
cle. Searching for genes that were expressed after exercise
and without exercise was possible using the SGDB database.While allowing for the visualization of changes in femalesand males, it is possible to identify the effects of physical
activity on gene expression by analyzing the data. Additional
information can be found on different types of exercise andthe link between activity and age.
Based on the survey, there are several challenges in imple-
menting sports data visualization. Hence, in this paper, theVEVF model has been suggested. The following section dis-
cusses the proposed VEVF model brieﬂy.
Video-basedeﬀectivevisualization
framework(VEVF)
Sports analytics and data visualization offered player selec-
tors, managers, and players a broader platform to enhance
performance on the ﬁeld. In the following section of theframework, policymakers and analysis use statistical instru-ments and algorithms for data to get insight into the future.
Data visualization is one of the most important results
in the ﬁeld of sports analytics. The virtual representationof data is easier to grasp than numbers and words. Big
data analysis principles include learning analytics, gam-
ing analytics, productive analysis, and data viewing toevaluate signiﬁcant user-generated data game analytics. Arti-
ﬁcial and real-world datasets comprise several visualization
techniques: uncertainty visualization, data collections, andmultidimensional/multivariate data viewing. Differences in
123

==== Page 4 ====
2972 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
the distribution of the ensemble are the most critical elements
in proper game analysis. The data in graphs and charts tovisualize data are the most important visualization and pre-
dictive analytics component. The data gathered are shown
for the team’s selectors, the captain, and the executives ofthe next auction to gain a better and clear knowledge of allthe season factors, teams, all-rounder, and batsmen.
Figure 1shows the proposed VEVF model. The video
correlates in terms of semantical content between the fol-lowing frames. Thus, the classiﬁcation system can get a
promising outcome if the frames’ temporal relationships can
be monitored. Therefore, the selection of a certain num-ber of frames to evaluate video data is a necessity. In this
case, the input video selects a certain number of the succes-
sive RGB color frame. The raw frames are then carried outto match additional processing, including resizing, rescal-ing, multiplying, and normalization. These processing steps
are the pre-processing stages that convert the raw frames
into the processed frames, suitable for neural network ana-lytics. Before processing rules, it is necessary to extract
representative information from the rules to create optimally
structured and logically arranged data structures that reﬂectthe dependencies between rules. Each incoming data frame
is compared against this data structure to determine the least
expensive matching rule. The spatial feature is then collectedfrom the managed video images via a convolutional neuralnetwork concurrently. The proposed CNN has convolution
layers followed by max-pooling and an activation function
to extract the features from the processed frames. Next, theretrieved features are passed to the classiﬁcation layer to col-
lect the temporal features through CNN. Finally, the sport
class is classiﬁed using Softmax function-based output lay-ers lead by fully connected layers.
Figure 2shows the sports data visualization management
system. The model has the subsequent function: (1) real-timegathering of athletes motion data via wearable devices andharmonization of the gathered information into data server
databases; (2) motion visualization management systems
read data from the data servers to drive the visual person-ality to move in real-time, to envision the information; (3)
CNN is utilized to forecast the future state of motions in line
with the prior athlete’s workout information; (4) multi vir-tual role management and human–computer interaction. The
practitioners can utilize various analytical methods and tech-
niques in athlete monitoring systems. Numerous variablesneed to be considered while gathering such data, determin-ing relevant changes, and different ways to data presentation.
The capacity of practitioners to convey essential information
and provide signiﬁcant information to their coaches leadsto improved athletic performance as a basis for a successful
athlete monitoring system.
Let us consider the issue of classifying a video sequence−→y/equal1/angbracketleft y
t|t/equal11,... T/angbracketrightby allocating it labels xfrom a dis-crete set of classes X. For instance, the series can be videos,
and the labels can be the activity existing in videos. Now,
Xis the set of identiﬁable activities like jumping, running,
skipping, etc. This study assumes that every component yt
of the video series are objects from input ﬁeld Y(e.g., video
frames).
Our initial task is to convert the arbitrary-length video
sequences into a form that is agreeable to classiﬁcation. To
this end, this initial study map every component of videosequences into q-dimensional feature vectors through param-
eterizable feature functions ϕ
θ(.):
ut/equal1ϕθ(yt)∈Rq. (1)
The feature function can be convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) employed to video frames with features extractedfrom the last activation layer in networks. This study intro-
duces the shorthand−→u/equal1/angbracketleft u
1,..., uT/angbracketrightto signify video
sequences of the component feature vector. When coupledwith feature attribution methods, which explain which pix-
els were essential for the categorization, feature visualization
can be a powerful tool for learning. An individual categoriza-tion can be explained and seen locally using both techniques.A feature function should describe the feature’s advantage or
"what it does."
Subsequently, the element feature vector sequence into
single p-dimensional feature vectors deﬁning the whole
video sequences through temporal encoding functions /Phi1has
been mapped:
v/equal1/Phi1/parenleftbig−→u/parenrightbig
∈R
p. (2)
The vector vis now a ﬁxed-length depiction of the video
sequence, which can be utilized for classiﬁcation. When
it comes to computer vision and deep learning, a feature
vector seems to be an n-dimensional vector of numericalcharacteristics that describe a certain item. Since numerical
representations improve processing and statistical analysis,
many machine learning methods require numerical repre-sentations of things. V ectors of explanatory variables are
employed in statistical techniques such as linear regression,
and feature vectors are equivalent. RGB (red–green–blue)color descriptors are an example of a feature vector that maybe familiar with. The amount of red, blue, and green can be
used to characterize it.
Characteristic temporal encoding function contains ade-
quate data computations or simple pooling operation, like avg
or max. Though the temporal encoding function can be much
more reﬁned, called rank-pool operators. Unlike avg or max-pooling operator, which can be expressed in closed-form,
rank-pool needs an optimization issue to identify the repre-
sentation. Prior to processing rules, it is necessary to extractrepresentative information from the rules to create optimally
123

==== Page 5 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2973
Fig. 1 Proposed VEVF model
Fig. 2 Sports data visualization management system
structured and logically arranged data structures that reﬂect
the dependencies between rules. Each incoming packet is
compared against this data structure to determine the least
expensive matching rule. Among many pooling methods,we chose the rank pooling strategy since it can signiﬁcantly
reduce the input dimension:
v∈argmin
v/primef/parenleftBig−→u,v/prime/parenrightBig
. (3)As inferred from Eq. ( 3), where f(·,·) is a measure of how
well a video sequence is deﬁned by every depiction, and this
research seeks a better depiction. It is a category of temporal
encoding functions. With its scene or object and wide recep-tive ﬁelds, this temporal encoding uses casual convolutions
and dilations to adapt to sequential data.
Figure 3shows the CNN model. Convolutional layers in
CNNs methodically employ learned ﬁlters to the input image
to make a feature map that encapsulates the existence of those
features in inputs. A pooling layer is a new layer added afterthe convolutional layer. After convolutionary layers, a pool-
123

==== Page 6 ====
2974 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
Fig. 3 CNN model
ing layer is applied. In particular, convolutional layers have
been added to the output of feature maps following nonlinear-
ity (e.g., ReLU). The feature map output of convolutionary
layers is restricted by recording the accurate location of fea-tures in inputs. This means that tiny adjustments in the feature
located in input video images lead to another feature map. It
can happen when the image is re-cropped, rotated, moved,and changed in an input image. The optimization issue iscommon and can contain constraints on the solution and
reduce the objective f. Furthermore, many normal pooling
operations can be expressed in this way. For instance, averagepooling can be formulated as:
avg/parenleftbig−→u/parenrightbig
/equal1argmin
v/braceleftBigg
1
2T/summationdisplay
t/equal11/bardblv−ut/bardbl2/bracerightBigg
. (4)
Signiﬁcantly, rank-pool operators encrypt temporal
dynamics of video sequences, which avg and max-poolingoperator does not. Precisely, the rank-pool operators attemptto seizure the order of components in the video series by
determining a vector vsuch that v
Tub<vTuafor all b<a,
i.e., the function u→vTuhonors the comparative order
of the components in the video series. This is attained by
regressing component feature vectors onto their index in
video sequences and resolved to utilize regularized supportvector regression (SVR) to provide point-wise ranking func-
tions. Furthermore, rank-pool−→uis deﬁned as:
argmin
v/braceleftBigg
1
2/bardblv/bardbl2+D
2T/summationdisplay
t/equal11/bracketleftBig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglet−vTut/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−/epsilon1/bracketrightBig
2
≥0/bracerightBigg
. (5)
A ss h o w ni nE q .( 5) and Fig. 4demonstrates the rank-pool,
where [ .]≥0/equal1max{·,0}projects onto the positive reals. D
denotes the learning parameter, and /epsilon1indicates the residual
error. Convolutional neural networks have rich characteris-
tics that may be captured via rank pooling algorithms. Torecognize actions from the video sequences, the designednetwork creates a new representation by learning to rank the
frame-level characteristics in a video in chronological order.
With a ﬁxed-length video sequences descriptor, v∈R
p,
prediction tasks are to map vto one of the discrete class
labels. Let gαbe a predictor parameterized by α. This paper
can encapsulate our classiﬁcation channel of random-length
video sequences−→yto a label x∈Xas:
−→y/equal1/angbracketleft yt/angbracketright→ϕθ/angbracketleftut/angbracketright→/Phi1v→gαx. (6)
To classify a video is to assign a label that is appropriate
to it based on the frames that make up the video’s content.Videos must be classiﬁed so that they offer correct framelabels and accurately represent their whole content based on
its features and annotations. Typical predictors comprise soft-
max and (linear) support vector machines (SVM) classiﬁers.For two-group classiﬁcation issues, a support vector machine
(SVM) is a machine learning model that employs supervised
methods for classiﬁcation problems. With the use of labeledtraining data, an SVM model can classify fresh text. Video
data is growing exponentially; thus, it is necessary to cate-
gorize video clips depending on their content. Determininghow to categorize videos into different genres based on theircontent automatically is, therefore, a top priority. With hyper-
parameter learning, the SVM algorithm performs a bi-level
optimization in this case. For the latter, the likelihood oflabels xgiven sequences−→yhas been used in this work, and
it can be written as:
Q(x|/vectory)/equal1exp/parenleftbig
α
T
xv/parenrightbig
/summationtext
x/primeexp/parenleftbig
αTxv/parenrightbig. (7)
Here gα(v) indicates the (discrete) probability distribution
total labels and α/equal1{αx}are the learned parameters of mod-
els. Any random variable can have any number of potential
values and probabilities within a given range, and the prob-ability distribution characterizes them all.
123

==== Page 7 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2975
Fig. 4 Rank-pool
Assumed a dataset of video sequence-label pairs,/braceleftBig/parenleftBig−→y(j),x(j)/parenrightBig/bracerightBigm
j/equal11our objective is to learn both the clas-
siﬁer’s variables and the depiction of the components in
video sequences. Therefore, let /Delta1(·,·) be loss functions. For
instance, when utilizing soft-max classiﬁers, a classic selec-
tion would be the cross-entropy loss:
/Delta1(x,gα(v))/equal1− log Q/parenleftbig
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−→y/parenrightbig
. (8)
The present study jointly evaluates feature functions and
prediction function parameters by reducing the normalizedempirical risk. As a general rule, normalizing the data hassped up learning and leads to faster convergence. The log-
arithm of the cross-entropy function helps the network to
detect and remove such tiny mistakes. To punish a projectedclass probability depending on how distant it is from the
actual anticipated value, a score/loss is generated. Our learn-
ing issue is:
Minimize
θ,αm/summationdisplay
j/equal11/Delta1/parenleftBig
x(j),gα/parenleftBig
v(j)/parenrightBig/parenrightBig
+R(θ,α)
subject to v(j)∈arg minvf/parenleftBig
/vectoru(j),v/parenrightBig
. (9)
As discussed in Eq. ( 9), where R(·,·) is regularization
functions, normally the k2-norm of the variables, and θseems
in the deﬁnition of the−→u(j)by Eq. ( 1). Losses can be reduced
by modifying the weights and learning rate of your neural net-work. As a consequence of optimization approaches, fewer
losses are incurred, and the outcomes are more accurate.
Equation ( 9) is an example of a bilevel optimization issue,
which has newly been discovered in the setting of hyper-
parameter learning and support vector machine (SVM).
Here an upper-level issue is resolved subject to restraintsimposed by a bottom-level issue. Several solution approaches
have been suggested for bilevel optimization issues. How-
ever, assumed our interest in learning video depictions frompowerful CNNs features, gradient-based methods are mostsuitable for ﬁne-tuning the convolutional neural network
parameter.
When the temporal encrypting functions ϕcan be assessed
in closed-form (e.g., avg or max), this study can replace the
constraints in the Eq. ( 9) straightly into the target and use
(sub-)gradient descent to resolve for (globally or locally)optimal variables.
Providentially, when the lower level goal is twice differ-
entiable, this study can calculate the gradient of the argminfunction as other authors have perceived. It is then merely a
matter of employing chain rules to ﬁnd the derivative of the
loss function concerning any variable in models.
Figure 5shows the big data-based sports visualization
model, including the data collection, data source layer, cen-
tral repository layer, exchange layer, application layer, anddata analysis layer. The data source layer primarily involvessportspersons’ historical data, sportspersons’ behavior tra-
jectories, Internet data sources, and video information. The
data sources layer is the basis for the analysis and predic-tive use of diverse sports big data. The next layer is the
data gathering layer that gathers and processes data from the
data sources layer; data collecting, data storage, data inter-change, manual imports, and the webserver. Next, the data
obtained are cleansed, and the processing needed is carried
out following varied application requirements. Finally, theinformation is categorized and saved. The data processed willbe saved in the main storage layer, including unstructured,
structured, and ﬁle storage. The data analysis layer is based
on individual applications and performs functional selection,relationship analysis, statistical analysis, and analysis of the
social network to determine possible knowledge, legislation,
and patterns in sporting big data according to the demandsof speciﬁc applications.
Based on the research results above, machine learning
and big data technology can boost sports applications. Itis possible to improve every aspect of sports training withmachine learning and big data analytics. A sports organiza-
tion’s performance, player recruiting, and ticket sales may
123

==== Page 8 ====
2976 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
Fig. 5 Big data-based sports visualization model
all be improved with the aid of predictive analytics. A team
needs to know how to evaluate players to maximize their
value in the future. The examination of sports big data is a
crucial use of big data in sport. When evaluating athletes, itis crucial to look at how they perform in different phases.During this session, tutors and other users will learn about
player performance factors and data-driven evaluation mod-
els. V aluable sports big data may enhance individuals andteams’ competitive level and encourage the growth of ﬁtness.
Therefore, prediction is an essential study issue for applica-
tions of sports big data. The success of a career in sportsdepends on the player’s skill and is associated with the team
and nation of the athlete. Therefore, a team or a country needs
people and material resources to cultivate an exceptional ath-lete. The growing sports star refers to the athletes who arenot excellent amongst their peers and are at the start of their
sports careers but tend to become sports stars. Finding a grow-
ing sports star gives positive guidelines on investing national
funding and helps sportspeople get great results earlier. Theproposed VEVF model enhances the accuracy, recall, pre-cision, F1-score, performance, efﬁciency and decreases the
error rate compared to other existing approaches.
Performanceanalysis
This study used objective metrics to assess the performanceof the suggested VEVF model based on big data analytics.
For this reason, this study utilized accuracy (A), recall (R),precision (P), F1-score, and error rate (E) to evaluate the per-
123

==== Page 9 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2977
Fig. 6 Accuracy ratio analysis
Fig. 7 Error rate
formance. In addition, these metrics are calculated in terms
of exact/improper classiﬁcation of data types for every clas-
siﬁcation in videos. Finally, the outcomes of all categories of
videos or shots be an average of determining the concludingvalue.
Fig. 8 Precision rate
Accuracy ratio analysis
For video scene classiﬁcation of sports videos, accuracy
denotes the ratio of properly classiﬁed scenes (true positiveand true negative) out of an overall number of video scenes.
Therefore, accuracy is calculated by:
A/equal1TP + TN
P+N, (10)
123

==== Page 10 ====
2978 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
Fig. 9 Recall rate
Fig. 10 F1-score ratio
where true positives (TP) signify the properly classiﬁed
shots of positive (P) classes. True negatives (TN) denote the
properly classiﬁed shots of negative (N) classes. Figure 6rep-
resents the accuracy ratio of the recommended VEVF model.
Error rate
Error rate denotes the ratio of miscategorized shots [false
negatives (FN) and false positives (FP)] to the entire observed
shots. Therefore, the error rate is calculated as:
E/equal1FP + FN
P+N. (11)
If the error rate is acceptable, the training is done. Oth-
erwise, backpropagate the error through the network. Feed
Fig. 11 Sports performance ratio
Fig. 12 Efﬁciency ratio
the error rates backward towards the input layer. The weights
of the hidden layers require information from the next layer,
and thus the error rate is sent backward through the network.Figure 7demonstrates the error rate of the suggested VEVF
model.
Precision rate
The suggested method outperforms classiﬁcation tasks using
convolutional neural networks without reﬂecting multi-shot
existence in mean average precision. Instead, precision rep-
resented the ratio of properly labeled scenes over the wholenumber of sports data and was calculated as follows:
P/equal1TP
TP + FP. (12)
123

==== Page 11 ====
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980 2979
A support vector machine classiﬁcation was investigated
to classify new videos utilizing the ﬂoating word in videoframes and visual contents, signiﬁcantly improving accuracy
and retrieval rates. Furthermore, the spatial–temporal vec-
tor is utilized to categorize video types into cartoon, news,commercial, and sports utilizing probabilistic analysis andmodeling of the main component, demonstrating an overall
performance increase. Figure 8shows the precision ratio of
the suggested VEVF model.
Recall rate
A common metric utilized to specify the classiﬁcation modelquality is the F-score, the harmonic mean of recall and pre-cision. The recall is the proportion of true prediction of the
shots over an overall number of sports classes in videos and
calculated as:
R/equal1TP
TP + FN. (13)
The standard CNN architecture achieved the results for
shot classiﬁcation with high precision, recall, F1-score, lower
error rate, and increase accuracy ratio. Figure 9demonstrates
the recall ratio of the suggested VEVF model.
F1-score ratio
F1-score or F-measure denotes the harmonic mean of recall
and precision. F-measure is a beneﬁcial metric for perfor-
mance assessment in better accuracy and a lesser recall ratiothan the other technique. In this situation, recall and precision
ratios autonomously are unable to deliver a true evaluation.
Thus, F-measure can reliably be utilized in such cases forperformance appraisal. F-measure is calculated as:
F1/equal1P×R
P+R. (14)
After complete training, the model trained to recognize
drains was virtually ﬂawless, while the model for low streamshad the smallest F-score. Figure 10illustrates the F1-score
ratio of the suggested model.
Sports performance ratio
To assess the performances of a team in a game, tacti-cal data is essential and is the basis for training players
and studying decisions on the game. There is no time and
space characteristic for statistical information, as it focusesmore on personal or competition information for players and
behavioral decisions or movement on the ground. Informa-
tion about statistics includes scores, shooting times, and freethrows. Statistical data may be easily recorded in a gameand represent the performance of the teams. It may provide
a comprehensive analysis for whole games and provide agranular analysis based on a particular event or object. Team
data include shot timings, free throws, mistakes, and other
quantitative performance and efﬁciency metrics. The teaminformation frequently refers to combat array and tacticalinformation in competing sports data vision studies. It is often
used in teams for comparison and assessment of efforts. Fig-
ure11shows the sports performance ratio.
Efficiency ratio
Possession data and shooting information are commonly
utilized to examine a player’s performance and assess the
performance and contribution of a player. A player’s action
is a time event when he shoots some time series at a certaincoordinate point. Other events include errors, ﬂaws, assists,
robs, player substitutions, and off-court issues. Other events
include blunders. Many researchers are studying players’performance over time and calculating the effectiveness of
the players to assess whether players increased their score
or lowered their score in their defense. Time series eventsare hence another way of measuring player performance andcontribution to games. The key indicator forms the basis for
analyzing player patterns of conduct and is the focal point
for most displays of sports data. Figure 12demonstrates the
efﬁciency ratio of the proposed VEVD model.
The proposed VEVF model enhances the accuracy, recall,
precision, F1-score, sports performance, efﬁciency anddecreases the error rate compared to other existing transfer
learning (TL), neutrosophy theory (NT), Histogram of Ori-
ented Gradients and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory(HOG-BDLSTM), natural language processing and conver-sational interfaces (NLP-CI) methods.
Conclusion
This study presents the VEVF model for sports visualiza-tion based on a convolutional neural network using big data
analytics. Integrating deep learning with coaches and ana-
lysts in applied contexts may account for more interactivefactors, delivering useful knowledge to teams faster. Thetemporal features of video sequences are important rather
than the features in static images, which can be extended in
future work. Our system will be added with different stride,padding, and convolution layers to different optimizers and
solve the classiﬁcation problem to increase accuracy and
performance. Our temporal pooling layer may reside aboveany CNN architecture and allows end-to-end learning from
all model parameters via bilevel optimization. Compared
with manual digitization, time reduction can make perfor-mance measurements feedback in training environments and
123

==== Page 12 ====
2980 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2023) 9:2969–2980
competitive sports simulation. Our results indicate that the
proposed VEVF model enhances the accuracy ratio of 98.6%,recall ratio of 94.5%, F1-score ratio of 97.9%, the preci-
sion ratio of 96.7%, the error rate of 29.1%, the performance
ratio of 95.2%, an efﬁciency ratio of 96.1% compared toother existing models. Even though this proposed approachcan best suit competitive sports training through effective
visualization through CNN with bilevel optimization, this
framework demands signiﬁcant network design strategies foroptimal energy conservation and secured network communi-
cation. Hence, to overcome this demerit, this study plans to
extend the proposed model with an energy-optimized com-munication system with a security scheme and real-time
visual analytics implementation.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Du M, Y uan X (2021) A survey of competitive sports data visual-
ization and visual analysis. J Vis 24(1):47–67
2. Vu DL, Nguyen TK, Nguyen TV , Nguyen TN, Massacci F, Phung
PH (2020) HIT4Mal: hybrid image transformation for malwareclassiﬁcation. Trans Emerg Telecommun Technol 31(11):e3789
3. Brewer BW, V an Brewer TP (2020) A visualization template for
the graphical representation of sport injury antecedents and conse-quences models and data. J Funct Morphol Kinesiol 5(4):87
4. Nguyen NT, Liu BH, Pham VT, Luo YS (2016) On maximizing
the lifetime for data aggregation in wireless sensor networks usingvirtual data aggregation trees. Comput Netw 105:99–110
5. Zhao J, Li G (2020) Study on real-time wearable sport health device
based on body sensor networks. Comput Commun 154:40–47
6. Ranjan G, Nguyen TN, Mekky H, Zhang ZL (2020) On virtual id
assignment in networks for high resilience routing: a theoreticalframework. In: GLOBECOM 2020–2020 IEEE global communi-cations conference. IEEE, pp 1–6
7. Manogaran G, Shakeel PM, Fouad H, Nam Y , Baskar S, Chil-
amkurti N, Sundarasekar R (2019) Wearable IoT smart-log patch:an edge computing-based Bayesian deep learning network systemfor multi access physical monitoring system. Sensors 19(13):3030
8. Liu BH, Nguyen NT, Pham VT, Lin YX (2017) Novel methods
for energy charging and data collection in wireless rechargeablesensor networks. Int J Commun Syst 30(5):e3050
9. Liu Y (2020) College students’ physical ﬁtness test data analysis,
visualization and prediction using data mining techniques. J PhysConf Ser 1631(1):012121
10. Manogaran G, Shakeel PM, Baskar S, Hsu CH, Kadry SN, Sun-
darasekar R, Muthu BA et al (2020) FDM: fuzzy-optimized datamanagement technique for improving big data analytics. IEEE
Trans Fuzzy Syst 29(1):177–185
11. Wang N, Li Q, Abd El-Latif AA, Yan X, Niu X (2013) A novel
hybrid multibiometrics based on the fusion of dual iris, visibleand thermal face images. In: 2013 international symposium onbiometrics and security technologies. IEEE, pp 217–223
12. Shi ZF, Y u LY , Abd El-Latif AA, Le D, Niu XM (2012) A kinemat-
ics signiﬁcance based skeleton map for rapid viewpoint selection.Res J Appl Sci Eng Technol 4(17):2887–2892
13. Huifeng W, Kadry SN, Raj ED (2020) Continuous health monitor-
ing of sportsperson using IoT devices based wearable technology.Comput Commun 160:588–595
14. Su H, Chang YK, Lin YJ, Chu IH (2015) Effects of training using
an active video game on agility and balance. J Sports Med Phys Fit55(9):914–921
15. Huifeng W, Shankar A, Vivekananda GN (2020) Modelling and
simulation of sprinters’ health promotion strategy based on sportsbiomechanics. Connect Sci 1–19
16. Wang Y , Muthu B, Sivaparthipan CB Internet of things driven
physical activity recognition system for physical education. Micro-process Microsyst 81:103723
17. Sheron PF, Sridhar KP , Baskar S, Shakeel PM (2021) Projection-
dependent input processing for 3D object recognition in human
robot interaction systems. Image Vis Comput 106:104089
18. Javed AR, Sarwar MU, Khan S, Iwendi C, Mittal M, Kumar N
(2020) Analyzing the effectiveness and contribution of each axisof tri-axial accelerometer sensor for accurate activity recognition.Sensors 20(8):2216
19. Wu W, Lin W, Hsu CH, He L (2018) Energy-efﬁcient hadoop for
big data analytics and computing: a systematic review and researchinsights. Futur Gener Comput Syst 86:1351–1367
20. Li S, Zhang B, Fei P , Shakeel PM, Samuel RDJ (2020) Computa-
tional efﬁcient wearable sensor network health monitoring systemfor sports athletics using IoT. Aggress Violent Behav 101541
21. Lin Q, Li T, Shakeel PM, Samuel RDJ (2021) Advanced artiﬁcial
intelligence in heart rate and blood pressure monitoring for stressmanagement. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput 12(3):3329–3340
22. Shakeel PM, Baskar S, Sampath R, Jaber MM (2019) Echocar-
diography image segmentation using feed forward artiﬁcial neuralnetwork (FFANN) with fuzzy multi-scale edge detection (FMED).Int J Signal Imaging Syst Eng 11(5):270–278
23. Raﬁq M, Raﬁq G, Agyeman R, Choi GS, Jin SI (2020) Scene clas-
siﬁcation for sports video summarization using transfer learning.Sensors 20(6):1702
24. Li J, Liu S, Wang Z, Guo J (2020) Neutrosophy theory based
visualization report of sports news data. Int J Electr Eng Educ0020720920940581
25. Fenil E, Manogaran G, Vivekananda GN, Thanjaivadivel T, Jeeva
S, Ahilan A (2019) Real time violence detection framework forfootball stadium comprising of big data analysis and deep learningthrough bidirectional LSTM. Comput Netw 151:191–200
26. Pavitt J, Braines D, Tomsett R (2021) Cognitive analysis in sports:
Supporting match analysis and scouting through artiﬁcial intelli-gence. Appl AI Lett 2(1):e21
2 7 .Y eS ,C h e nZ ,C h uX ,W a n gY ,F uS ,S h e nL ,W uYe ta l
(2020) Shuttlespace: exploring and analyzing movement trajec-tory in immersive visualization. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph27(2):860–869
28. Cao Q, Deng Z, Liu J, Li X (2020) SGDB: a sports gene database
for visualization of sports effects on human skeletal muscle geneexpression. IEEE Access 8:20557–20562
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123

