==== Page 1 ====
Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategies for Random Forest
by Philipp Probst, Marvin Wright and Anne-Laure Boulesteix
February 27, 2019
Abstract
The random forest algorithm (RF) has several hyperparameters that have to be set by the user, e.g., the number
of observations drawn randomly for each tree and whether they are drawn with or without replacement, the number
of variables drawn randomly for each split, the splitting rule, the minimum number of samples that a node must
contain and the number of trees. In this paper, we ﬁrst provide a literature review on the parameters’ inﬂuence on the
prediction performance and on variable importance measures.
It is well known that in most cases RF works reasonably well with the default values of the hyperparameters
speciﬁed in software packages. Nevertheless, tuning the hyperparameters can improve the performance of RF. In the
second part of this paper, after a brief overview of tuning strategies we demonstrate the application of one of the most
established tuning strategies, model-based optimization (MBO). To make it easier to use, we provide the tuneRanger
R package that tunes RF with MBO automatically. In a benchmark study on several datasets, we compare the
prediction performance and runtime of tuneRanger with other tuning implementations in R and RF with default
hyperparameters.
1 Introduction
The random forest algorithm (RF) ﬁrst introduced by Breiman (2001) has now grown to a standard non-parametric
classiﬁcation and regression tool for constructing prediction rules based on various types of predictor variables without
making any prior assumption on the form of their association with the response variable. RF has been the topic of
several reviews in the last few years including our own review (Boulesteix et al., 2012b) and others (Criminisi et al.,
2012; Ziegler and König, 2014; Biau and Scornet, 2016; Belgiu and Drăguţ, 2016). RF involves several hyperparameters
controlling the structure of each individual tree (e.g., the minimal size nodesize a node should have to be split) and
the structure and size of the forest (e.g., the number of trees) as well as its level of randomness (e.g., the number
mtryof variables considered as candidate splitting variables at each split or the sampling scheme used to generate
the datasets on which the trees are built). The impact of these hyperparameters has been studied in a number of
papers. However, results on this impact are often focused on single hyperparameters and provided as by-product of
studies devoted to other topics (e.g., a new variant of RF) and thus are diﬃcult to ﬁnd for readers without profound
knowledge of the literature. Clear guidance is missing and the choice of adequate values for the parameters remains a
challenge in practice.
It is important to note that RF may be used in practice for two diﬀerent purposes. In some RF applications, the
focus is on the construction of a classiﬁcation or regression rule with good accuracy that is intended to be used as a
prediction tool on future data. In this case, the objective is to derive a rule with high prediction performance—where
performance can be deﬁned in diﬀerent ways depending on the context, the simplest approach being to consider the
classiﬁcation error rate in the case of classiﬁcation and the mean squared error in the case of regression. In other
RF applications, however, the goal is not to derive a classiﬁcation or regression rule but to investigate the relevance
of the candidate predictor variables for the prediction problem at hand or, in other words, to assess their respective
contribution to the prediction of the response variable. See the discussion by Shmueli et al. (2010) on the diﬀerence
between “predicting” and “explaining”. These two objectives have to be kept in mind when investigating the eﬀect of
parameters. Note, however, that there might be overlap of these two objectives: For example one might use a variable
selection procedure based on variable importance measures to obtain a well performing prediction rules using RF.
1arXiv:1804.03515v2  [stat.ML]  26 Feb 2019

==== Page 2 ====
Note that most hyperparameters are so-called “tuning parameters”, in the sense that their values have to be
optimized carefully—because the optimal values are dependent on the dataset at hand. Optimality here refers to
a certain performance measure that have to be chosen beforehand. An important concept related to parameter
tuning is overﬁtting: parameter values corresponding to complex rules tend to overﬁtthe training data, i.e. to yield
prediction rules that are too speciﬁc to the training data—and perform very well for this data but probably worse for
independent data. The selection of such sub-optimal parameter values can be partly avoided by using a test dataset
or cross-validation procedures for tuning. In the case of random forest the out-of-bag observations can also be used.
We will see that for random forest not all but most presented parameters are tuning parameters. Furthermore,
note that the distinction between hyperparameters and algorithm variants is blurred. For example, the splitting rule
may be considered as a (categorical) hyperparameter, but also as deﬁning distinct variants of the RF algorithm.
Some arbitrariness is unavoidable when distinguishing hyperparameters from variants of RF. In the present paper,
considered hyperparameters are the number of candidate variables considered at each split (commonly denoted as
mtry), the hyperparameters specifying the sampling scheme (the replaceargument and the sample size), the minimal
node size and related parameters, the number of trees, and the splitting rule.
This paper addresses speciﬁcally the problem of the choice of parameters of the random forest algorithm from two
diﬀerent perspectives. Its ﬁrst part presents a review of the literature on the choice of the various parameters of RF,
while the second part presents diﬀerent tuning strategies and software packages for obtaining optimal hyperparameter
values which are ﬁnally compared in a benchmark study.
2 Literature Review
In the ﬁrst section of this literature review, we focus on the inﬂuence of the hyperparameters on the prediction
performance, e.g., the error rate or the area under the ROC Curve (AUC), and the runtime of random forest, while
literature dealing speciﬁcally with the inﬂuence on the variable importance is reviewed in the second section. In Table
1 the diﬀerent hyperparameters with description and typical default values are displayed.
Hyperparameter Description Typical default values
mtry Number of drawn candidate variables in each splitpp,p=3for regression
sample size Number of observations that are drawn for each tree n
replacement Draw observations with or without replacement TRUE (with replacement)
node size Minimum number of observations in a terminal node 1 for classiﬁcation, 5 for regression
number of trees Number of trees in the forest 500, 1000
splitting rule Splitting criteria in the nodes Gini impurity, p-value, random
Table 1: Overview of the diﬀerent hyperparameter of random forest and typical default values. nis the number of
observations and pis the number of variables in the dataset.
2.1 Inﬂuence on performance
As outlined in Breiman (2001), “[t]he randomness used in tree construction has to aim for low correlation while
maintaining reasonable strength” . In other words, an optimal compromise between low correlation and reasonable
strength of the trees has to be found. This can be controlled by the parameters mtry, sample size and node size
which will be presented in Section 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3, respectively. Section 2.1.4 handles the number of trees, while
Section 2.1.5 is devoted to the splitting criterion.
2.1.1 Number of randomly drawn candidate variables ( mtry)
One of the central hyperparameters of RF is mtry, as denoted in most RF packages, which is deﬁned as the number of
randomly drawn candidate variables out of which each split is selected when growing a tree. Lower values of mtrylead
to more diﬀerent, less correlated trees, yielding better stability when aggregating. Forests constructed with a low mtry
also tend to better exploit variables with moderate eﬀect on the response variable, that would be masked by variables
with strong eﬀect if those had been candidates for splitting. However, lower values of mtryalso lead to trees that
2

==== Page 3 ====
perform on average worse, since they are built based on suboptimal variables (that were selected out of a small set of
randomly drawn candidates): possibly non-important variables are chosen. We have to deal with a trade-oﬀ between
stability and accuracy of the single trees.
As default value in several software packages mtryis set toppfor classiﬁcation and p=3for regression with pbeing
the number of predictor variables. In their paper on the inﬂuence of hyperparameters on the accuracy of RF, Bernard
et al. (2009) conclude that mtry =ppis a reasonable value, but can sometimes be improved. They especially outline
that the real number of relevant predictor variables highly inﬂuences the optimal mtry. If there are many relevant
predictor variables, mtryshould be set small because then not only the strongest inﬂuential variables are chosen in the
splits but also less inﬂuential variables, which can provide small but relevant performance gains. These less inﬂuential
variables might, for example, be useful for the prediction of a small group of observations that stronger variables fail
to predict correctly. If mtryis large, however, these less inﬂuential variables might not have the chance to contribute
to prediction because stronger variables are preferably selected for splitting and thus “mask” the smaller eﬀects. On
the other hand, if there are only a few relevant variables out of many, which is the case in many genetic datasets, mtry
should be set high, so that the algorithm can ﬁnd the relevant variables (Goldstein et al., 2011). A large mtryensures
that there is (with high probability) at least one strong variable in the set of mtrycandidate variables.
Further empirical results are provided by Genuer et al. (2008). In their low dimensional classiﬁcation problems
mtry =ppis convenient regarding the error rate. For low dimensional regression problems, in their examplespp
performs better than p=3regarding the mean squared error. For high dimensional data they observe lower error rates
for higher mtryvalues for both classiﬁcation and regression, corroborating Goldstein et al. (2011).
Computation time decreases approximately linearly with lower mtryvalues (Wright and Ziegler, 2017), since most
of RF’s computing time is devoted to the selection of the split variables.
2.1.2 Sampling scheme: sample size and replacement
The sample size parameter determines how many observations are drawn for the training of each tree. It has a similar
eﬀect as the mtryparameter. Decreasing the sample size leads to more diverse trees and thereby lower correlation
between the trees, which has a positive eﬀect on the prediction accuracy when aggregating the trees. However, the
accuracy of the single trees decreases, since fewer observations are used for training. Hence, similarly to the mtry
parameter, the choice of the sample size can be seen as a trade-oﬀ between stability and accuracy of the trees.
Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) carried out an empirical analysis of the dependence of the performance on the
sample size. They concluded that the optimal value is problem dependent and can be estimated with the out-of-bag
predictions. In most datasets they observed better performances when sampling less observations than the standard
choice (which is to sample as many observations with replacement as the number of observations in the dataset).
Setting it to lower values reduces the runtime.
Moreover, Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) claim that there is no substantial performance diﬀerence between
sampling with replacement or without replacement when the sample size parameter is set optimally. However, both
theoretical (Janitza et al., 2016) and empirical results (Strobl et al., 2007) show that sampling with replacement may
induce a slight variable selection bias when categorical variables with varying number of categories are considered. In
these speciﬁc cases, performance may be impaired by sampling withreplacement, even if this impairment could not be
observed by Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez (2010) when considering averages over datasets of diﬀerent types.
2.1.3 Node size
Thenodesize parameter speciﬁes the minimum number of observations in a terminal node. Setting it lower leads to
trees with a larger depth which means that more splits are performed until the terminal nodes. In several standard
software packages the default value is 1 for classiﬁcation and 5 for regression. It is believed to generally provide good
results (Díaz-Uriarte and De Andres, 2006; Goldstein et al., 2011) but performance can potentially be improved by
tuning it (Lin and Jeon, 2006). In particular, Segal (2004) showed an example where increasing the number of noise
variables leads to a higher optimal node size.
Our own preliminary experiments suggest that the computation time decreases approximately exponentially with
increasing node size. In our experience, especially in large sample datasets it may be helpful to set this parameter to
3

==== Page 4 ====
a value higher than the default as it decreases the runtime substantially, often without substantial loss of prediction
performance (Segal, 2004).
Note that other hyperparameters than the node size may be considered to control the size of the trees. For example,
the R package party(Hothorn et al., 2006) allows to set the minimal size, minbucket , that child nodes should have
for the split to be performed. The hyperparameters nodesize andminbucket are obviously related, since the size of all
parent nodes equals at least twice the value of minbucket . However, setting minbucket to a certain value does not in
general lead to the same trees as setting nodesize to double this value. To explain this, let us consider a node of size
n= 10and a candidate categorical predictor variable taking value 1 for n1= 9of then= 10observations of the node,
and value 0 for the remaining observation. If we set nodesize to 10 and do not put any restriction on minbucket (i.e.,
set it to 1), our candidate variable can be selected for splitting. If, however, we proceed the other way around and set
minbucket to 5 while not putting any restriction on nodesize (i.e., while setting it to 2), our candidate variable cannot
be selected, because it would produce a—too small—child node of size 1. On the one hand, one may argue that splits
with two large enough child nodes are preferable—an argument in favor of setting minbucket to a value larger than
one. On the other hand, this may yield a selection bias in the case of categorical variables, as demonstrated through
this simple example and also discussed in Boulesteix et al. (2012a) in the context of genetic data.
Furthermore, in the R package randomForest (Liaw and Wiener, 2002), it is possible to specify maxnodes , the
maximum number of terminal nodes that trees in the forest can have, while the R package partyallows to specify the
strongly related hyperparameter maxdepth , the maximal depth of the trees, which is the maximum number of splits
until the terminal node.
2.1.4 Number of trees
The number of trees in a forest is a parameter that is not tunable in the classical sense but should be set suﬃciently
high (Díaz-Uriarte and De Andres, 2006; Oshiro et al., 2012; Probst and Boulesteix, 2017). Out-of-bag error curves
(slightly) increasing with the number of trees are occasionally observed for certain error measures (see Probst and
Boulesteix, 2017, for an empirical study based on a large number of datasets). According to measures based on the
mean quadratic loss such as the mean squared error (in case of regression) or the Brier score (in case of classiﬁcation),
however, more trees are always better, as theoretically proved by Probst and Boulesteix (2017).
The convergence rate, and thus the number of trees needed to obtain optimal performance, depends on the dataset’s
properties. Using a large number of datasets, Oshiro et al. (2012) and Probst and Boulesteix (2017) show empirically
that the biggest performance gain can often be achieved when growing the ﬁrst 100 trees. The convergence behaviour
can be investigated by inspecting the out-of-bag curves showing the performance for a growing number of trees. Probst
and Boulesteix (2017) argue that the error rate is not the optimal measure for that purpose because, by considering
a prediction as either true or false, one ignores much of the information output by the RF and focuses too much on
observations that are close to the prediction boundary. Instead, they recommend the use of other measures based
on the predicted class probabilities such as the Brier score or the logarithmic loss, as implemented in the R package
OOBCurve (Probst, 2017).
Note that the convergence rate of RF does not only depend on the considered dataset’s characteristics but possibly
also on hyperparameters. Lower sample size (see Section 2.1.2), higher node size values (see Section 2.1.3) and smaller
mtryvalues (see Section 2.1.1) lead to less correlated trees. These trees are more diﬀerent from each other and
are expected to provide more diﬀerent predictions. Therefore, we suppose that more trees are needed to get clear
predictions for each observation which leads to a higher number of trees for obtaining convergence.
4

==== Page 5 ====
The computation time increases linearly with the number of trees. As trees are trained independently from each
other they can be trained in parallel on several CPU cores which is implemented in software packages such as ranger
(Wright and Ziegler, 2017).
2.1.5 Splitting rule
The splitting rule is not a classical hyperparameter as it can be seen as one of the core properties characterizing the
RF. However, it can in a large sense also be considered as a categorical hyperparameter. The default splitting rule of
Breiman’s original RF (Breiman, 2001) consists of selecting, out of all splits of the (randomly selected mtry) candidate
variables, the split that minimizes the Gini impurity (in the case of classiﬁcation) and the weighted variance (in case
of regression). This method favors the selection of variables with many possible splits (e.g., continuous variables or
categorical variables with many categories) over variables with few splits (the extreme case being binary variables,
which have only one possible split) due to multiple testing mechanisms (Strobl et al., 2007).
Conditional inference forests (CIF) introduced by Hothorn et al. (2006) and implemented in the R package party
and in the newer package partykit (Hothorn and Zeileis, 2015) allow to avoid this variable selection bias by selecting
the variable with the smallest p-value in a global test (i.e., withoutassessing all possible splits successively) in a ﬁrst
step, and selecting the best split from the selected variable in a second step by maximizing a linear test statistic. Note
that the global test to be used in the ﬁrst step depends on the scale of the predictor variables and response variable.
Hothorn et al. (2006) suggest several variants. A computationally fast alternative using p-value approximations for
maximally selected rank statistics is proposed by Wright et al. (2017). This variant is available in the rangerpackage
for regression and survival outcomes.
When tests are performed for split selection, it may only make sense to split if the p-values fall below a certain
threshold, which should then be considered as a hyperparameter. In the R package partythe hyperparameter mincri-
terionrepresents one minus the p-value threshold and in rangerthe hyperparameter alphais thep-value threshold.
To increase computational eﬃciency, splitting rules can be randomized (Geurts et al., 2006). To this end, only a
randomly selected subset of possible splitting values are considered for a variable. The size of these subsets is speciﬁed
by the hyperparameter numRandomCuts in the extraTrees package and by num.random.splits inranger. If this
value is set to 1, this variant is called extremely randomized trees (Geurts et al., 2006). In addition to runtime reduction,
randomized splitting might also be used to add a further component of randomness to the trees, similar to mtryand
the sample size.
Until now, none of the existing splitting rules could be proven as superior to the others in general regarding the
performance. For example, the splitting rule based on the decrease of Gini impurity implemented in Breiman’s original
version is aﬀected by a serious variable selection bias as outlined above. However, if one considers datasets in which
variables with many categories are more informative than variables with less categories, this variable selection bias—
even if it is in principle a ﬂaw of the approach—may accidentally lead to improved accuracy. Hence, depending on the
dataset and its properties one or the other method may be better. Appropriate benchmark studies based on simulation
or real data have to be designed, to evaluate in which situations which splitting rule performs better.
Regarding runtime, extremely randomized trees are the fastest as the cutpoints are drawn completely randomly,
followed by the classical random forest, while for conditional inference forests the runtime is the largest.
2.2 Inﬂuence on variable importance
The RF variable importance (Breiman, 2001) is a measure reﬂecting the importance of a variable in a RF prediction
rule. While eﬀect sizes and p-values of the Wald test or likelihood ratio tests are often used to assess the importance
of variables in case of logistic or linear regression, the RF variable importance measure can also automatically capture
non-linear and interaction eﬀects without specifying these a priori (Wright et al., 2016) and is also applicable when
more variables than observations are available. Several variants of the variable importance exist, including the Gini
variable importance measure and the permutation variable importance measure (Breiman, 2001; Strobl et al., 2007).
In this section we focus on the latter, since the former has been shown to be strongly biased. The Gini variable
importance measure assigns higher importance values to variables with more categories or continuous variables (Strobl
et al., 2007) and to categorical variables with equally sized categories (Boulesteix et al., 2012a) even if all variables are
independent of the response variable.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Many of the eﬀects of the hyperparameters described in the previous section 2.1 are expected to also have an
eﬀect on the variable importance. However, speciﬁc research on this inﬂuence is still in its infancy. Most extensive is
probably the research about the inﬂuence of the number of trees. In contrast, the literature is very scarce as far as the
sample size and node size are concerned.
2.2.1 Number of trees
More trees are generally required for stable variable importance estimates (Genuer et al., 2010; Goldstein et al., 2011),
than for the simple prediction purpose. Lunetta et al. (2004) performed simulations with more noisy variables than
truly associated covariates and concluded that multiple thousands of trees must be trained in order to get stable
estimates of the variable importance. The more trees are trained, the more stable the predictions should be for the
variable importance. In order to assess the stability one could train several random forests with a ﬁxed number of
trees and check whether the ranking of the variables by importance are diﬀerent between the forests.
2.2.2 mtry, splitting rule and node size
Genuer et al. (2010) examine the inﬂuence of the parameter mtryon the variable importance. They conclude that
increasing the mtryvalue leads to much higher magnitudes of the variable importances. As already outlined in
Section 2.1.5 the random forest standard splitting rule is biased when predictor variables vary in their scale. This has
also a substantial impact on the variable importance (Strobl et al., 2007). In the case of the Gini variable importance,
predictorvariableswithmanycategoriesornumericalvaluesreceiveonaverageahighervariableimportancethanbinary
variables if both variables have no inﬂuence on the outcome variable. The permutation variable importance remains
unbiased in these cases, but there is a higher variance of the variable importance for variables with many categories.
This could not be observed for conditional inference forests combined with subsampling (without replacement) as
sampling procedure and therefore Strobl et al. (2007) recommend to use this method for getting reliable variable
importance measures.
Grömping (2009) compared the inﬂuence of mtryand the node size on the variable importance of the standard
random forest and of the conditional inference forest. Higher mtryvalues lead to lower variable importance of weak
regressors. The values of the variable importance from the standard random forest were far less dependent on mtry
than the ones from the conditional inference forests. This was due to the much larger size (i.e., number of splits until
the terminal node) of individual trees in the standard random forest. Decreasing the tree size (for example by setting
a higher node size value) while setting mtryto a small value leads to more equal values of the variable importances of
all variables, because there was less chance that relevant variables were chosen in the splitting procedures.
3 Tuning random forest
Tuning is the task of ﬁnding optimal hyperparameters for a learning algorithm for a considered dataset. In supervised
learning (e.g., regression and classiﬁcation), optimality may refer to diﬀerent performance measures (e.g., the error rate
or the AUC) and to the runtime which can highly depend on hyperparameters in some cases as outlined in Section 2.
In this paper we mainly focus on the optimality regarding performance measures.
Even if the choice of adequate values of hyperparameters has been partially investigated in a number of studies
as reviewed in Section 2, unsurprisingly the literature provides general trends rather than clear-cut guidance. In
practice, users of RF are often unsure whether alternative values of tuning parameters may improve performance
compared to default values. Default values are given by software packages or can be calculated by using previous
datasets (Probst et al., 2018). In the following section we will review literature about the “tunability” of random
forest. “Tunability” is deﬁned as the amount of performance gain compared to default values that can be achieved by
tuning one hyperparameter (“tunability” of the hyperparameter) or all hyperparameters (“tunability” of the algorithm);
see Probst et al. (2018) for more details. Afterwards, evaluation strategies, evaluation measures and tuning search
strategies are presented. Then we review software implementations of tuning of RF in the programming language R
and ﬁnally show the results of a large scale benchmark study comparing the diﬀerent implementations.
6

==== Page 7 ====
3.1 Tunability of random forest
Random forest is an algorithm which is known to provide good results in the default settings (Fernández-Delgado et al.,
2014). Probst et al. (2018) measure the “tunability” of algorithms and hyperparameters of algorithms and conclude
that random forest is far less tunable than other algorithms such as support vector machines. Nevertheless, a small
performance gain (e.g., an average increase of the AUC of 0.010 based on the 38 considered datasets) can be achieved
via tuning compared to the default software package hyperparameter values. This average performance gain, although
moderate, can be an important improvement in some cases, when, for example, each wrongly classiﬁed observation
implies high costs. Moreover, for some datasets it is much higher than 0.01 (e.g., around 0.03).
As outlined in Section 2, all considered hyperparameters might have an eﬀect on the performance of RF. It is
not completely clear, however, which of them should routinely be tuned in practice. Beyond the special case of RF,
Probst et al. (2018) suggest a general framework to assess the tunability of diﬀerent hyperparameters of diﬀerent
algorithms (including RF) and illustrate their approach through an application to 38 datasets. In their study, tuning
the parameter mtryprovides the biggest average improvement of the AUC (0.006), followed by the sample size (0.004),
while the node size had only a small eﬀect (0.001). Changing the replaceparameter from drawing with replacement to
drawing without replacement also had a small positive eﬀect (0.002). Similar results were observed in the work of van
Rijn and Hutter (2018). As outlined in Section 2.1.4, the number of trees cannot be seen as tuning parameter: higher
values are generally preferable to smaller values with respect to performance. If the performance of RF with default
values of the hyperparameters can be improved by choosing other values, the next question is how this choice should
be performed.
3.2 Evaluation strategies and evaluation measures
A typical strategy to evaluate the performance of an algorithm with diﬀerent values of the hyperparameters in the
context of tuning is k-fold cross-validation. The number kof folds is usually chosen between 2 and 10. Averaging the
results of several repetitions of the whole cross-validation procedure provides more reliable results as the variance of
the estimation is reduced (Seibold et al., 2018).
In RF (or in general when bagging is used) another strategy is possible, namely using the out-of-bag observations
to evaluate the trained algorithm. Generally, the results of this strategy are reliable (Breiman, 1996), i.e., approximate
the performance of the RF on independent data reasonably well. A bias can be observed in special data situations
(see Janitza and Hornung, 2018, and references therein), for example in very small datasets with n<20, when there
are many predictor variables and balanced classes. Since these problems are speciﬁc to particular and relatively rare
situations and tuning based on out-of-bag-predictions has a much smaller runtime than procedures such as k-fold
cross-validation (which is especially important in big datasets), we recommend the out-of-bag approach for tuning as
an appropriate procedure for most datasets.
The evaluation measure is a measure that is dependent on the learning problem. In classiﬁcation, two of the
most commonly considered measures are the classiﬁcation error rate and the Area Under the Curve (AUC). Two
other common measures that are based on probabilities are the Brier score and the logarithmic loss. An overview of
evaluation measures for classiﬁcation is given in Ferri et al. (2009).
3.3 Tuning search strategies
Search strategies diﬀer in the way the candidate hyperparameter values (i.e., the values that have to be evaluated with
respect to their out-of-bag performance) are chosen. Some strategies specify all the candidate hyperparameter values
from the beginning, for example, random search and grid search presented in the following subsections. In contrast,
other more sophisticated methods such as F-Race (Birattari et al., 2010), general simulated annealing (Bohachevsky
et al., 1986) or sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) (Jones et al., 1998; Hutter et al., 2011) iteratively use
the results of the diﬀerent already evaluated hyperparameter values and choose future hyperparameters considering
these results. The latter procedure, SMBO, is introduced at the end of this section and used in two of the software
implementations that are presented in the sections 3.4 and 3.5.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Grid search and random search
One of the simplest strategies is grid search, in which all possible combinations of given discrete parameter spaces
are evaluated. Continuous parameters have to be discretized beforehand. Another approach is random search, in
which hyperparameter values are drawn randomly (e.g., from a uniform distribution) from a speciﬁed hyperparameter
space. Bergstra and Bengio (2012) show that for neural networks random search is more eﬃcient in searching good
hyperparameter speciﬁcations than grid search.
Sequential model-based optimization
Sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) is a very successful tuning strategy that iteratively tries to ﬁnd the best
hyperparametersettingsbasedonevaluationsofhyperparametersthatweredonebeforehand. SMBOisgroundedinthe
“black-box function optimization” literature (Jones et al., 1998) and achieves state-of-the-art performance for solving a
number of optimization problems (Hutter et al., 2011). We shortly describe the SMBO algorithm implemented in the
R package mlrMBO (Bischl et al., 2017), which is also used in the R package tuneRanger (Probst, 2018) described
in Section 3.5. It consists of the following steps:
1. Specify an evaluation measure (e.g., the AUC in the case of classiﬁcation or the mean squared error in the case
of regression), also sometimes denoted as “target outcome” in the literature, an evaluation strategy (e.g., 5-fold
cross-validation) and a constrained hyperparameter space on which the tuning should be executed.
2. Create an initial design, i.e., draw random points from the hyperparameter space and evaluate them (i.e., evaluate
the chosen evaluation measure using the chosen evaluation strategy).
3. Based on the results obtained from the previous step following steps are iteratively repeated:
(a) Fit a regression model (also called surrogate model, e.g., kriging (Jones et al., 1998) or RF) based on all
already evaluated design points with the evaluation measure as the dependent variable and the hyperparam-
eters as predictor variables.
(b) Propose a new point for evaluation on the hyperparameter space based on an inﬁll criterion. This criterion
is based on the surrogate model and proposes points that have good expected outcome values and lie in
regions of the hyperparameter space where not many points were evaluated yet.
(c) Evaluate the point and add it to the already existing design points.
3.4 Existing software implementations
Several packages already implement such automatic tuning procedures for RF. We shortly describe the three most
common ones in R:
•mlrHyperopt (Richter, 2017) uses sequential model-based optimization as implemented in the R package ml-
rMBO. It has predeﬁned tuning parameters and tuning spaces for many supervised learning algorithms that are
part of the mlrpackage. Only one line of code is needed to perform the tuning of these algorithms with the pack-
age. In case of ranger, the default parameters that are tuned are mtry(between 1 and the number of variables
p) and the node size (from 1 to 10), with 25 iteration steps (step number 3 in the previous subsection) and no
initial design. In mlrHyperopt , the standard evaluation strategy in each iteration step of the tuning procedure
is 10-fold cross-validation and the evaluation measure is the mean missclassiﬁcation error. The parameters, the
evaluation strategy and measure can be changed by the user. As it is intended as a platform for sharing tuning
parameters and spaces, users can use their own tuning parameters and spaces and upload them to the webservice
of the package.
•caret(Kuhn, 2008) is a set of functions that attempts to streamline the process for creating predictive models.
When executing rangerviacaretit automatically performs a grid search of mtryover the whole mtryparameter
space. By default, the algorithm evaluates 3 points in the parameter space (smallest and biggest possible mtry
and the mean of these two values) with 25 bootstrap iterations as evaluation strategy. The algorithm ﬁnally
chooses the value with the lowest error rate in case of classiﬁcation and the lowest mean squared error in case of
regression.
8

==== Page 9 ====
•tuneRFfrom the randomForest package implements an automatic tuning procedure for the mtryparameter.
First, it calculates the out-of-bag error with the default mtryvalue (square root of the number of variables pfor
classiﬁcation and p=3for regression). Second, it tries out a new smaller value of mtry(default is to deﬂate mtry
by the factor 2). If it provides a better out-of-bag error rate (relative improvement of at least 0.05) the algorithm
continues trying out smaller mtryvalues in the same way. After that, the algorithm tries out larger values than
the default of mtryuntil there is no more improvement, analogously to the second step. Finally the algorithm
returns the model with the best mtryvalue.
3.5 The tuneRanger package
As a by-product of our literature review on tuning for RF, we created a package, tuneRanger (Probst, 2018), for
automatic tuning of RF based on the package rangerthrough a single line of code, implementing all features that we
identiﬁed as useful in other packages, and intended for users who are not very familiar with tuning strategies. The
package tuneRanger is mainly based on the R packages ranger(Wright and Ziegler, 2017), mlrMBO (Bischl et al.,
2017) and mlr(Bischl et al., 2016). The main function tuneRanger of the package works internally as follows:
•Sequentialmodel-basedoptimization(SMBO,seeSection3.3)isusedastuningstrategywith30evaluatedrandom
points for the initial design and 70 iterative steps in the optimization procedure. The number of steps for the
initial design and in the optimization procedure are parameters that can be changed by the user, although the
default settings 30 resp. 70 provide good results in our experiments.
•As a default, the function simultaneously tunes the three parameters mtry, sample size and node size. mtryvalues
are sampled from the space [0;p]withpbeing the number of predictor variables, while sample size values are
sampled from [0:2n;0:9n]withnbeing the number of observations. Node size values are sampled with higher
probability (in the initial design) for smaller values by sampling x from [0;1]and transforming the value by the
formula [(n0:2)x]. Thetunedparameterscanbechangedbytheuserbychangingtheargument tune.parameters ,
if, for example, only the mtryvalue should be tuned or if additional parameters, such as the sampling strategy
(sampling with or without resampling) or the handling of unordered factors (see Hastie et al. (2001), chapter
9.2.4 or the help of the rangerpackage for more details), should be included in the tuning process.
•Out-of-bagpredictionsareusedforevaluation, whichmakesitmuchfasterthanotherpackagesthatuseevaluation
strategies such as cross-validation.
•Classiﬁcation as well as regression is supported.
•The default measure that is optimized is the Brier score for classiﬁcation, which yields a ﬁner evaluation than
the commonly used error rate (Probst and Boulesteix, 2017), and the mean squared error for regression. It can
be changed to any of the 50 measures currently implemented in the R package mlrand documented in the online
tutorial (Schiﬀner et al., 2016): http://mlr-org.github.io/mlr-tutorial/devel/html/measures/index.html
•The ﬁnal recommended hyperparameter setting is calculated by taking the best 5 percent of all SMBO iterations
regarding the chosen performance measure and then calculating the average of each hyperparameter of these
iterations , which is rounded in case of mtryand node size.
Installation and execution
In the following one can see a typical example of the execution of the algorithm. The dataset monks-problem-1 is
taken from OpenML. Execution time can be estimated beforehand with the function estimateTimeTuneRanger which
trains a random forest with default values, multiplies the training time by the number of iterations and adds 50 for
the training and prediction time of surrogate models. The function tuneRanger then executes the tuning algorithm:
library(tuneRanger)
library(mlr)
library(OpenML)
monk_data_1 = getOMLDataSet(333)$data
monk.task = makeClassifTask(data = monk_data_1, target = "class")
9

==== Page 10 ====
# Estimate runtime
estimateTimeTuneRanger(monk.task)
# Approximated time for tuning: 1M 13S
set.seed(123)
# Tuning
res = tuneRanger(monk.task, measure = list(multiclass.brier), num.trees = 1000,
num.threads = 2, iters = 70, iters.warmup = 30)
res
# Recommended parameter settings:
# mtry min.node.size sample.fraction
# 1 6 2 0.8988154
# Results:
# multiclass.brier exec.time
# 1 0.006925637 0.2938
#
# Ranger Model with the new tuned hyperparameters
res$model
# Model for learner.id=classif.ranger; learner.class=classif.ranger
# Trained on: task.id = monk_data; obs = 556; features = 6
# Hyperparameters: num.threads=2,verbose=FALSE,respect.unordered.factors=order,mtry=6,min.node.size=2,
# sample.fraction=0.899,num.trees=1e+03,replace=FALSE
We also performed a benchmark with 5 times repeated 5-fold cross-validation to compare it with a standard
random forest with 1000 trees trained with rangeron this dataset. As can be seen below, we achieved an
improvement of 0.014 in the error rate and 0.120 in the Brier score.
# little benchmark
lrn = makeLearner("classif.ranger", num.trees = 1000, predict.type = "prob")
lrn2 = makeLearner("classif.tuneRanger", num.threads = 1, predict.type = "prob")
set.seed(354)
rdesc = makeResampleDesc("RepCV", reps = 5, folds = 5)
bmr = benchmark(list(lrn, lrn2), monk.task, rdesc, measures = list(mmce, multiclass.brier))
bmr
# Result
# task.id learner.id mmce.test.mean multiclass.brier.test.mean
# 1 monk_data classif.ranger 0.01511905 0.1347917
# 2 monk_data classif.tuneRanger 0.00144144 0.0148708
Further parameters
In the main function tuneRanger there are several parameters that can be changed. The ﬁrst argument is
the task, that has to be created via the mlrfunctions makeClassifTask ormakeRegrTask . The argument
measure has to be a list of the chosen measures that should be optimized, possible measures can be found
with listMeasures or in the online tutorial of mlr. The argument num.trees is the number of trees that
are trained, num.threads is the number of cpu threads that should be used by ranger,itersspeciﬁes the
number of iterations and iters.warmup the number of warm-up steps for the initial design. The argument
tune.parameters can be used to specify manually a list of the tuned parameters. The ﬁnal recommended
hyperparameter setting (average of the best 5 percent of the iterations) is used to train a RF model, which
can be accessed via the list element modelin the ﬁnal outcome.
3.6 Benchmark study
We now compare our new R package tuneRanger with diﬀerent software implementations with tuning
procedures for random forest regarding performance and execution time in a benchmark study on 39 datasets.
10

==== Page 11 ====
3.6.1 Compared algorithms
We compare diﬀerent algorithms in our benchmark study:
•Our package tuneRanger is used with its default settings (30 warm-up steps for the initial design, 70
iterations, tuning of the parameters mtry, node size and sample size, sampling without replacement)
that were set before executing the benchmark experiments. The only parameter of the function that
is varied is the performance measure that has to be optimized. We do not only consider the default
performance measure Brier score ( tuneRangerBrier ) but also examine the versions that optimize the
mean missclassiﬁcation error (MMCE) ( tuneRangerMMCE ), the AUC ( tuneRangerAUC ) and the
logarithmic loss ( tuneRangerLogloss ). Moreover, to examine if only tuning mtryis enough we run the
same algorithms with only tuning the mtryparameter.
•The three tuning implementations of the R packages mlrHyperopt ,caretandtuneRF that are de-
scribed in Section 3.4 are executed with their default setting. We did not include mlrHyperopt with
other performance measures because we expect similar performance as with tuneRanger but very long
runtimes.
•The standard RF algorithm as implemented in the package rangerwith default settings and without
tuning is used as reference, to see the improvement to the default algorithm. We use rangerinstead of
therandomForest package, because it is faster due to the possibility of parallelization on several cores
(Wright and Ziegler, 2017).
For each method, 2000 trees are used to train the random forest. Whenever possible (for tuneRanger ,
mlrHyperopt ,caretand the default rangeralgorithm) we use parallelization with 10 CPU cores with the
help of the rangerpackage (trees are grown in parallel).
3.6.2 Datasets, runtime and evaluation strategy
The benchmark study is conducted on datasets from OpenML (Vanschoren et al., 2013). We use the
OpenML100 benchmarking suite (Bischl et al., 2017) and download it via the OpenML R package (Casal-
icchio et al., 2017). For classiﬁcation we only use datasets that have a binary target and no missing values,
which leads to a collection of 39 datasets. More details about these datasets such as the number of observa-
tions and variables can be found in Bischl et al. (2017). We classify the datasets into small and big by using
theestimateTimeTuneRanger function of tuneRanger with 10 cores. If the estimated runtime is less than
10 minutes, the dataset is classiﬁed as small, otherwise it is classiﬁed as big. This results in 26 small datasets,
13 big datasets.
For the small datasets we perform a 5-fold cross-validation and repeat it 10 times and for the big we just
perform a 5-fold cross-validation. We compare the algorithms by the average of the evaluation measures mean
missclassiﬁcation error (MMCE), AUC, Brier score and logarithmic loss. Deﬁnitions and a good comparison
between measures for classiﬁcation can be found in Ferri et al. (2009). In case of error messages of the tuning
algorithms (on 2 datasets for mlrHyperopt , on 4 datasets for caretand on 3 datasets for tuneRF ), the
worst result of the other algorithms are assigned to these algorithms, if it fails in more than 20 % of the
cross-validation iterations, otherwise we impute missing values by the average of the rest of the results as
proposed by Bischl et al. (2013).
3.6.3 Results
First, to identify possible outliers, we display the boxplots of the diﬀerences between the performances of
the algorithms and the ranger default . Afterwards average results and ranks are calculated and ana-
lyzed. Wedenotethecomparedalgorithmsas tuneRangerMMCE ,tuneRangerAUC ,tuneRangerBrier ,
tuneRangerLogloss ,hyperopt ,caret,tuneRF andranger default .
11

==== Page 12 ====
Outliers and boxplots of diﬀerences
In Figure 1 on the left side, the boxplots of the diﬀerences between the performances of the algorithms and
theranger default with outliers are depicted.
We can see that there are two datasets, for which the performance of default random forest is very bad:
the error rate is by around 0.15 higher than for all the other algorithms (other evaluation measures behave
similarly). For these two datasets it is essential to tune mtry, which is done by all tuning algorithms. The
ﬁrst dataset (called monks-problems-2 in OpenML) is an artiﬁcial dataset which has 6 categorical predictor
variables. If two of them take the value 2 the binary outcome is 1, otherwise 0. Setting mtryto the default
2 (or even worse to the value 1) leads to wrongly partitioned trees: the dependence structure between the
categorical variables cannot be detected perfectly as sometimes the wrong variables are used for the splitting
(since one of the two variables that were randomly chosen in the splitting procedure has to be used for the
considered split). On the other hand, setting mtryto 6 leads to nearly perfect predictions as the dependence
structure can be identiﬁed perfectly. The second dataset with bad performance of the default random forest
is calledmadelon and has 20 informative and 480 non-informative predictor variables. The default mtryvalue
of 22 is much too low, because too many non-informative predictor variables are chosen in the splits. The
tuning algorithms choose a higher mtryvalue and get much better performances on average. For tuneRF we
have 3 outliers regarding the logarithmic loss. This tuning algorithm tends to yield clear-cut predictions with
probabilities near 0 and 1 for these datasets, which lead to the bad performance regarding the logarithmic
loss in these cases.
Average results and ranks
The average results for the 39 datasets can be seen in Table 2 and the average ranks in Table 3. The ranks
are given for each measure and each dataset separately from 1 (best) to 8 (worst) and then averaged over the
datasets. Moreover, on the right side of Figure 1 we can see the boxplots of the performance diﬀerences to
theranger default without the outliers, which give an impression about the distribution of the performance
diﬀerences.
MMCE AUC Brier score Logarithmic Loss Training Runtime
tuneRangerMMCE 0.0923 0.9191 0.1357 0.2367 903.8218
tuneRangerAUC 0.0925 0.9199 0.1371 0.2450 823.4048
tuneRangerBrier 0.0932 0.9190 0.1325 0.2298 967.2051
tuneRangerLogloss 0.0936 0.9187 0.1330 0.2314 887.8342
mlrHyperopt 0.0934 0.9197 0.1383 0.2364 2713.2438
caret 0.0972 0.9190 0.1439 0.2423 1216.2770
tuneRF 0.0942 0.9174 0.1448 0.2929 862.9917
ranger default 0.1054 0.9128 0.1604 0.2733 3.8607
Table 2: Average performance results of the diﬀerent algorithms.
Error rate AUC Brier score Logarithmic Loss Training Runtime
tuneRangerMMCE 4.19 4.53 4.41 4.54 5.23
tuneRangerAUC 3.77 2.56 4.42 4.22 4.63
tuneRangerBrier 3.13 3.91 1.85 2.69 5.44
tuneRangerLogloss 3.97 4.04 2.64 2.23 5.00
mlrHyperopt 4.37 4.68 4.74 4.90 7.59
caret 5.50 5.24 6.08 5.51 4.36
tuneRF 4.90 5.08 5.44 6.23 2.76
ranger default 6.17 5.96 6.42 5.68 1.00
Table 3: Average rank results of the diﬀerent algorithms.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Error rate −0.15−0.10−0.050.000.05
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRangerError rate (without outliers)−0.015 −0.005 0.005
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRanger
AUC −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRangerAUC (without outliers)−0.004 0.000 0.004 0.008
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRanger
Brier score −0.25 −0.15 −0.05
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRangerBrier score (without outliers)−0.05 −0.03 −0.01 0.01
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRanger
Logarithmic Loss −0.4−0.20.00.20.40.6
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRangerLogarithmic Loss (without outliers)−0.10−0.050.000.05
MMCE AUCBrierLogloss mlrHyp.carettuneRFranger
tuneRangerFigure 1: Boxplots of performance diﬀerences to ranger default . On the left side the boxplots with outliers are depicted
and on the right side the same plots without outliers. For the error rate, the Brier score and the logarithmic loss, low
values are better, while for the AUC, high values are preferable. If the tuned measure equals the evaluation measure the
boxplot is displayed in grey.
13

==== Page 14 ====
We see that the diﬀerences are small, although on average all algorithms perform better than the ranger
default. The best algorithm is on average by around 0.013 better regarding the error rate (MMCE) and by
0.007 better in terms of the AUC. These small diﬀerences are not very surprising as the results by Probst
et al. (2018) suggest that random forest is one of the machine learning algorithms that are less tunable.
On average the tuneRanger methods outperform ranger with default settings for all measures. Also
tuning the speciﬁc measure does on average always provide the best results among all algorithms among the
tuneRanger algorithms. It is only partly true if we look at the ranks: tuneRangerBrier has the best
average rank for the error rate, not tuneRangerMMCE .caretandtuneRF are on average better than
ranger default (with the exception of the logarithmic loss), but are clearly outperformed by most of the
tuneRanger methods for most of the measures. mlrHyperopt is quite competitive and achieves comparable
performance to the tuneRanger algorithms. This is not surprising as it also uses mlrMBO for tuning like
tuneRanger . Its main disadvantage is the runtime. It uses 25 iterations in the SMBO procedure compared
to 100 in our case, which makes it a bit faster for smaller datasets. But for bigger datasets it takes longer as,
unliketuneRanger , it does not use the out-of-bag method for internal evaluation but 10-fold cross-validation,
which takes around 10 times longer.
Figure 2 displays the average runtime in seconds for the diﬀerent algorithms and diﬀerent datasets. The
datasetsareorderedbytheruntimeofthe tuneRangerMMCE algorithm. Formostofthedatasets, tuneRF
is the fastest tuning algorithm, although there is one dataset for which it takes longer than all the other
datasetes. The runtime of mlrHyperopt is similar to the runtime of tuneRanger for smaller datasets, but
when runtime increases it gets worse and worse compared to the tuneRanger algorithms. For this reason we
claim that tuneRanger is preferable especially for bigger datasets, when runtime also plays a more important
role.
To examine if tuning only mtrycould provide comparable results to tuning the parameters mtry, node size
and sample size all together we run the tuneRanger algorithms with only tuning mtry. The results show
that tuning the node size and sample size provides on average a valuable improvement. On average the error
rate (MMCE) improves by 0.004, the AUC by 0.002, the Brier score by 0.010 and the logarithmic loss by
0.014 when tuning all three parameters.
14

==== Page 15 ====
0 10 20 30 4005000100001500020000
Dataset numberTime in secondstuneRangerMMCE
tuneRangerAUC
tuneRangerBrier
tuneRangerLogloss
mlrHyperopt
caret
tuneRF
ranger default
0 10 20 30 40
Dataset numberTime in seconds (logarithmic scale)
10−1100101102103104Figure 2: Average runtime of the diﬀerent algorithms on diﬀerent datasets (upper plot: unscaled, lower plot: logarithmic
scale). The datasets are ordered by the average runtime of the tuneRangerMMCE algorithm.
15

==== Page 16 ====
4 Conclusion and Discussion
The RF algorithm has several hyperparameters that may inﬂuence its performance. The number of trees
should be set high: the higher the number of trees, the better the results in terms of performance and
precision of variable importances. However, the improvement obtained by adding trees diminishes as more
and more trees are added. The hyperparameters mtry, sample size and node size are the parameters that
control the randomness of the RF. They should be set to achieve a reasonable strength of the single trees
without too much correlation between the trees (bias-variance trade-oﬀ). Out of these parameters, mtryis
most inﬂuential both according to the literature and in our own experiments. The best value of mtrydepends
on the number of variables that are related to the outcome. Sample size and node size have a minor inﬂuence
on the performance but are worth tuning in many cases as we also showed empirically in our benchmark
experiment. As far as the splitting rule is concerned, there exist several alternatives to the standard RF
splitting rule, for example those used in conditional inference forests (Hothorn et al., 2006) or extremely
randomized trees (Geurts et al., 2006).
The literature on RF cruelly lacks systematic large-scale comparison studies on the diﬀerent variants and
values of hyperparameters. It is especially scarce as far as the impact on variable importance measures is
concerned. This is all the more regrettable given that a large part of the data analysts using RF pay at
least as much attention to the output variable importances as to the output prediction rule. Beyond the
special case of RF, literature on computational methods tends to generally focus on the development of new
methods as opposed to comparison studies investigating existing methods. As discussed in Boulesteix et al.
(2018), computational journals often require the development of novel methods as a prequisit for publication.
Comparison studies presented in papers introducing new methods are often biased in favor of these new
methods—as a result of the publication bias and publication pressure. As a result of this situation, neutral
comparison studies as deﬁned by Boulesteix et al. (2017) (i.e., focusing on the comparison of existing methods
rather than aiming at demonstrating the superiority of a new one, and conducted by authors who are as a
group approximately equally competent on all considered methods) are important but rare.
The literature review presented in this paper, which is to some extent disappointing in the sense that
clear guidance is missing, leads us to make a plea for more studies investigating and comparing the behaviors
and performances of RF variants and hyperparameter choices. Such studies are, in our opinion, at least as
important as the development of further variants that would even increase the need for comparisons.
In the second part of the paper, diﬀerent tuning methods for random forest are compared in a benchmark
study. The results and previous studies show that tuning random forest can improve the performance although
the eﬀect of tuning is much smaller than for other machine learning algorithms such as support vector ma-
chines (Mantovani et al., 2015). Out of existing tuning algorithms, we suggest to use sequential model-based
optimization (SMBO) to tune the parameters mtry, sample size and node size simultanously. Moreover, the
out-of-bag predictions can be used for tuning. This approach is faster than, for example, cross-validation.
The whole procedure is implemented in the package tuneRanger . This package allows users to choose the
speciﬁc measure that should be minimized (e.g., the AUC in case of classiﬁcation). In our benchmark study
it achieved on average better performances than the standard random forest and other software that imple-
ment tuning for random forest, while the fast tuneRF function from the package randomForest can be
recommended if computational speed is an issue.
References
Belgiu, M. and Drăguţ, L. (2016) Random forest in remote sensing: A review of applications and future
directions. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing ,114, 24–31.
16

==== Page 17 ====
Bergstra, J. and Bengio, Y. (2012) Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,13, 281–305.
Bernard, S., Heutte, L. and Adam, S. (2009) Inﬂuence of hyperparameters on random forest accuracy. In
MCS, vol. 5519 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 171–180. Springer.
Biau, G. and Scornet, E. (2016) A random forest guided tour. Test,25, 197–227.
Birattari, M., Yuan, Z., Balaprakash, P. and Stützle, T. (2010) F-Race and iterated F-Race: An overview. In
Experimental methods for the analysis of optimization algorithms , 311–336. Springer.
Bischl, B.,Casalicchio,G., Feurer,M.,Hutter,F., Lang,M.,Mantovani,R.G.,vanRijn,J.N.andVanschoren,
J. (2017) OpenML benchmarking suites and the OpenML100. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03731 . URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03731 .
Bischl, B., Lang, M., Kotthoﬀ, L., Schiﬀner, J., Richter, J., Studerus, E., Casalicchio, G. and Jones, Z. M.
(2016) mlr: Machine learning in R. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,17, 1–5.
Bischl, B., Richter, J., Bossek, J., Horn, D., Thomas, J. and Lang, M. (2017) mlrMBO: A modular framework
for model-based optimization of expensive black-box functions. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03373 . URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03373 .
Bischl, B., Schiﬀner, J. and Weihs, C. (2013) Benchmarking local classiﬁcation methods. Computational
Statistics ,28, 2599–2619.
Bohachevsky, I. O., Johnson, M. E. and Stein, M. L. (1986) Generalized simulated annealing for function
optimization. Technometrics ,28, 209–217.
Boulesteix, A.-L., Bender, A., Lorenzo Bermejo, J. and Strobl, C. (2012a) Random forest gini importance
favours snps with large minor allele frequency: impact, sources and recommendations. Brieﬁngs in Bioin-
formatics ,13, 292–304.
Boulesteix, A.-L., Binder, H., Abrahamowicz, M. and Sauerbrei, W. (2018) On the necessity and design of
studies comparing statistical methods. Biometrical Journal ,60, 216–218.
Boulesteix, A.-L., Janitza, S., Kruppa, J. and König, I. R. (2012b) Overview of random forest methodology
and practical guidance with emphasis on computational biology and bioinformatics. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery ,2, 493–507.
Boulesteix, A.-L., Wilson, R. and Hapfelmeier, A. (2017) Towards evidence-based computational statistics:
lessons from clinical research on the role and design of real-data benchmark studies. BMC Medical Research
Methodology ,17, 138.
Breiman, L. (1996) Out-of-bag estimation. Tech. rep. , UC Berkeley, Department of Statistics.
— (2001) Random forests. Machine Learning ,45, 5–32.
Casalicchio, G., Bossek, J., Lang, M., Kirchhoﬀ, D., Kerschke, P., Hofner, B., Seibold, H., Vanschoren, J.
and Bischl, B. (2017) OpenML: An R package to connect to the machine learning platform OpenML.
Computational Statistics ,32, 1–15.
Criminisi, A., Shotton, J., Konukoglu, E. et al. (2012) Decision forests: A uniﬁed framework for classiﬁcation,
regression, density estimation, manifold learning and semi-supervised learning. Foundations and Trends ®
in Computer Graphics and Vision ,7, 81–227.
17

==== Page 18 ====
Díaz-Uriarte, R. and De Andres, S. A. (2006) Gene selection and classiﬁcation of microarray data using
random forest. BMC Bioinformatics ,7, 3.
Fernández-Delgado, M., Cernadas, E., Barro, S. and Amorim, D. (2014) Do we need hundreds of classiﬁers
to solve real world classiﬁcation problems? Journal of Machine Learning Research ,15, 3133–3181.
Ferri, C., Hernández-Orallo, J. and Modroiu, R. (2009) An experimental comparison of performance measures
for classiﬁcation. Pattern Recognition Letters ,30, 27–38.
Genuer, R., Poggi, J.-M.andTuleau, C.(2008)Randomforests: Somemethodologicalinsights. ArXiv preprint
arXiv:0811.3619 . URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/0811.3619 .
Genuer, R., Poggi, J.-M. and Tuleau-Malot, C. (2010) Variable selection using random forests. Pattern
Recognition Letters ,31, 2225–2236.
Geurts, P., Ernst, D. and Wehenkel, L. (2006) Extremely randomized trees. Machine Learning ,63, 3–42.
Goldstein, B. A., Polley, E. C. and Briggs, F. (2011) Random forests for genetic association studies. Statistical
Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology ,10.
Grömping, U. (2009) Variable importance assessment in regression: linear regression versus random forest.
The American Statistician ,63, 308–319.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. and Friedman, J. (2001) The Elements of Statistical Learning . Springer Series in
Statistics. New York, NY, USA: Springer New York Inc.
Hothorn, T., Hornik, K. and Zeileis, A. (2006) Unbiased recursive partitioning: A conditional inference
framework. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics ,15, 651–674.
Hothorn, T. and Zeileis, A. (2015) partykit: A modular toolkit for recursive partytioning in R. Journal of
Machine Learning Research ,16, 3905–3909.
Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H. and Leyton-Brown, K. (2011) Sequential model-based optimization for general algo-
rithm conﬁguration , 507–523. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Janitza, S., Binder, H. and Boulesteix, A.-L. (2016) Pitfalls of hypothesis tests and model selection on boot-
strap samples: causes and consequences in biometrical applications. Biometrical Journal ,58, 447–473.
Janitza, S. and Hornung, R. (2018) On the overestimation of random forest’s out-of-bag error. PLOS ONE ,
13, e0201904.
Jones, D. R., Schonlau, M. and Welch, W. J. (1998) Eﬃcient global optimization of expensive black-box
functions. Journal of Global optimization ,13, 455–492.
Kuhn, M. (2008) Building predictive models in R using the caret package. Journal of Statistical Software ,28,
1–26.
Liaw, A. and Wiener, M. (2002) Classiﬁcation and regression by randomForest. R News,2, 18–22.
Lin, Y. and Jeon, Y. (2006) Random forests and adaptive nearest neighbors. Journal of the American
Statistical Association ,101, 578–590.
Lunetta, K. L., Hayward, L. B., Segal, J. and Van Eerdewegh, P. (2004) Screening large-scale association
study data: exploiting interactions using random forests. BMC Genetics ,5, 32.
18

==== Page 19 ====
Mantovani, R. G., Rossi, A. L., Vanschoren, J., Bischl, B. and Carvalho, A. C. (2015) To tune or not to tune:
recommending when to adjust svm hyper-parameters via meta-learning. In Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2015
International Joint Conference on , 1–8. IEEE.
Martínez-Muñoz, G. and Suárez, A. (2010) Out-of-bag estimation of the optimal sample size in bagging.
Pattern Recognition ,43, 143–152.
Oshiro, T. M., Perez, P. S. and Baranauskas, J. A. (2012) How many trees in a random forest? In Machine
Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition: 8th International Conference, MLDM 2012, Berlin,
Germany, July 13-20, 2012, Proceedings , vol. 7376, 154. Springer.
Probst, P. (2017) OOBCurve: Out of Bag Learning Curve . R package version 0.2.
— (2018) tuneRanger: Tune random forest of the ’ranger’ package . R package version 0.1.
Probst, P., Bischl, B. and Boulesteix, A.-L. (2018) Tunability: Importance of hyperparameters of machine
learning algorithms. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09596 . URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09596 .
Probst, P. and Boulesteix, A.-L. (2017) To tune or not to tune the number of trees in random forest? ArXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.05654 . URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05654 .
Richter, J. (2017) mlrHyperopt: Easy hyperparameter optimization with mlr and mlrMBO . R package version
0.0.1.
van Rijn, J. N. and Hutter, F. (2018) Hyperparameter importance across datasets. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , 2367–2376. ACM.
Schiﬀner, J., Bischl, B., Lang, M., Richter, J., Jones, Z. M., Probst, P., Pﬁsterer, F., Gallo, M., Kirchhoﬀ,
D., Kühn, T., Thomas, J. and Kotthoﬀ, L. (2016) mlr tutorial. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1609.06146 . URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06146 .
Segal, M. R. (2004) Machine learning benchmarks and random forest regression. Center for Bioinformatics
& Molecular Biostatistics .
Seibold, H., Bernau, C., Boulesteix, A.-L. and De Bin, R. (2018) On the choice and inﬂuence of the number
of boosting steps for high-dimensional linear cox-models. Computational Statistics ,33, 1195–1215.
Shmueli, G. et al. (2010) To explain or to predict? Statistical Science ,25, 289–310.
Strobl, C., Boulesteix, A.-L., Zeileis, A. and Hothorn, T. (2007) Bias in random forest variable importance
measures: Illustrations, sources and a solution. BMC Bioinformatics ,8, 25.
Vanschoren, J., van Rijn, J. N., Bischl, B. and Torgo, L. (2013) OpenML: Networked science in machine
learning. SIGKDD Explorations ,15, 49–60.
Wright, M. N., Dankowski, T. and Ziegler, A. (2017) Unbiased split variable selection for random survival
forests using maximally selected rank statistics. Statistics in Medicine ,36, 1272–1284.
Wright, M. N. and Ziegler, A. (2017) ranger: A fast implementation of random forests for high dimensional
data in C++ and R. Journal of Statistical Software ,77, 1–17.
Wright, M. N., Ziegler, A. and König, I. R. (2016) Do little interactions get lost in dark random forests? BMC
Bioinformatics ,17, 145.
Ziegler, A. and König, I. R. (2014) Mining data with random forests: current options for real-world applica-
tions.Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery ,4, 55–63.
19

