==== Page 1 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms
and Applications
Tong Yu yutong01@inspur.com
Department of AI and HPC
Inspur Electronic Information Industry Co., Ltd
1036 Langchao Rd, Jinan, Shandong, China
Hong Zhu zhuhongbj@inspur.com
Department of AI and HPC
Inspur (Beijing) Electronic Information Industry Co., Ltd
2F, Block C, 2 Xinxi Rd., Shangdi, Haidian Dist, Beijing, China
Editor:
Abstract
Since deep neural networks were developed, they have made huge contributions to peoples
everyday lives. Machine learning provides more rational advice than humans are capable
of in almost every aspect of daily life. However, despite this achievement, the design and
training of neural networks are still challenging and unpredictable procedures that have
been alleged to be alchemy. To lower the technical thresholds for common users, automated
hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) has become a popular topic in both academic and
industrial areas. This paper provides a review of the most essential topics on HPO. The
rst section introduces the key hyper-parameters related to model training and structure,
and discusses their importance and methods to dene the value range. Then, the research
focuses on major optimization algorithms and their applicability, covering their eciency
and accuracy especially for deep learning networks. This study next reviews major services
and tool-kits for HPO, comparing their support for state-of-the-art searching algorithms,
feasibility with major deep-learning frameworks, and extensibility for new modules designed
by users. The paper concludes with problems that exist when HPO is applied to deep
learning, a comparison between optimization algorithms, and prominent approaches for
model evaluation with limited computational resources.
Keywords: Hyper-parameter, auto-tuning, deep neural network
1. Introduction
In the past several years, neural network techniques have become ubiquitous and inu-
ential in both research and commercial applications. In the past 10 years, neural networks
have shown impressive results in image classication (Szegedy et al., 2016; He et al., 2016),
objective detection (Girshick, 2015; Redmon et al., 2016), natural language understand-
ing (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Vaswani et al., 2017), and industrial control sys-
tems (Abbeel, 2016; Hammond, 2017).However, neural networks are ecient in applications
but inecient when obtaining a model. It is thought to be a brute force method because a
network is initialized with a random status and trained to an accurate model with an ex-
tremely large dataset. Moreover, researchers must dedicate their eorts to carefully coping
1arXiv:2003.05689v1  [cs.LG]  12 Mar 2020

==== Page 2 ====
Yu and Zhu
with model design, algorithm design, and corresponding hyper-parameter selection, which
means that the application of neural networks comes at a great price. Based on experience is
generally the most widely used method, which means a practicable set of hyper-parameters
requires researchers to have experience in training neural networks. However, the credibil-
ity of empirical values is weakened because of the lack of logical reasoning. In addition,
experiences generally provide workable instead of optimal hyper-parameter sets.
The no free lunch theorem suggests that the computational cost for any optimiza-
tion problem is the same for all problems and no solution oers a shortcut (Wolpert and
Macready, 1997; Igel, 2014).A feasible alternative for computational resources is the pre-
liminary knowledge of experts, which is ecient in selecting inuential parameters and
narrowing down the search space. To save the rare resource of experts experience, auto-
mated machine learning (AutoML) has been proposed as a burgeoning technology to design
and train neural networks automatically, at the cost of computational resources (Feurer
et al., 2015; Katz et al., 2016; Bello et al., 2017; Zoph and Le, 2016; Jin et al., 2018).Hyper-
parameter optimization (HPO) is an important component of AutoML in searching for
optimum hyper-parameters for neural network structures and the model training process.
Hyper-parameter refers to parameters that cannot be updated during the training of
machine learning. They can be involved in building the structure of the model, such as
the number of hidden layers and the activation function, or in determining the eciency
and accuracy of model training, such as the learning rate (LR) of stochastic gradient de-
scent (SGD), batch size, and optimizer (hyp).The history of HPO dates back to the early
1990s (Ripley, 1993; King et al., 1995),and the method is widely applied for neural net-
works with the increasing use of machine learning. HPO can be viewed as the nal step of
model design and the rst step of training a neural network. Considering the inuence of
hyper-parameters on training accuracy and speed, they must carefully be congured with
experience before the training process begins (Rodriguez, 2018). The process of HPO auto-
matically optimizes the hyper-parameters of a machine learning model to remove humans
from the loop of a machine learning system. As a trade of human eorts, HPO demands
a large amount of computational resources, especially when several hyper-parameters are
optimized together. The questions of how to utilize computational resources and design an
ecient search space have resulted in various studies on HPO on algorithms and toolkits.
Conceptually, HPOs purposes are threefold (Feurer and Hutter, 2019): to reduce the costly
menial work of articial intelligence (AI) experts and lower the threshold of research and
development; to improve the accuracy and eciency of neural network training (Melis et al.,
2017); and to make the choice of hyper-parameter set more convincing and the training re-
sults more reproducible (Bergstra et al., 2013).
In recent years, HPO has become increasingly necessary because of two rising trends
in the development of deep learning models. The rst trend is the upscaling of neural
networks for enhanced accuracy (Tan and Le, 2019).Empirical studies have indicated that
in most cases, more complex machine learning models with deeper and wider layers work
better than do those with simple structures (He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis,
2016; Huang et al., 2019).The second trend is to design a tricky lightweight model to pro-
vide satisfying accuracy with fewer weights and parameters (Ma et al., 2018; Sandler et al.,
2018; Tan et al., 2019). In this case, it is more dicult to adapt empirical values because
of the stricter choices of hyper-parameters. Hyper-parameter tuning plays an essential role
2

==== Page 3 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
in both cases: a model with a complex structure indicates more hyper-parameters to tune,
and a model with a carefully designed structure implies that every hyper-parameter must
be tuned to a strict range to reproduce the accuracy. For a widely used model, tuning its
hyper-parameters by hand is possible because the ability to tune by hand depends on ex-
perience and researchers can always borrow knowledge from previous works. This is similar
for models at a small scale. However, for a larger model or newly published models, the
wide range of hyper-parameter choices requires a great deal of menial work by researchers,
as well as much time and computational resources for trial and error.
In addition to research, the industrial application of deep learning is a crucial practice in
automobiles, manufacturing, and digital assistants. However, even for trained professional
researchers, it is still no easy task to explore and implement a favorable model to solve
specic problems. Users with less experience have substantial needs for suggested hyper-
parameters and ready-to-use HPO tools. Motivated by both academic needs and practical
application, automated hyper-parameter tuning services (Golovin et al., 2017; Amazon,
2018)and toolkits (Liaw et al., 2018; Microsoft, 2018)provide a solution to the limitation of
manual deep learning designs.
This study is motivated by the prosperous demand for design and training deep learning
network in industry and research. The diculty in selecting proper parameters for dierent
tasks makes it necessary to summarize existing algorithms and tools. The objective of this
research is to conduct a survey on feasible algorithms for HPO, make a comparison on lead-
ing tools for HPO tasks, and propose challenges on HPO tasks on deep learning networks.
Thus, this remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 begins with a dis-
cussion of key hyper-parameters for building and training neural networks, including their
inuence on models, potential search spaces, and empirical values or schedules based on pre-
vious experience. Section 3 focuses on widely used algorithms in hyper-parameter searching,
and these approaches are categorized into searching algorithms and trial schedulers. This
section also evaluates the eciency and applicability of these algorithms for dierent ma-
chine learning models. Section 4 provides an overview of mainstream HPO toolkits and
services, compares their pros and cons, and presents some practical and implementation de-
tails. Section 5 more comprehensively compares existing HPO methods and highlights the
ecient methods of model evaluation, and nally, Section 6 provides the studys conclusions.
The contribution of this study is summarized as follows:
- Hyper-parameters are systematically categorized into structure-related and training-
related. The discussion of their importance and empirical strategies are helpful to
determine which hyper-parameters are involved in HPO.
- HPO algorithms are analyzed and compared in detail, according to their accuracy,
eciency and scope of application. The analysis on previous studies is not only
committed to include state-of-the-art algorithms, but also to clarify limitations on
certain scenarios.
- By comparing HPO toolkits, this study gives insights of the design of close-sourced
libraries and open-sourced services, and claries the targeted users for each of them.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Yu and Zhu
- The potential research direction regarding to existing problems are suggested on al-
gorithms, applications and techniques.
2. Major Hyper-Parameters and Search Space
Considering the computational resources required, hyper-parameters with greater im-
portance receive preferential treatment in the process of HPO. Hyper-parameters with a
stronger eect on weights during training are more inuential for neural network train-
ing (Ng, 2017). It is dicult to quantitatively determine which of the hyper-parameters
are the most signicant for nal accuracy. In general, there are more studies on those with
higher importance, and their importance has been decided by previous experience.
Hyper-parameters can be categorized into two groups: those used for training and those
used for model design. A proper choice of hyper-parameters related to model training al-
lows neural networks to learn faster and achieve enhanced performance. Currently, the most
adopted optimizer for training a deep neural network is stochastic gradient descent (Rob-
bins and Monro, 1951) with momentum (Qian, 1999) as well as its variants such as Ada-
Grad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012a), and Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2014). In addition to the choice of optimizer, corresponding hyper-parameters (e.g., mo-
mentum) are critical for certain networks. During the training process, batch size and LR
draw the most attention because they determine the speed of convergence, the tuning of
which should always be ensured. Hyper-parameters for model design are more related to
the structure of neural networks, the most typical example being the number of hidden
layers and width of layers. These hyper-parameters usually measure the models learning
capacity, which is determined by the complexity of function (Agrawal, 2018).
This section provides an in-depth discussion on hyper-parameters of great importance
for model structures and training, as well as introduce their eect in models and provide
suggested values or schedules.
2.1 Learning Rate
LR is a positive scalar that determines the length of step during SGD (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). In most cases, the LR must be manually adjusted during model training,
and this adjustment is often necessary for enhanced accuracy (Bengio, 2012).An alternative
choice of xed LR is a varied LR over the training process. This method is referred to as
the LR schedule or LR decay (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Adaptive LR can be adjusted in
response to the performance or structure of the model, and it is supported by a learning
algorithm (Smith, 2017; Brownlee, 2019).
Constant LR, as the simplest schedule, is often set as the default by deep learning
frameworks (e.g., Keras). It is an important but tricky task to determine a good value
for LR. With a proper constant LR, the network is able to be trained to a passable but
unsatisfactory accuracy because the initial value could always be overlarge, especially in
the nal few steps. A small improvement based on the constant value is to set an initial
rate as 0.1, for example, adjusting to 0.01 when the accuracy is saturated, and to 0.001 if
necessary (nachiket tanksale, 2018).
Linear LR decay is a common choice for researchers who wish to set a schedule. It
changes gradually during the training process based on time or step. The basic mathematical
4

==== Page 5 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 1: Linear decay of learning rate with time-based (left) and drop-based (right) sched-
ules
function of linear decay is
lr=lr0
1 +kt
where lr0and kare hyper-parameters for linear learning decay, indicating the initial LR
and decay rate. A typical choice of tcould be training time or number for self-iteration.
Iftis training time, the schedule of LR is a continuous change, as shown in Figure 1. If t
stands for the number of iterations, the LR drops every few iterations. A typical choice is
to drop the LR by half every 10 epochs (Lau, 2017) by 0.1 every 20 epochs (Li et al., 2015).
This has the following mathematical form:
lr=lr0
1 +deacayselfiteration
Compared with LR itself, the deep learning model is less sensitive to lr0and k.
Exponential decay is another widely used schedule (Li et al., 2015).Compared with
linear decay, an exponential schedule provides a more drastic decay at the beginning and
a gentle decay when approaching convergence (Figure 2). The basic mathematical form of
exponential decay is as follows:
lr=lr0exp( kt)
where lr0and kare hyper-parameters for exponential learning decay. Similar to linear
decay, tcould be the number of self-iterations or epochs. If the number of epochs is used,
the LR can be expressed with a similar form:
lr=lr0floorepoch
epochsdrop
In addition to the initial LR and epoch drop rate, oor is another hyper-parameter.
Generally, the LR is set to drop every 10 epochs ( epochsdrop =10) by half ( oor =0.5),but
these can be decided by the model. EcientNet (Tan and Le, 2019) uses an exponential
schedule when trained with ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Its choice for lr0,oor and
epochsdrop are too tricky to be designed purely by hand. For example, the LR is updated
5

==== Page 6 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 2: Exponential decay of learning rate
every 2.4 epochs ( epochsdrop =2.4) by 0.97 ( oor =0.97). Automatic hyper-parameter tun-
ing is supposed to be applied in this case.
A typical LR schedule may encounter some challenges when applied to a certain model.
One problem is that users must determine all hyper-parameters in the schedule in advance
of training, which is a task that depends on experience. Another problem is that in the
abovementioned schedules, the LR only varies with time or steps, and the same value is
applied for all layers in a model. The rst problem is typically solved with automated HPO
or the cyclical LR method (Smith, 2017). The LR is updated in a triangle rule within a
certain bound value, and the bound value is decayed in a certain cyclic schedule (Figure 3).
Regarding the second problem, this study (You et al., 2017) suggested an algorithm
Figure 3: Learning rate decay in a cyclic schedule (source:
https://github.com/bckenstler/CLR)
based on layer-wise adaptive rate scaling (LARS). In their study, every layer had a local
LR related to its weight and gradient. Users decide how to adjust the LR according to the
layers and related hyper-parameters.
In reality, selecting the optimal LR or its optimum schedule is a challenge. A small
LR leads to slow convergence, whereas a large LR may prevent the model from converging
(Figure 4). The LR schedule must be adjusted according to the optimizer algorithm (Lau,
2017). If the LR schedule must be determined in advance, it is recommended to simultane-
ously tune the hyper-parameters of the LR schedule and corresponding optimizers.
The choice of LR varies with specic tasks, but generally some tips exist that are based
6

==== Page 7 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 4: Eect of learning rate (adapted gure from: https://www.jeremyjordan.me/nn-
learning-rate/)
on our experience. They can be viewed as a general rule for hyper-parameter tuning.
- In practice, it is dicult to decide the importance of a hyper-parameter if one has
no experience of it. A sensitivity test is suggested (Hamby, 1994; Breierova and
Choudhari, 1996) to ensure the inuence of a certain hyper-parameter.
- Initial values of hyper-parameters are inuential and must be carefully determined.
The initial LR could be a comparatively large value because it will decay during
training. In the early stage of training, a large LR will lead to fast convergence with
fewer risks (Figure 4)
- Use log scale to update the LR. Thus, exponential decay could be a better choice. An
exponential schedule could be applicable for many other tuning hyper-parameters,
such as momentum and weight decay.
- Try more schedules. Exponential decay is not always the best choice; it depends on
the model and dataset.
2.2 Optimizer
Optimizers, or optimization algorithms, play a critical role in improving accuracy and
training speed. Hyper-parameters related to optimizers include the choice of optimizer,
mini-batch size, momentum, and beta. Selecting an appropriate optimizer is a tricky task.
This section discusses the most widely adopted optimizers (mini-batch gradient descent,
RMSprop, and Adam), related hyper-parameters, and suggested values.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 5: (a) SGD without momentum; (b) SGD with momentum (Source:
https://www.willamette.edu/ gorr/classes/cs449/momrate.html)
The aim of mini-batch gradient descent (Li et al., 2014)is to solve the following two prob-
lems. Compared with vanilla gradient descent (Li et al., 2015),mini-batch gradient descent
(mini-batch GD) accelerates the training process, especially on a large dataset. Compared
with SGD with a mini-batch size of 1, mini-batch GD reduces the noise and increases the
probability of convergence (Ng, 2017).Mini-batch size is a hyper-parameter, and the value is
highly related to the memory of the computation unit. Its value is suggested to be a power
of 2 because of the access of CPU/GPU memory. The model runs faster if a power of 2 is
used as the mini-batch size, and 32 could be a good default value (Bengio, 2012; Masters
and Luschi, 2018). The maximum mini-batch size tting in CPU/GPU memory. With a
constant LR, researchers may nd that their model oscillates within a small range but does
not exactly converge in the last few steps (Figure 4). An opinion exists that for enhanced
accuracy, mini-batch size and LR could be re-optimized after other hyper-parameters are
xed (Masters and Luschi, 2018). Vanilla mini-batch GD without momentum may take
longer than some more recent optimizers, and the convergence relies on a robust initial
value and LR. As the foundation of more advanced optimization algorithms, mini-batch
GD is still used but not widely in recent publications (Ruder, 2016).
An improved method for solving the problem of oscillation and convergence speed is
SGD with momentum (Loizou and Richt arik, 2017). The momentum method (Qian, 1999)
accelerates the standard SGD by calculating the exponentially weighted averages for gradi-
ents (Figure 5). Furthermore, it helps the cost function go in the correct direction through
adding a fraction beta of the update vector:
vdw=vdw+ (1 )dw
w=w lrvdw
where windicates the weight. Here, momentum is also a hyper-parameter. The momen-
tum term is usually set as 0.9, or 0.99 or 0.999 if necessary. This reduces the oscillation
by strengthening the update in the same direction and decreasing the change in dierent
directions (Sutskever et al., 2013).
Root mean square prop (RMSprop) is one of the most widely used optimizers in the
training of deep neural networks (Karpathy et al., 2016). RMSprop accelerates the gradi-
ent descent in a manner similar to Adagrad and Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012), but it exhibits
superior performance when steps become smaller. It can be considered the development
of Rprop (Igel and H usken, 2000) for mini-batch weight update. In RMSprop, the LR
8

==== Page 9 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 6: Comparison of SGD (orange) and RMSprop (green) for optimization
is adapted by dividing by the root of the squared gradient. Compared with the original
GD, RMSprop slows the vertical oscillation and accelerates the horizontal movement from
a much larger LR (Bushaev, 2018), and it is implemented as follows. RMSprop uses expo-
nential weighted averages of the squares instead of directly using dwand db:
Sdw=Sdw+ (1 )dw2
Sdb=Sdb+ (1 )db2
w=w lrdw
sqrt(Sdw)
whereis the moving average parameter, suggested as 0.9 (Hinton et al., 2012a). Sdwis
relatively small and thus dwis divided by a relatively small number, whereas Sdbis rela-
tively large and thus dbs divided by a larger number. In this way, RMSprop endures a
slower movement in the bias direction (vertical) and a faster move in the weight direction
(horizontal; Figure 6).
Adaptive momentum estimation (Adam) also achieves good results quickly on most
neural network architectures. As a combination of GD with momentum and RMSprop,
Adam adds bias-correction and momentum to RMSprop, enabling it to slightly outperform
RMSprop in the late stage of optimization. It calculates the exponential weighted average
as well as squares of past gradients. Parameters 1and2control the decay rate as shown
below. Moreover, Adam retains an exponential decaying average of past gradients. Its re-
quirement for memory is in the middle of GD with momentum and RMSprop. In practice,
Adam is suggested as the default optimization algorithm for deep learning training (Karpa-
thy et al., 2016). It has more hyper-parameters compared with other optimizers, but works
well with little tuning of hyper-parameters except for LR.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Yu and Zhu
vdwandvdbare updated as with GD with momentum:
vdw=1vdw+ (1 1)dw
vdb=1vdb+ (1 1)db
SdwandSdbare updated as with RMSprop:
Sdw=2Sdw+ (1 2)dw2
Sdb=2Sdb+ (1 2)db2
The biases are corrected as follows:
vcorrected
dw =vdw+ (1 t
1)
vcorrected
db =vdb+ (1 t
1)
Scorrected
dw =Sdw+ (1 t
w)
weights wand biases bare updated as follows:
w=w lrvcorrected
dw
sqrt(Scorrected
dw+)
b=b lrvcorrected
db
sqrt(Scorrected
db+)
For the adjustment of LR, the previous section can be referred to, and it is reasonable
to start from 0.001. 1is the parameter of momentum, with a suggested value of 0.9; 2
is the parameter of RMSprop, with a suggested value of 0.999; here is used to avoid di-
viding by 0; and 10 8is the default value. The default congurations are suitable for most
problems, and therefore Adam is relatively easy to apply (Brownlee, 2017). The suggested
values are adapted by most deep learning frameworks, including TensorFlow (Abadi et al.,
2016), Keras (Chollet, 2018), Cae (Jia et al., 2014), MxNet (Chen et al., 2015), and Py-
Torch (Paszke et al., 2019).
Generally, optimization algorithms must be adjusted along with the LR schedule. Most
hyper-parameters for neural network training are highly related to optimizers and LR. RM-
Sprop and Adam can be applied in similar situations. In most cases, Adam can act as
the default optimizer (Ruder, 2016) because it is a more reliable improvement based on
RMSprop. If Adam is used as the optimizer, LR must be adjusted accordingly, whereas
default values are sucient for most other hyper-parameters. Compared with RMSprop
and Adam, SGD with momentum may require more time to nd the optimum.
The abovementioned subsections discussed the most critical hyper-parameters related
to model training. According to lecture notes of Ng (2017), the importance of hyper-
parameters are listed as follows:
- LR, as in our discussion above.
10

==== Page 11 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
- Momentum beta, for RMSprop etc.
- Mini-batch size, as in our discussion above, which is critical for all mini-batch GD.
- Number of hidden layers, which is a hyper-parameter related to model structure.
- LR decay, as in our discussion above.
- Regularization lambda, which is used to reduce variance and avoid overtting.
- Activation functions, which is used to add nonlinear elements.
- Adam1,2and, as in our discussion above.
We can notice that hyper-parameters included in the list are not only related to training,
but also determine the structure of model. , And therefore in the next section, we only talk
about the number of hidden layers, regularization lambda, and activation function.
2.3 Model Design-Related Hyper-Parameters
The number of hidden layers( d) is a critical parameter for determining the overall struc-
ture of neural networks, which has a direct inuence on the nal output (Hinton et al., 2006).
Deep learning networks with more layers are likely to obtain more complex features and
relatively higher accuracy. Upscaling the neural network by adding more layers is a regular
method of achieving better results. In this way, a baseline structure is repeated to increase
the receptive eld. For example, users can choose ResNet-18 to ResNet-200 according to
their need for accuracy (He et al., 2016). This study (Tan and Le, 2019) created a series of
neural networks with sets of depth and width hyper-parameters, obtaining high accuracy
with low computational resources and a limited number of parameters.
The number of neurons in each layer( w) must also be carefully considered. Too few neu-
rons in the hidden layers may cause undertting because the model lacks complexity (Op-
permann, 2019). By contrast, too many neurons may result in overtting and increase the
training time. The suggestions (Heaton) could be a good start for tuning the number of
neurons:
winput< w < w output
w=2
3winput +woutput
w < 2woutput
wherewinput is the number of neurons for the input layer, and woutput is the number of
neurons for the output layer.
In contrast to adding layers or neurons in each layer, regularization is applied to re-
duce the complexity of neural network models, especially those with insucient training
data. Overtting usually occurs in complex neural networks with many layers and neurons,
and the complexity can be reduced using regularization methods. A regularization term
is added to avoid overtting and address feature selections. The general expression of the
11

==== Page 12 ====
Yu and Zhu
L1 L2
Penalizes the sum of the absolute value of weights Penalizes the sum of square weights
Sparse solution Nonsparse solution
Multiple solution One solution
Built-in feature selection No feature selection
Robust to outliers Not robust to outliers
Unable to learn complex patterns Able to learn complex data patterns
Table 1: Comparison between L1 and L2
regularization term is as follows (Ng, 2004):
cost =lossfunction +regularizationterm
The L1 term uses the sum of absolute values of weights. The regression model used for
L1 regularization is also called Lasso Regression or L1 norm:
w=NX
i=0(yi MX
j=0xijWj)2+MX
j=0jWjj
The L2 term uses the sum of least square values of weights. The regression model used
for L2 regularization is also called Ridge Regression or L2 norm:
w=NX
i=0(yi MX
j=0xijWj)2+MX
j=0W2
j
whereis the regularization hyper-parameter. An overlarge will oversimplify the
structure of the deep learning network because some weights are close to zero, whereas an
undersized is not strong enough to reduce weights. In practice, L2 regularization is more
widely used, mainly because of its computational eciency; however, L1 regularization pre-
vails over L2 on sparse properties (Yan, 2016). Models generated using L1 norm are simpler
and interpretable, while L2 provides superior predictions. L1 and L2 have pros and cons,
as shown in Table 1 adapted from (Khandelwal, 2018).
In addition to the abovementioned methods, data augmentation (Wang and Perez,
2017) and dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) are commonly used regularization techniques.
Data augmentation is the most straightforward, especially for image classication and ob-
ject detection. The data augmentation method creates and adds fake data to the training
dataset to avoid overtting. Operations including image transformation, cropping, ipping,
color adjustment, and image rotation can improve the generalization in dierent cases (De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017). For documentation recognition (LeCun et al., 1998), several trans-
formations for enhanced model accuracy and robustness are mainly applied. For character
recoginition task (Bengio et al., 2011) image transformations and occlusions for their hand-
written characters were combined.
Dropout is a technique used to select neurons randomly with a given probability that
are not used during training, which makes the network less sensitive to the specic weights
12

==== Page 13 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 7: Comparison of a neural network before and after dropout is applied (Srivastava
et al., 2014)
of neurons (Hinton et al., 2012b). As a result, the simplied version of a neuron network
can reduce overtting (Figure 7). The probability of neuron deactivation applied for each
weight-updated step is suggested to be around 20%-50%. An overlarge dropout rate will
over-simplify the model, whereas a small value will have little eect. In addition, a larger
LR with decay and a larger momentum are suggested because fewer neurons updated with
dropout requires more update for each batch (Brownlee, 2016).
Activation functions are crucial in deep learning for introducing nonlinear properties to
the output of neurons. Without an activation function, a neural network will simply be a
linear regression model that is unable to represent complicated features of data. Activation
functions should be dierentiable to compute the gradients of weight and perform back-
propagation(Walia, 2017). The most popular and widely used activation functions include
sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent (tanh), rectied linear units (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton, 2010),
Maxout (Goodfellow et al., 2013), and Swish (Ramachandran et al., 2017a). Automatic
search techniques have been applied in search of proper activation functions, including the
structure of functions and related hyper-parameters (Ramachandran et al., 2017b).
Sigmoid functions are the most frequently used activation layer with a form of f(x) =
1
1+e x. The output of a sigmoid function is always between 0 and 1 (Figure 8a) when nega-
tive innite to positive innite are encountered, and thus it will not blow up the activation.
They provide nonlinearity and make clear distinctions, but in the past few years they have
fallen out of popularity because of some major disadvantages. With sigmoid function, one
nds that the output f(x) responds very little to the input x, which gives rise to the vanish-
ing gradient problem (Wang, 2019). This may not be a big problem for networks with a few
layers, but it causes weights that are too small when more layers are required in a network.
Another problem is it not being zero-centered, which means the average of data lies on the
13

==== Page 14 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 8: Comparison of activation functions: (a) sigmoid; (b) tanh; (c) ReLU; and (d)
Swish
zero. During backpropagation, weights will either be all positive or all negative, making
an undesirable zigzag on weights and making optimization more dicult. Softmax is a
function similar to a sigmoid function with each input within (0, 1). The major dierence
is that a sigmoid function is applied for binary classication, whereas a softmax function
is for a multinomial classication. With j classes, the predicted probability of ithclass is
asf(xi) =exp(xi)Pjexp(xi). In addition, softmax function allows a probabilistic interpretation.
With the softmax function, a high input value results in a higher probability than others,
and the sum of probabilities will be 1. Whereas with the sigmoid function, a high value
will lead to the high probability as well, but not the higher probability, and the sum of
probabilities is not necessarily to be 1. While creating neural networks, sigmoid function is
used as activation function, and softmax function is usually used in output layers.
Hyperbolic tangent (tanh) is in a form of f(x) =1 e 2x
1+e 2x. It is zero-centered and
the output ranges between minus one and one (Figure 8b). It is in a similar structure to
a Sigmoid function but with a steeper derivative. Tanh is more ecient than a Sigmoid
function and has a wider range for faster learning and grading (Kizrak, 2019), but it still
has the problem of vanishing gradients. Sigmoid and tanh cannot be applied for networks
with many layers.
In recent years, ReLU has become the most widely used activation function (Agarap,
2018). More advanced activation functions have arisen but ReLU and its variants (e.g.,
leaky ReLU, PReLU, ElU, and SeLU) are still the most typical and popular methods (Fig-
ure 8c).
14

==== Page 15 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
f(x) =0; x0
x; x > 0
ReLU is mathematically simple and solves the problem of vanishing gradients. Com-
pared with sigmoid and tanh, ReLU does not covert almost all neurons to be activated
in a similar way, and it is great for multi-layer networks. However, ReLU has two major
problems: the rst is that its range is from zero to innite, which means that it can blow up
the activation, and the second is its sparsity. For a negative x, ReLU yields some weights
to 0 and will never activate at any data point again (Lu et al., 2019). To solve the second
problem, leaky ReLU was proposed, which uses a very small slope (e.g., 0.01 x) for a nega-
tive x to keep the update alive. Despite these problems, ReLU is suggested to be used by
researchers who have little knowledge about their tasks or activation functions because it
involves highly simple mathematical operations. For deep learning networks, ReLU could
be the default choice in terms of ease and speed. If the problem of vanishing gradients
occurs, leaky ReLU could be the alternative.
Maxout activation is a generalization of ReLU and leaky ReLU, and is dened as
fi(x) =maxzij;zij=xTW:::ij+bij;W2Rdmk. It is actually a layer where the
activation is the max of input. Maxout activation is a learnable activation function xing
all problems with ReLU, and it often works in combination with dropout. However, it
doubles the total number of parameters because each neuron has an addition weight and
bias.
Swish was proposed by Google Brain as a competitor of ReLU. It is dened as f(x) =
xsigmoid (x) =x
1+e x(Figure 8d), the multiplication of input x and sigmoid function of
x. Swish has been claimed to outperform ReLU with similar simple calculations, but it is
not as popular as ReLU. It has similar shape to ReLU, with bounded below and unbounded
above. For a negative large x, Swish yields it into zero, whereas the values for a small
negative x are captured. In addition, Swish is a smooth curve and thus it is more favorable
if a smooth landscape is required.
3. Search Algorithms and Trial Schedulers on Hyper-Parameter
Optimization
HPO is a problem with a long history, but it has recently become popular for the ap-
plication of deep learning networks. The general philosophy remains the same: determine
which hyper-parameters to tune and their search space, adjust them from coarse to ne,
evaluate the performance of the model with dierent parameter sets, and determine the op-
timal combination (Strauss, 2007). This present study discusses the optimization methods
for the second and third step: how to adjust hyper-parameters and how to evaluate the
models performance.
For deep learning networks, the choice of hyper-parameters inuences both the structure
of the network (e.g., the number of hidden layers) and training accuracy (e.g., LR). The
hyper-parameters could be integers, oating points, categorical data, or binary data, with
a distribution of the search space. Mathematically, HPO is a process of nding a set of
hyper-parameters to achieve minimum loss or maximum accuracy of an objective network.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Yu and Zhu
The objective function is described as follows (Feurer and Hutter, 2019):
=argminorargmaxE (Dtrain;Dvalid)DV(L;A;Dtrain;Dvalid)
To maximize or minimize the V function using algorithm Aapplied for hyper-parameters,
the model is trained with dataset Dtrain and validated with dataset Dvalid.
The state-of-the-art algorithms for HPO can be classied into two categories: search
algorithms and trial schedulers. In general, search algorithms are applied for sampling
whereas trial schedulers mainly deal with the early stopping methods for model evaluation.
This section rst discusses popular search algorithms followed by state-of-the-art early stop-
ping strategies.
3.1 Search Algorithms
3.1.1 Grid Search
Grid search is a basic method for HPO. It performs an exhaustive search on the hyper-
parameter set specied by users. Users must have some preliminary knowledge on these
hyper-parameters because it is they who generate all candidates. Grid search is applicable
for several hyper-parameters with limited search space.
Grid search is the most straightforward search algorithm that leads to the most accu-
rate predictionsas long as sucient resources are given, the user can always nd the optimal
combination (Joseph, 2018). It is easy to run grid search in parallel because every trial runs
individually without the inuence of time sequence. Results for one trial are independent of
those from other trials. Computational resources can be allocated in a highly exible manner
(Figure 9). However, grid search suers from the curse of dimensionality because the con-
sumption of computational resources increases exponentially when more hyper-parameters
are awaiting tuning. Of course, methods exist for dimensionality reduction (e.g., PCA), but
any method comes with a cost on the robustness of the model (Yiu, 2019). In addition, a
limited sampling range is acceptable for grid search because too many congurations are
not desirable. In practice, grid search is almost only preferable when users have enough
experience of these hyper-parameters to enable the denition of a narrow search space and
no more than three hyper-parameters need to be tuned simultaneously.
Although other search algorithms may have more favorable features, grid search is still
the most widely used method because of its mathematical simplicity (Bergstra and Bengio,
2012).
3.1.2 Random Search
Random search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012) is a basic improvement on grid search. It
indicates a randomized search over hyper-parameters from certain distributions over pos-
sible parameter values. The searching process continues till the predetermined budget is
exhausted, or until the desired accuracy is reached. Random search is similar to grid search
but has been proven to create better results because of the following two benets (Mal-
adkar, 2018): rst, a budget can be assigned independently according to the distribution
16

==== Page 17 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 9: Grid search on dropout rate and learning rate in a parallel concurrent execu-
tion (Harrington, 2018)
of search space, whereas in grid search the budget for each hyper-parameter set is a xed
valueB1=N, Where Bis the total budget and Nis the number of hyper-parameters. There-
fore, random search may perform better especially when some hyper-parameters are not
uniformly distributed. In this search pattern, random search is comparatively more likely
to nd the optimal conguration than grid search (Figure 10). Second, although obtaining
the optimum using random search is not promising, it is quite certain that greater time
consumption will lead to a larger probability of nding the best hyper-parameter set. This
logic is known as Monte Carlo techniques, which is popular when deal with large volume
datasets in multi-dimensional deep learning scenarios (Harrison, 2010). By contrast, for
grid search, a longer search time cannot guarantee better results. Easy parallelization and
exible resource allocation are also dominant advantages of random search (Krivulin et al.,
2005).
In most cases, random search is more eective than grid search, but it is still a com-
putationally intensive method. The use of random search is suggested in the early stage of
HPO to rapidly narrow down the search space, before using a guided algorithm to obtain
a ner result (from a coarse to ne sampling scheme) (Ng, 2017). Random search is often
applied as the baseline of HPO to measure the eciency of newly designed algorithms.
Random search generally takes more time and computational resources than other guided
search methods.
3.1.3 Bayesian Optimization and Its Variants
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a traditional algorithm with decades of history. It was
raised by Mockus (Mo ckus, 1975; Mockus et al., 1978), and later became popular when it
was applied to the global optimization problem (Jones et al., 1998). BO is a typical method
for almost all types of global optimization, and is aimed at becoming less wrong with more
data (Koehrsen, 2018). It is a sequential model-based method aimed at nding the global
optimum with the minimum number of trials. It balances exploration and exploitation (Sil-
ver, 2014) to avoid trapping into the local optimum. Exploitation is the process of making
17

==== Page 18 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 10: Layout comparison between grid search and random search (Bergstra and Ben-
gio, 2012)
Figure 11: Exploration-oriented (left) and exploitation-oriented Bayesian optimization
(right); the shade indicates uncertainty.
the best decision based on current information (Figure 11, right), whereas with exploration,
the model will collect more information (Figure 11, left). BO outperforms random search
and grid search in two aspects: the rst is that users are not required to possess preliminary
knowledge of the distribution of hyper-parameters, and the second is posterior probability,
which is the core idea of BO. The process of BO is described as follows: a probability surro-
gate model of objectives is built, and then every attempt is made based on the assessment
of previous trials, and furthermore, the probability model is updated for the next trial until
the most promising hyper-parameter set is chosen. Compared with grid search and random
search, BO is more computationally ecient with fewer attempts required to nd the best
hyper-parameter set, in particular, especially when very costly objective functions are en-
countered. BO has another remarkable advantage over grid search and random searchit is
applicable regardless of whether the objective function is stochastic or discrete, or convex
or nonconvex.
This subsection presents a basic overview of the Bayesian algorithm, describes the
variants based on BO, and discusses its recent applications in deep learning.
18

==== Page 19 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
BO consists of two key ingredients: a Bayesian probability surrogate model to model
the objective function, and an acquisition function to determine the next sampling point.
The algorithms process can be described as follows: (1) build a prior distribution of the
surrogate model; (2) obtain the hyper-parameter set that performs best on the surrogate
model; (3) compute the acquisition function with the current surrogate model; (4) apply
the hyper-parameter set to the objective function; and (5) update the surrogate model with
new results. Steps 25 are repeated until the optimal conguration is found or the resource
limit is reached (Brecque, 2018).
The rst ingredient the surrogate model could be a specic analytic function or non-
parametric model. The prior distribution describes the hypothesis on objective function,
and the posterior distribution is tted based on observational data thus far. The second in-
gredient the acquisition function plays a role in balancing exploration and exploitation. It
ideally minimizes the loss function to select the optimal candidate points. Many probability
models could be used in the BO algorithm (Eggensperger et al., 2013), but Gaussian pro-
cess (GP) (Rasmussen, 2003) is overwhelmingly the most widely used. Various acquisition
functions have been proposed in previous studies, including the probability of improve-
ment (Kushner, 1964), GP upper condence bound (GP-UCB) (Lai and Robbins, 1985;
Srinivas et al., 2009), predictive entropy search (Hern andez-Lobato et al., 2014), and even
a portfolio containing multiple acquisition strategies (Homan et al., 2011). Among them,
the expected improvement algorithm (Mockus et al., 1978) is denitely the most common
choice. In this study, we only discussed the most popular choice of surrogate model and
acquisition function. A lack of space limits further discussion on this topic; please refer to
the review (Shahriari et al., 2015) for more information.
In BO, GP could be the default choice of surrogate model for objective functions (Fig-
ure 12). It is popular for two reasons: rst, as a nonparametric Bayesian statistical method,
GP is a method of obtaining exible models. For a nonparametric model, the number of
parameters is decided by the dataset size, without the requirement for it to be determined
in advance. Second, GP takes multivariate Gaussian distribution as the prior distribution
to innite numbers of real-valued variables. In this stochastic process, any nite subset for
random variables x1;:::;xn2follows multivariate Gaussian distribution (Do, 2007):
f()GP
();k(;0)
where() is the mean vector,
() =E[x] =2
64(x1)
...
(xn)3
75
andk(;0) is the covariance function,
k(;0) =Eh
x (x)
x0 (x0)i
=2
64k(x1;x1)::: k (x1;xm)
.........
k(xm;x1)::: k (xm;xm)3
75
for anyx;x02X. Similar to a Gaussian distribution dened by mean and covariance, a
Gaussian process is a high-dimensional multivariate Gaussian dened with the mean vec-
19

==== Page 20 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 12: Gaussian process with 29 samplings
20

==== Page 21 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
tor and covariance matrix. The mean function controls the smoothness and amplitude of
samples while the choice of covariance function or kernel function k(;0) determines the
quality of the surrogate model (Rasmussen, 2003). The most commonly used mean func-
tion is() = 0, and the most popular kernel is the squared exponential kernel or Gaussian
kernelkSE(x;x0) =exp( kxk2
2l2). Mat ern 5/2 kernel is widely used because of its exibil-
ity (Duvenaud, 2014) with learnable length scale parameters are common default kernel
functions for many applications (e.g., Spearmint and MOE). Kernel function can be com-
bined in various ways, and thus two or more kernels can be used simultaneously for GP.
Prediction following a normal distribution p(yjx;D) =N(yj^;^2) (Fasshauer and Mc-
Court, 2015) with 0(x) = 0 has a posterior distribution of
n(x) =k(x)T(K+2I) 1y
2
n(x) =k(x;x) k(x)T(K+2I) 1k(x)
When the surrogate model is chosen, posterior distribution at any point could be deter-
mined accordingly by the mean function and kernel function. Mean indicates the expected
results: a larger mean value implies a higher possibility of the optimum option. Kernel
indicates the uncertainty: a larger covariance value implies that exploration is worthwhile.
To avoid becoming trapped into the local optimum, whether choosing the location of the
next sampling point with a larger mean or larger uncertainty is determined using acquisition
functions.
In summary, GP is an attractive surrogate model for BO, which allows for the quan-
tication of uncertainty in predictions. It is a nonparametric model and its number of
parameters only depends on the input points. With a proper kernel function, GP is able to
take advantage of the data structure. However, GP also has some drawbacks. For example,
it is conceptually dicult to understand along with the theory of BO. Furthermore, its
poor scalability with high dimensions or large number of data points is another key prob-
lem (Feurer and Hutter, 2019). Most kernels have hyper-parameters that determine the
prior of a Gaussian process. Moreover, the choice of prior highly inuences the performance
for a given amount of data. GP itself is a computational resource-consuming process with
theO(N3) computation cost. Computing the kernel matrix costs O(DN3) withO(N2)
memory (Murray, 2016).
Acquisition function is a function of data point x, designed to choose the next sampling
point. Acquisition functions must be carefully selected to trade o exploration over the
search space and exploitation in current areas. The most common choice is the expected
improvement (EI) because of its good performance and ease of use (Frazier, 2018). Its
mathematical format is as follows:
E[I()] =E[max(fmin y;0)]
The improvement function is dened as I(x;v; ) = (v )I.Iis larger than zero when
an improvement exists; vis a normally distributed random variable; and s the target.
With the function of improvement I, the analytical expression of EI is as follows:
E[I()] =E[I(x;v; )] =
n(x) 
n(x) 
n(x)
+n(x)n(x) 
n(x)
21

==== Page 22 ====
Yu and Zhu
wheren(x)>0,() and () are the standard normal probability density function and
cumulative standard normal distribution function; and n(x) is the best observed value
thus far (Jones et al., 1998). In addition to improvement-based policies, knowledge gra-
dient function (Frazier et al., 2009), entropy search function (Hennig and Schuler, 2012),
and predictive entropy search function (Hern andez-Lobato et al., 2014) have recently been
developed to enhance performance over dierent applications. A portfolio with acquisition
functions was also proposed to cope with dierent strategies. It could be designed based
on the hedge algorithm, using which the acquisition function was chosen with past perfor-
mance (Homan et al., 2011). An entropy search portfolio (Shahriari et al., 2014) selects
the acquisition function using the information gained toward optimization.
BO is ecient because it selects the next hyper-parameter set in a guided manner. With
BO, users will make fewer calls to the objective function. For a machine learning model, BO
is more ecient at nding the optimum hyper-parameter compared with grid or random
search. However, there are some downsides of the vanilla Bayesian method. The most promi-
nent problem is that BO is a sequential process in which a trial is proposed using experience
from previous trials. Some solutions have been raised to solve the parallelism problem. A
method was proposed based on the batch input of current results (Ginsbourger et al., 2011).
As GP+EI is the most popular combination for Bayesian optimization, improvements based
on EI (Ginsbourger et al., 2010; Snoek et al., 2012) and GP-UCB (Hutter et al., 2012; De-
sautels et al., 2014) Parallelization on other acquisition functions (e.g. information-based
function) and the combination of BO with other algorithms (Falkner et al., 2018) are also
feasible solutions.
Another drawback of BO is the greater consumption of computational resources com-
pared with grid search and random search. This especially draw our attention when it is
applied to deep learning networks. Memory consumption, training time, and power con-
sumption are problems for training a neural network. Therefore, the search algorithm not
only needs to be fast but also resource-ecient. A straightforward method for solving this
problem is to set a boundary and determine whether a certain trial is still worthy of train-
ing. This boundary could be the loss function or average accuracy in the neural network.
Domhan roposed a predictive termination method that can be combined with the Bayesian
method. This idea can be combined with search algorithms other than BO (Domhan et al.,
2015).Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization (Swersky et al., 2014) utilizes a forecast curve
to determine whether to freeze a current trial or thaw a previous one. Currently, BO
has been applied for hyper-parameter tuning in deep learning networks, which has led to
achievements in both image classication (Snoek et al., 2015) and natural language pro-
cessing (Melis et al., 2017).
Bayesian methods were originally not applicable for integers, categorical values, or a
conditional search space. However, in reality, hyper-parameters for deep learning could be
in any data type. For vanilla Bayesian, kernel function and optimization process must be
adapted to involve integers (e.g., batch size) and categorical data (Hutter, 2009; Garrido-
Merch an and Hern andez-Lobato, 2017). Conditional variables may only inuence the results
with some other variable taking certain values. This is common in deep learning networks,
for example, hyper-parameters related to certain optimizers. Models with a tree-based struc-
ture have been designed to solve this problem. In addition to GP, random forests (Hutter
22

==== Page 23 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
et al., 2011) are another popular type of surrogate model with a structure similar to a
decision tree. Tree-structured Parzen Estimators (Bergstra et al., 2011, 2013) are discussed
in depth in the following subsection.
3.1.4 Tree Parzen Estimators
Tree Parzen Estimators (TPEs), models with a graphic structure that deal with the con-
ditional search space, are an alternative choice for surrogate model. In the regular Bayes
rule, the surrogate model is represented as p(yj) =p(jy)p(y)
p()of observation y given cong-
uration. Furthermore, p(jy) is the probability of hyper-parameters given the score on the
objective function. TPE convert p(jy) into a tree-structured expression:
p(jy) =l(); y < 0
g(); x0
whereis the threshold dividing observations into good and bad. The percentage is usually
set to 15%, and therefore the hyper-parameters have two dierent distributions, l() and
g(). Instead of directly drawing a value from l(), TPE uses the ratio of l(x)=g(x) to
maximize the expected improvement acquisition function:
EI() =l() l()R
 1p(y)dy
l() + (1 )g()_
+g()
l()(1 ) 1
In summary, the workow of TPE is as follows: draw a sample from l(x), evaluatel(x)=g(x)
with EI, and obtain the optimum value of l(x)=g(x) with the greatest EI. TPE outper-
forms the Bayesian method in dealing with conditional variables because of its tree struc-
ture (Strobl et al., 2008).
HyperOpt (Komer et al., 2014) realizes asynchronous parallelization and uses TPE to
facilitate the HPO. BOHB combined TPE with HyperBand and successfully solved the
problems of parallelization and conditional space. TPE is even more popular than the
original Bayesian method when applied to deep learning networks because it is applicable
for more data types. However, GPs still performance better when hyper-parameters have
strong interaction because TPE do not model the interactions (Bissuel, 2018).
3.2 Optimization with an Early-stopping Policy
HPO is often a time-consuming process that is computationally costly. In a realistic
scenario, it is necessary to design the HPO process with limited available resources. When
experts tune hyper-parameters by hand, they are occasionally able to use their experience
of parameters to narrow down the search space and evaluate the model during training, and
determine whether to halt the training or continue it. This is especially common for neural
networks because it takes a long time to train a model with each hyper-parameter set. An
early stopping strategy is a series of methods that mimics the behavior of AI experts to
maximize the computational-resource budget for promising hyper-parameter sets.
In addition to ecient search algorithms, a strategy to evaluate trials and determine
whether to halt them early is another active area of research. The following early-stopping
23

==== Page 24 ====
Yu and Zhu
algorithms can be applied in combination with a search algorithm or individually for both
searching and halting. The early-stopping algorithms for HPO are similar to that for neural
network training, but for neural network training, early stopping is applied to avoid over-
tting. This allows users to terminate a trial before nishing the whole training, thereby
freeing computational resources for trials with a promising hyper-parameter set.
3.2.1 median stopping
Median stopping is the most straightforward early termination policy, adapted by struc-
tured HPO frameworks such as Google Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017), Tune (Liaw et al., 2018),
and NNI (Microsoft, 2018). It is model-free and applicable to a wide range of performance
curves. Median stopping makes a decision based on the average of primary metrics (e.g.,
accuracy or loss) reported by previous runs. A trial Xis stopped at step Sif the best ob-
jective value by step Sis strictly worse than the median value of the running average of all
completed trials objective values reported at step S(Golovin et al., 2017). The median stop-
ping strategy is not a model, and thus no hyper-parameters need to be determined by users.
3.2.2 curve fitting
Curve tting is an LPA (learning, predicting, assessing) algorithm (Kohavi and John,
1995; Provost et al., 1999). It is applicable in the combinations of search algorithms men-
tioned in Section 2, supported by Google Vizier and NNI. This early stopping rule makes
a prediction of the nal objective value (e.g., accuracy or loss) with a performance curve
regressed from a set of completed or partially completed trials. A trial Xwill be halted at
step Sif the prediction of the nal objective value is suciently worse than the tolerant
value of the optimal in the trial history.
This algorithm has been commonly supported by Bayesian parametric regression (Swer-
sky et al., 2014; Golovin et al., 2017). A method is proposed (Domhan et al., 2015) that
used a weighted probability learning curve with a combination of 11 dierent increasing
saturated curves (Figure 13). The combination model can be expressed as:
fcomb(tj) =KX
k=1wkfk(tjk)
with new combined parameter vectors
= (w1;:::;wK;1;:::;K;2)
wherewKis the weight for each model k,Kis the individual model parameter, and 2is
the noise variance.
In general, there are three steps to determine whether to stop:
- Learning: The parameters of the curve are learned from current completed trials:
rst, t each curve with the least squares method and obtain parameter K. Then,
lter the curve and remove outliers. Finally, adjust the weight wKfor each curve
using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling method.
24

==== Page 25 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 13: Functions used for curve-tting, with related hyper-parameters a= 1,b= 1,
= 1,= 0,= 1, and= 1 or 2.
- Predicting: Calculate the nal objective value at a certain step, with the curve ob-
tained from the rst step.
- Assessing: If the predictive result does not converge, the model will continue to train,
obtain further information, and make a judgment again. If the predictive result is
superior within a threshold of historical best values, the result will be retained and
training stopped; otherwise, the result will be discarded and the training stopped.
Compared with median stopping, the curve tting method is a model with parameters.
Building the model is also a training process. When combined with search algorithms, the
predictive termination accelerates the optimization process and then nds a state-of-the-art
network. As mentioned previously, Freeze-Thaw BO can be viewed as a combination of BO
and curve tting.
3.2.3 Successive Halving and HyperBand
This and the next subsection discusses several bandit-based algorithms with strong per-
formance in optimizing deep learning hyper-parameters. HPO in deep neural networks is
more likely to be a tradeo between accuracy and computational resources because train-
ing a DNN is a very costly process. Successive halving (SHA) and HyperBand outperform
traditional searching algorithms without early stopping in saving resources for HPO, with
random search as a sampling method and a bandit-based early stopping policy.
SHA (Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016) is based on multi-bandit problems (Karnin et al.,
25

==== Page 26 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 14: Budget allocation with successive halving (Bissuel, 2018)
2013). SHA converts HPO into a nonstochastic best-arm identication to allocate more
computational resources to more promising hyper-parameter sets. Bandit processes are a
special type of Markov Decision Process with several possible choices (Kaufmann and Gariv-
ier, 2017), and they have a long history of stochastic setting. K-armed bandit is an ecient
tool for dealing with sequential decisions over time with uncertainty (Slivkins et al., 2019)
and stopping rules based on the Gittins index theorem (Gittins, 1974).The SHA model was
built upon the multi-armed bandit formulation (Agarwal et al., 2012; Sparks et al., 2015).
The SHA algorithm can be described as follows: users need to set an initial nite bud-
getBand the number of trials n, uniformly query all hyper-parameter sets for a portion
of initial budget, evaluate the performance of all trials, drop the worse performing half,
double the budget for the remaining half, and repeat the whole pipeline until only one trial
remains (Figure 14). For training a deep learning network, the budget could be the number
of iterations or the total training time.
Compared with BO, SHA is theoretically easier to understand and more computation-
ally ecient. Instead of evaluating models when they are fully trained to convergence, SHA
evaluates the intermediate results to determine whether to terminate it. The major draw-
back of SHA is the allocation of resources. Given a certain budget, a tradeo will occur
between total budget Band the number of trials n(the nvs.B/n" problem), which are
both decided by users in advance. With an overlarge n, each trial will be given a small
budget that may result in premature termination, while an insucient nwould not be able
to provide enough optional choices. Furthermore, too large a budget may lead to a waste
of choice, and too small a value may not promise an optimum.
HyperBand (HB) (Li et al., 2017) s an extension of SHA, mainly designed to solve the n
vs.B/n" problem by considering several possible nvalues with a xed B. Similar to SHA,
it also formulates the HPO into a pure-exploration, nonstochastic, innite-armed bandit
problem. HB has two improvements because it adds an out loop over the routine of SHA.
The rst modication is on the allocation of resources B. n out loop iterates over dierent
26

==== Page 27 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
combinations of nand B, and thus dierent tradeos will occur between nand B/n. Users
must set a maximum amount of resource Rthat can be allocated to a single trial to de-
termine how many dierent combinations need to be considered. The other modication
is the proportion of the trial to be discarded . Instead of 50%, the worst faction 1
will
be dropped and the budget for remaining trials multiplied by . This is another hyper-
parameter decided by users. The default value of is 2 in SHA and 3 or 4 in HB. The
suggested value and explanation of Randwere explicitly presented in the publication
of HB (Li et al., 2017). Rhas a limitation based on computation or memory resources.
Because the number of combinations Sis a function of R(Smax=blogn(R)c), a smaller R
usually indicates faster evaluation while a larger Rgives a better guarantee of nding the
optimal conguration. The value of can be determined by users within a specic limit. A
largerimplies a more aggressive rate for elimination and the user will receive the results
faster.
HB is easy to deploy in parallel because all trials are randomly sampled and run in-
dependently. It accelerates random search through the early stopping inherited from SHA
and a more reasonable adaptive allocation of resources. Compared with random search and
BO, HB exhibits superior accuracy with less resources, especially in the case of stochastic
gradient descent for deep neural networks. Currently, HB is involved in Tune and NNI as
part of trial scheduler for the HPO framework.
3.2.4 Asynchronous Successive Halving and Bayesian
OptimizationHyperBand
The paper on HB (Li et al., 2017) concludes by discussing potential improvements,
including distributed implements, adjustment of the convergence rate, and non-random
sampling. Methods discussed in this subsection can be viewed as extensions of HB. Asyn-
chronous SHA (ASHA) (Li et al., 2018) proposes an enhanced distribution scheme for
parallelizing HB and avoids straggler issues during elimination. As mentioned previously,
Bayesian OptimizationHyperBand (BOHB) (Falkner et al., 2018) is a combination of BO
and HB, and introduces a guided sampling method instead of simple random search (Table
2).
ASHA modies the original HB by improving the eciency of asynchronous paralleliza-
tion. It has similar performance to HB in sequential setting or small-scale distribution.
For large-scale parallelization, ASHA exceeds most state-of-the-art HPO methods. The
computational resources are automatically allocated by ASHA, and thus there are no extra
hyper-parameters for users compared with HB. The currently published ASHA is still an
incomplete version, and it is incorporated into Tune as a trial scheduler.
HB is successful in allocating trials and resources but limited by random sampling,
especially in the nal few steps for HPO. Random search is eective in the early stage of
sampling, but ineective when approaching the optimum conguration. Several approaches
combining BO and HB have been proposed in recent years (Bertrand et al., 2017; Falkner
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018), to solve the native problem with HB. Among them, BOHB
is the most widely applied as it is the only open-source one. The choice of budgets and
schedule of trials are inherited from the original HB. The BO part closely resembles the
27

==== Page 28 ====
Yu and Zhu
SHA HB BOHB ASHA
Discard ratio half adjusted by user (1/3) adjusted by user adjusted by user
B vs n one choice several combinations several combinations several combinations
Sampling random random TPE random
Parallelization synchronous synchronous synchronous asynchronous
Scalability small scale small scale small scale large scale
Time 2015 2018 2018 2018
Table 2: Comparison between bandit-based algorithms
Figure 15: Comparison between BOHB and HyperBand with dierent budgets (Bissuel,
2018)
TPE method (Bergstra et al., 2011) with a single multidimensional Kernel Density Estima-
tion (KDE). Compared with the hierarchy of one-dimensional KDEs used in the original
TPE, the improved version can better handle interaction eects. BOHB achieves quick
convergence to the best hyper-parameter set with Bayesian methods, and the feasibility of
parallelization with HB.
Advantages inherited from HB include budget control, the ability to check performance
at any time, computational eciency in the early stage of tuning, and most crucially
scalability. The involvement of BO ensures strong nal performance, robustness, and com-
putational eciency in the later stage of tuning. The empirical performance of BOHB
demonstrates state-of-the-art results over a wide range of HPO tasks, including Bayesian
neural networks, reinforcement learning agents, and convolutional networks. From the re-
sults shown in Figure 15, BOHB can be noticed to mainly benet from the strategy of HB
if given a limited budget, and both exhibit 20-times acceleration over random search. How-
ever, with more sucient budgets, BOHB outperforms HB because of the guided sampling
strategy with the Bayesian method, exhibiting 55-times acceleration over random search.
The original open-source version is HpBandSter on GitHub. In general, BOHB is a robust
and computationally eective HPO method that is easy to apply in multiple units.
28

==== Page 29 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
The major shortcoming of BOHB lies in the setting of budgets. Automatic adaption of
budgets may solve the problem especially for users with less experience. The application of
BOHB requires users to have some experience. In some extreme cases, either BO or the trail
schedule borrowed from HB could be a drawback for ecient searching. Compared with ran-
dom search, Bayesian methods may take longer to escape the local optimum (Biedenkapp,
2018). Another downside is inherited from bandit-based methods: users must dene a
proper budget that matches the required accuracy, but this is not an easy task because it
needs sucient experience of these algorithms. If a smaller budget is too noisy to make any
decision on the model performance, adjustments to the budget plan are necessary, which
is a time-consuming process. For this reason, BOHB could be several times slower than
vanilla TPE, and the rate is inuenced by the nvs.B/n" problem. Setting a small budget
is risky if one is not fully familiar with the training process or tuning algorithms. When the
downside of bandit-based methods encounters the trap in the local optimum, BOHB may
be less ecient compared with other optimization methods; however, this only happens in
some extreme cases.
3.2.5 Population-Based Training
Population-based methods are essentially series of random search methods based on
genetic algorithms (Shiman et al., 2012), such as evolutionary algorithms (Simon, 2013;
Orive et al., 2014), particle swarm optimization (Eberhart and Shi, 1998; Lorenzo et al.,
2017), and covariance matrix adaption evolutionary strategy (Hansen, 2016). The most
important parts of genetic algorithms are initialization (random creation of a population),
selection (evaluation of the current population and selection of parents), and reproduction
(creation of the next generation). One of the most widely used population-based methods
is population-based training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) proposed by
DeepMind. PBT is a conceptually simple but computationally eective method. It is a
unique method in two aspects: it allows for adaptive hyper-parameters during training and
it combines parallel search and sequential optimization. These features make PBT espe-
cially suitable for HPO in deep learning networks.
The process of PBT can be simply described as being similar to generic algorithms. First,
a population of trials with dierent hyper-parameter settings is initialized (Figure 16). The
size of the population is determined by the user (2040 has been suggested in a publication)
and all neural networks are trained in parallel. Then, for every miterations, all models are
evaluated with a certain metric, which could be loss or median accuracy. The paralleliza-
tion is inherited from traditional genetic algorithms. Finally, each trial uses the information
from the rest of the population to update the hyper-parameters through exploitation and
exploration; their balance is similar to the concepts of hand tuning and BO. Exploitation
of the best conguration is dened by replacing the current weights with weights that have
the best performance. This process is similar to inheritance and crossover in genetic al-
gorithms. Exploration is ensured by the random perturbation of hyper-parameters with a
noise dened by the user. This process is similar to mutation in generic algorithms, and
the noise can also be described as the mutation rate. Exploitation and exploration are
performed periodically, and training will continue with the described steps.
29

==== Page 30 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 16: PBT as a combination of sequential and parallel optimization (Jaderberg et al.,
2017)
PBT provides a way to involve HPO in regular training, using a warm start instead
of waiting for convergence. This is meaningful for large models, such as the training for
a generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and a transformer net-
work (Vaswani et al., 2017). It takes a long time to train these large models to convergence.
In this case, PBT will be far more eective than the abovementioned HPO methods, and
it is the only algorithm using transformer as a show case to prove its eectiveness. For the
optimization of adaptive hyper-parameters (e.g., LR), it is unnecessary for users to decide
whether to use linear decay or exponential decay because PBT will change the values of all
hyper-parameters periodically.
There are still some drawbacks to be explored in the future. For example, this method
is not theoretically proven to obtain the optimal hyper-parameter set. It is convincing that
PBT provides the best conguration with current computational resources, but whether
it is the optimum conguration is still open to discussion. Another problem is the com-
paratively easy strategy for exploitation and exploration. PBT is still not extendable to
advanced evolution and mutation decisions. In addition, the denition of hyper-parameters
and the changes made to the computation graph are complicated.
Algorithms can be viewed as theories supporting HPO. For practical application, users
always need to decide which hyper-parameters take into consideration, the way to apply
the search algorithms and the process to train deep learning models. In this case, a tool is
necessary to conduct these congurations.
30

==== Page 31 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
4. Toolkits for Hyper-parameter Optimization
Hyper-parameter training is a time-consuming process, especially for deep learning net-
works. It may take decades of GPU days to nish the whole process because training a
single neural network to convergence will take a whole day. A toolkit for HPO builds a
bridge between network training and hyper-parameter tuning. The combination of tuning
algorithm, scheduler for trials, and compatibility with major deep learning toolkits expe-
dites the optimization process and lowers the threshold for research & development.
This section provides a general comparison of contemporary open source toolkits and
services, and discusses the most integrated ones in detail. The frameworks are assessed
by their ability to handle resources, support state-of-the-art optimization algorithms, and
schedule for trials.
4.1 Overview
Generally, there are two types of toolkits for HPO: open source tools and services that
rely on cloud computing resources, and each of which are described in this subsection.
Multiple open-source libraries have been created to cater to the demand for dierent
tasks in automatic model design, including model construction, feature engineering, and
HPO. Some of them were designed for the application of the proposed algorithm. For ex-
ample, HyperOpt is specically designed for asynchronous BO (TPE) based on Gaussian
processes and regression trees. HpBandSter features in the implementation of BOHB, al-
though it also provides random search and HB. Xcessive outperforms other libraries with
an interactive graphical user interface (GUI) that is beginner-friendly. Users are able to
manage the training, optimization, and evaluation of models through the GUI. However,
Xcessive only supports automated hyper-parameter search through Bayesian methods, and
it is also inconvenient for training deep learning networks. Scikit-Optimize is a compre-
hensive library cited by many later frameworks. It contains Bayesian methods, random
search, random forest, and some other reliable optimization algorithms. All aforementioned
methods have downsides in common: their implementation on search algorithms, their sup-
port for deep learning training frameworks, and their application schedule for trials. These
inhibit ecient search for hyper-parameters for deep neural networks.
In addition, Google Cloud and Amazon Web Services (AWS) provide model selection
and HPO. These services are supported by massive computational resources, applicable for
thousands of parallel training processes and evaluations. However, they are a closed-source
infrastructure and users must pay for the service.
The tools for HPO are designed to satisfy the following considerations: ease of use, state
of the art, availability, scalability, and exibility (Golovin et al., 2017). Table 3 displays a
general comparison of the open source tools and services in regard to the abovementioned
considerations. More details are discussed in the following subsections.
31

==== Page 32 ====
Yu and Zhu
Vizier & Sagemaker NNI & Tune
Ease to useAlmost no conguration by users
- Friendly to starters with simple
workow
- Straightforward GUI for both task
management and result visualization
- Error correcting capability- Need minimal conguration
by users
- Preliminary knowledge on model
training
- Visualization with Tensorboard
Scalability- Very high with the support of
cloud service- Usually deployed on several units
State-of-the-art- Support classical search algorithms
- Some early stopping methods
- Transfer learning- Support almost all SOTA algorithms
- Not support transfer or meta
learning
Availability - Need to pay for the convenience - Open sourced and free
Flexibility- Extendable search algorithm
- Closed sourced in infrastructure- Able to modify everything
- High exibility for experienced users
Table 3: Comparison between closed-source services and open-source toolkits
Figure 17: Architecture of Google Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017)
4.2 Google Vizier
Google Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017) is a scalable service instead of a library for black-box
optimization based on Googles Cloud Machine Learning subsystem. The most prominent
advantage is its ease of use. With the service, users only need to choose an involved search
algorithm and submit a conguration le, and then they will be provided with a suggested
hyper-parameter set. All other setup tasks have been conducted by Google Vizier, such
as the deployment of the system, management of computational resources and memory,
and scheduling of trials. The simple client workow and minimal conguration make it
especially friendly for starters (Figure 17), while for experienced users it also allows them
to customize their algorithm with the algorithm playground. Although Google Vizier is
closed-source in infrastructure, it is easy to change or design new algorithms for HPO.
Another advantage over open-source libraries is the very high scalability. Google Vizier
32

==== Page 33 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
is scalable to millions of experiments and billions of trials with dierent hyper-parameter
sets. All jobs are partitioned across Google data centers and processed by Googles load-
balancing infrastructure. The whole system with a strong error-correcting ability will
pause a trial if it fails and prevent it from aecting the stability of the whole job.
A third benet is the implementation of transfer learning, which helps users to accelerate
their tuning processes but rarely implemented in an open-source library. This strategy, built
with GP regression, is based on previous jobs submitted by millions of users. Instead of
trained from scratch, the model submitted by user will be ne-tuned with provided dataset.
Transfer learning is often more valuable for deep learning networks because it is expensive
to train.
In addition, Google Vizier provides a benchmarking suite to measure the eciency of
algorithms with performance-over-time metrics.
Additional reason to choose Vizier is the GUI, which is applicable for both monitor-
ing the status and changing the setting for an experiment. There is almost no technical
threshold for common users because they are not even required command lines to create an
experiment or request a new suggestion.
Vizier does not outperform in search algorithms and early stopping strategies. Similar
to most open-source libraries, Google Vizier supports oat, integer, discrete, and categori-
cal parameters at a logarithmic scale. Grid and random search are involved, while batched
Gaussian process bandit optimization (Desautels et al., 2014) is the default mode for most
scenarios. Mat ern kernel with an automatic relevance determination (Rasmussen, 2003)
and expected improvement acquisition function (Mockus et al., 1978) are applied. The
early stopping algorithms are Curve Stopping Rule (refer to 4.2.2) and Median Stopping
Rule (refer to 4.2.1). In a recent study by DeepMind (Li et al., 2019), Vizier was imple-
mented with a PBT framework. This work indicated the feasibility of implementing new
optimization algorithms in Vizier, and the support of Viziers infrastructure was helpful
in accelerating the tuning process. The suggested search algorithm and default values for
hyper-parameters makes it friendlier for users with less experience, whereas with most open-
source frameworks users must make decisions based upon their own experience.
In general, Vizier is a forerunner of a comprehensive HPO service. The key design goal
is the signicant reduction of setup eorts. As a beginner in hyper-parameter tuning, one
can start and monitor an experiment with the dashboard, suggested with an ecient search
algorithm and early stopping strategy, use the allocation of Google Cloud, and nally check
the results on the UI. Very little eort is required if one is willing to use the default set-
tings provided by Vizier. Advanced users are able to replace the algorithm with their own
design, but they may still perceive a lack of exibility. All in all, if deploying a framework
and setting up an experiment generate no problems, one may not deem paying for these
features to be worthwhile.
Advisor is an open-source version of Google Vizier (adv, 2018) that attempts to realize
all of Viziers features without the support of Google Cloud. Grid search, random search,
and BO are also supported in Advisor, as are early stop algorithms. Advisor even realizes
an interactive GUI, allowing users to easily start and stop an experiment. However, the
open-source version will never reproduce the extremely high scalability of Vizier because it
is limited by the availability of computational resources.
33

==== Page 34 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 18: Structure of Neural Network Intelligence (Microsoft, 2018)
4.3 Automatic model tuning in Amazon SageMaker
Automatic model tuning is a module of Amazon SageMaker, a machine learning en-
vironment for simplifying the process of model building and deployment. As a service, it
is similar to Google Vizier with the support of Amazon Web Services (AWS). The most
attractive feature is also its ease-to-use: only a model and related training data are required
for a HPO task. It supports optimization for complex models and datasets with parallelism
on a large scale. The involvement of Jupyter simplies the conguration for optimization
and visualization of results. The HPO process and status of trials can be viewed with the
Amazon Sagemaker console, which supports early stop and warm start. Search algorithms
are limited to random search and BO, but users are provided with enough freedom to add
their own algorithms. Amazon SageMakers automatic model tuning shares most of the
advantages and limits of Google Vizier because both of them are cloud-based services. The
major dierence is that Amazon SageMaker, as a fully managed service, integrates every
step of training a neutral network; HPO is just a module of this service. It is not necessary
to switch to dierent tools to build, train, and tune a model.
4.4 Neural Network Intelligence
Neural Network Intelligence (NNI) is an open-source toolkit for both automated ma-
chine learning (AutoML) and HPO released by Microsoft. Compared with the abovemen-
tioned closed-source services, NNI provides not only a framework to train a model and tune
hyper-parameters but also more freedom for customization (Figure 18). This toolkit can
be deployed in dierent environments such as local machines, remote servers, and Dock-
ers. The support from Microsoft provides promising maintenance and update potential. In
general, it is more suitable for researchers with some knowledge of machine learning if they
are willing to (a) perform the deployment job by themselves; (b) test more algorithms or
networks in a dierent environment; and (c) involve HPO or AutoML in the NNI platform.
This section discusses the main advantages and drawbacks of NNI. NNI implements
more search algorithms than Google Vizier and SageMaker, and provides an extensible in-
34

==== Page 35 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
terface to write a new algorithm. In NNI, all algorithms related to HPO are generally
called Tuners or Advisors, and Assessors contain two early stopping algorithms. Actually,
there are two groups of algorithms. Tuner is similar to search algorithms, as mentioned
in Section 4.1, including grid search, random search, TPE, and their variants. The other
group refers to the schedulers mentioned in Section 4.2, including HB and BOHB. Almost
all state-of-the-art algorithms (except PBT) are built into NNI. If a user wishes to explore
the eciency of dierent algorithms, NNI is a convenient choice. Tuners can be applied in
combination with Assessors. Advisors already have their own early stopping strategy, and
thus Assessors are not applicable. All congurations for Tuners, Assessors, and Advisors
are set in the cong.yml le.
In addition, NNI is designed with high extensibility. As well as the built-in Tuners and
Assessors, researchers can test new self-designed algorithms. They only need to inherit the
base Tuner/Assessor, implement related functions, and congure the new algorithm into
thecong.yml le.
NNI is able to be deployed in all kinds of infrastructure, including local machines, re-
mote servers, and Kubernetes-based Dockers. It is extensible to implement more machine
learning frameworks, both by users and developers of NNI. In addition, NNI is compati-
ble with most popular deep learning frameworks and libraries, including PyTorch, Keras,
TensorFlow, MXNet, Scikit-learn, and XGBoost. There are also extensible points for new
platforms in NNI.
When an HPO experiment is initialized, its process and intermediate results can be
monitored through a visualization interface named Web UI (Figure 19). Web UI displays
almost all information in need of AutoML and HPO, including the status of the experiment
and each trial, search space and conguration information, log, intermediate results, plots
between metrics and hyper-parameters, plots showing relations between hyper-parameters,
and comparisons between dierent trials. TensorBoard and TensorBoardX are also compat-
ible with NNI. Compared with Web UI, plots are created by command lines in TensorBoard,
which is more exible but also requires more knowledge.
Documents and examples are helpful for starters. Examples for all search algorithms,
frameworks, and hardware platforms are prepared to lower the technical threshold. NNIs
developers are still working on the implementation of more algorithms and platforms, which
guarantees that it will be updated for SOTA development in AutoML.
However, NNI still has some downsides. Most AutoML/HPO tools are designed for a
specic algorithm (e.g., TPE) or certain tasks (e.g., image classication). The advantage is
that users only need to provide labeled data, and then the model training will be performed
by tools. The complexity of the model is wrapped up using HPO tools, and therefore knowl-
edge for model training is not a must. Compared with most existing tools and services, NNI
is universal for all training and optimization tasks, with any machine learning framework
on any platform. This is denitely an advantage, but could be a drawback for beginners
because model training experience is a prerequisite.
Furthermore, the function of Web UI could be extended. Compared with Google Vizier,
NNI only displays the status and results of experiments with no interactive function. Nei-
ther the hyper-parameter setting, choice of algorithm, or conguration of resources can be
adjusted from Web UI.
35

==== Page 36 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 19: Example of Web UI for NNI
A third problem lies in debug information. Specically, the debugging process could be
more straightforward. Users may need more details in the log le, especially when the NNI
manager or dispatcher fails.
NNI supports almost all cutting-edge search algorithms except for population-based
algorithms. PBT is quite a unique algorithm in its combination of the process of hyper-
parameter tuning and model training. It is especially ecient for models on a very large
scale.
4.5 Ray.Tune: An open-source toolkit for hyper-parameter search
Ray.Tune is a library of Ray developed by Berkeley RISELab. As a distributed frame-
work for model training, Ray guarantees the ecient allocation of computational resources.
Most searching methods implemented in Tune can be realized in parallel. As an open-source
framework, Tune shares similarities with NNI in many applications, but there are also some
major dierences (Table 4), which are listed as follows:
- NNI is a toolkit for both AutoML and HPO, whereas Tune is a library as a part of
Ray only supporting hyper-parameter tuning.
- Currently, Tune is not applicable for Kubernetes-based Dockers.
- Tune support PBT, which is a great advantage over NNI.
- Tune implements most search algorithms by importing existing libraries (e.g., BayesOpt
and HyperOpt), whereas the developers of NNI rewrite most of them. Therefore, users
may need to install the relevant package when using a certain algorithm.
36

==== Page 37 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
NNI Tune
ApplicationToolkit for AutoML , HPO
and model compressionOnly for HPO
Deployment Local, remote and Dockers Local and remote
AlgorithmSupport almost all SOTA algorithms
except PBTSupport almost all SOTA algorithms
including PBT
ImplementationBy rewriting the algorithm
in format of NNIBy importing existing libraries
with the interface if Tune
Start
an ExperimentImport NNI+ cong. le
+ search space leDene a trainable class
+tune.run function
Modication on
original codeLess. By adding individual les More. By build a trainable class
VisualizationWeb UI and TensorBoard
(TensorBoardX)TensorBoard
(TensorBoardX)
Table 4: Comparison between closed-source services and open-source toolkits
- To start an experiment, users must dene a trainable class and all congurations are
set in a tune.run function. Thus, users need to make more modications to their
original version compared with NNI, but it is not necessary to prepare individual les
for conguration or search space.
- Results can be visualized using TensorBoard for both NNI and Tune. Nevertheless,
NNI outperforms Tune in the design of Web UI, which is easier to use.
Tune and NNI also have advantages in common, which are as follows:
- Ease of deployment: Compared to closed-source services, users need to deploy the
framework by their own, but both Tune and NNI can be deployed with only one line
of command.
- Scalability: Both of them perform parallel tuning on multi computation units or
servers. Users just need to add a few lines in their original code or in a certain le.
- Support: Support for more state-of-the-art hyper-parameter searching and early stop-
ping algorithms compared with Google Vizier and SageMaker.
- Tune implements most search algorithms by importing existing libraries (e.g., BayesOpt
and HyperOpt), whereas the developers of NNI rewrite most of them. Therefore, users
may need to install the relevant package when using a certain algorithm.
- Open source implies exibility: Both provide extensible interfaces for algorithms,
allowing users to implement new ones. Furthermore, open source implies the lack of
the need to pay for all of these features.
However, Tune and NNI also share some drawbacks. They are indeed easy to use as a
comprehensive HPO framework, but not as convenient as closed-source toolkits supported
37

==== Page 38 ====
Yu and Zhu
by web services. Users cannot avoid deployment and conguration work, and they can-
not expect to run thousands of trials simultaneously because of the limitation of resources.
Moreover, neither has an interactive GUI; users must use command lines to start adjusting
an HPO experiment.
Nevertheless, Tune and NNI are still the most convenient toolkits for hyper-parameter
training. In general, they are more suitable for developers with some experience of model
training.
5. Discussion and Extensions
This section concludes the paper with a discussion on the comparison between algo-
rithms (Section 5.1) and evaluations of HPO (Section 5.2).
The concept of HPO has a history of over 20 years (Kohavi and John, 1995), and it is
a widely used mature technique. In the last few years, with the prosperous development of
deep learning, automatic HPO has also become a potential tool to adjust a model for certain
applications. Given the scale of deep learning models and their set of hyper-parameters,
the key challenges concerning automatic HPO are as follows:
- Many classical search algorithms (e.g., grid search, random search, and Bayesian meth-
ods) have become infeasible because of the large number of hyper-parameters and
complex conguration space.
- Evaluation of models with a certain structure or certain choice of hyper-parameters
could be extremely expensive.
- Parallelism will dramatically reduce the total training time. It is a must for HPO
tasks, especially for deep models.
- All in all, computational eciency is extremely crucial.
5.1 Comparability between dierent algorithms
This section makes a brief comparison between major algorithms, including their ad-
vantages for saving computational resources, disadvantages in accuracy and eciency, and
their applicability (Table 5).
-Eorts made by algorithms to save computational resources
Random search: For deep neural networks, the most important feature of random search
is computational parallelism. In addition, it is easy to combine with early stopping strate-
gies, and such combination will largely improve the eciency for narrowing down the search
space.
BO: This is the classical method for optimization addressing the experience of prior
search. It is a guided search method with surrogate model and acquisition functions, bal-
ancing the exploration and exploitation processes. Bayesian optimization and its variants
are the most reliable and convincing methods for optimization. Many recent studies have
38

==== Page 39 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Advantage DisadvantageApplicability
for DNN
Grid
Search- Simple
- Parallelism- curse of dimensionality- Applicable if only a
few HPs to tune
Random
search- Parallelism
- Easy to combine with
early stopping methods- Low eciency
- Cannot promise an
optimum- Convenient for early
stage
Bayesian
optimization- Reliable and promising
- Foundation of many
other algorithms- Dicult for parallelism
- Conceptually complex- Default algorithm for
tools
- Variants of BO could be
more applicable (TPE)
Multi-bandit
methods- Conceptually simple
- Computationally ecient- Balance between budget
and number of trials- Could be a default
choice
- Implemented by open-
sourced libraries.
PBT
methods- Combine HPO and model
training
- Parallelism- Constant changes to
computation graph
- Not extendable to
advanced evolution- For computationally
expensive models
Table 5: Comparison between major HPO algorithms
been conducted to t this method into the HPO task for deep neural networks.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These are actually a series of algorithms based on the
non-stochastic innite-armed bandit problem, including SHA, HB, BOHB, and ASHA. They
are dierent from the abovementioned search algorithms because they introduce an early
stopping method to balance the performance and training time. The core schedule for trials
is the same for these algorithms: rst assign all trials a given initial budget, remove the
worse half or a certain percentage, adjust the budget for the remaining trials according to
the drop percentage, and repeat until only one trial is left. Trials with poor performance
will be terminated halfway instead of trained to convergence to save computation time.
These algorithms are more computationally ecient for dealing with increasingly complex
models and increasing data size for deep learning networks. Furthermore, they are easy to
deploy in parallel.
PBT: This is unique in that it combines hyper-parameter tuning and model trainings.
It is a hybrid of random search (parallel optimization) and hand tuning (sequential opti-
mization). PBT starts with several networks trained in parallel, drops trials with the worst
performance, and adapts the model by rening hyper-parameters with a certain ratio and
inheriting them from the model with good performance. With PBT, a model is trained to
have nonstationary hyper-parameters at dierent stages, with warm start instead of waiting
to convergence. Among all the algorithms and schedules, PBT is the most ecient because
the parameters and hyper-parameters are trained simultaneously.
-In the meantime, every method has its shortcomings when applied in deep neural net-
works.
39

==== Page 40 ====
Yu and Zhu
Grid search: The number of function evaluations grows exponentially with dimension-
ality and search space. Grid search will quickly become infeasible if the hyper-parameters
cannot be limited in a very narrow range.
Random search: Low eciency occurs, especially when the performance is close to the
optimum. Random search only guarantees better results with more resources; it cannot
promise to obtain the optimal results, which is consistent with the Monte Carlo method.
BO: The most fatal drawback of the Bayesian method is its deployment in a distributed
system. As mentioned previously, parallelism is especially necessary for deep learning, while
the feature of borrowing ideas from precious results prevent Bayesian method from direct
parallelization. Many recent developments have solved this problem, but it is still not as
natural as random search. The conceptual complexity makes the application or improve-
ment of this algorithm challenging.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These have their native shortcomings in sampling, but
such problems are gradually overcome with the evolution of algorithms. SHA must deal
with the tradeo between budget and number of trials, and drops half every time; HB xes
the rst problem by testing several combinations of budgets and trial numbers, and users
can determine the scale to drop; and BOHB replaces random search in HB with BO, thereby
ensuring both strong anytime performance with early stopping and strong nal performance
with guided search algorithms. ASHA improves the distributed implementations, and trials
can be deployed asynchronously as soon as machines free up. Another unsolved problem is
the design of budgets, which is a tricky task in need of user experience of network training
and model tuning.
The limitation of PBT lies in the constant changes made to the computation graph. If
the model is trained with a pre-dened graph, this process could be complicated. Users
can never obtain the best hyper-parameter set or a constant value for any hyper-parameter,
because neither of them will be stationary during training. The evolutional algorithm is
comparatively simple for the original version of PBT; however, it is not quite extendable to
advanced evolutional decisions.
-Applicable for deep learning networks?
Grid search: Theoretically, grid search is not a good method unless only a few hyper-
parameters within a narrow spectrum are searched. However, it is still quite popular in
practical terms because users tend to narrow down the search space with their knowledge
of some hyper-parameters, such as LR. In this case, only several potential values must be
tested. In a recent study, the structural parameters determining the width and depth of
EcientNet were achieved using the grid search method (Tan and Le, 2019), which indi-
cated the applicability of this straightforward method.
Random search: Random search is convenient to use for early stages of HPO, especially
when combined with an early stopping strategy. When users have no experience in hyper-
parameters, they need to narrow down the search space at the rst step. The combination
of random search and early stopping is ecient in this case because it will explore the whole
search space with similar cost to more complicated algorithms. When the search space is
narrowed down, random search is not the best choice for a nonguided method.
BO: Many improved versions have been made based on the vanilla BO method for deep
neural networks, mainly in the parallelism and conguration spaces. One of the most pop-
40

==== Page 41 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
ular variants is TPE, which is suitable for conditional hyper-parameters and natural for
parallelization. It is applied in hyper-parameter tuning for convolutional neural networks
and neural language modeling. BO and its variants are implemented in almost every auto-
tuning framework, and it is the default search algorithm for Google Vizier and Sagemaker.
This indicates that BO is still an active research area for HPO.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These could be a default choice for deep neural net-
works because of their eciency in computational resources. For a massive parallel system,
ASHA outperforms most SOTA algorithms for both language processing and model classi-
cation models. In sequential systems and distributed systems with decades of computing
units, BOHB could be the rst choice for tuning most neural networks and reinforcement
learning algorithms because of its eciency and accuracy. Multi-armed bandit algorithms
are implemented in both NNI and Tune.
PBT: This is suitable for computationally expensive models (e.g., generative adversarial
networks and transformers) and nonstationary hyper-parameters (e.g., LR). With tradi-
tional search algorithms, a model is trained to convergence with dierent hyper-parameter
sets, and then the set with the best performance is chosen. This process could be extremely
expensive for large models or large datasets, and PBT is ecient in this case because the
hyper-parameters are tuned during training. For nonstationary hyper-parameters, PBT
makes a schedule rather than a certain value for them, which is more practical than hand
tuning or a man-made schedule.
5.2 Evaluation of results
The previous section mainly discussed the search algorithms for hyper-parameter sets,
as well as their feasibility and eciency. For a large model, the evaluation method could be
more critical for saving computation time for unnecessary training because training is usu-
ally much more time-consuming compared with the sampling process. An ideal evaluator
is supposed be fast, accurate, and simple. However, the choice of evaluation is actually to
seek a balance between accuracy and speed (Figure 20). In case of deep neural networks,
the less time spent on training, the lower accuracy and higher variance there will be.
In the following paragraphs, we review several widely used methods and relevant algo-
rithms for coping with the acceleration of evaluation. The most straightforward and widely
used method is a direct evaluation on the target dataset. The direct method is used to
evaluate hyper-parameter sets by training a corresponding model to convergence and com-
paring the loss or accuracy between models. This method is inecient as it usually takes
a long time between two samplings, but it is without doubt the most accurate method.
Most users with limited resources cannot aord its expensive time costs, and thus faster
methods have been proposed. The most straightforward idea is to decrease the delity to
trade evaluation time (March and Willcox, 2012; Fern andez-Godino et al., 2016).
Furthermore, subsampling has been adapted to deal with time consumption caused by
a large training dataset. With this method, the model is trained with a subset of original
training data. However, dierent datasets tend to have dierent hyper-parameter choices
for optimum performance (Kohavi and John, 1995); therefore, subsampling is risky in terms
of the potential to introduce more noise and uncertainty. A smaller dataset will acceler-
41

==== Page 42 ====
Yu and Zhu
Figure 20: Example of Web UI for NNI
ate the whole process, and the size of the subset must be carefully determined to ensure
accuracy. The direct application of a small dataset would denitely generate bias and low
delity. To solve the problem posed by a small data subset, a transfer series expansion
method was proposed on hyper-parameter tuning tasks to accelerate the evaluation with a
combination of a set of predictors (Hu et al., 2019).
In addition, an early stopping strategy saves training time, as was discussed in Section
6. With an early stopping strategy, the whole training process is divided into sections.
At each checkpoint, the model with a performance worse than a certain standard will be
terminated. As previously mentioned, median stopping and curve-tting are typical early
stopping methods that can be applied in combination with random search and Bayesian
methods among other. Multi-bandit-based algorithms and population-based algorithms are
essentially early stopping with dierent methods for determining checkpoints and judge-
ment criteria. They save training time by terminating poor models halfway, while it is still
possible that a models performance is worse during the early stage but improves more than
remaining ones with more training do. In this case, the model is killed too early to be good.
Early stopping is the most common method used to save resources, and it is implemented
in most AutoML frameworks.
Transfer learning uses knowledge from previous learning tasks to improve the learning
or save resources on a target task (Pan and Yang, 2009). The target model is supposed to
have a similar structure to the source model (Vanschoren, 2018; Yosinski et al., 2014); thus,
transfer learning is especially feasible for hyper-parameter tuning. Parameter reuse is the
most straightforward application of transfer learning in hyper-parameter tuning. The model
is initialized with parameters inherited from similar congurations, and is then ne-tuned
for further improvement in performance (Yosinski et al., 2014). Parameters inherited from
similar evaluated congurations could be a feasible initial value to save training time (Ben-
gio et al., 2007). The noise introduced by transfer learning is not as predictable as that
introduced by subsampling and early stopping. The model could be trapped in dierent
42

==== Page 43 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
local optima from dierent initializations, whereas a well-designed initialization performs
better with a similar training process (Sutskever et al., 2013). Transfer learning has been
approved to be workable for tasks with large image datasets, such as ImageNet (Sharif Raza-
vian et al., 2014). Furthermore, transfer learning is supported by Google Vizier to accelerate
the study of warm starting the model training with useful information from relevant stud-
ies (Yogatama and Mann, 2014). For a service based on Google Cloud, it is possible to
borrow results from other users experiments; however, most open-source AutoML frame-
works have not implemented a transfer learning module.
Meta learning is also applicable for directly predicting performance of a given model
with certain hyper-parameter congurations, by building a surrogate model with previous
congurations (Eggensperger et al., 2015; Baker et al., 2017). Surrogate models are approx-
imations for making a functional relationship between available data and dierent types of
delities (Fern andez-Godino et al., 2016). n early works, linear regression was the most
common surrogate model (Bensusan and Kalousis, 2001). With the development of com-
putational resources, more expensive models have also been developed. The curve-tting
method (Domhan et al., 2015) discussed in subsection 5.2.2 predicted the accuracy with a
weighted linear combination. In addition to the most straightforward linear regression, other
machine learning algorithms have also been applied as a surrogate model. Guerra made
the prediction using support vector machines (Guerra et al., 2008); Klein used Bayesian
neural networks to build the surrogate model (Klein et al., 2016); and Davis the MultiLayer
Perceptron to predict the performance of the model with a specic conguration (Davis
and Giraud-Carrier, 2018). This method is especially suitable for HPO among all AutoML
tasks because it is easy to use for quantication (Yao et al., 2018). The choice of surrogate
model may introduce bias because it determines the accuracy for prediction. The accuracy
of a surrogate model is inuenced by sampling points available for model construction and
the accuracy of sampling data (Simpson et al., 2001).
6. Conclusion
This study is motivated by the increasing application of deep neural networks. In this
paper, we provided a systematic review on HPO approaches, especially on neural networks.
The research began with the introduction of important hyper-parameters for training and
structure, and then extended to state-of-the-art search algorithms and schedulers for auto-
mated HPO. In addition to outlining related algorithms, we covered services and open-source
frameworks, including their pros and cons and applications. Comparisons of algorithms and
evaluation methods were further discussed in terms of their feasibility for large models and
their consumption of computational resources. This study is dedicated to summarizing in-
formation on HPO as a reference for researchers and industrial users.
References
Hyperparameter: optimization methods and real world model management. URL
https://missinglink.ai/guides/neural-network-concepts/hyperparameters-optimization-
43

==== Page 44 ====
Yu and Zhu
methods-and-real-world-model-management/ .
Advisor. https:/https://github.com/tobegit3hub/advisor , 2018.
Mart n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro,
Greg S Corrado, Andy Davis, Jerey Dean, Matthieu Devin, et al. Tensorow: Large-scale
machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467 ,
2016.
Pieter Abbeel. Deep reinforcement learning for robotics. https://vmayoral.github.
io/robots,/ai,/deep/learning,/rl,/reinforcement/learning/2016/07/06/
rl-intro/ , 2016.
Abien Fred Agarap. Deep learning using rectied linear units (relu). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.08375 , 2018.
Alekh Agarwal, Peter L Bartlett, and John C Duchi. Oracle inequalities for computationally
adaptive model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1208.0129 , 2012.
Samarth Agrawal. Hyperparameters in deep learning. https://vmayoral.github.
io/robots,/ai,/deep/learning,/rl,/reinforcement/learning/2016/07/06/
rl-intro/ , 2018.
Amazon. Advisor. https://github.com/tobegit3hub/advisor , 2018.
Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Ramesh Raskar, and Nikhil Naik. Accelerating neural archi-
tecture search using performance prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10823 , 2017.
Irwan Bello, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V Le. Neural optimizer search with
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning-Volume 70 , pages 459{468. JMLR. org, 2017.
Yoshua Bengio. Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep architec-
tures. In Neural networks: Tricks of the trade , pages 437{478. Springer, 2012.
Yoshua Bengio, Pascal Lamblin, Dan Popovici, and Hugo Larochelle. Greedy layer-wise
training of deep networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
153{160, 2007.
Yoshua Bengio, Fr ed eric Bastien, Arnaud Bergeron, Nicolas Boulanger-Lewandowski,
Thomas Breuel, Youssouf Chherawala, Moustapha Cisse, Myriam C^ ot e, Dumitru Erhan,
Jeremy Eustache, et al. Deep learners benet more from out-of-distribution examples.
InProceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Articial Intelligence and
Statistics , pages 164{172, 2011.
Hilan Bensusan and Alexandros Kalousis. Estimating the predictive accuracy of a classier.
InEuropean Conference on Machine Learning , pages 25{36. Springer, 2001.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization.
Journal of machine learning research , 13(Feb):281{305, 2012.
44

==== Page 45 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
James Bergstra, Daniel Yamins, and David Daniel Cox. Making a science of model search:
Hyperparameter optimization in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. 2013.
James S Bergstra, R emi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Bal azs K egl. Algorithms for hyper-
parameter optimization. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
2546{2554, 2011.
Hadrien Bertrand, Roberto Ardon, Matthieu Perrot, and Isabelle Bloch. Hyperparame-
ter optimization of deep neural networks: Combining hyperband with bayesian model
selection. In Conf erence sur lApprentissage Automatique , 2017.
Andr e Biedenkapp. Bohb: robust and ecient hyperparame-
ter optimization at scale. https://medium.com/criteo-labs/
hyper-parameter-optimization-algorithms-2fe447525903 , 2018.
Alo s Bissuel. Hyper-parameter optimization algorithms: a short review. https://www.
automl.org/blog_bohb/ , 2018.
Charles Brecque. The intuition behind bayesian optimization
with gaussian processes. https://towardsdatascience.com/
the-intuitions-behind-bayesian-optimization-with-gaussian-processes-7e00fcc898a0 ,
2018.
L Breierova and M Choudhari. An introduction to sensitivity analysis. massachusetts insti-
tute of technology. Technical report, D-4526-2, 1996.
Jason Brownlee. Dropout regularization in deep learning
models with keras. https://machinelearningmastery.com/
dropout-regularization-deep-learning-models-keras/ , 2016.
Jason Brownlee. Gentle introduction to the adam optimization al-
gorithm for deep learning. https://machinelearningmastery.com/
adam-optimization-algorithm-for-deep-learning/ , 2017.
Jason Brownlee. How to congure the learning rate when training
deep learning neural networks. https://machinelearningmastery.com/
learning-rate-for-deep-learning-neural-networks/ , 2019.
Vitaly Bushaev. Understanding rmsprop faster neu-
ral network learning. https://towardsdatascience.com/
understanding-rmsprop-faster-neural-network-learning-62e116fcf29a , 2018.
Tianqi Chen, Mu Li, Yutian Li, Min Lin, Naiyan Wang, Minjie Wang, Tianjun Xiao, Bing
Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Mxnet: A exible and ecient machine learning
library for heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.01274 , 2015.
Francois Chollet. Deep Learning mit Python und Keras: Das Praxis-Handbuch vom En-
twickler der Keras-Bibliothek . MITP-Verlags GmbH & Co. KG, 2018.
45

==== Page 46 ====
Yu and Zhu
C Davis and C Giraud-Carrier. Annotative experts for hyperparameter selection. In AutoML
Workshop at ICML , 2018.
Thomas Desautels, Andreas Krause, and Joel W Burdick. Parallelizing exploration-
exploitation tradeos in gaussian process bandit optimization. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research , 15:3873{3923, 2014.
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural
networks with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552 , 2017.
Chuong B Do. Gaussian processes. Stanford University, Stanford, CA, accessed Dec , 5:
2017, 2007.
Tobias Domhan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Speeding up automatic
hyperparameter optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves.
InTwenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Articial Intelligence , 2015.
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online
learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of machine learning research , 12(Jul):
2121{2159, 2011.
David Duvenaud. Automatic model construction with Gaussian processes . PhD thesis,
University of Cambridge, 2014.
Russell C Eberhart and Yuhui Shi. Comparison between genetic algorithms and particle
swarm optimization. In International conference on evolutionary programming , pages
611{616. Springer, 1998.
Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, Frank Hutter, James Bergstra, Jasper Snoek,
Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Towards an empirical foundation for assessing
bayesian optimization of hyperparameters. In NIPS workshop on Bayesian Optimization
in Theory and Practice , volume 10, page 3, 2013.
Katharina Eggensperger, Frank Hutter, Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Ecient
benchmarking of hyperparameter optimizers via surrogates. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Con-
ference on Articial Intelligence , 2015.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. Bohb: Robust and ecient hyperparameter
optimization at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01774 , 2018.
Gregory Fasshauer and Michael McCourt. Kernel-based approximation methods using Mat-
lab, volume 19. World Scientic Publishing Company, 2015.
M Giselle Fern andez-Godino, Chanyoung Park, Nam-Ho Kim, and Raphael T Haftka. Re-
view of multi-delity models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07196 , 2016.
Matthias Feurer and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter optimization. In Automated Machine
Learning , pages 3{33. Springer, 2019.
46

==== Page 47 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel Blum,
and Frank Hutter. Ecient and robust automated machine learning. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 2962{2970, 2015.
Peter Frazier, Warren Powell, and Savas Dayanik. The knowledge-gradient policy for cor-
related normal beliefs. INFORMS journal on Computing , 21(4):599{613, 2009.
Peter I Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811 ,
2018.
Eduardo C Garrido-Merch an and Daniel Hern andez-Lobato. Dealing with integer-
valued variables in bayesian optimization with gaussian processes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03673 , 2017.
David Ginsbourger, Rodolphe Le Riche, and Laurent Carraro. Kriging is well-suited to par-
allelize optimization. In Computational intelligence in expensive optimization problems ,
pages 131{162. Springer, 2010.
David Ginsbourger, Janis Janusevskis, and Rodolphe Le Riche. Dealing with asynchronicity
in parallel gaussian process based global optimization. 2011.
Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision , pages 1440{1448, 2015.
John Gittins. A dynamic allocation index for the sequential design of experiments. Progress
in statistics , pages 241{266, 1974.
Daniel Golovin, Benjamin Solnik, Subhodeep Moitra, Greg Kochanski, John Karro, and
D Sculley. Google vizier: A service for black-box optimization. In Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages
1487{1495, 2017.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 2672{2680, 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning . MIT press, 2016.
Ian J Goodfellow, David Warde-Farley, Mehdi Mirza, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
Maxout networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.4389 , 2013.
Silvio B Guerra, Ricardo BC Prud^ encio, and Teresa B Ludermir. Predicting the performance
of learning algorithms using support vector machines as meta-regressors. In International
Conference on Articial Neural Networks , pages 523{532. Springer, 2008.
DM Hamby. A review of techniques for parameter sensitivity analysis of environmental
models. Environmental monitoring and assessment , 32(2):135{154, 1994.
Mark Hammond. Deep reinforcement learning in the enterprise: Bridging the gap from
games to industry, 2017.
47

==== Page 48 ====
Yu and Zhu
Nikolaus Hansen. The cma evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772 ,
2016.
Charlie Harrington. Practical guide to hyperparameters optimization for deep learning
models. 2018.
Robert L Harrison. Introduction to monte carlo simulation. In AIP conference proceedings ,
volume 1204, pages 17{21. American Institute of Physics, 2010.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 770{778, 2016.
Je Heaton. The number of hidden layers, 2017. URL https://www. heatonresearch.
com/2017/06/01/hidden-layers. html .
Philipp Hennig and Christian J Schuler. Entropy search for information-ecient global
optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13(Jun):1809{1837, 2012.
Jos e Miguel Hern andez-Lobato, Matthew W Homan, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Predictive
entropy search for ecient global optimization of black-box functions. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 918{926, 2014.
Georey Hinton, Nitsh Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learn-
ing. Coursera, video lectures , 264:1, 2012a.
Georey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep
belief nets. Neural computation , 18(7):1527{1554, 2006.
Georey E Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan R
Salakhutdinov. Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature de-
tectors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.0580 , 2012b.
Sepp Hochreiter and J urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation ,
9(8):1735{1780, 1997.
Matthew D Homan, Eric Brochu, and Nando de Freitas. Portfolio allocation for bayesian
optimization. In UAI, pages 327{336. Citeseer, 2011.
Yi-Qi Hu, Yang Yu, Wei-Wei Tu, Qiang Yang, Yuqiang Chen, and Wenyuan Dai. Multi-
delity automatic hyper-parameter tuning via transfer series expansion. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 3846{3853, 2019.
Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen,
HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Ecient training
of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 103{112, 2019.
Frank Hutter. Automated conguration of algorithms for solving hard computational prob-
lems. PhD thesis, University of British Columbia, 2009.
48

==== Page 49 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimiza-
tion for general algorithm conguration. In International conference on learning and
intelligent optimization , pages 507{523. Springer, 2011.
Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Parallel algorithm congura-
tion. In International Conference on Learning and Intelligent Optimization , pages 55{70.
Springer, 2012.
Christian Igel. No free lunch theorems: Limitations and perspectives of metaheuristics. In
Theory and principled methods for the design of metaheuristics , pages 1{23. Springer,
2014.
Christian Igel and Michael H usken. Improving the rprop learning algorithm. In Proceedings
of the second international ICSC symposium on neural computation (NC 2000) , volume
2000, pages 115{121. Citeseer, 2000.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Je Donahue,
Ali Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population
based training of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846 , 2017.
Kevin Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identication and hyper-
parameter optimization. In Articial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 240{248, 2016.
Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Je Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long, Ross Gir-
shick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. Cae: Convolutional architecture for
fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on
Multimedia , pages 675{678, 2014.
Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, and Xia Hu. Ecient neural architecture search with network
morphism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10282 , 2018.
Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Ecient global optimization of
expensive black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization , 13(4):455{492, 1998.
Rohan Joseph. Grid search for model tuning. https://towardsdatascience.com/
grid-search-for-model-tuning-3319b259367e , 2018.
Zohar Karnin, Tomer Koren, and Oren Somekh. Almost optimal exploration in multi-armed
bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1238{1246, 2013.
Andrej Karpathy et al. Cs231n convolutional neural networks for visual recognition. Neural
networks , 1:1, 2016.
Gilad Katz, Eui Chul Richard Shin, and Dawn Song. Explorekit: Automatic feature genera-
tion and selection. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) ,
pages 979{984. IEEE, 2016.
Emilie Kaufmann and Aur elien Garivier. Learning the distribution with largest mean: two
bandit frameworks. ESAIM: Proceedings and surveys , 60:114{131, 2017.
49

==== Page 50 ====
Yu and Zhu
R Khandelwal. L1 and l2 regularization. Data Driven Investor,[Online]. Available:
https://medium. com/datadriveninvestor/l1-l2-regularization-7f1b4fe948f2 , 2018.
Ross D. King, Cao Feng, and Alistair Sutherland. Statlog: comparison of classication
algorithms on large real-world problems. Applied Articial Intelligence an International
Journal , 9(3):289{333, 1995.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
Ayy uce Kizrak. Comparison of activation functions for
deep neural networks. https://towardsdatascience.com/
comparison-of-activation-functions-for-deep-neural-networks-706ac4284c8a? ,
2019.
Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Learning curve
prediction with bayesian neural networks. 2016.
Will Koehrsen. Comparison of activation functions for deep neural networks. https:
//towardsdatascience.com/bayes-rule-applied-75965e4482ff , 2018.
Ron Kohavi and George H John. Automatic parameter selection by minimizing estimated
error. In Machine Learning Proceedings 1995 , pages 304{312. Elsevier, 1995.
Brent Komer, James Bergstra, and Chris Eliasmith. Hyperopt-sklearn: automatic hyperpa-
rameter conguration for scikit-learn. In ICML workshop on AutoML , volume 9. Citeseer,
2014.
Nikolai K Krivulin, Dennis Guster, and Charles Hall. Parallel implementation of a random
search procedure: an experimental study. In 5th WSEAS International Conference on
Simulation, Modeling and Optimization (SMO'05), Corfu Island, Greece, August 17-19,
2005. WORLD SCIENTIFIC PUBL CO PTE LTD, 2005.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Georey E Hinton. Imagenet classication with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pages 1097{1105, 2012.
Harold J Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak
curve in the presence of noise. 1964.
Tze Leung Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically ecient adaptive allocation rules.
Advances in applied mathematics , 6(1):4{22, 1985.
Suki Lau. Learning rate schedules and adaptive learning rate methods for deep learning.
Towards Data Science , 2017.
Yann LeCun, L eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haner. Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278{2324, 1998.
50

==== Page 51 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Ang Li, Ola Spyra, Sagi Perel, Valentin Dalibard, Max Jaderberg, Chenjie Gu, David Bud-
den, Tim Harley, and Pramod Gupta. A generalized framework for population based
training. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 1791{1799, 2019.
Fei-Fei Li, Andrej Karpathy, and Justin Johnson. Convolutional neural networks for visual
recognition, 2015.
Liam Li, Kevin Jamieson, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Ekaterina Gonina, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin
Recht, and Ameet Talwalkar. Massively parallel hyperparameter tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.05934 , 2018.
Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar.
Hyperband: A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 18(1):6765{6816, 2017.
Mu Li, Tong Zhang, Yuqiang Chen, and Alexander J Smola. Ecient mini-batch training
for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 661{670, 2014.
Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion
Stoica. Tune: A research platform for distributed model selection and training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.05118 , 2018.
Nicolas Loizou and Peter Richt arik. Momentum and stochastic momentum for stochas-
tic gradient, newton, proximal point and subspace descent methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.09677 , 2017.
Pablo Ribalta Lorenzo, Jakub Nalepa, Michal Kawulok, Luciano Sanchez Ramos, and
Jos e Ranilla Pastor. Particle swarm optimization for hyper-parameter selection in deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference ,
pages 481{488, 2017.
Lu Lu, Yeonjong Shin, Yanhui Su, and George Em Karniadakis. Dying relu and initializa-
tion: Theory and numerical examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06733 , 2019.
Ningning Ma, Xiangyu Zhang, Hai-Tao Zheng, and Jian Sun. Shuenet v2: Practical
guidelines for ecient cnn architecture design. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 116{131, 2018.
Kishan Maladkar. Why is random search better than grid search more machine learning.
https://towardsdatascience.com/bayes-rule-applied-75965e4482ff , 2018.
Andrew March and Karen Willcox. Provably convergent multidelity optimization algo-
rithm not requiring high-delity derivatives. AIAA journal , 50(5):1079{1089, 2012.
Dominic Masters and Carlo Luschi. Revisiting small batch training for deep neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07612 , 2018.
51

==== Page 52 ====
Yu and Zhu
G abor Melis, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. On the state of the art of evaluation in neural
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05589 , 2017.
Microsoft. Neural network intelligence. https://github.com/microsoft/nni#
nni-released-reminder , 2018.
Jonas Mo ckus. On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization techniques
IFIP technical conference , pages 400{404. Springer, 1975.
Jonas Mockus, Vytautas Tiesis, and Antanas Zilinskas. The application of bayesian methods
for seeking the extremum. Towards global optimization , 2(117-129):2, 1978.
I Murray. Gaussian processes and kernels, 2016.
nachiket tanksale. Finding good learning rate and the
one cycle policy. https://towardsdatascience.com/
finding-good-learning-rate-and-the-one-cycle-policy-7159fe1db5d6 , 2018.
Vinod Nair and Georey E Hinton. Rectied linear units improve restricted boltzmann ma-
chines. In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-
10), pages 807{814, 2010.
Andrew Ng. Improving deep neural networks: Hyperparameter tuning, regularization and
optimization. Deeplearning. ai on Coursera , 2017.
Andrew Y Ng. Feature selection, l 1 vs. l 2 regularization, and rotational invariance. In
Proceedings of the twenty-rst international conference on Machine learning , page 78,
2004.
Artem Oppermann. Overtting and undertting in deep learning. https://www.
deeplearning-academy.com/p/ai-wiki-overfitting-underfitting , 2019.
David Orive, G Sorrosal, Cruz Enrique Borges, C Mart n, and A Alonso-Vicario. Evolu-
tionary algorithms for hyperparameter tuning on neural networks models. In Proceedings
of the 26th european modeling & simulation symposium. Burdeos, France , pages 402{409,
2014.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on
knowledge and data engineering , 22(10):1345{1359, 2009.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imper-
ative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 8024{8035, 2019.
Foster Provost, David Jensen, and Tim Oates. Ecient progressive sampling. In Proceedings
of the fth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining , pages 23{32, 1999.
Ning Qian. On the momentum term in gradient descent learning algorithms. Neural net-
works , 12(1):145{151, 1999.
52

==== Page 53 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V Le. Swish: a self-gated activation function.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941 , 7, 2017a.
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V Le. Searching for activation functions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941 , 2017b.
Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes in machine learning. In Summer School on
Machine Learning , pages 63{71. Springer, 2003.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once:
Unied, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 779{788, 2016.
Brian D Ripley. Statistical aspects of neural networks. Networks and chaosstatistical and
probabilistic aspects , 50:40{123, 1993.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The annals of
mathematical statistics , pages 400{407, 1951.
Jesus Rodriguez. Understanding hyperparameters optimization in deep learning models:
Concepts and tools, 2018.
Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.04747 , 2016.
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen.
Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4510{4520, 2018.
Bobak Shahriari, Ziyu Wang, Matthew W Homan, Alexandre Bouchard-C^ ot e, and Nando
de Freitas. An entropy search portfolio for bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.4625 , 2014.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking
the human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
104(1):148{175, 2015.
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. Cnn fea-
tures o-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops , pages 806{813, 2014.
Daniel Shiman, Shannon Fry, and Zannah Marsh. The nature of code . D. Shiman, 2012.
David Silver. Lecture 9: Exploration and exploitation. Computer Science Department,
University of London , 2014.
Dan Simon. Evolutionary optimization algorithms . John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
Timothy W Simpson, JD Poplinski, Patrick N Koch, and Janet K Allen. Metamodels
for computer-based engineering design: survey and recommendations. Engineering with
computers , 17(2):129{150, 2001.
53

==== Page 54 ====
Yu and Zhu
Aleksandrs Slivkins et al. Introduction to multi-armed bandits. Foundations and Trends R
in Machine Learning , 12(1-2):1{286, 2019.
Leslie N Smith. Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 464{472. IEEE, 2017.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of
machine learning algorithms. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
2951{2959, 2012.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sun-
daram, Mostofa Patwary, Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable bayesian optimization
using deep neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages
2171{2180, 2015.
Evan R Sparks, Ameet Talwalkar, Michael J Franklin, Michael I Jordan, and Tim Kraska.
Tupaq: An ecient planner for large-scale predictive analytic queries. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.00068 , 2015.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian pro-
cess optimization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint
arXiv:0912.3995 , 2009.
Nitish Srivastava, Georey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overtting. The journal
of machine learning research , 15(1):1929{1958, 2014.
Martin J. Strauss. Typical steps for solving optimization problems. Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Michigan , 2007.
Carolin Strobl, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, Thomas Kneib, Thomas Augustin, and Achim
Zeileis. Conditional variable importance for random forests. BMC bioinformatics , 9
(1):307, 2008.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Georey Hinton. On the importance of
initialization and momentum in deep learning. In International conference on machine
learning , pages 1139{1147, 2013.
Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan Prescott Adams. Freeze-thaw bayesian optimiza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.3896 , 2014.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna.
Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2818{2826, 2016.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V Le. Ecientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11946 , 2019.
54

==== Page 55 ====
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard,
and Quoc V Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
2820{2828, 2019.
Joaquin Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548 , 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
Gomez,  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pages 5998{6008, 2017.
Anish Singh Walia. Activation functions and its types-which is better? Towards Data
Science , 29, 2017.
CF Wang. The vanishing gradient problem. Towards Data Science , 2019.
Jason Wang and Luis Perez. The eectiveness of data augmentation in image classication
using deep learning. Convolutional Neural Networks Vis. Recognit , page 11, 2017.
Jiazhuo Wang, Jason Xu, and Xuejun Wang. Combination of hyperband and bayesian
optimization for hyperparameter optimization in deep learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.01596 , 2018.
David H Wolpert and William G Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE
transactions on evolutionary computation , 1(1):67{82, 1997.
Yan. L1 norm regularization and sparsity explained for dummies. https://medium.com/
mlreview/l1-norm-regularization-and-sparsity-explained-for-dummies-5b0e4be3938a ,
2016.
Quanming Yao, Mengshuo Wang, Yuqiang Chen, Wenyuan Dai, Hu Yi-Qi, Li Yu-Feng,
Tu Wei-Wei, Yang Qiang, and Yu Yang. Taking human out of learning applications: A
survey on automated machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13306 , 2018.
Tony Yiu. The curse of dimensionality. https://towardsdatascience.com/
the-curse-of-dimensionality-50dc6e49aa1e , 2019.
Dani Yogatama and Gideon Mann. Ecient transfer learning method for automatic hyper-
parameter tuning. In Articial intelligence and statistics , pages 1077{1085, 2014.
Jason Yosinski, Je Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features
in deep neural networks? In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
3320{3328, 2014.
Yang You, Igor Gitman, and Boris Ginsburg. Large batch training of convolutional net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03888 , 2017.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07146 , 2016.
55

==== Page 56 ====
Yu and Zhu
Matthew D Zeiler. Adadelta: an adaptive learning rate method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1212.5701 , 2012.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01578 , 2016.
56

