==== Page 1 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with
Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization
Tong Geng†, Chunshu Wu‡, Yongan Zhang§, Cheng Tan†, Chenhao Xie†, Haoran You§, Martin C.
Herbordt‡, Yingyan Lin§, Ang Li†
†Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA
‡Boston University, Boston, MA
§Rice University, Houston, TX
{tong.geng, cheng.tan, chenhao.xie, ang.li }@pnnl.gov,{happycwu, herbordt }@bu.edu,{yz87,hy34,yingyan.lin }@rice.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have drawn tremendous
attention in the past three years. Compared with other deep learning
modalities, high-performance hardware acceleration of GCNs is as
critical but even more challenging. The hurdles arise from the poor
data locality and redundant computation due to the large size, high
sparsity, and irregular non-zero distribution of real-world graphs.
In this paper we propose a novel hardware accelerator for GCN
inference, called I-GCN, that significantly improves data locality
and reduces unnecessary computation. The mechanism is a new
online graph restructuring algorithm we refer to as islandization .
The proposed algorithm finds clusters of nodes with strong internal
but weak external connections. The islandization process yields two
major benefits. First, by processing islands rather than individual
nodes, there is better on-chip data reuse and fewer off-chip memory
accesses. Second, there is less redundant computation as aggrega-
tion for common/shared neighbors in an island can be reused. The
parallel search, identification, and leverage of graph islands are all
handled purely in hardware at runtime working in an incremen-
tal pipeline. This is done without any preprocessing of the graph
data or adjustment of the GCN model structure. Experimental re-
sults show that I-GCN can significantly reduce off-chip accesses
and prune 38% of aggregation operations, leading to performance
speedups over CPUs, GPUs, the prior art GCN accelerators of 5549 ×,
403×, and 5.7×on average, respectively.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computer systems organization →Neural networks ;Par-
allel architectures ;•Computing methodologies →Parallel
algorithms .
KEYWORDS
Graph Neural Network, High-Performance Computing, Data Local-
ity, Machine Learning, Hardware Accelerator
ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by an employee,
contractor, or affiliate of the United States government. As such, the United States
government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this
article, or to allow others to do so, for government purposes only.
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8557-2/21/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480113ACM Reference Format:
Tong Geng, Chunshu Wu, Yongan Zhang, Cheng Tan, Chenhao Xie, Haoran
You, Martin C. Herbordt, Yingyan Lin, Ang Li. 2021. I-GCN: A Graph Convo-
lutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through
Islandization . In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’21), October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480113
1 INTRODUCTION
Conventional deep learning paradigms such as Convolution Neural
Networks (CNNs) [ 26] and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
[33] have been demonstrated to be quite efficient, but primarily
for applications using Euclidean data [ 15,16,42,44]. Many other
applications, however, require that the relationships between data
points be conserved and must therefore use non-Euclidean data
structures such as graphs [ 10,32,36,46,49,56]. To fill this need,
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) have been proposed [ 6,11,25,50].
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are a type of GNN that
has drawn tremendous attention in the past three years due to their
unique ability to extract latent information from graph data. Practi-
cal applications of GCNs include prediction of cascading power-grid
failure [ 32], E-commerce [ 49], and etc [ 10,36]. The deployment
of GCNs in these applications typically poses strict constraints on
latency and throughput.
To satisfy the increasingly stringent performance requirements,
designing high-performance hardware accelerators for GCNs be-
comes urgent [ 14,48]. Real world graphs tend to have large size,
high sparsity, and extremely unbalanced non-zero distributions;
therefore, the direct application of existing methods, such as Sparse
CNNs [ 19,23,52], has been reported to be insufficient [ 2,17,27,45].
We briefly discuss the performance challenges of the two major
graph aggregation methods used in GCN acceleration:
(1) In PULL-based aggregation nodes are evaluated sequentially,
but for each node: the neighbor features are gathered (i.e., pulled)
simultaneously for aggregation. The advantage of the pullmethod
is that since nodes are processed in order, a small buffer is sufficient
to accommodate the aggregation results. In other words, it shows
good reuse for the result matrix. The major problem, however, is
thepoor data locality for accessing the feature matrix . Given that the
adjacency matrix of real-world graphs is typically very sparse and
imbalanced, parallel fetches of the corresponding neighbor features
can be random and non-coalesced. Since the feature matrix can bearXiv:2203.03606v1  [cs.AR]  7 Mar 2022

==== Page 2 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
Figure 1: Workflow of I-GCN.
too large to fit into on-chip memory, repeated irregular off-chip data
accesses for the feature matrix are required; this process is bounded
by off-chip bandwidth. HyGCN [ 48] uses PULL approach. Although
data-aware sparsity-elimination hardware is used to reduce off-chip
data accesses, feature matrices still need to be accessed many times.
An HBM is required to avoid hardware starvation.
(2) In PUSH-based aggregation nodes are evaluated in parallel,
but the feature data of the nodes are distributed sequentially (i.e.
pushed) to their neighbors for aggregation. This avoids the irreg-
ularity in accessing the feature matrix, but essentially shifts the
burden to the result matrix. Given that aggregation for a node is
processed sequentially, a large buffer is required to hold the partial
results. If there are too many nodes, the partial result buffer cannot
fit into on-chip memory, leading to frequent off-chip access and
bandwidth saturation. Furthermore, the power-law distribution of
non-zeros in the adjacency matrix can cause serious workload im-
balance. AWB-GCN [ 14] practices the PUSH approach and uses a
run-time workload autotuning architecture to effectively tackle the
workload imbalance problem. However, it does not address the data
locality problem for the irregular and random accesses of the result
matrix, which can be the most critical problem in GNN processing
especially for large graphs.
Clearly, the key problem is the irregularity (i.e., distribution of
non-zeros) of the adjacency matrix, which leads to poor data reuse
in accessing either the feature matrix or the result matrix. A recent
trend therefore is to rely on offline preprocessing to restructure
the adjacency matrix to improve data locality, e.g. in Rubik [ 8]
and GraphACT [ 51]. The implicit assumption is that the graph
structure (i.e., the adjacency matrix) is fixed upon inference so that
the large overhead of graph restructuring can be omitted in the
critical path. However, this is not always the case, as real-world
graphs are frequently updated (e.g., evolving graphs) or generated
dynamically (e.g., inductive graphs). The high restructuring over-
head, e.g., seconds in Rubik and GraphACT, is not tolerable when
processed online. Besides, although both Rubik and GraphACT al-
low for the possibility of computation reuse for shared neighbors
during aggregation, their complex software-based reordering al-
gorithms introduce significant delay and are only feasible when
processed offline.
In this paper, we propose a novel hardware accelerator, called
I-GCN, which implements a new online graph restructuring algo-
rithm – islandization – that can significantly improve data localityand reduce redundant computation for GCN inference acceleration.
Specifically, I-GCN’s Island Locator module, at runtime, is able to de-
tect the hubnodes (i.e. nodes with high degree), find their neighbors,
and then use these neighbor nodes as starting points to explore and
locate islands iteratively. Islands are groups of nodes with strong
internal, but no external, connections other than with hubs. Note
that islands often (but not always) have practical semantics: in a
social network they might correspond to people working in the
same institute; in a citation network they might correspond to pa-
pers published in the same conference series. Determining islands
is non-obvious, especially in typical (huge and sparse) adjacency
matrices.
Figure 1 gives an overview of I-GCN. (i) Island Locator: after
identifying the islands, the non-zeros of the adjacency matrix be-
come highly clustered – the none-zeros of hubs and islands form
the L-shapes and the anti-diagonal respectively. (ii) Island Con-
sumer: using the hub and island information, the Island Consumer
performs aggregation and combination in a fine-grained pipelined
manner. Redundant aggregation is skipped. This process contin-
ues until all nodes are determined to be either hubs or islands.
The benefits of islandization are two-fold: (1) Improving on-chip
data locality. Through clustering, accesses to the feature and result
matrices can be constrained within a much smaller working-set
(i.e., each L-shape and island in Figure 1). This greatly improves
on-chip data reuse and avoids a tremendous number of off-chip ac-
cesses. (2) Reducing redundant computation. After clustering, nodes
within a cluster tend to share a large portion of common neighbors.
During GCN aggregation, rather than repeatedly counting each
neighbor, aggregated information about the common neighbors as
a whole can be distributed and reused, avoiding repeated aggre-
gation calculation for common neighbors. This neighbor-sharing
information is mostly ambiguous in the raw adjacency matrix, but
becomes obvious after islandization (see node 1 ∼4 in Figure 1). In
summary, islandization resolves the locality issues in both Pull and
Push approaches.
This is the first work, to the best of our knowledge, that tackles
the fundamental data locality problem of GCN acceleration and effi-
ciently skips redundant aggregation through online hardware-based
graph restructuring. This paper makes the following contributions:
•We propose a novel islandization algorithm for efficient runtime
parallel graph restructuring, which can significantly improve
on-chip data locality.
•We design a new hardware accelerator architecture called I-GCN
that effectively implements the islandization algorithm, harvest-
ing the data locality exposed through islandization and avoiding
redundant aggregation among shared neighbors.
•Experimental results show that I-GCN can significantly reduce
off-chip accesses and prune 38% of aggregation operations, lead-
ing to performance speedups over PyG- & DGL-based CPUs, PyG-
& DGL-based GPUs, and prior art GCN accelerators of 9568 ×&
1243×, 368×& 453×, and 5.7×, respectively.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
We first introduce GCN algorithms and then elaborate the existing
GCN processing methodologies and their challenges.

==== Page 3 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
1
12
24
46
63
35
5x =Outer Loop
Inner Loop
1
66
22 {X  }2
44
35
1
6 2 4351
12
24
46
63
35
5
A (XW) XCombination AggregationInner Loopb1: Pull-Row-Wisec1: Push-Column-Wise
c2: Push-Outer-Product
b2: Pull-Inner-Product(b) Pull-based Methods (c) Push-based Methods (a) GCN Modelx =
{(AX) } 1
{(AX) } 5
{(AX) } 6{X  }4
{X  }6
O A (XW) XO1 {X  }13 {X  }3
... ... {(AXW)  }m
m{(AX)  } 
1
6 2 435
1
6 2 4351
12
24
46
63
35
5x =Outer LoopInner Loop Outer Loop
Loop1
12
24
46
63
35
5x =1
6 2 435 Loop
Figure 2: PULL-based (Row-wise & Inner-Product) and PUSH-based (Column-wise & Outer-Product) methods.
2.1 Graph Convolutional Networks
GCNs are composed of stacked GraphCONV layers. The compu-
tation flow of each GraphCONV layer includes two phases: Ag-
gregation and Combination , as illustrated in Figure 2-(a). In the
aggregation phase, each node gathers and aggregates features of
its neighbor nodes to update the local feature-vector. In the com-
bination phase, the updated feature-vectors are further merged
to extract high-level abstraction through a local Multi-Layer Per-
ceptron (MLP) network. From the perspective of linear algebra,
the layer-wise forward propagation of GCN can be expressed as
Equation 1:
𝑋(𝑙+1)=𝜎(˜𝐴𝑋(𝑙)𝑊(𝑙)) (1)
where ˜𝐴is the graph adjacency matrix. 𝑋(𝑙)is the matrix of
input features in layer- 𝑙;𝑊𝑙is the weight matrix of layer- 𝑙.𝜎(.)
denotes non-linear activation functions [26].
There are many modalities beneath the umbrella of GCNs, e.g.
GraphSage [ 7,18] and Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) [ 47].
As shown in [ 21], the forward propagation of most GCNs can be
abstracted and expressed as Equation 1.
2.2 Design Space Exploration
We first discuss the design choices related to execution order of the
two phases in GraphCONV. We then present the design choices
within each phase.
2.2.1 Execution Order of a GraphCONV Layer. There are two al-
ternative computation orders for a GraphCONV layer: aggregation
first ((𝐴𝑋)×𝑊) and combination first (𝐴×(𝑋𝑊)). Existing work
[14,30] has shown that the combination first approach can reuse the
same Sparse-dense Matrix Multiplication (SpMM) kernel for both
multiplications 𝑋𝑊 and𝐴(𝑋𝑊)and incorporates less arithmetic
computation. I-GCN follows this combination first approach.
2.2.2 Aggregation Phase. We first discuss the design choices of the
aggregation phase, which is normally the performance bottleneck
of GCN processing. There are two typical methods of aggregation:
PULL and PUSH. For clarity, we compare them from a linear algebra
perspective as illustrated in Figure 2. We discuss the correspondence
between PULL/PUSH-based graph computation methods and four
SpMM approaches as summarized in [ 39]: inner-product, outer-
product, row-wise, and col-wise.PULL-based methods aggregate nodes sequentially. For each
particular node, the feature vectors of all its neighbors are gathered
and aggregated in two ways: (1) PULL-Inner-Product: features from
different channels are calculated sequentially, analogous to the
inner-product approach of SpMM. (2) PULL-Row-Wise: features
from all channels are calculated in parallel, similar to the row-wise-
product approach of SpMM. As shown in Figure 2-(b), PULL-based
methods always process non-zeros of matrix A and produce the
aggregation result matrix 𝑋𝑜by rows ( outer loop ). To calculate each
row of𝑋𝑜(inner loop ), PULL-Row-Wise (Figure 2-(b1)) fetches the
entire feature vectors (i.e. entire rows of 𝑋𝑊) of required nodes
and performs vector accumulation sequentially; in contrast, PULL-
Inner-Product fetches features by channel (i.e. column of 𝑋𝑊) and
computes the output features in 𝑋𝑜sequentially (Figure 2-(b2)).
PULL-based methods have their advantages and disadvantages.
On the plus side, they reuse matrix A and only require relatively
small on-chip buffers to conserve the partial aggregation results
(since they are produced row by row). However, they both suffer
from poor data reuse of matrix 𝑋𝑊. Due to the scattered and irreg-
ular distribution of non-zeros in matrix A, the rows to be accessed
in XW can be random. Given that the height of XW equals the
number of nodes in the graph, which can be very large, XW (which
is dense) can rarely be stored on-chip, leading to frequent data
fetches and inferior performance. Ideally, if the non-zeros from the
same column of A can be clustered, they can reuse the same row of
XW, improving data locality.
PULL-Row-Wise is more popular than PULL-Inner-Product in
prior art mainly due to: (1) accessing the entire rows is more efficient
than randomly fetching elements from different columns in terms of
off-chip access; (2) as 𝑋𝑊 is dense, the processing of a row in a fixed
size can be parallelized without introducing workload imbalance.
PUSH-based aggregation, in contrast, calculates the aggregated
features of all nodes simultaneously by broadcasting features of
each node to all its neighbors one after another. Once a node re-
ceives the features from its neighbors, it updates its local feature
vector. There are two ways of feature broadcasting: PUSH-Column-
Wise and PUSH-Outer-Product. With PUSH-Column-Wise, the in-
put features are broadcast by channel; the output features are calcu-
lated by channel. As shown in Figure 2-(c1), at iteration 𝑘ofouter
loop, each node only pushes its features at channel k (i.e. column
k of XW) to the neighbors. Once all nodes have broadcast their
features at channel k to the neighbors ( inner loop ), every node
has the complete aggregated features at channel k (i.e. column k

==== Page 4 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
On-chip
StorageOff-chip
AccessReuse
𝑋𝑊Reuse
𝐴Reuse
𝑋𝑜Load
ImbalanceRedundancy
Removal
PULL Low High Low High High No Hard
PUSH High High High Low Low Yes Hard
Islandization Low Low High High High No Easy
Table 1: Comparison of PULL, PUSH, Island methods.
of𝑋𝑜). In contrast, PUSH-Outer-Product (Figure 2-(c2)) method
processes all channels at the same time. The entire input feature
vector of each node is broadcast to all its neighbors in parallel. Once
done, the feature aggregation of the entire graph finishes. In the
matrix perspective, PUSH-Outer-Product processes the non-zeros
of matrix A by column, accesses the features of XW by row, and
updates the corresponding partial results of 𝑋𝑜with respect to the
row IDs of non-zeros in matrix A.
The advantage of PUSH-based methods over PULL is that the
data of XW can be fully reused via feature broadcasting. However,
the accesses to 𝑋𝑜then become scattered and random. Given the
height of𝑋𝑜is equal to the number of nodes in the graph, which can
be large, even a single column of 𝑋𝑜may not be able to be buffered
on-chip. Frequent accesses to 𝑋𝑜thus render repeated data fetches
from off-chip DRAM. Ideally, if the non-zeros from the same row of
A can be clustered, they can reuse the same row of 𝑋𝑜, improving
data locality and performance.
PUSH-Column-Wise method is more popular than PUSH-Outer-
Product in prior art because for graphs that a single column of
𝑋𝑜can be put on-chip, PUSH-Column-Wise method can avoid the
repeated off-chip data accesses over 𝑋𝑜. However, this does not
work for large graphs. Consequently, PUSH-Column-Wise does not
fundamentally handle the data locality issue. Additionally, it needs
to repeatedly access matrix A which also incurs additional off-chip
access.
Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of both
approaches. The proposed islandization method is capable of over-
coming all the drawbacks by clustering the non-zeros at runtime
and provides nearly optimal data reuse in GCN inference. Further-
more, with islandization, the unnecessary aggregation for com-
monly shared neighbors can be identified much more easily for
effective pruning.
2.2.3 Combination Phase. As both combination and aggregation
are based on SpMM kernels, the combination phase shares similar
issues with aggregation phase. The only difference is that the weight
matrix W in combination is normally much smaller than the feature
matrix XW in aggregation, and can be more likely stored on-chip.
Therefore, the data locality issue of the PULL-based method is less
prominent than in aggregation. Consequently, I-GCN adopts the
PULL-based method for combination.
3 ALGORITHMS AND ARCHITECTURES
This section first presents the overall workflow and hardware ar-
chitecture of I-GCN. It then introduces the algorithms and the
corresponding architectures of two major components of I-GCN:
theIsland Locator and the Island Consumer .
3.1 I-GCN Overview
3.1.1 I-GCN Workflow. Figure 3 illustrates how I-GCN improves
data locality through islandization: the clustering of graph nodes
Figure 3: Detailed I-GCN workflow and overview of I-GCN
architecture
into islands. Elements of an island tend to have strong internal con-
nections, and are connected to other islands through hubs – nodes
with high fan-in/out degrees, which act as the points of contact
for islands. Islandization is the process of finding these structures
hidden in the original graph. At high level, I-GCN processing begins
by locating these islands, after which it processes the graph at the
granularity of hubs and islands rather than nodes, thus being able
to improve locality and reduce redundant computation.
I-GCN creates the islands gradually by round. Figure 3 shows the
process using the CORA dataset. The scattered non-zeros belonging
to the same island are clustered around the diagonal. The islands (in-
cluding the hubs and nodes) are discovered in parallel by a hardware
module called Island Locator . In each round, the Island Locator
uses different thresholds to recognize hubs and then shapes the
island by scanning the hubs’ neighbor nodes. As shown in Figure 3,
the processing moves from the bottom-left corner of the adjacency
matrix to the upper-right corner, along the anti-diagonal. In each
round a portion of the non-zeros are gathered into an L-shape clus-
ter (except the non-zeros around the anti-diagonal), leaving the
remaining non-zeros untouched. With new hubs located at each
round, new L-shape clusters are formed. This process continues un-
til all non-zeros are clustered either into L-shapes (hubs) or around
the anti-diagonal (islands) (see Round N in Figure 3).
In parallel, whenever an island is formed its adjacency informa-
tion is forwarded to the second module called Island Consumer .
Island Consumer then processes the island as a small but dense
sub-graph, fetches its node features, and performs the required com-
bination and aggregation. Note that although the Island Locator
forms the islands gradually by round, and requires per round syn-
chronization, the Processing Elements in the Island Consumer can
process an island as soon as it is formed without synchronization at
the completion of each round: it does not need to wait until all the
islands in an islandization round are formulated. I-GCN overlaps
graph restructuring and graph processing.
As shown in Figure 3, each node in an island, labeled as an
island node, only connects to the nodes of the same island and
the hub nodes connected to the island. This ensures that the space
between the L-shapes is purely blank. Therefore, when processing
a GraphCONV layer, the associated data of island nodes are only
needed when the island is being processed. Consequently, they
only need to be fetched from off-chip once. The hubs do have
the chance of being used multiple times during the processing of
different islands and inter-hub connections. However, since hubs

==== Page 5 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
are normally a small fraction of the entire graph, their associated
data will likely be stored on-chip and sufficiently reused. Even if
the hubs’ associated data is too large to fit in the on-chip memory,
our method still reduces off-chip data movement.
In summary, for GraphCONV processing of real-world graphs
with component structures using I-GCN, most data are fetched only
once, except the adjacency data of some island nodes which may
need to be accessed multiple times during the multi-round island
locating. We evaluate this in Section 4.6. Note that component
structures are commonly observed in real-world graphs.
Another benefit of islandization is that it assembles the redun-
dant aggregation among shared neighbors in the processing of each
island. These redundant operations, originally hidden in the large
graph, are illuminated after islandization.
As shown in Figure 3, islands are formed by nodes with intensive
internal links, most of which are among shared neighbors. During
the processing of the small and dense islands, it becomes easy
to recognize these repeated computations and skip them. As an
example, Figure 3(A) shows the sub-graph structure of the sixth
island found in the first round. The bitmap at the lower-left corner is
the purple block in the Round 1 adjacency matrix enlarged. The two
hub vectors are from the L-shape, while the 7 ×7 matrix includes
the adjacency data of the island nodes. During the evaluation of
the island, Island Consumer will find the redundant aggregation
operations for the shared neighbors and skip them. The redundancy
removal methodology is discussed in detail in Section 3.3.
3.1.2 I-GCN Overall Architecture. The overall architecture of I-
GCN, including Island Locator and Island Consumer, is shown in
Figure 3(B). The HUB Locator in the Island Detector is responsible
for recognizing hubs. The hubs found are forwarded to TP-BFS
Task Generator. TP-BFS is short for Threshold-based and Paral-
lel Breadth-First Search . Task Generator will generate and assign
BFS tasks for islandization. These tasks are conducted by TP-BFS
Engines. Once TP-BFS locates an island, the related adjacency and
node ID information are forwarded to Island Collector in Island
Consumer. Island Collector distributes the island information to an
idle PE for performing its combination and aggregation jobs. Fur-
thermore, Island Collector also generates and distributes new tasks
which include inter-hub connections based on the hub information
collected by TP-BFS engines at each round. Detailed architectures
are presented next.
3.2 Island Locator
We first introduce the algorithm used in the Island Locator and then
present its architectural support. For clarity we use a homemade
graph (Figure 4) to illustrate the process.
3.2.1 Algorithm. Algorithm 1 describes the simplified workflow of
the Island Locator; a toy example can be found in Figure 4. Overall
the purpose of the algorithm is to locate the hubs and use their
neighbors as starting points to search for islands (with the TP-BFS
algorithm). To boost parallelism, the algorithm comprises three
concurrent asynchronous tasks: hub detection (line 6), BFS task
generation (line 7), and TP-BFS execution (line 8). Hub detection
and TP-BFS are additionally performed in parallel across the 𝑃1
and𝑃2parallel for loops in algorithm 2 (line4) and 4 (line5). AsAlgorithm 1 Island Locator Algorithm: Th1, Th2, and Th3 are
executed concurrently and asynchronously.
1:Inputs:𝑁: Node list of the input graph; (𝑃1,𝑃2): parallel factors for
hub detection and island searching; 𝑇𝐻𝑜: initial threshold for hub
nodes;𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥: the maximum number of nodes that an island can have;
Decay(): hub threshold decay function
2:Outputs:𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 : list of islands’ nodes and hubs info
3:𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝=𝑇𝐻𝑜;𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 ={}
4:while|𝑁|>0do
5:𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘={};ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 ={}
# pop hub nodes from graph 𝑁toℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟
6: Th1: detect_hub (𝑁,𝑃1,𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝 ,ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 )
# pop neighbors of nodes in ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 to𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘
7: Th2: task_assign (ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 ,𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 )
# explore islands from nodes in 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 using BFS
8: Th3: TP-BFS (𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 ,𝑃2,𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝 ,𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 )
9: [ Hold until parallel Th1/2/3 finish]
10:𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝=Decay(𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝)
11:return𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠
Algorithm 2 detect_hub : sweep nodes and move nodes with
degrees larger than thresholds to container ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟
1:Inputs:𝑁: input graph node list; 𝑃1: parallel factor; 𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝: threshold
for hub’s degree; ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 : container of the hub nodes
2:Outputs: None (modify ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 in place )
3:for𝑏=0to⌈|𝑁|/𝑃1⌉do
4: for𝑝=0to𝑃1in parallel do
5: Check node 𝑁[𝑏∗𝑃1+𝑝]as𝑛𝑜
6: if𝑛𝑜∈𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 then
7: Pop𝑛𝑜from𝑁
8: else if𝑛𝑜.𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒≥𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝then
9: Pop𝑛𝑜from𝑁toℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟
Algorithm 3 task_assign : pop nodes from ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 and add
them and their neighbors to task queue
1:Inputs:ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 : container of the hub nodes; 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 : container of
nodes to be chosen as potential starting points for BFS
2:Outputs: None (modify 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 in place)
3:while|ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟|>0do
4: Pop a node from ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟
5: Append the popped hub node and each of its neighbors to 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 , in
the form of tuples.
mentioned in Section 3.1, locating islands is performed by rounds,
which are iterations of line 4. 𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝represents the most current
hub detection threshold, which is modified at run-time. Note that
synchronization is required among the three tasks at the start of
each round (line 9). Specifically, the algorithm takes the input of
(1) node list 𝑁; (2) parallel factors 𝑃1and𝑃2, which define the
numbers of the parallel FIFOs and TP-BFS engines, respectively; (3)
the initial hub threshold 𝑇𝐻𝑜, which marks the initial minimum
degree of the hub nodes; (4) the maximum number of nodes in
an island,𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥; and (5) Decay(), which defines the function to
decrease the hub detection threshold. The algorithm then outputs
the abstract container 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 , which encapsulates all island-related
information. This includes island nodes’ indices and neighbors, the
connected hub nodes’ indices and their connections with island

==== Page 6 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
nodes, the number of island and hub nodes, and etc. Note that this
abstract container is used just for clarity.
Island location starts with parallel hub detection. This is shown in
Algorithm 2, which uses a threshold-based method to find hubs by
rounds. If the degree of a node is above the current threshold 𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝,
the node is identified as a hub and inserted into a container(buffer)
ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 .𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝is reduced each round (line 10 of Algorithm 1)
until all nodes are classified as island or hub nodes. To accelerate
parallel hub detection, in each round we remove the nodes already
classified as hub and island nodes in the previous round. At the end
of island location, the node list 𝑁should be empty.
Hub detection is followed by BFS task generation (Algorithm 3).
Once a hub node is detected, the Island Locator finds its neighbors
by accessing its adjacency list and caches these neighbor nodes in
a task queue, 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘. The Island Locator sends neighbor nodes to the
task queue,𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘, and then to parallel BFS engines where the nodes
are used by TP-BFS as the starting points for forming islands. Here
we use neighbor nodes as the starting nodes (instead of hubs) in
order to extract higher parallelism from TP-BFS. This significantly
improves the scalability of the Island Locator.
Once the first task is generated and stored in the task queue,
TP-BFS starts (see Algorithm 4). The algorithm keeps track of the
number of nodes whose neighbors have been explored exhaustively
(𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 ) and the total number of visited nodes ( 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ). Once𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦
catches up with 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 , an island is found with all the nodes and
their neighbors within the island completely explored and the island
information is returned. Multiple TP-BFS engines are able to work
in parallel on different neighbors of different hubs. Multiple 𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 s
are used to keep track of the nodes visited locally by each TP-BFS
engine while 𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 is used to keep track of the nodes visited by
any of the TP-BFS engines.
Each engine begins island searching by (a) recording the initial
node,𝑎𝑜, as the first visited node in a locally visited list, 𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ; (b)
setting the𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 pointer to zero indicating no node’s neighbors
have been fully explored; and (c) accessing the node’s neighbors.
Note that if an engine finds 𝑎𝑜also a hub, it will drop the task and
forward this inter-hub connection information to Island Collector.
As the Island Locator overlaps hub detection and TP-BFS, the TP-
BFS engine does not know which nodes are the hubs and should not
be considered as island nodes. Therefore, when the neighbors of the
first node arrive, the engine checks whether it is a hub node (line 11
of Algorithm 4). In addition, the engine must also check whether it
has itself visited this node during the execution of the current task
(line 12 of Algorithm 4). When either happens, the engine needs
to skip the node and work on the next neighbor. Otherwise, the
engine would have appended the node to the local visited list and
increment the 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 (line 16 of Algorithm 4).
To accelerate BFS and reduce off-chip accesses to adjacency
data, redundant search must be avoided. To achieve this, the Island
Locator keeps a record of the IDs of nodes visited by all TP-BFS
engines during a certain round in a global visit list, 𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 . When a
BFS engine reaches a node labeled as visited in the global, but not
in the local visited list, it knows that this region has been searched
previously by other engines. The BFS engine then drops this task
and waits for the next (line 20 of Algorithm 4 and Figure 5(A)).
As shown in the Algorithm 4 (line 14), the TP-BFS engine checks
that a node is not on the global visit list before adding it to the localAlgorithm 4 Simplified TP-BFS : fetch nodes from the task
queue and use them as starting points in island detection
1:Inputs:𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 : container of nodes to be chosen as potential starting
points for BFS; 𝑇𝐻: threshold for hub nodes’ degree; 𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥: the max
number of node in an island; 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 : list of islands’ nodes and hubs
info;𝑃2: parallel factor
2:Outputs: None (modify 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 in place)
3:𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 ={}
4:while|𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘|>0do
5: for𝑝=0to𝑃2in parallel do {# distributed across 𝑃2engines }
6: Pop{ℎ𝑢𝑏 𝑜,𝑎𝑜}from𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 {# Pop the hub and one of its neighbors }
7:𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ={𝑎𝑜},ℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ={ℎ𝑢𝑏 𝑜},𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 =0, and𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 =1, if𝑎𝑜is
not a hub
8: while𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 ≠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 do{# if there exist unexplored nodes }
9:𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑜=𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙[𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦]
10: for𝑛∈𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑜.𝑛𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑠 do
11: if𝑛.𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒 <𝑇𝐻then {# hub node or not }
12: if𝑛∈𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 then {#𝑛locally explored by engine p }
13: Skip neighbor 𝑛
14: else if𝑛∉𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 then {# not explored by other engines }
15: 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡+=1
16: Append𝑛to𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 and𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
# if exceeding the max number of nodes in an island
17: if|𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙|>𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥 break while(line 8)
18: else {# already explored by other engines }
19: remove𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 from𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
20: break while(line 8)
21: else {# else it’s a hub node }
22: Add𝑛toℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
23:𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦+=1
24: Append (𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ,ℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ) to𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠
...
......Hub Detection
Nodes with 
high degrees: hubsPopped ...
... ...Task Generation
Generated tasks:
(hub, neighbor)
pairs
...
......TP-BFS
Search
directions
TP-BFS 
starting pointsDiscovered
islands
from graph
Figure 4: Toy example of Island Locator algorithm.
visited list and incrementing the visited node counter. If the counter
is over the threshold (expected maximum island size), the engine
drops the task and waits for a new one ((line 17) and Figure 5 (B)).
When all neighbors of the initial node have been scanned, the
engine checks whether the query pointer value equals the counter
value. This indicates that all nodes have been searched, that TP-
BFS is done without reaching the island size threshold, and that an
island is found. If this happens, the engine sends the connection
information of this island to the Island Consumer and requests a
new task from the Task Generator (see Figure 5 (C)). Otherwise,
it accesses the adjacency list of the node pointed to by the query
pointer and explores all its neighbors. This process continues until
one of the three task-break conditions is triggered.
3.2.2 Architecture. Figure 6 shows the architecture support of Is-
land Locator. The blue part in Algorithm 1 is realized as the Hub
Detector. The degree information of the nodes are distributively
stored in the Node Degree Buffers which are implemented with

==== Page 7 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
Figure 5: Task break conditions of TP-BFS engine.
loop-back FIFOs. The number of FIFOs determines the parallelism
of the hub detection (P1 in Algorithm 1). The Island Node Filters
(IFs) check whether the nodes popped out of the FIFOs are among
the island nodes in the previous round (line 6 in Algorithm 2) by
checking Island Node Table (PR-INT). If yes, these nodes are dis-
carded; if no, the comparators check whether the nodes are hubs
(line 8 in Algorithm 2). The nodes recognized as hubs are sent to a
hub buffer which is also implemented with multi-bank FIFOs; while
the remaining nodes are sent back to the Node Degree Buffers for
the next round detection.
The TP-BFS Task Generator realizes Algorithm 3. Once a hub
node is popped out of the hub buffer, Task Generator will start to
access its adjacency list from global memory. The node IDs of the
neighbors in the list received by Task Generator and the ID of their
hub form task tuples which are cached in TP-BFS Task Queues.
These tasks are further assigned to idle TP-BFS engines.
The simplified architecture of TP-BFS is shown in Figure 6(b).
We implement the orange block of Algorithm 1 as a three-stage
Finite State Machine (FSM). At Stage 0, TP-BFS is ideal and sends
requests of new tasks to Task Generator. When the new task arrives,
TP-BFS engine moves to Stage 2 from Stage 0 with Query Pointer
pointing to row 0 of the Local Visited Table (LVT) and the Island
Node Counter as 1. In general, at Stage 2, the engine first checks
whether the query pointer value and the Island Node Counter are
the same. If yes, the engine finds an island, forwards the data stored
at the output terminal to the Island Consumer, and records island
nodes in CR-INT. Otherwise, the engine accesses the adjacency list
of the node pointed by the Query Pointer from global memory, adds
one to the Query Pointer, and then moves to Stage 1. At Stage 1, the
TP-BFS engine records the newly-arrived adjacency information
in the island bitmap buffer at output terminal and tries to find
unvisited nodes by scanning the nodes included in this information
each per cycle. If the node being scanned is not a hub and also not
visited, the Island Node Counter increases by one. If the counter
value overpasses the maximum number of nodes for an island, the
engine is reset to Stage 0. Otherwise, the engine keeps scanning
the list and at the end moves to state 2.
3.3 Island Consumer
Island Consumer follows Island Locator and conducts combination
and aggregation of islands and hubs. Before introducing the algo-
rithm and architecture adopted in Island Locator, we first discuss
where the redundant calculation of aggregation comes from.
As islands contain nodes with strong internal connections, it is
highly likely that multiple nodes have more than one shared neigh-
bors in which case the aggregation result of these shared neighbors
can be reused multiple times with one-time calculation. Figure 7
uses the graph structure and adjacency matrix of a typical island as
a motivational example. As mentioned in Section 3.1, the adjacency
Figure 6: Simplified architecture of Island Locator.
matrix of an island includes all connections between island nodes
and the connections with hubs. During island processing, all these
connections are evaluated. The example graph has seven island
nodes from ‘a’ to ‘g’ and one hub ‘H’.
As shown in Figure 7(A1), nodes d,e,f, and g are the shared neigh-
bors of nodes b and c; as an undirected graph, nodes b and c are
also the shared neighbors of nodes d, e, f, and g. For the aggre-
gation of nodes b and c, the feature vectors of nodes d, e, f, and
g need to be accumulated twice; to process nodes d, e, g, and f,
the feature vectors of nodes b and c need to be accumulated four
times. If the feature vector length is L, these accumulations take
16×𝐿operations. However, if we can pre-calculate the accumula-
tion results and reuse them, then only 10×𝐿operations are needed.
Figure 7(A2) shows how the pre-calculated results are reused during
aggregation. We add two virtual nodes whose feature vectors are
the accumulation results d,e,f,g and c,b in the graph. We connect
them to the real nodes according to the accumulation requirements.
During the aggregation phase, the pre-aggregated feature vectors
are forwarded directly to the target nodes, so that the accumulation
from shared neighbors is only done once. Note that in the original
graph without island-based locality enhancement, these nodes are
highly scattered, as is the processing of their aggregation opera-
tions. It is therefore prohibitive to find and prune these repeated
operations from shared neighbors at runtime. Through I-GCN, the
nodes with strong interconnects are largely clustered, which makes
redundancy removal feasible.
3.3.1 Algorithm. We first introduce the calculation methodology of
the Island Consumer. Once the information of an island is forwarded
to the Island Consumer, it assigns that information to a PE which is
waiting for new calculation tasks. The information includes island
node IDs, hub node ID, the local adjacency bitmap, the round IDs,
and etc. The PE performs first combination and then aggregation
reusing the same MAC units.
The PE starts the combination of all hub and island nodes by first
accessing their input feature vectors from global memory and then
conducting PULL-based combination. Different from conventional

==== Page 8 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
Figure 7: Redundancy removal of a typical island.
combination, the Island Consumer conducts pre-aggregation at
the completion of the combination of every k node. Specifically,
after the combination results of k nodes have been calculated, we
sum them up and use the results in aggregation and so skip the
redundant operations. k can be customized.
When the combination results of all nodes in an island and
their pre-aggregated results are ready, the PE starts aggregation by
scanning the local adjacency bitmap. Figure 7(B) shows how the
Island Consumer uses these results in aggregation with redundancy
removal. The scan starts from the top-left corner of the bitmap and
slides towards the bottom-right following the green trace. The size
of the scan window is 1×𝑘where k is the number of nodes whose
feature vectors are pre-aggregated during the combination phase.
If the number of non-zeros covered by the sliding window is less
than𝑘/2, it is more efficient to accumulate the feature vectors of
nodes that are connected (column id of non-zeros under the sliding
window) to the node being scanned (row id of the sliding window);
otherwise, it is more efficient to subtract the feature vectors of
nodes that are not connected (column id of zeros under the sliding
window) from the pre-aggregation results. The Island Consumer
can automatically pick the one that demands the fewest operations.
Figure 7(B) gives an example. For clarity, k is set to 2. The scan
starts once the combination of all nodes and all pre-aggregations
of adjacent k nodes finish. For each scan, if both bits are non-zeros,
i.e. the nodes under-scan are the common neighbors of node-H and
node-a, instead of redoing the accumulation, Island Consumer will
directly use the pre-aggregation result, saving one vector addition
operation. After the first two columns are scanned, Island Con-
sumer proceeds to columns b and c with the combination and pre-
aggregation results of node-b and node-c. After the entire bitmap
is scanned, both GraphCONV’s aggregation and combination of
the island have been completed.
3.3.2 Architecture. The architecture of Island Consumer is illus-
trated in Figure 8. The island-related information sent from Island
Locator is received by Island Collector and then stored in the dis-
tributed memory of the Island Evaluation Task if the incoming
island is not redundant. The major information of each island task
includes: numbers of hubs and island nodes, hub node IDs, island
node IDs, adjacency bitmap, and the round ID. The arbiters in island
collector prefetch evaluation tasks every clock cycle and forward
them to the idle PEs. Once a PE receives an evaluation task, it
performs the aggregation and combination. At the end of evalua-
tion of each island, the PE produces complete output features of
all island nodes and partial results of the output features of hubs.
The complete final outputs of island nodes are stored back to the
global memory, while the incomplete results of hubs are sent to
the corresponding bank of a HUB Partial Result Cache through
Figure 8: Simplified architecture of Island Consumer.
the ring-based reduction network to update the corresponding par-
tial sums calculated previously. To obtain complete aggregation
results of hub nodes, it is necessary to evaluate not only the is-
lands but also the inter-hub connections, which are not included
in islands. To perform the aggregation of inter-hub connections,
Island Collector maintains an inter-hub edge map based on the
information provided by TP-BFS engines during island locating,
generates inter-hub aggregation tasks based on the edge map fol-
lowing Push-Outer-Product execution order, and inserts the tasks
into the evaluation task queues. More details about the creation
of inter-hub edge map and the generation of inter-hub tasks are
omitted due to the space limit. Once all islands and inter-hub tasks
are evaluated, the complete hubs’ results are obtained.
As shown in Figure 8, all PEs are connected in a ring network.
The partial results of hub nodes are distributively stored in the
multi-bank HUB Partial Result Cache (DHUB-PRC). Each bank of
DHUB-PRC is attached to one PE. Note that at the first appearance
of each hub, the Island Collector will map it to an unused row in a
certain bank. The bank ID and row address are attached to the hub
before its island evaluation task is assigned to a PE. This bank ID
and row address will be fixed and reused when this hub appears
again in the future tasks. At the end of each island or inter-hub
task processing, the PE will check the hubs’ bank IDs. If the bank
ID matches its PE ID, the partial results will be used to update the
partial sum stored locally, otherwise it will be forwarded to the
corresponding banks through the ring network.
To accelerate the partial sum update of hubs and reduce com-
munication, the ring network is equipped with the support of in-
network reduction. Particularly, the switch at each entry of the
ring network will check the hub IDs of the partial results sent from
local PE and from its left neighbor. If both are valid and the same,
they are reduced at the entry and the new result will be sent to the

==== Page 9 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
Figure 9: Islandization effect on Cora, Citeseer, PubMed, and NELL. Space be-
tween L-shapes is totally blank.
0%20%40%
Actual Operation % Pruned Operation % 60%80%100%
CoraCiteseerPubMedNellReddit CoraCiteseerPubMedNellRedditPruning Rate(Aggregation) Pruning Rate(Overall)
39% 40%35%
46%29%9%5% 4% 5%
17%Figure 10: Pruning rates with redundancy re-
moval.
right neighbor at the next cycle. This in-network reduction design
is widely used in smart-NIC architectures, so we do not elaborate
it due to page limit.
The simplified architecture of each PE is illustrated at the bottom
of Figure 8. The right part is the module for PULL-based combina-
tion. As mentioned in Section 3.3.1, this module accesses feature
data of island nodes based on their IDs from off-chip. These data
are accessed only once as all connections of these island nodes
will be processed during the execution of this island task. Weight
matrix is distributively stored on-chip in Weight Matrix Buffers
of PEs if possible. During calculation, non-zeros of the same node
will be sequentially broadcast to the same row of MAC units and
are multiplied with the corresponding row of weight matrix. The
partial combination results of the same row are locally accumulated.
Once a certain node is completely calculated, the row of MAC units
starts to work on the next node if applicable. If the node is a hub,
the resulting combined features will be stored in HUB Matrix XW
Cache for the reuse in future island and inter-hub tasks. Once the
combination and pre-aggregation of all nodes are done, the right
module will be deactivated and the left one will be activated to start
aggregation. The left module is designed based on the calculation
method introduced in Section 3.3.1. The purple blocks in the figure
are the scan windows. To avoid pipeline bubbles in the aggregation
module, the scans with all zeros need to be skipped. To achieve
this, we scan multiple rows in parallel at each cycle and only for-
ward the scans with non-zeros to FSMs, i.e. CASE and Scheduler
modules in the figure, which access the required pre-aggregation
and/or combination output results from the combination module
and assign the aggregation task to idle MAC units.
4 EVALUATION
4.1 Experiment Setup
We evaluate I-GCN’s latency, energy efficiency, off-chip data move-
ment, and hardware resource utilization with a Stratix 10 SX FPGA.
We evaluate I-GCN on three different models – GCN, GraphSage,
and GIN – using five datasets commonly used in GCN accelera-
tion research [ 14,30,48]. These include Cora (CR), Citeseer (CS),
Pubmed (PM), Nell (NE), and Reddit (RD). With respect to network
structures, existing systems use various configurations: GCNs and
GraphSage have two layers, while GIN has three layers. For GCNs
and GraphSage, EnGN and AWB-GCN use the configurations re-
ported in the original algorithm papers [ 25], while HyGCN uses its
own configuration of 128 hidden channels for all datasets. Here we
label GCN and GraphSage with original configurations, “GCN-algo”
and “GS-algo” and label the ones used in HyGCN, “GCN-Hy” and
Figure 11: Hardware consumption breakdown of I-GCN.
“GS-Hy”. For GIN, HyGCN is the only work that uses it in evaluation.
We evaluate all these models and compare with the corresponding
existing work.
To better demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed on-the-
fly algorithm-architecture co-design for islandization, we compare
I-GCN with 6 existing lightweight graph reordering algorithms
(Section 4.5). These algorithms are realized on an Intel Xeon Gold
6226R CPU with 64 threads. For cross-platform comparison, we
compare I-GCN with prior art GCN accelerators (HyGCN [ 48],
AWB-GCN [ 14]), prior art SpMM accelerator (SIGMA [ 38]), NVIDIA
V100 GPU, RTX8000 GPU, Intel E5-2683-V3 CPU, and Intel E5-2680-
V3 CPU. The CPU and GPU results are based on PyTorch Geometric
(PyG) [13] and Deep Graph Library (DGL) [41].
4.2 Islandization Effect
We first evaluate the efficiency of the islandization algorithm. Fig-
ure 9 shows the effects of the proposed islandization method on
the adjacency matrices of four real-world graphs with various sta-
tistics including size, sparsity and non-zero distribution. Among
them, NELL is believed to be the most difficult to process due to its
extremely high sparsity and imbalanced distribution[ 14]. As shown
in Figure 9, for all these four datasets, our islandization method
is able to optimally cluster all non-zeros to the anti-diagonals and
L-shaped clusters within several rounds. The islandization effect on
NELL looks even more significant than the other datasets, since its
adjacency matrix is the sparsest and its graph has more significant
component structures.
4.3 Island-based Redundancy Removal
Here we evaluate the effects of shared-neighbor-aware redundancy
removal in the Island Consumer. Figure 10 shows the operation
pruning rates during aggregation phase. The Island-based Aggrega-
tor is able to skip, on average, 38% of aggregation operations. These
operations are all redundant and are for the aggregation among
shared neighbors. The removal of these operations is lossless. Note
that in combination-first calculation, aggregation phase takes 23%
operations on average. Therefore, 9% of operations of the entire

==== Page 10 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
010k20k30k
05k10k15k20k25k
01k2k3k4k5k
01k
1.3 1.9 15.12k3k4k5k
01k2k3k4k5k
40k50k60kLatency (μs)Pubmed Nell Reddit
rabbit dbg hubsort hubcluster dbg-hubsort dbg-hubcluster
GNN processing based on AWB-GCN with graph reordering I-GCN32k / 266k
Cora Citeseer
Figure 12: Latency of I-GCN vs AWB-GCN + light weight re-
ordering algorithms.
processing can be eliminated without accuracy loss. Meanwhile,
the theoretical latency is lowered by 9%.
4.4 Hardware Consumption
Figure 11 illustrates the hardware resource usage breakdown of an
I-GCN with 4K MAC units and 64 TP-BFS Engines. In order to show
comparable breakdowns with ASIC implementation, we normalize
the usage of LUTs and Flip-Flops to the number of Adaptive Logic
Modules (ALMs) which is the basic component in Intel FPGAs. The
Island Locator accounts for 34% of the entire accelerator. The Island
Consumer accounts for the remaining 66%. Note that in practical
FPGA implementations, the MAC units are normally instantiated
with DSP slices. Here we normalize the usage of DSP slides to ALMs
for a clearer area breakdown.
4.5 Comparison with Lightweight Reordering
To evaluate the benefits of I-GCN over lightweight graph reordering
algorithms, we compare I-GCN with 6 baselines. These baselines
use 6 traditional lightweight graph reordering algorithms [ 3,5,
12,53] for graph preprocessing to enhance locality and then use
AWB-GCN [ 14], which is a prior art GNN accelerator, to process
the reordered graphs. We use these open-source graph ordering
codes[ 12] and run them using a high-end Intel Xeon Gold 6226R
CPU with 64 threads enabled. There are two findings. First, I-GCN
is much faster than the lightweight graph reordering approaches.
As shown in Figure 12, the reordering latency alone can be already
higher than the entire I-GCN end-to-end inference latency (more
than 100×for Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed). And second, I-GCN
generates better non-zero clustering. As shown in Figure 13, I-
GCN’s islandization process is able to push all the non-zeros into
the L-shaped regions and the anti-diagonal, leaving the remaining
area empty. In contrast, the graph reordering methods leave many
outlying non-zeros, which introduces significant overhead for their
special handling.
4.6 Cross-platform Comparison
4.6.1 Off-chip Data Movement. Figure 14(A) compares the normal-
ized numbers of off-chip data accesses of I-GCN with AWB-GCN,
HyGCN, and PyG-CPU (Intel Xeon E5-2680-V3) using both GCN-
Algo and GCN-Hy. Note that we count the numbers of off-chip
accesses assuming that the adjacency matrix and input feature ma-
trix are all stored off-chip at the start of processing. In practice, in
the case that the on-chip memory is not fully occupied, these ma-
trices can be partially or even completely stored on-chip to reduce
the off-chip bandwidth requirements.
4.6.2 Latency. Figure 14(B) compares the end-to-end inference la-
tency of I-GCN with SOTA GNN accelerators (AWB-GCN, HyGCN),
Figure 13: Comparison of non-zero clustering effects
SOTA SpMM accelerator (SIGMA), PyG-based CPU and GPU, and
DGL-based CPU and GPUs. Results show I-GCN provides speedups
of9568×over PyG-based E5-2680-v3 CPU, 1243×over DGL-based
E5-2683-v3 CPU, on average 368×over PyG-based GPUs (RTX8000
and V100), 453×over DGL-based V100, 16×over SIGMA, and on av-
erage 5.7×over GNN accelerators (HyGCN and AWB-GCN). Table 2
lists the absolute results of I-GCN and AWB-GCN. The speedups of
I-GCN over AWB-GCN on Reddit are lower than other datasets, as
Reddit graph has less significant component structures.
Fairness of evaluation: HyGCN is an ASIC design which uses
4608 fixed-point MAC units running at 1GHz; AWB-GCN is an
FPGA design which uses 4096 floating-point MAC units (running
at 330MHz). To provide a fair comparison, the I-GCNs used for
evaluation are also equipped with 4096 floating-point MAC units
running at 330MHz and use comparable numbers of ALM resources
of the same FPGA used by AWB-GCN.
5 RELATED WORK
Researchers have designed dedicated hardware architecture to ac-
celerate GCNs [ 1,4,8,14,24,29,30,48,51,55]. In [ 4], Auten et
al., present the first GNN hardware accelerator. By designing four
specialized modules – for graph traversals, dense matrix opera-
tions, data scheduling, and graph aggregations, respectively – the
proposed accelerator provides high performance in tackling irregu-
lar data movement and intensive computation for GNN inference.
HyGCN [48] is another of the earliest GNN accelerators. With the
observation that GCNs are composed of two phases with different
computation patterns, HyGCN introduces a hybrid architecture
with dedicated modules for aggregation and combination, respec-
tively. AWB-GCN [14] is another early study of GCN acceleration.
It observes that the power-law distribution of the non-zeros in the
adjacency matrix results in workload imbalance issues. To solve
this problem, the authors propose a workload autotuning technique.
EnGN [30] uses an unified architecture to accelerate GNNs and
adopts a ring-based network to perform aggregation. The results
produced by PEs are sent to the network where they are aggre-
gated. Researchers have also designed hardware for training. Rubik
[8] proposes an offline graph reordering method to improve data
locality. GraphACT [51] uses heterogeneous platforms with CPUs
and FPGAs and uses pre-processing to find and skip redundant op-
erations among two-node shared neighbors. G-CoS [55] is the first
GNN co-search framework for network structure and accelerator

==== Page 11 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
I-GCN AWB-GCN
Device: Intel Stratix 10 SX; Frequency: 330MHz; Num of MACs: 4096
Cora Citeseer Pubmed Nell Reddit Cora Citeseer Pubmed Nell Reddit
GCN_algo Latency 1.3 1.9 15.1 5.9E2 3.0E4 Latency 2.3 4.0 30 1.6E3 3.2E4
EE 7.1E6 3.7E6 5.3E5 1.3E4 3.5E2 EE 3.1E6 1.9E6 2.5E5 4.1E3 2.1E2
GCN_Hy Latency 8.2 12.9 1.1E2 1.2E3 4.6E4 Latency 17 29 2.3E2 3.3E3 5.0E4
EE 9.6E5 6.0E5 8.1E4 7.5E3 2.2E2 EE 4.4E5 2.7E5 3.2E4 2.3E3 1.5E2
Table 2: I-GCN’s absolute results of Latency in 𝜇𝑠and Energy Efficiency (EE) in Graph/kJ.
Figure 14: Cross-platform comparison of (A) Normalized off-chip data access and (B) Speedup (end-to-end latency).
architecture. G-CoS can automatically search for the matched GNN
structures and accelerators to maximize both task accuracy and
acceleration efficiency.
In differentiation from all prior work, the proposed I-GCN is de-
signed to solve the data locality problem fundamentally. As I-GCN
reorders graphs using hardware-only solutions, it is compatible
with both static and dynamic graphs and both inductive and trans-
ductive GNN models. Furthermore, I-GCN finds and skips redun-
dant operations among arbitrary numbers of shared neighbors at
runtime.
In graph processing, various reordering algorithms [ 3,5,9,12,
22,28,43,53,54] have been proposed for enhancing data locality.
The evaluations of six traditional lightweight graph reordering
algorithms [ 3,5,12,53] in Section 4.5 demonstrates the high over-
heads of graph reordering, even for the lightweight ones, which
is prohibitive for many real-time GNN inference tasks. There are
also many other sophisticated graph reordering algorithms. Slash-
Burn [ 31] is one of them. SlashBurn is able to effectively cluster
non-zeros in the adjacent matrices to one of their corners. However,
it requires very expensive and complex logic to conduct frequent
node degree sorting, graph reconstruction, component size sorting,
and node degree updating. Furthermore, SlashBurn is not designed
to be parallelized. These make SlashBurn hardware-unfriendly and
unsuited for GNN acceleration which normally poses very strict
constraints on latency.
Other architectural and software optimizations have been pro-
posed that improve graph processing efficiency through cache-
guided scheduling [ 34,35]. Among them, HATS [ 34] appears to be
the first hardware work that leverages the community structure of
graphs without preprocessing. The main goal of HATS, which is
tightly integrated with hierarchical cache systems, is to enhance
the efficiency of the cache hierarchy for graph processing. In con-
trast, the islandization in our loosely-coupled I-GCN accelerator
aims at clustering non-zeros through community identification for
the purpose of extremely fast GNN inference ( 𝜇s-level). Also, I-
GCN and HATS define components in different ways. HATS detectsvery coarse-grained and large components by Bounded Depth-First
Scheduling (BDFS), while I-GCN locates smaller and more fine-
grained components through hub nodes.
Another related topic is hardware acceleration for SpMM [ 20,37–
40]. Prior art systems include MatRaptor [ 39], Extensor [ 20], SIGMA
[38], and Tensaurus [ 40]. Although the major kernel of GNN pro-
cessing is SpMM (see Equation 1), a high-performance GNN accel-
erator should be able to fully leverage unique graph features. For
example, real-world graphs are extremely sparse, contain commu-
nities, and follow the power-law distribution. I-GCN, as a graph-
specific architecture, can effectively detect communities from real-
world large graphs, and process them more efficiently by avoiding
repeated computation for common neighbors. In contrast, SpMM
accelerators need to handle all different kinds of sparse matrices.
They may behave better for general sparse matrices, but not in
those likely to be processed by GCNs.
6 CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a novel hardware accelerator for GCN infer-
ence, I-GCN, which significantly improves data locality and reduces
unnecessary computation through a new hardware runtime algo-
rithm — islandization. Islandization finds clusters of nodes with
strong internal but weak external connections which yields two
major benefits: (1) by processing islands, data can be better reused
on-chip which significantly relieves the off-chip bandwidth pres-
sure; (2) there is less redundant computation as aggregation for
shared neighbors in an island can be reused. Experimental results
show that I-GCN provides speedups over CPUs, GPUs, prior art
GCN accelerators of 5549 ×, 403×, and 5.7×, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Compute-Flow-Architecture (CFA)
project under PNNL’s Data-Model-Convergence (DMC) LDRD Ini-
tiative. The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is operated by
Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-
AC05-76RL01830.

==== Page 12 ====
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
REFERENCES
[1]Sergi Abadal, Akshay Jain, Robert Guirado, Jorge López-Alonso, and Eduard
Alarcón. 2020. Computing Graph Neural Networks: A Survey from Algorithms
to Accelerators. arXiv:2010.00130 [cs.LG]
[2]A. Abou-Rjeili and G. Karypis. 2006. Multilevel algorithms for partitioning power-
law graphs. In Proceedings 20th IEEE International Parallel Distributed Processing
Symposium . 10 pp.–. doi: 10.1109/IPDPS.2006.1639360.
[3]Junya Arai, Hiroaki Shiokawa, Takeshi Yamamuro, Makoto Onizuka, and Sotetsu
Iwamura. 2016. Rabbit Order: Just-in-Time Parallel Reordering for Fast Graph
Analysis. In 2016 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
(IPDPS) . 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/IPDPS.2016.110
[4]Adam Auten, Matthew Tomei, and Rakesh Kumar. 2020. Hardware acceleration
of graph neural networks. In 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference
(DAC) . IEEE, 1–6.
[5]Vignesh Balaji and Brandon Lucia. 2018. When is Graph Reordering an Optimiza-
tion? Studying the Effect of Lightweight Graph Reordering Across Applications
and Input Graphs. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characteri-
zation (IISWC) . 203–214. https://doi.org/10.1109/IISWC.2018.8573478
[6]Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. 2014. Spectral
Networks and Locally Connected Networks on Graphs. In the 2nd International
Conference on Learning Representations .
[7]Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, and Cao Xiao. 2018. Fastgcn: fast learning with graph
convolutional networks via importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10247
(2018).
[8]Xiaobing Chen, Yuke Wang, Xinfeng Xie, Xing Hu, Abanti Basak, Ling Liang,
Mingyu Yan, Lei Deng, Yufei Ding, Zidong Du, et al .2020. Rubik: A Hierarchical
Architecture for Efficient Graph Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12495 (2020).
[9]YuAng Chen and Yeh-Ching Chung. 2021. Corder: cache-aware reordering for
optimizing graph analytics. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium
on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming . 472–473.
[10] Connor W. Coley, Wengong Jin, Luke Rogers, Timothy F. Jamison, Tommi S.
Jaakkola, William H. Green, Regina Barzilay, and Klavs F. Jensen. 2019. A graph-
convolutional neural network model for the prediction of chemical reactivity.
Chemical Science 10 (2019), 370–377. Issue 2. doi: 10.1039/C8SC04228D.
[11] Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. 2016. Convo-
lutional Neural Networks on Graphs with Fast Localized Spectral Filtering. In
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems . 3844–3852. doi: 10.5555/3157382.3157527.
[12] Priyank Faldu, Jeff Diamond, and Boris Grot. 2019. A Closer Look at Lightweight
Graph Reordering. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Character-
ization (IISWC) . 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1109/IISWC47752.2019.9041948
[13] Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. 2019. Fast graph representation learn-
ing with PyTorch Geometric. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv
abs/1903.02428 (2019).
[14] T. Geng, A. Li, R. Shi, C. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Li, P. Haghi, A. Tumeo, S. Che,
S. Reinhardt, and M. C. Herbordt. 2020. AWB-GCN: a Graph Convolutional
Network Accelerator with Runtime Workload Rebalancing. In 2020 53rd An-
nual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 922–936. doi:
10.1109/MICRO50266.2020.00079.
[15] T. Geng, T. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Li, C. Yang, W. Wu, A. Li, and M.C. Herbordt. 2021.
O3BNN-R: an Out-Of-Order Architecture for High-Performance and Regularized
BNN Inference. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 32, 1 (2021),
199–213. doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2020.3013637.
[16] T. Geng, T. Wang, C. Wu, C. Yang, W. Wu, A. Li, and M.C. Herbordt. 2019.
O3BNN: an Out-Of-Order Architecture for High-Performance Binarized Neural
Network Inference with Fine-Grained Pruning. ACM International Conference on
Supercomputing 2160 (2019), 461–472. doi: 10.1145/ 3330345. 3330386.
[17] Joseph E Gonzalez, Yucheng Low, Haijie Gu, Danny Bickson, and Carlos Guestrin.
2012. PowerGraph: distributed graph-parallel computation on natural graphs.
InProceedings of the 10th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation . USENIX Association, 17–30. doi: 10.5555/2387880.2387883.
[18] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive representation
learning on large graphs. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems . 1024–1034. doi:10.5555/3294771.3294869.
[19] Song Han, Xingyu Liu, Huizi Mao, Jing Pu, Ardavan Pedram, Mark A Horowitz,
and William J Dally. 2016. EIE: efficient inference engine on compressed deep
neural network. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on Computer
Architecture . IEEE, 243–254. doi: 10.1109/ISCA.2016.30.
[20] Kartik Hegde, Hadi Asghari-Moghaddam, Michael Pellauer, Neal Crago, Aamer
Jaleel, Edgar Solomonik, Joel Emer, and Christopher W Fletcher. 2019. Exten-
sor: An accelerator for sparse tensor algebra. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 319–333.
[21] Avinash Karanth Jiajun Li, Ahmed Louri and Razvan Bunescu. 2021. GCNAX:
A Flexible and Energy-efficient Accelerator for Graph Convolutional Neural
Networks. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture .[22] Konstantinos I Karantasis, Andrew Lenharth, Donald Nguyen, Mara J Garzaran,
and Keshav Pingali. 2014. Parallelization of reordering algorithms for bandwidth
and wavefront reduction. In SC’14: Proceedings of the International Conference for
High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . IEEE, 921–932.
[23] Dongyoung Kim, Junwhan Ahn, and Sungjoo Yoo. 2017. A novel zero
weight/activation-aware hardware architecture of convolutional neural network.
InDesign, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2017 .
IEEE, 1462–1467.
[24] Kevin Kiningham, Christopher Re, and Philip Levis. 2020. GRIP: A Graph Neural
Network AcceleratorArchitecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13828 (2020).
[25] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. 2016. Semi-supervised classification with
graph convolutional networks. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv
abs/1609.02907 (2016).
[26] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems . 1097–1105.
[27] Matthieu Latapy. 2008. Main-memory triangle computations for very large (sparse
(power-law)) graphs. Theoretical computer science 407, 1-3 (2008), 458–473.
[28] Eunjae Lee, Junghyun Kim, Keunhak Lim, Sam H Noh, and Jiwon Seo. 2019.
Pre-select static caching and neighborhood ordering for bfs-like algorithms
on disk-based graph engines. In 2019{USENIX}Annual Technical Conference
({USENIX}{ATC}19). 459–474.
[29] Shengwen Liang, Cheng Liu, Ying Wang, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. 2020.
DeepBurning-GL: an automated framework for generating graph neural net-
work accelerators. In 2020 IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided
Design (ICCAD) . IEEE, 1–9.
[30] Shengwen Liang, Ying Wang, Cheng Liu, Lei He, LI Huawei, Dawen Xu, and
Xiaowei Li. 2020. EnGN: A High-Throughput and Energy-Efficient Accelerator
for Large Graph Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Comput. (2020).
[31] Yongsub Lim, U Kang, and Christos Faloutsos. 2014. Slashburn: Graph compres-
sion and mining beyond caveman communities. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering 26, 12 (2014), 3077–3089.
[32] Yuxiao Liu, Ning Zhang, Dan Wu, Audun Botterud, Rui Yao, and Chongqing Kang.
2020. Guiding Cascading Failure Search with Interpretable Graph Convolutional
Network. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv abs/2001.11553 (2020).
[33] Tomáš Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukáš Burget, Jan Černock `y, and Sanjeev Khu-
danpur. 2010. Recurrent neural network based language model. In Eleventh
annual conference of the international speech communication association .
[34] Anurag Mukkara, Nathan Beckmann, Maleen Abeydeera, Xiaosong Ma, and
Daniel Sanchez. 2018. Exploiting Locality in Graph Analytics through Hardware-
Accelerated Traversal Scheduling. In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) . 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.
2018.00010
[35] Anurag Mukkara, Nathan Beckmann, and Daniel Sanchez. 2017. Cache-Guided
Scheduling: Exploiting caches to maximize locality in graph processing. AGP’17
(2017).
[36] Huy-Trung Nguyen, Quoc-Dung Ngo, and Van-Hoang Le. 2018. IoT botnet
detection approach based on PSI graph and DGCNN classifier. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Information Communication and Signal Processing
(ICICSP) . IEEE, 118–122.
[37] Subhankar Pal, Jonathan Beaumont, Dong-Hyeon Park, Aporva Amarnath, Siy-
ing Feng, Chaitali Chakrabarti, Hun-Seok Kim, David Blaauw, Trevor Mudge,
and Ronald Dreslinski. 2018. Outerspace: An outer product based sparse ma-
trix multiplication accelerator. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE, 724–736.
[38] Eric Qin, Ananda Samajdar, Hyoukjun Kwon, Vineet Nadella, Sudarshan Srini-
vasan, Dipankar Das, Bharat Kaul, and Tushar Krishna. 2020. Sigma: A sparse
and irregular GEMM accelerator with flexible interconnects for DNN training. In
2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA) . IEEE, 58–70.
[39] Nitish Srivastava, Hanchen Jin, Jie Liu, David Albonesi, and Zhiru Zhang. 2020.
Matraptor: A sparse-sparse matrix multiplication accelerator based on row-wise
product. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
tecture (MICRO) . IEEE, 766–780.
[40] Nitish Srivastava, Hanchen Jin, Shaden Smith, Hongbo Rong, David Albonesi,
and Zhiru Zhang. 2020. Tensaurus: A versatile accelerator for mixed sparse-dense
tensor computations. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE, 689–702.
[41] Minjie Wang, Da Zheng, Zihao Ye, Quan Gan, Mufei Li, Xiang Song, Jinjing Zhou,
Chao Ma, Lingfan Yu, Yu Gai, Tianjun Xiao, Tong He, George Karypis, Jinyang
Li, and Zheng Zhang. 2019. Deep Graph Library: A Graph-Centric, Highly-
Performant Package for Graph Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01315
(2019).
[42] T. Wang, T. Geng, A. Li, X. Jin, and M. Herbordt. 2020. FPDeep: Scalable Acceler-
ation of CNN Training on Deeply-Pipelined FPGA Clusters. IEEE Trans. Comput.
69, 08 (2020), 1143–1158. doi: 10.1109/TC.2020.3000118.

==== Page 13 ====
I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
[43] Hao Wei, Jeffrey Xu Yu, Can Lu, and Xuemin Lin. 2016. Speedup graph pro-
cessing by graph ordering. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on
Management of Data . 1813–1828.
[44] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and
S Yu Philip. 2020. A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE
transactions on neural networks and learning systems (2020).
[45] Cong Xie, Ling Yan, Wu-Jun Li, and Zhihua Zhang. 2014. Distributed power-
law graph computing: Theoretical and empirical analysis. In Advances in neural
information processing systems . 1673–1681.
[46] Tian Xie and Jeffrey C Grossman. 2018. Crystal graph convolutional neural
networks for an accurate and interpretable prediction of material properties.
Physical review letters 120, 14 (2018), 145301.
[47] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. 2019. How Powerful
are Graph Neural Networks?. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
[48] Mingyu Yan, Lei Deng, Xing Hu, Ling Liang, Yujing Feng, Xiaochun Ye, Zhimin
Zhang, Dongrui Fan, and Yuan Xie. 2020. HyGCN: A GCN Accelerator with Hy-
brid Architecture. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv abs/2001.02514
(2020).
[49] Hongxia Yang. 2019. Aligraph: A comprehensive graph neural network platform.
InProceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining . ACM, 3165–3166.
[50] Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, and Hyunwoo J Kim.
2019. Graph Transformer Networks. In Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems . 11960–11970.
[51] Hanqing Zeng and Viktor Prasanna. 2020. Graphact: Accelerating gcn training
on cpu-fpga heterogeneous platforms. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/SIGDA
International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays . 255–265.
[52] Shijin Zhang, Zidong Du, Lei Zhang, Huiying Lan, Shaoli Liu, Ling Li, Qi Guo,
Tianshi Chen, and Yunji Chen. 2016. Cambricon-x: An accelerator for sparse
neural networks. In The 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture . IEEE Press, 20.
[53] Yunming Zhang, Vladimir Kiriansky, Charith Mendis, Saman Amarasinghe, and
Matei Zaharia. 2017. Making caches work for graph analytics. In 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . 293–302. https://doi.org/10.1109/
BigData.2017.8257937
[54] Yunming Zhang, Vladimir Kiriansky, Charith Mendis, Saman Amarasinghe, and
Matei Zaharia. 2017. Making caches work for graph analytics. In 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE, 293–302.
[55] Yongan Zhang, Haoran You, Yonggan Fu, Tong Geng, Ang Li, and Yingyan
Lin. 2021. G-CoS: GNN-Accelerator Co-Search Towards Both Better Accuracy
and Efficiency. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
(ICCAD 2021) .
[56] Marinka Zitnik, Monica Agrawal, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Modeling polyphar-
macy side effects with graph convolutional networks. Bioinformatics 34, 13 (2018),
i457–i466.

