==== Page 1 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01359-2
Image Matching from Handcrafted to Deep Features: A Survey
Jiayi Ma1·Xingyu Jiang1·Aoxiang Fan1·Junjun Jiang2·Junchi Yan3
Received: 9 January 2020 / Accepted: 15 July 2020 / Published online: 4 August 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
As a fundamental and critical task in various visual applications, image matching can identify then correspond the same or
similar structure/content from two or more images. Over the past decades, growing amount and diversity of methods have beenproposed for image matching, particularly with the development of deep learning techniques over the recent years. However,it may leave several open questions about which method would be a suitable choice for speciﬁc applications with respect to
different scenarios and task requirements and how to design better image matching methods with superior performance in
accuracy, robustness and efﬁciency. This encourages us to conduct a comprehensive and systematic review and analysis forthose classical and latest techniques. Following the feature-based image matching pipeline, we ﬁrst introduce feature detection,
description, and matching techniques from handcrafted methods to trainable ones and provide an analysis of the development
of these methods in theory and practice. Secondly, we brieﬂy introduce several typical image matching-based applicationsfor a comprehensive understanding of the signiﬁcance of image matching. In addition, we also provide a comprehensive
and objective comparison of these classical and latest techniques through extensive experiments on representative datasets.
Finally, we conclude with the current status of image matching technologies and deliver insightful discussions and prospectsfor future works. This survey can serve as a reference for (but not limited to) researchers and engineers in image matchingand related ﬁelds.
Keywords Image matching ·Graph matching ·Feature matching ·Registration ·Handcrafted features ·Deep learning
Communicated by V . Lepetit.
B Junchi Yan
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
Jiayi Ma
jyma2010@gmail.com
Xingyu Jiang
jiangx.y@whu.edu.cn
Aoxiang Fan
fanaoxiang@whu.edu.cn
Junjun Jiang
junjun0595@163.com
1Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan430072, China
2School of Computer Science and Technology, HarbinInstitute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoEKey Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai 200240, China1 Introduction
Vision-based artiﬁcial systems, as widely used to guide
machines to perceive and understand the surroundings for
better decision making, have been playing a signiﬁcant role
in the age of global automation and artiﬁcial intelligence.However, how to process the perceived information under
speciﬁc requirements and understand the differences and/or
relationships among multiple visual targets are crucial topicsin various ﬁelds, including computer vision, pattern recog-
nition, image analysis, security, and remote sensing. As a
critical and fundamental problem in these complicated tasks,image matching, also known as image registration or cor-respondence, aims to identify then correspond the same or
similar structure/content from two or more images. This tech-
nique is used for high-dimensional structure recovery as wellas information identiﬁcation and integration, such as 3-D
reconstruction, visual simultaneous localization and map-
ping (VSLAM), image mosaic, image fusion, image retrieval,target recognition and tracking, as well as change detection,
etc.
123

==== Page 2 ====
24 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Image matching has rich meaning in pairing two objects,
thus deriving many speciﬁc tasks, such as sparse featurematching, dense matching (like image registration and stereo
matching), patch matching (retrieval), 2-D and 3-D point set
registration, and graph matching. Image matching in generalconsists of two parts, namely, the nature of the matched fea-tures and the matching strategy, which indicate what are used
to match and how to match them, respectively. The ultimate
goals are to geometrically warp the sensed image into thecommon spatial coordinate system of the reference image and
align their common area pixel-to-pixel (i.e., image registra-
tion). To this end, a direct strategy, also known as area-based
method , registers two images by using the similarity mea-
surement of the original image pixel intensity or information
after pixel-domain transformation in the sliding windows ofpredeﬁned size or even the entire images, without attemptingto detect any salient image structure.
Another classic and widely adopted pipeline called feature-
based method , i.e., feature detection and description, feature
matching, transform model estimation, image resampling
and transformation, has been introduced in the prestigious
survey paper (Zitova and Flusser 2003 ) and applied in var-
ious ﬁelds. The feature-based image matching is popular
due to its ﬂexibility and robustness and the capability of
wide range applications. In particular, feature detection canextract the distinctive structure from an image, and fea-ture description may be regarded as an image representation
method that is widely used in image coding and similarity
measurements such as image classiﬁcation and retrieval. Inaddition, due to the strong ability in deep feature acquisition
and non-linear expression, applying deep learning techniques
for image information representation and/or similarity mea-surement, as well as parameter regression of image pair
transformation, are hot topics in nowadays image matching
community, which have been proven to achieve better match-ing performance and present greater potential compared withtraditional methods.
In real-world settings, images for matching are usually
taken from the same or similar scene/object while capturedat different times, from different viewpoints or imaging
modalities. In particular, a robust and efﬁcient matching strat-
egy is desirable to establish correct correspondences, thusstimulating various methods for achieving better efﬁciency,
robustness and accuracy. Although numerous techniques
have been devised over the decades, developing a uniﬁedframework remains a challenging task in terms of the fol-lowing aspects:
– Area-based methods that directly match images often
depend on an appropriate patch similarity measurement
for creating pixel level matches between images. They
can be computational expensive and are sensitive toimage distortion, appearance changes by noise, vary-ing illumination, and different imaging sensors, which
can have negative impact on similarity measurement andmatch searching. As a result, usually these methods can
only work well under small rotation, scaling, and local
deformation.
– Feature-based matching methods are often more efﬁcient
and can better handle geometrical deformation. But they
are based on salient feature detection and description, fea-
ture matching, and geometrical model estimation whichcan also be challenging. On the one hand, in feature-
based image matching, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne and extract
a high percentage and a large number of features belong-ing to the same positions in 3-D space in the real world
to ensure the matchability. On the other hand, matching
Nfeature points to Nfeature points detected in another
image would create a total of N!possible matchings, and
thousands of features are usually extracted from high-
resolution images and dominated outliers and noise are
typically included in the points sets, which lead to signiﬁ-cant difﬁculties for existing matching methods. Although
various local descriptors have been proposed and cou-
pled with detected features to ease the matching process,the use of local appearance information will unavoid-
ably result in ambiguity and numerous false matches,
especially for images with low quality, repeated contents,and those undergoing serious nonrigid deformations andextreme viewpoint changes.
– A predeﬁned transformation model is often required to
indicate the geometrical relation between two imagesor point sets. But it may vary on different data and
is unknown beforehand thus hard to model. A sim-
ple parametric model is often insufﬁcient for imagepairs that involve non-rigid transformations caused by
ground surface ﬂuctuation and image viewpoint varia-
tions, multi-targets with different motion properties, andalso local distortions.
– The emergence of deep learning has provided a new way
and has shown great potential to address image match-
ing problems. However, it still faces several challenges.The option of learning from images for direct registra-
tion or transformation model estimation is limited when
applied to wide baseline image stereo or registrationunder complex and serious deformation. The application
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) onto sparse
point data for matching, registration, and transforma-tion model estimation is also difﬁcult, because the pointsto be matched–known as unstructured or non-Euclidean
data due to their disordered and dispersed nature–make
it difﬁcult to operate and extract the spatial relation-ships between two or more points (e.g., neighboring
elements, relative positions, and length and angle infor-
mation among multi-points) using a deep convolutionaltechnique.
123

==== Page 3 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 25
Fig. 1 Structure of this survey
Existing surveys are focused on different parts of image
matching tasks and fail to cover the literature from the last
decade. For instance, the early reviews (Zitova and Flusser2003 ; Tuytelaars and Mikolajczyk 2008 ; Strecha et al. 2008 ;
Aanæs et al. 2012 ; Heinly et al. 2012 ; Awrangjeb et al.
2012 ;L ie ta l . 2015 ) typically focus on handcrafted meth-
ods, which are not sufﬁcient to provide a valuable referencefor investigating CNN-based methods. Most recent reviews
involve trainable techniques, but they merely cover a single
part of image matching community, either focus on detectors(Huang et al. 2018 ; Lenc and V edaldi 2014 ) or descriptors
(Balntas et al. 2017 ; Schonberger et al. 2017 ) or speciﬁc
matching tasks (Ferrante and Paragios 2017 ; Haskins et al.
2020 ; Yan et al. 2016b ; Maiseli et al. 2017 ), and many others
pay more attention on related applications (Fan et al. 2019 ;
Guo et al. 2016 ; Zheng et al. 2018 ; Piasco et al. 2018 ). In this
survey, we aim to provide an up-to-date and comprehensivesummary and assessment of existing image matching meth-
ods, especially for the recently introduced learning-based
methods. More importantly, we have provided a detailedevaluation and analysis for mainstream methods which are
missing in existing literature.
This survey mainly focuses on feature-based matching,
although patch matching, point set registration, and otherrelated matching tasks are also reviewed. The overall orga-
nization is presented in Fig. 1; Sects. 2and 3describe the
feature detection and description techniques respectively,from handcrafted methods to trainable ones. Patch match-ing is classiﬁed as a feature description domain, and 3-D
point set features are also reviewed. In Sect. 4, we present
different matching methods, including area-based imagematching, pure point set registration, image descriptor sim-
ilarity matching and mismatch removal, graph matching,
and learning-based methods. Sections 5and 6respectively
introduce the image matching-based visual applications and
evaluation metrics, including the performance comparison.
In Sect. 7, we conclude and discuss possible future develop-
ments.
2 Feature Detection
Early image features are annotated manually, which arestill used in some low-quality image matching. With thedevelopment of computer vision and the requirement for
auto-matching approaches, many feature detection methods
have been introduced to extract stable and distinct featuresfrom images.
123

==== Page 4 ====
26 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
2.1 Overview of Feature Detectors
Detected features represent speciﬁc semantic structures in
an image or the real world and can be divided into corner
feature (Moravec 1977 ;H a r r i se ta l . 1988 ; Smith and Brady
1997 ; Rosten and Drummond 2006 ; Rublee et al. 2011 ), blob
feature (Lowe 2004 ; Bay et al. 2006 ; Agrawal et al. 2008 ;Y i
et al. 2016 ), line/edge (Harris et al. 1988 ; Smith and Brady
1997 ; Canny 1987 ; Perona and Malik 1990 ), and morpho-
logical region feature (Matas et al. 2004 ; Mikolajczyk et al.
2005 ). However, the most popular features that are used for
matching are the points (a.k.a. keypoints or interest points).The points are easy to extract and deﬁne with a simpliﬁed
form compared with the line and region features, which can
be roughly classiﬁed into corner and blob.
A good interest point must be easy to ﬁnd and ideally
fast to compute, as an interest point at a good location
is crucial for further feature description and matching. To
promote (i) matchability, (ii) the capability for subsequentapplications, and (iii) matching efﬁciency and reduction of
storage requirements, many required properties have been
proposed for reliable feature extraction (Zitova and Flusser2003 ; Tuytelaars and Mikolajczyk 2008 ), including repeata-
bility, invariance, robustness and efﬁciency. The common
idea for feature detection is to construct a feature response todistinguish salient point, line, and region from one another,along with ﬂat and nondistinctive image areas. This idea can
be subsequently classiﬁed into gradient-, intensity-, second-
order derivative-, contour curvature-, region segmentation-,and learning-based detectors . In the following, we provide
a comprehensive introduction of feature detectors with these
methods, focusing more on learning-based methods to guideresearchers on how the traditional and trainable detectors
work and give insights on their strengths and weaknesses.
2.2 Corner Features
A corner feature can for example be deﬁned as the crossing
point of two straight lines with the forms of “L”, “T”, “X”, ora high curvature point of a contour. The common idea of cor-
ner detection is to compute a corner response and distinguish
it from edge, ﬂat, or other less distinctive image areas. Differ-ent strategies can be utilized for traditional corner searching,namely, gradient-, intensity-, and contour curvature-based.
Refer to Zitova and Flusser ( 2003 ), Li et al. ( 2015 ), Tuyte-
laars and Mikolajczyk ( 2008 ) and Rosten et al. ( 2010 )f o r
details.
2.2.1 Gradient-Based Detectors
A gradient-based corner response prefers the use of the ﬁrst-
order information in image to distinguish the corner feature.The earliest automatic corner detection method could betraced to Moravec detector (Moravec 1977 ), which ﬁrst intro-
duced the concept of “interest points” to deﬁne the distinctfeature points, which are extracted based on the autocor-
relation of the local intensity. This method calculates and
searches the minimum intensity variation of each pixel froma shifted window in eight directions, and the interest point isdetected if the minimum is superior to the given threshold.
However, the Moravec detector is not invariant to the
direction or image rotation due to the discontinuous compar-ing directions and sizes. The famous Harris corner detector
(Harris et al. 1988 ) was introduced to address the anisotropy
and computation complexity problem. The goal of the Har-ris method is to ﬁnd the directions of the fastest and lowest
grey-value changes using a two-order moment matrix or an
auto-correlation matrix; thus, it is invariant to orientation andillumination and has reliable repeatability and distinctive-ness. Harris was further improved in Shi and Tomasi ( 1993 )
for better tracking performance by making the features more
“spread out” and locating more accurately.
2.2.2 Intensity-Based Detectors
Several template- or intensity comparison-based corner
detectors have been proposed by comparing the intensity
of the surrounding pixels with that of the center pixel to
simplify the image gradient computing. Due to their binarynature, they are widely used in many modern applications,
particularly some with storage and real-time requirements.
The intensity-based corner detector, namely, smallest uni-
value segment assimilating nucleus (SUSAN) (Smith and
Brady 1997 ), is based on the brightness similarity between
the local radius region pixels and the nucleus. SUSAN canbe implemented rapidly because it does not require gradientcomputation. Many analogous methods have been proposed
based on the concept of brightness comparison, the most
famous of which is the FAST detector (Trajkovi´ c and Hedley
1998 ). FAST uses binary comparison with each pixel along
a circle pattern against the central pixel and then determines
more reliable corner features using a machine learning (i.e.,ID3 tree Quinlan 1986 ) strategy, which is trained on a large
number of similar scene images and can generate the best
criteria for corner selection.
As an improvement of SUSAN, FAST is extremely efﬁ-
cient with high repeatability and is used more widely. To
improve FAST without loss of efﬁciency, FAST-ER (Ros-
ten et al. 2010 ) was introduced to enhance the repeatability
by generalizing the detector based on further pixel intensity
comparison centered on the nucleus. Another improvement
is the AGAST (Mair et al. 2010 ), in which two more pixel
brightness comparison criteria are deﬁned, after which an
optimal and specialized decision tree is trained in an extended
conﬁguration space, thus rendering the FAST detector moregeneric and adaptive. To combine the efﬁciency of FAST
123

==== Page 5 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 27
and the reliability of the Harris detector, Rublee et al. ( 2011 )
proposed an integrated feature detector and descriptor formatching called ORB. The ORB uses the Harris response to
select a certain number of FAST corners as the ﬁnal detected
features. The gray-scale centroid of the local patch and thecenter pixel itself are formed as a vector to represent themain direction of the ORB feature, which helps calculate
the similarity of the binary descriptor in ORB. Recently, a
Sadder-like detector (Aldana-Iuit et al. 2016 ) has been pro-
posed to extract interest points. In this detector, the saddle
condition is veriﬁed efﬁciently by intensity comparisons on
two concentric rings with certain geometric constraints. TheSadder detector can achieve higher repeatability and greater
spread out than traditional methods even modern trainable
ones (Komorowski et al. 2018 ).
2.2.3 Curvature-Based Detectors
Another strategy for corner feature extraction is based on
detected high-level image structures, such as edges, con-
tours, and salient regions. Corner features can be deﬁned
immediately as the midpoint/endpoint or sparse samplingfrom an edge or contour (Belongie et al. 2002 ). These are
subsequently used for shape matching or point registration,
especially for an image pair of less texture or binary type.
The curvature-based strategy aims to extract the corner pointwith the maximum curvature searching based on the detected
image curve-like edges. This strategy starts with an edge
extraction and selection method, and the two subsequentsteps are the curve smoothing and curvature estimation. The
corners are ﬁnally determined by selecting the curvature
extremum points. In general, an edge detector is often ﬁrstin need for contour curvature-based corner detection.
In curve smoothing, the slope and curvature are difﬁcult to
evaluate due to the quantized position of a curve point. Noise
and local deformation in a curve may also lead to a seriousimpact on the feature stability and distinctiveness. There-
fore, smoothing methods should be implemented before
or during the curvature calculation to make the curvatureextremum points more distinct from other curve points. Two
smoothing strategies, namely, direct and indirect methods,
are generally utilized. A direct smoothing, such as Gaus-sian smoothing (Mokhtarian and Suomela 1998 ; Pinheiro
and Ghanbari 2010 ), removes noise and may change curve
locations to a certain extent. In comparison, in the indirect
smoothing strategy, e.g., the region of support method or thechord-length-based method (Ramer 1972 ; Awrangjeb and Lu
2008 ), may preserve the curve point locations.
As for curvature estimation, for each point of the smoothed
curve, a signiﬁcance response measure is needed for corner
searching, i.e., curvature. Curvature estimation methods are
also generally classiﬁed as direct and indirect. The formeris based on an algebraic or geometric estimation, such ascosine, local curvature, and tangential deﬂection (Mokhtar-
ian and Suomela 1998 ; Rosenfeld and Weszka 1975 ; Pinheiro
and Ghanbari 2010 ). The latter estimates the curvature in an
indirect way and is often used as a signiﬁcance measure, such
as counting the number of curve points through several mov-ing rectangles along the curve (Masood and Sarfraz 2007 ),
using the perpendicular distances from the chord connecting
the two endpoints of the curve to curve points (Ramer 1972 ),
and other alternatives (Zhang et al. 2010 ,2015 ). Compared
with indirect estimation methods, the direct ones are more
sensitive to noise and local variation due to the less neigh-
boring point consideration.
Finally, corners can be determined with threshold strat-
egy to remove false and indistinctive points (Mokhtarian and
Suomela 1998 ; Awrangjeb and Lu 2008 ). Additional details
can be obtained from a contour curvature-based corner survey(Awrangjeb et al. 2012 ). In addition and more recently, a mul-
tiscale segmentation-based corner detector, named MSFD
(Mustafa et al. 2018 ), has been proposed for wide-baseline
scene matching and reconstruction. Feature points in MSFD
are detected at the intersection of the boundaries of three
or more regions by using off-the-shelf segmentation meth-ods. MSFD can generate rich and accurate corner features
for wide-baseline image matching and high reconstruction
performance.
The above-mentioned corner feature detectors are easily
located in the contour or edge structures of an image (i.e., not
such spread-out or uneven distribution), and are limited by the
scale and afﬁne transformation between two images. Among
the three types of corner detection strategies, the gradient-
based methods are able to locate more accurately, whereas
the intensity-based methods show advantage for efﬁciency.The contour curvature-based methods require more compu-
tation but they are a better choice for processing textureless or
binary images, such as infrared and medical images, becausethe image cue-based feature descriptors are unworkable forthese types of images and the point-based descriptors are
often coupled for the matching task (i.e., point set registra-
tion or shape matching). Please refer to Sects. 3and 4for
details.
2.3 Blob Features
A blob feature is commonly indicated as a local closed region
(e.g., with a regular shape of circle or ellipse), inside which
the pixels are considered similar to one another and are dis-tinct from the surrounding neighborhoods. The blob feature
can be written in the form of (x,y,θ), with (x,y)being
the pixel coordinate of the feature location and θindicat-
ing the blob shape information of the feature, including
scale and/or afﬁne. Numerous blob feature detectors have
been introduced over the past decades, and they can beroughly classiﬁed into second-order partial derivative- and
123

==== Page 6 ====
28 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
region segmentation-based detectors. Second-order partial
derivative-based methods are based on the Laplacian scaleselection and/or Hessian matrix calculation for afﬁne invari-
ant. While segmentation-based methods prefer to detect blob
features by segmenting the morphological regions ﬁrst, thenestimate the afﬁne information with ellipse ﬁtting. Comparedwith corner features, blob features are more useful for visual
applications with high precision requirement, because more
image cues are utilized for feature identiﬁcation and repre-sentation, thus enabling the blob features to be more accurate
and robust to image transformation.
2.3.1 Second-Order Partial Derivative-Based Detectors
In methods based on second-order partial derivatives ,t h e
Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) (Lindeberg 1998 ) is applied
based on scale space theory. Here, the Laplace operator is ﬁrst
used for edge detection in accordance with the zero crossings
in the second-order differential of an image, and the Gaussianconvolution ﬁltering is then applied as a preprocessing to
reduce noise.
LoG can detect the local extremum point and the area
with normalized response arising from the circular symme-try of the Gaussian kernel. Different standard deviations of
the Gaussian function can detect the scale-invariant blobs
in different scales by searching the extremum in the multi-scale space as the ﬁnal stable blob feature. The difference of
Gaussians (DoG) (Lowe et al. 1999 ;L o w e 2004 ) ﬁlter can
be used to approximate the LoG ﬁlter, and greatly speedsup the computations. Another classical blob feature detec-
tion strategy is based on the determinant of Hessian (DoH)
(Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2001 ,2004 ). This is more afﬁne
invariant because the eigenvalue and eigenvector of the sec-ond matrix can be applied to estimate and correct the afﬁne
region.
Interest point detection by using DoG, DoH, and both
has been widely utilized in recent visual applications. The
famous SIFT (Lowe et al. 1999 ;L o w e 2004 ) extracts key-
point as the local extrema in a DoG pyramid, ﬁltered usingthe Hessian matrix of the local intensity values (the according
description part will be reviewed in the next section). Miko-
lajczyk et al. combined the Harris and Hessian detectors withthe Laplacian and Hessian matrices for scale and afﬁne fea-ture detection (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2001 ,2004 ), i.e.,
the Harris/Hessian-Laplacian/afﬁne. SURF (Bay et al. 2006 )
accelerates the SIFT by approximating the Hessian matrix-based detector using Haar wavelet calculation, together with
an integral image strategy, thus simplifying the construction
of a second-order differential template.
Several SIFT- and SURF-based improvements, have been
successively proposed for better property in subsequent
applications. Such improvements include a fully afﬁne invari-ant SIFT detector (ASIFT) (Morel and Y u 2009 ), a center-surround extremum (Agrawal et al. 2008 ) strategy feature
detector with the Laplace calculation approximated by theproposed bilateral ﬁltering to enhance the efﬁciency, and
the efﬁcient approximation of DoH with piecewise triangle
ﬁlters in DARTs (Marimon et al. 2010 ). In addition, a cosine-
modulated Gaussian ﬁlter is utilized in the SIFT-ER detector(Mainali et al. 2013 ) to obtain high feature detectability with
minimum scale-space localization errors, in which the ﬁl-
terbank system has a highly accurate ﬁlter approximationwithout any image sub/upsampling. An edge foci-based blob
detector (Zitnick and Ramnath 2011 ) has also been intro-
duced for the matching task. In this detector, the edge foci isdeﬁned as the point in an image that is roughly equidistant
from the closest edge with orientations perpendicular to this
point.
Unlike the circle-like Gaussian response function, a non-
linear partial differential equation is applied in KAZA
detector for blob feature searching with nonlinear diffu-
sion ﬁltering (Alcantarilla et al. 2012 ). An accelerated
version called AKAZA (Alcantarilla and Solutions 2011 )i s
implemented by embedding the fast explicit diffusion in a
pyramidal framework to dramatically speedup feature detec-tion in nonlinear scale spaces. However, it still suffers from
high computation complexity. Another method is W ADE
(Salti et al. 2013 ), which implements nonlinear feature detec-
tion by a wave propagation function.
2.3.2 Segmentation-Based Detectors
The segmentation-based blob detectors begin with an irreg-
ular region segmentation based on constant pixel intensity or
zero gradient. One of the most famous region segmentation-based blob feature is maximally stable extremal region(MSER) (Matas et al. 2004
). It extracts regions that remain
stable under a large range of intensity thresholding values.
This approach does not need extra processing for scale esti-mation, and is robust to large viewpoint changes. The term
“maximally stable” describes the threshold selection process,
given that every extremal region is a connected component ofa watershed image by thresholding. An extension to MSER
was introduced in Kimmel et al. ( 2011 ) to exploit shape struc-
ture cues. Other improvements are based on the watershedregions of principal curvature images (Deng et al. 2007 ; Fer-
raz and Binefa 2012 ) or considered color information for a
higher discrimination (Forssén 2007 ).
Similar to MSER, other segmentation-based features,
such as intensity- and edge-based regions (Tuytelaars and
V an Gool 2004 ), are also used for afﬁne covariant region
detection. However, feature detection of this type is of lessuse for feature matching, and it is gradually developed toward
saliency detection and segmentation in computer vision. Spe-
ciﬁc method investigation and comprehensive reviews can befound in Mikolajczyk et al. ( 2005 ) and Li et al. ( 2015 ).
123

==== Page 7 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 29
2.4 Learnable Features
Over the recent years, data-driven learning-based methods
have achieved signiﬁcant progress in general visual pattern
recognition tasks, and have also been applied to image featuredetection. This pipeline can be roughly classiﬁed into theusing of classical learning and deep learning.
2.4.1 Classical Learning-Based Detectors
Early from the past decade, classical learning-based meth-
ods, such as decision tree, support vector machine (SVM),and other classiﬁers by opposition to Deep Learning, havealready been used in handcrafted keypoint detection (Tra-
jkovi´ c and Hedley 1998 ; Strecha et al. 2009 ; Hartmann et al.
2014 ; Richardson and Olson 2013 ). FAST (Trajkovi´ c and
Hedley 1998 ) detector was the ﬁrst attempt to use tradi-
tional learning for reliable and matchable point identiﬁcation,
and similar strategies have been applied in many subsequentimprovements (Mair et al. 2010 ; Rublee et al. 2011 ). Strecha
et al. ( 2009 ) trained the Wald-Boost classiﬁer to learn key-
points with high repeatability on pre-aligned training sets.
More recently, Hartmann et al. ( 2014 ) showed that it can
be learnt from a structure-from-motion (SfM) pipeline to
predict which candidate points are matchable, thus signiﬁ-
cantly reducing the number of interest points without losingexcessive true matches. Meanwhile, Richardson and Olson
(2013 ) reported that hand-designed detectors can be learned
by random sampling in the space of convolutional ﬁlters andtried to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁlter using a learning strategy over
frequency-domain constraints. However, classical learning
has only been used for reliable feature selection through clas-siﬁer learning, rather than the extraction of interest featuresdirectly from raw images until the emergence of deep learn-
ing.
2.4.2 Deep Learning-Based Detectors
Inspired by the handcrafted feature detectors, a general solu-
tion for CNN-based detection is to construct response maps
to search the interest points in a supervised (Yi et al. 2016 ;
V erdie et al. 2015 ; Zhang et al. 2017b ), self-supervised
(Zhang and Rusinkiewicz 2018 ; DeTone et al. 2018 ), or
unsupervised manner (Lenc and V edaldi 2016 ; Savinov et al.
2017 ; Ono et al. 2018 ; Georgakis et al. 2018 ; Barroso-Laguna
et al. 2019 ). The task is often converted into a regression
problem that can be trained in a differentiable way under
the transformation and imaging condition invariance con-
straints. Supervised methods have shown the beneﬁts of usinganchors (e.g., obtained from SIFT method) to guide their
training, but the performance could be largely restricted by
the method of anchor construction, because the anchor itselfis intrinsically difﬁcult to reasonably deﬁne and may pre-vent the network from proposing new keypoints in case no
anchor exists in the proximity (Barroso-Laguna et al. 2019 ).
Self-supervised and unsupervised methods train detectors
without any human annotations, and only the geometric con-
straints between two images are required for optimizationguidance; a simple human aid is sometimes asked for pre-training (DeTone et al. 2018 ). In addition, many methods
integrate feature detection into the entire matching pipeline
by jointly training with feature description and matching (Yiet al. 2016 ; DeTone et al. 2018 ; Ono et al. 2018 ; Shen et al.
2019 ; Dusmanu et al. 2019 ;C h o ye ta l . 2016 ; Rocco et al.
2018 ; Dusmanu et al.
2019 ; Revaud et al. 2019 ), which can
enhance the ﬁnal matching performance and optimize the
entire procedure in an end-to-end manner.
For instance, TILDE (V erdie et al. 2015 ) trains multiple
piecewise linear regression models to detect repeatable key-points under drastic imaging changes of weather and lighting
conditions. First, it identiﬁes good keypoint candidates in
multiple training images taken from the same viewpointsusing DoG for training set collection, and then trains a gen-
eral regressor to predict a score map, whose maxima after
non-maximum suppression (NMS) can then be regarded asthe desired interest points.
DetNet (Lenc and V edaldi 2016 ) is the ﬁrst fully general
formulation for learning local covariant features; it casts thedetection task as a regression problem and then derives acovariance constraint to automatically learn stable anchors
for local feature detection under geometric transformations.
Meanwhile, Quad-net (Savinov et al. 2017 ) realizes keypoint
detection under transformation-invariant quantile ranking
with a single real-valued response function, enabling it to
learn the detector completely from scratch by optimizingfor a repeatable ranking. A similar detector in Zhang and
Rusinkiewicz ( 2018 ) combines this “ranking” loss with a
“peakedness” loss and produces a more repeatable detector.
Zhang et al. ( 2017b ) proposed TCDET detector by deﬁn-
ing a novel formulation based on the new concepts of
“standard patch” and “canonical feature” to place equal focus
on discriminativeness and covariant constraint. The proposeddetector can detect discriminative and repeatable features
under diverse image transformations. Key.Net (Barroso-
Laguna et al. 2019 ) combines handcrafted and learned CNN
ﬁlters within a shallow multiscale architecture and proposes a
light/efﬁcient trainable detector. The handcrafted ﬁlters pro-
vide anchor structures for localizing, scoring, and rankingrepeatable features that are fed to learned ﬁlters. CNN is usedto represent the scale space by detecting keypoints at differ-
ent levels; the loss function is deﬁned to detect robust feature
points from different scales and maximize the repeatabilityscore. The afﬁne region-based interest point is also learned
using CNNs in Mishkin et al. ( 2017 ,2018 ).
The methods of integrating a detector into a matching
pipeline are similar to those solely designed for detection
123

==== Page 8 ====
30 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
reviewed above. The main difference may lie in the way of
training, and the core challenge is to make the entire pro-cess differentiable. For example, Yi et al. ( 2016 ) attempted
to train a detector, an orientation estimator, and a descriptor
jointly based on inputting four patches. Their proposed LIFTcan be regarded as a trainable version of SIFT and requiressupervision from the SfM system for determining the fea-
ture anchor. The training procedure is conducted individually
from descriptor to detector and can use the learned resultsto guide the detector training, thus promoting detectability.
Unlike LIFT, SuperPoint (DeTone et al. 2018 ) introduces
a fully convolutional model by inputting full-sized imagesand jointly computing pixel-level interest point locations and
associated descriptors in one forward pass; a synthetic dataset
is constructed for pseudo-ground truth generation and pre-training, and the homography adaption module enables it toachieve self-supervised training while promoting detection
repeatability.
LF-Net (Ono et al. 2018 ) conﬁnes the end-to-end pipeline
to one branch to optimize the entire procedure in a dif-
ferentiable way; it also uses a fully convolutional network
operating on full-sized images to generate a rich featurescore map, which can then be used to extract keypoint
locations and the feature attributes, such as scale and ori-
entation; simultaneously, it performs a differentiable formof NMS, namely, sof targmax , for subpixel location and
increasing the accuracy and saliency of keypoint. Similar
to LF-Net, RF-Net (Shen et al. 2019 ) selects high-response
pixels as keypoints on multiscales, but the response mapsare constructed by receptive feature maps. Bhowmik et al.
(2020 ) indicated that increased accuracy for these low-level
matching scores does not necessarily translate to better per-formance in high-level vision tasks, thus they embedded
the feature detector in a complete vision pipeline, where
the learnable parameters are trained in an end-to-end man-ner. The authors overcome the discrete nature of keypointselection and descriptor matching using principles from rein-
forcement learning. Luo et al. ( 2020 ) proposed ASFeat to
explore local shape information of feature points and enhancethe accuracy of points detection, by jointly learning local
feature detectors and descriptors. Another detection-related
learning-based method is to estimate the orientation (Moo Yiet al. 2016 ), while the spatial transformation network (STN)
(Jaderberg et al. 2015 ) could also be a great reference in
deep learning-based detectors for rotation invariance (Yi et al.2016 ; Ono et al. 2018 ).
Unlike local feature descriptors, there is little review on
salient feature detectors, particularly for the recent CNN-
based techniques. To our best knowledge, the most recentsurvey (Lenc and V edaldi 2014 ) focuses on local feature
detection. It introduces the basic idea of several well-
known methods from handcrafted detectors to acceleratedand learned ones.2.5 3-D Feature Detectors
Dedicated on 3-D keypoint detectors, Tombari et al. ( 2013 )
provided an excellent survey on the state-of-the-art meth-
ods and a detailed evaluation of their performances. Inbrief, the existing methods were divided into two categories,ﬁxed-scale detectors and adaptive-scale detectors . In both
categories, keypoints are selected as local extrema of a pre-
deﬁned saliency measurement. The difference lies in theinvolvement of the scale characteristic, which deﬁnes the
support for the subsequent description stage. The ﬁxed-
scale detectors tend to search keypoints at a speciﬁc scalelevel, which is given as prior information. The adaptive-scale
detectors either extend the scale concept for 2-D images by
adopting a scale space deﬁned on the surface or implementthe traditional scale-space analysis by embedding 3-D dataonto a 2-D plane.
2.5.1 Fixed-Scale Detectors
Chen and Bhanu ( 2007 ) introduced the local surface patch
(LSP) method. The saliency of a point in LSP is measuredby its shape index (Dorai and Jain 1997 ), as deﬁned by the
principal curvatures at the point. Zhong ( 2009 ) introduced
the intrinsic shape signature (ISS) method, in which saliency
is derived from the eigenvalue decomposition of the scat-ter matrix of the support region. In this approach, the ratio
of eigenvalues is used to prune some points, and the ﬁnal
saliency is determined by the eigenvector. In this way, pointswith large variations along each principal direction are iden-
tiﬁed. Analogous to ISS, Mian et al. ( 2010 ) also utilized the
scatter matrix to prune nondistinctive points but with a differ-ent curvature-based saliency measurement. Sun et al. ( 2009 )
presented the heat kernel signature (HKS) method, based
on the properties of the heat diffusion process on a shape.
In this method, the saliency measurement is deﬁned by therestriction of the heat kernel to the temporal domain. The
heat kernel is uniquely determined by the underlying man-
ifold, which makes HKS a compact characterization of theshape.
2.5.2 Adaptive-Scale Detectors
It is desirable to adaptively ﬁt with the scale in detection.
For this purpose, Unnikrishnan and Hebert ( 2008 ) proposed
a Laplace-Beltrami scale space by computing the designedfunction on the increasing support around each point. This
function is deﬁned by a novel operator that reﬂects the local
mean curvature of the underlying shape and provides thesaliency information. Zaharescu et al. ( 2009 ) presented the
MeshDoG method, which is analogous to the DoG operator
in the 2-D case (Lowe 2004 ); nonetheless, the operator is
computed on a scalar function deﬁned on the manifold. The
123

==== Page 9 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 31
output of the DoG operator represents the saliency for key-
points detection. Castellani et al. ( 2008 ) also built scale space
using the DoG operator but directly on the 3-D mesh. Mian
et al. ( 2010 ) proposed an automatic scale selection technique
for extracting scale invariant features. The scale space is builtby increasing the support size, and automatic scale selectionat each keypoint is performed by using NMS along scale. The
disadvantage of sensitivity to scale of HKS was addressed by
Bronstein and Kokkinos ( 2010 ), who used Fourier transform
magnitude to extract a scale-invariant quantity from the HKS
without the need to perform scale selection. Sipiran and Bus-
tos ( 2011 ) extended the well-known Harris operator ( 1988 )
into 3-D data with an adaptive-scale determination technique.
Readers are referred to Tombari et al. ( 2013 ) for further dis-
cussion on other adaptive-scale detectors. Salti et al. ( 2015 )
devised a learning-based 3-D keypoint detector, whereby thekeypoint detection problem was cast as a binary classiﬁca-
tion problem, to determine whose support can be correctly
matched by a predeﬁned 3-D descriptor.
2.6 Summary
The basic idea of feature detectors is to distinguish the interestfeature from others through the response value, thus leading
to the solutions of two problems: (i) how to deﬁne discrimi-
nant patterns in an image, and (ii) how to repeatedly detect thesalient feature under different image conditions and image
qualities (Zhang et al. 2017b ). Along with the development of
these detectors, the main improvements and common strate-gies are related to four aspects, i.e., feature response type and
improvements on efﬁciency, robustness, and accuracy, which
lead to an increase in the matchability of detected featuresand the improved performance of their subsequent applica-tions.
For traditional methods, using more image cues can result
in better robustness and repeatability, but usually requiresmore computational cost. In addition to using low-order fea-
ture detectors, several strategies, such as approximate and
pre-compute, are designed to largely speed up the computa-tion and maintain the matchability. To ensure the robustness,
scale and afﬁne information estimation is usually required
when searching stable features. While for accuracy enhance-ment, a local extremal searching for subpixel accuracy andNMS strategy in pixel and scale space to avoid features
locally gathered, are two popular choices in traditional
pipelines.
As for learning-based detectors, repeatable and salient
keypoints can be extracted based on high-level cues cap-
tured by CNNs, except for intensity, gradient, or second-orderderivative. While the efﬁciency would largely depend on
the network structure, and early deep learning methods are
often time-consuming. Methods proposed recently, such asSuperPoint and Key.Net, have already achieved good imple-mentation in real time while maintaining state-of-the-art
performance. Multiscale sampling or changed receptive ﬁeldwould make these deep learning-based detectors invariant
to scale, where the scale or rotation information is directly
estimated in networks. They can achieve promising results,because the deep learning techniques can easily distinguishthe same structures, despite the fact that images suffer from
apparent variance and geometrical transformation. The accu-
racy can be optimized directly in the loss function of thelearning-based methods, and the differentiable form of NMS
is often used for subpixel accuracy location and repeatability
enhancement.
3 Feature Description
Once discriminative interest points are detected from raw
images, a local patch descriptor is required to be coupled
for each feature in order to establish feature correspondencecorrectly and efﬁciently across two or more images. In other
words, the feature descriptors are commonly used to trans-
form the original local information around the interest pointinto a stable and discriminative form, usually as a high-dimensional vector, so that two corresponding features are
as close as possible in the descriptor space, and two non-
corresponding features are as far as possible.
3.1 Overview of Feature Descriptors
The processing procedure of feature description can be
divided into three steps: local low-level feature extrac-
tion, spatial pooling, and feature normalization (Lowe 2004 ;
Rublee et al. 2011 ; Brown et al. 2010 ). First, the low-level
information of a local image region has to be extracted. This
information consists of pixel intensity and gradient or is
obtained from a series of steerable ﬁlters. Subsequently, thelocal patch is divided into several parts and the local informa-
tion is pooled in each part, then concatenate them by using
pooling methods, such as rectangular gridding (Lowe 2004 ),
polar gridding (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 ), Gaussian
sampling (Tola et al. 2010 ), and others (Rublee et al. 2011 );
the joint feature representation is transformed into a more dis-criminative one that may preserve signiﬁcant information ina simpliﬁed form for better matching performance. Finally,
a descriptor is obtained from the normalized results of the
pooled local information, which aims to map the aggregatedresults into a long vector of either ﬂoating-point or binary
values for easily evaluating the similarity between image fea-
tures.
Similar to feature detectors, existing descriptors are pro-
posed and improved to become highly robust, efﬁcient, and
discriminant for addressing image matching problems. Esti-mating a good size and orientation for a cropped image
123

==== Page 10 ====
32 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
patch is core problems in the task of feature description
and matching. By correctly identifying the size and orien-tation, the matching methods can be robust and invariant to
global and/or local deformations, such as rotation and scal-
ing. The original intention of feature description is focusedon discrimination enhancement compared with direct simi-larity measurement using raw image information. Numerous
well-designed descriptors can improve the discrimination
and matching performance, by using pooling parameteroptimization, sampling rule design, or the use of machine
learning and deep learning techniques.
Feature description has drawn increasing attention. Descrip-
tors can be regarded as distinguishable and robust representa-
tions for given images and are widely used not only in image
matching but also in image coding for image retrieval, facerecognition, and other tasks that are based on image similar-ity measurements. However, direct similarity measurements
for two image patches using raw image information will be
regarded as an area-based image matching method, whichwill be reviewed in the next section. As for image patch-based
feature descriptors, we will review the traditional ones, i.e.,
ﬂoating and binary descriptors, in terms of their data types.A new subsection will be added for the recent data-driven
methods, including classical machine learning- and emerg-
ing deep learning-based methods. We will comprehensivelyreview handcrafted and learning-based feature descriptionmethods and show the connections among these methods
to provide useful instructions for the readers toward their
further research, especially for developing better descriptionapproaches using deep learning/CNN techniques. In addi-
tion, we will also review the 3-D feature descriptors, where
features are typically obtained from point data without anyimage pixel information but with spatial position relation-
ships (e.g., 3-D point cloud registration).
3.2 Handcrafted Feature Descriptors
Handcrafted feature descriptors often depend on expert pri-ori knowledge, which are still widely used in many visual
applications. Following the construction procedure of a tra-ditional local descriptor, the ﬁrst step is to extract low-levelinformation, which can be brieﬂy classiﬁed into image gradi-
ent and intensity. Subsequently, the commonly used pooling
and normalizing strategies, such as statistic and comparison,are applied to generate long and simple vectors for discrim-
inative description with respect to the data type (ﬂoat or
binary). Therefore, handcrafted descriptors mostly rely onthe knowledge of their authors, and description strategies
can be classiﬁed into gradient statistic-, local binary pat-
tern statistic-, local intensity comparison- and local intensityorder statistic-based methods.3.2.1 Gradient Statistic-Based Descriptors
Gradient statistic methods are often used to form ﬂoat
type descriptors such as the histogram of oriented gradients
(HOG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005 ) as introduced in SIFT (Lowe
et al. 1999 ;L o w e 2004 ) and its improvement versions (Bay
et al. 2006 ; Morel and Y u 2009 ; Dong and Soatto 2015 ;T o l a
et al. 2010 ), and they are still widely used in several modern
visual tasks. In SIFT, feature scale and orientation are respec-tively determined by DoG computation and the largest bin
in a histogram of gradient orientation from a local circular
region around the detected keypoint, thus achieving scaleand rotation invariance. In the description stage, the local
region of detected feature is ﬁrst rectangularly divided into
4×4 non-overlapping grids based on the normalized scale
and rotation, then a histogram of gradient orientation with8 bins is conducted in each cell and embedded into a 128-
dimensional ﬂoat vector as the SIFT descriptor.
Another representative descriptor, namely, SURF (Bay
et al. 2006 ), can accelerate the SIFT operator by using the
responses of Haar wavelets to approximate gradient com-
putation; integral images are also applied to avoid repeatedcomputation in Haar wavelet responses, enabling more efﬁ-
cient computation than SIFT. Other improvements based
on these two typically focus on discrimination, efﬁciency,robustness, and coping with speciﬁc image data or tasks.For instance, CSIFT (Abdel-Hakim and Farag 2006 )u s e s
additional color information to enhance the discrimination,
and ASIFT (Morel and Y u 2009 ) simulates all image views
obtainable by varying the two camera axis orientation param-
eters for fully afﬁne invariance. Mikolajczyk and Schmid
(2005 ) use a polar division and histogram statistics of gradi-
ent orientations. SIFT-rank (Toews and Wells 2009 ) has been
proposed to investigate ordinal image description based on
off-the-shelf SIFT for invariant feature correspondence. AWeber’s law-based method (WLD) (Chen et al. 2009 ) has
been studied to compute a histogram by encoding differen-
tial excitations and orientations at certain locations.
Arandjelovi´ c and Zisserman ( 2012 ) used a square root
(Hellinger) kernel instead of the standard Euclidean dis-
tance measurement to transform the original SIFT space
to the RootSIFT space and yielded superior performancewithout increasing processing or storage requirements. Dong
and Soatto ( 2015 ) modiﬁed SIFT by pooling the gradi-
ent orientation across different domain sizes and proposedDSP-SIFT descriptor. Another efﬁcient dense descriptorfor wide-baseline stereo based on SIFT, namely, DAISY
(Tola et al. 2010 ), uses a log-polar grid arrangement and
Gaussian pooling strategy to approximate the histograms ofgradient orientations. Inspired by DAISY , DARTs (Marimon
et al. 2010 ) can efﬁciently compute scale space and reuse
it for descriptors, thus resulting in high efﬁciency. Severalhandcrafted ﬂoat-type descriptors have also been proposed
123

==== Page 11 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 33
recently and shown promising performance; for example, the
pattern of local gravitational force local descriptor (Bhat-tacharjee and Roy 2019 ) is inspired from the law of universal
gravitation and can be regarded as a combination of force
magnitude and angle.
3.2.2 Local Binary Pattern Statistic-Based Descriptors
Different from SIFT-like approaches, several intensity statistic-
based methods, which are inspired by the local binary pattern
(LBP) (Ojala et al. 2002 ), have been proposed in the past
decades. LBP has properties that favor its usage in inter-est region description, such as tolerance against illuminationchange and computational simplicity. The drawbacks are
that the operator produces a rather long histogram and is
insigniﬁcantly robust in ﬂat image areas. Center-symmetricLBP (CS-LBP) (Heikkilä et al. 2009 ) (using SVM for clas-
siﬁer training) is a modiﬁed version of LBP combining the
strengths of SIFT and LBP to address the ﬂat area problem.Speciﬁcally, CS-LBP uses a SIFT-like grid and replaces the
gradient information with an LBP-based feature. To address
the noise, center-symmetric local ternary pattern (CS-LTP)(Gupta et al. 2010 ) suggests the use of a histogram of rel-
ative orders in patch and a histogram of LBP codes, such
as histogram of relative intensities. The two CS-based meth-
ods are designed to be more robust to Gaussian noise thanpreviously considered descriptors. RLBP (Chen et al. 2013 )
improves the robustness of LBP by changing the coding bit;
a completed modeling of the LBP operator and an associ-ated completed LBP scheme (Guo et al. 2010 ) have been
developed for texture classiﬁcation. LBP-like methods are
widely used in texture representation and face recognitioncommunity, and additional details can be found in the reviewliterature (Huang et al. 2011 ).
3.2.3 Local Intensity Comparison-Based Descriptors
Another form of descriptors is based on the comparison
of local intensities, which is also called binary descriptorsand the core challenge is the selection rule for comparison.
Because of their limited distinctiveness, these methods are
mostly limited to short-baseline matching. Calonder et al.(2010 ) proposed the BRIEF descriptor built by concatena-
tion of the results of a binary test of intensities for several
random point pairs in image patch. Rublee et al. ( 2011 )p r o -
posed rotated BRIEF combined with oriented FAST cornersand selected robust binary tests using an machine learning
strategy in their ORB algorithm to alleviate the limitations in
rotation and scale change. Leutenegger et al. ( 2011 )d e v e l -
oped the BRISK method using a concentric circle sampling
strategy with increasing radius. Inspired by the retina struc-
ture, Alahi et al. ( 2012 ) proposed the FREAK descriptor by
comparing image intensities over a retinal sampling patternfor fast computing and matching with low memory cost while
remaining robust to scale, rotation, and noise. Handcraftedbinary descriptors and classical machine learning techniques
are also widely studied and these shall be introduced in the
learning-based subsection.
3.2.4 Local Intensity Order Statistic-Based Descriptors
Thus far, many methods have been devised using orders
of pixel values rather than raw intensities, achieving morepromising performance (Tang et al. 2009 ; Toews and Wells
2009 ). Pooling by intensity orders is invariant to rotation
and monotonic intensity changes and also encodes ordi-nal information into descriptor; the intensity order-poolingscheme may enable the descriptors to be rotation-invariant
without estimation of a reference orientation as SIFT, which
appears as a major error source for most existing methods.To solve this problem, Tang et al. proposed the ordinal spa-
tial intensity distribution (Tang et al. 2009 ) method, which
normalizes captured texture information and structure infor-mation using an ordinal and spatial intensity histogram; the
proposed method is invariant to any monotonically increas-
ing brightness changes.
Fan et al. ( 2011 ) pooled local features based on their gra-
dient and intensity orders in multiple support regions and
proposed the multi-support region order-based gradient his-
togram and the multi-support region rotation and intensitymonotonic invariant descriptor methods. A similar strategy
was used in LIOP (Wang et al. 2011 ,2015 ), to encode the
local ordinal information of each pixel. In that work, the over-all ordinal information was used to divide the local patch into
subregions, which were used to accumulate LIOP . LIOP was
further improved into OIOP/MIOP (Wang et al. 2015 ), which
can then encode overall ordinal information for noise anddistortion robustness. They also proposed a learning-based
quantization to improve its distinctiveness.
3.3 Learning-Based Feature Descriptors
Handcrafted descriptors, as reviewed above, require exper-
tise to design and may disregard useful patterns hidden inthe data. This requirement has prompted the investigationson learning-based descriptors, which have recently become
dominantly popular due to their data-driven property and
promising performance. In the following, we will discussa group of classical learning-based descriptors introduced
before the deep learning era.
3.3.1 Classical Learning-Based Descriptors
The learning-based descriptors can be traced back to PCA-
SIFT (Ke et al. 2004 ), in which principal component analysis
(PCA) is used to form a robust and compact descriptor by
123

==== Page 12 ====
34 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
reducing the dimensionality of a vector made of the local
image gradients. Cai et al. ( 2010 ) investigated the use of
linear discriminant projections to reduce dimensionality and
improve the discriminability of local descriptors. Brown et al.
(2010 ) introduced a learning framework with a set of building
blocks for constructing descriptors by using Powell mini-mization and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) technique
to ﬁnd the optimal parameters. Simonyan et al. ( 2014 )p r e -
sented a novel formulation to represent the spatial poolingand dimensionality reduction in descriptor learning as con-
vex optimization problems based on Brown’s work (Brown
et al. 2010 ). Meanwhile, Trzcinski et al. ( 2012 ,2014 ) applied
the boosting trick to learn boosted, complex non-linear local
visual feature representations from multiple gradient-based
weak learners.
Apart from the above-mentioned ﬂoat-valued descrip-
tors, binary descriptors are also of great interest in classical
descriptor learning due to their beneﬁcial properties, such as
low storage requirements and high matching speed. A nat-ural way to obtain binary descriptors is to learn it from the
provided ﬂoat-valued descriptors. This task is convention-
ally achieved by the hashing methods, thus suggesting thatcompact representations of high-dimensional data should
be learned while maintaining their similarity in the new
space. Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999 )
is arguably a popular unsupervised hashing method. Thismethod generates embeddings via random projections and
has been used for many large-scale search tasks. Some vari-
ants of LSH include kernelized LSH (Kulis and Grauman2009 ), spectral hashing (Weiss et al. 2009 ), semantic hashing
(Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009 ) and p-stable distribution-
based LSH (Datar et al. 2004 ). These variants are unsuper-
vised by design.
Supervised hashing methods have also been extensively
investigated, where different machine learning strategieshave been proposed to learn feature spaces tailored to speciﬁctasks. In this case, a plethora of methods have been proposed
(Kulis and Darrell 2009 ; Wang et al. 2010 ; Strecha et al.
2012 ; Liu et al. 2012a ; Norouzi and Blei 2011 ; Gong et al.
2013 ; Shakhnarovich 2005 ), among which image matching
is considered an important experimental validation task. For
example, the LDA technique is utilized in Strecha et al.(2012 ) to aid hashing. Semi-supervised sequential learning
algorithms are proposed in Liu et al. ( 2012a ) and Wang et al.
(2010 ) to ﬁnd discriminative projections. Minimal loss hash-
ing (Norouzi and Blei 2011 ) provided a new formulation to
learn binary hash functions on the basis of structural SVMs
with latent variables. Gong et al. ( 2012 ) proposed searching
a rotation of zero-centered data to minimize the quantizationerror of mapping the descriptor to the vertices of a zero-
centered binary hypercube.
Trzcinski and Lepetit ( 2012 ) and Trzcinski et al. ( 2017 )
reported that a straightforward way of developing binarydescriptors is to directly learn representations from image
patches. In Trzcinski and Lepetit ( 2012 ), they proposed to
project image patches to a discriminant subspace by using a
linear combination of a few simple ﬁlters and then threshold
their coordinates for creating the compact binary descrip-tor. The success of descriptors (e.g., SIFT) during imagematching indicates that non-linear ﬁlters, such as gradient
response, are more suitable than linear ones. Trzcinski et al.
(2017 ) proposed to learn a hash function of the same form as
an AdaBoost strong classiﬁer, i.e. the sign of a linear com-
bination of nonlinear weak learners, for each descriptor bit.
This work is more general and powerful than Trzcinski andLepetit ( 2012 ), which is based on simple thresholded lin-
ear projections. Trzcinski et al. ( 2017 ) proposed to generate
binary descriptors that are independently adapted per patch.This objective is achieved by inter- and intra-class onlineoptimization for descriptors.
3.3.2 Deep Learning-Based Descriptors
Descriptors using deep techniques are usually formulated as a
supervised learning problem. The objective is to learn a rep-resentation that can enable the two matched features to beas close as possible while the unmatched ones are far apart
in the measuring space (Schonberger et al. 2017 ). Descrip-
tor learning is often conducted with cropped local patchescentered on the detected keypoints; thus, it is also known as
patch matching. In general, existing methods consist of two
forms, namely, metric learning (Weinberger and Saul 2009 ;
Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2015 ; Han et al. 2015 ; Kedem
et al. 2012 ; Wang et al. 2017 ; Weinberger and Saul 2009 )
and descriptor learning (Simo-Serra et al. 2015 ; Balntas et al.
2016a ,2017 ; Zhang et al. 2017c ; Mishchuk et al. 2017 ;W e i
et al. 2018 ;H ee ta l . 2018 ; Tian et al. 2019 ; Luo et al. 2019 ),
according to the output of deep learning-based descriptors.
These two forms are often jointly trained. Speciﬁcally, metriclearning methods often learn a discriminative metric for simi-
larity measurement with raw patches or generated descriptors
as inputs. By contrast, descriptor learning tends to generatethe descriptor representation from raw images or patches.
Such a process requires a measurement method, such as L2
distance or trained metric network, for similarity evaluation.In contrast with single metric learning, the use of CNNs togenerate description vectors is more ﬂexible and may save
time by avoiding repeated computation when a large number
of candidate patches are available for correspondence search.Deep learning has achieved satisfying performance in feature
description due to its strong ability in information extraction
and representation.
Descriptors with deep learning techniques can be regarded
as an extension of those based on classical learning (Schon-
berger et al. 2017 ). For instance, the Siamese structure in
Chopra et al. ( 2005 ) and the commonly used loss func-
123

==== Page 13 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 35
tions, such as hinge, Siamese, triplet, ranking, and contrastive
losses, have been borrowed and modiﬁed in recent deepmethods. Speciﬁcally, Zagoruyko and Komodakis ( 2015 )
proposed their DeepCompare and demonstrated the mech-
anism by which to directly learn from raw image pixels witha general patch similarity function. In such scenario, variousSiamese-type CNN models are applied to encode the sim-
ilarity function. These models are then trained to identify
the positive and negative image patch pairs. The attempteddifferent network structures include Siamese with shared
or unshared weights and central-surround form. MatchNet
(Han et al. 2015 ) is proposed to simultaneously learn the
descriptor and metric. Such a technique is implemented by
cascading a Siamese-like description network and fully con-
volutional decision network. The task is converted into aclassiﬁcation problem under a cross-entropy loss. DeepDesc(Simo-Serra et al. 2015 ) uses CNNs to learn discriminant
patch representations together with L2 distance measuring.
In particular, it trains a Siamese network with pairs of posi-tive and negative patches by minimizing the pairwise hinge
loss, and the proposed hard negative mining strategy has
alleviated the unbalanced positive and negative samples.Consequently, the description performance is siginiﬁcantly
enhanced. Wang et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a novel deep rank-
ing model to learn ﬁne-grained image similarity. The modelemploys a triplet-based hinge loss and ranking function tocharacterize ﬁne-grained image similarity relationships. A
multiscale neural network architecture is utilized to capture
the global visual properties and image semantics.
Kumar et al. ( 2016 ) ﬁrst used the global loss to enlarge
the distance margin between positive and negative patch
pairs. It is implemented through triplet and Siamese networkstrained with a combination of triplet and global losses. TFeat
(Balntas et al. 2016b ) proposes to utilize triplets of training
samples for CNN-based patch description and matching. It isimplemented with shallow convolutional networks and fasthard negative mining strategy. In L2Net (Tian et al. 2017 ),
Tian et al. applied a progressive sampling strategy to optimize
the relative distance-based loss function in the Euclideanspace. The authors of that work considered the intermediate
feature map and compactness of descriptor to achieve bet-
ter performance. HardNet (Mishchuk et al. 2017 ) achieves
better improvement than L2Net by using a simple hinge
triplet loss with the “hardest-within-batch” mining. PN-Net
(Balntas et al. 2016a ) uses ideas introduced in the ﬁeld of
distance metric learning and online boosting by simultane-ously training with positive and negative constraints. The
proposed SoftPN loss function exhibits faster convergence
and lower error than hinge loss or SoftMax ratio (Wang et al.2014 ; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2015 ). Zhang et al. ( 2017c )
trained their networks by using their proposed global orthog-
onal regularization together with triplet loss for encouragingthe descriptor to be sufﬁciently “spread out”. It was carried
out to fully utilize the descriptor space.
Descriptor learning based on average precision attention
(He et al. 2018 ), introduces a general-purpose learning to
rank formulation. This approach is deﬁned to a constraintwherein the true matches should be ranked above all falsepath matches and is optimized on the basis of the binary
and real-value local feature descriptors. BinGAN (Zieba
et al. 2018 ) proposes a regularization method for genera-
tive adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014 ) to learn
discriminative yet compact binary representations of image
patches. In comparison, other methods focused on binarydescriptor learning are proposed in Erin Liong et al. ( 2015 ),
Lin et al. ( 2016a ) and Duan et al. ( 2017 ). Except for loss
function, network structure, regularization and hard nega-tive mining, Wei et al. ( 2018 ) learned a discriminative deep
descriptor by using kernelized subspace pooling. Tian et al.
(2019 ) used second-order similarity in their SOSNet. In Con-
textDesc, a more recent method, Luo et al. ( 2019 ) combined
the local patch similarity constraint with the spatial geomet-
rical constraint of interest point to train their networks, which
largely improves the matching performance.
1
As mentioned in the CNN-based detectors, an increas-
ing number of end-to-end learning methods integrate the
feature description together with the detectors into the com-plete matching pipeline. These methods are similar to thosethat have been singly designed for the description reviewed
above. The main difference may lie on the way of training and
the design of the entire network structure. The core challengeis to make the whole process differentiable and trainable. For
example, LIFT (Yi et al. 2016 ) attempts to simultaneously
implement keypoint detection, orientation estimation, andfeature description, by end-to-end CNN networks.
SuperPoint (DeTone et al. 2018 ) proposes a self-supervised
framework for training interest point detectors and descrip-tors for multiple view geometrical problems. The fully con-volutional model operates on full-sized images and jointly
computes pixel-level interest point locations and associated
descriptors, which is in contrast with path-based networks.LF-Net (Ono et al. 2018 ) devises a two-branch setup and cre-
ates virtual target responses iteratively to allow training from
scratch without handcrafted priors. This technique realizesfeature map generation, scale-invariant keypoint detection
using top K selection and NMS, orientation estimation, and
descriptor extraction. In LF-Net, the target function includesimage level loss (satisfying additional constraints amongimage pairs, depth map, and essential matrix), patch-wise
loss (learning keypoints that are good for matching and
involves the orientation and scale component geometric con-sistency), and triplet loss for descriptor learning.
1https://image-matching-workshop.github.io/leaderboard/ .
123

==== Page 14 ====
36 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Subsequently, RF-Net (Shen et al. 2019 ) creates an end-
to-end trainable matching framework that is modiﬁed fromthe LF-Net structure. First, the constructed receptive feature
maps lead to effective keypoint detection. Second, a general
loss function term, that is, neighbor mask, facilitates trainingpatch selection to enhance the stability in descriptor train-ing. D2-Net (Dusmanu et al. 2019 ) uses a single CNN to
play a dual role: simultaneously achieving a dense feature
descriptor and a feature detector. In Bhowmik et al. ( 2020 ),
a keypoint selection and descriptor matching are optimized
under high-level vision tasks by using principles from rein-
forcement learning. In addition, Li et al. ( 2020 ) introduced
dual-resolution correspondence networks to obtain pixel-
wise correspondences in coarse-to-ﬁne manner by extracting
different resolution feature maps.
Except for feature matching for the same target or scene,
semantic matching for images that are captured from sim-
ilar targets/scenes has also been studied using CNNs and
distinct promotion has been achieved. The semantic match-ing problem may pose a challenge for handcrafted methods
due to the required understanding of semantic similarity. To
this end, UCN (Choy et al. 2016 ) uses deep metric learning
to directly learn a feature space that preserves either geo-
metric or semantic similarity. The use of such an approach
also helps generate dense and accurate correspondences foreither geometric or semantic correspondence tasks. Specif-ically, UCN implements a fully convolutional architecture
with a correspondence contrastive loss for fast training and
testing, and proposes a convolutional spatial transformer forlocal patch normalization. NCN (Rocco et al. 2018 )d e v e l -
ops an end-to-end trainable CNN architecture based on the
classic idea of disambiguating feature matching by usingsemi-local constraints to ﬁnd reliable dense correspondences
between a pair of images. This framework identiﬁes sets
of spatially consistent matches by analyzing the neighbor-ing consensus patterns for a global geometric model. Themodel can be efﬁciently trained via weak supervision with-
out any manual annotations of point correspondences. This
type of framework can be applied for both category-level andinstance-level matching tasks, and other similar methods are
presented in Han et al. ( 2017 ), Plötz and Roth ( 2018 ), Chen
et al. ( 2018 ), Laskar and Kannala ( 2018 ), Kim et al. ( 2018 ,
2020 ), Ufer and Ommer ( 2017 ) and Wang et al. ( 2018 ).
3.4 3-D Feature Descriptors
Extensive studies on 3-D feature descriptors have been con-
ducted. As previously mentioned, many researchers have
turned their attention to deep learning paradigm due toits revolutionary success in numerous different areas. This
fact motivates us to categorize modern descriptors into two
groups, i.e. handcrafted and learning-based ones. Guo et al.(2016 ) presented a comprehensive performance evaluationof conventional handcrafted 3-D feature descriptors, while
the learning-based methods are left out. In the following sec-tion, we provide a brief introduction of the state-of-the-art
handcrafted descriptors and the learning-based ones.
3.4.1 Handcrafted 3-D Descriptors
Guo et al. ( 2016 ) divided the handcrafted descriptors into
spatial distribution histogram - and geometric attribute his-
togram -based descriptors, with the former representing the
local feature by histograms that encode spatial distribu-
tions of the points in the support region. In general, thelocal reference frame/axis is constructed for each keypoint.Accordingly, the 3-D support region is partitioned into bins
to form a histogram. The values of each bin are calcu-
lated by accumulating the spatial distribution measurements.Some representative work include spin image (Johnson and
Hebert 1999 ), 3-D shape context (Frome et al. 2004 ), unique
shape context (Tombari et al. 2010a ), rotational projection
statistics (Guo et al. 2013 ) and tri-spin-image (Guo et al.
2015 ). The spatial distribution histogram descriptors repre-
sent the local features by generating histograms from thestatistics of geometric attributes (e.g., normals, curvatures)in the support region. These histograms include local sur-
face patch (Chen and Bhanu 2007 ), THRIFT (Flint et al.
2007 ), point feature histogram (Rusu et al. 2008 ), fast point
feature histogram (Rusu et al. 2009 ) and signature of his-
togram of orientations (Tombari et al. 2010b ). Apart from the
geometric attribute and spatial distribution histogram-baseddescriptors, Zaharescu et al. ( 2009 ) introduced the Mesh-
HoG descriptor, which is analogous to SIFT (Lowe 2004 ),
and uses gradient information to generate a histogram.
The spectral descriptors, such as global point signature
(Rustamov 2007 ), HKS (Sun et al. 2009 ) and wave kernel
signature (WKS) (Aubry et al. 2011 ), also make up an impor-
tant category in this area. The descriptors are obtained fromthe spectral decomposition of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
associated with the shape. The Global Point Signature (Rus-
tamov 2007 ) utilizes the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of
the Laplace–Beltrami operator on the shape to represent the
local feature of points. The HKS (Sun et al. 2009 ) and WKS
(Aubry et al. 2011 ) are based on the heat diffusion process
and the temporal evolution of quantum mechanical particleson the shape, respectively.
3.4.2 Learning-Based 3D Descriptors
Efforts have also been devoted to generalizing spectral
descriptors by using different learning schemes. Litman andBronstein ( 2014 ) generalized the spectral descriptors to a
generic family and proposed to learn from examples for
obtaining optimized descriptors for a speciﬁc task. The learn-ing scheme resembles the spirit of Wiener ﬁlter in signal
123

==== Page 15 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 37
processing. Rodolà et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a learning method
that enables the wave kernel descriptor to recognize a broaderclass of deformations from the example set by using the
random forest classiﬁer. Windheuser et al. ( 2014 ) proposed
a metric learning method to improve the representation ofthe spectral descriptors. Modern deep learning techniqueshave also been successfully applied. Masci et al. ( 2015 )p r o -
posed the ﬁrst attempt and introduced a generalization of the
CNN paradigm to non-Euclidean manifolds for shape corre-spondences. Subsequently, Boscaini et al. proposed to learn
descriptors by spectral convolutional networks (Boscaini
et al. 2015 ), and anisotropic CNNs (Boscaini et al. 2016 ).
Monti et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a uniﬁed framework for gener-
alizing CNN architectures to non-Euclidean domains (graphs
and manifolds). Xie et al. ( 2016 ) constructed a deep metric
network to form a binary spectral shape descriptor for shapecharacterization. The input is based on the eigenvalue decom-
position of the Laplace-Beltrami operator.
In the spatial domain, the differences of various deep
learning methods often lie in the representation of the con-
sumed data. Wei et al. ( 2016 ) trained a deep CNN on the
depth map representation of shapes to ﬁnd correspondences.Zeng et al. ( 2017 ) proposed to use a 3D deep CNN for
learning a local volumetric patch descriptor. This descriptor
consumes a voxel grid of truncated distance function val-ues of the local region. Elbaz et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a deep
neural network auto-encoder to address the 3D matching
problem. The authors used a random sphere cover set algo-
rithm to detect feature points and project each local regioninto a depth map as input to the neural network for producing
descriptors. Khoury et al. ( 2017 ) parameterized the input by
using spherical histograms centered at each point and uti-lized fully connected networks to generate low-dimensional
descriptors. Georgakis et al. ( 2018 ) recently employed a
Siamese architecture network that processes depth maps.Zhou et al. ( 2018 ) proposed to learn from the images of
multiple views for the description of 3D keypoints. Wang
et al. ( 2018b ) parameterized the multiscale localized neigh-
borhoods of a keypoint into regular 2D grids as the input of atriplet-architecture CNN. Deng et al. ( 2018 ) ﬁrst presented an
order-free network on the basis of PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a ).
This network can consume raw point clouds to exploit thefull sparsity in the 3D matching task.
3.5 Summary
As previously mentioned, the image patch descriptor is des-
ignated to enable accurate and effective correspondence
establishment between detected feature points. The objectiveis to transform the original image information into a discrim-
inative and stable representation that makes the two matched
features as close as possible, while the unmatched ones are farapart. To this end, the descriptors should be easy to computewith low computation and storage request. These descriptors
should also maintain their discriminative and invariant fea-tures against serious deformations and imaging conditions. In
the following section, we provide a comprehensive analysis
of the handcrafted descriptors and introduce the mechanismby which the learning-based methods can partly address thesechallenges and achieve promising performance.
Following the construction procedure of traditional local
descriptors, the ﬁrst step is to extract the low-level infor-mation, which can be brieﬂy classiﬁed into image gradient
and intensity. Speciﬁcally, the gradient information can be
regarded as a higher order image cue than raw intensity. Thepooling strategy together with a histogram or statistic manner
is often required to form a ﬂoat descriptor. Thus, this strategy
is more invariant to geometrical transformations (perhaps thepool and statistic strategy make it more independent to pixelposition and geometrical variety). Nevertheless, it requires
additional computation in gradient calculation and statistics
as well as the distance measure of ﬂoat-type data. LBP-basedmethods typically have high discriminative ability and good
robustness to illumination change and image contrast, which
are frequently used in texture representation and face recog-nition.
In contrast with the gradient and/or statistic-based meth-
ods, the simple comparison strategy on image intensity wouldsacriﬁce great discrimination and robustness. A classicalmachine learning technique is often designed to identify sub-
stantial useful bits. These types of methods are typically in
need of the reference orientation estimation to achieve rota-tion invariant, which appears to be a major error source for
most existing methods. However, the use of intensity order
is intrinsically invariant to rotation and intensity changeswithout any geometrical estimation. It can achieve promising
performance due to the combination of the use of intensity
order and statistical strategy.
Learning-based methods have largely avoided the require-
ment of manual experience and knowledge priori. They
automatically optimize and obtain the optimal parameters
and directly construct the wanted descriptor. Traditionallearning methods aim to enable the generated descriptors
superior in terms of efﬁciency, low storage, and discrimina-
tion. However, the used image cues, such as intensity andgradient, are still with low order, and they highly rely on the
framework in handcrafted methods. Nevertheless, the target
function, training skills, and datasets that appeared at thattime are signiﬁcant and useful for designing better learning-based methods. Thus, the emergence of deep learning has
further advanced this procedure in traditional learning.
Several skills can help improve the discriminability and
robustness of deep descriptors. On the one hand, the central-
surround and triplet (even more) structure may provide
substantial signiﬁcant information to learn. The hard nega-tive sample mining strategy would make the structure focused
123

==== Page 16 ====
38 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
on hard samples (may result in overﬁtting as well) and thus
can achieve better matching performance. More reliable lossfunctions should also be designed according to the basic and
intrinsic properties of description task. For instance, recently
designed triplet, ranking, contrastive, and global losses, aresuperior than early simple hinge and cross-entropy losses.On the other hand, valid and comprehensive ground truth
datasets are also required for better performance in match-
ing and generalization ability. Training a descriptor togetherwith detectors into the complete matching pipeline through
an end-to-end manner has also drawn great attention at
present. This can jointly optimize the detector and descriptor,thus can achieve encouraging performance, and the unsu-
pervised training in it can perform without the need of any
labeled ground truth patch data. The current descriptors canachieve signiﬁcant matching performance across image pairsof appearance variances, such as illumination and day-night,
by using deep techniques. However, these descriptors still
suffer from serious geometrical deformation, such as largerotation or low-overlapped image pair. The low generaliza-
tion ability for new types of data is also another limitation.
The overall performance of descriptor also depends on
the appropriate detector. Different combinations of detectors
and descriptors may result in varied matching performance.
For this reason, the descriptors should be chosen accordingto a speciﬁc task and the type of image data. The advanceddescriptors using deep learning have shown great potential.
4 Matching Methods
The matching task aims to establish the correct image pixelor point correspondences between two images with or with-
out using the feature detection and/or description. This task
has played a signiﬁcant role for the entire image matchingpipeline. Different deﬁnitions of matching task are intro-
duced for speciﬁc applications and scenarios and may show
their own strengths.
4.1 Overview of Matching Methods
Over the past decades in the image matching community,existing methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two cat-
egories, saying area-based and feature-based (Zitova and
Flusser 2003 ; Litjens et al. 2017 ). Area-based methods
typically refer to dense matching, also known as image regis-
tration, which usually do not detect features. In feature-based
methods, when the feature points and their local descriptorsare extracted from the image pairs, the image matching task
could be converted into matching them in indirect and direct
ways, which correspond to the use and non-use of the localimage descriptors.Direct feature matching aims to establish the corre-
spondences from two given feature sets by directly usingthe spatial geometrical relations and optimization meth-
ods, which can be roughly classiﬁed into graph matching
and point set registration . In comparison, indirect feature
matching methods typically casts the matching task into atwo-stage problem. Such task commonly starts with estab-
lishing preliminary correspondences through the similarity
of descriptors with the distance judging from the measur-ing space. Thereafter, the false matches are removed from
the putative match sets by using extra local and/or global
geometrical constraints. Dense matching from sparse featurecorrespondences often requires a post-process of transform
model estimation, followed by image resampling and inter-
polation (warping).
We will separate the learning-based methods from area-
and feature-based methods and introduce them in a new sub-
section. From the aspect of input data, learning from images
and point data are the two main forms in learning-basedmatching. These methods can achieve better performance
for some scenarios compared to the traditional ones. The
matching task in 3-D cases is also brieﬂy introduced in thissection.
4.2 Area-Based Matching
Area-based methods aim for image registration and estab-
lish dense pixel correspondences by directly using the pixel
intensity of the entire image. A similarity metric togetherwith an optimization method is in need for geometrical
transformation estimation and common area alignment by
minimizing the overall dissimilarity between the target andwarped moving images. Consequently, several manual simi-larity metrics are frequently used, including correlation-like,
domain transformation, and mutual information (MI) meth-
ods. The optimization methods and transform models arealso required to perform the ﬁnal registration task (Zitova
and Flusser 2003 ).
In the image registration community, correlation-like
methods, which are regarded as a classical representative in
area-based methods, correspond two images by maximizing
the similarities of two sliding windows (Zitova and Flusser2003 ;L ie ta l . 2015 ). For example, the maximum correlation
of wavelet features has been developed for automatic regis-
tration (Le Moigne et al. 2002 ). However, this type of method
may greatly suffer from the serious image deformations (canonly be successfully applied when slight rotation and scaling
are presented), windows containing a smooth area without
any prominent details, and huge computational burden.
Domain transformed methods tend to align two images
on the basis of converting the original images into another
domain, such as phase correlation based on Fourier shift the-orem (Reddy and Chatterji 1996 ; Liu et al. 2005 ; Chen et al.
123

==== Page 17 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 39
1994 ; Takita et al. 2003 ; Foroosh et al. 2002 ), and Walsh
transform-based methods (Lazaridis and Petrou 2006 ;P a n
et al. 2008 ). Such methods are robust against the correlated
and frequency-dependent noise and non-uniform, time vary-
ing illumination disturbances. Nevertheless, these methodshave some limitations in case of image pairs with signiﬁ-cantly different spectral contents and small overlap area.
Based on information theory, the MI, such as non-rigid
image registration using MI together with B-splines (Kleinet al. 2007 ) and conditional MI (Loeckx et al. 2009 ), is a mea-
surement of statistical dependency between two images and
works with the entire image (Maes et al. 1997 ). Thus, MI is
particularly suitable for the registration of multi-modalities
(Chen et al. 2003a ,b; Johnson et al. 2001 ). Recently, Cao
et al. ( 2020 ) proposed a structure consistency boosting trans-
form to enhance the structural similarity in multi-spectraland multi-modal image registration problem, thus avoiding
spectral information distortion. However, the MI exhibits
difﬁculty in determining the global maximum of the entiresearching space, inevitably reducing its robustness. More-
over, optimization methods (e.g., continuous optimization,
discrete optimization, and their hybrid form) and transfor-mation models (e.g., rigid, afﬁne, thin plate spline (TPS),
elastic body, and diffusion models) are considered sufﬁ-
ciently mature. Please refer to Zitova and Flusser ( 2003 ),
Dawn et al. ( 2010 ), Sotiras et al. ( 2013 ) and Ferrante and
Paragios ( 2017 ) for representative literature and further
details.
The area-based methods are acceptable for medical or
remote sensing image registration, which many feature-based
methods are not workable anymore because the images often
contain less textural details and large variance of imageappearance due to the different imaging sensors. However,
the area-based methods may greatly suffer from the serious
geometrical transformations and local deformations. Whiledeep learning has proven its efﬁcacy, in which the early onesare usually employed as a direct extension of the classical
registration framework, and later ones use a reinforcement
learning paradigm to iteratively estimate the transformation,even directly estimate the deformative ﬁeld in an end-to-end
manner. The area-based matching with learning strategies
will be reviewed in the part of learning-based matching.
4.3 Graph Matching Methods
Given the feature points extracted from an image, we canconstruct a graph by associating each feature point to a
node and specifying edges. This procedure naturally pro-
vides convenience to investigate the intrinsic structure ofimage data, especially for the matching problem. By this
deﬁnition, graph matching (GM) refers to the establishment
of node-to-node correspondences between two or multiplegraphs. For its importance and fundamental challenge, GMhas been a long-standing research area over decades and is
still of great interest to researchers. From the problem settingperspective, GM can be divided into two categories, namely,
exact and inexact matching. Exact matching methods con-
sider GM to be a special case of the graph or subgraphisomorphism problem. It aims to ﬁnd the bijection of twobinary (sub)graphs; consequently, all edges are strictly pre-
served babai2018groups,cook2006mining,levi1973note ). In
fact, this requirement is too strict for real-world tasks likecomputer vision. Hence researchers often resort to inexact
matching with weighted attributes on nodes and edges. Such
an approach enjoys good ﬂexibility and utility in practice.Therefore, we primarily concentrate on the review of inexact
matching methods in this survey.
To some extent, GM possesses a simple yet general for-
mulation of the feature matching problem, which encodesthe geometrical cues into the node afﬁnities (ﬁrst-order rela-
tions) and edge afﬁnities (second-order relations) to deduce
the true correspondences between two graphs. Aside from thegeometrical cues, the high-level information of feature points
can also be incorporated in GM (e.g. descriptor similarities as
node afﬁnities). This information only serves as a supplemen-tary one and is not necessarily required. In the general and
recent form, GM can be formulated as a Quadratic Assign-
ment Problem (QAP) (Loiola et al. 2007 ). Although different
forms exist in the literature, the main body of research hasfocused on the Lawler’s QAP (Lawler 1963 ). Given two
graphs G
1=(V1,E1)andG2=(V2,E2), where |V1|=n1,
|V2|=n2, each node vi∈V1orvj∈V2represents a feature
point, and each edge ei∈E1orej∈E2is deﬁned over a
pair of nodes. Without loss of generality we assume n1≥n2,
Lawler’s QAP formulation of GM then can be written as:
max J(X)=vec(X)/latticetopKvec(X),
s.t.X∈{0,1}n1×n2,X1n2≤1n1,X/latticetop1n1=1n2,(1)
where Xdenotes the permutation matrix, i.e. Xij=1 indi-
cates that node vi∈V1corresponds to node vj∈V2and
Xij=0 otherwise, vec (X)denotes the column-wise vector-
ization of X, and 1n1and 1n2respectively denote the column
vectors of all ones, Kdenotes the afﬁnity matrix, whose
diagonal and non-diagonal entries encode the ﬁrst-order and
second-order edge afﬁnities between the two graphs. Nouniversal approach can be utilized to construct the afﬁnity
matrix; however, a simple strategy is to use the similarities
of feature descriptors [e.g. Shape Context (Belongie et al.2001 )] and differences of edge length to determine node and
edge afﬁnities.
The Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP is another popular for-
mulation. The form is different from Lawler’s QAP asexpressed as:
J(X)=tr(K
/latticetop
pX)+tr(A1XA 2X/latticetop), (2)
123

==== Page 18 ====
40 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
where A1and A2are the weighted adjacency matrices of
the two graphs, respectively, and Kpis the node afﬁnity
matrix. In Zhou and De la Torre ( 2015 ), the relation between
Koopmans–Beckmann’s and Lawler’s QAP has been inves-
tigated, which reveals that Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP canbe regarded as a special case of Lawler’s.
The GM problem is translated into ﬁnding the optimal
one-to-one correspondences Xthat maximizes the overall
afﬁnity score J(X). As a combinatorial QAP problem in
general, GM is known to be NP-hard. Most methods relax
the stringent constraints and provide approximate solutions
in an affordable over head. In this regard, many relaxationstrategies are introduced in the literature, thereby leading to
a variety of GM solvers. In the following, we brieﬂy review
the inﬂuential ones through the development course of GM.
4.3.1 Spectral Relaxations
The ﬁrst group of methods follow a strategy of spectral relax-
ation. Leordeanu and Hebert ( 2005 ) proposed to replace the
one-to-one mapping constraint and the binary constraint by
constraining /bardblvec(X)/bardbl
2
2=1. In this case, the solution X
can be obtained by solving an eigenvector problem. Each
element in Xis interpreted as the association of one corre-
spondence with the optimal cluster (true correspondences).A discretization strategy is used to enforce the mapping con-straints. The idea was later improved by Cour et al. ( 2007 ),
who explicitly considered enforcing the one-to-one map-
ping constraint to achieve tighter relaxation. This methodcan also be solved in closed forms as an eigenvector prob-
lem. Liu and Yan ( 2010 ) proposed to detect multiple visual
patterns by using a l
1-norm-based spectral relaxation tech-
nique, i.e. constraining /bardblvec(X)/bardbl1=1. The solution can be
efﬁciently obtained by replicator equation from evolution-
ary game theory. Jiang et al. ( 2014 ) presented a non-negative
matrix factorization technique, which extends the constraintas/bardblvec(X)/bardbl
p=1,p∈[1,2]. Meanwhile, Egozi et al.
(2012 ) presented a fairly different approach. In their work,
they provided a probabilistic interpretation of spectral match-ing schemes and derived a novel probabilistic matching
scheme wherein the afﬁnity matrix is also updated in the
iteration process. With Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP for-mulation, the spectral methods (Umeyama 1988 ; Scott and
Longuet-Higgins 1991 ; Shapiro and Brady 1992 ; Caelli and
Kosinov 2004 ) relax Xto be orthogonal, i.e. X
/latticetopX=I.T h i s
expression can be solved in a closed form as an eigenvalueproblem. These methods possess the merit of efﬁciency due
to the loose relaxation. However, the accuracy is not advan-
taged in general.4.3.2 Convex Relaxations
Many studies have turned to investigating convex relaxations
of the original problem to obtain theoretical advantages for
solving the non-convex QAP issue. Strong convex relax-ations can be obtained by lifting methods that add auxiliaryvariables representing quadratic monomials in the original
variables. This enables the addition of additional convex con-
straints on the lifted variables. Semi-deﬁnite programming(SDP) is a general tool for combinatorial problems and has
been applied to solving GM (Schellewald and Schnörr 2005 ;
Torr 2003 ; Zhao et al. 1998 ; Kezurer et al. 2015 ). The SDP
relaxation is quite tight and allows ﬁnding a strong approxi-
mation in polynomial time. However, the high computational
cost prohibits its scalability. Some other lifting methods withlinear programming relaxations have also been developed(Almohamad and Duffuaa 1993 ; Adams and Johnson 1994 ).
The dual problem of the LP relaxations are recently exten-
sively considered to solve GM (Swoboda et al. 2017 ; Chen
and Koltun 2015 ; Swoboda et al. 2017 ; Torresani et al. 2012 ;
Zhang et al. 2016 ), which has a strong link with the MAP
inference algorithms.
4.3.3 Convex-to-Concave Relaxations
One useful strategy is to utilize the path-following technique.
This approach gradually achieves a convex-to-concave pro-
cedure of the original problem to ﬁnally ﬁnd a good solution
with the constraints satisﬁed. The computational complex-ity is also much lower than those of the lifting methods.
Zaslavskiy et al. ( 2009 ) adopted this strategy for GM prob-
lem with Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP formulation, whichis extended by to directed graphs (Liu et al. 2012b ) and par-
tial matching (Liu and Qiao 2014 ). Zhou and De la Torre
(2015 ) presented a uniﬁed framework of GM based on the
factorization of afﬁnity matrix based on Lawler’s QAP . Sucha framework effectively reduces the computational complex-
ity and reveals the relation between Koopmans–Beckmann’s
and Lawler’s QAPs. The (advanced) doubly stochastic (DS)relaxation methods improve upon these approaches by iden-
tifying tighter formulations (Fogel et al. 2013 ; Dym et al.
2017 ; Bernard et al. 2018 ), where the tightness of spectral,
SDP , and DS relaxation is discussed and theoretically veri-
ﬁed.
123

==== Page 19 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 41
4.3.4 Continuous Relaxations
A large volume of GM methods has focused on devising accu-
rate or efﬁcient algorithms to solve the QAP approximately,
albeit with no global optimality guarantee. In most cases, X
is simply relaxed to be continuous, as a DS matrix. Gold andRangarajan ( 1996 ) proposed a graduated assignment algo-
rithm, which performs gradient ascent on the relaxed problem
under an annealing schedule. The convergence of this methodhas been revisited and improved by Tian et al. ( 2012 ) with a
soft constrained mechanism. van Wyk and van Wyk ( 2004 )
proposed to enforce the one-to-one mapping constraint bysuccessively projecting onto the convex set of the desired
integer constraints. Leordeanu et al. ( 2009 ) proposed an efﬁ-
cient algorithm that optimizes in the (quasi) discrete domainvia solving a sequence of linear assignment problems. Manyfamous optimization techniques, such as ADMM (Lê-Huu
and Paragios 2017 ), tabu search (Adamczewski et al. 2015 )
and multiplicative update algorithm (Jiang et al. 2017a ), have
also been tested. Recent studies also include Jiang et al.
(2017b ) and Y u et al. ( 2018 ), which introduce new schemes
to asymptotically approximate the original QAP , and Maronand Lipman ( 2018 ), which presents a new (probably) concave
relaxation technique. Y u et al. ( 2020b ) introduced a determi-
nant regularization technique together with gradient-basedoptimization to relax this problem into continuous domain.
4.3.5 Multi-graph Matching
In contrast to the classic two-graph matching setting, jointly
matching a batch of graphs with consistent correspondences,
i.e. multi-graph matching, has recently drawn increasingattention due to its methodological advantage and potentialto incorporate cross-graph information. Arguably, one cen-
tral issue of multi-graph matching lies in the enforcement
of cycle-consistency for a feasible solution. In general, thisconcept refers to the fact that the bijection correspondence
between two graphs shall be consistent with a derived one
through an intermediate graph. Put it more concretely, forany pair of graphs G
aand Gbwith their node correspon-
dence matrix Xab,l e tGcbe an intermediate graph, the cycle
consistency constraint is enforced: XacXcb=Xab, where
Xacand Xcbare the matching solutions of Gaand Gcand
GcandGb, respectively.
Existing multi-graph matching methods can be roughly
grouped into three lines of works. For the methods fallinginto the ﬁrst group, the multi-graph matching problem is
solved by an iterative procedure for computing a number of
two-graph matching tasks (Yan et al. 2013 ,2014 ,2015a ,b;
Jiang et al. 2020b ). In each iteration, a two-graph matching
solution is computed to locally maximize the afﬁnity score,
which can leverage off-the-shelf pairwise matching solvers,such as in Jiang et al. ( 2020b ), both ofﬂine batch mode andonline setting are considered to explore the concept of cycle-
consistency over pairwise matching. Another body of worktakes the initial (noisy) pairwise matching result as input, and
aims to recover a globally consistent pairwise matching set
(Kim et al. 2012 ; Pachauri et al. 2013 ; Huang and Guibas
2013 ; Chen et al. 2014 ; Zhou et al. 2015 ; Wang et al. 2018 ;
Hu et al. 2018 ). In these methods, matching over all graphs
is jointly and equally considered to form a bulk matrix that
includes all pairwise matchings. The intrinsic structure ofthis matrix induced by the matching problem, such as cycle-
consistency, is investigated. The last group utilizes clustering
or low rank recovery techniques to solve multi-graph match-ing, which provides a new perspective in the feature space
for the problem (Zeng et al. 2012 ; Yan et al. 2015c ,2016a ;
Tron et al. 2017 ). More recently, the multi-graph matching
problem has been considered in the optimization frameworkwith a theoretically well-grounded convex relaxation (Swo-
boda et al. 2019 ), or with projected power iterations to search
for a feasible solution (Bernard et al. 2019 ).
4.3.6 Other Paradigms
Although the QAP formulation is prevalent in GM, the way
of formulation is not unique. Numerous methods deal with
GM from different perspectives or paradigms and also forman important category in this ﬁeld.
Cho et al. ( 2010 ) provided a random walk view of GM
and devised a technique to obtain solution by simulating
random walks on the association graph. Lee et al. ( 2010 )
and Suh et al. ( 2012 ) introduced Monte Carlo methods to
improve the matching robustness. Cho and Lee ( 2012 ) further
devised a progressive GM method, which combines pro-gression of graphs with matching of graphs to reduce the
computational complexity. Wang et al. ( 2018a ) proposed to
use a functional representation of graphs and conduct match-ing by minimizing the discrepancy between the original andthe transformed graphs. Subsequently, in order to suppress
the matching of outliers, Wang et al. ( 2020 ) assigned zero-
valued vectors to the potential outliers in the obtained optimalcorrespondence matrix. The afﬁnity matrix plays a key role in
the GM problem. However, the handcrafted Kis vulnerable
to scale and rotation differences. To this end, unsupervised(Leordeanu et al. 2012 ) and supervised (Caetano et al. 2009 )
methods are devised to learn K. Zanﬁr and Sminchisescu
(2018 ) recently addressed this issue with an end-to-end deep
learning scheme. Wang et al. (
2020 ) introduced a fully train-
able framework for graph matching. In this framework, they
utilized a graph network block module and simultaneously
considered the learning of node/edge afﬁnities and the solv-ing of combinatorial optimization.
123

==== Page 20 ====
42 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
The extension of GM to a high-order formulation is a
natural way to improve the robustness by mostly exploringthe geometrical cues. This leads to a tensor-based objective
(Lee et al. 2011 ) also called hypergraph matching:
J
H(X)=H⊗1x⊗2x...⊗mx, (3)
where mis the order of afﬁnities, H denotes the m-order tensor
encoding the afﬁnities between hyperedges in the graphs, ⊗k
is the tensor product, and x=vec(X). Representative studies
on hypergraph matching include Zass and Shashua ( 2008 ),
Chertok and Keller ( 2010 ), Lee et al. ( 2011 ), Chang and
Kimia ( 2011 ), Duchenne et al. ( 2011 ) and Yan et al. ( 2015d ).
4.4 Point Set Registration Methods
Point set registration (PSR) aims to estimate the spatial trans-
formation that optimally aligns two point sets. In feature
matching, different formulations are adopted in PSR and GM.
For two point sets, GM methods determine the alignmentvia maximizing the overall afﬁnity score of unary corre-
spondence and pairwise correspondences. By contrast, PSR
methods determine the underlying global transformation.Given the two point sets {x
i}n1
i=1and{yi}n2
i=1, the general
conventional objective can be expressed as
min J(P,θ)=/summationdisplay
i,jpij/bardblyj−T(xi,θ)/bardbl2
2+g(P)
s.t.θ∈/Theta1,P∈{0,1}n1×n2,P1n2≤1n1,P/latticetop1n1≤1n2,(4)
where θdenotes the parameters of the predeﬁned transfor-
mation. The regularization term g(P)avoids trivial solutions,
such as P=0. Compared to GM, this model only repre-
sents the general principles, but does not necessarily cover
all the algorithms for PSR. For example, a probabilistic inter-
pretation or a density-based objective can be used, and theconstraints for Pmay be only partially imposed during opti-
mization, which all differ from the above formulation.
PSR poses a stronger assumption on the data, that is,
the existence of a global transformation between point sets,
which is the key feature that differentiates it from GM.
Although the generality is restricted, this assumption leads tolow computational complexity because of the few parametersneeded for global transformation models. A sophisticated
transformation model is developed from rigid to non-rigid
ones in order to enhance the generalization ability. V ariousschemes are also proposed to improve robustness against
degradations, such as noise, outliers, and missing points.
4.4.1 ICP and Its Variants
PSR has been an important research topic for the last few
decades in computer vision, and the iterative closest point(ICP) algorithm is a popular method (Besl and McKay 1992 ).
ICP iteratively alternates between hard assignments of cor-respondences for the closest points in two point sets and
the closed-form rigid transformation estimation until con-
vergence. The ICP algorithm is widely used as baselines dueto its simplicity and low computational complexity. How-ever, a good initialization is required because ICP is prone
to be trapped into local optima. Numerous studies, such as
EM-ICP (Granger and Pennec 2002 ), LM-ICP (Fitzgibbon
2003 ), and TriICP (Chetverikov et al. 2005 ), in the research
ﬁeld of PSR have been proposed to improve ICP . The reader
is referred to a recent survey (Pomerleau et al. 2013 )f o r
a detailed discussion of ICP’s variants. The robust point
matching (RPM) algorithm (Gold et al. 1998 ) are proposed
to overcome the ICP limitations; the soft assignment anddeterministic annealing strategy are adopted, and the rigidtransformation model is generalized to a non-rigid one by
using the thin-plate spline [TPS-RPM (Chui and Rangarajan
2003 )].
4.4.2 EM-Based Methods
RPM is also a representative of the EM-like PSR methods,
which form an important category in this ﬁeld. The EM-like
methods formulate PSR as an optimization problem of either
a weighted squared loss function or the log-likelihood max-imization of Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), and local
optimum is searched through EM or EM-like algorithms. The
posterior probability of each correspondence is computed inthe E-step, and the transformation is reﬁned in the M-step.
Sofka et al. ( 2007 ) investigated the modeling of uncertainty
in the registration process and presented a covariance drivencorrespondence method in an EM-like framework. Myro-nenko and Song ( 2010 ) proposed the well-known coherent
point drift (CPD) method in which a probabilistic framework
is established on the basis of GMM; here, the EM algo-rithm is utilized for maximum likelihood estimation of the
parameters. Horaud et al. ( 2011 ) developed an expectation
conditional maximization-based probabilistic method, whichallows the use of anisotropic covariance for the mixture
model components and improves over isotropic covariance
case. Ma et al. ( 2016b ) and Zhang et al. ( 2017a ) exploited the
uniﬁcation of local feature and global feature in the GMM-based probabilistic framework. Lawin et al. ( 2018 ) presented
a density adaptive PSR method via modeling the underlying
structure of the scene as a latent probability distribution.
4.4.3 Density-Based Methods
Density-based methods introduce generative models to the
PSR problem, in which no explicit point correspondence
is established. Each point set is represented by a densityfunction, such as GMM. Registration is achieved by the mini-
123

==== Page 21 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 43
mization of a statistical discrepancy measure between the two
density functions. Tsin and Kanade ( 2004 ) were the ﬁrst to
propose such a method and used kernel density functions to
model the point sets, and the discrepancy measure is deﬁned
as kernel correlation. Meanwhile, Glaunes et al. ( 2004 ) rep-
resented the point sets by using relaxed Dirac delta functions.They then determined the optimal diffeomorphic transforma-
tion that minimizes the distance of the two distributions. Jian
and V emuri ( 2011 ) extended this approach by using GMM-
based representation and minimizing the L2 error between
the densities. The authors also provided a uniﬁed framework
of density-based PSR. Many popular methods, includingMyronenko and Song ( 2010 ) and Tsin and Kanade ( 2004 ) can
be regarded as special cases in theory. Campbell and Peters-
son ( 2015 ) proposed to use a support vector parameterized
GMM for adaptive data representation. This approach canimprove the robustness of density-based methods to noise,
outliers, and occlusions. Recently, Liao et al. ( 2020 ) utilized
fuzzy clusters to represent a scanned point set, then registedtwo point sets by minimizing a fuzzy weighted sum of dis-
tances between their fuzzy cluster centers.
4.4.4 Optimization-Based Methods
A group of optimization-based methods have been proposed
as globally optimal solutions to alleviate the local optimumissue. These methods generally search in a limited transfor-
mation space for timing saving, such as rotation, translation,
and scaling. Stochastic optimization techniques, includinggenetic algorithms (Silva et al. 2005 ; Robertson and Fisher
2002 ), particle swarm optimization (Li et al. 2009 ), parti-
cle ﬁltering (Sandhu et al. 2010 ) and simulated annealing
schemes (Papazov and Burschka 2011 ; Blais and Levine
1995 ), are widely used, but no convergence is guaranteed.
Meanwhile, Branch and bound (BnB) is a well-established
optimization technique that can efﬁciently search the glob-ally optimal solution in the transformation space and form
the theoretical basis of many optimization-based methods,
including Li and Hartley ( 2007 ), Parra Bustos et al. ( 2014 ),
Campbell and Petersson ( 2016 ), Yang et al. ( 2016 ) and
Liu et al. ( 2018b ). In addition to these methods, Maron
et al. ( 2016 ) introduced a semideﬁnite programming (SDP)
relaxation-based method, in which a global solution is guar-anteed for isometric shape matching. Lian et al. ( 2017 )
formulated PSR as a concave QAP by eliminating the rigid
transformation variables, and BnB is utilized to achieve aglobally optimal solution. Yao et al. ( 2020 ) presented a
formulation for robust non-rigid PSR based on a globally
smooth robust estimator for data ﬁtting and regularization,which is optimized by majorization-minimization algorithm
to reduce each iteration in solving a simple least-squares
problem. Another method in Iglesias et al. ( 2020 )p r e s e n t sa
study of global optimality conditions for PSR with missingdata. This method applies Lagrangian duality to generate a
candidate solution for the primal problem thus enables it toobtain the corresponding dual variable in a closed form.
4.4.5 Miscellaneous Methods
Apart from the commonly used rigid model or non-rigid
transformation model based on TPS (Chui and Rangara-
jan 2003 ) or Gaussian radial basis functions (Myronenko
and Song 2010 ), additional complex deformations are also
considered in the literature. These models include simple
articulated extensions, such as Horaud et al. ( 2011 ) and Gao
and Tedrake ( 2019 ). A smooth locally afﬁne model is intro-
duced as the transformation model and developed under the
ICP framework in non-rigid ICP (Amberg et al. 2007 ), which
is also adopted in Li et al. ( 2008 ). However, this model should
be used in conjunction with sparse hand selected feature
correspondences as it allows many degrees of freedom. A
different linear skinning model, which does not require user’sinvolvement in the registration process, has been proposed
and applied in another work (Chang and Zwicker 2009 ).
Another line of PSR methods introduce shape descriptors
into the registration process. Local shape descriptors, suchas spin images (Johnson and Hebert 1999 ), shape contexts
(Belongie et al. 2001 ), integral volume (Gelfand et al. 2005 )
and point feature histograms (Rusu et al. 2009 ) are gener-
ated. Sparse feature correspondences are established by a
similarity constraint of descriptors. Subsequently, the under-
lying rigid transformation can be estimated using randomsampling consensus (RANSAC) (Fischler and Bolles 1981 )
or BnB search (Bazin et al. 2012 ). Ma et al. ( 2013b ) proposed
a robust algorithm based on the L
2Eestimator in a non-rigid
case.
Some new schemes for PSR based on different observa-
tions have emerged. Golyanik et al. ( 2016 ) modeled point set
as particles with gravity as attractive force, and registration isaccomplished by solving the differential equations of New-
tonian mechanics. Ma et al. ( 2015a ) and Wang et al. ( 2016 )
proposed the use of context-aware Gaussian ﬁelds to addressthe PSR problem. V ongkulbhisal et al. ( 2017 ,2018 ) proposed
the discriminative optimization method. This approach learns
the search direction from training data to guide optimizationwithout the need of deﬁning cost functions. Danelljan et al.(2016 ) and Park et al. ( 2017 ) considered the color informa-
tion of point sets, whereas Evangelidis and Horaud ( 2018 )
and Giraldo et al. ( 2017 ) addressed the problem of joint reg-
istration of multiple point sets.
4.5 Descriptor Matching with Mismatch Removal
Descriptor matching followed by mismatch removal, alsocalled indirect image matching, casts the matching task into atwo-stage problem. This method commonly starts with estab-
123

==== Page 22 ====
44 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
lishing preliminary correspondences through the similarity
of local image descriptors with the distance judging fromthe measuring space. Several common strategies, including
ﬁxed threshold (FT), nearest neighbor (NN) also called brute
force matching, mutual NN (MNN), and NN distance ratio(NNDR), are available for the construction of putative matchsets. Thereafter, the false matches are removed from the puta-
tive match sets by using extra local and/or global geometrical
constraints. We brieﬂy divide the mismatch removal meth-ods into resampling-based, non-parametric model-based, and
relaxed methods. In the following sections, we will introduce
these methods in detail and provide comprehensive analysis.
4.5.1 Putative Match Set Construction
Suppose that we have detected and extracted Mand Nlocal
features to be matched from the considering two images I
1
andI2. The descriptor matching stage operates by computing
the pairwise distance matrix with M×Nentries and then
selecting the potential true matches through the aforemen-
tioned rule.
The FT strategy considers the matches with their distances
below a ﬁxed threshold. However, this strategy can be sen-sitive and may incur numerous one-to-many matchings in
contrast to the one-to-one correspondence nature. This situ-
ation results in poor performance in feature matching task.The NN strategy can effectively deal with the data sensitivity
problem and recall more potential true matches. Such a strat-
egy has been applied in various descriptor matching methods,but it cannot avoid the one-to-many cases. In mutual NN
descriptor matching, each feature in I
1, looks for its NN in
I2(and vice versa), and the feature pairs that are mutual NN
become candidate matches in the putative match set. Thistype of strategy can obtain high ratio of correct matches but
may sacriﬁce many other true correspondences. The NNDR
considered that the distance difference between ﬁrst and sec-ond NN is signiﬁcant. Hence, the use of the distance ratio with
a predeﬁned threshold would obtain robust and promising
matching performance while not sacriﬁce many true matches.However, NNDR relies on the stable distance distribution
of these descriptors even though the method is widely used
and well performed in SIFT-like descriptor matching. In fact,NNDR is no longer applicable for descriptors of other types,such as binary or some learning based descriptors (Rublee
et al. 2011 ; Ono et al. 2018 ).
The optimal choice of these methods for descriptor match-
ing should rely on the property of descriptor and the speciﬁc
application. For example, the MNN is stricter than others with
high inlier ratio but may sacriﬁce many other potential truematches. By contrast, NN and NNDR tend to be more general
in feature matching task with relatively better performance.
Mikolajczyk and Schmid ( 2005 ) proposed a simple test about
these candidate match selection strategies. Although variousapproaches are available for putative feature correspondence
construction the use of only local appearance informationand simple similarity-based putative match selection strate-
gies, will unavoidably result in a large number of incorrect
matches, particularly when images undergo serious non-rigiddeformation, extreme viewpoint changes, low quality, and/orrepeated contents. Therefore, a robust, accurate, and efﬁcient
mismatch elimination method is urgently required in the sec-
ond stage to preserve as many true matches as possible whilekeeping the mismatch to a minimum by using additional geo-
metrical constraints.
4.5.2 Resampling-Based Methods
Resampling technique is (arguably) a prevalent paradigm and
is represented by the classic RANSAC algorithm (Fischlerand Bolles 1981 ). Basically, the two images are assumed
to be coupled by a certain parametric geometric relation,
such as projective transformation or epipolar geometry. TheRANSAC algorithm then follows a hypothesize-and-verify
strategy: repeatedly sample a minimal subset from the data,
e.g. four correspondences for projective transformation andseven correspondences for fundamental, estimate a model ashypothesis, and verify the quality by the number of consis-
tent inliers. Finally, the correspondences consistent with the
optimal model are recognized as inliers.
V arious methods have been proposed to improve the per-
formance of RANSAC. In MLESAC (Torr and Zisserman
1998 ,2000 ), the model quality is veriﬁed by a maximum
likelihood process, which albeit under certain assumptions,
can improve the results and is less sensitive to the pre-
deﬁned threshold. The idea of modifying the veriﬁcationstage is not only utilized but also further extended in manyfollowing studies due to the simple implementation. The
modiﬁcation of sampling strategy has also been considered
in quite a few studies due to the appealing result of efﬁciencyenhancement. In essence, diverse prior information is incor-
porated to increase the probability of selecting an all-inlier
sample subset. Speciﬁcally, the inliers are assumed to be spa-tially coherent in NAPSAC (Nasuto and Craddock 2002 ), or
exist with some groupings in GroupSAC (Ni et al. 2009 ).
PROSAC (Chum and Matas 2005 ) exploits a priori predicted
inlier probability, and EVSAC (Fragoso et al. 2013 )u s e s
an estimate of conﬁdence with extreme value theory of the
correspondences. Another seminal work is the locally opti-
mized RANSAC (LO-RANSAC) (Chum et al. 2003 ), with
the key observation that taking minimal subsets can amplify
the underlying noise and yield hypotheses that are far from
the ground truth. This problem is addressed by introducinga local optimization procedure when arriving at the so-far-
the-best model. In the original paper, local optimization is
implemented as an iterated least squares ﬁtting process witha shrinking inlier-outlier threshold inside an inner RANSAC.
123

==== Page 23 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 45
This has a large-than-minimal sampling and is applied only to
the inliers of the current model. The computational cost issueof LO-RANSAC is addressed in Lebeda et al. ( 2012 ), where
several implementation improvements are suggested. The
local optimization step is augmented with a graph-cut tech-nique in Barath and Matas ( 2018 ). Many improving strategies
for RANSAC are integrated in USAC (Raguram et al. 2012 ).
More recently, Barath et al. ( 2019b ) applyed σ-consensus
in their MAGSAC, to eliminate the need of a user-deﬁnedthreshold by marginalizing over a range of noise scales.
Whereafter, observing that nearby points are more likely
to originate from the same geometric model, Barath et al.(2019a ) extracted the local structure for global sampling and
parameter model estimation by drawing samples from grad-
ually growing neighborhoods. Based on above two methods,they introduced MAGSAC++ (Barath et al. 2020 ) with a new
scoring function. This method avoids requiring the inlier-
outlier decision, in which a novel marginalization procedure
formulated as an M-estimation is solved by an iterativelyre-weighted least squares procedure, and the progressive
growing sampling strategy in Barath et al. ( 2019a )i sa l s o
applied for RANSAC-like robust estimation.
Some fundamental shortcomings are exhibited by the
resampling methods despite their efﬁcacy in wide appli-
cations of computer vision. For example, the theoreticallyrequired runtime exponentially grows with the increase ofoutlier rate. The minimal subset sampling strategy only
applies to parametric models and fails to handle image pairs
undergoing complex transformations, such as non-rigid ones.This situation motivates researchers to develop new algo-
rithms divorced from the resampling paradigm.
4.5.3 Non-parametric Model-Based Methods
A group of non-parametric model-based methods have
been proposed. Instead of simple parametric models, non-parametric models address more general priors in matching,
e.g. motion coherence, and can deal with degenerated sce-
narios. These methods are distinguished by different defor-mation functions to model the transformation and different
means to cope with gross outliers. Pilet et al. ( 2008 ) proposed
the use triangulated 2-D mesh to model the deformation usinga tailored robust estimator for eliminating the detrimentaleffect of outliers. The idea of robust estimators is also lever-
aged in Gay-Bellile et al. ( 2008 ), with Huber estimator, and
Ma et al. ( 2015 ), with L
2Eestimator, despite of their dif-
ferent modeling of deformation. A fairly different method is
proposed in Li and Hu ( 2010 ), in which the Support V ec-
tor Regression technique is employed to robustly estimate acorrespondence function and reject mismatches.
The seminal work vector ﬁeld consensus (VFC) (Ma
et al. 2013a ,2014 ) introduces a new framework for non-
rigid matching. The deformation function is restricted withinthe reproducing kernel Hilbert space in association with
Tikhonov regularization to enforce the smoothness con-straint. The estimation is conducted in a Bayesian model,
where the outliers are explicitly considered for robustness.
The VFC algorithm, and its variants (Ma et al. 2015b ,2017a ,
2019b ) have been proven effective.
4.5.4 Relaxed Methods
The recent trend has been towards developing relaxed meth-
ods for matching, where the geometric constraint is made
less strict to accommodate even complex scenarios, suchas motion discontinuities arising from image pairs of widebaselines or with objects undergoing independent motions.
Certain GM methods (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ;L i u
and Yan 2010 ) are available for such requirements and use
quadratic models that incorporate pairwise geometric rela-
tions of correspondences to ﬁnd the potentially correct ones.
However, the results are often coarse.
Lipman et al. ( 2014 ) considered deformations that are
piecewise afﬁne; they then formulated feature matching into
a constrained optimization problem that seeks for such adeformation consistent with the most correspondences andexerts a bounded distortion. Lin et al. ( 2014 ,2017 )p r o -
posed to identify true matches with likelihood functions
estimated using nonlinear regression technique in a speciallydesigned domain of correspondence, where motion coher-
ence is imposed, while discontinuities are also allowed. This
concept corresponds to enforcing a local motion coherenceconstraint. Ma et al. ( 2018a ,2019d ) presented a locality pre-
serving approach for matching, whereby a global distortion
model for matching is relaxed to focus on the locality ofeach correspondence in exchange for generality and efﬁ-ciency. The derived criterion has been proven able to rapidly
and accurately ﬁlter erroneous matches. A similar method
appeared in Bian et al. ( 2017 ) wherein a simple criterion
based on local supporting matches to reject outliers is intro-
duced. Jiang et al. ( 2020a ) casted feature matching as a
spatial clustering problem with outliers to adaptively clusterthe putative matches into several motion consistent clusters
together with an outlier/mismatch cluster. Another method
in Lee et al. ( 2020 ) formulates the feature matching prob-
lem as a Markov random ﬁeld that uses both local descriptordistance and relative geometric similarities to enhance the
robustness and accuracy.
4.6 Learning for Matching
Apart from detectors or descriptors, learning-based matching
methods are commonly used to substitute traditional meth-
ods in information extraction and representation or model
regression. The matching step by learning can be roughlyclassiﬁed into image-based and point-based learning. Based
123

==== Page 24 ====
46 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
on the traditional methods, the former aims to cope with three
typical tasks, namely image registration (Wu et al. 2015a ),
stereo matching (Poursaeed et al. 2018 ) and camera local-
ization or transformation estimation (Poursaeed et al. 2018 ;
Erlik Nowruzi et al. 2017 ; Yin and Shi 2018 ). Such a method
can directly realize task-based learning without attemptingto detect any salient image structure (e.g. interest points) in
advance. By contrast, point-based learning prefers conduct-
ing on the extracted point sets; such methods are commonlyused for point data processing, such as classiﬁcation, seg-
mentation (Qi et al. 2017a ,b) and registration (Simonovsky
et al. 2016 ; Liao et al. 2017 ). Researchers have also used
these for correct match selection and geometrical transfor-
mation model estimation from putative match sets (Moo Yi
et al. 2018 ;M ae ta l . 2019a ; Zhao et al. 2019 ; Ranftl and
Koltun 2018 ; Poursaeed et al. 2018 ).
4.6.1 Learning from Images
Matching methods of image-based learning often use CNNs
for image-level latent information extraction and similar-
ity measurement, as well as geometrical relation estimation.Therefore, the patch-based learning (Sect. 3.3: learning-
based feature descriptors) is frequently used as an extension
of area-based image registration and stereo matching. This
is because traditional similarity measurements in a slidingwindow can be easily replaced with a deep manner, i.e., deep
descriptors. However, the success achieved by researchers in
using deep learning in spatial transformation networks (STN)(Jaderberg et al. 2015 ) and optical ﬂow estimation (FlowNet)
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2015 ) has aroused a wave of studies on
directly estimating the geometrical transformation or non-parametric deformation ﬁeld with deep learning techniques,even achieving an end-to-end trainable framework.
Image registration. For area-based image registration,
early deep learning is generally used as a direct extensionof the classical registration framework, and later use the
reinforcement learning paradigm to iteratively estimate the
transformation, even directly estimate the deformative ﬁeldor displacement ﬁeld for the registration task. The most intu-
itional approach is to use deep learning networks to estimate
the similarity measurement for the target image pair in orderto drive an iterative optimization procedure. In this way,the classical measure metrics, such as the correlation-like
and MI methods, etc., can be substituted with more supe-
rior deep metrics. For instance, Wu et al. ( 2015a ) achieved
deformable image registration by using the convolutional
stacked auto-encoder (CAE) to discover compact and highly
discriminative features from the observed image patch datafor similarity metrics learning. Similarly, to obtain better
similarity measure, Simonovsky et al. ( 2016 ) used a deep
network trained from a few aligned image pairs. In addi-tion, a fast, deformable image registration method calledQuicksilver (Yang et al. 2017b ) has been devised by the
patch-wise prediction of a deformation model directly usingimage appearance, whereby a deep encoder-decoder network
is used for predicting the large deformation diffeomorphic
model. Inspired by deep convolution, Revaud et al. ( 2016 )
introduced a dense matching algorithm based on a hierarchi-cal correlation architecture. This method can handle complex
non-rigid deformations and repetitive textured regions. Arar
et al. ( 2020 ) introduced an unsupervised multi-modal image
registration technique based on an image-to-image transla-
tion network with geometric preserving constraints.
Different from metric learning, a trained agent is used for
image registration with a reinforcement learning paradigm,
and typically for estimating a rigid transformation model
or a deformable ﬁeld. Liao et al. ( 2017 ) ﬁrst used the rein-
forcement learning for rigid image registration, in which anartiﬁcial agent and a greedy supervised approach coupled
with attention-driven hierarchical strategy are used to realize
the “strategy learning” process and ﬁnd the best sequence of
motion actions to yield image alignment. An artiﬁcial agent,
which explores the parametric space of a statistical deforma-
tion model by training from a large number of syntheticallydeformed image pairs, is also trained in Krebs et al. ( 2017 )
to cope with deformable registration problem and the difﬁ-
culty in extracting reliable ground-truth deformable ﬁelds ofreal data. Instead of using a single agent, Miao et al. ( 2018 )
proposed a multi-agent reinforcement learning paradigm for
medical image registration in which the auto-attention mech-
anism is used for receptive multiple image regions. However,the reinforcement learning is often used to predict iterative
updates of the regression procedure and still consumes large
computation in the iterative process.
To reduce the run time and avoid explicitly deﬁning
a dissimilarity metric, end-to-end registration in one shot
has received increasing attention. Sokooti et al. ( 2017 ) ﬁrst
designed deep regression networks to directly learn a dis-placement vector ﬁeld from a pair of input images. Another
method in de V os et al. ( 2017 ) similarly trained a deep
network to regress and output the parameters of spatial trans-formation, which can then generate the displacement ﬁeld
to warp the moving image to the target image. However,
a similarity metric between image pairs is still required toachieve unsupervised optimization. More recently, a deep
learning framework has been introduced in de V os et al.
(2019 ) for unsupervised afﬁne and deformable image reg-
istration. The trained networks can be used to register pairsof unseen images in one shot. Similar methods regarding
deep networks as a regressor can directly learn the parame-
ter transform model from image pairs, such as Fundamental(Poursaeed et al. 2018 ), Homography (DeTone et al. 2016 ),
and non-rigid deformation (Rocco et al. 2017 ).
Many other end-to-end image level learning-based reg-
istration methods are presented. Chen et al. ( 2019 )p r o -
123

==== Page 25 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 47
posed end-to-end trainable deep networks to directly predict
the dense displacement ﬁeld for image alignment. Wangand Zhang ( 2020 ) introduced DeepFLASH for efﬁcient
deformable medical image registration, which is imple-
mented in a low dimensional bandlimited space thus dra-matically reduces the computational and memory request.To simultaneously enhance the topology preservation and
smoothness of the transformation model, Mok and Chung
(2020 ) proposed an efﬁcient unsupervised symmetric image
registration method which maximizes the similarity between
images within the space of diffeomorphic maps and estimates
both forward and inverse transformations simultaneously. InTruong et al. ( 2020 ), the authors introduced a universal net-
work for geometric matching, optical ﬂow estimation and
semantic corresponding, which can achieve both high accu-racy and robustness by investigating the combined use ofglobal and local correlation layers. See more details in the
registration-speciﬁc reviews (Ferrante and Paragios 2017 ;
Haskins et al. 2020 ).
Stereo matching. Over the past years, analogous to regis-
tration, numerous studies in stereo matching have focused on
accurately computing the matching cost by using deep con-volutional techniques and reﬁning the disparity map (Zbontar
and LeCun 2015 ; Luo et al. 2016 ; Zbontar and LeCun 2016 ;
Shaked and Wolf 2017 ). In addition to the deep descriptors,
such as DeepCompare (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2015 )
and MatchNet (Han et al. 2015 ), etc., Zbontar and LeCun
(2015 ) introduced a deep Siamese network to compute the
matching cost, which is trained to predict the similaritybetween image patches. They further proposed a series of
CNNs (Zbontar and LeCun 2016 ) for the binary classiﬁ-
cation of pairwise matching and applied these in disparityestimation. Similar to converting the computation of match-
ing costs into a multi-label classiﬁcation problem, Luo et al.
(2016 ) proposed an efﬁcient Siamese network for fast stereo
matching. In addition, Shaked and Wolf ( 2017 ) improved
the performance by computing the matching cost with the
proposed constant highway networks and the disparity esti-
mation with reﬂective conﬁdence learning.
The end-to-end deep manner for this matching task has
drawn increasing attention in recent years. For instance,
Mayer et al. ( 2016 ) trained an end-to-end CNN in their Disp-
Net to obtain a ﬁne disparity map, which is extended by
Pang et al. ( 2017 ) with a two-stage CNN called cascade
residual learning (CRL). More recently, a spatial pyramidpooling module together with a 3-D convolutional strat-egy has been introduced in Chang and Chen ( 2018 ). This
approach can exploit global context information to enhance
stereo matching. Inspired from CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017 )
and to deal with domain gap, Liu et al. ( 2020 ) proposed
an end-to-end training framework to translate all synthetic
stereo images into realistic ones simultaneously maintainepipolar constraints. This method is implemented througha jointly optimizing between domain translation and stereo
matching. Another method in Yang et al. ( 2020 ) learns the
wavelet coefﬁcients of the disparity rather than the disparity
itself, which can learn global context information from low
frequency submodule and details from others. Moreover, theguided strategy (Zhang et al. 2019a ; Poggi et al. 2019 )i sa l s o
utilized for stereo matching.
Stereo matching with deep convolutional techniques has
been dominated for their top performance in public bench-marks
2. However, the use of CNNs in stereo matching
community is limited by the input image pairs, which are
generally captured from the binocular camera with a narrowbaseline and epipolar rectiﬁcation. Nevertheless, the network
structure, basic ideas, and some tricks or strategies in these
learning-based stereo matching may have a strong referencefor general image matching tasks.
4.6.2 Learning from Points
Learning from points is not as popular as those in images
for feature extraction, representation and similarity mea-
surements. Point-based learning, particularly for featurematching, has only been introduced in recent years. Thisis because using CNNs on point data is more difﬁcult than
on raw images due to the unordered structure and dispersed
nature of sparse points. Moreover, operating and extract-ing the spatial relationships, such as neighboring elements,
relative positions, length, and angle information, among
multi-points using deep convolutional techniques are chal-lenging. However, using deep learning techniques to solve
points-based tasks has received increasing considerations.
These techniques can be roughly divided into parameter ﬁt-ting (Brachmann et al. 2017 ; Ranftl and Koltun 2018 ) and
point classiﬁcation and/or segmentation (Qi et al. 2017a ,b;
M o oY ie ta l . 2018 ;M ae ta l . 2019a ; Zhao et al. 2019 ). The for-
mer is inspired by the classical RANSAC algorithm and aimsto estimate the transformation model, such as fundamen-
tal matrix (Ranftl and Koltun 2018 ) and epipolar geometry
(Brachmann and Rother 2019 ), by means of a data-driven
optimization strategy with CNNs. However, the latter tends
to train a classiﬁer to identify the true matches from putative
match set. Generally, parameter ﬁtting and point classiﬁca-tion are trained jointly for performance enhancement.
For trainable fundamental matrix estimation, Brachmann
et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a differentiable RANSAC, termed as
DSAC, which is based on reinforcement learning in an end-to-end manner. They replaced the deterministic hypothesis
selection by probabilistic selection to decrease the expected
loss and optimize the learnable parameters. Subsequently,Ranftl and Koltun ( 2018 ) presented a trainable method for
2http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_scene_ﬂow.php?
benchmark=stereo
123

==== Page 26 ====
48 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
fundamental matrix estimation from noise, which is casted
as a series of weighted homogeneous least-squares prob-lem, where the robust weights are estimated with deep
networks. Similar to DSAC, using learning techniques to
improve re-sampling strategy is also introduced in Brach-mann and Rother ( 2019 ) and Kluger et al. ( 2020 ). Brachmann
and Rother ( 2019 ) proposed NG-RANSAC, a robust estima-
tor using learned guidance of hypothesis sampling. It uses
the inlier count itself as training objective to facilitate self-supervised learning of NG-RANSAC, and can incorporate
non-differentiable task loss functions and non-differentiable
minimal solvers. While CONSAC (Kluger et al. 2020 )i s
introduced as a robust estimator for multiple parametric
model ﬁtting. It uses neural network to sequentially update
the conditional sampling probabilities for the hypothesisselection.
Learning-based mismatch removal methods have been
developed in recent years. Moo Yi et al. ( 2018 ) ﬁrst attempted
to introduce a learning-based technique termed as learning toﬁnd good correspondences (LFGC), which aims to train a net-
work from a set of sparse putative matches together with the
image intrinsics under the rigid geometrical transformationconstraints, and to label the test correspondences as inliers or
outliers and output the camera motion simultaneously. How-
ever, the LFGC may sacriﬁce many true correspondencesto estimate the motion parameters, failing to handle generalmatching problems, such as deformable and non-rigid image
matching. To this end, Ma et al. ( 2019a ) proposed a gen-
eral framework to learn a two-class classiﬁer for mismatchremoval called LMR, which uses a few images, and hand-
crafted geometrical representation for training. Their method
showed promising matching performance with linearithmictime complexity. More recently, Zhang et al. ( 2019b ) focused
on the geometrical recovery based on their order-aware net-
works (OAN) and have achieved promising performanceon pose estimation. Sarlin et al. ( 2020 ) proposed Super-
Glue, to match two sets of local features by jointly ﬁnding
correspondences and rejecting non-matchable points. This
method is implemented with graph neural networks (Scarselliet al. 2009 ) for differentiable transport problem optimiza-
tion. Similar graph neural network pipeline has been adopted
by an emerging research branch namely deep graph match-ing (Wang et al. 2019 ;Y ue ta l . 2020a ; Fey et al. 2020 ),
where cross-graph convolution (Wang et al. 2019 ), channel-
independent embedding (Y u et al. 2020a ) and Spline-based
convolution (Fey et al. 2020 ) are proposed and adopted for
supervised graph correspondence learning.
Even though applying CNNs onto point data is difﬁcult,
the latest techniques have shown great potential for matrixestimation and point data classiﬁcation with deep regressor
and classiﬁer, particularly for the challenging data or scenar-
ios. Moreover, the multi-layer perception methods in naturallanguage processing and the graph convolutional techniquesmay serve as great references for addressing these dispersed
and unstructured point data in the matching task.
4.7 Matching in 3-D Cases
Similar to its 2-D counterpart, 3-D matching methodsoften involve two steps, i.e., namely, keypoint detection
and local feature description, and a sparse correspondence
set can then be established by calculating the similaritiesbetween descriptors. Although most methods use local fea-
ture descriptors, which are designed to be robust to noise
and deformations to establish correspondences between 3-Dinstances, a variety of classical and recent works fall intoanother category. We refer the readers to the recent surveys
(Biasotti et al. 2016 ; V an Kaick et al. 2011 ) in the shape
matching area given that a detailed review of the literature isbeyond the scope for this paper.
The embedding methods aim to parametrize the com-
plex matching problem with less degrees of freedom fortractability by exploiting some natural assumptions (e.g.,
approximate isometry). A traditional approach is proposed
by Elad and Kimmel ( 2003 ) to match shapes by embedding
them in an intermediate Euclidean space. In this approach,the geodesic distances are approximated by Euclidean ones,
and the original non-rigid registration problem is reduced to
rigid registration in the intermediate space. Notably, anotherwork developed conformal mapping approaches that also use
embedding space (Lipman and Funkhouser 2009 ; Kim et al.
2011 ; Zeng et al. 2010 ).
A more direct approach is to ﬁnd a point-wise match-
ing between (subsets of) points on shapes by minimizing
the structure distortion. This formulation was developedby Bronstein et al. ( 2006 ), who introduced a highly non-
convex and non-differentiable objective and generalized
multidimensional scaling technique for optimization. Some
researchers have also attempted to mitigate the prohibitivelyhigh computational complexity issue (Sahillioglu and Yemez
2011 ;T e v se ta l . 2011 ) while considering the quadratic
assignment formulation (Rodola et al. 2012 ,2013 ; Chen and
Koltun 2015 ; Wang et al. 2011 ) in graph matching.
The family of methods based on the functional map frame-
work was ﬁrst developed by Ovsjanikov et al. ( 2012 ). Instead
of point-to-point matching in Euclidean space, these meth-ods represent the correspondences using the functional map
between two manifolds, which can be characterized by linear
operators. The functional map can be encoded in a compactform by using the eigenbases of the Laplace-Beltrami oper-
ator. Most natural constraints on the map, such as landmark
correspondences and operator commutativity, become lin-ear in this formulation, leading to an efﬁcient solution. This
approach was adopted and extended in many follow-up works
(Aﬂalo et al. 2016 ; Kovnatsky et al. 2015 ; Pokrass et al. 2013 ;
Rodolà et al. 2017 ; Litany et al. 2017 ).
123

==== Page 27 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 49
Point set learning in 3-D cases for registration is also a
hot topic. Yew et al. ( 2020 ) proposed RPM-Net for rigid
point cloud registration, in which it desensitizes initializa-
tion and improves convergence performance with learned
fusion features. Gojcic et al. ( 2020 ) introduced an end-to-
end multiview point cloud registration framework by directlylearning to register all views of a scene in a globally consistent
manner. Pais et al. ( 2020 ) introduced a learning architecture
for 3D point registration, namely 3DRegNet. This methodcan identify true point correspondences from a set of puta-
tive matches, and regress the motion parameters to align the
scans into a common reference frame. Choy et al. ( 2020 )
used high-dimensional convolutional networks to detect lin-
ear subspaces in high-dimensional spaces, then applied it for
3D registration under rigid motions and image correspon-dence estimation.
4.8 Summary
Given a pair of images of similar object/scene and with/without
the feature detection and/or description, the matching tasks
have been extended into several different forms, such asimage registration, stereo matching, feature matching, graphmatching, and point set registration. These different matching
deﬁnitions are generally introduced for speciﬁc applications,
with their own strengths presented.
Traditional image registration and stereo achieve dense
matching by means of patch-wise similarity measuring
together with optimization strategy to search the overall opti-mal solution. However, they are conducted on image pairs of
high overlapping area (slight geometrical deformation) and
binocular camera, and these may require large computationalburden and the limited handcrafted measuring metrics.
The introduction of deep learning has promoted registra-
tion accuracy and disparity estimation due to advancements
in network design and loss deﬁnition, as well as abundanttraining samples. However, we also ﬁnd that using deep
learning for these matching tasks is usually performed on
image pairs undergoing slight geometrical deformation suchas medical image registration and binocular stereo match-
ing. Applying them for more complex scenarios, such as
wide baseline images stereo or image registration with seri-ous geometric deformations, still remains open.
Feature-based matching can effectively address the limita-
tions in large viewpoint, wide baseline, and serious non-rigid
image matching problems. Among those proposed in theliterature, the most popular strategy is to construct the puta-
tive matches based on descriptor distance, followed by a
robust estimator such as RANSAC. However, a large num-ber of mismatches in the putative match sets may negatively
affect the performance in subsequent visual task and also
require considerable time for model estimation. Therefore,the mismatch removal method is required and integrated topreserve as many true matches as possible while maintain-
ing the mismatch to a minimum level using extra geometricalconstraints. Speciﬁcally, the resampling-based method, such
as RANSAC, can estimate the latent parameter model and
simultaneously remove the outliers. However, their theoreti-cally required runtime grows exponentially with the increasein outlier rate, and they cannot process the image pairs that
undergo more complex non-rigid transformations. The non-
parametric model-based methods can handle the non-rigidimage matching problem by using high-dimensional non-
parametric model, but it is still challenging in deﬁning the
objective function and ﬁnding the optimal solution in a morecomplex solution space. Different from the global constraints
in the resampling and non-parameter model-based methods,
the relaxed mismatch removal methods are commonly con-ducted on a local coherent assumption of potential inliers.Thus, much simpler but efﬁcient rules are designed to ﬁl-
ter out the outliers while maintaining the inliers within an
extremely short time. However, methods of this type are lim-ited due to their parameter sensitivity; moreover, they are
prone to preserve evident outliers, thereby affecting the accu-
racy of subsequent pose estimation and image registration.
In addition, the image patch-based descriptor may not be
workable due to the matching request in less-texture images,
shape, semantic images, and the raw points directly capturedfrom speciﬁc device. Therefore, for performing the matchingtask of these situations, the graph matching and point regis-
tration methods are more suitable. The graph structure among
neighboring points and the overall corresponding matrix areapplied to optimize and ﬁnd the optimal solution. However,
these pure point-based methods are limited by restrictions in
their computation burden and outlier sensitivity. Therefore,designing appropriate problem formulation and constraint
conditions, and proposing more efﬁcient optimization meth-
ods, are still open problems in image matching communityand require further research attention.
Analogously to image-based learning, increasing studies
have used deep learning in feature-based matching commu-
nity. The latest techniques have shown great potential formatrix estimation (e.g. fundamental matrix) and point data
classiﬁcation (such as mismatch removal) with deep regres-
sor and classiﬁer, particularly for handling challenging dataor scenarios. However, conducting convolutional networks
on point data is not as easy as on raw images due to the
unordered structure and dispersed nature of these sparsepoints. Nevertheless, recent studies have shown the feasibil-ity of using the graph convolutional strategy and multi-layer
perception methods, together with speciﬁc normalization on
such point data. In addition to rigid transformation parameterestimation, matching on point data with non-rigid and even
serious deformation by using deep convolutional techniques
may be a more challenging and signiﬁcant problem.
123

==== Page 28 ====
50 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
5 Matching-Based Applications
Image matching is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and is considered a critical prerequisite in a wide range of
applications. In this section, we brieﬂy review several repre-sentative applications.
5.1 Structure-from-Motion
Structure-from-motion (SfM) involves recovering the 3-D
structure of a stationary scene from a series of images,
which are obtained from different viewpoints by estimat-ing the camera motions corresponding to these images. SfM
involves three main stages, namely, (i) feature matching
across images, (ii) camera pose estimation, and (iii) recoveryof the 3-D structure using the estimated motion and features.
Its efﬁcacy largely depends on the admissible set of feature
matches.
In modern SfM systems (Schonberger and Frahm 2016 ;
Wu2018 ; Sweeney et al. 2015 ), the feature matching pipeline
is widely adopted across images, i.e., feature detection,
description, and nearest-neighbor matching, to provide ini-tial correspondences. The initial correspondences contain a
number of outliers. Thus, geometric veriﬁcation is required,
which is tackled via the estimation fundamental matrix usingRANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ). This can potentially
be addressed by mismatch removal methods.
Meanwhile, to enhance the SfM task, researchers have
focused on performing robust feature matching, i.e., thusestablishing rich and accurate correspondences. Evidently,
advanced descriptors can greatly affect this task (Fan et al.
2019 ). Moreover, Shah et al. ( 2015 ) proposed a geometry-
aware approach, which initially uses a small sample of
features to estimate the epipolar geometry between the
images and leverages it for the guided matching of theremaining features. Lin et al. ( 2016b ) utilized RANSAC to
guide the training of match consistency curves for differ-
entiating true and false matches. Their approach traces thecommon problems of wide-baselines and repeated structuresfor reconstructing modern cities. These correspondences are
also the prerequisites for camera pose estimation, and the
effective substitution of commonly used RANSAC for thistask has also been investigated (Moo Yi et al. 2018 ), with a
pre-stage of identifying good correspondences.
5.2 Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
Acquiring maps of the environment is a fundamental task
for autonomous mobile robots, thereby forming the basis
of many different higher-level tasks, such as navigation and
localization. The problem of simultaneous localization andmapping (SLAM) (Davison et al. 2007 ; Mur-Artal et al. 2015 ;Sturm et al. 2012 ) has received intensive attention over the
decades.
In common SLAM systems, feature matching is needed to
establish correspondences between frames, which then serve
as the input for estimating the relative camera pose and local-ization. Similar to SfM, the full-ﬂedged feature matchingpipeline is used in most SLAM systems. Typically, in Endres
et al. ( 2012 ), Endres et al. introduced a SLAM system that
incorporates feature matching to establish spatial relationsfrom the sensor data in the front-end. The well-known SIFT
(Lowe 2004 ), SURF (Bay et al. 2008 ), and ORB (Rublee et al.
2011 ) algorithms are optionally used to detect and describe
features, and RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) is subse-
quently used for robust matching.
An evaluation of different feature detectors and descrip-
tors can be found in Gil et al. ( 2010 ). Recently, Lowry and
Andreasson ( 2018 ) proposed a spatial veriﬁcation method for
visual localization, which is robust in the presence of a high
proportion of outliers. For a SLAM system that percepts 3-D range scans, the point set registration methods (e.g. ICP)
(Nüchter et al. 2007 ) are also used for scan matching and
localizing the robot.
Loop closure detection–another core module in SLAM
application–refers to accurately asserting that an agent has
returned to a previously visited location. It is crucial to reducethe drift of the estimated trajectory caused by accumula-tive error. A group of appearance-based approaches have
been developed to use image similarities to identify previ-
ously visited places. Feature matching results are naturallyapplicable to measure the similarity of two scenes and have
been the bases of many state-of-the-art methods. For exam-
ple, Liu and Zhang ( 2012 ) performed feature matching with
SIFT between the current image and each previously vis-
ited image, after which they determined the closed loop on
the basis of the number of accurate matches in the results.Zhang et al. ( 2011 ) used directed matching of raw features
extracted from images for detecting loop-closure events. To
achieve loop closure detection, Wu et al. ( 2014 )u s e dL S H
as the basic technique by matching the binary visual featuresin the current view of a robot with the visual features in the
robot appearance map. Liu et al. ( 2015a ) developed a consen-
sus constraint to prune outliers and veriﬁed the superiorityof their methods for loop closure detection.
5.3 Visual Homing
Visual homing aims to navigate a robot from an arbitrary
starting position to a goal or home position based solely
on visual information. This is often accomplished by esti-mating a homing vector/direction (pointing from the current
position to the home position) from two panoramic images,
which are captured respectively at the current position andthe home position. Conventionally, feature matching serves
123

==== Page 29 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 51
as the building block of correspondence methods in visual
homing research (Möller et al. 2010 ). In this category, the
homing vector can be determined by transforming the cor-
respondences into motion ﬂows (Ma et al. 2018b ; Churchill
and V ardy 2013 ; Liu et al. 2013 ; Zhao and Ma 2017 ).
Ramisa et al. ( 2011 ) combined the average landmark vec-
tor with invariant feature points automatically detected in
panoramic images to achieve autonomous visual homing.
However, the feature matches are solely determined by thesimilarity of the descriptors in the method, thus leading to a
number of mismatches. The presence of outliers has been ver-
iﬁed to be the reason of performance degradation for visualhoming (Schroeter and Newman 2008 ). In order to resolve
the degradation caused by mismatches, Liu et al. ( 2013 )u s e d
a RANSAC-like method to remove mismatches. Meanwhile,Zhao and Ma ( 2017 ) proposed a visual homing method by
simultaneously mismatch removal and robust interpolation
of sparse motion ﬂows under a smoothness prior. Ma et al.
(2018b ) also proposed a guided locality preserving matching
method to handle extremely large proportions of outliers and
improve the visual homing robustness.
5.4 Image Registration and Stitching
Image registration is the process of aligning two or more
images of the same scene obtained from different view-points, at different times, or from different sensors (Zitova
and Flusser 2003 ). In the past decades, feature-based methods
in which the key requirement is feature matching have gainedincreasing attention due to its robustness and efﬁciency.
Once the correspondence is established, image registration
is reduced to estimate the transformation model (e.g., rigid,afﬁne, or projective). Finally, the source image is transformedby means of the mapping functions, which rely on some
interpolation technique (e.g., bilinear and nearest neighbor).
A large number of works have been proposed for featurematching and image registration. Ma et al. ( 2015b )p r o -
posed a Bayesian formulation for rigid and non-rigid feature
matching and image registration. To further exploit the geo-metrical cues, the locally linear transforming constraint is
incorporated. They also recently proposed a guided local-
ity preserving matching method (Ma et al. 2018a ). Their
proposed method can signiﬁcantly reduce the computationalcomplexity and is able to deal with a more complex transfor-
mation model. For non-rigid image registration, Pilet et al.
(2008 ) and Gay-Bellile et al. ( 2008 ) proposed solutions,
where robust matching techniques are insensitive to outliers.
Some efforts (Paul and Pati 2016 ;M ae ta l . 2017b ; Yang
et al. 2017a ) also attempted to modify feature detectors and
descriptors to improve the registration process.
The problem of multi-modal image registration is more
complicated due to the high variability of appearance causedby different modalities, which frequently arise in medicalimage and multi-sensor image analysis. For example, Chen
et al. ( 2010 ) developed the partial intensity invariant feature
descriptor (PIIFD) to register retinal images, whereas Wang
et al. ( 2015 ) extended PIIFD in a more robust registration
framework with SURF detector (Bay et al. 2008 ) and a single
Gaussian point matching model. On the basis of the charac-teristics of multi-modal images, Liu et al. ( 2018a ) proposed
an afﬁne and contrast invariant descriptor for IR and visible
image registration. Du et al. ( 2018 ) also proposed an IR and
visible image registration method based on scale-invariant
PIIFD feature and locality preserving matching. Ye et al.
(2017 ) proposed a novel feature descriptor based on the struc-
tural properties of images for multi-modal registration. A
detailed discussion of feature matching-based, multi-modal
registration techniques of the medical image analysis area,which are categorized as geometric methods, can be foundin Sotiras et al. ( 2013 ).
Meanwhile, image stitching or image mosaic involves
obtaining a wider ﬁeld-of-view of a scene from a sequenceof partial views (Ghosh and Kaabouch 2016 ). Compared to
image registration, image stitching deals with low overlap-
ping images and requires accurate alignment in the pixel-level to avoid visual discontinuities. Feature-based stitching
methods are popular in this area because of their invariance
properties and efﬁciency. For example, in order to iden-tify geometrically consistent feature matches and achieveaccurate homography estimation, Brown and Lowe ( 2007 )
proposed the use of the SIFT (Lowe 2004 ) feature matching
and the RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) algorithm. Lin
et al. ( 2011 ) used SIFT (Lowe 2004 ) to pre-compute matches
and then jointly estimating the matching and the smoothly
varying afﬁne ﬁelds for better stitching performance. Inter-ested readers can refer to the comprehensive survey (Ghosh
and Kaabouch 2016 ; Bonny and Uddin 2016 ) for an overview
of more feature-based image mosaic and stitching methods.
5.5 Image Fusion
To generate a more conducive image to subsequent appli-cations, image fusion is adopted to combine the meaningful
information from images acquired by different sensors or
under different shooting settings (Pohl and V an Genderen1998 ), wherein the source images have been accurately
aligned in advance. The very premise of image fusion is to
register source images using feature matching methods, and
the accuracy of registration directly affects the fusion quality.Liu et al. ( 2017 ) used the CNN to jointly generate the activ-
ity level measurement and fusion rules for multi-focus image
fusion. Meanwhile, Ma et al. ( 2019c ) proposed an end-to-end
model for infrared and visible image fusion, which generates
images with a dominant infrared intensity and an additional
visible gradient under the framework of generative adversar-ial networks. Subsequently, they introduced a detail loss and
123

==== Page 30 ====
52 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
a target edge-enhancement loss to further enrich the texture
details (Ma et al. 2020 ).
A group of methods aim to fuse images based on the local
features, among which the dense SIFT is the most popu-
lar. Liu et al. ( 2015b ) proposed the fusion of multi-focus
images with dense scale invariant feature transform, whereinthe local feature descriptors are used not only as the activity
level measurement, but also to match the mis-registered pix-
els between multiple source images to improve the qualityof the fusion results. Similarly, Hayat and Imran ( 2019 )p r o -
posed a ghost-free multi-exposure image fusion technique
using the dense SIFT descriptor with a guided ﬁlter, whichcan produce high-quality images using ordinary cameras. In
addition, Chen et al. ( 2015 ) and Ma et al. ( 2016a ) introduced a
method that can perform image registration and image fusionsimultaneously, thus fulﬁlling image fusion on unalignedimage pairs.
5.6 Image Retrieval, Object Recognition and
Tracking
Feature matching can be used to measure similarity between
images, thereby enabling a series of high-level applications,including image retrieval (Zhou et al. 2017 ), object recogni-
tion, and tracking. The goal of image retrieval is to retrieve all
images that exhibit similar scenes for a given query image.In local feature-based image retrieval, the image similarity
is intrinsically determined by the feature matches between
images. Thus, the image similarity score can be obtainedby aggregating votes from the matched features. In Zhou
et al. ( 2011 ), the relevance score is simply determined by the
number of feature matches across two images. In Jégou et al.(2010 ), the scoring function is deﬁned as a cumulation of the
squared term frequency inverse document frequency weights
on shared visual words, which is essentially a bag of features
of inner products.
Moreover, geometric context veriﬁcation, a common tech-
nique for reﬁning initial image retrieval result, is directly
related to feature matching. By incorporating the geometri-cal information, geometric context veriﬁcation technique can
be used to address the false match problem caused by the
ambiguity of local descriptor and the quantization loss. Forimage retrieval, a large group of methods estimate the trans-formation model in an explicit approach to verify the tentative
matches. For example, Philbin et al. ( 2007 ) used a RANSAC-
like method to ﬁnd the inlier correspondences, whereasAvrithis and Tolias ( 2014 ) developed a simple spatial match-
ing model inspired by Hough voting in the transformation
space. Another line of works address geometric context ver-iﬁcation without explicitly handling a transformation model.
For example, Sivic and Zisserman ( 2003 ) utilized the con-
sistency of spatial context in local feature groups to verifythe tentative correspondences. Zhou et al. ( 2010 ) proposedthe spatial coding method, whereby the valid visual word
matches are identiﬁed by verifying the global relative posi-tion consistency.
With the function of measuring similarity, feature match-
ing also plays an important role in object recognition andtracking. For example, Lowe et al. ( 1999 ) used SIFT features
to match sample images and new images. In their proposed
method, the potential model pose is identiﬁed through a
Hough transform hash table and then through a least-squaresﬁt to achieve a ﬁnal estimate of model parameters. The pres-
ence of the object is strongly evident if at least three keys
agree on the model parameters with low residuals. Modernattempts for object recognition also include some speciﬁcally
handcrafted features (Dalal and Triggs 2005 ; Hinterstoisser
et al. 2012 ) and, more recently, deep learning approaches
(Wohlhart and Lepetit 2015 ).
Tracking basically refers to estimating the trajectory of
an object over images. Feature matching across images is
the basis of feature-based tracking, and a variety of algo-rithms for these tasks have been proposed in the literature.
The feature matching pipeline is adopted in most visual
tracking systems, except that the matching is constrained tothose of the known features that are predicted to lie close
to the encountered position. The readers are referred to a
comprehensive evaluation of different feature detectors anddescriptors for tracking by Gauglitz et al. ( 2011 ), and the
recently presented benchmark (Wu et al. 2015b ), which cov-
ers a review of modern object tracking methods as well as
the role played by feature representation methods.
6 Experiments
Diverse methods for image matching have been proposed,
particularly when the deep learning techniques are becoming
increasingly popular. However, the question of which methodwould be suitable for speciﬁc applications under different
scenarios and requirements still remains. We are encouraged
to conduct more comprehensive and objective comparativeanalysis of these classical and state-of-the-art techniques.
6.1 Overview of Existing Reviews
To evaluate the existing matching methods at an early time,
the classical image registration survey (Zitova and Flusser
2003 ) provided several deﬁnitions for evaluation of regis-
tration accuracy including localization error, matching error,
and alignment or registration error. In 2005, Mikolajczyk et
al. evaluated afﬁne region detectors (Mikolajczyk et al. 2005 )
and local descriptors (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 )a g a i n s t
changes of viewpoint, scale, illumination, blur, and image
compression on their own proposed VGG (a.k.a. Oxford)datasets. They also presented a comprehensive compari-
123

==== Page 31 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 53
Fig. 2 Examples of the ﬁve datasets. The ground truth is given using
colored correspondences. The head and tail of each arrow in the motionﬁeld correspond to the positions of feature points in two images (blue= true positive, black = true negative). For visibility, in the image pairs,
at most 100 randomly selected matches are presented, and the true neg-atives are not shown (Color ﬁgure online)
son on repeatability and accuracy for detectors and recall ,
1−precision for descriptors. Subsequently, Strecha et al.
(2008 ) published a dense 3-D dataset for wide-baseline stereo
and 3-D geometrical and camera pose evaluation.
In addition, Aanæs et al. ( 2012 ) evaluated some repre-
sentative detectors using a large dataset of known camerapositions, controlled illumination, and 3-D models, namely,
DTU. At the same time, Heinly et al. ( 2012 ) compared the
traditional ﬂoat and binary feature operators in 2012 and eval-uated their matching performance with the inter-combination
of existing detectors and descriptors on the public and their
own datasets. The evaluation was conducted on more system-atic performance metrics consisting of putative match ratio ,
precision ,matching score ,recall , and entropy . Similarly,
using inter-combination strategy, Mukherjee et al. ( 2015 )
provided a comparative experimental analysis for selectingappropriate combination of various detectors and descrip-
tors in order to solve the problems of image matching using
different image data.
More recently, inspired by emerging deep learning tech-
niques, Balntas et al. ( 2017 ) reported that existing defective
datasets and evaluation metrics may lead to unreliable com-parative results. Thus, they proposed and publicized a largebenchmark for handcrafted and learned local image descrip-
tors called Hpathes. They also comprehensively evaluated
the performance of widely used handcrafted descriptorsand recent deep ones with extensive experiments on patch
recognition, patch veriﬁcation, image matching, and patch
retrieval. Schonberger et al. ( 2017 ) conducted an experimen-
tal evaluation of learned local features, including classical
machine learning based variants of SIFT and recent CNN-based techniques, in which they considered that ﬁnding
additional true matches between similar images does notnecessarily improve performance when matching imagesunder extreme viewpoint or illumination changes. Mitra et al.
(2018 ) provided a PhotoSynth (PS) dataset for training local
image descriptors. Komorowski et al. ( 2018 ) provided a sta-
bility evaluation for handcrafted and learning-based interest
point detectors on ApolloScape street dataset (Huang et al.
2018 ). A comprehensive comparison of local image feature
detectors based on both classical and CNN techniques is con-
ducted on public datasets (Lenc and V edaldi 2014 ). That
work proposed a modiﬁed repeatability for detection eval-uation, which is more robust to feature scale variety. Jinet al. ( 2020 ) introduced a benchmark for local features and
robust estimation algorithms, focusing on the accuracy of the
reconstructed camera pose as their practical evaluation. Inaddition, Bellavia and Colombo ( 2020 ) provided a compre-
hensive analysis and evaluation about the descriptor design
based on SIFT.
From the above mentioned, we can know that several com-
prehensive and thorough evaluation of feature detectors and
descriptors can be found in Komorowski et al. ( 2018 ), Lenc
and V edaldi ( 2014 ), Heinly et al. ( 2012 ) and Schonberger
et al. ( 2017 ). However, in order to evaluate the local feature
methods, many studies compared the matching performances
on a 3-D reconstruction task, including the works of Fanet al. ( 2019 ) and Schonberger et al. ( 2017 ). In the 3-D case,
Tombari et al. ( 2013 ) presented a thorough evaluation of sev-
eral state-of-the-art 3-D keypoint detectors, and Guo et al.
(2016 ) compared ten popular local feature descriptors in the
contexts of 3-D object recognition, 3-D shape retrieval, and
123

==== Page 32 ====
54 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Fig. 3 Quantitative performance of the state-of-the-art mismatch
removal algorithms on the introduced ﬁve datasets. The statistics ofprecision, recall, F-score and runtime are reported for each dataset, andthe average values are given in the legend. From top to bottom, the statis-tics of DAISY , DTU, Retina, RemoteSensing and VGG. The results arepresented in cumulative distribution, a point on the curve with coordi-
nate (x, y) denotes that there are (100∗x)percents of image pairs which
have the performance value (i.e., precision, recall, F-score or runtime)no more than y
3-D modeling. Several matching related applications, such
as image retrieval (Zheng et al. 2018 ) and visual localization
(Piasco et al. 2018 ), have also been evaluated recently. We
refer the readers to these works for a detailed discussion oftheir performance. For mismatch removal, point set regis-
tration, graph matching, and the application performance ofpose estimation and loop-closure detection, we will present
both quantitative and qualitative comparisons.
6.2 Results on Mismatch Removal
We conduct experiments on ﬁve image matching datasetswith ground truth. Our primary aim is to evaluate different
123

==== Page 33 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 55
mismatch removal methods. The features of each image are
assumed to be detected and described, and the open sourceVLFeat toolbox is used to determine the putative correspon-
dence using SIFT (Lowe 2004 ). The details of the adopted
datasets are described as follows, and some representativeimage matching examples from the used datasets are illus-trated in Fig. 2. The ground truth of each dataset is checked
by the provided geometrical transform matrix, such as homo-
graph, or provided in the manner that each match is manuallylabeled as true or false. The experiments of this part are per-
formed on a desktop with 3.4 GHz Intel Core i5-7500 CPU,
8GB memory.
DAISY (Tola et al. 2010 ): The dataset consists of wide
baseline image pairs with ground truth depth maps, includ-
ing two short image sequences and several individual imagepairs. We match each two images in one sequence and allthe individual pairs are used, which creates in total 47 image
pairs for evaluation. This dataset is a challenging one due
to the large number of matches, which is up to 8000. Theaverage numbers of matches and inlier rate are 1191.6 and
77.99%, respectively.
DTU (Aanæs et al. 2016 ): The dataset is originally desig-
nated for multiple-view stereo evaluation, which involves a
number of different scenes with a wide range of objects. The
ground truth camera positions and internal camera param-eters have high accuracy. Two scenes are selected for thisdataset (i.e., Frustum and House), after which we create 130
image pairs for evaluation. These scenes generally have large
viewpoint changes in the scenes. The average numbers ofmatches and inlier rate are 729 .3 and 58 .83%, respectively.
Retina (Ma et al. 2019d ) It consists of 70 retinal image
pairs with non-rigid transformation. Due to different modal-ities between images, ambiguous putative matches are gen-
erated, resulting in a small number of correct matches and a
low inlier ratio. The average numbers of matches and inlierrate are 158 .4 and 41 .56%, respectively.
RemoteSensing (Ma et al. 2019d ) There are 161 remote
sensing image pairs including color-infrared, SAR, and
panchromatic photographs. The feature matching task forsuch image pairs typically arises in image-based position-
ing as well as navigating and change detection. The average
numbers of matches and inlier rate are 767 .6 and 68 .50%,
respectively.
VGG (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 ) It contains 40
image pairs either of planar scenes or captured by a cam-era in a ﬁxed position during acquisition. Hence, the imagetransformation can be precisely described by homography.
The ground truth homographies are included in the dataset.
These abovementioned datasets are collected and avail-
able at.
3In addition, a small UA V image registration dataset
(SUIRD) is also provided for image registration or match-
3https://github.com/StaRainJ/Imgae_matching_Datasets .ing research. This dataset includes 60 pairs of low-altitude
remote sensing images captured by small UA V and theirgroundtruth. The image pairs contain viewpoint changes in
horizontal, vertical, their mixture and extreme patterns which
produce problems of low overlap, image distortion and severeoutliers.
4Throughout the experiments, we use three evalua-
tion metrics: precision, recall, and F-score. Given the number
of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives
(FP) and false negatives (FN), the precision is obtained by:
P=TP
TP+FP. (5)
The recall is given as follows:
R=TP
TP+FN. (6)
The F-score, as a summary statistic of precision and recall,
is obtained as follows:
F=2×P×R
P+R. (7)
The mismatch removal methods include: RANSAC (Fis-
chler and Bolles 1981 ) (abbreviated as RS), SM (Leordeanu
and Hebert 2005 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 ), GS (Liu and Yan
2010 ), LO-RANSAC (Lebeda et al. 2012 ) (abbreviated as
LRS), VFC (Ma et al. 2014 ), LPM (Ma et al. 2019d ), GMS
(Bian et al. 2017 ), and LFGC (Moo Yi et al. 2018 ).
Figure 3shows the performance on the ﬁve datasets
evaluated by precision, recall, F-score, and runtime with
cumulative distribution. In addition, the average values ofeach statistic is summarized in Table 1for a more straightfor-
ward comparison. The graph matching methods, SM and GS,
have shown relatively weak performances given the graphi-cal model, albeit with strong generality, only excavates theshallow pairwise geometric constraints. Random sampling
methods, RS and LRS, hold the key assumption that the
image pairs are related by parametric models. This assump-tion seems to work well in the datasets; however, their time
costs are not favorable. The non-parametric interpolation
method VFC is relatively robust and outperforms ICF. How-ever, its computational cost is higher than that of some other
strong competitors, e.g., LPM. LPM is simple to implement.
It utilizes a more relaxed geometric constraint, yet it achievessurprisingly excellent performance and becomes the best per-former considering the time cost. Compared with GMS, it
obtains much better performance with only a slight increase
in runtime. The recent trend has suggested a deep learningparadigm for differentiating mismatches, e.g. LFGC. LFGC
has proven to be much more effective than the traditional
4https://github.com/yyangynu/SUIRD/tree/master/SUIRD_v2.2 .
123

==== Page 34 ====
56 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79Table 1 Quantitative performance of the state-of-the-art mismatch removal algorithms on the introduced ﬁve datasets
Alg. RS (Fischler and
Bolles 1981 )SM (Leordeanu
and Hebert2005 )ICF (Li and Hu
2010 )GS (Liu and Yan
2010 )LRS (Lebeda
et al. 2012 )VFC (Ma et al.
2014 )LPM (Ma et al.
2019d )GMS (Bian et al.
2017 )LFGC (Moo Yi
et al. 2018 )
DAISY P 97.52 92.95 94.71 96.16 97.45 97.42 98.29 92.51 97.63
R 87.99 85.32 37.67 74.59 93.83 92.48 96.10 85.65 43.89
F 92.31 88.37 49.21 81.83 95.51 94.72 97.16 88.71 59.90
T 8.37e1 4.60e2 1.09e4 8.71e4 1.33e2 5.63e1 2.52e1 5.54e0 8.02e0
DTU P 94.65 82.26 95.62 92.73 93.79 93.07 95.52 88.01 89.34
R 87.94 93.14 50.59 74.31 92.10 91.41 95.21 81.85 49.19
F 90.92 85.65 62.57 80.05 92.76 91.98 95.28 83.94 61.22
T 1.92e2 5.46e1 9.20e2 1.39e4 1.19e2 4.67e2 1.21e1 1.06e0 7.01e0
Retina P 94.82 75.75 70.90 72.80 94.57 94.76 93.97 79.25 96.96
R 92.82 99.62 84.14 97.03 97.09 94.39 90.22 69.45 81.53
F 93.63 85.14 71.62 80.32 95.73 94.42 91.52 73.32 88.22
T 1.65e2 2.97e0 3.48e1 5.79e2 5.19e1 5.75e0 2.30e0 7.5e-1 7.02e0
RS P 99.07 85.31 88.93 99.20 99.02 99.39 98.12 97.31 42.22
R 98.12 93.14 60.37 87.56 99.55 98.17 98.81 88.53 36.90
F 98.53 86.13 63.03 92.44 99.27 98.76 98.37 92.08 38.02
T 5.98e2 8.70e1 1.39e3 1.81e4 4.65e2 6.08e2 1.24e1 1.09e0 8.55e0
VGG P 97.34 95.33 92.35 96.62 96.48 98.03 97.04 96.12 94.86
R 98.65 87.92 50.78 95.31 98.13 97.50 85.79 82.27 38.43
F 97.88 90.38 62.17 94.91 97.25 97.55 87.17 85.58 53.43
T 1.01e2 4.38e1 9.27e2 6.33e4 7.56e1 1.44e2 1.08e1 1.14e0 4.07e1
The average statistics of precision ( P), recall ( R), F-score ( F) in percentage and runtime ( T) in milliseconds with scientiﬁc notation are reported for each dataset. The RemoteSensing dataset is
abbreviated as RS
123

==== Page 35 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 57
Fig. 4 2-D shape contours used in our experiments, from left to right, ﬁsh,whale ,fu,beijing
Fig. 5 The bunny and wolf pattern of 3-D point cloud used in our
experiments
methods. However, in our case, it has a restricted performance
with low recall and high accuracy, resulting in the failure
in RemoteSensing. This ﬁnding indicates that the learning
methods are data-dependent with limited generality.
6.3 Results on Point Set Registration
The experiments for point set registration consist of twoparts: non-rigid registration with 2-D shape contour data
and rigid registration with 3-D point cloud data. In the 2-D
case, six representative methods, namely, TPS-RPM (Chuiand Rangarajan 2003 ), GMM (Jian and V emuri 2011 ), CPD
(Myronenko and Song 2010 ),L
2E(Ma et al. 2013b ), PR-
GLS (Ma et al. 2015a ), and APM (Lian et al. 2017 )a r e
evaluated. In the 3-D case, the rigid versions of GMM andCPD as well as ICP (Besl and McKay 1992 ) and GoICP
(Yang et al. 2016 ) are evaluated. The experiments of this part
are performed on a desktop with 3.4 GHz Intel Core i5-7500CPU, 8GB memory.
The point data are normalized as inputs, thus allowing
the use of a ﬁxed threshold to evaluate the registration per-formance. Speciﬁcally, a point is accurately aligned if itsdistance to the ground truth corresponding point is below a
given threshold. Thus, we can deﬁne the accuracy of reg-
istration as the percentage of accurately aligned points. In
our experiment, the threshold is empirically set to 0 .1. Four
patterns are collected to evaluate the non-rigid 2-D registra-tion results, as shown in Fig. 4. We also create ﬁve deformed
shapes for each pattern as the data to be registered, generating
a total of 20 instances. We also conduct noise, outlier, androtation experiments on these instances. For the 3-D case, as
shown in Fig. 5, two patterns are used, and we exert random
rotation to create 20 instances for each pattern. Noise andoutlier experiments are also conducted on these 40 instances.
The results of non-rigid 2-D registration are presented in
Fig. 6. The outlier experiments of APM are excluded due
to its prohibitive runtime with the increase in data points.The experimental setting is relatively challenging, and the
weaknesses of each method have emerged. For instance,
TPS-RPM is generally robust to outliers, but it can bedegraded in the case of severe noises. CPD and GMM have
similar performances and are sensitive to outliers. L
2Eand
PR-GLS utilize the information of shape context descriptorto guide the registration, but their performances are unstable.
APM can only deal with afﬁne deformation, thus leading to
its inferior performance. However, compared to other meth-ods that are only locally convergent and fail to handle violentrotations, APM is invariant to rotation owing to its global
optimality.
The results of rigid 3-D point cloud registration are pre-
sented in Fig. 7. In our random rotation settings, the locally
convergent methods, i.e., GMM, CPD, and ICP , fail to accu-
rately register the point clouds. In this regard, the globallyoptimal method, GoICP , outperforms them by a large margin.
123

==== Page 36 ====
58 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Noise Level0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.911.11.2Average Accuracy TPSRPM
GMM
CPD
L2E
PR-GLS
APM
Degree of Rotation-0.200.20.40.60.811.2Average AccuracyTPSRPM
GMMCPD
L2E
PR-GLSAPM
1
Outlier Ratio00.20.40.60.811.2Average Accuracy
TPSRPM
GMM
CPD
L2E
PR-GLS
0.01 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09 30 60 90 120 150 180 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0
Cumulative Distribution10-210-1100101Time/s
TPSRPM
GMMCPD
L2EPR-GLS
APM
Fig. 6 Quantitative evaluation of non-rigid 2-D shape contour registration
0.01 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09
Noise Level-0.200.20.40.60.811.2Average AccuracyGMM
CPD
ICP
GoICP
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Outlier Ratio-0.200.20.40.60.811.2Average AccuracyGMM
CPD
ICP
GoICP
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Cumulative Distribution100101102103Time/sGMM
CPD
ICP
GoICP
Fig. 7 Quantitative evaluation of rigid 3-D point cloud registration
6.4 Results on Graph Matching
Graph matching represents an alternative means to establish
correspondences between two feature sets. Here, we evalu-ate seven state-of-the-art methods in the literature, namely,
SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ), SMAC (Cour et al. 2007 ),
IPFP (Leordeanu et al. 2009 ), RRWM (Cho et al. 2010 ), TM
(Duchenne et al. 2011 ), GNCCP (Liu and Qiao 2014 ), and
FGM (Zhou and De la Torre 2015 ) on several extensively
used and publicly available datasets. These datasets includethe CMU house sequence (Cho et al. 2010 ; Zhou and De la
Torre 2015 ), the car and motorbike dataset (Zhou and De la
Torre 2015 ; Leordeanu et al. 2012 ), and the Chinese char-
acter dataset (Liu and Qiao 2014 ; Zhang et al. 2016 ). The
experiments of this part are performed on a desktop with 3.4
GHz Intel Core i5-7500 CPU, 8GB memory.
The CMU house sequence consists of 111 images of a
toy house captured from different viewpoints. Each image
has 30 manually marked landmark points with known corre-
spondences. We match all images spaced by 5 ,10,..., 110
frames and compute the average performance per separationgap. The large gaps indicate more challenging scenes due to
the increasing perspective changes. We build the graph using
Delaunay triangulation and construct the afﬁnity matrix sim-ply by the edge distance as in Zhou and De la Torre ( 2015 ),
except for TM, which has high order. Different from the
original equal-size 30-node to 30-node matching, we removesome nodes and conduct unequal-size matching experiments
with the corresponding settings of 25 versus 30 and 20 versus30 on this dataset to test the robustness of these algorithms,
as presented in Fig. 8. The ﬁgure shows that in the equal-
size matching, most GM methods can achieve near-optimal
performance, except for the spectral relaxed baselines. Forunequal-size matching, the performance gap has emerged.
In summary, FGM achieves the best performance with the
highest time cost, and RRWM is the most balanced algo-rithm, which is only inferior to FGM in accuracy but is much
more efﬁcient.
The car andmotorbike dataset consists of 30 pairs of car
images and 20 pairs of motorbike images obtained from thePASCAL challenges (Everingham et al. 2010 ). Each pair
contains 30–60 ground-truth correspondences. We consider
the most general graph wherein the edge is directed and theedge feature is asymmetrical. Similarly, the graph is built
with Delaunay triangulation, and the afﬁnity matrix is con-
structed as in Zhou and De la Torre ( 2015 ) except for TM.
To test the robustness to outliers, 2 ∼20 outliers are ran-
domly selected from the background. As shown in Fig. 9,t h e
path following algorithms, i.e., GNCCP and FGM, outper-form all other methods, except for TM with the highest timecost. The RRWM remains competitive with high accuracy
and low runtime. The higher-order TM has achieved remark-
able performance in this experiment with consistent optimalperformance. Moreover, its runtime is reasonable due to the
adopted random sampling strategy used for constructing the
three-order afﬁnity matrix. The direct comparison of pairwiseand higher-order graph matching methods can be unfair, but
123

==== Page 37 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 59
Baseline0.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.951Accuracy
SM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
Baseline10-310-210-1100101102Time/sSM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
Baseline0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Accuracy
SM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
Baseline0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Accuracy SM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110
Fig. 8 Quantitative evaluation on the CMU house dataset. Top row
(from left to right): illustration of equal-size matching with ground-truth correspondence, 30 versus 30 matching results and its runtimestatistics. Bottom row (from left two right): example of unequal-size
matching with ground-truth correspondence, 25 versus 30 matchingresults and 20 versus 30 matching results
#Outlier0.40.50.60.70.80.91Accuracy
SM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
#Outlier10-310-210-1100101102Time/sSM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
#Outlier0.40.50.60.70.80.91Accuracy
SM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM
#Outlier10-310-210-1100101102Time/sSM
SMAC
IPFP
RRWM
TM
GNCCP
FGM02468 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0 0 2 4 6 8 1 01 21 41 61 82 0
02468 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0 0 2 4 6 8 1 01 21 41 61 82 0
Fig. 9 Quantitative evaluation on car andmotorbike dataset. Top row
(from left to right): example of equal-size matching with ground-truthcorrespondence, car image matching results and the runtime statistics.Bottom row (from left two right): example of unequal-size matching
with ground-truth correspondence, motorbike matching results and theruntime statistics
123

==== Page 38 ====
60 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Fig. 10 Examples of the Chinese character dataset
the results still exhibit the efﬁcacy of utilizing higher-order
information in GM.
The Chinese character dataset has four hand-written Chi-
nese characters with marked features wherein each characterhas 10 samples. We create matching instances between allpairs of samples for each character, i.e. 45 instances each.
The average performance is summarized in Table 2and the
example is shown in Fig. 10. The scene is relatively challeng-
ing, and we use simple edge distances to construct afﬁnity
matrix, resulting in the relatively low accuracy for all meth-
ods. However, the superior performers are still evident. FGMand TM perform similarly, but TM is more efﬁcient.
6.5 Results on Pose Estimation
The camera pose estimation aims to determine the posi-
tion and orientation of the camera with respect to the objector scene, which is a signiﬁcant step in 3-D computer vision
tasks, such as SfM, SLAM, and visual localization for self-
driving cars and augmented reality. Here, the camera poseestimation of traditional approaches estimates the pose from
a set of 2-D versus 3-D matches between pixels in a query
image and 3-D points in a scene model. However, the 3-Dmodel is typically obtained via SfM, thus leading to poten-tially inaccurate pose estimates. To address this problem, one
alternative is to perform a set of 2-D versus 2-D correspon-
dences between two or more images of the same scene.
To estimate the camera pose, the putative sparse feature
correspondences must also be constructed with off-the-shelf
feature matcher, such as SIFT. Moreover, the most classi-cal pipeline is the combination of SIFT and RANSAC. The
geometric model can be estimated and converted into the rel-
ative camera pose, i.e., rotation matrix and translation matrix.Many advanced handcrafted methods and trainable ones areconsidered as good options for their superior performance.
Here, we integrate some typical mismatch removal meth-
ods between SIFT and RANSAC, while some learning-basedmethods can intrinsically output the transform matrix from
their networks, which can be directly used for this task. In
addition, two different datasets, including indoor and outdoorscenes, are used in this experiment. The performance is char-
acterized by the mean average precision (mAP), as depicted
in Table 3. The experiments of this part are performed on a
server with 2.00 GHz Intel Xeon CPU, 128 GB memory.In the following, we brieﬂy introduce the datasets and
evaluation metrics to be used and provide quantitative com-parisons and analyses.
Outdoor scenes. We adopt the Yahoo’s YFCC100M
dataset (Thomee et al. 2016 ), with 100 million publicly
accessible tourist photos from the Internet and subsequentlycurate into 72 image sequences for SfM. From this dataset,
68 sequences are selected as valid raw data. Next, we use
the Visual SfM (Heinly et al. 2015 ) to recover the camera
poses and generate the ground-truth. This dataset is divided
into disjoint subsets for training (60%), validation (20%),
and test (20%). For fairness, all learning-based methods arere-trained on the same training set.
Indoor scenes. We adopt the SUN3D dataset (Xiao et al.
2013 ), which is an RGBD video dataset with camera poses
computed by generalized bundle adjustment. Speciﬁcally,all samples in this dataset are subsampled from videos of
every 10 frames of feature ofﬁce-like scenes. This dataset
is extremely challenging for sparse correspondence methodsdue to the few distinctive features, heavy repetitive elements,
and substantial self-occlusions. Zhang et al. ( 2019b ) reported
that some sequences in this dataset do not provide cameraposes. Thus, these sequences are dropped and 239 sequences
are ﬁnally obtained as valid data. Similar to the data of out-
door scenes, the SUN3D dataset is split into disjoint subsetsfor training (60%), validation (20%), and testing (20%).
Evaluation Metrics. Once potential inliers are obtained,
it is possible to efﬁciently estimate the rotation and transla-
tion vectors by RANSAC. The performance can be evaluatedusing the angular difference between the estimated and
ground-truth vectors; i.e., the closest arc distance in degrees
as the error metric. First, a curve should be generated by clas-sifying whether each pose as accurate or not. The precision
should be computed with respect to the given angle threshold
from 0
◦to 180◦, and a normalized cumulative curve should
be built. Second, the area under curve (AUC) is computed upto a maximum threshold of 5
◦,1 0◦,o r2 0◦. Since the curve
itself can measure precision, its AUC can be regarded as the
metric of mAP .
Several traditional mismatch removal methods, i.e., GMS
(Bian et al. 2017 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 ), LPM (Ma et al.
2019d ), SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ) and VFC (Ma et al.
2014 ) are used for evaluation of the pose estimation task,
in addition to two deep-learning-based methods, i.e., LFGC
(Moo Yi et al. 2018 ) and OAN (Zhang et al. 2019b ). For
these methods, pose estimation results are obtained by a sub-sequent RANSAC procedure. In addition, plain RANSAC
(Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) is also included for comparison.
As shown in Table 3, on the adopted dataset, the perfor-
mances of traditional methods are very limited due to the
dominant outliers. In contrast, the deep-learning-based meth-
ods seem to signiﬁcantly outperform the traditional methods,resilient to the high outlier ratio.
123

==== Page 39 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 61Table 2 Evaluation by average accuracy and runtime on Chinese character dataset (best in bold)
Dataset SM (Leordeanu
and Hebert2005 )SMAC (Cour
et al. 2007 )IPFP (Leordeanu
et al. 2009 )RRWM (Cho
et al. 2010 )TM (Duchenne
et al. 2011 )GNCCP (Liu and
Qiao 2014 )FGM (Zhou and
De la Torre2015 )
Character1 (Acc) 0.2151 0.2690 0.3325 0.5548 0.7611 0.5508 0.6048
Character1 (Time) 0.0045 0.0293 0.0089 0.0408 0.2834 0.3138 2.1719Character2 (Acc) 0.3449 0.4464 0.6580 0.8097 0.7729 0.8879 0.8986
Character2 (Time) 0.0033 0.0121 0.0064 0.0129 0.2300 0.1351 1.1638Character3 (Acc) 0.2413 0.2595 0.3889 0.5151 0.9000 0.5040 0.6500
Character3 (Time) 0.0039 0.0284 0.0081 0.0343 0.2835 0.2932 1.9731Character4 (Acc) 0.2077 0.2338 0.2879 0.5082 0.5787 0.4242 0.6116
Character4 (Time) 0.0033 0.0113 0.0062 0.0218 0.2290 0.2189 1.3926
123

==== Page 40 ====
62 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79Table 3 mAP performance of representative methods for pose estimation on YFCC100M andSUN3D datasets
Dataset degree GMS (Bian et al.
2017 )ICF (Li and Hu
2010 )LPM (Ma et al.
2019d )SM (Leordeanu
and Hebert 2005 )VFC (Ma et al.
2014 )RANSAC (Fis-
chler and Bolles1981 )LFGC (Moo Yi
et al. 2018 )OAN (Zhang
et al. 2019b )
YFCC100M 5 1.61 3 .71 6 .26 3 .77 7 .79 9 .08 47.98 52.18
10 3.30 7 .76 11 .65 7 .79 13 .87 14 .28 – –
20 7.04 16 .13 21 .79 16 .48 24 .13 22 .80 – –
SUN3D 5 0.39 3 .48 6 .36 5 .08 7 .65 2 .85 15.98 17.50
10 1.22 6 .65 11 .14 9 .13 12 .54 5 .61 – –
20 3.94 13 .52 19 .52 16 .79 20 .78 11 .22 — –
123

==== Page 41 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 63Table 4 Performance by maximum recall rate (%) at precision equals to 100% for loop closure detection (best in bold)
dataset LPM (Ma et al.
2019d )GMS (Bian et al.
2017 )GS (Liu and Yan
2010 )SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 )I C F ( L i a n d H u
2010 )RANSAC
(Fischler andBolles 1981 )LORANSAC
(Lebeda et al.2012 )VFC (Ma et al.
2014 )
Lip6Indoor 91.82 88.64 87.73 91 .36 88.18 93.18 93 .18 90.45
Lip6Outdoor 54.89 54.23 54.06 55 .22 51.41 56.22 56.55 54.06
NewCollege 84.99 84.26 84.75 85 .96 64.89 85.47 84.99 86.44
CityCentre 73.08 70.05 71.66 71 .3 45.28 74.33 75.04 71.12
123

==== Page 42 ====
64 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
6.6 Results on Loop-Closure Detection
Appearance-based loop-closure detection is a fundamental
component in visual SLAM. The essence involves recogniz-
ing previously visited areas of the environment. This task iscrucial in reducing the drift of the estimated trajectory causedby the accumulative error and contributes to global consistent
mapping.
Appearance-based loop-closure detection only uses image
similarity to identify previously visited places. This category
commonly starts with the construction of a set of putative
correspondences by a feature operator, such as SIFT, betweenthe current image and each previously visited image. Then,
the closed loop is determined on the basis of the number
of accurate matches using mismatch removal methods. Thissolution is simple but relatively effective.
Moreover, the computational requirement in directly real-
izing feature matching between the current image and each
previously visited image would be largely increased. Toensure the real-time performance of loop-closure detection,
we use a two-step approach. In the ﬁrst step, loop-closure
candidates are selected by the BoW method with presup-posed score threshold, which is fast and easy to implement.
However, the BoW method only considers whether or not a
feature exists and neglects the spatial arrangement of the fea-tures, thereby leading to perceptual aliasing problem. Thus,in the second step, a robust feature matching algorithm is
required to determine whether a loop-closure candidate is a
true loop-closure event.
To evaluate the effectiveness and compare the perfor-
mance of the loop-closure detection methods based on feature
matching, we conduct extensive experiments on four differ-ent datasets, including NewCollege ,CityCentre ,Lip6Indoor ,
and Lip6Outdoor . The performance is characterized by the
maximum recall that can be achieved at 100% precision, asshown in Table 4. The experiments are performed on a desk-
top with 2 .6 GHz Intel Core CPU, 16 GB memory.
The NewCollege and CityCentre datasets are obtained
from the work of Cummins and Newman Cummins andNewman ( 2008 ). The NewCollege dataset contains 1 ,073
images with size of 640 ×480, and the CityCentre dataset
contains 1 ,237 images with size of 640 ×480. The images
were recorded by means of the vision system of a wheeled
robotic platform while traversing 2 .2kmthrough a college’s
campus grounds and adjoining parks with buildings, roads,gardens, cars, and people. The environment is outdoor anddynamic.
The Lip6Indoor and Lip6Outdoor datasets are obtained
from Angeli et al. ( 2008 ). The Lip6Indoor dataset has 388
images with size of 240 ×192; it is an indoor image
sequence with strong perceptual aliasing problem. While
theLip6Outdoor dataset has 1 ,063 images with size of
240×192; it is a long outdoor image sequence of a street withmany buildings, cars, and people. Both image sequences are
grabbed with a single-monocular handheld camera. In addi-tion, a binary matrix is deﬁned as the ground truth for each
dataset, whose rows and columns correspond to images at
different time indices. Each element in this binary matrixdenotes the presence (set to 1) or absence (set to 0) of aloop-closure event between the corresponding frame pair.
To generate consistent maps, the loop-closure detection
module should obtain true positive detections to provideinformation for the back-end optimization, thereby reducing
the drift of the estimated trajectory caused by accumulative
error. However, the loop-closure detection result must alsoinclude no false positive detections as this can affect the per-
formance of a full SLAM system and result in a completely
inaccurate map result. In summary, the loop closure mech-anisms should work at 100% precision while maintaininghigh recall rate. In such cases, the evaluation of loop-closure
detection algorithm is performed in terms of precision-recall
metrics. Here, precision is the ratio of the number of true pos-
itive loop-closure detections to the number of total positive
loop-closure detections identiﬁed by the system, and recall
is the ratio between the true positive loop closure detectionsand the total actual loop-closure events deﬁned by the ground
truth of dataset. Combining the analysis and the curve, we
focus on the maximum recall that can be achieved at 100%precision, indicating that the loop-closure detection resultincludes no false positive detection and avoids the inﬂuence
in a full SLAM system.
Some of the representative mismatch removal methods
are adopted for comparison in our experiment. The quan-
titative comparisons, with respect to maximum recall rate
at precision of 100% on different datasets, are presented inTable 4. From the results, we can see that the methods that
pursue relaxed geometric constraints, i.e., LPM (Ma et al.
2019d ), GMS (Bian et al. 2017 ), GS (Liu and Yan 2010 ),
SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 )
and VFC (Ma et al. 2014 ), are less favored in this task. In
comparison, the resampling methods that exploit parametric
models of the correspondences, i.e., RANSAC (Fischler andBolles 1981 ) and LORANSAC (Lebeda et al. 2012 ), can give
better results for loop-closure detection.
7 Conclusions and Future Trends
Image matching has played a signiﬁcant role in various
visual applications and has attracted considerable attention.
Researchers have also achieved signiﬁcant progress in this
ﬁeld in the past few decades. Therefore, we provide a compre-hensive review of the existing image matching methods–from
handcrafted to trainable ones–in order to provide better
reference and understanding for the researchers in this com-munity.
123

==== Page 43 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 65
Image matching can be brieﬂy classiﬁed into area- and
feature-based matching. Area-based methods are used toachieve dense matching without detecting any salient fea-
ture points from the images. They are more welcomed in
high overlapping image matching (such as medical imageregistration) and narrow-baseline stereo (such as binocularstereo matching). The deep learning-based techniques have
drawn increasing attention for such a pipeline. Therefore, we
provide a brief review of these types of methods in Sect. 4
and focus more on the learning-based methods.
The feature-based image matching can effectively address
the limitations in large viewpoint, wide baseline, and seri-ous non-rigid image matching problems. It can be used in a
pipeline of salient feature detection, discriminative descrip-
tion, and reliable matching, often including transformationmodel estimation. Following this procedure, feature detec-tion can extract the distinctive structure from the image.
Meanwhile, feature description may be regarded as an image
representation method, which is widely used for image cod-ing and similarity measurement. The matching step can be
extended into different types of matching forms, such as
graph matching, point set registration, descriptor match-ing and mismatch removal, as well as the matching task
in 3-D cases. These are more ﬂexible and applicable than
area-based methods, thereby receiving considerable atten-tion in image matching area. Therefore, we review them withthe core idea that they are used from traditional techniques
to classical learning and deep learning. Moreover, to pro-
vide a comprehensive understanding of the signiﬁcance inimage matching, we introduce several applications related to
image matching. We also provide comprehensive and objec-
tive comparisons and analyses of these classical and deeplearning-based techniques through extensive experiments on
representative datasets.
Despite the considerable development in both theory and
performance, image matching remains an open problem withchallenges for further efforts.
– The two-stage strategy for feature matching, which has
been widely adopted in the literature, performs mismatch
removal on only a small set of potential correspondences
with sufﬁciently similar descriptors. However, this maylead to restricted performance in recall, which can beproblematic for some scenarios.
– In a different scenario, correspondences are sought not
between projections of physically the same points indifferent images, but between semantic analogs across
different instances within a category. This requires new
paradigms for feature matching in feature description andmismatch removal.
– Joint matching of multiple images has been proven to
drastically boost the matching performance of pairwisematching and has attracted considerable attention inrecent years. However, the complexity is still the main
concern of the problem. Thus, practical and efﬁcient algo-rithms are required.
– In recent years, deep learning schemes have rapidly
evolved and shown tremendous improvements in manyresearch ﬁelds related to computer vision. However, in theliterature of feature matching, most works have applied
deep learning techniques to feature detection and descrip-
tion. Thus, the potential capacity for accurate featurematching can be further explored in the future.
– Image matching among multi-modal images is still an
unsolved problem. In the future, deep learning techniquescan be used for better feature detection and description
performance.
– Feature matching is a fundamental task in computer
vision. However, its application has not been sufﬁcientlyexplored. Thus, one promising research direction is to
customize modern feature matching techniques to sat-
isfy different requirements of practical vision tasks, e.g.,SfM and SLAM.
Acknowledgements This work was partly supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 61773295 and61972250, Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province under GrantNo. 2019CFA037, and National Key Research and Development Pro-gram of China under Grant No. 2018AAA0100704.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Aanæs, H., Dahl, A. L., & Pedersen, K. S. (2012). Interesting interest
points. International Journal of Computer Vision ,97(1), 18–35.
Aanæs, H., Jensen, R. R., V ogiatzis, G., Tola, E., & Dahl, A. B. (2016).
Large-scale data for multiple-view stereopsis. International Jour-
nal of Computer Vision ,120(2), 153–168.
Abdel-Hakim, A. E., & Farag, A. A. (2006). Csift: A sift descriptor
with color invariant characteristics. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1978–
1983.
123

==== Page 44 ====
66 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Adamczewski, K., Suh, Y ., & Mu Lee, K. (2015). Discrete tabu search
for graph matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE international con-
ference on computer vision , pp. 109–117.
Adams, W. P ., & Johnson, T. A. (1994). Improved linear programming-
based lower bounds for the quadratic assignment problem.DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Com-puter Science ,16, 43–77.
Aﬂalo, Y ., Dubrovina, A., & Kimmel, R. (2016). Spectral general-
ized multi-dimensional scaling. International Journal of Computer
Vision ,118(3), 380–392.
Agrawal, M., Konolige, K., & Blas, M. R. (2008). Censure: Center
surround extremas for realtime feature detection and matching. InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision , pp.
102–115.
Alahi, A., Ortiz, R., & V andergheynst, P . (2012). Freak: Fast retina key-
point. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 510–517.
Alcantarilla, P . F., Bartoli, A., & Davison, A. J. (2012) Kaze features.
InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision ,
pp. 214–227.
Alcantarilla, P . F., & Solutions, T. (2011). Fast explicit diffusion for
accelerated features in nonlinear scale spaces. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,34(7), 1281–1298.
Aldana-Iuit, J., Mishkin, D., Chum, O., & Matas, J. (2016). In the sad-
dle: Chasing fast and repeatable features. In Proceedings of the
international conference on pattern recognition , pp. 675–680.
Almohamad, H., & Duffuaa, S. O. (1993). A linear programming
approach for the weighted graph matching problem. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,15(5),
522–525.
Amberg, B., Romdhani, S., & V etter, T. (2007). Optimal step nonrigid
ICP algorithms for surface registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
Angeli, A., Filliat, D., Doncieux, S., & Meyer, J. A. (2008). A fast and
incremental method for loop-closure detection using bags of visualwords. In: IEEE transactions on robotics , pp. 1027–1037.
Arandjelovi´ c, R., & Zisserman, A. (2012). Three things everyone should
know to improve object retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2911–
2918.
Arar, M., Ginger, Y ., Danon, D., Bermano, A. H., & Cohen-Or, D.
(2020). Unsupervised multi-modal image registration via geome-try preserving image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 13,410–13,419.
Aubry, M., Schlickewei, U., & Cremers, D. (2011). The wave kernel
signature: A quantum mechanical approach to shape analysis. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision workshops , pp. 1626–1633.
Avrithis, Y ., & Tolias, G. (2014). Hough pyramid matching: Speeded-up
geometry re-ranking for large scale image retrieval. International
Journal of Computer Vision ,107(1), 1–19.
Awrangjeb, M., & Lu, G. (2008). Robust image corner detection based
on the chord-to-point distance accumulation technique. IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia ,10(6), 1059–1072.
Awrangjeb, M., Lu, G., & Fraser, C. S. (2012). Performance compar-
isons of contour-based corner detectors. IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing ,21(9), 4167–4179.
Babai, L. (2018). Groups, graphs, algorithms: The graph isomorphism
problem. In Proceedings of the international congress of mathe-
maticians , pp. 3319–3336.
Balntas, V ., Johns, E., Tang, L., & Mikolajczyk, K. (2016a). Pn-net:
Conjoined triple deep network for learning local image descriptors.arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.05030 .
Balntas, V ., Lenc, K., V edaldi, A., & Mikolajczyk, K. (2017). Hpatches:
A benchmark and evaluation of handcrafted and learned localdescriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5173–5182.
Balntas, V ., Riba, E., Ponsa, D., & Mikolajczyk, K. (2016b). Learning
local feature descriptors with triplets and shallow convolutionalneural networks. In Proceedings of the British machine vision con-
ference , pp. 1–11.
Barath, D., & Matas, J. (2018). Graph-cut ransac. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
6733–6741.
Barath, D., Ivashechkin, M., & Matas, J. (2019a). Progressive napsac:
Sampling from gradually growing neighborhoods. arXiv preprintarXiv:1906.02295 .
Barath, D., Matas, J., & Noskova, J. (2019b). Magsac: Marginalizing
sample consensus. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10,197–10,205.
Barath, D., Noskova, J., Ivashechkin, M., & Matas, J. (2020).
Magsac++, a fast, reliable and accurate robust estimator. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision andpattern recognition , pp. 1304–1312.
Barroso-Laguna, A., Riba, E., Ponsa, D., & Mikolajczyk, K. (2019).
Key.net: Keypoint detection by handcrafted and learned CNNﬁlters. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pp. 5836–5844.
Bay, H., Tuytelaars, T., & V an Gool, L. (2006). Surf: Speeded up robust
features. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision , pp. 404–417.
Bay, H., Ess, A., Tuytelaars, T., & V an Gool, L. (2008). Speeded-up
robust features (surf). Computer Vision and Image Understanding ,
110(3), 346–359.
Bazin, J.C., Seo, Y ., & Pollefeys, M. (2012). Globally optimal consensus
set maximization through rotation search. In Proceedings of the
Asian conference on computer vision , pp. 539–551.
Bellavia, F., & Colombo, C. (2020). Is there anything new to say about
sift matching? International Journal of Computer Vision ,128(3),
1847–1866.
Belongie, S., Malik, J., & Puzicha, J. (2001). Shape context: A new
descriptor for shape matching and object recognition. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 831–837.
Belongie, S., Malik, J., & Puzicha, J. (2002). Shape matching and object
recognition using shape contexts. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,4, 509–522.
Bernard, F., Theobalt, C., & Moeller, M. (2018). Ds*: Tighter lifting-
free convex relaxations for quadratic matching problems. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 4310–4319.
Bernard, F., Thunberg, J., Swoboda, P ., & Theobalt, C. (2019).
Hippi: Higher-order projected power iterations for scalable multi-
matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pp. 10,284–10,293.
Besl, P . J., & McKay, N. D. (1992). Method for registration of 3-d
shapes. In Sensor fusion IV: Control paradigms and data struc-
tures , V ol. 1611, pp. 586–607.
Bhattacharjee, D., & Roy, H. (2019). Pattern of local gravitational force
(plgf): A novel local image descriptor. In IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence .
Bhowmik, A., Gumhold, S., Rother, C., & Brachmann, E. (2020). Rein-
forced feature points: Optimizing feature detection and descriptionfor a high-level task. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition
, pp. 4948–4957.
Bian, J., Lin, W. Y ., Matsushita, Y ., Yeung, S. K., Nguyen, T. D., &
Cheng, M. M. (2017). Gms: Grid-based motion statistics for fast,ultra-robust feature correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4181–
4190.
Biasotti, S., Cerri, A., Bronstein, A., & Bronstein, M. (2016). Recent
trends, applications, and perspectives in 3d shape similarity assess-
123

==== Page 45 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 67
ment. In Computer graphics forum , V ol. 35, Wiley Online Library,
pp. 87–119.
Blais, G., & Levine, M. D. (1995). Registering multiview range data to
create 3d computer objects. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,17(8), 820–824.
Bonny, M. Z., & Uddin, M. S. (2016). Feature-based image stitching
algorithms. In Proceedings of the international workshop on com-
putational intelligence , pp. 198–203.
Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Melzi, S., Bronstein, M. M., Castellani, U.,
& V andergheynst, P . (2015). Learning class-speciﬁc descriptorsfor deformable shapes using localized spectral convolutional net-works. In Computer graphics forum , V ol. 34, Wiley Online Library,
pp. 13–23.
Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Rodolà, E., & Bronstein, M. (2016). Learning
shape correspondence with anisotropic convolutional neural net-works. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
3189–3197.
Brachmann, E., & Rother, C. (2019). Neural-guided RANSAC: Learn-
ing where to sample model hypotheses. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 4322–4331.
Brachmann, E., Krull, A., Nowozin, S., Shotton, J., Michel, F.,
Gumhold, S., & Rother, C. (2017). Dsac-differentiable RANSAC
for camera localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 6684–6692.
Bronstein, M. M., & Kokkinos, I. (2010). Scale-invariant heat kernel
signatures for non-rigid shape recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
1704–1711.
Bronstein, A. M., Bronstein, M. M., & Kimmel, R. (2006). General-
ized multidimensional scaling: a framework for isometry-invariantpartial surface matching. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences ,103(5), 1168–1172.
Brown, M., Hua, G., & Winder, S. (2010). Discriminative learning of
local image descriptors. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,33(1), 43–57.
Brown, M., & Lowe, D. G. (2007). Automatic panoramic image stitch-
ing using invariant features. International Journal of Computer
Vision ,74(1), 59–73.
Caelli, T., & Kosinov, S. (2004). An eigenspace projection clustering
method for inexact graph matching. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,26(4), 515–519.
Caetano, T. S., McAuley, J. J., Cheng, L., Le, Q. V ., & Smola, A. J.
(2009). Learning graph matching. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,31(6), 1048–1058.
Cai, H., Mikolajczyk, K., & Matas, J. (2010). Learning linear discrimi-
nant projections for dimensionality reduction of image descriptors.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
33(2), 338–352.
Calonder, M., Lepetit, V ., Strecha, C., & Fua, P . (2010). Brief: Binary
robust independent elementary features. In Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision , pp. 778–792.
Campbell, D., & Petersson, L. (2015). An adaptive data representation
for robust point-set registration and merging. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 4292–
4300.
Campbell, D., & Petersson, L. (2016). Gogma: Globally-optimal gaus-
sian mixture alignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5685–5694.
Canny, J. (1987). A computational approach to edge detection. In Read-
ings in computer vision , Elsevier, pp. 184–203.
Cao, S. Y ., Shen, H. L., Chen, S. J., & Li, C. (2020). Boosting structure
consistency for multispectral and multimodal image registration.IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,29, 5147–5162.
Castellani, U., Cristani, M., Fantoni, S., & Murino, V . (2008). Sparse
points matching by combining 3d mesh saliency with statisticaldescriptors. In Computer graphics forum , V ol. 27, Wiley Online
Library, pp. 643–652.
Chang, J. R., & Chen, Y . S. (2018). Pyramid stereo matching network.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 5410–5418.
Chang, W., & Zwicker, M. (2009). Range scan registration using
reduced deformable models. In Computer graphics forum , V ol. 28,
Wiley Online Library, pp. 447–456.
Chang, M. C., & Kimia, B. B. (2011). Measuring 3d shape similarity
by graph-based matching of the medial scaffolds. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding ,115(5), 707–720.
Chen, Q., & Koltun, V . (2015). Robust nonrigid registration by convex
optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision , pp. 2039–2047.
Chen, Y ., Guibas, L., & Huang, Q. (2014). Near-optimal joint object
matching via convex relaxation. In Proceedings of the interna-
tional conference on machine learning , pp. 100–108.
Chen, Y . C., Huang, P . H., Y u, L. Y ., Huang, J. B., Yang, M. H., & Lin,
Y . Y . (2018). Deep semantic matching with foreground detectionand cycle-consistency. In Proceedings of the Asian conference on
computer vision , pp. 347–362.
Chen, J., Kellokumpu, V ., Zhao, G., & Pietikäinen, M. (2013). Rlbp:
Robust local binary pattern. In Proceedings of the British machine
vision conference .
Chen, J., Wang, L., Li, X., & Fang, Y . (2019). Arbicon-net: Arbitrary
continuous geometric transformation networks for image registra-tion. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
3410–3420.
Chen, H. M., Arora, M. K., & V arshney, P . K. (2003a). Mutual
information-based image registration for remote sensing data.International Journal of Remote Sensing ,24(18), 3701–3706.
Chen, H., & Bhanu, B. (2007). 3d free-form object recognition in range
images using local surface patches. Pattern Recognition Letters ,
28(10), 1252–1262.
Chen, Q. S., Defrise, M., & Deconinck, F. (1994). Symmetric phase-
only matched ﬁltering of Fourier-Mellin transforms for imageregistration and recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence ,16(12), 1156–1168.
Chen, C., Li, Y ., Liu, W., & Huang, J. (2015). Sirf: Simultaneous satel-
lite image registration and fusion in a uniﬁed framework. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing ,24(11), 4213–4224.
Chen, J., Shan, S., He, C., Zhao, G., Pietikainen, M., Chen, X., et al.
(2009). Wld: A robust local image descriptor. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,32(9), 1705–1720.
Chen, J., Tian, J., Lee, N., Zheng, J., Smith, R. T., & Laine, A. F. (2010).
A partial intensity invariant feature descriptor for multimodalretinal image registration. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engi-
neering ,57(7), 1707–1718.
Chen, H. M., V arshney, P . K., & Arora, M. K. (2003b). Perfor-
mance of mutual information similarity measure for registrationof multitemporal remote sensing images. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,
41(11), 2445–2454.
Chertok, M., & Keller, Y . (2010). Efﬁcient high order matching.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
32(12), 2205–2215.
Chetverikov, D., Stepanov, D., & Krsek, P . (2005). Robust Euclidean
alignment of 3d point sets: The trimmed iterative closest pointalgorithm. Image and Vision Computing ,23(3), 299–309.
Cho, M., & Lee, K. M. (2012). Progressive graph matching: Making
a move of graphs via probabilistic voting. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
398–405.
Cho, M., Lee, J., & Lee, K. M. (2010). Reweighted random walks for
graph matching. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 492–505.
123

==== Page 46 ====
68 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Chopra, S., Hadsell, R., LeCun, Y ., et al. (2005). Learning a similar-
ity metric discriminatively, with application to face veriﬁcation.InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 539–546.
Choy, C. B., Gwak, J., Savarese, S., & Chandraker, M. (2016). Univer-
sal correspondence network. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 2414–2422.
Choy, C., Lee, J., Ranftl, R., Park, J., & Koltun, V . (2020). High-
dimensional convolutional networks for geometric pattern recog-nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 11,227–11,236.
Chui, H., & Rangarajan, A. (2003). A new point matching algorithm for
non-rigid registration. Computer Vision and Image Understanding ,
89(2–3), 114–141.
Chum, O., & Matas, J. (2005). Matching with prosac-progressive sam-
ple consensus. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 220–226.
Chum, O., Matas, J., & Kittler, J. (2003). Locally optimized ransac. In
Proceedings of the joint pattern recognition symposium , Springer,
pp. 236–243.
Churchill, D., & V ardy, A. (2013). An orientation invariant visual hom-
ing algorithm. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems ,71(1),
3–29.
Cook, D. J., & Holder, L. B. (2006). Mining graph data .N e wY o r k :
Wiley.
Cour, T., Srinivasan, P ., & Shi, J. (2007). Balanced graph matching. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 313–320.
Cummins, M., & Newman, P . (2008). Fab-map: Probabilistic localiza-
tion and mapping in the space of appearance. The International
Journal of Robotics Research ,27(6), 647–665.
Dalal, N., & Triggs, B. (2005). Histograms of oriented gradients for
human detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 886–893.
Danelljan, M., Meneghetti, G., Shahbaz Khan, F., & Felsberg, M.
(2016). A probabilistic framework for color-based point set regis-tration. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 1818–1826.
Datar, M., Immorlica, N., Indyk, P ., & Mirrokni, V . S. (2004). Locality-
sensitive hashing scheme based on p-stable distributions. InProceedings of the twentieth annual symposium on computationalgeometry , pp. 253–262.
Davison, A. J., Reid, I. D., Molton, N. D., & Stasse, O. (2007).
Monoslam: Real-time single camera slam. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,6, 1052–1067.
Dawn, S., Saxena, V ., & Sharma, B. (2010). Remote sensing image reg-
istration techniques: A survey. In Proceedings of the international
conference on image and signal processing , pp. 103–112.
de V os, B. D., Berendsen, F. F., Viergever, M. A., Sokooti, H., Staring,
M., & Isgum, I. (2019). A deep learning framework for unsuper-vised afﬁne and deformable image registration. Medical Image
Analysis ,52, 128–143.
de V os, B. D., Berendsen, F. F., Viergever, M. A., Staring, M., & Isgum,
I. (2017). End-to-end unsupervised deformable image registrationwith a convolutional neural network. In Deep learning in medi-
cal image analysis and multimodal learning for clinical decisionsupport , Springer, pp. 204–212.
Deng, H., Birdal, T., & Ilic, S. (2018). Ppfnet: Global context aware
local features for robust 3d point matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
195–205.
Deng, H., Zhang, W., Mortensen, E., Dietterich, T., & Shapiro, L.
(2007). Principal curvature-based region detector for object recog-nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
DeTone, D., Malisiewicz, T., & Rabinovich, A. (2016). Deep image
homography estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03798 .DeTone, D., Malisiewicz, T., & Rabinovich, A. (2018). Superpoint:
Self-supervised interest point detection and description. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and patternrecognition workshops , pp. 224–236.
Dong, J., & Soatto, S. (2015). Domain-size pooling in local descrip-
tors: Dsp-sift. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5097–5106.
Dorai, C., & Jain, A. K. (1997). Cosmos-a representation scheme for
3d free-form objects. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,19(10), 1115–1130.
Dosovitskiy, A., Fischer, P ., Ilg, E., Hausser, P ., Hazirbas, C., Golkov,
V ., V an Der Smagt, P ., Cremers, D., & Brox, T. (2015). Flownet:Learning optical ﬂow with convolutional networks. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp.
2758–2766.
Duan, Y ., Lu, J., Wang, Z., Feng, J., & Zhou, J. (2017). Learning deep
binary descriptor with multi-quantization. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
1183–1192.
Duchenne, O., Bach, F., Kweon, I. S., & Ponce, J. (2011). A tensor-based
algorithm for high-order graph matching. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,33(12), 2383–2395.
Du, Q., Fan, A., Ma, Y ., Fan, F., Huang, J., & Mei, X. (2018). Infrared
and visible image registration based on scale-invariant piifd featureand locality preserving matching. IEEE Access ,6, 64107–64121.
Dusmanu, M., Rocco, I., Pajdla, T., Pollefeys, M., Sivic, J., Torii, A., &
Sattler, T. (2019). D2-net: A trainable cnn for joint description anddetection of local features. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8092–8101.
Dym, N., Maron, H., & Lipman, Y . (2017). Ds++: A ﬂexible, scal-
able and provably tight relaxation for matching problems. arXivpreprint arXiv:1705.06148 .
Egozi, A., Keller, Y ., & Guterman, H. (2012). A probabilistic approach
to spectral graph matching. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,35(1), 18–27.
Elad, A., & Kimmel, R. (2003). On bending invariant signatures for
surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence ,25(10), 1285–1295.
Elbaz, G., Avraham, T., & Fischer, A. (2017). 3d point cloud registration
for localization using a deep neural network auto-encoder. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and patternrecognition , pp. 4631–4640.
Endres, F., Hess, J., Engelhard, N., Sturm, J., Cremers, D., & Burgard,
W. (2012). An evaluation of the rgb-d slam system. In Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on robotics and automation ,
pp. 1691–1696.
Erin Liong, V ., Lu, J., Wang, G., Moulin, P ., & Zhou, J. (2015). Deep
hashing for compact binary codes learning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
2475–2483.
Erlik Nowruzi, F., Laganiere, R., & Japkowicz, N. (2017). Homogra-
phy estimation from image pairs with hierarchical convolutionalnetworks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pp. 913–920.
Evangelidis, G. D., & Horaud, R. (2018). Joint alignment of multiple
point sets with batch and incremental expectation-maximization.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
40(6), 1397–1410.
Everingham, M., V an Gool, L., Williams, C. K., Winn, J., & Zisser-
man, A. (2010). The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge.International Journal of Computer Vision ,88(2), 303–338.
Fan, B., Kong, Q., Wang, X., Wanga, Z., Xiang, S., Pan, C., et al. (2019).
A performance evaluation of local features for image-based 3dreconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,28(10),
4774–4789.
123

==== Page 47 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 69
Fan, B., Wu, F., & Hu, Z. (2011). Rotationally invariant descriptors using
intensity order pooling. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,34(10), 2031–2045.
Ferrante, E., & Paragios, N. (2017). Slice-to-volume medical image
registration: A survey. Medical Image Analysis ,39, 101–123.
Ferraz, L., & Binefa, X. (2012). A sparse curvature-based detector of
afﬁne invariant blobs. Computer Vision and Image Understanding ,
116(4), 524–537.
Fey, M., Lenssen, J. E., Morris, C., Masci, J., & Kriege, N. M. (2020).
Deep graph matching consensus. In International conference on
learning representations .
Fischler, M. A., & Bolles, R. C. (1981). Random sample consensus:
a paradigm for model ﬁtting with applications to image analysisand automated cartography. Communications of the ACM ,24(6),
381–395.
Fitzgibbon, A. W. (2003). Robust registration of 2d and 3d point sets.
Image and Vision Computing ,21(13–14), 1145–1153.
Flint, A., Dick, A., & V an Den Hengel, A. (2007). Thrift: Local 3d
structure recognition. In Proceedings of the biennial conference
on digital image computing techniques and applications , pp. 182–
188.
Fogel, F., Jenatton, R., Bach, F., & d’Aspremont, A. (2013). Convex
relaxations for permutation problems. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , pp. 1016–1024.
Foroosh, H., Zerubia, J. B., & Berthod, M. (2002). Extension of phase
correlation to subpixel registration. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing ,11(3), 188–200.
Forssén, P . E. (2007). Maximally stable colour regions for recognition
and matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
Fragoso, V ., Sen, P ., Rodriguez, S., & Turk, M. (2013). Evsac: accel-
erating hypotheses generation by modeling matching scores withextreme value theory. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pp. 2472–2479.
Frome, A., Huber, D., Kolluri, R., Bülow, T., & Malik, J. (2004). Rec-
ognizing objects in range data using regional point descriptors. InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision , pp.
224–237.
Gao, W., & Tedrake, R. (2019). Filterreg: Robust and efﬁcient prob-
abilistic point-set registration using Gaussian ﬁlter and twistparameterization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 11,095–11,104.
Gauglitz, S., Höllerer, T., & Turk, M. (2011). Evaluation of interest point
detectors and feature descriptors for visual tracking. International
Journal of Computer Vision ,94(3), 335–360.
Gay-Bellile, V ., Bartoli, A., & Sayd, P . (2008). Direct estimation of
nonrigid registrations with image-based self-occlusion reasoning.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
32(1), 87–104.
Gelfand, N., Mitra, N. J., Guibas, L. J., & Pottmann, H. (2005). Robust
global registration. In Symposium on geometry processing ,V o l .2 ,
Vienna, Austria, p. 5.
Georgakis, G., Karanam, S., Wu, Z., Ernst, J., & Kosecká, J. (2018).
End-to-end learning of keypoint detector and descriptor for poseinvariant 3d matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1965–1973.
Ghosh, D., & Kaabouch, N. (2016). A survey on image mosaicing
techniques. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Repre-
sentation ,34, 1–11.
Gil, A., Mozos, O. M., Ballesta, M., & Reinoso, O. (2010). A compara-
tive evaluation of interest point detectors and local descriptors forvisual slam. Machine Vision and Applications ,21(6), 905–920.
Gionis, A., Indyk, P ., Motwani, R., et al. (1999). Similarity search in
high dimensions via hashing. In Proceedings of the international
conference on very large databases , pp. 518–529.Giraldo, L. G. S., Hasanbelliu, E., Rao, M., & Principe, J. C. (2017).
Group-wise point-set registration based on rényi’s second orderentropy. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 2454–2462.
Glaunes, J., Trouvé, A., & Y ounes, L. (2004). Diffeomorphic matching
of distributions: A new approach for unlabelled point-sets and sub-manifolds matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 712–718.
Gojcic, Z., Zhou, C., Wegner, J. D., Guibas, L. J., & Birdal, T. (2020).
Learning multiview 3d point cloud registration. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition , pp. 1759–1769.
Gold, S., & Rangarajan, A. (1996). A graduated assignment algorithm
for graph matching. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,18(4), 377–388.
Gold, S., Rangarajan, A., Lu, C. P ., Pappu, S., & Mjolsness, E. (1998).
New algorithms for 2d and 3d point matching: Pose estimation andcorrespondence. Pattern Recognition ,31(8), 1019–1031.
Golyanik, V ., Aziz Ali, S., & Stricker, D. (2016). Gravitational approach
for point set registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5802–5810.
Gong, Y ., Kumar, S., Rowley, H. A., & Lazebnik, S. (2013). Learning
binary codes for high-dimensional data using bilinear projections.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 484–491.
Gong, Y ., Lazebnik, S., Gordo, A., & Perronnin, F. (2012). Iterative
quantization: A procrustean approach to learning binary codes forlarge-scale image retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,35(12), 2916–2929.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D.,
Ozair, S., Courville, A., & Bengio, Y . (2014). Generative adver-sarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pp. 2672–2680.
Granger, S., & Pennec, X. (2002). Multi-scale em-icp: A fast and robust
approach for surface registration. In Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision , pp. 418–432.
Guo, Y ., Bennamoun, M., Sohel, F., Lu, M., Wan, J., & Kwok, N. M.
(2016). A comprehensive performance evaluation of 3d local fea-ture descriptors. International Journal of Computer Vision ,116(1),
66–89.
Guo, Y ., Sohel, F., Bennamoun, M., Lu, M., & Wan, J. (2013). Rotational
projection statistics for 3d local surface description and objectrecognition. International Journal of Computer Vision ,105(1),
63–86.
Guo, Y ., Sohel, F., Bennamoun, M., Wan, J., & Lu, M. (2015). A novel
local surface feature for 3d object recognition under clutter andocclusion. Information Sciences ,293, 196–213.
Guo, Z., Zhang, L., & Zhang, D. (2010). A completed modeling of local
binary pattern operator for texture classiﬁcation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Image Processing ,19(6), 1657–1663.
Gupta, R., Patil, H., & Mittal, A. (2010). Robust order-based methods
for feature description. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 334–341.
Han, X., Leung, T., Jia, Y ., Sukthankar, R., & Berg, A. C. (2015).
Matchnet: Unifying feature and metric learning for patch-basedmatching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3279–3286.
Han, K., Rezende, R. S., Ham, B., Wong, K. Y . K., Cho, M., Schmid,
C., & Ponce, J. (2017). Scnet: Learning semantic correspondence.InProceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision , pp. 1831–1840.
Harris, C. G., Stephens, M., et al. (1988). A combined corner and edge
detector. In Proceedings of the Alvey vision conference , pp. 147–
151.
123

==== Page 48 ====
70 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Hartmann, W., Havlena, M., & Schindler, K. (2014). Predicting match-
ability. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 9–16.
Haskins, G., Kruger, U., & Yan, P . (2020). Deep learning in medical
image registration: A survey. Machine Vision and Applications ,
31(1), 8.
Hayat, N., & Imran, M. (2019). Ghost-free multi exposure image fusion
technique using dense sift descriptor and guided ﬁlter. Journal of
Visual Communication and Image Representation ,62, 295–308.
He, K., Lu, Y ., & Sclaroff, S. (2018). Local descriptors optimized for
average precision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 596–605.
Heikkilä, M., Pietikäinen, M., & Schmid, C. (2009). Description of
interest regions with local binary patterns. Pattern Recognition ,
42(3), 425–436.
Heinly, J., Dunn, E., & Frahm, J. M. (2012). Comparative evaluation
of binary features. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 759–773.
Heinly, J., Schonberger, J. L., Dunn, E., & Frahm, J. M. (2015). Recon-
structing the world* in six days*(as captured by the yahoo 100million image dataset). In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3287–3295.
Hinterstoisser, S., Lepetit, V ., Ilic, S., Holzer, S., Bradski, G., Konolige,
K., & Navab, N. (2012). Model based training, detection and poseestimation of texture-less 3d objects in heavily cluttered scenes.InProceedings of the Asian conference on computer vision , pp.
548–562.
Horaud, R., Forbes, F., Yguel, M., Dewaele, G., & Zhang, J. (2011).
Rigid and articulated point registration with expectation condi-tional maximization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,33(3), 587–602.
Hu, N., Huang, Q., Thibert, B., & Guibas, L. J. (2018). Distributable
consistent multi-object matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2463–
2471.
Huang, Q. X., & Guibas, L. (2013). Consistent shape maps via semidef-
inite programming. In Computer graphics forum , V ol. 32, Wiley
Online Library, pp. 177–186.
Huang, X., Cheng, X., Geng, Q., Cao, B., Zhou, D., Wang, P ., Lin, Y ., &
Yang, R. (2018). The apolloscape dataset for autonomous driving.InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition workshops , pp. 954–960.
Huang, D., Shan, C., Ardabilian, M., Wang, Y ., & Chen, L. (2011).
Local binary patterns and its application to facial image analysis:as u r v e y . IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C (Applications and Reviews) ,41(6), 765–781.
Iglesias, J. P ., Olsson, C., & Kahl, F. (2020). Global optimality for point
set registration using semideﬁnite programming. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition , pp. 8287–8295.
Jaderberg, M., Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., et al. (2015). Spatial trans-
former networks. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pp. 2017–2025.
Jégou, H., Douze, M., & Schmid, C. (2010). Improving bag-of-features
for large scale image search. International Journal of Computer
Vision ,87(3), 316–336.
Jiang, B., Tang, J., Ding, C., & Luo, B. (2017b). Binary constraint
preserving graph matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4402–4409.
Jiang, B., Tang, J., Ding, C., Gong, Y ., & Luo, B. (2017a). Graph match-
ing via multiplicative update algorithm. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pp. 3187–3195.
Jiang, Z., Wang, T., & Yan, J. (2020b). Unifying ofﬂine and online
multi-graph matching via ﬁnding shortest paths on supergraph. InIEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence .Jiang, X., Ma, J., Jiang, J., & Guo, X. (2020a). Robust feature matching
using spatial clustering with heavy outliers. IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing ,29, 736–746.
Jiang, B., Zhao, H., Tang, J., & Luo, B. (2014). A sparse nonnega-
tive matrix factorization technique for graph matching problems.Pattern Recognition ,47(2), 736–747.
Jian, B., & V emuri, B. C. (2011). Robust point set registration using
Gaussian mixture models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,33(8), 1633–1645.
Jin, Y ., Mishkin, D., Mishchuk, A., Matas, J., Fua, P ., Yi, K. M., &
Trulls, E. (2020). Image matching across wide baselines: Frompaper to practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01587 .
Johnson, K., Cole-Rhodes, A., Zavorin, I., & Le Moigne, J. (2001).
Mutual information as a similarity measure for remote sensingimage registration. In Geo-spatial image and data exploitation II ,
pp. 51–61.
Johnson, A. E., & Hebert, M. (1999). Using spin images for efﬁcient
object recognition in cluttered 3d scenes. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,21(5), 433–449.
Ke, Y ., Sukthankar, R., et al. (2004). Pca-sift: A more distinctive repre-
sentation for local image descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 506–
513.
Kedem, D., Tyree, S., Sha, F., Lanckriet, G. R., & Weinberger, K. Q.
(2012). Non-linear metric learning. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , pp. 2573–2581.
Kezurer, I., Kovalsky, S. Z., Basri, R., & Lipman, Y . (2015). Tight
relaxation of quadratic matching. In Computer graphics forum ,
V ol. 34, Wiley Online Library, pp. 115–128.
Khoury, M., Zhou, Q. Y ., & Koltun, V . (2017). Learning compact
geometric features. In Proceedings of the IEEE international con-
ference on computer vision , pp. 153–161.
Kim, S., Lin, S., JEON, S. R., Min, D., & Sohn, K. (2018). Recurrent
transformer networks for semantic correspondence. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 6126–6136.
Kim, V .G., Lipman, Y ., & Funkhouser, T. (2011). Blended intrinsic
maps. In ACM transactions on graphics , V ol. 30, ACM, p. 79.
Kim, V . G., Li, W., Mitra, N. J., DiV erdi, S., & Funkhouser, T. A. (2012).
Exploring collections of 3d models using fuzzy correspondences.ACM Transactions on Graphics ,31(4), 54–1.
Kimmel, R., Zhang, C., Bronstein, A., & Bronstein, M. (2011). Are mser
features really interesting? IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,33(11), 2316–2320.
Kim, S., Min, D., Lin, S., & Sohn, K. (2020). Discrete-continuous trans-
formation matching for dense semantic correspondence. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,42(1),
59–73.
Klein, S., Staring, M., & Pluim, J. P . (2007). Evaluation of optimiza-
tion methods for nonrigid medical image registration using mutualinformation and b-splines. IEEE Transactions on Image Process-
ing,16(12), 2879–2890.
Kluger, F., Brachmann, E., Ackermann, H., Rother, C., Yang, M. Y .,
& Rosenhahn, B. (2020). Consac: Robust multi-model ﬁtting byconditional sample consensus. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
, pp. 4634–
4643.
Komorowski, J., Czarnota, K., Trzcinski, T., Dabala, L., & Lynen, S.
(2018). Interest point detectors stability evaluation on apolloscapedataset. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision , pp. 727–739.
Kovnatsky, A., Bronstein, M. M., Bresson, X., & V andergheynst, P .
(2015). Functional correspondence by matrix completion. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and patternrecognition , pp. 905–914.
Krebs, J., Mansi, T., Delingette, H., Zhang, L., Ghesu, F. C., Miao,
S., Maier, A. K., Ayache, N., Liao, R., & Kamen, A. (2017).
123

==== Page 49 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 71
Robust non-rigid registration through agent-based action learning.
InProceedings of the international conference on medical image
computing and computer-assisted intervention , pp. 344–352.
Kulis, B., & Darrell, T. (2009). Learning to hash with binary reconstruc-
tive embeddings. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pp. 1042–1050.
Kulis, B., & Grauman, K. (2009). Kernelized locality-sensitive hashing
for scalable image search. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pp. 2130–2137.
Kumar, B., Carneiro, G., Reid, I., et al. (2016). Learning local image
descriptors with deep siamese and triplet convolutional networksby minimising global loss functions. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5385–
5394.
Laskar, Z., & Kannala, J. (2018). Semi-supervised semantic matching.
InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision
workshop , pp. 1–11.
Lawin, F. J., Danelljan, M., Khan, F., Forssén, P . E., & Felsberg, M.
(2018). Density adaptive point set registration. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 3829–
3837.
Lawler, E. L. (1963). The quadratic assignment problem. Management
Science ,9(4), 586–599.
Lazaridis, G., & Petrou, M. (2006). Image registration using the Walsh
transform. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,15(8), 2343–
2357.
Le Moigne, J., Campbell, W. J., & Cromp, R. F. (2002). An automated
parallel image registration technique based on the correlation ofwavelet features. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing ,40(8), 1849–1864.
Lebeda, K., Matas, J., & Chum, O. (2012). Fixing the locally optimized
ransac–full experimental evaluation. In Proceedings of the British
machine vision conference , pp. 1–11.
Lee, J., Cho, M., & Lee, K. M. (2010). A graph matching algorithm using
data-driven markov chain monte carlo sampling. In Proceedings
of the international conference on pattern recognition , pp. 2816–
2819.
Lee, J., Cho, M., & Lee, K. M. (2011). Hyper-graph matching via
reweighted random walks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1633–1640.
Lee, S., Lim, J., & Suh, I. H. (2020). Progressive feature matching:
Incremental graph construction and optimization. In IEEE trans-
actions on image processing .
Lê-Huu, D. K., & Paragios, N. (2017). Alternating direction graph
matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4914–4922.
Lenc, K., & V edaldi, A. (2014). Large scale evaluation of local image
feature detectors on homography datasets. In Proceedings of the
British machine vision conference .
Lenc, K., & V edaldi, A. (2016). Learning covariant feature detectors.
InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision ,
pp. 100–117.
Leordeanu, M., & Hebert, M. (2005). A spectral technique for corre-
spondence problems using pairwise constraints. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 1482–
1489.
Leordeanu, M., Hebert, M., & Sukthankar, R. (2009). An integer pro-
jected ﬁxed point method for graph matching and map inference.InAdvances in neural information processing systems , pp. 1114–
1122.
Leordeanu, M., Sukthankar, R., & Hebert, M. (2012). Unsupervised
learning for graph matching. International Journal of Computer
Vision ,96(1), 28–45.
Leutenegger, S., Chli, M., & Siegwart, R. (2011). Brisk: Binary robust
invariant scalable keypoints. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , pp. 2548–2555.Levi, G. (1973). A note on the derivation of maximal common subgraphs
of two directed or undirected graphs. Calcolo ,9(4), 341.
Li, H., & Hartley, R. (2007). The 3d–3d registration problem revisited.
InProceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision , pp. 1–8.
Li, X., Han, K., Li, S., & Prisacariu, V . A. (2020). Dual-resolution
correspondence networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08844 .
Li, H., Shen, T., & Huang, X. (2009). Global optimization for alignment
of generalized shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 856–863.
Li, H., Sumner, R. W., & Pauly, M. (2008). Global correspondence
optimization for non-rigid registration of depth scans. In Computer
graphics forum , V ol. 27, Wiley Online Library, pp. 1421–1430.
Lian, W., Zhang, L., & Yang, M. H. (2017). An efﬁcient globally optimal
algorithm for asymmetric point matching. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,39(7), 1281–1293.
Liao, R., Miao, S., de Tournemire, P ., Grbic, S., Kamen, A., Mansi,
T., & Comaniciu, D. (2017). An artiﬁcial agent for robust imageregistration. In Proceedings of the thirty-ﬁrst AAAI conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence , pp. 4168–4175.
Liao, Q., Sun, D., & Andreasson, H. (2020). Point set registration
for 3d range scans using fuzzy cluster-based metric and efﬁcient
global optimization. In IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence .
Li, X., & Hu, Z. (2010). Rejecting mismatches by correspondence func-
tion. International Journal of Computer Vision ,89(1), 1–17.
L i ,Z . ,M a h a p a t r a ,D . ,T i e l b e e k ,J .A . ,S t o k e r ,J . ,v a nV l i e t ,L .J . ,&V o s ,
F. M. (2015). Image registration based on autocorrelation of localstructure. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,35(1), 63–75.
Lin, W. Y . D., Cheng, M. M., Lu, J., Yang, H., Do, M. N., & Torr, P .
(2014). Bilateral functions for global motion modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the European conference on computer vision , pp.
341–356.
Lin, W. Y ., Liu, S., Jiang, N., Do, M. N., Tan, P ., & Lu, J. (2016b).
Repmatch: Robust feature matching and pose for reconstructingmodern cities. In Proceedings of the European conference on com-
puter vision , pp. 562–579.
Lin, W. Y ., Liu, S., Matsushita, Y ., Ng, T. T., & Cheong, L. F. (2011).
Smoothly varying afﬁne stitching. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 345–352.
Lin, K., Lu, J., Chen, C. S., & Zhou, J. (2016a). Learning compact
binary descriptors with unsupervised deep neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and patternrecognition , pp. 1183–1192.
Lindeberg, T. (1998). Feature detection with automatic scale selection.
International Journal of Computer Vision ,30(2), 79–116.
Lin, W. Y ., Wang, F., Cheng, M. M., Yeung, S. K., Torr, P . H., Do, M.
N., et al. (2017). Code: Coherence based decision boundaries for
feature correspondence. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,40(1), 34–47.
Lipman, Y ., & Funkhouser, T. (2009). Möbius voting for surface corre-
spondence. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,28(3), 72.
Lipman, Y ., Yagev, S., Poranne, R., Jacobs, D. W., & Basri, R. (2014).
Feature matching with bounded distortion. ACM Transactions on
Graphics ,33(3), 26.
Litany, O., Remez, T., Rodolà, E., Bronstein, A., & Bronstein, M.
(2017). Deep functional maps: Structured prediction for denseshape correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pp. 5659–5667.
Litjens, G., Kooi, T., Bejnordi, B. E., Setio, A. A. A., Ciompi, F.,
Ghafoorian, M., et al. (2017). A survey on deep learning in medicalimage analysis. Medical Image Analysis ,42, 60–88.
Litman, R., & Bronstein, A. M. (2014). Learning spectral descriptors for
deformable shape correspondence. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,36(1), 171–180.
123

==== Page 50 ====
72 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Liu, H., & Yan, S. (2010). Common visual pattern discovery via spatially
coherent correspondences. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1609–1616.
Liu, Y ., & Zhang, H. (2012). Indexing visual features: Real-time loop
closure detection using a tree structure. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation , pp. 3613–
3618.
Liu, Y ., Feng, R., & Zhang, H. (2015a). Keypoint matching by outlier
pruning with consensus constraint. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation , pp. 5481–
5486.
Liu, W., Wang, J., Ji, R., Jiang, Y . G., & Chang, S. F. (2012a). Supervised
hashing with kernels. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2074–2081.
Liu, Y ., Wang, C., Song, Z., & Wang, M. (2018b). Efﬁcient global point
cloud registration by matching rotation invariant features throughtranslation search. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 448–463.
Liu, R., Yang, C., Sun, W., Wang, X., & Li, H. (2020). Stereogan:
Bridging synthetic-to-real domain gap by joint optimization ofdomain translation and stereo matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pp. 12,757–12,766.
Liu, X., Ai, Y ., Zhang, J., & Wang, Z. (2018a). A novel afﬁne and con-
trast invariant descriptor for infrared and visible image registration.Remote Sensing ,10(4), 658.
Liu, Y ., Chen, X., Peng, H., & Wang, Z. (2017). Multi-focus image
fusion with a deep convolutional neural network. Information
Fusion ,36, 191–207.
Liu, H., Guo, B., & Feng, Z. (2005). Pseudo-log-polar Fourier transform
for image registration. IEEE Signal Processing Letters ,13(1), 17–
20.
Liu, Y ., Liu, S., & Wang, Z. (2015b). Multi-focus image fusion with
dense sift. Information Fusion ,23, 139–155.
Liu, M., Pradalier, C., & Siegwart, R. (2013). Visual homing from scale
with an uncalibrated omnidirectional camera. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics ,29(6), 1353–1365.
Liu, Z. Y ., & Qiao, H. (2014). GNCCP–graduated nonconvexityand
concavity procedure. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,36(6), 1258–1267.
Liu, Z. Y ., Qiao, H., & Xu, L. (2012b). An extended path following algo-
rithm for graph-matching problem. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,34(7), 1451–1456.
Li, Y ., Wang, S., Tian, Q., & Ding, X. (2015). A survey of recent
advances in visual feature detection. Neurocomputing ,149, 736–
751.
Loeckx, D., Slagmolen, P ., Maes, F., V andermeulen, D., & Suetens,
P . (2009). Nonrigid image registration using conditional mutual
information. IEEE Transactions on Image ,29(1), 19–29.
Loiola, E. M., de Abreu, N. M. M., Boaventura-Netto, P . O., Hahn, P ., &
Querido, T. (2007). A survey for the quadratic assignment problem.European Journal of Operational Research ,176(2), 657–690.
Lowe, D.G., et al. (1999). Object recognition from local scale-invariant
features. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pp. 1150–1157.
Lowe, D. G. (2004). Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
keypoints. International Journal of Computer Vision ,60(2), 91–
110.
Lowry, S., & Andreasson, H. (2018). Logos: Local geometric support
for high-outlier spatial veriﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation , pp. 7262–
7269.
Luo, W., Schwing, A. G., & Urtasun, R. (2016). Efﬁcient deep learning
for stereo matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5695–5703.Luo, Z., Shen, T., Zhou, L., Zhang, J., Yao, Y ., Li, S., Fang, T., &
Quan, L. (2019). Contextdesc: Local descriptor augmentation withcross-modality context. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2527–2536.
Luo, Z., Zhou, L., Bai, X., Chen, H., Zhang, J., Yao, Y ., Li, S., Fang, T., &
Quan, L. (2020). Aslfeat: Learning local features of accurate shapeand localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 6589–6598.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Jiang, J., Zhou, H., Zhou, Y ., Wang, Z., & Guo, X.
(2018b). Visual homing via guided locality preserving matching.InProceedings of the IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation , pp. 7254–7261.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Tian, J., Tu, Z., & Y uille, A. L. (2013b). Robust esti-
mation of nonrigid transformation for point set registration. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 2147–2154.
Ma, J., Chen, C., Li, C., & Huang, J. (2016a). Infrared and visible
image fusion via gradient transfer and total variation minimization.Information Fusion ,31, 100–109.
Maes, F., Collignon, A., V andermeulen, D., Marchal, G., & Suetens,
P . (1997). Multimodality image registration by maximization ofmutual information. IEEE Transactions on Image ,16(2), 187–198.
Mainali, P ., Lafruit, G., Yang, Q., Geelen, B., V an Gool, L., & Lauw-
ereins, R. (2013). Sifer: Scale-invariant feature detector with errorresilience. International Journal of Computer Vision ,104(2), 172–
197.
Mair, E., Hager, G. D., Burschka, D., Suppa, M., & Hirzinger, G. (2010).
Adaptive and generic corner detection based on the acceleratedsegment test. In Proceedings of the European conference on com-
puter vision , pp. 183–196.
Maiseli, B., Gu, Y ., & Gao, H. (2017). Recent developments and trends
in point set registration methods. Journal of Visual Communication
and Image Representation ,46, 95–106.
Ma, J., Jiang, X., Jiang, J., Zhao, J., & Guo, X. (2019a). LMR: Learning
a two-class classiﬁer for mismatch removal. IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing ,28(8), 4045–4059.
Ma, J., Jiang, J., Liu, C., & Li, Y . (2017a). Feature guided Gaussian
mixture model with semi-supervised em and local geometric con-straint for retinal image registration. Information Sciences ,417,
128–142.
Ma, J., Jiang, J., Zhou, H., Zhao, J., & Guo, X. (2018a). Guided locality
preserving feature matching for remote sensing image registration.IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,56(8),
4435–4447.
Ma, J., Liang, P ., Y u, W., Chen, C., Guo, X., Wu, J., et al. (2020). Infrared
and visible image fusion via detail preserving adversarial learning.Information Fusion ,54, 85–98.
Ma, J., Qiu, W., Zhao, J., Ma, Y ., Y uille, A. L., & Tu, Z. (2015). Robust
l
2eestimation of transformation for non-rigid registration. IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing ,63(5), 1115–1129.
Marimon, D., Bonnin, A., Adamek, T., & Gimeno, R. (2010). Darts:
Efﬁcient scale-space extraction of daisy keypoints. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, pp. 2416–2423.
Maron, H., & Lipman, Y . (2018). (probably) concave graph matching. In
Advances in Neural information processing systems , pp. 406–416.
Maron, H., Dym, N., Kezurer, I., Kovalsky, S., & Lipman, Y . (2016).
Point registration via efﬁcient convex relaxation. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics ,35(4), 73.
Masci, J., Boscaini, D., Bronstein, M., & V andergheynst, P . (2015).
Geodesic convolutional neural networks on Riemannian mani-folds. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision workshops , pp. 37–45.
Masood, A., & Sarfraz, M. (2007). Corner detection by sliding rectan-
gles along planar curves. Computers & Graphics ,31(3), 440–448.
123

==== Page 51 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 73
Matas, J., Chum, O., Urban, M., & Pajdla, T. (2004). Robust wide-
baseline stereo from maximally stable extremal regions. Image
and Vision Computing ,22(10), 761–767.
Ma, W., Wen, Z., Wu, Y ., Jiao, L., Gong, M., Zheng, Y ., et al. (2017b).
Remote sensing image registration with modiﬁed sift and enhancedfeature matching. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters ,
14(1), 3–7.
Ma, J., Wu, J., Zhao, J., Jiang, J., Zhou, H., & Sheng, Q. Z. (2019b).
Nonrigid point set registration with robust transformation learn-ing under manifold regularization. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems ,30(12), 3584–3597.
Mayer, N., Ilg, E., Hausser, P ., Fischer, P ., Cremers, D., Dosovitskiy,
A., & Brox, T. (2016). A large dataset to train convolutional net-works for disparity, optical ﬂow, and scene ﬂow estimation. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 4040–4048.
Ma, J., Y u, W., Liang, P ., Li, C., & Jiang, J. (2019c). Fusiongan: A gen-
erative adversarial network for infrared and visible image fusion.Information Fusion ,48, 11–26.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Jiang, J., Zhou, H., & Guo, X. (2019d). Locality preserv-
ing matching. International Journal of Computer Vision ,127(5),
512–531.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Ma, Y ., & Tian, J. (2015a). Non-rigid visible and
infrared face registration via regularized gaussian ﬁelds criterion.Pattern Recognition ,48(3), 772–784.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Tian, J., Bai, X., & Tu, Z. (2013a). Regularized vector
ﬁeld learning with sparse approximation for mismatch removal.Pattern Recognition ,46(12), 3519–3532.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., Tian, J., Y uille, A. L., & Tu, Z. (2014). Robust point
matching via vector ﬁeld consensus. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing ,23(4), 1706–1721.
Ma, J., Zhao, J., & Y uille, A. L. (2016b). Non-rigid point set registration
by preserving global and local structures. IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing ,25(1), 53–64.
Ma, J., Zhou, H., Zhao, J., Gao, Y ., Jiang, J., & Tian, J. (2015b). Robust
feature matching for remote sensing image registration via locallylinear transforming. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing ,53(12), 6469–6481.
Mian, A., Bennamoun, M., & Owens, R. (2010). On the repeatability
and quality of keypoints for local feature-based 3d object retrievalfrom cluttered scenes. International Journal of Computer Vision ,
89(2–3), 348–361.
Miao, S., Piat, S., Fischer, P ., Tuysuzoglu, A., Mewes, P ., Mansi, T., &
Liao, R. (2018). Dilated fcn for multi-agent 2d/3d medical imageregistration. In Proceedings of the thirty-second AAAI conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence , pp. 4694–4701.
Mikolajczyk, K., & Schmid, C. (2001). Indexing based on scale invari-
ant interest points. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pp. 525–531.
Mikolajczyk, K., & Schmid, C. (2004). Scale & afﬁne invariant interest
point detectors. International Journal of Computer Vision ,60(1),
63–86.
Mikolajczyk, K., & Schmid, C. (2005). A performance evaluation
of local descriptors. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,27(10), 1615–1630.
Mikolajczyk, K., Tuytelaars, T., Schmid, C., Zisserman, A., Matas, J.,
Schaffalitzky, F., et al. (2005). A comparison of afﬁne region detec-tors. International Journal of Computer Vision
,65(1–2), 43–72.
Mishchuk, A., Mishkin, D., Radenovic, F., & Matas, J. (2017). Working
hard to know your neighbor’s margins: Local descriptor learningloss. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
4826–4837.
Mishkin, D., Radenovic, F., & Matas, J. (2017). Learning dis-
criminative afﬁne regions via discriminability. arXiv preprintarXiv:1711.06704 .Mishkin, D., Radenovic, F., & Matas, J. (2018). Repeatability is not
enough: Learning afﬁne regions via discriminability. In Proceed-
ings of the European conference on computer vision , pp. 284–300.
Mitra, R., Doiphode, N., Gautam, U., Narayan, S., Ahmed, S., Chan-
dran, S., & Jain, A. (2018). A large dataset for improving patchmatching. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01466 .
Mok, T. C., & Chung, A. (2020). Fast symmetric diffeomorphic image
registration with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition , pp. 4644–4653.
Mokhtarian, F., & Suomela, R. (1998). Robust image corner detection
through curvature scale space. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence ,20(12), 1376–1381.
Möller, R., Krzykawski, M., & Gerstmayr, L. (2010). Three 2d-warping
schemes for visual robot navigation. Autonomous Robots ,29(3–4),
253–291.
Monti, F., Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Rodola, E., Svoboda, J., & Bronstein,
M. M. (2017). Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifoldsusing mixture model CNNs. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5115–5124.
Moo Yi, K., Trulls, E., Ono, Y ., Lepetit, V ., Salzmann, M., & Fua, P .
(2018). Learning to ﬁnd good correspondences. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 2666–2674.
Moo Yi, K., V erdie, Y ., Fua, P ., & Lepetit, V . (2016). Learning to assign
orientations to feature points. In Proceedings of the IEEE confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 107–116.
Moravec, H. P . (1977). Techniques towards automatic visual obstacle
avoidance .
Morel, J. M., & Y u, G. (2009). Asift: A new framework for fully afﬁne
invariant image comparison. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences ,
2(2), 438–469.
Mukherjee, D., Wu, Q. J., & Wang, G. (2015). A comparative experi-
mental study of image feature detectors and descriptors. Machine
Vision and Applications ,26(4), 443–466.
Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J. M. M., & Tardos, J. D. (2015). ORB-SLAM:
A versatile and accurate monocular slam system. IEEE Transac-
tions on Robotics ,31(5), 1147–1163.
Mustafa, A., Kim, H., & Hilton, A. (2018). Msfd: Multi-scale
segmentation-based feature detection for wide-baseline scenereconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,28(3),
1118–1132.
Myronenko, A., & Song, X. (2010). Point set registration: Coherent
point drift. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence ,32(12), 2262–2275.
Nasuto, D., & Craddock, J. B. R. (2002). Napsac: High noise, high
dimensional robust estimation-it’s in the bag. In Proceedings of
the British machine vision conference , pp. 458–467.
Ni, K., Jin, H., & Dellaert, F. (2009). Groupsac: Efﬁcient consensus in
the presence of groupings. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , pp. 2193–2200.
Norouzi, M., & Blei, D. M. (2011). Minimal loss hashing for compact
binary codes. In Proceedings of the international conference on
machine learning , pp. 353–360.
Nüchter, A., Lingemann, K., Hertzberg, J., & Surmann, H. (2007).
6d SLAM–3d mapping outdoor environments. Journal of Field
Robotics ,24(8–9), 699–722.
Ojala, T., Pietikäinen, M., & Mäenpää, T. (2002). Multiresolution gray-
scale and rotation invariant texture classiﬁcation with local binarypatterns. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence ,24(7), 971–987.
Ono, Y ., Trulls, E., Fua, P ., & Yi, K. M. (2018). LF-NET: Learning
local features from images. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 6234–6244.
123

==== Page 52 ====
74 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Ovsjanikov, M., Ben-Chen, M., Solomon, J., Butscher, A., & Guibas,
L. (2012). Functional maps: A ﬂexible representation of mapsbetween shapes. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,31(4), 30.
Pachauri, D., Kondor, R., & Singh, V . (2013). Solving the multi-way
matching problem by permutation synchronization. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pp. 1860–1868.
Pais, G. D., Ramalingam, S., Govindu, V . M., Nascimento, J. C., Chel-
lappa, R., & Miraldo, P . (2020). 3dregnet: A deep neural networkfor 3d point registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 7193–7203.
Pan, W. H., Wei, S. D., & Lai, S. H. (2008). Efﬁcient NCC-based image
matching in Walsh-Hadamard domain. In Proceedings of the Euro-
pean conference on computer vision , pp. 468–480.
Pang, J., Sun, W., Ren, J. S., Yang, C., & Yan, Q. (2017). Cascade resid-
ual learning: A two-stage convolutional neural network for stereomatching. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pp. 887–895.
Papazov, C., & Burschka, D. (2011). Stochastic global optimization for
robust point set registration. Computer Vision and Image Under-
standing ,115(12), 1598–1609.
Park, J., Zhou, Q. Y ., & Koltun, V . (2017). Colored point cloud registra-
tion revisited. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision , pp. 143–152.
Parra Bustos, A., Chin, T. J., & Suter, D. (2014). Fast rotation search with
stereographic projections for 3d registration. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
3930–3937.
Paul, S., & Pati, U. C. (2016). Remote sensing optical image registration
using modiﬁed uniform robust sift. IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters ,13(9), 1300–1304.
Perona, P ., & Malik, J. (1990). Scale-space and edge detection using
anisotropic diffusion. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,12(7), 629–639.
Philbin, J., Chum, O., Isard, M., Sivic, J., & Zisserman, A. (2007).
Object retrieval with large vocabularies and fast spatial matching.InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
Piasco, N., Sidibé, D., Demonceaux, C., & Gouet-Brunet, V . (2018).
A survey on visual-based localization: On the beneﬁt of heteroge-neous data. Pattern Recognition ,74, 90–109.
Pilet, J., Lepetit, V ., & Fua, P . (2008). Fast non-rigid surface detection,
registration and realistic augmentation. International Journal of
Computer Vision ,76(2), 109–122.
Pinheiro, A. M., & Ghanbari, M. (2010). Piecewise approximation of
contours through scale-space selection of dominant points. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing ,19(6), 1442–1450.
Plötz, T., & Roth, S. (2018). Neural nearest neighbors networks. In
Advances in Neural information processing systems , pp. 1087–
1098.
Poggi, M., Pallotti, D., Tosi, F., & Mattoccia, S. (2019). Guided stereo
matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 979–988.
Pohl, C., & V an Genderen, J. L. (1998). Review article multisensor
image fusion in remote sensing: concepts, methods and applica-tions. International Journal of Remote Sensing ,19(5), 823–854.
Pokrass, J., Bronstein, A. M., Bronstein, M. M., Sprechmann, P ., &
Sapiro, G. (2013). Sparse modeling of intrinsic correspondences.InComputer graphics forum , V ol. 32, Wiley Online Library, pp.
459–468.
Pomerleau, F., Colas, F., Siegwart, R., & Magnenat, S. (2013). Com-
paring ICP variants on real-world data sets. Autonomous Robots ,
34(3), 133–148.
Poursaeed, O., Yang, G., Prakash, A., Fang, Q., Jiang, H., Hariharan, B.,
& Belongie, S. (2018). Deep fundamental matrix estimation with-out correspondences. In Proceedings of the European conference
on computer vision workshop , pp. 1–13.Qi, C.R., Su, H., Mo, K., & Guibas, L. J. (2017a). Pointnet: Deep
learning on point sets for 3d classiﬁcation and segmentation. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 652–660.
Qi, C. R., Yi, L., Su, H., & Guibas, L. J. (2017b). Pointnet++: Deep
hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. InAdvances in neural information processing systems , pp. 5099–
5108.
Quinlan, J. R. (1986). Induction of decision trees. Machine Learning ,
1(1), 81–106.
Raguram, R., Chum, O., Pollefeys, M., Matas, J., & Frahm, J. M. (2012).
USAC: A universal framework for random sample consensus.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
35(8), 2022–2038.
Ramer, U. (1972). An iterative procedure for the polygonal approxima-
tion of plane curves. Computer Graphics and Image Processing ,
1(3), 244–256.
Ramisa, A., Goldhoorn, A., Aldavert, D., Toledo, R., & de Mantaras,
R. L. (2011). Combining invariant features and the ALV hom-ing method for autonomous robot navigation based on panoramas.Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems ,64(3–4), 625–649.
Ranftl, R., & Koltun, V . (2018). Deep fundamental matrix estimation.
InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision ,
pp. 284–299.
Reddy, B. S., & Chatterji, B. N. (1996). An FFT-based technique for
translation, rotation, and scale-invariant image registration. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing ,5(8), 1266–1271.
Revaud, J., Weinzaepfel, P ., De Souza, C., Pion, N., Csurka, G., Cabon,
Y ., & Humenberger, M. (2019). R2d2: Repeatable and reliabledetector and descriptor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06195 .
Revaud, J., Weinzaepfel, P ., Harchaoui, Z., & Schmid, C. (2016). Deep-
matching: Hierarchical deformable dense matching. International
Journal of Computer Vision ,120(3), 300–323.
Richardson, A., & Olson, E. (2013). Learning convolutional ﬁlters for
interest point detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on robotics and automation , pp. 631–637.
Robertson, C., & Fisher, R. B. (2002). Parallel evolutionary registration
of range data. Computer Vision and Image Understanding ,87(1–
3), 39–50.
Rocco, I., Arandjelovic, R., & Sivic, J. (2017). Convolutional neural
network architecture for geometric matching. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 6148–6157.
Rocco, I., Cimpoi, M., Arandjelovi´ c, R., Torii, A., Pajdla, T., & Sivic,
J. (2018). Neighbourhood consensus networks. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pp. 1651–1662.
Rodola, E., Bronstein, A. M., Albarelli, A., Bergamasco, F., & Torsello,
A. (2012). A game-theoretic approach to deformable shape match-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 182–189.
Rodolà, E., Cosmo, L., Bronstein, M. M., Torsello, A., & Cremers, D.
(2017). Partial functional correspondence. In Computer graphics
forum , V ol. 36, Wiley Online Library, pp. 222–236.
Rodolà, E., Rota Bulo, S., Windheuser, T., V estner, M., & Cremers,
D. (2014). Dense non-rigid shape correspondence using randomforests. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 4177–4184.
Rodola, E., Torsello, A., Harada, T., Kuniyoshi, Y ., & Cremers, D.
(2013). Elastic net constraints for shape matching. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp.
1169–1176.
Rosenfeld, A., & Weszka, J. S. (1975). An improved method of angle
detection on digital curves. IEEE Transactions on Computers ,
100(9), 940–941.
123

==== Page 53 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 75
Rosten, E., & Drummond, T. (2006). Machine learning for high-speed
corner detection. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 430–443.
Rosten, E., Porter, R., & Drummond, T. (2010). Faster and better: A
machine learning approach to corner detection. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,32(1), 105–119.
Rublee, E., Rabaud, V ., Konolige, K., & Bradski, G. R. (2011). Orb:
An efﬁcient alternative to sift or surf. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 2564–2571.
Rustamov, R. M. (2007). Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions for defor-
mation invariant shape representation. In Proceedings of the
Eurographics symposium on geometry processing , pp. 225–233.
Rusu, R. B., Blodow, N., & Beetz, M. (2009). Fast point feature his-
tograms (fpfh) for 3d registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation , pp. 3212–
3217.
Rusu, R. B., Blodow, N., Marton, Z. C., & Beetz, M. (2008). Aligning
point cloud views using persistent feature histograms. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robotsand systems , pp. 3384–3391.
Sahillioglu, Y ., & Yemez, Y . (2011). Coarse-to-ﬁne combinatorial
matching for dense isometric shape correspondence. In Computer
graphics forum , V ol. 30, Wiley Online Library, pp. 1461–1470.
Salakhutdinov, R., & Hinton, G. (2009). Semantic hashing. Interna-
tional Journal of Approximate Reasoning ,50(7), 969–978.
Salti, S., Lanza, A., & Di Stefano, L. (2013). Keypoints from symmetries
by wave propagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2898–2905.
Salti, S., Tombari, F., Spezialetti, R., & Di Stefano, L. (2015). Learn-
ing a descriptor-speciﬁc 3d keypoint detector. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 2318–
2326.
Sandhu, R., Dambreville, S., & Tannenbaum, A. (2010). Point set
registration via particle ﬁltering and stochastic dynamics. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,32(8),
1459–1473.
Sarlin, P .E., DeTone, D., Malisiewicz, T., & Rabinovich, A. (2020).
Superglue: Learning feature matching with graph neural networks.InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 4938–4947.
Savinov, N., Seki, A., Ladicky, L., Sattler, T., & Pollefeys, M. (2017).
Quad-networks: Unsupervised learning to rank for interest pointdetection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1822–1830.
Scarselli, F., Gori, M., Tsoi, A. C., Hagenbuchner, M., & Monfardini,
G. (2009). The graph neural network model. In TNN .
Schellewald, C., & Schnörr, C. (2005). Probabilistic subgraph matching
based on convex relaxation. In Proceedings of the international
workshop on energy minimization methods in computer vision andpattern recognition , pp. 171–186.
Schonberger, J. L., & Frahm, J. M. (2016). Structure-from-motion revis-
ited. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 4104–4113.
Schonberger, J. L., Hardmeier, H., Sattler, T., & Pollefeys, M. (2017).
Comparative evaluation of hand-crafted and learned local features.InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 1482–1491.
Schroeter, D., & Newman, P . (2008). On the robustness of visual hom-
ing under landmark uncertainty. In Proceedings of the intelligent
autonomous systems , pp. 278–287.
Scott, G. L., & Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1991). An algorithm for associ-
ating the features of two images.
Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London. Series B: Biological Sciences ,244(1309), 21–26.
Shah, R., Srivastava, V ., & Narayanan, P . (2015). Geometry-aware fea-
ture matching for structure from motion applications. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE winter conference on applications of computer
vision , pp. 278–285.
Shaked, A., & Wolf, L. (2017). Improved stereo matching with con-
stant highway networks and reﬂective conﬁdence learning. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 4641–4650.
Shakhnarovich, G. (2005). Learning task-speciﬁc similarity. Ph.D. the-
sis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Shapiro, L. S., & Brady, J. M. (1992). Feature-based correspondence:
An eigenvector approach. Image and Vision Computing ,10(5),
283–288.
Shen, X., Wang, C., Li, X., Y u, Z., Li, J., Wen, C., Cheng, M., & He, Z.
(2019). RF-NET: An end-to-end image matching network based onreceptive ﬁeld. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8132–8140.
Shi, J., & Tomasi, C. (1993). Good features to track. Technical report,
Cornell University.
Silva, L., Bellon, O. R. P ., & Boyer, K. L. (2005). Precision range
image registration using a robust surface interpenetration measureand enhanced genetic algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,27(5), 762–776.
Simonovsky, M., Gutiérrez-Becker, B., Mateus, D., Navab, N., &
Komodakis, N. (2016). A deep metric for multimodal registra-
tion. In Proceedings of the international conference on medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pp. 10–18.
Simonyan, K., V edaldi, A., & Zisserman, A. (2014). Learning local
feature descriptors using convex optimization. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,36(8), 1573–1585.
Simo-Serra, E., Trulls, E., Ferraz, L., Kokkinos, I., Fua, P ., & Moreno-
Noguer, F. (2015). Discriminative learning of deep convolutionalfeature point descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pp. 118–126.
Sipiran, I., & Bustos, B. (2011). Harris 3d: A robust extension of the Har-
ris operator for interest point detection on 3d meshes. The Visual
Computer ,27(11), 963.
Sivic, J., & Zisserman, A. (2003). Video google: A text retrieval
approach to object matching in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 1–8.
Smith, S. M., & Brady, J. M. (1997). Susan: A new approach to low
level image processing. International Journal of Computer Vision ,
23(1), 45–78.
Sofka, M., Yang, G., & Stewart, C. V . (2007). Simultaneous covariance
driven correspondence (CDC) and transformation estimation in theexpectation maximization framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
Sokooti, H., de V os, B., Berendsen, F., Lelieveldt, B. P ., Isgum, I., & Star-
ing, M. (2017). Nonrigid image registration using multi-scale 3d
convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the international
conference on medical image computing and computer-assistedintervention , pp. 232–239.
Sotiras, A., Davatzikos, C., & Paragios, N. (2013). Deformable med-
ical image registration: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging ,32(7), 1153.
Strecha, C., Lindner, A., Ali, K., & Fua, P . (2009). Training for task spe-
ciﬁc keypoint detection. In Joint pattern recognition symposium ,
Springer, pp. 151–160.
Strecha, C., V on Hansen, W., V an Gool, L., Fua, P ., & Thoennessen,
U. (2008). On benchmarking camera calibration and multi-viewstereo for high resolution imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1–8.
Strecha, C., Bronstein, A., Bronstein, M., & Fua, P . (2012). Ldahash:
Improved matching with smaller descriptors. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,34(1), 66–78.
Sturm, J., Engelhard, N., Endres, F., Burgard, W., & Cremers, D. (2012).
A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D slam systems. In Pro-
123

==== Page 54 ====
76 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
ceedings of the IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent
robots and systems , pp. 573–580.
Suh, Y ., Cho, M., & Lee, K. M. (2012). Graph matching via sequen-
tial Monte Carlo. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 624–637.
Sun, J., Ovsjanikov, M., & Guibas, L. (2009). A concise and prov-
ably informative multi-scale signature based on heat diffusion.InComputer graphics forum , V ol. 28, Wiley Online Library, pp.
1383–1392.
Sweeney, C., Hollerer, T., & Turk, M. (2015). Theia: A fast and scalable
structure-from-motion library. In Proceedings of the ACM inter-
national conference on multimedia , pp. 693–696.
Swoboda, P ., Kuske, J., & Savchynskyy, B. (2017). A dual ascent frame-
work for Lagrangean decomposition of combinatorial problems.InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 1596–1606.
Swoboda, P ., Mokarian, A., Theobalt, C., Bernard, F., et al. (2019). A
convex relaxation for multi-graph matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
11,156–11,165.
Swoboda, P ., Rother, C., Abu Alhaija, H., Kainmuller, D., & Savchyn-
skyy, B. (2017). A study of lagrangean decompositions and dual
ascent solvers for graph matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1607–
1616.
Takita, K., Aoki, T., Sasaki, Y ., Higuchi, T., & Kobayashi, K. (2003).
High-accuracy subpixel image registration based on phase-onlycorrelation. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics,
Communications and Computer Sciences ,86(8), 1925–1934.
Tang, F., Lim, S. H., Chang, N. L., & Tao, H. (2009). A novel feature
descriptor invariant to complex brightness changes. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, pp. 2631–2638.
Tevs, A., Berner, A., Wand, M., Ihrke, I., & Seidel, H. P . (2011). Intrin-
sic shape matching by planned landmark sampling. In Computer
graphics forum , V ol. 30, Wiley Online Library, pp. 543–552.
Thomee, B., Shamma, D. A., Friedland, G., Elizalde, B., Ni, K., Poland,
D., et al. (2016). Yfcc100m: The new data in multimedia research.Communications of the ACM ,59(2), 64–73.
Tian, Y ., Fan, B., & Wu, F. (2017). L2-net: Deep learning of discrimi-
native patch descriptor in Euclidean space. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
661–669.
Tian, Y ., Yan, J., Zhang, H., Zhang, Y ., Yang, X., & Zha, H. (2012).
On the convergence of graph matching: Graduated assignmentrevisited. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision , pp. 821–835.
Tian, Y ., Y u, X., Fan, B., Wu, F., Heijnen, H., & Balntas, V . (2019).
Sosnet: Second order similarity regularization for local descrip-tor learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 11,016–11,025.
Toews, M., & Wells, W. (2009). Sift-rank: Ordinal description for invari-
ant feature correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 172–177.
Tola, E., Lepetit, V ., & Fua, P . (2010). Daisy: An efﬁcient dense descrip-
tor applied to wide-baseline stereo. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,32(5), 815–830.
Tombari, F., Salti, S., & Di Stefano, L. (2010a). Unique shape context
for 3d data description. In Proceedings of the ACM workshop on
3D object retrieval , pp. 57–62.
Tombari, F., Salti, S., & Di Stefano, L. (2010b). Unique signatures
of histograms for local surface description. In Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision , pp. 356–369.
Tombari, F., Salti, S., & Di Stefano, L. (2013). Performance evalua-
tion of 3d keypoint detectors. International Journal of Computer
Vision ,102(1–3), 198–220.Torr, P . H. (2003). Solving Markov random ﬁelds using semi deﬁnite
programming. In Proceeding of AISTATS , pp. 1–8.
Torr, P ., & Zisserman, A. (1998). Robust computation and parametriza-
tion of multiple view relations. In Proceedings of the international
conference on computer vision , pp. 727–732.
Torresani, L., Kolmogorov, V ., & Rother, C. (2012). A dual decompo-
sition approach to feature correspondence. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,35(2), 259–271.
Torr, P . H., & Zisserman, A. (2000). Mlesac: A new robust estimator
with application to estimating image geometry. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding ,78(1), 138–156.
Trajkovi´ c, M., & Hedley, M. (1998). Fast corner detection. Image and
Vision Computing ,16(2), 75–87.
Tron, R., Zhou, X., Esteves, C., & Daniilidis, K. (2017). Fast multi-
image matching via density-based clustering. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 4057–
4066.
Truong, P ., Danelljan, M., & Timofte, R. (2020). Glu-net: Global-local
universal network for dense ﬂow and correspondences. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and patternrecognition , pp. 6258–6268.
Trzcinski, T., & Lepetit, V . (2012). Efﬁcient discriminative projections
for compact binary descriptors. In Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision , pp. 228–242.
Trzcinski, T., Christoudias, M., Fua, P ., & Lepetit, V . (2013). Boosting
binary keypoint descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2874–2881.
Trzcinski, T., Christoudias, M., Lepetit, V ., & Fua, P . (2012). Learning
image descriptors with the boosting-trick. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pp. 269–277.
Trzcinski, T., Christoudias, M., & Lepetit, V . (2014). Learning image
descriptors with boosting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,37(3), 597–610.
Tsin, Y ., & Kanade, T. (2004). A correlation-based approach to robust
point set registration. In Proceedings of the European conference
on computer vision , pp. 558–569.
Tuytelaars, T., & V an Gool, L. (2004). Matching widely separated views
based on afﬁne invariant regions. International Journal of Com-
puter Vision ,59(1), 61–85.
Tuytelaars, T., Mikolajczyk, K., et al. (2008). Local invariant fea-
ture detectors: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Computer
Graphics and Vision ,3(3), 177–280.
Ufer, N., & Ommer, B. (2017). Deep semantic feature matching. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and patternrecognition , pp. 6914–6923.
Umeyama, S. (1988). An eigen decomposition approach to weighted
graph matching problems. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,10(5), 695–703.
Unnikrishnan, R., & Hebert, M. (2008). Multi-scale interest regions
from unorganized point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops
,
pp. 1–8.
van Wyk, B. J., & van Wyk, M. A. (2004). A POCS-based graph
matching algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence ,26(11), 1526–1530.
V an Kaick, O., Zhang, H., Hamarneh, G., & Cohen-Or, D. (2011). A
survey on shape correspondence. In Computer graphics forum ,
V ol. 30, Wiley Online Library, pp. 1681–1707.
V erdie, Y ., Yi, K., Fua, P ., & Lepetit, V . (2015). Tilde: A temporally
invariant learned detector. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 5279–5288.
V ongkulbhisal, J., De la Torre, F., & Costeira, J. P . (2017). Dis-
criminative optimization: Theory and applications to point cloudregistration. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4104–4112.
123

==== Page 55 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 77
V ongkulbhisal, J., Irastorza Ugalde, B., De la Torre, F., & Costeira,
J. P . (2018). Inverse composition discriminative optimization forpoint cloud registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2993–3001.
Wang, J., & Zhang, M. (2020). Deepﬂash: An efﬁcient network for
learning-based medical image registration. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 4444–4452.
Wang, C., Bronstein, M. M., Bronstein, A. M., & Paragios, N.
(2011). Discrete minimum distortion correspondence problems fornon-rigid shape matching. In Proceedings of the international con-
ference on scale space and variational methods in computer vision ,
pp. 580–591.
Wang, Z., Fan, B., & Wu, F. (2011). Local intensity order pattern for
feature description. In Proceedings of the international conference
on computer vision , pp. 603–610.
Wang, H., Guo, J., Yan, D. M., Quan, W., & Zhang, X. (2018b). Learning
3d keypoint descriptors for non-rigid shape matching. In Proceed-
ings of the European conference on computer vision , pp. 3–19.
Wang, J., Kumar, S., & Chang, S. F. Semi-supervised hashing for scal-
able image retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition .
Wang, T., Liu, H., Li, Y ., Jin, Y ., Hou, X., & Ling, H. (2020). Learning
combinatorial solver for graph matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 7568–7577.
Wang, J., Song, Y ., Leung, T., Rosenberg, C., Wang, J., Philbin, J., Chen,
B., & Wu, Y . (2014). Learning ﬁne-grained image similarity withdeep ranking. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1386–1393.
Wang, G., Wang, Z., Chen, Y ., Zhou, Q., & Zhao, W. (2016). Context-
aware Gaussian ﬁelds for non-rigid point set registration. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 5811–5819.
Wang, F., Xue, N., Y u, J. G., & Xia, G. S. (2020). Zero-assignment
constraint for graph matching with outliers. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 3033–3042.
Wang, F., Xue, N., Zhang, Y ., Bai, X., & Xia, G. S. (2018a). Adaptively
transforming graph matching. In Proceedings of the European con-
ference on computer vision , pp. 625–640.
Wang, R., Yan, J., & Yang, X. (2019). Learning combinatorial embed-
ding networks for deep graph matching. In ICCV .
Wang, Q., Zhou, X., & Daniilidis, K. (2018). Multi-image semantic
matching by mining consistent features. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
685–694.
Wang, J., Zhou, F., Wen, S., Liu, X., & Lin, Y . (2017). Deep metric
learning with angular loss. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , pp. 2593–2601.
Wang, Z., Fan, B., Wang, G., & Wu, F. (2015). Exploring local
and overall ordinal information for robust feature description.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
38(11), 2198–2211.
Wang, G., Wang, Z., Chen, Y ., & Zhao, W. (2015). Robust point match-
ing method for multimodal retinal image registration. Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control ,19, 68–76.
Wei, L., Huang, Q., Ceylan, D., V ouga, E., & Li, H. (2016). Dense
human body correspondences using convolutional networks. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pp. 1544–1553.
Wei, X., Zhang, Y ., Gong, Y ., & Zheng, N. (2018). Kernelized subspace
pooling for deep local descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1867–
1875.Weinberger, K. Q., & Saul, L. K. (2009). Distance metric learning for
large margin nearest neighbor classiﬁcation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,10
(Feb), 207–244.
Weiss, Y ., Torralba, A., & Fergus, R. (2009) Spectral hashing. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 1753–
1760.
Windheuser, T., V estner, M., Rodolà, E., Triebel, R., & Cremers, D.
(2014). Optimal intrinsic descriptors for non-rigid shape analysis.InProceedings of the British machine vision conference .
Wohlhart, P ., & Lepetit, V . (2015). Learning descriptors for object
recognition and 3d pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3109–
3118.
Wu, Y ., Lim, J., & Yang, M. H. (2015b). Object tracking benchmark.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
37(9), 1834–1848.
Wu, J., Zhang, H., & Guan, Y . (2014). Visual loop closure detection by
matching binary visual features using locality sensitive hashing.InProceeding of the world congress on intelligent control and
automation , pp. 940–945.
Wu, C. Visualsfm: A visual structure from motion system. Retrieved
November 16, 2018 from http://ccwu.me/vsfm/doc.html .
Wu, G., Kim, M., Wang, Q., Munsell, B. C., & Shen, D. (2015a).
Scalable high-performance image registration framework by unsu-pervised deep feature representations learning. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering ,63(7), 1505–1516.
Xiao, J., Owens, A., & Torralba, A. (2013). Sun3d: A database of big
spaces reconstructed using SFM and object labels. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp.
1625–1632.
Xie, J., Wang, M., & Fang, Y . (2016). Learned binary spectral shape
descriptor for 3d shape correspondence. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
3309–3317.
Yan, J., Li, Y ., Liu, W., Zha, H., Yang, X., & Chu, S. M. (2014).
Graduated consistency-regularized optimization for multi-graphmatching. In Proceedings of the European conference on com-
puter vision , pp. 407–422.
Yan, J., Ren, Z., Zha, H., & Chu, S. (2016a). A constrained clustering
based approach for matching a collection of feature sets. In Pro-
ceedings of the international conference on pattern recognition ,
pp. 3832–3837.
Yan, J., Tian, Y ., Zha, H., Yang, X., Zhang, Y ., & Chu, S. M. (2013).
Joint optimization for consistent multiple graph matching. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
pp. 1649–1656.
Yan, J., Xu, H., Zha, H., Yang, X., Liu, H., & Chu, S. (2015c). A
matrix decomposition perspective to multiple graph matching. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computervision , pp. 199–207.
Yan, J., Yin, X. C., Lin, W., Deng, C., Zha, H., & Yang, X. (2016b). A
short survey of recent advances in graph matching. In Proceedings
of the ACM on international conference on multimedia retrieval ,
pp. 167–174.
Yan, J., Zhang, C., Zha, H., Liu, W., Yang, X., & Chu, S. M.
(2015d). Discrete hyper-graph matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
1520–1528.
Yan, J., Cho, M., Zha, H., Yang, X., & Chu, S. M. (2015a). Multi-graph
matching via afﬁnity optimization with graduated consistency reg-ularization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence ,38(6), 1228–1242.
Yang, M., Wu, F., & Li, W. (2020). Waveletstereo: Learning wavelet
coefﬁcients of disparity map in stereo matching. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition , pp. 12,885–12,894.
123

==== Page 56 ====
78 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Yang, X., Kwitt, R., Styner, M., & Niethammer, M. (2017b). Quicksil-
ver: Fast predictive image registration-a deep learning approach.NeuroImage ,158, 378–396.
Yang, J., Li, H., Campbell, D., & Jia, Y . (2016). Go-ICP: A globally opti-
mal solution to 3d ICP point-set registration. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,38(11), 2241–2254.
Yang, K., Pan, A., Yang, Y ., Zhang, S., Ong, S., & Tang, H. (2017a).
Remote sensing image registration using multiple image features.Remote Sensing ,9(6), 581.
Yan, J., Wang, J., Zha, H., Yang, X., & Chu, S. (2015b). Consistency-
driven alternating optimization for multigraph matching: A uniﬁedapproach. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,24(3), 994–
1009.
Yao, Y ., Deng, B., Xu, W., & Zhang, J. (2020). Quasi-Newton solver
for robust non-rigid registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 7600–
7609.
Ye, Y ., Shan, J., Bruzzone, L., & Shen, L. (2017). Robust registration
of multimodal remote sensing images based on structural similar-ity.IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,55(5),
2941–2958.
Yew, Z. J., & Lee, G. H. (2020). RPM-NET: Robust point matching
using learned features. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 11,824–
11,833.
Yi, K. M., Trulls, E., Lepetit, V ., & Fua, P . (2016). Lift: Learned invariant
feature transform. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision , pp. 467–483.
Yin, Z., & Shi, J. (2018). Geonet: Unsupervised learning of dense depth,
optical ﬂow and camera pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1983–1992.
Y u, T., Wang, R., Yan, J., & Li, B. (2020a). Learning deep graph match-
ing with channel-independent embedding and Hungarian attention.InInternational conference on learning representations .
Y u, T., Yan, J., & Li, B. (2020b). Determinant regularization
for gradient-efﬁcient graph matching. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, pp. 7123–7132.
Y u, T., Yan, J., Wang, Y ., Liu, W., et al. (2018). Generalizing graph
matching beyond quadratic assignment model. In Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems , pp. 861–871.
Zagoruyko, S., & Komodakis, N. (2015). Learning to compare image
patches via convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.
4353–4361.
Zaharescu, A., Boyer, E., V aranasi, K., & Horaud, R. (2009). Surface
feature detection and description with applications to mesh match-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 373–380.
Zanﬁr, A., & Sminchisescu, C. (2018). Deep learning of graph matching.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 2684–2693.
Zaslavskiy, M., Bach, F., & V ert, J. P . (2009). A path following algorithm
for the graph matching problem. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,31(12), 2227–2242.
Zass, R., & Shashua, A. (2008). Probabilistic graph and hypergraph
matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , IEEE, pp. 1–8.
Zbontar, J., & LeCun, Y . (2015). Computing the stereo matching cost
with a convolutional neural network. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1592–
1599.
Zbontar, J., & LeCun, Y . (2016). Stereo matching by training a convo-
lution neural network to compare image patches. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research ,17(1), 2287–2318.Zeng, Z., Chan, T. H., Jia, K., & Xu, D. (2012). Finding correspondence
from multiple images via sparse and low-rank decomposition. InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision , pp.
325–339.
Zeng, A., Song, S., Nießner, M., Fisher, M., Xiao, J., & Funkhouser,
T. (2017). 3dmatch: Learning local geometric descriptors fromRGB-D reconstructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1802–1811.
Zeng, Y ., Wang, C., Wang, Y ., Gu, X., Samaras, D., & Paragios,
N. (2010). Dense non-rigid surface registration using high-ordergraph matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 382–389.
Zhang, H. (2011). Borf: Loop-closure detection with scale invariant
visual features. In Proceedings of the IEEE international confer-
ence on robotics and automation , pp. 3125–3130.
Zhang, L., & Rusinkiewicz, S. (2018). Learning to detect features in tex-
ture images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 6325–6333.
Zhang, F., Prisacariu, V ., Yang, R., & Torr, P . H. (2019a). Ga-net: Guided
aggregation net for end-to-end stereo matching. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 185–194.
Zhang, Z., Shi, Q., McAuley, J., Wei, W., Zhang, Y ., & V an Den Hengel,
A. (2016). Pairwise matching through max-weight bipartite beliefpropagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1202–1210.
Zhang, J., Sun, D., Luo, Z., Yao, A., Zhou, L., Shen, T., Chen, Y ., Quan,
L., & Liao, H. (2019b). Learning two-view correspondences andgeometry using order-aware network. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 5845–5854.
Zhang, S., Yang, Y ., Yang, K., Luo, Y ., & Ong, S. H. (2017a). Point set
registration with global-local correspondence and transformationestimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision , pp. 2669–2677.
Zhang, X., Y u, F. X., Karaman, S., & Chang, S. F. (2017b). Learning
discriminative and transformation covariant local feature detec-tors. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pp. 6818–6826.
Zhang, X., Y u, F. X., Kumar, S., & Chang, S. F. (2017c). Learning
spread-out local feature descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 4595–4603.
Zhang, X., Qu, Y ., Yang, D., Wang, H., & Kymer, J. (2015). Laplacian
scale-space behavior of planar curve corners. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,37(11), 2207–2217.
Zhang, X., Wang, H., Smith, A. W., Ling, X., Lovell, B. C., & Yang, D.
(2010). Corner detection based on gradient correlation matrices ofplanar curves. Pattern Recognition ,43(4), 1207–1223.
Zhao, J., & Ma, J. (2017). Visual homing by robust interpolation for
sparse motion ﬂow. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems , pp. 1282–1288.
Zhao, C., Cao, Z., Li, C., Li, X., & Yang, J. (2019). Nm-net: Mining reli-
able neighbors for robust feature correspondences. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion, pp. 215–224.
Zhao, Q., Karisch, S. E., Rendl, F., & Wolkowicz, H. (1998). Semidef-
inite programming relaxations for the quadratic assignment prob-lem. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization ,2(1), 71–109.
Zheng, L., Yang, Y ., & Tian, Q. (2018). Sift meets CNN: A decade
survey of instance retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence ,40(5), 1224–1244.
Zhong, Y . (2009). Intrinsic shape signatures: A shape descriptor for
3d object recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision workshops , pp. 689–696.
Zhou, W., Li, H., & Tian, Q. (2017). Recent advance in content-
based image retrieval: A literature survey. arXiv preprintarXiv:1706.06064 .
123

==== Page 57 ====
International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 79
Zhou, W., Li, H., Lu, Y ., & Tian, Q. (2011). Large scale image search
with geometric coding. In Proceedings of the ACM international
conference on multimedia , pp. 1349–1352.
Zhou, W., Lu, Y ., Li, H., Song, Y ., & Tian, Q. (2010). Spatial coding for
large scale partial-duplicate web image search. In Proceedings of
the ACM international conference on multimedia , pp. 511–520.
Zhou, X., Zhu, M., & Daniilidis, K. (2015). Multi-image matching via
fast alternating minimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , pp. 4032–4040.
Zhou, L., Zhu, S., Luo, Z., Shen, T., Zhang, R., Zhen, M., Fang, T., &
Quan, L. (2018). Learning and matching multi-view descriptorsfor registration of point clouds. In Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision , pp. 505–522.
Zhou, F., & De la Torre, F. (2015). Factorized graph matching. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,38(9),
1774–1789.
Zhu, J. Y ., Park, T., Isola, P ., & Efros, A. A. (2017). Unpaired image-
to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks.InProceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision , pp. 2223–2232.
Zieba, M., Semberecki, P ., El-Gaaly, T., & Trzcinski, T. (2018). Bingan:
Learning compact binary descriptors with a regularized GAN. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 3608–
3618.Zitnick, C. L., & Ramnath, K. (2011). Edge foci interest points. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computervision , pp. 359–366.
Zitova, B., & Flusser, J. (2003). Image registration methods: A survey.
Image and Vision Computing ,21(11), 977–1000.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123

