==== Page 1 ====
Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks
for Structure-Guided Image Registration
Matthew C.H. Lee, Ozan Oktay, Andreas Schuh
Michiel Schaap, and Ben Glocker
HeartFlow, USA
Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Imperial College London, UK
Shared senior authorship.
Abstract. Image registration with deep neural networks has become an
active eld of research and exciting avenue for a long standing problem in
medical imaging. The goal is to learn a complex function that maps the
appearance of input image pairs to parameters of a spatial transforma-
tion in order to align corresponding anatomical structures. We argue and
show that the current direct, non-iterative approaches are sub-optimal,
in particular if we seek accurate alignment of Structures-of-Interest (SoI).
Information about SoI is often available at training time, for example,
in form of segmentations or landmarks. We introduce a novel, generic
framework, Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks (ISTNs), to lever-
age SoI information allowing us to learn new image representations that
are optimised for the downstream registration task. Thanks to these rep-
resentations we can employ a test-specic, iterative renement over the
transformation parameters which yields highly accurate registration even
with very limited training data. Performance is demonstrated on pairwise
3D brain registration and illustrative synthetic data.
1 Introduction
Image registration remains a fundamental problem in medical image computing,
where the goal is to estimate a spatial transformation T:Rd!Rdmapping cor-
responding anatomical locations between d-dimensional images. The most widely
used approach is intensity-based registration formalised as an optimisation prob-
lem seeking optimal transformation parameters that minimise a dissimilarity
measure (or cost function) L(MT;F), whereMis the moving source image
undergoing spatial transformation and Fis the xed target image. We refer the
reader to [1] for a detailed overview of what we here call traditional methods, i.e.,
non-learning based approaches making use of iterative optimisation strategies to
minimise the cost function for a given pair of images.
Recently, the use of neural networks to learn the complex mapping from
image appearance to spatial transformation has become an active eld of re-
search [2{7], providing a new perspective on tackling challenging registration
problems. So called supervised approaches [2,3] have been used, which are sim-
ilar in nature to methods used for image segmentation, where a convolutionalarXiv:1907.09200v1  [cs.CV]  22 Jul 2019

==== Page 2 ====
2 M.C.H. Lee, O. Oktay, A. Schuh, M. Schaap, B. Glocker
Fig. 1: A toy example (vessel trees on white box) illustrating the benet of
structure-guided image registration. The initial alignment of images (a,b) is
shown in (c) and after intensity-based ane registration in (d). Registration
focuses on aligning the white box ignoring Structures-of-Interest (SoI), i.e., the
vessels. Our ISTNs learn to focus on the SoI yielding accurate alignment in (e).
neural network is trained to predict the transformation directly using examples of
images and their ground truth transformation. Because actual ground truth for
Tis not available, either random transformations are used to generate synthetic
examples or a well established traditional registration method is employed to ob-
tain reference transformations. Neither is optimal, as synthetic transformations
might not be realistic and/or yield poor generalisation, while when employing a
traditional method the prediction accuracy of the trained network is inherently
limited by the accuracy of that method. One might argue that in this case the
neural network is mostly learning to replicate the traditional method, although
with a potentially remarkable computational speed up.
Due to the limitations of supervised methods, a number of works have then
considered so called unsupervised approaches [6, 7] where a neural network is
trained based on the original cost function of traditional intensity-based meth-
ods minimising a dissimilarity measure such as mean squared intensity dier-
ences and others. While training over large number of examples might indeed be
benecial for optimising the cost function (it could have a regularisation eect
or improve generalisation), these unsupervised approaches cannot be expected
to perform fundamentally better compared to traditional methods as the exact
same function is optimised. One might even argue that traditional methods are
more exible, as they can adapt to any new pair of test images, and are not lim-
ited to register images of similar appearance as the training data. For example,
many of the traditional methods discussed in [1] can be equally used for brain
MRI and lung CT with maybe only a few changes to some hyper-parameters.
A recent hybrid approach [8] is combining an unsupervised and supervised cost
function using a traditional method to generate training deformation elds.
Overall, one may argue that neural network based image registration, so
far, has not taken full advantage of deep representation learning but mostly led
to a speed up in the time it takes to register two images. At the same time,
one may argue that registration accuracy is of higher importance than speed
in many clinical applications. We observe that neither the supervised nor the
unsupervised methods exploit two key advantages of neural networks, which are
1) the ability to learn new representations that are optimised for a downstream

==== Page 3 ====
Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 3
𝑀
𝐹𝜃
𝐹′𝑀′ 𝑀
𝐹𝜃ITN
ITNmoving fixed
𝑆𝑀
𝑆𝐹STN STNℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝑀
ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝐹𝐹𝑀𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑢
𝑆𝐹 𝑆𝑀;𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
𝑆𝐹𝑀𝜃′ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝑀
𝐹′𝑆𝑀;𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝐹
Spatial Transformer Network Image -and-Spatial Transformer Network Training ApproachesUnsupervised STN
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑢
Structure -guided STN
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
Structure -guided ISTN explicit
ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝑀+ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝐹+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
Structure -guided ISTN implicit
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝑀+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝐹+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠loss function
representation mapping
shared
weights
Fig. 2: Overview of image registration using Spatial Transformer Networks
(STNs), with the classical model shown on the left mapping an image pair M;F
directly to parameters of a spatial transformation (cf. [6, 7]). Our Image-and-
Spatial Transformer Networks (ISTNs) introduce a dedicated image transformer
network (ITN) to learn to produce image representations M0;F0optimised for
the downstream registration task, as well as predicting . This gives raise to mul-
tiple ways of training ISTNs by combining dierent loss functions (see Sec 2.2).
task, and 2) the ability to incorporate and benet from additional information
during training that is unavailable (or very dicult to obtain) at test time.
Some exceptions to the second point are works that consider extra informa-
tion such as segmentations or weak labels during training [4{6]. This additional
supervision can help to guide the registration at test time in a dierent way
than using image intensities alone. For example, the registration may focus on
particular SoI (cf. Fig 1). However, the current approaches do not retain or
explicitly extract such extra information, so it cannot be used further at test
time, for example, for rening the predicted, initial transformation parameters.
In fact, most of the current works consider neural network based registration
as a one-pass (non-iterative) process, which might be sub-optimal as we show
in our results. The few works that discuss subsequent renement either suggest
to use a traditional (iterative) method [6], or to use the network in an auto-
regressive way [7]. As both rely again on optimising the original intensity-based
cost function the advantage over a traditional method remains unclear, and any
extra information that was available during training is somewhat lost.
1.1 Contributions
To overcome these limitations, and to make best use of the key ability of neural
networks to learn representations, we introduce Image-and-Spatial Transformer
Networks (ISTNs) where a dedicated Image Transformer Network (ITN) is added
to the head of a Spatial Transformer Network (STN) aiming to extract and retain
information about SoIs, for which annotations are only required during training.
While the STN predicts the parameters of the spatial transformation, the ITN
produces a new image representation which is learned in an end-to-end fashion

==== Page 4 ====
4 M.C.H. Lee, O. Oktay, A. Schuh, M. Schaap, B. Glocker
and optimised for the downstream registration task. This allows us to not only
predict a good initial transformation at test time, but enables what we call
structure-guided registration with an accurate test-specic, iterative renement
using the exact same model. An illustrative example of what ISTNs can do and
why structure-guided registration can be useful is shown in Fig. 1. A schematic
overview of our approach and how it relates to previous work that uses STNs
only (such as [6,7]) is shown in Fig. 2.
2 Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks
Spatial Transformer Networks [9] are the building block of most of the recent
works on neural network based image registration. An STN is a neural network
in itself commonly consisting of a few convolutional and fully connected layers
that are able to learn a mapping from input images ( M;F ) to parameters of a
spatial transformation T. Taking advantage of the fact that image re-sampling
is a dierentiable operation, STNs can be trained end-to-end, and plugged as
a module into larger networks (as originally used for improving image classi-
cation [9]). Revisiting the structure of an STN, we observe that there are two
main components: a feature extraction part learning a new representation of the
input using convolutional layers, and a second part that maps these represen-
tations to transformation parameters. We indicate this in Fig. 2 using dierent
colours within the STN module. The representation that STNs may learn, how-
ever, is not exposed and remains hidden during inference. This is where our main
contribution comes into play where we redesign the basic building block of the
transformer module of neural network based image registration by introducing
a dedicated Image Transformer Network.
2.1 Image Transformer Networks
We dene ITNs to be convolutional neural networks that map an input image
to an output image of the same size and dimension. In this paper we consider
the case where the number of channels is the same for the input and output,
although this does not have to be the case and other variants may be considered.
The role of the ITN is to expose explicitly a learned image representation that
is optimal for the downstream registration task solved by the STN. A shared
ITN for inputs MandFlearns to generate outputs M0andF0which are fed
into a regular STN (cf. Fig. 2). This new architecture gives raise to a number
of training approaches, in particular, when extra information about SoIs are
available, such as image segmentations or landmarks.
2.2 Explicit and Implicit Training of ISTNs
As indicated in Fig. 2, dierent loss functions can be considered for training
ISTNs. Note that the unsupervised case using image intensities only, here corre-
sponding toLSTN u(M;F), is a special case of training an ISTN. We use M

==== Page 5 ====
Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 5
Fig. 3: For a toy example, we show the progress of the output of the ITN module
in an ISTN model trained with the implicit loss functionLISTN i(cf. Eq. (2)
in Sec. 2.2 and Fig. 2). The top row corresponds to a case where the SoI is
a segmentation-like mask (shown on the most right). The bottom row shows
training with landmark maps. The learned image representation allows accurate
structure-guided registration with test-specic renement at test time.
as a short form of MT. Similarly, we can incorporate auxiliary information in
form of segmentations as in [6] or other structural or geometric information via a
`structure-guided' or `supervised' loss LSTN s(SM;;SF). Here,Sare images en-
coding SoIs (e.g., organ segmentations, anatomical landmarks, centerlines, etc.),
and `supervised' refers to the fact that such SoIs need annotations on the training
data. Note, that neither LSTN unorLSTN swill encourage the ITN to learn
any directly useful representations. In order to facilitate this, we propose two
dierent strategies for training ISTNs when auxiliary information about SoIs is
available. The loss function for our explicit ISTN is dened as
LISTN e=LM
ITN+LF
ITN+LSTN s (1)
which combines the supervised STN with an ITN loss LITN(SI;I0) explicitly
penalizing dierences between the SoI encoding SIand the ITN output I0for
input image I. While the explicit loss has the desired eect of producing repre-
sentations capturing the SoI information, the ITN and STN losses are somewhat
decoupled where the ITN loss plays the role of deep supervison.
An intriguing alternative is the implicit ISTN with a loss function dened as
LISTN i=LM
STN i+LF
STN i+LSTN s (2)
Here, the two terms LM
STN i(M0
;SF) andLF
STN i(SM;;F0) intertwine the out-
puts of the ITN ( M0;F0), the SoI encodings ( SM;SF) and the estimated trans-
formation parameters from the STN. Combined with the supervised STN loss
this gives raise to a fully end-to-end training of image representations that are
optimised for the downstream registration task. In Fig. 3 we show how the ITN
representations evolve over the course of training on an illustrative toy example
both for the case of segmentations and landmark annotations. Due to space rea-
sons, we omit the gure for the explicit ISTN which shows similar results with
slightly sharper representations due to the ITN loss.

==== Page 6 ====
6 M.C.H. Lee, O. Oktay, A. Schuh, M. Schaap, B. Glocker
In this paper, for all above mentioned loss functions we use the mean squared
error (MSE) loss. Other losses can be considered but we nd MSE to work very
well. It also allows us to exibly incorporate dierent types of SoI information
by simply representing it in the form of real-valued images. This is straightfor-
ward for binary segmentations, and anatomical landmarks can be, for example,
encoded via distance maps or smoothed centroid maps (cf. bottom row of Fig. 3).
2.3 Test-specic Iterative Renement
The key of ISTNs is that they enable structure-guided, test-specic renement
based on the learned representations M0andF0that are exposed by the ITN.
Though any registration technique can be used for renement by using the in-
ferred images M0andF0as inputs, we can also directly leverage the STN module
itself to perform the renement at inference time by iteratively updating the STN
weights (keeping the ITN weights xed) through minimization of a renement
loss denoted asLSTN r(M0
;F0). Note, that no annotations are required for the
test images to perform this iterative renement, as the necessary representations
M0andF0are generated by the trained ITN.
2.4 Transformation Models
STNs make no assumption about the employed spatial transformation model,
and hence, our ISTN architecture remains generic allowing the integration of
various linear and non-linear transformation models. In this paper, we consider
two specic transformation models as a proof-of-concept. We employ a typical
parameterisation for ane transformations decomposed into
Tane
 =MtRS 1
 DsS (3)
whereMt,R,DsandS are the translation, rotation, scaling and shearing
matrices. This decomposition allows us to set intuitive bounds on the individual
transformation parameters by using appropriately scaled tanh functions. For
non-linear registration we employ a standard B-spline parameterisation using a
regular grid of control points. Transformation parameters then correspond to
control point displacements. Details on this, with emphasis on their applications
and implementations within neural network architectures can be found in [7,10].
3 Experiments
We evaluate ISTNs on the task of pairwise registration of brain MRI (similar
to [6, 8]). In the rst set of experiments, we use 420 individual subjects from
the UK Biobank Imaging Study1to form 100 random pairs of moving and xed
images for training, 10 pairs for validation, and 100 pairs for testing. For each
1UK Biobank Resource under Application Number 12579

==== Page 7 ====
Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 7
Fig. 4: Visual results for ane registration with SoI overlaid in red (moving),
and green (xed). On the left: the input images before registration. Close-ups
from left to right: initial alignment, STN-u, STN-s, ISTN-e, ISTN-i.
image, segmentations of sub-cortical structures are available. Images are skull-
stripped and intensity normalised. Binarised segmentation label maps are used
as the SoI information. Due to space reasons, we focus on the results while
our publicly available code2contains details on architectural choices, hyper-
parameters and training congurations.
We assess agreement of SoI after registration by calculating Dice scores and
average surface distances (ASDs). We compare the explicit and implicit variants
(ISTN-e and ISTN-i) with unsupervised and supervised models (STN-u and
STN-s). These baselines are conceptually similar to the approaches in [6,7]. The
baselines have been set up in a competitive way and we checked for proper
convergence and best possible performance on the validation set.
Table 1 summarizes the quantitative results before and after iterative re-
nement using the four dierent approaches with ane and non-linear B-spline
transformation models. For the B-splines we use a 30 mm control point spacing
and start registration from rigidly pre-aligned images. For both ane and B-
splines we provide numbers for the initial state (Id) and results when the SoI is
used directly for registration as an upper bound \best-case" reference. We note
that ISTN-e/i outperform STN-u/s for the one-pass predictions. Test-specic
renement boosts the accuracy signicantly for all approaches. ISTNs achieve
overall highest Dice scores and lowest ASDs, sometimes close to the best-case.
STN-u/s after renement converge to the same lower accuracy as no SoI infor-
mation can be leveraged. Fig. 4 shows qualitative results after renement for
ane registration, while Fig. 5 shows an example of learned SoI representations.
We repeat the experiments but with 1,000 pairs for training instead of 100.
The one-pass predictions improve for all four methods with Dice scores of 0.75
(STN-u), 0.77 (STN-s), and 0.80 (ISTN-e/i) for ane, and 0.79, 0.83, and 0.86
(same order) for non-linear. Iterative renement yields quasi identical results for
STN-u/s as before when trained with 100 pairs, and slightly improves for ISTNs.
Remarkably, ISTNs trained with only 100 pairs achieve much higher accuracy
than STN-u and STN-s trained with 1,000 pairs, indicating excellent data ef-
ciency and benet of iterative, test-specic renement for image registration.
2https://github.com/biomedia-mira/istn

==== Page 8 ====
8 M.C.H. Lee, O. Oktay, A. Schuh, M. Schaap, B. Glocker
Table 1: Summary of registration results when using 100 training images.
Evaluated Methods
T Metric Rene Id STN-u STN-s ISTN-e ISTN-i SoIAneDicebefore0.530.71 0.70 0.75 0.750.84after 0.79 0.79 0.83 0.82
ASDbefore2.411.11 1.10 0.93 0.890.50after 0.69 0.69 0.53 0.58B-SplineDicebefore0.700.74 0.77 0.80 0.810.91after 0.84 0.83 0.86 0.85
ASDbefore1.050.88 0.74 0.63 0.590.27after 0.51 0.52 0.45 0.46
Fig. 5: Overlay of the learned representations of sub-cortical structures as
heatmaps on top of a test input. The axial, sagittal and coronal slices on the left
correspond to the ITN output of an explicit ISTN-e, the left shows the output
for an implicit ISTN-i. Black contours show the ground truth segmentations.
4 Conclusion
ISTNs are a generic framework for neural network based structure-guided image
registration with test-specic renement using learned representations. In our ex-
periments the explicit and implicit variants perform equally well and outperform
unsupervised and supervised STNs both before and after renement. Implicitly
learned representations may be benecial to prevent overtting in cases where
SoI information contains noise or corruption. This eect and other applications
of ISTNs using dierent types of SoI will be explored in future work.
References
1. Sotiras, A., Davatzikos, C., Paragios, N.: Deformable medical image registration:
A survey. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2013)
2. Yang, X., Kwitt, R., Styner, M., Niethammer, M.: Quicksilver: Fast predictive
image registration{a deep learning approach. NeuroImage (2017)
3. Sokooti, H., de Vos, B., Berendsen, F., Lelieveldt, B.P., I sgum, I., Staring, M.:
Nonrigid image registration using multi-scale 3d convolutional neural networks.
In: In MICCAI. (2017)
4. Roh e, M.M., Datar, M., Heimann, T., Sermesant, M., Pennec, X.: Svf-net: Learning
deformable image registration using shape matching. In: In MICCAI. (2017)

==== Page 9 ====
Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 9
5. Hu, Y., Modat, M., Gibson, E., Li, W., Ghavami, N., Bonmati, E., Wang, G.,
Bandula, S., Moore, C.M., Emberton, M., Ourselin, S., Noble, J.A., Barratt, D.C.,
Vercauteren: Weakly-supervised convolutional neural networks for multimodal im-
age registration. Medical Image Analysis (2018)
6. Balakrishnan, G., Zhao, A., Sabuncu, M.R., Guttag, J., Dalca, A.V.: Voxelmorph: a
learning framework for deformable medical image registration. IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging (2019)
7. de Vos, B.D., Berendsen, F.F., Viergever, M.A., Sokooti, H., Staring, M., I sgum,
I.: A deep learning framework for unsupervised ane and deformable image reg-
istration. Medical Image Analysis (2019)
8. Fan, J., Cao, X., Yap, P.T., Shen, D.: BIRNet: brain image registration using
dual-supervised fully convolutional networks. Medical Image Analysis (2019)
9. Jaderberg, M., Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Spatial transformer
networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. (2015)
10. Sandk uhler, R., Jud, C., Andermatt, S., Cattin, P.C.: Airlab: Autograd image
registration laboratory. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09907 (2018)

