==== Page 1 ====
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Improving optimization of convolutional neural networks through
parameter fine-tuning
Nicholas Becherer1•John Pecarina1•Scott Nykl1•Kenneth Hopkinson1
Received: 16 May 2017 / Accepted: 13 November 2017 / Published online: 25 November 2017
/C211The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in a number of computer vision
problems such as image classiﬁcation. Prior research has shown that a transfer learning technique known as parameter ﬁne-
tuning wherein a network is pre-trained on a different dataset can boost the performance of these networks. However, the
topic of identifying the best source dataset and learning strategy for a given target domain is largely unexplored. Thus, this
research presents and evaluates various transfer learning methods for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation as well as the effect
on ensemble networks. The results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of parameter ﬁne-tuning over random initial-
ization. We ﬁnd that training should not be reduced after transferring weights, larger, more similar networks tend to be the
best source task, and parameter ﬁne-tuning can often outperform randomly initialized ensembles. The experimental
framework and ﬁndings will help to train models with improved accuracy.
Keywords Convolutional neural networks /C1Transfer learning /C1Computer vision /C1Parameter ﬁne-tuning
1 Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are machine
learning models that extend the traditional artiﬁcial neural
network by adding increased depth and additional con-
straints to the early layers. Recent work has focused on
tuning their architecture to achieve maximum performance
on benchmarks such as the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) [ 1,2].
CNNs are not a new topic in the ﬁeld of computer
vision. They can trace their origins back to the early 1980s
with Fukushima’s Neocognitron [ 4]. More directly, they
were shown to be highly effective in the 1990s when used
for handwritten digit recognition and eventually in industryfor automated check readers [ 5,6]. They rely on several
successive convolutional layers to extract information from
an image. Since convolution is a shift and slide operation, it
is invariant to translations in the data. Most importantly,
these convolutional layers are fully learnable through the
backprop algorithm, meaning they can identify low- and
high-level patterns through supervised training [ 7]. How-
ever, they fell out of favor in the new millennium because
of their difﬁculty scaling to larger problems [ 8]. Problems
beyond the optical character recognition or low-resolution
imagery were either too computationally expensive or
lacked enough training data to avoid overﬁtting.
Recently, they have stepped back into the spotlight as
these problems have been overcome. In 2012, Krizhevsky
et al. [ 1] leveraged several recent advances to overcome
these issues in the 2012 ILSVRC. First, they used NVI-
DIA’s CUDA programming language to implement their
CNN on a highly parallel GPU, reducing run time by orders
of magnitude [ 9]. Second, the ImageNet competition
included a dataset on the scale of millions of images
automatically sourced from the Internet [ 10]. Combined
with several new techniques such as dropout regularization
[11] and simple data augmentation, they presented a model
dubbed AlexNet that won the competition. Since the&John Pecarina
john.pecarina@us.af.mil
Nicholas Becherer
nbechere@citadel.edu
Scott Nykl
scott.nykl@aﬁt.edu
Kenneth Hopkinson
kenneth.hopkinson@aﬁt.edu
1Air Force Institute of Technology, Dayton, OH 45433, USA
123Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-017-3285-0

==== Page 2 ====
introduction of AlexNet, the winning entries for the Ima-
geNet competition have all been CNNs [ 2,12,13]. These
newer CNNs have largely advanced the ﬁeld by making the
basic CNN architecture deeper. The Oxford VisualGeometry Group’s Visual Geometry Group (VGG) net-
work experimented with 11–19 learnable weight layers,
ﬁnding that 19 was the optimal architecture [ 13]. The
current leading network, GoogLeNet, has 6.7 million
learnable weights across 22 layers [ 2]. Others have focused
on improving the performance of CNNs through data
augmentation and training techniques [ 14]. Yet ultimately,
all techniques still required large amounts of training datato be effective.
The issue compelling the need for large amounts of data
is due to the fact that CNN training is an extremely com-plex optimization problem. They typically use stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) to ﬁnd the minima for a loss
function and this technique uses large labeled trainingdatasets to minimize effectively. Since SGD is a greedy
method, it is not guaranteed to ﬁnd the global minima. This
means that initialization can have an effect on the ﬁnaloutcome. These weights are usually initialized by sampling
from a Gaussian distribution [ 15]. However, it has been
shown that a transfer learning technique known asparameter ﬁne-tuning can improve the performance of a
CNN compared to random initialization (sometimes to a
substantial degree) [ 3].
However, there is a transfer learning technique that can
help overcome a lack of training data. Parameter ﬁne-
tuning is a method wherein a network is pre-trained on adifferent data set and then retrained on the target set.
Research has shown this method boosts the performance of
a network over random initialization [ 3]. However,
research on this topic is still relatively scarce. This paper
will present several gaps in our understanding as well a
framework for investigating them. We investigate threemain areas. The ﬁrst is the optimal learn rate for transferred
layers. The second is to analyze how different source
datasets affect the outcome on a number of target datasets.Lastly, we compare an ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks to
an ensemble of randomly initialized networks. These
experiments are done through an experimental frameworkthat allows a single variable to be manipulated and studied
across several datasets. Lastly, we apply this methodology
to a unique dataset aggregated from several sources andpresent the results.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2describes
related work in the area of transfer learning for CNNs, andSect. 3exposes our experimental framework. In Sect. 4,
we investigate the claim made by Girshick [ 18] that the
reduction in the learning rate may improve the accuracy ofthe transfer task. We evaluate the use of various source
data sets in Sect. 5, and in Sect. 6we explore the use ofensembles of transfer networks. A conclusion discussion
and suggestion of future work is described in Sect. 7.
2 Related works in transfer learning
for CNNs
Transfer learning is the study of using data gained from one
problem in machine learning and applying it to another
related, yet different, problem. With CNNs, there are twomain ways to apply transfer learning. The ﬁrst is to remove
the output layer of a trained network and use the raw output
of the previous fully connected layer as a generic feature
vector that describes a particular image. These features are
then used in a number of algorithms which were originallydesigned around using SIFT or SURF features [ 16,17].
Since CNNs are inherently only capable of image classi-
ﬁcation, extra algorithmic work is necessary to apply it toanother problem. The second transfer learning technique is
known as parameter ﬁne-tuning, detailed above. This is the
focus of this paper.
After the publication of Krizhevsky’s AlexNet, Girshick
et al. demonstrated both kinds of transfer learning in a
single paper [ 18]. They ﬁne-tuned AlexNet trained on the
ImageNet dataset to target the 2007 PASCAL VOC data-
set. They note that ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly increases per-
formance; however, they do not report any numbers. Oneparticular interesting claim made is that they reduce the
learning rate during ﬁne-tuning in order to avoid ‘clob-
bering the initialization’ of the original CNN. They provideno further reasoning or evidence that this is optimal. This
paper investigates this claim and ﬁnds it to be suboptimal.
After ﬁne-tuning, they then pass regions of the imagethrough their CNN and classify the region with SVMs
based on the raw output of the CNN. Their methodology is
extremely similar to an algorithm that relies on SIFT fea-tures, but outperforms it [ 19]. Girshick et al. [ 18] are
among the ﬁrst to demonstrate that CNNs can be used
effectively for other computer vision problems.
The work of both Razavian et al. [ 20] and Azizpour
et al. [ 21] also focuses on applying CNNs to other prob-
lems. In general, they ﬁnd that CNNs coupled with SVMsprovide competitive results to existing state-of-the-art
solutions for many datasets. The paper from Azizpour in
particular identiﬁes all the factors involved in transferlearning. However, they only test two different source
datasets which are similar in nature. This paper provides
and executes an experimental framework for testing dif-ferent source networks on several different target datasets.
Research from Yosinski et al. [ 3] focuses exclusively on
parameter ﬁne-tuning. Yosinski et al. randomly divide theImageNet dataset in half. For each half, they train on one
half and then target the second half. In both cases, the ﬁne-3470 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123

==== Page 3 ====
tuned network outperformed the randomly initialized net-
work. They also provide evidence against the claim made
by Girshick et al. [ 18] by showing that halting the learning
in the transferred layers can greatly reduce the perfor-mance. Lastly, they attempt to see if the effect is still
present when more dissimilar datasets are used relative to
the source. They do this by separating the dataset into man-made and natural subsets. They ﬁnd this delivers less
improvement compared to the original split. However, this
split does not quite capture visual dissimilarity correctly.
Since CNNs operate on visual information, more distant
tasks should be more visually dissimilar. Consider the caseof lemon, tennis ball, and microwave (all classes in the
dataset). Visually, a tennis ball and a lemon are similar
because of similar shape and color. However, microwave isconsidered closer to tennis ball than lemon under the cat-
egorical man-made deﬁnition. The dataset we present
better encapsulates visual dissimilarity.
Another question not currently addressed in the litera-
ture is the effect of ﬁne-tuning on ensembles of CNNs. The
top performing entries of each year’s ILSVRC have allused ensembles of CNNs [ 1,2,12,13]. Any given CNN
may overﬁt to some particular class or classes of data.
Because of the stochastic nature of SGD, however, dif-ferent CNNs trained on the same dataset are unlikely to all
overﬁt exactly the same way. By averaging the output of
each individual CNN, the propensity to overﬁt is reduced,leading to an overall model that is more general [ 22]. The
next section explains the experimental framework used to
address the various gaps in the literature in the area ofparameter ﬁne-tuning.
3 Experimental framework and dataset
Herein we provide an exposition of an experimentalframework and dataset to investigate transfer learning and
parameter ﬁne-tuning. To give context to the reader, Fig. 1
shows a simple example of parameter ﬁne-tuning, depict-ing a network trained on a source task (left) to be applied toa network trained on a target task (right). The source task
network, with green nodes, proceeds through training with
learned weights represented by blue lines and mapped to
two outputs. To transfer the network, a layer is cut off (inthis case only the output layer, but not necessarily so).
However, due to the mismatched nature of the outputs both
in classiﬁcation and number, the weights in the ﬁnalremaining layer must be reinitialized, which is represented
in the ﬁgure by red lines. After transfer, the learned weights
optimize SGD to the target task with three outputs.
To investigate gaps in the topic of parameter ﬁne-tuning,
this paper addresses three open questions:
1. Should learning be reduced in transferred layers?
2. What type of dataset serves as the best source task?
3. Do ensembles of ﬁne-tuned CNNs outperform ensem-
bles of randomly initialized CNNs?
In order to answer these questions, we assembled a
dataset that aggregates seven different ﬁne-grained data-
sets, described in Table 1with a breakdown of the data’s
characteristics. Each dataset has one major classiﬁcationand a number of minor classiﬁcation labels. For example,
the plane dataset has a major class label of simply plane. It
has 78 minor class labels such as Boeing 737 and Spitﬁre.We refer to the major classes as generalist (G) and the
minor as classes as high-fan (HF) for the way they ‘fan out’
the dataset.
This allows us to create several conﬁgurations using the
same aggregated dataset. When a network is trained on the
entirety of the dataset, it is referred to as a superset net-work. Depending on how the data are labeled, the superset
network may either be a generalist or a high-fan network.
A generalist classiﬁes all images at the major class level(e.g., plane vs. bird). A high-fan network classiﬁes every-
thing at the minor class level (e.g., 737 vs. Spitﬁre vs.
Cardinal vs. Crow). Generalist and high-fan networks alsohave a variant where a single subset is removed. For
example, there are the generalist-without-planes (GWP)
and high-fan-without-planes (HFWP). A network trainedonly on a single subset of data is a specialist network.
Fig. 1 Fine-tuning visualized,
where the network on the left istrained on a task similar to the
transfer task. At right the pre-
trained network, the outputlayer is cut off and the ﬁnalweight layer is transferred to a
network with varied outputs
(colour ﬁgure online)Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3471
123

==== Page 4 ====
Specialist networks always classify at the minor class level.
Figure 2shows an example of the different dataset con-
ﬁgurations. It shows the number of images and a notional
set of classes in each major class (for readability). This willbe discussed further in Sect. 5.
The experimental framework is based on using different
initializations for each specialist network. The ﬁrst is ran-
dom initialization, which is referred to as a scratchinitialization, and is used as a control. The other four come
from transferring the weights learned in the superset net-
works. This framework has a number of inherent advan-
tages. By using 7 different subsets of data, we effectivelyhave 7 different trials to verify results. We can also mea-
sure the effect on different types of datasets. For example,
the bird subset has a large number of classes but little
training data per class, while the dog dataset has fewerTable 1 A high-level overview
of the multiple class image
datasetsMajor class Images Train Test Categories Median Source
Vegetable 17,562 13243 4409 24 800 ImageNet [ 10]
Cat 2392 1795 597 12 200 Oxford Pets [ 23]
Flower 8189 6180 2009 102 66 Oxford Flowers [ 24]
Bird 11,788 8872 2916 200 60 CalTech-UCSD Birds [ 25]
Sign 5886 4424 1462 24 189 KUL Belgian Signs [ 26]
Dog 71,947 53,982 17,965 111 800 Stanford Dogsa[27]
Plane 17,800 13,350 4450 78 100 FGVC [ 28], Mashb[8]
Total 135,654 101,846 33,808 551 91
aSupplemented with data from the given ImageNet synsets
bThis dataset is not publicly available
Fig. 2 Different conﬁgurations
of the multiclass image dataset.At top left a generalist
(G) dataset is shown, then a
generalist dataset without planes(GWP, top right). At bottomleft, a high-fan (HF) dataset,
depicting notional subclasses,
ﬁnally, high-fan-without-planes(HFWP) is shown at bottom
right3472 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123

==== Page 5 ====
classes and a much larger amount of training data per class.
Data are split 75% for training and 25% for testing. Test
data are never used for training on any network. In order to
normalize the effect of transfer learning and make theeffect comparable across multiple datasets, we use the
following formula to measure the error reduction rate:
Reduction rate ¼1/C0Scratch errors /C0transfer errors ðÞ
Scratch errors:
ð1Þ
There are many parameters that can be adjusted when it
comes to training CNNs. Typically, one would tune eachparameter to ﬁnd the best set for their particular problem.
However, we are interested only in the effect of ﬁne-tun-
ing. In order to isolate this effect, we use the same set ofhyperparameters for all networks. This likely leads to
suboptimal performance for particular datasets, but optimal
performance is not our goal. Unless otherwise noted, theparameters described below are used across all
experiments.
The basic network architecture to be used for this
experiment is the same one as in AlexNet [ 1]. AlexNet has
5 convolutional layers and three fully connected layers
attached to a SoftMax layer at the output that generates a
probability distribution of all possible classes. While other
architectures have been used to achieve better results on theILVSRC challenge, AlexNet is used for several reasons.
First, it is a well-known architecture and has become a
standard architecture for experiments on CNNs themselves[3]. Second, even with high-powered GPUs, training a
CNN takes days, and more complicated models take longer
(the authors of VGG reported that training took 2-3 weekson similar hardware [ 13]). Given the number of CNNs that
need to be trained for this experiment, time is a nontrivial
factor.
There still remains a number of network hyperparame-
ters to be deﬁned. Many of these hyperparameters were
chosen by experimenting until the network began to traineffectively. Large minibatches can lead to slow conver-
gence, while smaller minibatches may lead to suboptimal
convergence. Minibatch size was set to 256. The learn ratewas initially set to .001. It was reduced by half every
25,000 training iterations. It is unlikely that this is the best
learning strategy for every dataset. However, the goal ofthis research is not to ﬁnd the best possible results for each
dataset; rather we are trying to study the effect of ﬁne-
tuning, so we standardized on a schedule of learning ratemultipliers and number of training iterations to measure
affects across the datasets. Tweaking the learning strategy
for every dataset would multiply the amount of trainingrequired, which would have made an experiment on this
scale unfeasible due to time constraints. It takes a 3-4 days
to capture results on a particular setting. Most networksconverged to an optimal solution in less than 100,000
training iterations and then began to overﬁt; however, for
the sake of consistency and thoroughness, all networks
were trained for 200,000 iterations. Training consisted of100 iterations followed by a complete test against the entire
validation set. When a network’s accuracy is reported, it is
the model that had the best accuracy on the validation set.However, the best model was never used for transferring.
The model saved at 200,000 iterations was always the
source model. This is in line with the research done by
Azizpour et al. [ 21], which found that early stopping was
less beneﬁcial than overﬁtting, although the beneﬁt ofoverﬁtting diminishes beyond 200,000 iterations.
All experiments were done using Berkeley Caffe [ 29].
Caffe was chosen because it supports GPU-acceleratedtraining which makes research on this scale feasible. It also
makes it simple to transfer learned weights. Furthermore, it
is very popular and well supported by the community. It isexpected that the same results would be achieved regard-
less of deep learning framework used. The main difference
is the interface and underlying implementation, not thealgorithm.
4 Optimizing learn rate
The ﬁrst experiment was designed to evaluate the claimby Girshick et al. [ 18] that there is some value in
reducing the learning rate during ﬁne-tuning. To test this
claim, we applied a learn rate multiplier to the transferredlayers. By varying our learn rate multiplier from 0 to 1,
we can measure the effect of preserving the initialization.
Using a multiplier of 0 freezes the learning in the trans-ferred layers and absolutely preserves the initialization.
We increase the multiplier to 1 in .2 increments. By the
time we have a multiplier of 1, we have effectivelyeschewed the learn rate multiplier and only use the global
learn rate. A network with no transferred layers is trained
from scratch to serve as a baseline comparison. For thisexperiment, the transferred weights came from pretraining
on the generalist network.
Using the planes subset as the target dataset, Fig. 3
shows the result that using a learning rate multiplier is
suboptimal to simply using the global learning rate.
Completely freezing the initialization led to an accuracy of18.584%. It was omitted from Fig. 3in order to prevent
compressing the scale of the rest of the results shown in the
ﬁgure. Other than that, all other ﬁne-tuned networks out-performed the scratch initialization. The global learning
rate performed the best overall. This contradicts the claim
of Girshick for the situation where the classiﬁcation task isaimed at a straightforward labeling of the designated
dataset.Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3473
123

==== Page 6 ====
Recalling the mechanisms of training a CNN that
involve minimizing an optimization problem, the functionto be minimized is the cross-entropy loss function of the
network. Since cross-entropy loss is a nonconvex function,
it may have many local minima that are different from theglobal minima. Relying on a greedy algorithm like
stochastic gradient descent causes convergence to the local
minima rather than the global minima. By choosing a betterinitialization, better minima may be found. Reducing the
learn rate of the network after transferring weights does
nothing to affect the initialization; if anything, it preventsthe valley of the local minima from being efﬁciently tra-
versed. For this reason we recommend the global learning
rate for straightforward labeling tasks. Attempting tointerpret Girshick’s claim another way, it may be possible
to achieve higher classiﬁcation accuracy if a secondary
classiﬁcation task is to be pursued. We hope to approachthat answer in part in the next section.
5 Analyzing effect of the source task
The next experimental question analyzes what type ofdataset may serve as the best source for the labeling task, in
other words, what data should be used in pretraining. An
open question for ﬁne-tuning is which dataset should bechosen for pretraining. As mentioned earlier, our dataset
better allows us to measure the effect of source task. Using
our dataset, we can control for factors such as the type ofsource task, the visual similarity of the source task, and the
amount of training data in the target task. For each major
class in the dataset, we train a specialist network with 5different initializations. The ﬁrst is the scratch or random
initialization. This serves as the control and acts as the
baseline against which all other initializations are com-
pared. The remaining initializations come from transferringweights trained on different conﬁgurations of the entire
dataset. They are the generalist, high-fan, generalist-with-
out, and high-fan-without datasets where the without net-work has had the major class of the target task removed.
These serve as a more visually distant source task com-
pared to the full dataset. With these different initializations,
we can measure the effect source task has on ﬁne-grained
image classiﬁcation as well as the effect that visual simi-larity has. Furthermore, by repeating this experiment on
each major class subset, we can see the effect of increased
amounts of training data, starting with Fig. 4, described
next.
Figure 4shows the results from the ﬁrst ﬁve specialist
networks. All networks showed an improvement overrandom initialization regardless of which source was used
for ﬁne-tuning. The beneﬁt varied from task to task. For
example, both the bird and ﬂower datasets have similaramounts of data in the training set. However, the ﬂower
network had a much larger increase in both absolute and
relative terms of accuracy compared to the bird dataset. Ingeneral, the more distant high-fan-without and generalist-
without networks underperformed their more visually
similar counterparts. The one exception to this trend is thehigh-fan-without initialization for the vegetable network
was the highest performing initialization for that specialist
network.
Figure 5shows the results from the dog and sign net-
works, which seem to be the outliers. The dog specialist
network is noteworthy because the high-fan-without ini-tialization actually underperformed the random scratch
initialization. In the 28 ﬁne-tuned networks trained for this
experiment, this was the only instance of this happening.The other initializations also provided very little beneﬁt
over random initialization, although they did provide some
beneﬁt. The results for the sign specialist network are alsoshown. These are noteworthy due to the high performance
of the scratch network. It was not realized at the time of
data collection, but as of 2013 the signs dataset is con-sidered solved [ 30]. Because it is less difﬁcult and has little
room for improvement, this type of dataset is a poor choice
for incorporation and is not recommended for transferlearning.
Figure 6shows the normalized results for all 7 subsets
of data. Overall, the high-fan initialization was most oftenthe best choice, turning out to be the top performing ini-
tialization 3 out of 7 times. Table 2shows the raw data for
each network as well as the mean of the data. The meanalso indicates that the high-fan initialization generally leads
to the best performance. However, it was noted that the
Fig. 3 The results from varying the learn rate multiplier in the
transferred layers using the planes subset of the dataset. The scratch
network is the control, and the frozen trial was omitted for sake of
clarity3474 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123

==== Page 7 ====
mean indicates that the generalist was the worst performing
initialization. This is due to the anomalous behavior of the
sign specialist network, where all other initializations
outperform the generalist initialization. In no other datasetdoes the generalist-without initialization outperform the
generalist initialization. When the mean is recomputed
without the results from the sign dataset, the high-fan
networks remain the best initialization and the generalist no
Fig. 4 The results from the ﬁrst ﬁve specialist networks. From left to right: bird, cat, ﬂower, plane, and vegetable. A sample image from each
dataset is shown above the graph for that major classNeural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3475
123

==== Page 8 ====
longer is seen as underperforming the generalist-without
networks.
The results also show that the more visually dissimilar
without networks tend to underperform their more similarcousins. This demonstrates that more visually similar tasks
should be chosen as the source task. However, there
doesn’t seem to be a clear connection between the amountof training data available in the target task and the effect onparameter ﬁne-tuning. Both the ﬂower and bird datasets
had very little training data available. The best ﬂowerinitialization leads to an error reduction rate of 52.73%,
while the best bird initialization only had an error reduction
rate of 9.60%. Meanwhile, the dog dataset, which had themost training data, beneﬁted the least from parameter ﬁne-
tuning. The vegetable dataset, which had a similar amount
of training data per class but far fewer classes, had a moretypical beneﬁt.
6 Ensembles of transfer networks
Ensembles of classiﬁers have long been known to outper-form individuals classiﬁers because the propensity of any
single model to overﬁt is reduced [ 5]. Ensembles of CNNs
work by simply passing the same image through eachindividual CNN and taking the mean of each probability
distribution to obtain the ensemble’s probability distribu-
tion of the output. Since ﬁne-tuned networks tend to out-perform networks trained from scratch, it seems intuitive
that an ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks would outperform
an ensemble of scratch networks. In order to test this, wetrained an additional three scratch networks for each major
class (except for the sign dataset). This allows direct
comparison of 4 scratch networks to the four ﬁne-tunednetworks trained in the above experiment. Figure 7shows
the results for the plane specialist networks. As expected,
Fig. 5 The results for two outlier specialist networks, dog and sign. A sample image from each dataset is shown above the graph for that major
class
Fig. 6 The error reduction rate of every different datasets. This
method normalizes the results and allows us to compare the effectbetween datasets3476 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123

==== Page 9 ====
the ensembles produced fewer errors than the best model
individually. However, it was surprising to see that the best
ﬁne-tuned network outperformed the entire ensemble ofscratch networks. In fact, the ensemble of scratch networks
only outperformed one of the ﬁne-tuned networks. This is
particularly interesting because training and deploying an
ensemble of 4 CNNs requires 4 times as many computa-
tional resources, whereas ﬁne-tuning a single network atmost requires only twice the training time and no additional
resources for deployment.
Figure 8shows the results for all major classes. The
trend observed in the plane dataset is repeated in all other
major classes with one exception. The dog subset, which
beneﬁted very little from parameter ﬁne-tuning, has theensemble of scratch networks outperform the best ﬁne-
tuned network. Still, the ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks
outperformed the ensemble of scratch networks, though.Recall that the high-fan-without initialization underper-
formed the scratch network. It was thought that removing
this network from the ensemble might improve the per-formance of the ensemble. However, doing this caused the
overall accuracy to drop from 42.4 to 42.21%. Ensemblesof CNNs are more accurate than the individual networks
that comprise them. By improving the accuracy of the
individual networks through parameter ﬁne-tuning, itseems obvious that the performance of the ensemble would
improve as well. Our results conﬁrm this assumption.
7 Conclusion and future work
This paper makes several important contributions. First,we ﬁnd that contrary to the assertion of Girshick [ 18],
there is no beneﬁt to reducing the learning in a ﬁne-tunednetwork. The initialization provides a beneﬁt but the
initialization is not better that full training on the target.
Next, in the study of different source tasks, we observedthat pretraining on a dataset with a wide variety of ﬁnely
grained images provides a better source task than a
smaller variety of more general classes. Furthermore,pretraining on a dataset with no overlap with the target
dataset provides less of a beneﬁt than a more visually
similar source dataset. The amount of training data in theTable 2 The reduction in error
rate for each datasetDataset Generalist (%) High-fan (%) Generalist w/out (%) High-fan w/out (%)
Sign 18.1657 54.5414 60.6114 54.5414
Vegetable 21.2968 22.0706 20.5247 22.3421Dog 2.7095 2.4938 1.5842 -4.4402
Cat 44.6799 48.2259 36.1694 46.8075Flower 45.7029 52.7343 39.9724 44.8423Bird 8.9763 9.6034 5.5840 5.1137Plane 18.6788 10.1740 16.2494 3.9466Mean 22.871 28.5491 25.8136 24.7362Mean w/out Sign 23.674 24.217 20.014 19.769
Fig. 7 Comparison of ensembles for the plane subset. The best ﬁne-
tuned network alone outperforms the ensemble of scratch networks
Fig. 8 The accuracy of the best scratch and ﬁne-tuned networks
compared to their respective ensemblesNeural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3477
123

==== Page 10 ====
target task seems to have little correlation with the beneﬁt
provided by parameter ﬁne-tuning. Lastly, we study the
effect of ﬁne-tuning ensembles of networks. As expected,
an ensemble of ﬁne-tuned networks outperforms anensemble of randomly initialized networks. However, it
also seems to be the case that a single ﬁne-tuned network
can outperform an entire ensemble of randomly initializednetworks. The results demonstrate that parameter ﬁne-
tuning almost always leads to an improvement in image
classiﬁcation accuracy. Given these results, we see no
reason not to utilize parameter ﬁne-tuning. The only
possible downside is the increased training time requiredfor pretraining. However, if using an existing network
architecture with available trained models, there may be
no increase in training time. Many applications, such asautomatic navigation of unmanned vehicles, require a
high degree of accuracy in order to rely on a computer
vision solution. This technique may help state-of-the-artsolutions reach their required thresholds.
There are several directions in which this work could
extend. An obvious example would be to apply parameterﬁne-tuning to a production system to demonstrate that the
effect is valid in real-world scenarios. One would be to ﬁnd
the optimal ensemble composition. For example, would theplane specialist ensemble perform better with four sepa-
rately trained generalist initializations or does the variety of
four different initializations produce the beneﬁt? Anotherarea would be to combine our methodology with that of
Azizpour et al. [ 20] to measure the effect of source task on
other computer vision problems. Yet another interest areawould be to apply our methodology a new architecture
such as GoogLeNet to see if our results scale to a much
larger CNN [ 2]. These and certainly other works may
extend from this type of research. The value of doing so
will continue to reﬁne the theory behind convolutional
neural networks since the ﬁeld is so new. Insights gainedfrom these experimental observations may allow for
stronger mathematical constructs and insights to be estab-
lished. In the meantime, they help inform researchers onbest practices for training and pretraining networks for
image classiﬁcation.
Acknowledgements This work was sponsored by the Vehicles
Directorate of the Air Force Research Laboratory. The views
expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarilyreﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or position of the Air Force, Defense
Department or the U.S. Government.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://crea
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide alink to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes weremade.References
1. Krizhevsky A, Sulskever I, Hinton GE (2012) ImageNet classi-
ﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Advances inneural information processing systems, pp 1–9
2. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P (2014) Going deeper with
convolutions. arXiv Prepr. arXiv 1409.4842
3. Yosinski J, Clune J, Bengio Y, Lipson H (2014) How transferable
are features in deep neural networks? In: Advances in neural
information processing systems (Proceedings NIPS), vol 27,pp 1–9
4. Fukushima K, Miyake S (1982) Neocognitron: a new algorithm
for pattern recognition tolerant of deformations and shifts in
position. Pattern Recognit 15(6):455–469
5. LeCun Y, Boser B, Denker JS, Henderson D, Howard RE,
Hubbard W, Jackel LD (1990) Handwritten digit recognition with
a back-propagation network. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol 2
6. LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y (1997) Reading checks with
multilayer graph transformer networks. In: International confer-
ence on acoustics, speech, and signal processing, pp 151–154
7. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton GE (2015) Deep learning. Nature
521(7553):436–444
8. Mash R, Becherer N, Woolley B, Pecarina J (2016) Toward
aircraft recognition with convolutional neural networks. In:National aerospace and electronics conference
9. Strigl D, Koﬂer K, Podlipnig S (2010) Performance and scala-
bility of GPU-based convolutional neural networks. In: 2010 18th
Euromicro conference on parallel, distributed network-basedprocess, pp 317–324
10. Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li L-J, Li K, Fei-Fei L (2009)
ImageNet: a large-scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,pp 2–9
11. Hinton GE, Srivastava N, Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Salakhut-
dinov RR (2012) Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. arXiv e-prints, pp 1–18
12. Sermanet P, Eigen D, Zhang X, Mathieu M, Fergus R, LeCun Y
(2013) OverFeat: integrated recognition, localization and detec-
tion using convolutional networks. arXiv Prepr. arXiv,p 1312.6229
13. Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional net-
works for large-scale image recognition. In: ImageNet Challenge,
pp 1–10
14. Howard AG (2013) Some improvements on deep convolutional
neural network based image classiﬁcation. arXiv Prepr.
arXiv1312.5402, pp 1–6
15. Kra ¨henbu ¨hl P, Doersch C, Donahue J, Darrell T (2015) Data-
dependent initializations of convolutional neural networks. In:
International conference on computer vision, pp 1–12
16. Lowe DG (1999) SIFT. Comput Vis 2:1150–115717. Bay H, Tuytelaars T, Van Gool L, Leonardis A, Bischof H, Pinz
A (2006) SURF: speeded up robust features. Comput Vis
3951:404–417
18. Girshick R, Donahue J, Darrell T, Malik J (2014) Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmen-tation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp 580–587
19. Uijlings JRR, Van De Sande KEA, Gevers T, Smeulders AWM
(2013) Selective search for object recognition. Int J Comput Vis
104(2):154–171
20. Sharif Razavian A, Azizpour H, Sullivan J, Carlsson S, (2014)
CNN features off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recogni-tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition workshops, pp 806–8133478 Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479
123

==== Page 11 ====
21. Azizpour H, Sharif Razavian A, Sullivan J, Maki A, Carlsson S,
(2015) From generic to speciﬁc deep representations for visual
recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp 36–45
22. Giacinto G, Roli F (2001) Design of effective neural network
ensembles for image classiﬁcation purposes. Image Vis Comput19(9–10):699–707
23. Parkhi OM, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A, Jawahar CV (2012) Cats
and dogs. In: 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp 3498–3505
24. Nilsback M-E, Zisserman A (2006) A visual vocabulary for
ﬂower classiﬁcation. In: Computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp 1447–1454
25. Welinder P, Branson S, Mita T, Wah C (2010) Caltech-UCSD
birds 200. CalTech 200:1–15
26. Timofte R, Zimmermann K, Van Gool L (2014) Multi-view
trafﬁc sign detection, recognition, and 3D localisation. Mach Vis
Appl 25(3):633–64727. Khosla A, Jayadevaprakash N, Yao B, Fei-Fei L (2011) Novel
dataset for ﬁne-grained image categorization: Stanford dogs. In:
First work. Fine-grained visual categorization. IEEE Conferenceon computer vision and pattern recognition
28. Maji S, Rahtu E, Kannala J, Blaschko M, Vedaldi A (2013) Fine-
grained visual classiﬁcation of aircraft. TechReport
29. Jia Y, Shelhamer E, Donahue J, Karayev S, Long J, Girshick R,
Guadarrama S, Darrell T (2014) Caffe: convolutional architecture
for fast feature embedding. In: Proceedings of ACM international
conference on multimedia—MM’14, pp 675–678
30. Mathias M, Timofte R, Benenson R, Van Gool L (2013) Trafﬁc
sign recognition—How far are we from the solution? In: 2013
international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN),
pp 1–8Neural Computing and Applications (2019) 31:3469–3479 3479
123

