==== Page 1 ====
Improved Mixed-Example Data Augmentation
Cecilia Summers
Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland
cecilia.summers.07@gmail.comMichael J. Dinneen
Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland
mjd@cs.auckland.ac.nz
Abstract
In order to reduce overﬁtting, neural networks are
typically trained with data augmentation, the practice
of artiﬁcially generating additional training data via
label-preserving transformations of existing training exam-
ples. While these types of transformations make intuitive
sense, recent work has demonstrated that even non-label-
preserving data augmentation can be surprisingly effec-
tive, examining this type of data augmentation through lin-
ear combinations of pairs of examples. Despite their ef-
fectiveness, little is known about why such methods work.
In this work, we aim to explore a new, more generalized
form of this type of data augmentation in order to deter-
mine whether such linearity is necessary. By consider-
ing this broader scope of “mixed-example data augmenta-
tion”, we ﬁnd a much larger space of practical augmenta-
tion techniques, including methods that improve upon pre-
vious state-of-the-art. This generalization has beneﬁts be-
yond the promise of improved performance, revealing a
number of types of mixed-example data augmentation that
are radically different from those considered in prior work,
which provides evidence that current theories for the ef-
fectiveness of such methods are incomplete and suggests
that any such theory must explain a much broader phe-
nomenon. Code is available at https://github.com/
ceciliaresearch/MixedExample .
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable
performance on many tasks previously considered in-
tractable, but they come with a cost: they require large
amounts of data. While great progress has been made at
making neural nets more data-efﬁcient through the use of
improved network architectures and training methods, the
limitation remains, with the greatest effect in data-starved
domains such as robotics [18, 19] and medical applica-
tions [4, 8, 7].
To get around the requirement for large amounts of
data, machine learning practitioners typically either trans-
Linear Methods
Input
Generalized
Figure 1. Given two input examples, mixed-example data aug-
mentation consists of the set of functions that combine the inputs
into a novel image, perhaps with an appearance unrealistic to hu-
mans. Previous work has considered the case of linear transfor-
mations, i.e.element-wise weighted averaging. In this work, we
explore a more generalized space of functions in order to deter-
mine whether non-linear functions are similarly effective. Shown
above are examples of 8 of the methods considered in this work,
all of which result in improved performance over non-mixed ex-
ample augmentation, illustrating that the space of viable functions
is much broader than previously realized.
fer knowledge from other tasks, or employ large amounts
of “data augmentation”, the practice of generating synthetic
data based on real examples. This synthetic data artiﬁcially
expands the size of datasets used for training models by
many orders of magnitude, and typically takes the form of
transformations that maintain the realistic appearance of the
input, e.g.for image classiﬁcation, ﬂipping an image hori-
zontally or making minor adjustments to its brightness.
A handful of recent work, however, has pointed out a
new direction: data augmentation can take the form of mix-
ing training examples together, speciﬁcally via element-
wise averages of pairs of inputs [27, 24, 25, 12]. ThougharXiv:1805.11272v4  [cs.CV]  19 Jan 2019

==== Page 2 ====
this type of data augmentation does not produce data real-
istic to humans, it is surprisingly effective at training mod-
els, signiﬁcantly improving performance across a variety of
tasks and domains even after other forms of data augmenta-
tion are considered. Due to the nascency of such techniques,
we currently do not have a good understanding of why they
are effective. One hypothesis comes from Zhang et al. [27],
who suggest that the added linearity this form of data aug-
mentation encourages is a useful inductive bias. Another
is from Tokozume et al. [24], who put forth the idea that
CNNs treat imagery as waveform data and that such data
augmentation puts constraints on internal feature distribu-
tions. While the true modus operandi by which these meth-
ods are successful remains an area of active research, these
works nevertheless point to new directions for reducing the
dependence of modern deep neural networks on large quan-
tities of labeled data.
In this paper, we ask the question: is linearity critical to
the success of these data augmentation methods that com-
bine multiple input examples? To answer this question,
we explore this new area of data augmentation as general-
ized functions of multiple inputs, which we denote “mixed-
example data augmentation”. We propose a variety of al-
ternative methods for example generation, and surprisingly
ﬁnd that almost all methods result in improvements over
models trained without any form of mixed-example data
augmentation (see Fig. 1 for examples). As a byproduct
of increasing this search space, we ﬁnd multiple methods
that improve upon existing work [27, 24]. Though we do
not propose new theoretical reasons for the utility of mixed-
example data augmentation, our experiments shed empirical
light on existing hypotheses, providing evidence that they
are incomplete.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
Sec. 2 we review related work in data augmentation and reg-
ularization more generally, and in Sec. 3 we present our ex-
ploration of mixed-example data augmentation, overview-
ing 14 alternatives. We present experiments on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Caltech-256 in Sec. 4, then conclude with
a discussion in Sec. 5.
2. Related Work
Data Augmentation. Data augmentation is key to the
success of most modern neural networks across nearly every
domain. Here we limit our discussion of data augmentation
to applications with images, the focus of this work.
Common forms of data augmentation include random
crops, horizontal ﬂipping, and color augmentation [15],
which improve robustness to translation, reﬂection, and il-
lumination, respectively. Occasionally, random scalings are
also done [21] as well as random rotations and afﬁne trans-
formations, though these tend to get somewhat less use.
One more recent form of data augmentation consists of ze-roing out random parts of the image [3, 28], a structured
form of input-layer dropout, which works surprisingly well
on the CIFAR-10/100 datasets. Though they differ greatly
in technique, all of these methods are a form of label-
preserving data augmentation, i.e. they are designed to
maintain the label of the transformed image, which requires
a small amount of task-speciﬁc knowledge. For example, in
the context of image classiﬁcation, an image of a cat, even
after horizontally ﬂipping it and altering its brightness, is
still recognizable as an image of a cat.
More directly relevant to our work is recent progress on
generating images for training as linear combinations of
other training images [27, 24, 12]. While we save a de-
tailed overview for Sec. 3.2, these methods take the gen-
eral form of randomly generating a mixing coefﬁcient and
producing a new image and label as a convex combination
of two images/labels. Tokozume et al. [24] further consid-
ered an improved form based on the interpretation of im-
ages as waveform data, and Inoue restricted the sampling
coefﬁcient to 0:5. Our research, inspired by these, consid-
ers more generalized functions of a different form, showing
that the space of effective mixed-example data augmenta-
tion is much more broad than linearity-based methods.
Regularization. Closely related to the topic of data
augmentation is regularization. One of the most common
approaches to regularization is weight decay [16], which
is equivalent to L2-regularization when using a vanilla
stochastic gradient descent learning rule. Other common
types of regularization include Dropout [22], which can also
be considered a form of feature-space data augmentation in-
jected at intermediate layers in a neural network, and Batch
Normalization [13], which has a regularization effect due
to randomness in minibatch statistics. Other more exotic
forms of regularization include randomly dropping out lay-
ers [11] and introducing disparities between forward- and
backward-propagation [5]. Data augmentation and regu-
larization can both be viewed as ways to incorporate prior
knowledge into models, either via invariances in data (label-
preserving data augmentation) or through priors on how
weights and activations in neural networks should behave
(regularization), and both have the goal of reducing the
train-test generalization gap. As such, it is folk wisdom that
there is a tradeoff between the optimal amount of data aug-
mentation and regularization to use — for example, Zhang
et. al [27] found that using mixup well required a 5x lower
amount of weight decay than without mixup on CIFAR-10.
3. Methods
3.1. General Formulation
Most uses of label-preserving data augmentation can be
represented by stochastic functions of the form
(~x;~y) =~f(x;y) = (f(x);y): (1)

==== Page 3 ====
For example, fmay be a function randomly altering the
brightness of its input, horizontally ﬂipping it, or applying
a projective transformation. Of key note, however, is that ~f
is an identity function with respect to its second input.
In this work, we consider generalized methods for data
augmentation of the form:
(~x;~y) =~f(f(xi;yi)g2
i=1) (2)
That is, we consider arbitrary functions mapping two ex-
amples into a single new training example. This is a strict
generalization of the form of augmentation in Eq. 1, which
can be obtained by ignoring either one of the two inputs. In
theory one could consider functions with N > 2examples
as input, but in initial experiments (also agreeing with [27])
we did not see improvement beyond N= 2, so in this work
we restrict our methods to this setting.
3.2. Linearity-Based Methods
In this section we present previous work [27, 24, 25, 12],
which can be represented as special cases of Eq. 2 in which
~fis a linear combination of (x1;y1);(x2;y2):
Mixup. Inmixup [27], the augmentation function ~fis
represented by:
~x=x1+ (1 )x2
~y=y1+ (1 )y2(3)
whereBeta (;)for each pair of examples, with
a hyperparameter. For experiments on CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100, Zhang et al. [27] used the value = 1, which
results in a uniform distribution between 0 and 1, and found
that on larger datasets such as ImageNet [20] a smaller value
ofwas required due to underﬁtting. Mixup was motivated
as encouraging linearity between training examples, with
the hypothesis that linearity is an effective inductive bias
(an assumption built into a model) for most models. In-
deed, mixup was shown to be useful across a wide variety
of tasks and models. As we shall show in our work, this pic-
ture is incomplete — linearity, while useful, is not required
for mixed-example data augmentation to be effective, and
extremely non-linear methods can perform nearly as well.
Between Class (BC+). Tokozume et al. [24] devel-
oped two methods for mixed-example data augmentation.
The ﬁrst, “BC” (Between-Class), is equivalent to mixup and
was developed in parallel with Zhang et al. [27]. Improving
upon “BC” and building upon their previous work with au-
dio [25], Tokozume et al. developed “BC+”, which is based
on the intuition that neural networks (speciﬁcally CNNs)
can treat imagery as waveform data. Using this intuition,
two improvements were made:First, waveforms are naturally zero-mean signals, while
images are not. Therefore, Tokozume et al. ﬁrst subtract
each image’s mean (computed across all channels, i.e. a
single number per image) from itself before further pro-
cessing. This stands in contrast to most recent work with
CNNs [26], which uses a mean across an entire dataset for
normalization.
The second improvement comes from noting that com-
bining examples in a strictly linear fashion does not produce
aperceptually linear combination of images, a fact which
was an acute concern in their prior work on audio [25]. To
solve this, Tokozume et al. use the standard deviation of
each image1;2to measure energy, and ultimately derive
the mixing equation
~x=p(x1 1) + (1 p)(x2 2)p
p2+ (1 p)2
wherep=1
1 +1
21 
(4)
withU[0;1]and the label being linearly determined
as in mixup . While BC+ is technically a non-linear method,
we group it together with linearity-based methods such as
mixup since the non-linearity only occurs in the normaliza-
tion term and the method is still fundamentally based on
element-wise averaging.
3.3. Non-Linear Methods
We now illustrate the generality of our formulation
(Eq. 2) by presenting many different non-linear methods for
mixed-example data augmentation. Although we present
them as alternatives to linearity-based approaches, we note
that most of these methods are largely orthogonal both to
such approaches as well as to more traditional forms of data
augmentation and can potentially be employed in combina-
tion with them. Illustrative examples are shown in Fig. 2.
Vertical Concat. As in mixup and similar to BC+,
“Vertical Concat” begins be sampling a random mixing co-
efﬁcientBeta (;). However, instead of element-
wise averaging, in this method the top fraction of image
x1is vertically concatenated with the bottom (1 )frac-
tion of image x2. Formally, we have
~x(r;c) =x1(r;c);ifrH
x2(r;c) otherwise(5)
whereHis the height of the image and x(r;c)denotes
the 3-dimensional pixel at row rand column cof an image
x. Though simple, this is an extremely non-linear transfor-
mation with respect to the input. The label ~yremains equal
to the original labels weighted by the mixing coefﬁcient:
y1+ (1 )y2. Thus, a network trained with “Vertical

==== Page 4 ====
Concat” must not only correctly classify the top and bot-
tom portions of the image, but also correctly identify what
fraction of the image they occupy.
Horizontal Concat. This method is similar to “Verti-
cal Concat.”, but instead horizontally concatenates the left
fraction ofx1with the right (1 )fraction ofx2:
~x(r;c) =x1(r;c);ifcW
x2(r;c) otherwise(6)
whereWis the width of the image. As before, we have
~y=y1+ (1 )y2.
Mixed Concat. This is a combination of vertical
and horizontal concatenation: ﬁrst we sample 1;2
Beta (;). Then we divide the output image in a 22grid
as shown in Fig. 2, where the horizontal boundary between
grid members is determined by 1and the vertical boundary
is determined by 2. The top-left and bottom-right portions
of the output image are set to the corresponding pixel val-
ues inx1, and the top-right and bottom-left are set to x2,
with ~y= (12+ (1 1)(1 2))y1+ (1(1 2) +
(1 1)2)y2,i.e.~yis determined by the relative area of
x1vsx2. Another interpretation of “Mixed Concat.” is an
application of “Vertical Concat.” to two images produced
by “Horizontal Concat.” with the same mixing coefﬁcient
but opposite argument order.
Random 22.This method is a more randomized
version of “Mixed Concat.”. First, this method divides the
image into a 22grid with random sizes as before, but
instead of using a ﬁxed assignment of grid cells to input im-
ages, “Random 22” randomly decides for each square in
the grid whether it should take content from x1orx2. This
prevents the network from relying on the ﬁxed assignment
in “Mixed Concat.“, instead forcing it to adapt to potentially
changing positions of the input content. The target label ~y
is measured as a function of the relative area of x1vsx2in
the generated image.
One implementation detail that we have found to mod-
estly help “Random 22” is a constraint on the 22grid
produced. Speciﬁcally, this constraint forces the intersec-
tion lines of the grid to occur in the middle pfraction of the
image, preventing image content from becoming too long,
narrow, or not even present. Though this constraint is not
critical to the success of the method, we ﬁnd that it tends to
improve performance by a small but signiﬁcant amount. In
our experiments we set pto0:5.
VH-Mixup. In order to explore whether it is possible
to combine the strengths of non-linear methods with meth-
ods based on linearity, we introduce “VH-Mixup”, the goal
xi xjOriginal
images
mixupNoisy
mixup
Horiz.
Concat.
Mixed
Concat.
VH-
Mixup/
BC+
Random
Row
Interval
Random
RowsVertical
Concat.
Random
2 x 2or
oror
or
Random
Column
Interval
Random
Columns
Random
PixelsRandom
ElementsRandom
SquareFigure 2. Example outputs for each mixed-example data augmen-
tation method. See text (Sec. 3) for details of each method. Di-
agonal stripes are used to indicate element-wise weighted aver-
aging. Note that for “VH-Mixup/VH-BC+”, the bottom-left and
upper-right region use different weights for the weighted average
depending on 3(see text).
of which is to leverage the advantages of “Vertical Con-
cat.”, “Horizontal Concat.”, and mixup [27] (or equivalently
BC [24]). First, two intermediate images are made as the
result of “Vertical Concat.” and “Horizontal Concat.”, each
with their own randomly chosen . Then, mixup is applied

==== Page 5 ====
with these two images as input. This has the effect of pro-
ducing an image where the top-left is from x1, the bottom-
right is from x2, and the top-right and bottom-left are mixed
between the two with different mixing coefﬁcients. All to-
gether, with 1;2;3Beta (;), we have that ~x(r;c)
is equal to:
x1(r;c); ifr1H^c2W
3x1(r;c) + (1 3)x2(r;c);ifr1H^c> 2W
(1 3)x1(r;c) +3x2(r;c);ifr> 1H^c2W
x2(r;c) ifr> 1H^c> 2W
(7)
The label ~yis determined in a straightforward manner
based on the rules for label generation in “Vertical Concat.”,
“Horizontal Concat.”, and mixup , and can be thought of as
the expected fraction of its value a random pixel takes from
x1vsx2.
VH-BC+. Rather than combining the outputs of “Ver-
tical Concat.” and “Horizontal Concat.” with mixup , in
“VH-BC+” they are combined with BC+. While it is tempt-
ing to think of this as simply replacing mixup with BC+,
there is a subtle implementation detail: when to subtract the
mean for each image. There are two options: directly be-
fore applying BC+, i.e.after performing “Vertical Concat.”
and “Horizontal Concat.”, or before producing either of the
concatenated images. We argue that the latter is correct —
if an output of one of the concatenation methods is made
into a zero-mean image, then it will have relatively little ef-
fect, as the image will still be clearly made of two distinct
parts, even only based on ﬁrst-order statistics (the mean).
However, if the original two images are zero-meaned before
either of the concatenation methods, then each concatenated
image will still be zero mean in expectation, but the bound-
ary between the two will no longer be as easily discerned.
Indeed, we tested both methods in initial experiments, and
while we found both to perform reasonably, ultimately the
latter was slightly better on average.
Random Square. In this method, a random square
withinx1is replaced with a portion of x2. This method
is inspired by Cutout [3] and random erasing data augmen-
tation [28], but instead of replacing the subimage with 0,
we replace it with part of a different image. As in Cutout,
the size of the square is a hyperparameter, which we set
to 16 pixels. One subtle implementation choice with this
method is which region in x2to use as a replacement —
in our implementation, we use a portion of x2picked ran-
domly among all regions of the appropriate size, which we
found slightly better than using the region in x2directly cor-
responding to the replaced region of x1.Random Column Interval. This method is a slight
generalization of “Horizontal Concat.” — a random interval
of columns is picked and that part of image x1is replaced
with columns in x2. The difference between this method
and “Horizontal Concat.” is that this column interval need
not begin with the ﬁrst column. The interval in this method
is picked by sampling the lower bound of the interval uni-
formly, with the upper bound then sampled uniformly be-
tween all possible remaining upper bounds.
Random Row Interval. This method is identical to
“Random Column Interval” but is applied to a random in-
terval of rows instead of columns.
Random Rows. For each row in the output image ~x,
this method randomly samples whether to take the row from
x1orx2, where the probability of choosing the correspond-
ing row inx1is given by . As before, ~yis determined
based on the fraction of rows that were taken from x1com-
pared withx2. One interpretation of this method is as a
higher-frequency variant of “Vertical Concat.” in that rows
are still taken either entirely from x1orx2, but with this
method they may alternate between x1andx2, possibly
many times, rather than being grouped into a single large
block of rows.
Random Columns. This method is identical to “Ran-
dom Rows” but samples columns instead of rows.
Random Pixels. This method is similar to “Random
Rows” but samples each pixel separately. That is, after ﬁrst
sampling, a matrix of size WHis created, consisting
of numbers drawn uniformly from [0;1], and converted to a
binary matrix via comparison with . This is interpreted as
a boolean mask which can be element-wise multipled with
x1andx2in order to efﬁciently compute the output. The
label ~ycan also be easily determined using the expected
value of the mask.
Random Elements. This method is similar to “Ran-
dom Rows” but samples each element of the image sepa-
rately. That is, when the image is represented as a HW3
tensor (using RGB), each element in the tensor is randomly
sampled from the corresponding value in either x1orx2.
As with “Random Pixels”, this can be efﬁciently computed
by using aHW3tensor of random numbers.
Noisy Mixup. Normally, in mixup [27], a single 
Beta (;)is sampled and then used across the entire im-
age (orU[0;1]for BC [24]). However, in order to pro-
duce an output with an expected label of y1+ (1 )y2,
there is no need for to be the same across an entire image

==== Page 6 ====
– instead, as long as its expectation is the same, the same
label applies. In this method, we ﬁrst sample in the same
fashion, but then for each pixel identiﬁed by a row rand
columncwe add random zero-centered noise to the mixing
coefﬁcient: r;c=+`r;cwhere`r;cN(0;2), with
2a hyperparameter that we set top
0:0250:16, indi-
cating adding a small amount of pixel-wise data-dependent
noise. It is also useful to constrain r;cto lie in the range
[0;1],i.e.r;c= max (min ( +`r;c;1);0). Though this
method is nearly linear, we ﬁnd that it makes for an interest-
ing comparison experimentally with the strictly linear meth-
odsmixup [27] and BC [24].
4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
In all experiments, we perform mixed-example data aug-
mentation by directly pairing together two examples at a
time, rather than doing it on a batch-by-batch basis [27].
While this has the potential to slow down data processing
due to twice as much I/O and non-vectorized operations,
it is somewhat simpler to develop with, especially for the
slightly more involved data generation methods. Further-
more, we found that we were still able to generate data
fast enough for models to use via effective use of dataset
caching, which keeps I/O to a minimum. Initial experiments
furthermore suggested that this does not affect accuracy. We
also found that it was crucial to do other types of data aug-
mentation ( e.g.random cropping and ﬂips) before applying
any type of mixed-example data augmentation, with differ-
ences in accuracy greater than 1%on CIFAR-10, but do not
currently have an explanation for why this is important, an
implementation detail we also found shared in all existing
open-source code of prior work. All experiments were done
on a desktop with two Nvidia Geforce GTX 1080 Ti GPUs.
We now list dataset-speciﬁc implementation details.
CIFAR 10/100. We perform the bulk of our exper-
iments on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets [14],
the primary test bed used by prior work [27, 24]. Fol-
lowing [27], we conduct our experiments using the pre-
activation ResNet-18 [9], which we re-implemented in Ten-
sorFlow [1]. This network architecture has the advantage
of having a relatively high accuracy ( e.g. 5:4%error on
CIFAR-10) while taking only 2 hours for a complete train-
ing run with any of the methods. Furthermore, previous
work [27, 24] has already shown strong correlations in im-
provements across model architectures. We also note that
this ResNet variant is slightly different from the ofﬁcial pre-
activation ResNet-18, attaining somewhat higher accuracy.
Following both Zhang et al. [27] and Tokozume et
al.[24], we use = 1 where applicable, which results in
a uniform distribution for , though this parameter can inprinciple be tuned based on the extent of overﬁtting. On
CIFAR-10 we use a weight decay of 10 4for all mixed-
example methods and 510 4for the baseline ResNet-18,
and on CIFAR-100 we use a weight decay of 510 4for
all methods on CIFAR-100, which we found necessary in
order to reproduce prior work [27], making a difference of
slightly more than 1%in ﬁnal accuracy.
Following [9], we use minibatches of size 128, the learn-
ing rate starts at .01 for a warm-up period of 400 steps, in-
creases to 0.1, then decays by a factor of 10 after 32,000,
48,000, and 70,000 steps. In practice, we noticed that this
learning rate strategy can be somewhat unstable, with losses
spiking up at the 400-step transition, after which models
failed to recover well and ended up with a few percent lower
accuracy than they would otherwise. Though the extent of
this problem depended on the method, for reproducibility
we have taken the practice of running 20 copies of each
model for three epochs ( 1,200 steps) and then only con-
tinuing the three models with the lowest loss values, which
tended to not observe dramatic spikes in loss. This both im-
proved ﬁnal performance and reduced training variability.
Caltech-256. For experiments on Caltech-256 [6] we
used the Inception-v3 [23] architecture with the default “In-
ception” preprocessing, resulting in a 299299pixel im-
age input to the model. We used the default weight decay
for Inception models of 410 5and a batch size of 64 for
all methods. For the baseline model we used a learning rate
of .03, decayed by a factor of 10 when validation perfor-
mance saturated, which occurred after 20,000 and 26,000
steps. The learning rate additionally had a warm-up pe-
riod of 2,000 steps, during which time we increased it at
a log-linear rate from 310 5to .03. All other methods
had a similar warm-up phase and initial learning rate, but
with learning rate decays by a factor of 10 after 45,000 and
57,000 steps, echoing the observation in prior work [27, 24]
that mixed-example data augmentation can take longer to
train, particularly with larger models. For “BC+” and “VH-
BC+”, we found it important to add a small constant when
determining the standard deviation of each image in order
to avoid numerical issues that made the loss diverge.
4.2. Results
CIFAR-10. CIFAR-10 [14] consists of 60,000 images
of size 3232pixels, split evenly among 10 categories,
with 50,000 training images and 10,000 test images, and is
a standard test bed for training of small-scale deep learning
models, having been used extensively in related work [27,
24]. Results on CIFAR-10 are shown in Table 1. A few
trends are immediately apparent:
First, we examine the central question of our work: is
linearity required for mixed-example data augmentation to
be successful? Our experimental results answer this clearly:

==== Page 7 ====
CIFAR-10Method Error (%)
ResNet-18 5.4
mixup [27] 4.3
BC+[24] 4.2
Rand. Elems. 6.2
Rand. Pixels 5.7
Rand. Col. Int. 5.1
Rand. Cols 4.8
Horiz. Concat. 4.7
Rand. Rows 4.6
Noisy Mixup 4.5
Rand. Row. Int. 4.5
Vert. Concat. 4.4
Mixed. Concat. 4.4
Rand. Square. 4.3
Rand. 22 4.1
VH-BC+ 3.8
VH-Mixup 3.8
Table 1. Experimental results on CIFAR-10. All numbers are the
average across three training runs, measured at the ﬁnal step of
training, and methods are ordered by performance. Numbers for
the baseline ResNet-18 model, mixup , and BC+ are from our Ten-
sorFlow re-implementation. Italicized method names and perfor-
mances indicate methods which performed better than either ex-
isting state-of-the-art mixed-example method.
linearity is not required for effective mixed-example data
augmentation . Rather, the space of useful mixed-example
data augmentation appears to be much larger than real-
ized in previous work [27, 24, 12] — with the exception
of “Rand. Pixels” and “Rand. Elems”, all other mixed-
example techniques improved upon the baseline ResNet.
Even the simplest of methods, “Horiz. Concat” and “Vert
Concat’, improved upon the baseline signiﬁcantly, and are
perhaps the least similar to prior work of the methods con-
sidered.
While linearity may not be a requirement in order for
a method to improve upon baseline performance, is it re-
quired among the most effective methods? Again, our re-
sults indicate that this need not be the case. While “VH-
BC+” and “VH-Mixup” have some element of linearity in
portions of the image, “Rand. 22”, despite containing no
element-wise weighted averaging at all, was just as useful a
form of data augmentation as BC+ andmixup , even slightly
outperforming them in the sample set of runs we conducted.
While we agree with previous work that linearity on its own
can be a fruitful inductive bias, it is by no means necessary.
Can we get the best of both worlds by combining the in-
sights of linearity as an inductive bias with non-linear types
of mixed-example data augmentation? Two of the methods
we explored, “VH-Mixup” and “VH-BC+”, do just that, and
in fact both were able to outperform all other approaches,
setting a new state of the art for mixed-example data aug-CIFAR-100Method Error (%)
ResNet-18 23.6
mixup [27] 21.3
BC+[24] 21.1
Rand. Elems. 24.2
Rand. Pixels 24.0
Rand. Cols 22.4
Noisy Mixup 21.8
Horiz. Concat. 21.7
Rand. Col. Int. 21.4
Rand. Square. 20.9
Rand. Rows 20.9
Mixed. Concat. 20.9
Vert. Concat. 20.8
Rand. 22 20.4
Rand. Row. Int. 20.1
VH-BC+ 19.9
VH-Mixup 19.7
Table 2. Experimental results on CIFAR-100. As in CIFAR-10,
all numbers are the average across three training runs, measured
at the ﬁnal step of training, and methods are ordered by perfor-
mance. Italics indicates better than existing state-of-the-art mixed-
example methods.
mentation. This result is particularly promising due to the
nascency of mixed-example approaches and the general ap-
plicability to a wide range of tasks (for the methods in this
paper, tasks in computer vision).
Last, in an effort to learn more about which aspects of
such augmentation methods are useful, it is worth remark-
ing on the methods that did not work well as negative ex-
amples. In particular, “Rand. Elems” and “Rand. Pixels”
both worked worse than the baseline of doing no mixed-
example data augmentation. These methods have a com-
monality: by treating every pixel differently, they exhibit
the tendency to introduce high-frequency signals in the data.
We hypothesize that this type of data augmentation makes it
more difﬁcult for models to capture local details within im-
ages, forcing them to rely more on low-frequency content
and limiting their ability to properly learn from all avail-
able signals. In a similar vein, we also note that “Noisy
Mixup”, although it worked reasonably well, was not even
as effective as mixup without any modiﬁcations, which we
also attribute to the addition of high-frequency content.
CIFAR-100. CIFAR-100 [14] is a 100-class compan-
ion of CIFAR-10 with otherwise similar properties. We
present our results on CIFAR-100 in Table 2 Trends on
CIFAR-100 were largely similar to results on CIFAR-10,
with the best and worst methods consistent, though the or-
dering in between changed somewhat. One clear difference,
though, is that many more of our exploratory methods out-

==== Page 8 ====
Caltech-256Method Accuracy (%)
Inception-v3 48.6
mixup [27] 57.3
BC+[24] 57.4
VH-Mixup 56.3
VH-BC+ 59.7
Table 3. Experimental results on Caltech-256. Accuracies are de-
termined by a single run of model training, with evaluation check-
points picked based on maximum validation performance.
performed prior work on CIFAR-100 (8 for CIFAR-100 vs
3 for CIFAR-10). While we do not offer any compelling
hypothesis for this change, it provides evidence that at
least some minor differences in effectiveness between each
mixed-example method are likely to be data-dependent.
A further point worth noting, shared across both CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100, is that row-based methods performed
better than their column-based counterparts: “Vert. Con-
cat” outperformed “Horiz. Concat”, “Rand. Rows” outper-
formed “Rand. Cols”, and “Rand. Row. Int” improved upon
“Rand. Col. Int”. This potentially indicates the importance
of keeping horizontal information intact when doing data
augmentation, a ﬁnding reminiscent of much older work in
picking horizontally-shaped spatial pooling grids [17].
Caltech-256. In order to test methods for mixed-
example data augmentation on larger, more real-world im-
ages, we additionally evaluate on Caltech-256 [6], a dataset
of 256 categories. Since there is no canonical training, val-
idation, or test splits, we constructed splits by randomly
taking 40 images from each category for training, 10 for
validation, and 30 for testing, resulting in splits of size
10,240, 2560, and 7,680, respectively. While smaller than
other datasets of large natural images, e.g.ImageNet [20],
experiments are also much more tractable, taking roughly
10 hours on average when training from scratch, compared
with an estimated 25 days to run a single ImageNet ex-
periment, which is prohibitively long. For this set of ex-
periments, we focused our analysis on the best-performing
methods from CIFAR-10 and 100, “VH-Mixup” and “VH-
BC+”, in addition to the three baselines. Results are pre-
sented in Table 3.
Most noticeably, we found that allmixed-example data
augmentation methods were able to improve performance
over the baseline Inception-v3 network. The effect is dra-
matic, with improvements of up to 10% in accuracy above
baseline. This highlights the strength of mixed-example
methods, particularly with high-capacity models, a ﬁnding
that strengthens results from prior work [27, 24].
Within the set of mixed-example methods, though, or-
dering is less obvious — while it is clear that “VH-BC+”
was particularly successful, the reason by which it was somuch better than “VH-Mixup” remains mysterious. It is
also worth noting that conﬁdence intervals for these exper-
iments are somewhat wide: a 95% conﬁdence interval due
to data sampling alone is roughly 1%at current accuracy
levels, and the true interval is likely larger due to additional
run-to-run variance from random initialization and data pro-
cessing. Despite these limitations in measurement, we see
these results as highly encouraging for applied tasks where
data may be limited and performance is critical.
5. Discussion
In this paper we explored the space of mixed-example
data augmentation, in the process generalizing and improv-
ing upon recent work [27, 24, 12]. We sought to determine
whether linearity was necessary in order for mixed-example
data augmentation to be effective, and in the process of
answering that question, found a surprisingly large spec-
trum of non-linear methods that resulted in improvements
over models trained with standard augmentation methods.
Our methods, though speciﬁc to image-based tasks, are
straightforward to implement and do not require any hyper-
parameter tuning beyond those in existing methods [27, 24].
Though we considered a variety of methods in this work, the
ﬁeld of mixed-example data augmentation is still in its early
stages, and we postulate that it is likely even more effective
methods exist. We hope that our explorations inspire further
research in the area.
Key questions for future research include developing
an understanding for why mixed-example data augmenta-
tion works and determining which speciﬁc properties of
such augmentation methods are useful. We have shown
that it is possible to combine the strengths of multiple ap-
proaches, but it remains unclear what the limits of mixed-
example data augmentation are. On a lower level, it would
also be interesting to understand the relationship between
mixed-example data augmentation and other more tradi-
tional forms of data augmentation. For example, we found
the puzzling behavior that mixed-example data augmenta-
tion is only effective when performed after other forms of
data augmentation, and even this simple detail eludes cur-
rent understanding.
One disadvantage of our approach is that, unlike some
prior work [27, 24], our methods operate only on images.
While this is true, we believe it is likely that domain-speciﬁc
approaches such as ours can be made for other problems,
such as speech [10] or natural language processing [2]. Fur-
thermore, we believe that such approaches are actually most
important for domain-speciﬁc tasks, such as robotics [18],
which also tend to be the most data-starved and in need of
improved methodology and further research.

==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean,
M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, et al. Tensor-
ﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In OSDI ,
volume 16, pages 265–283, 2016. 6
[2] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen,
K. Kavukcuoglu, and P. Kuksa. Natural language pro-
cessing (almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 12(Aug):2493–2537, 2011. 8
[3] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor. Improved regularization of
convolutional neural networks with cutout. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.04552 , 2017. 2, 5
[4] A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M. Swetter,
H. M. Blau, and S. Thrun. Dermatologist-level classiﬁ-
cation of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature ,
542(7639):115, 2017. 1
[5] X. Gastaldi. Shake-shake regularization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.07485 , 2017. 2
[6] G. Grifﬁn, A. Holub, and P. Perona. Caltech-256 object cat-
egory dataset. 2007. 6, 8
[7] Y . Gu, J. Zhou, and B. Qian. Melanoma detection based on
mahalanobis distance learning and constrained graph regu-
larized nonnegative matrix factorization. In Applications of
Computer Vision (WACV), 2017 IEEE Winter Conference on ,
pages 797–805. IEEE, 2017. 1
[8] V . Gulshan, L. Peng, M. Coram, M. C. Stumpe, D. Wu,
A. Narayanaswamy, S. Venugopalan, K. Widner, T. Madams,
J. Cuadros, et al. Development and validation of a deep
learning algorithm for detection of diabetic retinopathy in
retinal fundus photographs. Jama , 316(22):2402–2410,
2016. 1
[9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Identity mappings in
deep residual networks. In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision , pages 630–645. Springer, 2016. 6
[10] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed,
N. Jaitly, A. Senior, V . Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath,
et al. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech
recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine , 29(6):82–97, 2012. 8
[11] G. Huang, Y . Sun, Z. Liu, D. Sedra, and K. Q. Weinberger.
Deep networks with stochastic depth. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision , pages 646–661. Springer, 2016.
2
[12] H. Inoue. Data augmentation by pairing samples for images
classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02929 , 2018. 1, 2,
3, 7, 8
[13] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167 , 2015. 2
[14] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. 2009. 6, 7
[15] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
1097–1105, 2012. 2[16] A. Krogh and J. A. Hertz. A simple weight decay can im-
prove generalization. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , pages 950–957, 1992. 2
[17] S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce. Beyond bags of
features: Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing natural
scene categories. In null, pages 2169–2178. IEEE, 2006. 8
[18] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel. End-to-end
training of deep visuomotor policies. The Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research , 17(1):1334–1373, 2016. 1, 8
[19] A. Munawar, P. Vinayavekhin, and G. De Magistris. Spatio-
temporal anomaly detection for industrial robots through
prediction in unsupervised feature space. In Applications of
Computer Vision (WACV), 2017 IEEE Winter Conference on ,
pages 1017–1025. IEEE, 2017. 1
[20] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein,
et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision , 115(3):211–252,
2015. 3, 8
[21] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. ICLR , 2015. 2
[22] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
R. Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural
networks from overﬁtting. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 15(1):1929–1958, 2014. 2
[23] C. Szegedy, V . Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna.
Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 2818–2826, 2016. 6
[24] Y . Tokozume, Y . Ushiku, and T. Harada. Between-class
learning for image classiﬁcation. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2018. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
[25] Y . Tokozume, Y . Ushiku, and T. Harada. Learning from
between-class examples for deep sound recognition. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
1, 3
[26] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Doll ´ar, Z. Tu, and K. He. Aggregated
residual transformations for deep neural networks. In Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017 IEEE
Conference on , pages 5987–5995. IEEE, 2017. 3
[27] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y . N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz.
mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization. ICLR , 2018.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
[28] Z. Zhong, L. Zheng, G. Kang, S. Li, and Y . Yang.
Random erasing data augmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.04896 , 2017. 2, 5

