==== Page 1 ====
Improving the Robustness of Capsule Networks to Image Afﬁne Transformations
Jindong Gu
University of Munich
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology
jindong.gu@siemens.comV olker Tresp
University of Munich
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology
volker.tresp@siemens.com
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve transla-
tional invariance by using pooling operations. However, the
operations do not preserve the spatial relationships in the
learned representations. Hence, CNNs cannot extrapolate
to various geometric transformations of inputs. Recently,
Capsule Networks (CapsNets) have been proposed to tackle
this problem. In CapsNets, each entity is represented by
a vector and routed to high-level entity representations by
a dynamic routing algorithm. CapsNets have been shown
to be more robust than CNNs to afﬁne transformations
of inputs. However, there is still a huge gap between
their performance on transformed inputs compared to un-
transformed versions. In this work, we ﬁrst revisit the
routing procedure by (un)rolling its forward and backward
passes. Our investigation reveals that the routing procedure
contributes neither to the generalization ability nor to the
afﬁne robustness of the CapsNets. Furthermore, we explore
the limitations of capsule transformations and propose
afﬁne CapsNets (Aff-CapsNets), which are more robust to
afﬁne transformations. On our benchmark task, where
models are trained on the MNIST dataset and tested on the
AffNIST dataset, our Aff-CapsNets improve the benchmark
performance by a large margin (from 79% to 93.21%),
without using any routing mechanism.
1. Introduction
Human visual recognition is quite insensitive to afﬁne
transformations. For example, entities in an image, and
a rotated version of the entities in the image, can both
be recognized by the human visual system, as long as the
rotation is not too large. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), the currently leading approach to image analysis,
achieve afﬁne robustness by training on a large amount of
data that contain different transformations of target objects.
Given limited training data, a common issue in many
real-world tasks, the robustness of CNNs to novel afﬁne
transformations is limited [23].With the goal of learning image features that are more
aligned with human perception, Capsule Networks (Cap-
sNets) have recently been proposed [23]. The proposed
CapsNets differ from CNNs mainly in two aspects: ﬁrst,
they represent each entity by an activation vector, the
magnitude of which represents the probability of its ex-
istence in the image; second, they assign low-level entity
representations to high-level ones using an iterative routing
mechanism (a dynamic routing procedure). Hereby, Cap-
sNets aim to keep two important features: equivariance of
output-pose vectors and invariance of output activations.
The general assumption is that the disentanglement of
variation factors makes CapsNets more robust than CNNs
to afﬁne transformations.
The currently used benchmark task to evaluate the afﬁne
robustness of a model is to train the model on the stan-
dard MNIST dataset and test it on the AffNIST1dataset.
CapsNets achieve 79% accuracy on AffNIST, while CNNs
with similar network size only achieve 66% [23]. Although
CapsNets have demonstrated their superiority on this task,
there is still a huge performance gap since CapsNets achieve
more than 99% on the untransformed MNIST test dataset.
In our paper, we ﬁrst investigate the effectiveness of
components that make CapsNets robust to input afﬁne trans-
formations, with a focus on the routing algorithm. Many
heuristic routing algorithms have been proposed [10, 25, 16]
since [23] was published. However, recent work [19] shows
that all routing algorithms proposed so far perform even
worse than a uniform/random routing procedure.
From both numerical analysis and empirical experi-
ments, our investigation reveals that the dynamic routing
procedure contributes neither to the generalization ability
nor to the afﬁne robustness of CapsNets. Therefore, it is
infeasible to improve the afﬁne robustness by modifying the
routing procedure. Instead, we investigate the limitations of
the CapsNet architectures and propose a simple solution.
Namely, we propose to apply an identical transformation
function for all primary capsules and replace the routing by
a simple averaging procedure (noted as No Routing).
1Each example is an MNIST digit with a small afﬁne transformation.
7285


==== Page 2 ====
Our contributions of this work can be summarized as
follows: 1) We revisit the dynamic routing procedure of
CapsNets; 2) We investigate the limitations of the current
CapsNet architecture and propose a more robust afﬁne
Capsule Networks (Aff-CapsNet); 3) Based on extensive
experiments, we investigate the properties of CapsNets
trained without routing. Besides, we demonstrate the
superiority of Aff-CapsNet.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section
2 ﬁrst reviews CapsNets and related work. Section 3
investigates the effectiveness of the routing procedure by
(un)rolling the forward and backward passes of the iterative
routing iterations. Section 4 shows the limitations of current
CapsNets on the afﬁne transformations and proposes a
robust afﬁne CapsNet (Aff-CapsNet). Section 4 conducts
extensive experiments to verify our ﬁndings and proposed
modiﬁcations. The last two sections discuss and conclude
our work.
2. Background and Related Work
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the CapsNets with
dynamic routing and then review related work.
2.1. Fundamentals of Capsule Networks
CapsNets [23] encode entities with capsules. Each cap-
sule is represented by an activity vector (e.g., the activation
of a group of neurons), and elements of each vector encode
the properties of the corresponding entity. The length of
the activation vector indicates the conﬁdence of the entity’s
existence. The output classes are represented as high-level
capsules.
A CapsNet ﬁrst maps the raw input features to low-level
capsules and then routes the low-level capsules to high-level
ones. For instance, in image classiﬁcation tasks, a CapsNet
starts with one (or more) convolutional layer(s) that convert
the pixel intensities into low-level visual entities. A fol-
lowing capsule layer of the CapsNet routs low-level visual
entities to high-level visual entities. A CapsNet can have
one or more capsule layers with routing procedures.
Given a low-level capsule uuuiof theL-th layer with N
capsules, a high-level capsule sssjof the(L+1)-th layer with
Mcapsules, and a transformation matrix WWWij, the routing
process is
ˆuˆuˆuj|i=WWWijuuui, sssj=N/summationdisplay
icijˆuˆuˆuj|i (1)
wherecijis a coupling coefﬁcient that models the degree
with which ˆuˆuˆuj|iis able to predict sssj. The capsule sssj
is shrunk to a length in (0, 1) by a non-linear squashing
functiong(·), which is deﬁned as
vvvj=g(sssj) =/bardblsssj/bardbl2
1+/bardblsssj/bardbl2sssj
/bardblsssj/bardbl(2)The coupling coefﬁcients {cij}are computed by an
iterative routing procedure. They are updated so that high
agreement ( aij=vvvT
jˆuˆuˆuj|i) corresponds to a high value of
cij.
cij=exp(bij)/summationtext
kexp(bik)(3)
where initial logits bikare the log prior probabilities and
updated with bik=bik+aijin each routing iteration.
The coupling coefﬁcients between a i-th capsule of the L-
th layer and all capsules of the (L+ 1) -th layer sum to 1,
i.e.,/summationtextM
j=1cij= 1. The steps in Equations 1, 2, and 3 are
repeatedKtimes in the routing process, where sssjandcij
depend on each other.
2.2. Related Work
Routing Algorithms: Many papers have improved the
routing-by-agreement algorithm. [27] generalizes existing
routing methods within the framework of weighted kernel
density estimation and proposes two fast routing methods
with different optimization strategies. [6] proposes an
attention-based routing procedure with an attention module,
which only requires a fast forward-pass. The agreement
aijcan also be calculated based on a Gaussian distribution
assumption [10, 2] or distance measures [16] instead of the
simple inner product.
Since the routing procedure is computationally expen-
sive, several works propose solutions reducing the com-
plexity of the iterative routing process. [25] formulates the
routing strategy as an optimization problem that minimizes
a combination of clustering-like loss and a KL distance
between the current coupling distribution and its last states.
[17] approximates the expensive routing process with two
branches: a master branch that collects primary information
from its direct contact in the lower layer and an aide branch
that replenishes the master branch based on pattern variants
encoded in other lower capsules.
Understanding the Routing Procedure: [4] incorpo-
rates the routing procedure into the training process by
making coupling coefﬁcients trainable, which are supposed
to be determined by an iterative routing process. The
coupling coefﬁcients are independent of examples, which
stay unchanged in the testing phase. What they proposed is
simply to reduce the iterative updates to a single forward
pass with prior coupling coefﬁcients. [5] removes the
routing procedure completely and modiﬁes the CapsNet
architectures. Their pure CapsNets achieve competitive
performance. However, it has not been investigated how
the properties of their CapsNets, e.g., the robustness to
afﬁne transformation, will be affected by the removal of
the routing procedure. Furthermore, [19] shows that many
routing procedures [23, 10, 25, 16] are heuristic, and
perform even worse than a random routing assignment.
7286


==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1: The gradients of the loss w.r.t. randomly choosen
ˆuˆuˆum|iare visualized. The blue lines correspond to the
unrolled routing iterations in Gradient Backpropagation,
while the yellow lines to rolled routing iterations.
3. Revisiting the Dynamic Routing of CapsNets
In this section, we analyze dynamic routing, both theo-
retically and empirically. By unrolling the backpropagation
of the routing procedure and rolling the forward propa-
gation of the routing procedure, we show which role the
routing procedure plays in CapsNets.
3.1. Backpropagation through Routing Iterations
The forward pass of an iterative routing process can be
written as the following iterative steps
sss(t)
j=N/summationdisplay
ic(t)
ijˆuˆuˆuj|i
vvv(t)
j=g(sss(t)
j)
c(t+1)
ij=exp(bij+/summationtextt
r=1vvv(r)
jˆuˆuˆuj|i)
/summationtext
kexp(bik+/summationtextt
r=1vvv(r)
kˆuˆuˆuk|i)(4)
where the superscript t∈ {1,2,...}is the index of an
iteration. The c(1)
ijandbijare initialized as in Equation 3.
Assuming that there are Kiterations and the classiﬁca-
tion loss is L(yyy,ttt), whereyyy= (/bardblvvv(K)
1/bardbl,···,/bardblvvv(K)
M/bardbl)is the
prediction and tttthe target, the gradients through the routing
procedure are
∂L
∂ˆuˆuˆum|i=∂L
∂vvv(K)
m∂vvv(K)
m
∂sss(K)
mc(K)
im+M/summationdisplay
j=1∂L
∂vvv(K)
j∂vvv(K)
j
∂sss(K)
jˆuˆuˆuj|i∂c(K)
ij
∂ˆuˆuˆum|i
(5)
The gradients are propagated through the unrolled routing
iteration via the second item of Equation 5, which is also
the main computational burden of the expensive routingprocedure in CapsNets. By unrolling this term, we prove
that
∂L
∂ˆuˆuˆum|i≈C·∂L
∂vvv(K)
m∂vvv(K)
m
∂sss(K)
mc(K)
im (6)
whereCis a constant, which can be integrated into the
learning rate in the optimization process (see the proof in
Appendix A). The approximation means that the gradients
ﬂowing through c(K)
ijin Equation 5 can be ignored. The
c(K)
ijcan be treated as a constant in Gradient Backpropaga-
tion, and the routing procedure can be detached from the
computational graph of CapsNets.
To conﬁrm Equation 6 empirically, we visualize∂L
∂ˆuˆuˆum|i.
Following [23], we train a CapsNet on the MNIST dataset.
The architecture and the hyper-parameter values can be
found in Appendix B. We ﬁrst select capsule predictions
ˆuˆuˆuj|irandomly prior to the routing process and then visualize
their received gradients in two cases: 1) unrolling the
routing iterations as in [23]; 2) rolling the routing iterations
by taking all cijas constants in Gradient Backpropagation
(i.e., ignoring the second item in Equation 5). As shown in
each plot of Figure 1, the gradients of the two cases (blue
lines and yellow lines) are similar to each other.
In this section, we aim to show that the intrinsic contri-
bution of the routing procedure is to identify speciﬁed con-
stants as coupling coefﬁcients c(K)
ij. Without a doubt, both
computational cost and memory footprint can be saved by
rolling the routing iterations in Gradient Backpropagation.
The computational graphs of the two cases can be found in
Appendix C.
3.2. Forward Pass through Routing Iterations
The forward iterative routing procedure can be for-
mulated as a function, mapping capsule predictions ˆuˆuˆuto
coupling coefﬁcients, i.e., ˆuˆuˆu→CCC(K)={c(K)
ij}where the
indexes of low-level capsules ivary from 1toNand the
indexes of high-level capsules jvary from 1toM. Given an
instance, without loss of generality, we assume the ground-
truth class is the M-th (i.e.,vvvM). With the idea behind the
CapsNet, the optimal coupling coefﬁcients CCC∗={c∗
ij}of
the instance can be described as
CCC∗= max
{cij}f(ˆuˆuˆu) = max
{cij}(N/summationdisplay
iciMˆuˆuˆuM|ig(/summationdisplay
iciMˆuˆuˆuM|i)
−M−1/summationdisplay
jN/summationdisplay
icijˆuˆuˆuj|ig(/summationdisplay
icijˆuˆuˆuj|i))(7)
where the ﬁrst term describes the agreement on the target
class, and the second term corresponds to the agreement on
non-ground-truth classes. The optimal coupling coefﬁcient
CCC∗corresponds to the case where the agreement on the
target class is maximized, and the agreement on the non-
ground-truth classes is minimized.
7287


==== Page 4 ====
Figure 2: The green lines correspond to the model with
dynamic routing, while the magenta ones to the model
without routing procedure. For both models, the agreement
on the target class increases with training time, and the
agreement on the non-ground-truth classes decreases. The
values are averaged over the whole training or test dataset.
Many routing algorithms differ only in how they approx-
imateCCC∗. For instance, the original work [23] approximates
CCC∗with an iterative routing procedure. Without requiring
iterative routing steps, [4] makes {bij}trainable to approx-
imate{c∗
ij}. Their proposal can be understood as only one-
step routing with learned prior coupling coefﬁcients. By
further reformulation, we show that the optimal sss∗
jcan be
learned, without a need for coupling coefﬁcients, as
sss∗
j=N/summationdisplay
ic∗
ijˆuˆuˆuj|i=N/summationdisplay
ic∗
ijWWW∗
ijuuui=N/summationdisplay
iWWW′
ijuuui. (8)
In the training process, the transformation matrix WWWij
is updated via Gradient Decent Method. The coupling
coefﬁcients cijare determined by the agreement between
low-level capsules and the corresponding high-level cap-
sules. The training process ends up with parameter values
sss∗
j,WWW∗
ij,c∗
ij. As shown in Equation 8, the CapsNet can
achieve the same results by simply learning a transforma-
tion matrix WWW′
ijwithoutc∗
ij. In other words, the connection
strengths c∗
ijbetween low-level capsules and high-level
capsules can be learned implicitly in the transformation
matrixWWW′
ij. Therefore, we can conclude that different ways
to approximate CCC∗do not make a signiﬁcant difference
since the coupling coefﬁcients will be learned implicitly.
We visualize the implicit learning process of the cou-
pling coefﬁcients. In our experiments, we introduce the
no-routing approach, where we remove the iterative rout-
ing procedure by setting all coupling coefﬁcient cijas a
constant1
M. In each training epoch, the agreement on
the target class and on the non-ground-truth classes is
visualized in Figure 2. As a comparison, we also visualizethe corresponding agreement values of CapNets with the
dynamic routing process. We can observe that, during the
training process, the agreement on the target class increases
(in the left plot) for both cases, and the agreement on the
non-ground-truth classes decreases (in the right plot). In
other words, f(ˆuˆuˆu)increases in both CapNets with/without
routing procedure, meaning that the coupling coefﬁcients
can be learned implicitly.
In summary, the afﬁne robustness of CapsNet can not be
contributed to the routing procedure. We conclude that it
is not infeasible to improve the robustness of CapsNet by
modifying the current routing-by-agreement algorithm.
4. Afﬁne Robustness of Capsule Networks
Besides the dynamic routing process, the other dif-
ference between CapsNets and traditional CNNs is the
CapsNet architecture. CapsNets represent each entity with
a capsule and transform it to high-level entities employing
transformation matrices. In this section, we investigate the
limitation of the transformation process in terms of afﬁne
robustness and propose robust afﬁne capsule networks.
4.1. The Limitation of CapsNets
The CapsNet starts with two convolutional layers, which
converts the pixel intensities to form primary (low-level)
capsules (e.g., the red cuboid in Figure 3 is a capsule uuui).
Each primary capsule has a certain receptive ﬁeld (e.g., the
image patch xxximarked with the yellow rectangle). For all
inputs, the coordinates of the receptive ﬁeld of uuuiare the
same. In other words, a primary capsule can only see a
speciﬁc area in input images. We denote the corresponding
converting process by uuui=pi(xxxi).
Each primary capsule is transformed to high-level cap-
sules with the corresponding transformation matrix. Each
transformation matrix WWWijlearns how to transform the i-
th low-level capsule to the j-th high-level one, i.e., ˆuˆuˆuj|i=
tj|i(uuui). The transformation process corresponding to the
input patch xxxican be described as
ˆuˆuˆuj|i=WWWijuuui=tj|i(uuui) =tj|i(pi(xxxi)). (9)
The transformation matrix WWWijcan only make meaningful
transformations for the entities that have, at some point,
appeared in the position of xxxi. The input domain of the
transformation function tj|i(·)isUi.
In the testing phase, if novel afﬁne transformations are
conducted on the input, the corresponding transformation
processtj|i(pi(xxx′
i))are not meaningful since pi(xxx′
i)is not
in the input domain Ui. In other words, the transformation
matrixWWWijdoes not describe a meaningful transformation
since the entities of xxx′
ihave never appeared in the position of
the patch xxxiduring training. Hence, the CapsNet is limited
in its generalization ability to novel afﬁne transformations
of inputs.
7288


==== Page 5 ====
Figure 3: Illustration of the limitations of CapsNets: The transformation matrix WWWijcan only transform uuuito high-level
capsules, while WWWkjcan only make meaningful transformations on uuuk. When an input is transformed (e.g., rotated), the
receptive ﬁeld corresponding to uuuiis notxxxiany more. For the novel uuui, the transformation process using WWWijcan fail.
4.2. Robust Afﬁne Capsule Networks
To overcome the limitation above, we propose a very
simple but efﬁcient solution. Concretely, we propose
to use the same transformation function for all primary
capsules (i.e., ensuring tj|i(·)≡tj|k(·)). We implement
a robust afﬁne capsule network (Aff-CapsNet) by sharing
a transformation matrix. Formally, for Aff-CapsNets, we
have
WWWij=WWWkj,∀i,k∈ {1,2,···,N} (10)
whereNis the number of primary capsules. In Aff-
CapsNets, the transformation matrix can make a meaningful
transformation for all primary capsules since it learns how
to transform all low-level capsules to high-level capsules
during training. The transformation matrix sharing has also
been explored in a previous publication [21]. The difference
is that they aim to save parameters, while our goal is to make
CapsNets more robust to afﬁne transformations.
From another perspective, primary capsules and high-
level capsules correspond to local coordinate systems and
global ones, respectively. A transformation matrix is
supposed to map a local coordinate system to the global
one. One might be wondering that the transformation from
each local coordinate system to a global one requires a
speciﬁc transformation matrix. In existing architectures,
the coordinate system is high-dimensional. Hence, a single
shared transformation matrix is able to make successful
transformations for all local coordinate systems.
5. Experiments and Analysis
The experiments include two parts: 1) We train CapsNets
with different routing mechanisms (including no routing) on
popular standard datasets and compare their properties from
many perspectives; 2) We show that Aff-CapsNets out-
perform CapsNets on the benchmark dataset and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. For all the experiments of thissection, we train models with 5 random seeds and report
their averages and variances.
5.1. Effectiveness of the Dynamic Routing
In Section 3, we show that the routing mechanism can be
learned implicitly in CapsNets without routing procedure.
Our experiments in this section aim to investigate if the
advantages of CapsNets disappear when trained with no
routing. We consider the following routing procedures in
our training routines:
1.Dynamic-R : with standard dynamic routing in [23];
2.Rolled-R : with a rolled routing procedure by treating
coupling coefﬁcients as constants during Gradient
Backpropagation, as analyzed in Section 3.1;
3.Trainable-R : one-step routing with trainable coupling
coefﬁcients, as in [4];
4.No-R : without routing procedure, which is equivalent
to the uniform routing in [19, 5].
We train CapsNets with different routing procedures de-
scribed above on four standard datasets, namely, MNIST
[15], FMNIST [26], SVHN [18] and CIFAR10 [13]. The
performance is reported in Table 1.
Given the performance variance for each model, the
performance between different models is relatively small.
The reason behind this is that coupling coefﬁcients can
be learned in transformation matrices implicitly, and all
the models possess a similar transformation process. The
models trained with No-R do not prevent the learning
of coupling coefﬁcients. We can also observe that the
models with Trainable-R orNo-R show a slightly better
performance than the other two. To our understanding, the
reason is that they do not suffer the polarization problem of
coupling coefﬁcients [17].
7289


==== Page 6 ====
Datasets MNIST FMNIST SVHN CIFAR10
Dynamic-R 99.41 (±0.08) 92.12 (±0.29) 91.32 (±0.19) 74.64 (±1.02)
Rolled-R 99.29 (±0.09) 91.53 (±0.22) 90.75 (±0.52) 74.26 (±0.94)
Trainable-R 99.55 (±0.04) 92.58 (±0.10) 92.37 (±0.29) 76.43 (±1.11)
No-R 99.54 (±0.04) 92.53 (±0.26) 92.15 (±0.29) 76.28 (±0.39)
Table 1: The performance of CapsNets with different routing procedures on different standard datasets is shown, where the
standard (untransformed) test datasets are used. We can observe that the routing procedures do not improve performance.
From this experiment, we can only conclude that the
routing procedure does not contribute to the generalization
ability of CapsNets. In work [23], CapsNets show many
superior properties over CNNs, besides the classiﬁcation
performance. In the following, we analyze the properties
of CapsNets with No-R and compare them with CapsNets
with Dynamic-R .
5.1.1 On learned Representations of Capsules
When training CapsNets, the original input is reconstructed
from the activity vector (i.e., instantiation parameters) of
a high-level capsule. The reconstruction is treated as a
regularization technique. In CapsNets with Dynamic-R
[23], the dimensions of the activity vector learn how to
span the space containing large variations. To check such
property of CapsNets with No-R , following [23], we feed
a perturbed activity vector of the ground-truth class to
decoder network.
Figure 4: Disentangled Individual Dimensions of Capsules:
By perturbing one dimension of an activity vector, the
variations of an input image are reconstructed.
The perturbation of the dimensions can also cause vari-
ations of the reconstructed input. We show some examples
in Figure 4. The variations include stroke thickness, width,
translation, rotation, and various combinations. In Figure
5, we also visualize the reconstruction loss of the models
with Dynamic-R and the ones with No-R . The CapsNets
with No-R show even less reconstruction error and can
reconstruct inputs better.
Figure 5: The average reconstruction loss of CapsNets with
Dynamic-R andNo-R on the test dataset is shown in each
epoch of the training process.
5.1.2 Parallel Attention Mechanism between Capsules
Dynamic routing can be viewed as a parallel attention
mechanism, in which each high-level capsule attends to
some active low-level capsules and ignores others. The
parallel attention mechanism allows the model to recognize
multiple objects in the image even if objects overlap [23].
The superiority of the parallel attention mechanism can be
shown on the classiﬁcation task on MultiMNIST dataset
[9, 23]. Each image in this dataset contains two highly over-
lapping digits. CapsNet with dynamic routing procedure
shows high performance on this task.
In this experiment, we show that the parallel attention
mechanism between capsules can be learned implicitly,
even without the routing mechanism. Following the experi-
mental setting in [23], we train a CapsNet with No-R on the
same classiﬁcation task of classifying highly overlapping
digits. The model No-R achieves 95,49% accuracy on
the test set, while the one with Dynamic-R achieves 95%
accuracy. The removal of the routing procedure does
not make the parallel attention mechanism of CapsNets
disappear.
5.1.3 Robustness to Afﬁne Transformation
CapsNets are also known for their robustness to afﬁne
transformation. It is important to check whether the re-
moval of the routing procedure affects the afﬁne robustness.
We conduct experiments on a standard benchmark task.
Following [23], we train CapsNets with or without routing
procedure on the MNIST training dataset and test them on
7290


==== Page 7 ====
(a) Without a routing procedure: the test accuracy of CapsNets and
Aff-Capsnets on on the expanded MNIST test set and the AffNIST
test set.
(b) With the dynamic routing: the test accuracy of CapsNets and
Aff-Capsnets on the expanded MNIST test set and the AffNIST
test set.
Figure 6: For both cases (with or without routing procedure), Aff-CapsNets clearly outperform CapsNets on the AffNIST
test dataset.
the affNIST dataset. The images in the MNIST training
dataset are placed randomly on a black ground of 40×40
pixels to match the size of images in affNIST dataset. The
CNN baseline is set the same as in [23].
It is hard to decide if one model is better at generalizing
to novel afﬁne transformations than another one when they
achieved different accuracy on untransformed examples. To
eliminate this confounding factor, we stopped training the
models when they achieve similar performance, following
[23]. The performance is shown in Table 2. Without routing
procedure, the CapsNets show even better afﬁne robustness.
In summary, our experiments show that the dynamic
routing procedure contributes neither to the generalization
ability nor to the afﬁne robustness. Due to the high afﬁne
robustness of CapsNet cannot be attributed to the routing
procedure: Instead, it is the inductive bias (architecture) of
CapsNets that contributes to the afﬁne robustness.
5.2. Afﬁne Robustness of Aff­CapsNets
In Section 4, we proposed Aff-CapsNets that are more
robust to the novel afﬁne transformations of inputs. In
this experiment, we train Aff-CapsNets with Dynamic-R
and No-R respectively. As a comparison, we also train
CapsNets with or without dynamic routing correspondingly.
We visualize the test accuracy on the expanded MNIST
test set and the AffNIST test set. The performance is shown
in Figure 6. The lines show the averaged values, while the
colored areas around the lines describe the variances caused
by different seeds. Figure 6a shows the accuracy of models
trained without a routing procedure. We can observe thatModels Test on MNIST Test on AffNIST
CNN [23] 99.22% 66%
Dynamic-R [23] 99.23% 79%
No-R 99.22% 81.81%
Table 2: The performance on the expanded MNIST test set
and the AffNIST test set.
the Aff-CapsNets constantly shows better accuracy than
CapsNets on AffNIST. To a great extent, our Aff-CapsNets
covers the performance gap between the test accuracy on
untransformed examples and that on transformed ones.
In addition, the Aff-CapsNet architecture is still effec-
tive, even when the dynamic routing is applied in training
(see Figure 6b). We can also observe that the CapsNets with
dynamic routing overﬁt to the current viewpoints. With
the training process going on, the coupling coefﬁcients are
polarized (become close to 0 or 1) [17]. The polarization of
the coupling coefﬁcient causes the overﬁtting. Furthermore,
the training with dynamic routing is more unstable than
without routing. The variance of model test performance
in Figure 6b is much bigger than the ones in Figure 6a.
We now compare our model with previous work. In
Table 3, we list the performance of CNN variants and
CapsNet variants on this task. Without training on AffNIST
dataset, our Aff-CapsNets achieve state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on AffNIST test dataset. This experiment shows that
the proposed model is robust to input afﬁne transformation.
7291


==== Page 8 ====
Models Trained on
AffNIST?MNIST AffNIST
Marginal. CNN [28] Yes 97.82% 86.79%
TransRA CNN[1] Yes 99.25 % 87.57%
BCN [3] Mix* 97.5% 91.60%
CNN [23] No 99.22% 66%
Dynamic-R [23] No 99.23% 79%
GE-CAPS [16] No - 89.10%
SPARSECAPS [22] No 99% 90.12%
Aff-CapsNet + No-R No 99.23% 93.21 (±0.65)%
Table 3: Comparison to state-of-the-art performance on the
benchmark task.
6. Discussion
The difference between the regular CNNs, Aff-
Capsnet and CapsNets: Each neuron in the convolutional
layer is connected only to a local spatial region in the input.
However, each element in a capsule layer (with or without
dynamic routing) is connected to all elements of all input
capsules. By considering global information, the features
extracted by the capsule layer might be more useful for
some tasks, e.g., afﬁne-transformed image classiﬁcation or
semantic image segmentation.
What is the difference between a fully connected (FC)
layer and the capsule layer without dynamic routing? In an
FC layer, each neuron is also connected to all neurons of the
preceding layer. Compared with FC layers, convolutional
layers show inductive biases, which are Local Connection
and Parameter Sharing. Similarly, capsule layers might
show a new inductive bias, namely, a new way to combine
activations of the preceding layer.
The relationship between CapsNet architectures and
CNN architectures is illustrated in Figure 7. CapsNets
might be considered as new architectures parallel to CNNs.
In the past years, our community has focused on exploring
CNN architectures manually or automatically. The ﬁgure il-
lustrates that there is ”space” outside of the CNN paradigm:
CapsNets, or even other unexplored options.
Going Deeper with CapsNets: One way to make Cap-
sNets deep is to integrate advanced techniques of training
CNNs into CapsNets. The integration of skip connections
[8, 21] and dense connections [11, 20] have been proven to
be successful. Instead of blindly integrating more advanced
techniques from CNN into CapsNets, it might be more
promising to investigate more into the effective components
in CapsNets. Our investigation reveals that the dynamic
routing procedure contributes neither to the generalization
ability nor to the afﬁne robustness of CapsNets. Such
conclusion is helpful for training CapsNets on large scale
datasets, e.g., the ImageNet 1K dataset [7].
Figure 7: The relationship between different CNN architec-
tures and Capsule Network architectures.
Application of CapsNets to Computer Vision Tasks
Besides the object recognition task, CapsNets are also
applied to many other computer vision tasks, for exam-
ples, object segmentation [14], image generation models
[12, 24], and adversarial defense [10]. It is not clear
whether routing procedures are necessary for these tasks.
If routing is not required here as well, the architectures of
CapsuleNets can be integrated into these vision tasks with
much less effort.
The Necessity of the Routing Procedure in CapsNets
[23] demonstrated many advantages of CapsNets with
dynamic routing over CNNs. However, our investigation
shows that all the advantages do not disappear when the
routing procedure is removed. Our paper does not claim
that routing does not have any beneﬁts but rather poses the
question to the community: What is the routing procedure
really good for? If the routing procedure is not necessary
for a given task, CapsNets have the chance of becoming an
easier-to-use building block.
7. Conclusion
We revisit the dynamic routing procedure of CapsNets.
Our numerical analysis and extensive experiments show
that neither the generalization ability nor the afﬁne ro-
bustness of CapsNets is reduced by removing the dynamic
routing procedure. This insight guided us to focus on the
CapsNet architecture, instead of various routing procedures,
to improve the afﬁne robustness. After exploring the
limitation of the CapsNet architecture, we propose Aff-
CapsNets, which improves afﬁne robustness signiﬁcantly
using fewer parameters.
Since this work mainly focused on the robustness to
afﬁne transformation, we investigate the standard CapsNets
with dynamic routings. Other beneﬁcial properties have
also been shown in improved CapsNets, like adversarial
robustness and viewpoint invariance. Further analysis of
these properties will be addressed in future work.
7292


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Shuhei Asano. Proposal of transformation robust
attentive convolutional neural network . PhD thesis,
Waseda University, 2018.
[2] Mohammad Taha Bahadori. Spectral capsule net-
works. In ICML Workshop , 2018.
[3] Simyung Chang, John Yang, SeongUk Park, and
Nojun Kwak. Broadcasting convolutional network for
visual relational reasoning. In ECCV , pages 754–769,
2018.
[4] Zhenhua Chen and David Crandall. Generalized
capsule networks with trainable routing procedure. In
ICML Workshop , 2019.
[5] Zhenhua Chen, Xiwen Li, Chuhua Wang, and David
Crandall. Capsule networks without routing proce-
dures. In ICLR open review submissions , 2020.
[6] Jaewoong Choi, Hyun Seo, Suii Im, and Myungjoo
Kang. Attention routing between capsules. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops , pages 0–0, 2019.
[7] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai
Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchi-
cal image database. In CVPR , pages 248–255. Ieee,
2009.
[8] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
CVPR , pages 770–778, 2016.
[9] Geoffrey E Hinton, Zoubin Ghahramani, and
Yee Whye Teh. Learning to parse images. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pages 463–
469, 2000.
[10] Geoffrey E Hinton, Sara Sabour, and Nicholas Frosst.
Matrix capsules with em routing. In ICLR , 2018.
[11] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten,
and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected convo-
lutional networks. In CVPR , pages 4700–4708, 2017.
[12] Ayush Jaiswal, Wael AbdAlmageed, Yue Wu, and
Premkumar Natarajan. Capsulegan: Generative ad-
versarial capsule network. In ECCV , pages 0–0, 2018.
[13] Alex Krizhevsky et al. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. 2009.
[14] Rodney LaLonde and Ulas Bagci. Capsules for object
segmentation. In International Conference on Medical
Imaging with Deep Learning , 2018.
[15] Yann LeCun, L ´eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and
Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
86(11):2278–2324, 1998.[16] Jan Eric Lenssen, Matthias Fey, and Pascal
Libuschewski. Group equivariant capsule networks.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 8844–8853, 2018.
[17] Hongyang Li, Xiaoyang Guo, Bo DaiWanli Ouyang,
and Xiaogang Wang. Neural network encapsulation.
InECCV , pages 252–267, 2018.
[18] Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro
Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading digits
in natural images with unsupervised feature learning.
2011.
[19] Inyoung Paik, Taeyeong Kwak, and Injung Kim. Cap-
sule networks need an improved routing algorithm.
ArXiv , abs/1907.13327, 2019.
[20] Sai Samarth R Phaye, Apoorva Sikka, Abhinav Dhall,
and Deepti R Bathula. Multi-level dense capsule
networks. In Asian Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 577–592. Springer, 2018.
[21] Jathushan Rajasegaran, Vinoj Jayasundara, Sandaru
Jayasekara, Hirunima Jayasekara, Suranga Senevi-
ratne, and Ranga Rodrigo. Deepcaps: Going deeper
with capsule networks. In CVPR , pages 10725–10733,
2019.
[22] David Rawlinson, Abdelrahman Ahmed, and Gideon
Kowadlo. Sparse unsupervised capsules generalize
better. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06094 , 2018.
[23] Sara Sabour, Nicholas Frosst, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Dynamic routing between capsules. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 3856–
3866, 2017.
[24] Raeid Saqur and Sal Vivona. Capsgan: Using dy-
namic routing for generative adversarial networks. In
Science and Information Conference , pages 511–525.
Springer, 2019.
[25] Dilin Wang and Qiang Liu. An optimization view on
dynamic routing between capsules. In ICLR Worksop ,
2018.
[26] Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland V ollgraf.
Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747 , 2017.
[27] Suofei Zhang, Quan Zhou, and Xiaofu Wu. Fast
dynamic routing based on weighted kernel density
estimation. In International Symposium on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Robotics , pages 301–309. Springer,
2018.
[28] Jian Zhao, Jianshu Li, Fang Zhao, Xuecheng Nie,
Yunpeng Chen, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng.
Marginalized cnn: Learning deep invariant represen-
tations. In BMVC , 2017.
7293


