==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1809.07857v2  [cs.NI]  19 Jul 2019IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 1
In-Edge AI: Intelligentizing Mobile Edge
Computing, Caching and Communication by
Federated Learning
Xiaofei Wang1, Yiwen Han1, Chenyang Wang1, Qiyang Zhao2, Xu Chen3, Min Chen4∗
1Tianjin Key Laboratory of Advanced Networking (TANK), Scho ol of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
2Huawei Technology, Shenzhen, P. R. China.
3School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University , Guangdong, Guangzhou, P. R. China.
4School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong Univer sity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.
*Corresponding author.
Abstract —Recently, along with the rapid development of
mobile communication technology, edge computing theory an d
techniques have been attracting more and more attentions
from global researchers and engineers, which can signiﬁcan tly
bridge the capacity of cloud and requirement of devices by th e
network edges, and thus can accelerate the content deliveri es
and improve the quality of mobile services. In order to bring
more intelligence to the edge systems, compared to traditio nal
optimization methodology, and driven by the current deep
learning techniques, we propose to integrate the Deep Reinf orce-
ment Learning techniques and Federated Learning framework
with the mobile edge systems, for optimizing the mobile edge
computing, caching and communication. And thus, we design
the “In-Edge AI” framework in order to intelligently utiliz e
the collaboration among devices and edge nodes to exchange
the learning parameters for a better training and inference
of the models, and thus to carry out dynamic system-level
optimization and application-level enhancement while red ucing
the unnecessary system communication load. “In-Edge AI” is
evaluated and proved to have near-optimal performance but
relatively low overhead of learning, while the system is cog nitive
and adaptive to the mobile communication systems. Finally, we
discuss several related challenges and opportunities for u nveiling
a promising upcoming future of “In-Edge AI”.
Index Terms —Mobile Edge Computing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Deep Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the increasing quantity and quality of rich multimedia
services over mobile networks, there has been a huge increas e
in the trafﬁc and computation for mobile users and devices
over recent years, which imposes a huge amount of workload
on today’s already-congested backbone networks and the mo-
bile networks.
Naturally, the emerging idea of Mobile Edge Computing
(MEC) is proposed [1] as a novel paradigm for easing the bur-
den of backbone networks by pushing the computation/storag e
resources to the proximity of the User Equipments (UEs).
On the other hand, MEC circumvents the long propagation
delays introduced by transmitting data from mobile devices
@ 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Perm ission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or fut ure media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for adve rtising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redi stribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work i n other works.to remote cloud computing infrastructures, and hence is abl e
to support latency-critical mobile and Internet of Things
(IoT) applications. Speciﬁcally, edge nodes, i.e., base st ations
equipped with computation/storage capability, could deal with
the computation and content requests of UEs, and conse-
quently this scheme improves the Quality-of-Service (QoS)
of Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) and the Quality-of-
Experience (QoE) of UEs and relieves the load of backbone
networks, and pressure of clouds (data centers) [2].
Fulﬁlling the requirement of QoE of UEs is not a trivial
even by virtue of MEC. The key and difﬁcult point lies in that
the computation ofﬂoading requires wireless data transmis sion
and might bring about the congestion of wireless channels, a nd
hence raises the decision making or optimization problem on
the whole communication and computation integrated system ,
i.e., how to jointly allocate communication resources and
computation resources of edge nodes.
Several pioneer works have been proposed and realize quite
good results in their assuming settings based on convex opti -
mization, game theory and so on [3] [4] . Nevertheless, con-
sidering the particular use cases in MEC, these optimizatio n
methods may suffer from the following issues: 1) Uncertain
Inputs: they assume the that some key information factors
are given as inputs, but actually some of them are difﬁcult to
obtain due to variant wireless channels and privacy policie s;
2) Dynamic Conditions: dynamics of the integrated commu-
nication and computation system are not well addressed; 3)
Temporal Isolation: most of them do not consider the long-
term effect of current decision on resource allocation exce pt
for Lyapunov optimization, viz., in a highly time-varying
MEC system, most of proposed optimization algorithms is
optimal or close-to-optimal only for a snapshot of the syste m.
In a word, the problem existed in the resource allocation
optimization of the MEC system is “ lack of intelligence ”.
In view of the increasing complexity of mobile networks,
e.g., a typical 5G node is expected to have 2000 or more
conﬁgurable parameters, a recent new trend is to optimize
wireless communication by Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tec h-
niques [4] [5], include but not limited to the application of
AI for Physical Layer (PHY), Data Link Layer, and trafﬁc
control [6]. Particularly, related studies on edge computi ng
and caching, such as [7] [8], have shown that reinforcement

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 2
learning [9] (include Deep Q-Learning [10] in Deep Rein-
forcement Learning) has the potential to be effective in joi nt
resource management. But [7] is based on Q-Learning, which
is not feasible for the practical MEC system where the state-
action space is tremendous and the focus of [8] is on vehicula r
networks. Besides, none of these works has thought over 1)
in what form the training data shall be gathered (whether in a
distributed or a centralized way), 2) where the reinforceme nt
learning agent should be placed and trained (whether in UEs,
edge nodes or remote cloud infrastructures), 3) how the upda te
process of reinforcement learning agents should be proceed ed
and collaborated, and 4) the privacy protection of training data.
Therefore, in this article, we use Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) to jointly manage the communication and
computation resources. And both cases of computation of-
ﬂoading and edge caching among the MEC system (illustrated
in Fig. 1) is discussed. In addition, Federated Learning [11 ]
is introduced as a framework for training DRL agents in
a distributed manner while 1) largely reducing the amount
of data which should be uploaded via the wireless uplink
channel, 2) reacting cognitively to the mobile communicati on
environment and conditions of cellular networks, 3) adapti ng
well with heterogeneous UEs in a practical cellular network ,
and 4) preserving the personal data privacy,
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst group to
study the application of DRL coupled with Federated Learnin g
for intelligent joint resource management of communicatio n
and computation in MEC systems. Our contribution can be
summarized as follows:
•1) we discuss the methodology of utilizing DRL (specif-
ically, Deep Q-Learning), and Distributed DRL for opti-
mizing the Edge Caching and Computation;
•2) we propose “In-Edge AI” framework to further utilize
the “Federated Learning” for a better deployment of
intelligent resource management in the MEC system;
•3) we provide proof-of-concept evaluation and verify that
the proposed scheme has advantages on the balance of
performance and cost.
In addition, we also discuss opportunities and challenges t o
hopefully unveil the upcoming future of edge architecture
supporting various AI-based applications.
II. O PTIMIZING THE EDGE BY DRL
We intend to use AI techniques (particularly DRL) as the
method of cognitive computing for building an intelligenti zing
mobile edge computing, caching and communication system.
The cognitive process among protocol stacks of wireless
communication is given as Fig. 2, where we partition the
whole process into three main parts.
•Information Collecting: Sense and collect the indis-
pensable observing data for cognitive computing among
the MEC system, including but not limit on the usage
of communication and computation resources, wireless
environments and intensities of UEs’ requests;
•Cognitive Computing: By making use of the observing
data of the system, cognitive computing is performedto fuse the massive observed data and further give the
decision of scheduling;
•Request Handling: The MEC system deals with the
request of UEs on the basis of the scheduling decision
given by cognitive computing.
In this section, two representative use cases in the MEC
system are investigated.
A. DRL over the MEC System for Caching
Recently, we have observed the emergence of promising
mobile content caching and delivery techniques, by which
popular contents are cached in the intermediate servers (or
middleboxes, gateways or routers) so that demands from user s
for the same content can be accommodated easily without
duplicate transmissions from remote cloud servers, and hen ce
signiﬁcantly reducing redundant trafﬁc.
Thereinafter, we focus on the scenario of caching contents
in edge nodes. In the MEC system depicted by Fig. 1, there is a
library of Fpopular content ﬁles, denoted as F={1,...,F},
that all mobile users may request in the system. The content
popularity is deﬁned as (Pf)F×1, which is the probability dis-
tribution of content requests from all users. Content popul arity
indicates the common interests of all users in the network.
In related works, the content popularity is always describe d
by MZipf distribution. Moreover, for simply asserting the
efﬁciency of DRL in edge caching, we assume that the content
popularity changes slowly and all contents have the same siz e.
For each request, the DRL agent in the edge node can make a
decision to cache or not cache, and if yes, the agent determin es
which local content shall be replaced. We assume that all
content popularity, user preference and average arrival ra te of
requests are static during a relatively long period. We mode l
the cache replacement problem in all edge nodes as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) and use DRL to solve it, and the
results will be shown in Section IV.
B. DRL over the MEC System for Computation Ofﬂoading
1) Communication Model: As illustrated in Fig. 1, consid-
ering an environment where a set of UEs N={1,...,N}is
covered by a set of base stations B={1,...,B}, UEs could
choose to ofﬂoad their intensive computation tasks to an edg e
node via the wireless channel or execute these tasks locally .
There are Mwireless channels and the set M={1,...,M}
denotes channels of one base station. Speciﬁcally, among th e
decision choice an∈ {0}/uniontextM, UEncould choose to ofﬂoad
the computation to the edge via a wireless channel anor
compute its tasks locally as a decision an= 0. For the purpose
of simulating the variation of wireless channels, the chann el
gain state between a UE and a base station (belongs to an
edge node) is independently picked from a ﬁnite state space,
by which the channel state transitions are modelled as a ﬁnit e-
state discrete-time Markov chain. In this wireless scenari o, the
achievable data rate could be evaluated by Shannon-Hartley
theorem.

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 3
Computation-
Constrained UE Energy-
Constrained UE 
Integrated 
Communication 
and Computing Integrated 
Communication 
and Computing Edge Nodes eNodeB 
Communication 
Computation Resource Cost 
Edge 
Nodes Pool Backhaul 
Network User 
Equipment 
Communication-
Constrained UE 
Internet 
Fig. 1. Framework of AI-supported mobile edge system with co gnitive ability
Channel Quality 
Received Request 
Information 
Communication 
Resources 
Computing Resources …
Sensing Cognitive 
Computing Edge Node Server Scheduling Computing 
Resource 
PDCP 
RLC 
MAC Forwarding 
GTP-U
UDP-IP 
L2 
I/Q Date PHY L1 GTP-UUEs’ 
Requests Cross-layer 
Aware Internet Local 
Network 
Information Collecting Request Handling Cognitive Computing Data 
Fusion 
Fig. 2. Procedure of utilizing cognitive computing in mobil e edge system among protocol stacks
2) Computation Model: In order to portrait the long-
term effects within the MEC system, computation tasks are
generated according to Bernoulli distribution across the t ime
horizon. A computation task is represented by (µ,ν), where
µ,νdenote the size of computation input data (in bits)
and the total number of CPU cycles needed to complete the
computation task, respectively. All these generated tasks are
stored in a task queue and executed sequentially on the UE or
edge node according to a FIFO (First-in First-out) principl e.
When the task is executed locally, the computation executio n
time of it is given as dL=ν/fL, where fLis the the
computation capability (i.e., CPU cycles per second) of theUE and determined by the amount of energy the UE decides
to allocate. And when the task is scheduled to be executed on
the edge node, the execution time of this ofﬂoaded task can
be calculated as dE=ν/fE, wherefEis the computation
capability the edge node allocated to the UE and the formula
fE≫fLholds (the computing performance of edge nodes is
much stronger than the UE’s).
3) Problem Formulation for Computation Ofﬂoading: For
efﬁciently performing computation ofﬂoading over the MEC
system, the UE shall make a joint communication and compu-
tation resource allocation decision in terms of a control ac tion
(c,e), where c∈ {0}/uniontextMis the computation ofﬂoading

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 4
decision denoting the UE chooses to execute the task locally
(c= 0) or to ofﬂoad the task via which wireless, and edenotes
the amount of allocated energy for wireless communication
and locally computation. In the MEC system, our attention in
this section is focus on how to improve the task executing
experience (viz., QoE) of UEs.
High complexities of the MEC system will be introduced
especially when dealing with task ofﬂoading problems and
the difﬁculty of acquiring the global necessary informatio n
when involving massive UEs. Hence, DRL algorithm such
as Deep Q-Leaning is utilized here as the agent, which
handles the joint control action of the UE. The whole problem
could be summarized as that the UE decides a joint wireless
channel selection and energy allocation decision accordin g to
a stationary control policy Φ= (Φc(Υ),Φe(Υ)), while it
keeps observing the network state Υwhich involves the task
queuing state, the cumulative energy consumption of the UE,
the occupying wireless channel of the UE and qualities of all
wireless channels. In addition, we deﬁne an immediate utili ty
function u(Υ,(c,e))to evaluate the QoE of UEs, which is
inversely proportional to the execution delay of tasks (inc lude
the wireless transmission delay and the computation delay) ,
the task queuing delay, the energy consumption of the UE and
the count of task dropping and failing. By taking advantage o f
Deep Q-Learning and its improved version, e.g., Double DQN
[12], the control policy Φ= (Φc(Υ),Φe(Υ))could be trained
and achieves increasing the utility of UEs for the long-term
performance optimization.
III. I N-EDGE AIWITH FEDERATED LEARNING
In Section II, two use cases of DRL in the MEC system
are put forward. However, one key challenge is still pending
in practical, namely the deployment of DRL agent. Taking the
computation ofﬂoading use case in Section II-B as example,
if the DRL agent is trained on edge nodes or remote cloud
servers just as depicted in Fig. 4(a) , due to the wireless
communication characters of the MEC system, three deﬁcien-
cies existed: 1) the training data is large in quantity when
considering massive UEs, and it will increase the burden of
uplink wireless channels; 2) the training data which should be
uploaded to edge nodes or cloud is privacy-sensitive, and it
might cause potential privacy accidents; 3) if training dat a is
transformed for privacy consideration, server-side proxy data
is less relevant than on-device data. And if the DRL agent
is trained on the UE individually , there are still another two
defects: 1) the computation capability of a UE is relatively
weak, and it will consume long time or is even impossible to
train the DRL agent on large-scale data; 2) the training proc ess
of a DRL agent may introduce extra energy consumption of a
UE.
DRL techniques require intensive computation capacity for
ﬁnding the optimal solutions. Particularly, if there are hu ge
amount of data factors, parameters, and criteria for optimi zing
the resource over large-scale MEC systems (an operator’s
network in cities), advanced distributed Deep Learning (DL )
approaches should be utilized. Hence, thinking about train ing
DRL agents in a distributed fashion efﬁciently is natural. A sthe Fig. 3 illustrates, though keeping and training a DRL age nt
in every UE and edge node can achieve the best performance, it
is only practical to apply distributed DRL in the MEC system,
because there shall not have enough time and data for trainin g.
However, most distributed DRL architectures, described by
Fig. 4(b), could not handle unbalanced and non-IID data and
cope with the privacy issues [11]. In addition, they usually
reduce the performance of DRL agents when UEs and network
states are heterogeneous. Therefore, Federated Learning ( FL)
is introduced in this paper for training DRL agents in the MEC
system on account of the fact it could deal with several key
challenges below, which differentiates it from other distr ibuted
DL approaches [11]:
•Non-Independent and Identically Distributed (Non-
IDD): The training data (transition memories in DRL)
on the UE is based on the wireless environment it ex-
perienced and its own computation capability and energy
consumption. Hence, any individual training data of a UE
will not be able to represent the training data of all UEs.
In FL, this challenge could be met by merging the updates
of models with FedAvg in [11].
•Limited communication: UEs are often unpredictably
off-line or allocated with poor communication resources.
Nevertheless, using additional computation could de-
crease the consumption of communication rounds needed
to train a model. In addition, FL only asks a part of
clients, in one round, to upload their updates, which
handles the circumstance where clients are often unpre-
dictably off-line.
•Unbalanced: Some UEs may have more computation
tasks to be handled and some may experience more
states of mobile networks, resulting in varying amounts
of training data among UEs. Also, this challenge could
be coped with the FedAvg algorithm.
•Privacy and Security: The information needs to be up-
loaded for FL is the minimal update necessary to improve
the DRL agent. Further, techniques of secure aggregation
and differential privacy could be applied naturally, which
could avoid that privacy-sensitive data are contained in
local updates. Nonetheless, the privacy and security is
not our focus in this work, more information about these
issues could be found in references of [11]
A. Integration of Federated Learning within Edge for In-Edg e
AI
Between AI in cloud and AI in UEs, there is an “edge”.
With the aid of FL framework, edge nodes equipped with AI
computation in “edge” could combine the cloud and massive
UEs together and form a powerful AI entity with strong
cognitive ability provided by massive UEs and edge nodes.
Throughout this envisioned architecture, each edge node ca n
support AI tasks on system level dynamically, not only for
its own but for the global optimization and balancing of the
whole MEC system.
Use cases of edge caching in Section II-A and computation
ofﬂoading in Section II-B are taken to represent In-Edge AI
of integrating FL.

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 5
Deep Learning with Edge 
DRL Distributed DRL Federated Learning 
Small-Scale 
•Caching Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … 
On One UE or Edge Node Medium 
•Resource Allocation 
•Caching Policy 
•Computation Offloading 
Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … Large-Scale 
•Resource Allocation 
•Caching Policy 
•Computation Offloading 
Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … Cons: Impractical in Edge ( 
Massive Redundant Data 
Transmission; Privacy Risk;) Pros: Best Performance Pros: Fast Training; Barely 
Usable in Edge 
Cons: Privacy Risk; Weaker 
Performance; …Cons: Near Best Performance Pros: Minimum Data 
Transmission; Privacy Protection; 
Flexible Training; Robust to 
Unbalanced and non- IID data; … 
Fig. 3. Taxonomy of applying Deep Reinforcement Learning in mobile edge system
1) From Edge to Cloud: Considering edge caching in the
MEC system, the DRL agent employed in an edge node
makes decisions on caching appropriate content according t o
requested contents of UEs dynamically. However, space-tim e
popularity dynamics of requesting contents put forward the
requirement for collaborated edge caching. Thus, the cloud
server belongs to MNOs could be the central server for
coordinating the edge nodes. Among all edge nodes, each
of them keeps a DRL agent and updates it by its own local
training data.
2) From UEs to Edge: In the scenario of computation
ofﬂoading, each UE shall decide whether one computation
task should be ofﬂoaded to edge nodes, ofﬂoading the task via
which wireless channel and the energy consumption accordin g
to the inference result of the DRL agent in it. Though UEs such
as mobile phones, industrial IoT devices, and smart vehicle s
are able to perform some AI computation, the computation
capability and the energy consumption still limit their abi lities
in AI computing (DRL training on large-scale data). Therefo re,
we proposed to use all edge nodes in “edge” as an integral
server for coordinating massive UEs covered by them. By
virtue of this scheme, UEs with relative weak computation
capability could be able to hold a complex DRL agent.
The methodology of tackling two aforementioned scenarios
is similar. For training a general DL model, as depicted in Fi g.
4 (c), FL iteratively solicits a random set of clients (distr ibuted
devices which train DL model) to 1) download parameters of
the DL model from a certain server, 2) perform the training
process on the downloaded model with their own data, and 3)
upload only the new model parameters to the server, which
aggregates uploaded updates of the client to further improv e
the model. The process inside an individual client is also
illustrated in Fig. 4(c), where symbols are taken as the same
version in [9] for accessible reading. Speciﬁcally, the cli ent
trains its model, which is download from the central serverbefore, based on local training data and upload the updated
weight of MainNet backward when it is available.
To summarize, FL enables resource-constrained edge to
compute devices (include UEs and edge nodes) to learn a
shared model, while keeping the training data local.
B. Pros and Cons of Federated Learning for In-Edge AI
The core beneﬁt of FL lies in distributing the quality of
knowledge across a large number of devices without neces-
sarily centralizing the training data. Extended by this cor e
beneﬁt, several particular beneﬁts are brought further in t he
MEC system.
•Cognitive: Server-side proxy data is less relevant than
on-device data. In the MEC system, massive UEs and
edge nodes could act as perceptrons and acquire various,
abundant and personalized data for updating the global
DL model. On the perspective of UEs, these data could
include the quality of the wireless channel, the remanent
battery life and the energy consumption, the immedi-
ate computation capability and so on. Concerning edge
nodes, the cognitive data could include the computation
load, the storage occupation, the number of wireless
communication links, the task queue states waiting for
handling, and etc. Thus, using FL based on these raw
data instead of centralized DL renders the MEC system
more cognitive.
•Robust: FL inherently could address key issues about
the availability of UEs and edge nodes and the unbal-
anced and non-IID data. Consequently, the performance
of In-Edge AI shall not be easily affected by the un-
balanced data and sometimes the poor communication
environment. Further, its ability of handling non-IDD data
allows massive UEs in different wireless environments to
train their own DL model without concerning about the
negative effect.

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 6
MNO Core Cloud 
…
…Centralized 
DQN 
Massive 
Training 
Data 
…
dddd
(a) Centralized DRLMNO Core Cloud 
………Distributed 
DQN 
Upload 
Training 
Data 
(b) Distributed DRL
MNO Core Cloud 
… ……Federated 
Learning One Round in FL Download 
Model 
Client Central 
Server Training Process in a Client 
MainNet TargetNet 
Local Replay Memory Loss Function 
Multi-Layer 
Perception Replace 
Local Model 
Periodically 
Environment Gradient 
 (!",#";$)
!%argmax & (!"'*,#;$) (!"'*,
argmax & (!"'*,#;$)
;$+)
( !,"!,#!, !$%)#& &,"&, &$%
 &$%
Local 
Training Data 
1
(c) DRL with Federated Learning
Fig. 4. Centralized DRL v.s. Distributed DRL v.s. DRL with Fe derated Learning over mobile edge system
•Flexible: In FL, additional computation could be used to
decrease the number of communication rounds to train a
model. An effective way to add computation is increasing
computation per UE, i.e., adding more local SGD updates
per round. Hence, a trade-off between computation and
communication existed. Speciﬁcally, powerful (both in
computation and energy) UEs could decide to perform
more mini-batches in training for further decreasing the
communication cost and vice versa.
Certainly, due to the limitation of federated optimization ,
FL could not outperform the centralized DL trained model,
but could still achieve the near best performance, which wil l
demonstrated in Section IV.
C. Practicability Discussion
To some extent, our proposed In-Edge AI is a future-
oriented concept. We envision a near future where most of
the mobile devices, particularly smartphones, are endowed
with the ability of not only inferring but also training the
Deep Learning model. As is well known, even the state-of-
the-art edge chips, such as Edge TPU (brought by Google andpowered by TensorFlow Lite), could only support elementary
training processes in DL. Therefore, the practicability sh ould
be discussed with considering both practical deployment an d
delay requirement.
1) Deploy Challenges: Learning takes long time of train-
ing as well as inferring according to the required accuracy
level. Obviously, the DRL model should not be deployed
directly while setting weights of neural networks at random .
Otherwise, the MEC system will be paralyzed because the
DRL model could only make random decisions at preliminary
exploration.
Nonetheless, this may be solved if the DL model is not
trained from scratch. We are now working on using transfer
learning to boost the training process in MEC systems. The
basic idea is to simulate the wireless environment and reque sts
of UEs. Just as evaluating and adjusting the antenna setting s
in a simulated testbed, the simulated environment is used to
train an off-line Deep Reinforcement Learning agent. Then, the
established DRL model could be distributed to mobile UEs.
2) Delay Requirement: Learning always takes long time of
training as well as inferring according to the required accu racy
level. However, if using transfer learning, there shall be l ess

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 7
time or computation consumption on the side of training.
Based on the pre-established DRL, the requirement of
training (not inferring) is alleviated, i.e., the DRL agent could
reach the satisﬁed accuracy level after a small number of
mini-batches or even directly inferring. And when the wirel ess
environment or the pattern of UEs’ requests is changed, the
UE could also take advantage of the established DRL to adjust
neural networks in its DRL model.
Unlike using an enormous number of hidden layers and
neurons in CNN or RNN, the neural network in DRL is merely
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP, shown in Fig. 4(c)). And in
our simulated scenarios, the MLP has only one hidden layer
with 200 neurons. Therefore, once the model has been trained ,
the inferring process could be performed quickly due to the
low complexity of the MainNet in DRL agents.
Besides, our work [14] aims to meet the challenge of
running DL on resource-constrained mobile devices. By inco r-
porating this work, the requirement on computation capacit y
of UEs could be relaxed along with decreasing the inferring
delay.
IV. D ATA-DRIVEN EVALUATION OF PROOF -OF-CONCEPT
IN-EDGE AI F RAMEWORK
A. Experiment Settings
For investigating the performance of In-Edge AI with FL,
two simulations on edge caching and computation ofﬂoading
as in Section II-A and Section II-B are presented, respectiv ely.
Among all simulations, the time horizon is discretized into
time epochs.
We capture Xender’s trace for one month (from 01/09/2016
to 30/09/2016), including 9,514 active mobile users, conve ying
188,447 content ﬁles, and 2,107,100 content requests [13], of
which the content popularity distribution can be well ﬁtted
by a Zipf distribution with ∂= 1.58. In edge caching
simulations, we use this mined Zipf distribution as the cont ent
popularity distribution to generate the content request of UEs,
and consider the cooperation of 6edge nodes. Once an edge
node receives a request from UE, the local DRL agent in it
will make a decision to cache which content or not cache, and
then obtain the reward of this action for its own training. In
edge caching, the cloud server belongs to MNOs is the central
server for coordinating the edge nodes.
On investigating the capabilities of DRL coupled with FL
over the MEC system for computation ofﬂoading, we suppose
the whole bandwidth ω= 5 MHz of an edge node is divided
into10wireless channels, and take 10UEs as the clients in FL
framework to individually train their DRL agents and merge
them among edge nodes. The channel gain states between the
UE and the edge node are from a common ﬁnite set, which
quantiﬁes the quality of the wireless channel into 6levels.
Throughout the simulation, the number of tasks generated on
each UE follows Bernoulli distribution with average arriva l
rateλTper time epoch.
As for the DRL settings in UEs, edge nodes, and cloud, we
choose the Double DQN algorithm and select tanh as the ac-
tivation function and Adam optimizer. We used a single-laye r
fully-connected feedforward neural network, which includ es200 neurons, to serve as the target (TargetNet) and the eval
(MainNet) Q network. Other parameter values in Double DQN
are set as follows: replay memory capacity M= 5000 , mini-
batch size B= 200 , discount factor γ= 0.9, exploration
probability ǫ= 0.001, learning rate ζ= 0.005and the period
of replacing the target Q network is φ= 250 . In addition, to
build a baseline for the performance of DRL agent with FL,
we construct a centralized DRL agent for comparison and it is
assumed to be able to receive all data used for reinforcement
learning.
B. Evaluation Results
To elucidate the performance of our In-Edge AI framework,
experiments on edge caching and computation ofﬂoading are
carried out under various settings.
Fig. 5 depicts the performance of DDQN with FL both on
edge caching and computation ofﬂoading. Three edge nodes
(E1,E2andE3) and three UEs ( m1,m2andm3) are chosen
for exhibiting the capabilities of their own DRL agents. On
the perspective of edge caching, E1,E2andE3are chosen
to cache contents, and hit rates of them are improving and
ﬁnally maintain within a certain range along with the proces s
of training DRL agents. In the simulation of computation
ofﬂoading, the average utilities of three UEs m1,m2andm3
are increasing with the decreasing of training loss, and als o
maintain within a certain range at last. This means that the
efﬁciency of handling ofﬂoaded tasks in the MEC system is
improved.
Further, Fig. 6 gives the details of performance comparison
as follows.
1) In Fig. 6(a), the edge caching performance of the DDQN
with FL is compared to the centralized DDQN, and
some other caching policies, such as known LRU (Least
Recently Used), LFU (Least Frequently Used) and FIFO
(First in, First out). It can be easily seen that the speciﬁc
performance of FL is near close to the results of central-
ized DDQN in terms of achieved hit rates of 3clients
(edge nodes), and outperform LRU, LFU, and FIFO.
2) In the experiment on computation ofﬂoading, the per-
formance of the DDQN with FL is compared to the
centralized DDQN, and another three baseline computa-
tion ofﬂoading policies, i.e., mobile execution, edge node
execution, and greedy execution. Here, mobile execution,
edge node execution and greedy execution mean that the
UE processes all computation tasks locally, all compu-
tation tasks are ofﬂoaded from the UE to edge nodes,
and the UE makes decision on executing a computation
task locally or ofﬂoading it to edge nodes with the
aim of maximizing the immediate utility, respectively. In
Fig. 6(b), it can be observed that the DDQN with FL
achieves the near performance of centralized DDQN and
is superior to another three baseline policies;
3) On investigating the detailed performance in training pr o-
cess, we assume that the capability of wireless commu-
nication is not the hinder, i.e., both massive training data
for centralized DDQN and lightweight model updates for
DDQN with FL can be uploaded to the target position

==== Page 8 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 8
MNO 
Core Cloud 
……
Computation Offloading Performance 
with DDQN and FL E1E2E3m3
m1
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Edge Caching Performance with DDQN and FL 
Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time E1E2E3
Average Utility 
Training Time Average Utility 
Training Time Average Utility 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time m1m2m3
m2
m
Fig. 5. Capability of Federated Learning in edge caching and computation ofﬂoading
within a discretized time epoch. As illustrated in Fig.
6(c), the performance of centralized DDQN is better than
that of DDQN with FL at the beginning of training.
However, once the model merging of FL has been pro-
cessed several times, the performance of DDQN with FL
becomes near to that of centralized DDQN. Certainly,
if the client wishes to obtain the expected performance
using DDQN with FL, it must take time to wait for the
model merging, i.e., exploiting training results of other
clients. Nonetheless, this experiment assumes an ideal
wireless environment. In practice, massive training data
are actually unable to be uploaded without any delay.
Therefore, performing DDQN with FL is more practical
in MEC systems, at least for now when the wireless
resource is also the major consideration.
4) We also gather statistics of the total wireless transmis-
sion until the DRL agent is well trained both in the
scenario of edge caching and computation ofﬂoading.
In the framework of FL, every client only needs to
upload the update of its model. Without FL framework,
viz., using centralized DRL, UEs must upload the whole
training data via wireless channels and thus consume
more communication resources, which is demonstrated
by Fig. 6(d).
With no doubt, FL must trade something for its advantages.
Speciﬁcally, due to the fact that the coordinating server in FL
only executes tasks of merging updates instead of taking ove rthe whole training, the computation load of clients is inevi tably
heavier on account of the local training process. This will
cause more energy cost on UEs or burden the computation
of both UEs and edge nodes, and these issues are still open
questions.
V. O PPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
We hereby discuss a few essential promising research direc-
tions of In-Edge AI, and highlight several pending problems
from the perspective of elaborating and widening the usage o f
AI and Edge Computing.
A. Accelerating AI Tasks by Edge Communication and Com-
puting Systems
Aforementioned sections is to optimize the edge of mobile
communication systems by AI techniques, but it is also im-
portant to exploit specialized methods of optimizing learn ing
computation tasks by the support of edge [14]. DRL can
be treated as a type of specialized edge computing task at
the service-level. How to ﬁnd correct edge nodes to collabo-
rate, and how to allocate appropriate resources, for the lar ge
amount of AI tasks with various priorities, deadlines, scal es,
different requirement on CPU, memory and so on are also
indispensable. Interestingly, this is the reverse directi on of
the aforementioned Federated Learning, but also a kind of
application of the “In-Edge AI”. Potential research topics may

==== Page 9 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 9
(a) Performance comparison in edge
caching
(b) Performance comparison in computa-
tion ofﬂoading
(c) Detailed performance comparison in
computation ofﬂoading
(d) Comparison of transmission cost
Fig. 6. Performance Evaluation of Double DDQN with and witho ut Federated
Learninginclude game theoretic algorithms for the competition of ed ge
nodes and mobile users over the multi-dimensional resource
for AI acceleration by the edge, and the dynamic and adaptive
splitting of AI tasks becomes quite challenging.
B. Efﬁciency of In-edge AI for Real-time Mobile Communica-
tion System towards 5G
In 5G, the deﬁned Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communica-
tions (URLLC) scenarios strongly desire very small delays a nd
high reliability of the mobile system. However, general dee p
learning-based optimization and prediction schemes take q uite
long running time of recursions for converging to the result s,
which is inappropriate for mobile edge systems; particular ly
the system-level edge computing tasks desiring rapid respo nses
in the scale of millisecond. In order to manage the guarantee d
QoS of delays and bandwidth for caching, communication and
computation, In-Edge AI should be able to provide differen-
tiated support for various types of services, and ﬁne-grain ed
collaborative scheduling of the AI tasks (or split ones) ove r the
edge nodes and mobile devices should be accelerated in nearl y
real-time, which is critical but remain unsolved in current
literature. Furthermore, the integration of Federated Lea rning
framework with AI chipset hardware should be explored as
well.
C. Incentive and Business Model of In-Edge AI
In-Edge AI is a tight confederation among mobile operators,
SPs/CPs, and mobile users, while capable entities may con-
tribute more to the overall optimization of the edge caching
and computing tasks, but a large number of UEs may rely on
the AI of edge nodes and other UEs. Also, AI computation
requirements from SPs and CPs should be satisﬁed across
edge nodes of different mobile operators. And hence, more
reliable and accurate design of the incentive framework of
In-Edge AI become interesting, which should further provid e
a loop of the digital copyrights of the content and services.
Blockchain techniques may be integrated into In-Edge AI
framework [15], but how to distribute the huge computation
load of the proof of work over the edge system and how
to evaluate the contribution of In-Edge AI computation on
heterogenous scenarios are still unexplored.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this article, we discussed the potential of integrating
the Deep Reinforcement Learning techniques and Federated
Learning framework with the mobile edge system and optimiz-
ing the mobile edge computing, caching and communication
with it. We perform experiments on investigating the scenar ios
of edge caching and computation ofﬂoading in mobile edge
system, and the “In-Edge AI” is evaluated and proved to
have the abilities to achieve near-optimal performance. Fo r our
future work, we concentrate on not only optimizing learning
computation tasks by the support of edge but also scheduling
the AI tasks over the edge nodes and mobile devices in a
ﬁne-grained and collaborative manner.

==== Page 10 ====
IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 10
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
REFERENCES
[1] ETSI, “Mobile Edge Computing - Introductory Technical W hite Paper”,
Sep. 2014.
[2] X. Wang, M. Chen, T. Taleb, A. Ksentini, V . C. M. Leung, “Ca che in
the Air: Exploiting Content Caching and Delivery Technique s for 5G
Systems,” in IEEE Communications , vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 131-139, Feb.
2014.
[3] M. Chen and Y . Hao, “Task Ofﬂoading for Mobile Edge Comput ing
in Software Deﬁned Ultra-Dense Network,” in IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. , vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 587-597, Mar. 2018
[4] Y . Mao, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, K. B. Letaief, “A Survey on Mobile
Edge Computing: The Communication Perspective”, in IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutorials , vol. 19, no.4, pp. 2322-2358, Aug. 2017.
[5] Q. Mao, F. Hu, and Q. Hao, “Deep Learning for Intelligent W ireless
Networks: A Comprehensive Survey,” in IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials ,
Early Access, 2018.
[6] F. Tang, B. Mao, Z. M. Fadlullah, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue, and
K. Mizutani, “On Removing Routing Protocol from Future Wire less
Networks: A Real-Time Deep Learning Approach for Intellige nt Trafﬁc
Control,” in IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 154-160,
Feb. 2018.
[7] A. Sadeghi, F. Sheikholeslami, and G. B. Giannakis, “Opt imal and
Scalable Caching for 5G Using Reinforcement Learning of Spa ce-Time
Popularities,” in IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
180-190, Feb. 2018.
[8] Y . He, N. Zhao, and H. Yin, “Integrated Networking, Cachi ng, and
Computing for Connected Vehicles: A Deep Reinforcement Lea rning
Approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 44-55, Jan.
2018.
[9] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-
tion” . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[10] V . Mnih et al., “Human-Level Control through Deep Reinf orcement
Learning,” in Nature , vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529-533, Feb. 2015.
[11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
y Arcas, “Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Network s from
Decentralized Data,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , Apr. 2017.
[12] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep Reinforcem ent Learning
with Double Q-Learning,” in Proceedings of the 30th AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 16, 2016, pp. 2094-2100.
[13] X. Li, X. Wang, P.-J. Wan, Z. Han, V . C.M. Leung, “Hierarc hical
Edge Caching in Device-to-Device Aided Mobile Networks: Mo deling,
Optimization, and Design”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Com-
munications , Special Issue on Caching for Communication Systems and
Networks, Early Access, 2018.
[14] E. Li, Z. Zhou, X. Chen, “Edge Intelligence: On-Demand D eep Learning
Model Co-Inference with Device-Edge Synergy,” in ACM SIGCOMM,
MECOMM Workshop , 2018.
[15] Z. Xiong, Y . Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When m obile
blockchain meets edge computing: Challenges and applicati ons,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.05938 , 2017.
PLACE
PHOTO
HEREXiaofei Wang (xiaofeiwang@tju.edu.cn) is currently
a professor in Tianjin University, China. He received
M.S. and Ph.D degrees from the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
in 2008 and 2013 respectively. He received the B.S.
degree in the Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology in 2005. He is the winner of the IEEE
ComSoc Fred W. Ellersick Prize in 2017. His cur-
rent research interests are social- aware multimedia
service in cloud computing, cooperative backhaul
caching and trafﬁc ofﬂoading in mobile content- centric net works.PLACE
PHOTO
HEREYiwen Han [S’18] (hanyiwen@tju.edu.cn) is a Ph.D
student in Tianjin University, China. He received the
B.S. and M.S. degrees from Nanchang University
and Tianjin University, China, in 2015 and 2017,
respectively. His current research interests include
edge computing, wireless communication, and ma-
chine learning.
PLACE
PHOTO
HEREChenyang Wang (chenyangwang@tju.edu.cn) re-
ceived his B.S. and M.S. degrees from Henan Nor-
mal University, Xinxiang, Henan province, China.
He is now a Ph.D student in the School of Computer
Science and Technology at Tianjin University. His
research interests include Mobile Edge Computing,
Caching, Ofﬂoading and D2D wireless networks.
PLACE
PHOTO
HEREQiyang Zhao is currently a senior research engi-
neer at Huawei Technologies, China. He received
B.S. and Ph.D degrees from Xidian University and
University of York in 2005 and 2013 respectively.
He is specialized in end-to-end network slicing,
radio resource management, control and user planes,
network orchestration, optimization, reinforcement
learning, transfer learning, neural network and data
analytics, plus comprehensive skills in mathematical
modeling, system level simulation and large-scale
prototype development.
PLACE
PHOTO
HEREXu Chen [M’12] (chenxu35@mail.sysu.edu.cn) re-
ceived his Ph.D. degree in information engineering
from the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2012.
He was a postdoctoral research associate with Ari-
zona State University, Tempe, from 2012 to 2014,
and a Humboldt Fellow with the University of Goet-
tingen, Germany, from 2014 to 2016. He is currently
a professor with the School of Data and Computer
Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
He received the 2017 IEEE ICC Best Paper Award,
the 2014 IEEE INFOCOM Best Paper Runner-Up
Award, and the 2014 Hong Kong Young Scientist Runner-Up Awar d.

