==== Page 1 ====
Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence:
A Definition and Research Challenges
Albrecht Schmidt
albrecht.schmidt@ifi.lmu.de
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
München, Germany
Figure 1: Is AI and ML a new material to name an epoch? Will it impact live as the “stone age” or “bronze age” did?
ABSTRACT
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become the buzzword of the last
decade. Advances so far have been largely technical with a focus on
machine learning (ML). Only recently have we begun seeing a shift
towards focusing on the human aspects of artificial intelligence,
centered on the narrow view of making AI interactive and explain-
able. In this paper I suggest a definition for “Interactive Human
Centered Artificial Intelligence” and outline the required properties.
Staying in control is essential for humans to feel safe and have
self-determination. Hence, we need to find ways for humans to
understand AI based systems and means to allow human control
and oversight. In our work, we argue that levels of abstractions and
granularity of control are a general solution to this. Furthermore,
it is essential that we make explicit why we want AI and what are
the goals of AI research and development. We need to state the
properties that we expect of future intelligent systems and who
will benefit from a system or service. For me, AI and ML are very
much comparable to raw materials (like stone, iron, or bronze).
Historical periods are named after these materials as they funda-
mentally changed what humans can build and what tools humans
can engineer. Hence, I argue that in the AI age we need to shift
the focus from the material (e.g. the AI algorithms, as there will
be plenty of material) towards the tools and infrastructures that
are enabled which are beneficial to humans. It is apparent that AI
will allow the automation of mental routine tasks and that it will
extend our ability to perceive the world and foresee events. For me,
the central question is how to create these tools for amplifying the
human mind without compromising human values.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7535-1/20/09.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3399715.3400873CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Human computer interac-
tion (HCI) ;Ubiquitous and mobile computing theory, con-
cepts and paradigms ;•Computing methodologies →Artifi-
cial intelligence; Machine learning.
KEYWORDS
Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence, Human Com-
puter Interaction, Artificial Intelligence
ACM Reference Format:
Albrecht Schmidt. 2020. Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence:
A Definition and Research Challenges . In International Conference on Ad-
vanced Visual Interfaces (AVI ’20), September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3399715.3400873
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become the buzzword of the last
decade. With strong advances in Machine Learning (ML), a range
of new applications have become possible and many others appear
to be within reach in the near future. Speech interaction, intelli-
gent assistants, and autonomous driving are just some examples.
In conferences, exploding in size, researchers in AI and ML have
demonstrated technical feasibility (e.g. fast and robust face recog-
nition techniques) and celebrated major scientific advances with
regard to gains in speed, recognition performance and precision,
sometimes even under real world conditions. The applications that
were enabled by these advances, received a mixed response from so-
ciety. On one side there is great excitement about new applications
(e.g. personal image search including names), but also fear about
the use of this technology against individuals and society (e.g. face
recognition for surveillance). This has stirred up the old question of
whether a technology is good or bad and raises concerns about the
bigger picture of responsibility.
There is an understanding that the advances seen in AI and ML
are only the beginning and that there will be more to come as our

==== Page 2 ====
AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy Schmidt, Albrecht
lives become increasingly digital. From a technical perspective, this
is truly exciting. From an individual as well as societal perspective,
there is a fear of competition between humans and AI. This fear
may be very concrete (and very realistic): is the job I am good at
easily be replaced by an intelligent agent? Or it may be very abstract
(and in my view not well founded at this point in time): will AI
take over control and dominate humankind. In general, there is the
hope that if we get it right, the majority of people could benefit
from the advances driven by AI. This is well summarized by the
following statement from the title page of [1]:
"Experts say the rise of artificial intelligence will make
most people better off over the next decade, but many
have concerns about how advances in AI will affect
what it means to be human, to be productive and to
exercise free will".
To focus on the human aspects of artificial intelligence, there are
several initiatives working towards a human centered AI as well as
towards making AI interactive and explainable. Examples include
the European Humane AI Project[ 4] and the Stanford Institute for
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence[3]. These initiatives bring
together researchers from different backgrounds, in particular from
artificial intelligence and human computer interaction but also from
social science, philosophy, and ethics. With the following definition
of “Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence” we hope to
start a more in-depth discussion on the goals of AI research and
the properties that we expect of future systems.
2 INTERACTIVE HUMAN CENTERED
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The term “Artificial Intelligence” is used in many different ways and
there is no clear definition. The term “Machine Learning” is more
technical and more specific, but here too finding a clear definition
is difficult. Even going one step back and looking for a definition of
“intelligence” it becomes clear that this also opens a philosophical
discussion.
Hence that the term “Interactive Human Centered Artificial
Intelligence” is in no way self-explaining. However, attempting to
defining this term can help to uncover what challenges we will face
when working towards an Interactive Human Centered Artificial
Intelligence. In the following I suggest a definition as a starting
point for further discussion.
2.1 Definition
AnInteractive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence is an
Artificial Intelligence that enables interactive exploration and ma-
nipulation in real time and is designed with a clear purpose for
human benefit while being transparent about who has control over
data and algorithms.
2.2 Properties
An “Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence” has the
following properties:
•Individuals can interact in real time with the algorithms,
models, and data and can manipulate and control all relevant
parameters.•The impact of changes and manipulations made by the user
can be observed in real time.
•In fast processes the speed can be reduced to allow interac-
tions, interventions, and manipulation.
•Individuals can interactively explore why and how specific
decisions are made and find out how changes in the parame-
ters, data, and models impact outcomes.
•It states how humans can benefit from the artificial intelli-
gence.
•It explains what risks the artificial intelligence poses for
individuals as well as on societal level.
•It is visible who has control of the artificial intelligence, in
particular who has the power over data, models, and algo-
rithms.
•It is visible what data, knowledge base, and information is
used or has been used to create and inform the artificial
intelligence.
With this definition and list of properties we aim to be inclusive
with regard to different technologies and to ensure that humans can
effectively explore and control how an AI works. We also ask that
the underlying goals that motivated the design be made transparent.
To verify that an AI is human centric it is essential to know the
design goals and who has control of the data and algorithms.
3 LEVELS OF ABSTRACTION AND
GRANULARITY OF CONTROL
Working with different levels of abstractions is one of the most
powerful methods in computer science. For creating an Interactive
Human Centered Artificial Intelligence abstractions and granular-
ity of control play a major role in understanding and controlling
systems.
3.1 Understanding Systems
Understanding an algorithm on a very abstract level is in many
cases straight forward and does not required in-depth knowledge.
For example, the explanation that a chat-bot has “learned” all the
responses people gave on Reddit to a certain question and compiles
its response based on this “knowledge” can be understood by virtu-
ally anyone. In most cases, this is explanation is good enough to
understand the behavior of the chat-bot. In specific cases, individ-
uals may want to dig deeper into the behavior, e.g. by looking at
knowledge representation or learned weights.
Arguing for open sourcing of code and models may be mislead-
ing as this limits comprehension to a very small set of people. To
understand systems that are built on current ML and AI techniques,
looking at the implementation of the algorithm, the models, or the
parameters of a trained network may provide little insight to even
an experienced AI researcher. An algorithmic level of understand-
ing, which we see in current AI explainability research, seems to
focus again on technological curiosity of the experts who really
want to understand how and why their neural networks works. But
this will add little to making AI understandable for end-users.
Looking at the design goals and the functionality that was imple-
mented with these techniques provides insights as to what outputs
can be expected. Hence we ask that not only the source code be
made publicly available, but also the design goals.

==== Page 3 ====
Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy
3.2 Staying in control
Control of our environment is of great importance for humans.
Being able to determine what should happen is strongly related
to self-determination and freedom of choice, and is ultimately a
basis for feeling safe. The granularity of control is however of
lesser importance. When going on a train or a plane we want to
decide where we want to go, we want to have control of the target
destination. In this case we are less concerned with the exact route
taken or from which runway we will take off. In a conventional
car there is a very fine-grained control. We have many choices, e.g.
where we drive on the road (e.g. more to the middle or closer to
the edge) or how fast we accelerate. Most of these choices are not
relevant in general and we may be happy to hand them off to an AI
that can handle the details of driving for us. As long as these choices
are not relevant to what we want to do (typically arriving safely
and in time at a certain place) we may not feel a loss of control –
as we still stay in control on a different level of abstraction.
To achieve this, we argue that we must fundamentally rethink
how we create systems that support humans. Requiring humans
to interact does not scale with ubiquitous computing technologies.
To overcome this problem, we have suggested a new interaction
paradigm: Intervention User Interfaces [ 8]. Here the idea is that
systems are well designed and run autonomously, but humans can
intervene operation at any time. In this paradigm, systems must
make their state observable and provide ways for humans to see
how to intervene and predict the outcome of their interventions.
4 A NEW MATERIAL FOR TOOLS?
Is AI and ML just another material for creating new tools? Is there
something fundamentally new when we can build systems based
on AI? It seems AI is in a tradition of other materials that have
changed human abilities and massively changed societies.
4.1 AI as basis for new tools?
Human history is an impressive account how tools have changed
abilities. The invention of the wheel has changed our ability to
transport things; changes in record keeping and writing tools fun-
damentally changed the human ability to remember things. We
could consider AI and ML as a new technological basis – as a mate-
rial for new tools – and that changes what tools can be made, see
figure 1.
In history we have name these epochs by the base material (e.g.
“stone age”, “bronze age” or “iron age”) and not by the tools that
were created. AI could therefore be a new material that advances
humankind. What tools we make out of it (good or bad) – an iron
shovel to dig large irrigation canals or a highly effective battle axe –
is obviously not a new question. It is interesting to see that epochs
are name on materials: “stone age”, “bronze age”, or “iron age”.
Whenreferring to oral cultures and societies that could read and
write we look at the impact of tools. With AI and ML the technical
and the societal aspects may be combined.
Also interesting in this historic reference is that once a material
was understood, the focus of the majority of people was on what to
create and achieve with the material. Only a few concentrated on
how to improve the materials. With regard to AI this would meanthat the next focus is not on a new algorithm or model, but on the
human ability to make use of it.
4.2 Automation vs. Augmentation vs.
Amplification
Automation vs. augmentation is an old but still highly relevant
discussion. In our work we added a further term: Amplification,
see [ 5] and [ 6]. This is to highlight that we aim for improving and
amplifying abilities at larger scale. With current technologies it
becomes harder to make a clear discrimination. In a simplistic view
we can see automation that serves a human need as augmentation,
potentially on a larger scale of granularity.
Smart tools are one example. A broom augments our ability
to sweep the floor. A manual vacuum cleaner is just advancing
this tool to augment the ability even further. What is a vacuum
cleaning robot? Is it just an advanced broom, where my need for
interaction and control is further reduced or is it an automation?
Here it becomes clear that this discrimination is in many cases no
longer helpful. The questions shift to how agency and control are
implemented and how this is manifested in the interaction between
humans and smart tools. In these cases, we off-load larger and larger
tasks to tools that are somehow intelligent.
We see similar developments in the space of cognitive and per-
ceptual support. AI technologies provide means for augmentation
or automation of cognitive and perceptual processes. Here too the
border between augmentation and automation is blurred. Already
Douglas Engelbart made a strong argument for keeping the human
in the loop, for Augmenting the Human intellect [ 2] rather than
for automation.
In the following we have several themes that show that there
are opportunities for more general benefits for humankind through
advances in AI. To highlight that this is an advancement we use
the term amplify rather than augment.
5 HOW DOES HUMANKIND BENEFIT FROM
AI?
Who benefits from AI? This question needs to be at the very center
of any technological advancement. So far, the novelty and techno-
logical progress provide enough excitement to put this question to
the back – even on a political level where large national investments
are made in AI. At the same time, it is apparent that some individu-
als and many companies have a clear understanding how they can
benefit from using AI and how their profits can be increased using
ML-based technologies. Related to this question is also who will
lose out from AI, and this too must be discussed and addressed.
5.1 Artificial Intelligence to Automate Mental
Routine Tasks
Digital technologies have provided new tools that are based on
automating routine tasks that are based on data. Examples are
searching in big data bases for specific content or matching data
from different sources. With AI there is a hope to automate routine
mental tasks, e.g. automating decision making or classification tasks.
In many areas this step is gradual rather than revolutionary. Text
processing tools provide new smart corrections, a search engine

==== Page 4 ====
AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy Schmidt, Albrecht
adds new features predicting what you look for, or a spreadsheet
suggests graphs you may want to create. One central question that
arises here is, what happens if we are not involved in routine mental
tasks anymore? Will we lose skills, or what skills will we lose? Is
this a bad thing or is this rather positive to free mental capabilities
for more important and relevant tasks? Another issue is whether
automation lead to more consistent behavior. Will it lead to less
variety (e.g. texts become more and more similar as keyboards sug-
gest next words or provide template texts for responses)? Research
here is still in its infancy and we have to address these questions
experimentally.
5.2 Artificial Intelligence to Amplify our
Perception
Using artificial intelligence, we can change what we see and hear.
This ranges from providing images that are processed to increase
the human ability to see specific things, be it a tumor in a tissue or
an enemy in the woods. AI can help to focus on the “right” things
by directing attention based on information extracted from the
environment. Another example is the use of sensors that are more
sensitive than human senses (e.g. hearing) or capture information
human senses can’t (e.g. thermal imagining) and processing these
signals for human perception. We have explored numerous research
probes in the context of the European project AMPLIFY [7].
On a higher level, perception can be aided by providing the right
amount of information to not overload the user or to provide it in
ways that can be more easily understood (e.g. reading interfaces).
This amplification of perception is in the tradition of optical
instruments (in particular the microscope and telescope), but with
using AI as the material to create the new tools. By literally making
things visible or perceivable that could not be seen before a new
level understanding is provided. Once things can be perceived (e.g.
bacteria in the example of the microscope), they fundamentally
change how we understand the world.
6 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO AMPLIFY
OUR MIND
Iron improved the strength of mechanical tools. Engines amplified
the physical strength of humans through powered machines. Writ-
ing and reading had a strong impact on the memory capabilities of
humans. With artificial intelligence we have the chance to create
a change for improving the abilities of the mind, similar to what
engines and motors have done for the body.
The ingenuity in amplifying physical strength was and is rooted
in the devices that are built around the motor. In many cases the
motor is very much exchangeable as the innovation lies in the
system or device. Relating this back to AI and ML, we can see that
it is important to have good algorithms and methods, but in order
to make it useful for human kind we have to find the innovations
that advance the abilities of individuals as well as of society.
6.1 Human Centered Training of Artificial
Intelligence
To truly advance what we can do with AI it is not enough to observe
the current world and learn from it. Scraping existing databases,document collections, or online forums is not a good idea, as we
have seen from several examples. Observing the world as it is, is not
enough. The question of how to transfer skills and knowledge to a
system is not as simple as collecting data, as each data collection is
biased. When training systems, humans will need to define goals
and aims, which may be on very high and abstract level. We will
always encode our values – explicitly through the algorithms and
methods, or implicitly through the selection of data. It is important
to make transparent exactly which values have been encoded as
this aids in understandability.
6.2 No Opting Out of Artificial Intelligence
I would expect that individuals as well as societies will realistically
have no opportunity to opt-out of using devices and interaction
with systems that are driven by AI. Not using AI will create major
disadvantages, as others will be faster, see things you do not see,
and will be able predict events long before you encounter them.
Opting out is like putting your head in the sand. Since opting out
is not a viable option, we need to ensure that AI is working for
humans and not against them.
Societies that will be effective in using AI and ML – by creating
products and services around them – will have major advantages
(and likely to dominate the others). The important part of this
statement is that it is not just the societies that have AI, but those
who are able to use it effectively to advance their cultures and
economies who will succeed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly conducted
within the Amplify project which
received funding from the Euro-
pean Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no.
683008).
REFERENCES
[1]Janna Anderson, Lee Rainie, and Alex Luchsinger. 2018. Artificial intelligence and
the future of humans. Pew Research Center 10 (2018).
[2]Douglas C Engelbart and William K English. 1968. A research center for augment-
ing human intellect. In Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer
conference, part I. 395–410.
[3]John Etchemendy Fei-Fei Li. 2020. Advancing AI research, education, policy, and
practice to improve the human condition. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from https:
//hai.stanford.edu/
[4]Paul Lukowicz. 2020. European Project Humane AI: Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from https://www.humane-ai.eu/
[5]Albrecht Schmidt. 2017. Augmenting human intellect and amplifying perception
and cognition. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16, 1 (2017), 6–10.
[6]Albrecht Schmidt. 2017. Technologies to amplify the mind. Computer 50, 10 (2017),
102–106.
[7]Albrecht Schmidt. 2020. European Project ERC AMPLIFY: Digital Technologies to
Amplify Human Perception (ERC Consolidator Grant no.683008). Retrieved August
20, 2020 from https://amp.ubicomp.net/
[8]Albrecht Schmidt and Thomas Herrmann. 2017. Intervention user interfaces: a
new interaction paradigm for automated systems. interactions 24, 5 (2017), 40–45.

