==== Page 1 ====
Statistics Surveys
Vol. 16 (2022) 1–85
ISSN: 1935-7516
https://doi.org/10.1214/21-SS133
Interpretable machine learning:
Fundamental principles and 10 grand
challenges∗
Cynthia Rudin, Chaofan Chen, Zhi Chen, Haiyang Huang, Lesia
Semenova, Chudi Zhong†
e-mail: cynthia@cs.duke.edu ;chaofan.chen@maine.edu ;zhi.chen1@duke.edu
haiyang.huang@duke.edu ;lesia.semenova@duke.edu ;chudi.zhong@duke.edu
Abstract: Interpretability in machine learning (ML) is crucial for high
stakes decisions and troubleshooting. In this work, we provide fundamen-
tal principles for interpretable ML, and dispel common misunderstandingsthat dilute the importance of this crucial topic. We also identify 10 technicalchallenge areas in interpretable machine learning and provide history andbackground on each problem. Some of these problems are classically impor-tant, and some are recent problems that have arisen in the last few years.
These problems are: (1) Optimizing sparse logical models such as decision
trees; (2) Optimization of scoring systems; (3) Placing constraints into gen-eralized additive models to encourage sparsity and better interpretability;(4) Modern case-based reasoning, including neural networks and match-ing for causal inference; (5) Complete supervised disentanglement of neural
networks; (6) Complete or even partial unsupervised disentanglement of
neural networks; (7) Dimensionality reduction for data visualization; (8)Machine learning models that can incorporate physics and other generativeor causal constraints; (9) Characterization of the “Rashomon set” of goodmodels; and (10) Interpretable reinforcement learning. This survey is suit-
able as a starting point for statisticians and computer scientists interested
in working in interpretable machine learning.
MSC2020 subject classiﬁcations :Primary 68T01; secondary 62-02.
Keywords and phrases: Interpretable machine learning, explainable ma-
chine learning.
Received March 2021.
Contents
I n t r o d u c t i o n .................................. 2
1 Sparse logical models: Decision trees, decision lists, decision sets . . . 11
2 S c o r i n gs y s t e m s............................... 16
3 G e n e r a l i z e da d d i t i v em o d e l s........................ 21
4 M o d e r nc a s e - b a s e dr e a s o n i n g ....................... 25
5 Complete supervised disentanglement of neural networks . . . . . . . . 31
arXiv:2103.11251
∗Partial support provided by grants DOE DE-SC0021358, NSF DGE-2022040, NSF CCF-
1934964, and NIDA DA054994-01.
†Equal contribution from C. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Huang, L. Semenova, and C. Zhong
1

==== Page 2 ====
2 C. Rudin et al.
6 Unsupervised disentanglement of neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7 Dimension reduction for data visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8 Machinelearningmodelsthatincorporatephysicsandothergenerative
o rc a u s a lc o n s t r a i n t s............................ 45
9 Characterization of the “Rashomon” set of good models . . . . . . . . 48
10 Interpretable reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
11 Problems that were not in our top 10 but are really important . . . . 58
1 2C o n c l u s i o n ................................. 61
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s ............................... 61
R e f e r e n c e s.................................... 61
Introduction
With widespread use of machine learning (ML), the importance of interpretabil-
ityhasbecomeclearinavoidingcatastrophicconsequences. Blackboxpredictive
models, which by deﬁnition are inscrutable, have led to serious societal prob-lems that deeply aﬀect health, freedom, racial bias, and safety. Interpretablepredictive models, which are constrained so that their reasoning processes aremore understandable to humans, are much easier to troubleshoot and to use in
practice. It is universally agreed that interpretability is a key element of trust
for AI models [ 304,257,235,17,287,278,42]. In this survey, we provide funda-
mental principles, as well as 10 technical challenges in the design of inherentlyinterpretable machine learning models.
Let us provide some background. A black box machine learning model is a
formula that is either too complicated for any human to understand, or pro-
prietary, so that one cannot understand its inner workings. Black box models
are diﬃcult to troubleshoot, which is particularly problematic for medical data.Black box models often predict the right answer for the wrong reason (the“Clever Hans” phenomenon), leading to excellent performance in training butpoor performance in practice [ 268,172,225,331,19,119]. There are numerous
other issues with black box models. In criminal justice, individuals may have
been subjected to years of extra prison time due to typographical errors in blackbox model inputs [ 317] and poorly-designed proprietary models for air quality
have had serious consequences for public safety during wildﬁres [ 203]; both of
these situations may have been easy to avoid with interpretable models. In caseswhere the underlying distribution of data changes (called domain shift, which
occurs often in practice), problems arise if users cannot troubleshoot the model
in real-time, which is much harder with black box models than interpretablemodels. Determining whether a black box model is fair with respect to gender orracial groups is much more diﬃcult than determining whether an interpretablemodel has such a bias. In medicine, black box models turn computer-aided deci-sions into automated decisions, precisely because physicians cannot understand
the reasoning processes of black box models. Explaining black boxes, rather
than replacing them with interpretable models, can make the problem worseby providing misleading or false characterizations [ 250,173,171], or adding un-

==== Page 3 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 3
necessary authority to the black box [ 253]. There is a clear need for innovative
machine learning models that are inherently interpretable.
There is now a vast and confusing literature on some combination of in-
terpretability and explainability. Much literature on explainability confounds it
with interpretability/comprehensibility, thus obscuring the arguments (and thusdetracting from their precision), and failing to convey the relative importanceand use-cases of the two topics in practice. Some of the literature discusses top-ics in such generality that its lessons have little bearing on any speciﬁc problem.
Some of it aims to design taxonomies that miss vast topics within interpretable
ML. Some of it provides deﬁnitions that we disagree with. Some of it evenprovides guidance that could perpetuate bad practice. Importantly, most of itassumes that one would explain a black box without consideration of whetherthere is an interpretable model of the same accuracy. In what follows,we providesome simple and general guiding principles of interpretable machine learning.
These are not meant to be exhaustive. Instead they aim to help readers avoid
common but problematic ways of thinking about interpretability in machinelearning.
The major part of this survey outlines a set of important and fundamental
technical grand challenges in interpretable machine learning. These are bothmodern and classical challenges, and some are much harder than others. They
are all either hard to solve, or diﬃcult to formulate correctly. While there
are numerous sociotechnical challenges about model deployment (that can bemuch more diﬃcult than technical challenges), human-computer interactionchallenges, and how robustness and fairness interact with interpretability, thosetopics can be saved for another day. We begin with the most classical and mostcanonical problems in interpretable machine learning: how to build sparse mod-
els for tabular data, including decision trees (Challenge #1) and scoring systems
(Challenge #2). We then delve into a challenge involving additive models (Chal-lenge #3), followed by another in case-based reasoning (Challenge #4), whichis another classic topic in interpretable artiﬁcial intelligence. We then move tomore exotic problems, namely supervised and unsupervised disentanglement of
concepts in neural networks (Challenges #5 and #6). Back to classical prob-
lems, we discuss dimension reduction (Challenge #7). Then, how to incorporatephysicsorcausalconstraints(Challenge#8).Challenge#9involvesunderstand-ing, exploring, and measuring the Rashomon set of accurate predictive models.Challenge #10 discusses interpretable reinforcement learning. Table 1provides
a guideline that may help users to match a dataset to a suitable interpretable
supervised learning technique. We will touch on all of these techniques in the
challenges.
General principles of interpretable machine learning
Our ﬁrst fundamental principle deﬁnes interpretable ML, following [ 250]:
Principle 1 An interpretable machine learning model obeys a domain-speciﬁc
set of constraints to allow it (or its predictions, or the data) to be more easily

==== Page 4 ====
4 C. Rudin et al.
Table 1
Rule of thumb for the types of data that naturally apply to various supervised learning
algorithms. “Clean” means that the data do not have too much noise or systematic bias.
“Tabular” means that the features are categorical or real, and that each feature is a
meaningful predictor of the output on its own. “Raw” data is unprocessed and has a complex
data type, e.g., image data where each pixel is a feature, medical records, or time series data.
Models Data type
decision trees / decision lists(rule lists) / decision sets somewhat clean tabular data with interactions, includ-ing multiclass problems. Particularly useful for cate-gorical data with complex interactions (i.e., more thanquadratic). Robust to outliers.
scoring systems somewhat clean tabular data, typically used in medicine
and criminal justice because they are small enough that
they can be memorized by humans.
generalized additive models(GAMs) continuous data with at most quadratic interactions,useful for large-scale medical record data.
case-based reasoning any data type (diﬀerent methods exist for diﬀerent data
types), including multiclass problems.
disentangled neural net-
worksdata with raw inputs (computer vision, time series, tex-tual data), suitable for multiclass problems.
understood by humans. These constraints can diﬀer dramatically depending on
the domain.
Atypicalinterpretablesupervisedlearningsetup,withdata {zi}i,andmodels
chosen from function class Fis:
min
f∈F1
n/summationdisplay
iLoss(f,zi)+C·InterpretabilityPenalty( f),subject to (*)
InterpretabilityConstraint( f),
where the loss function, as well as soft and hard interpretability constraints, are
chosentomatchthedomain.(Forclassiﬁcation zimightbe( xi,yi),xi∈Rp,yi∈
{−1,1}.) The goal of these constraints is to make the resulting model for its
predictions more interpretable. While solutions of ( *) would not necessarily be
suﬃciently interpretable to use in practice, the constraints would generally help
usﬁndmodelsthatwouldbeinterpretable(ifwedesignthemwell),andwemightalso be willing to consider slightly suboptimal solutions to ﬁnd a more usefulmodel. The constant Ctrades oﬀ between accuracy and the interpretability
penalty, and can be tuned, either by cross-validation or by taking into accountthe user’s desired tradeoﬀ between the two terms.
Equation ( *)can be generalizedto unsupervised learning, wherethe loss term
would simply be replaced by a loss term for the unsupervised problem, whetherit is novelty detection, clustering, dimension reduction, or another task.
Creating interpretable models can sometimes be much more diﬃcult than
creating black box models for many diﬀerent reasons including: (i) Solving theoptimization problem may be computationally hard, depending on the choice of
constraints and the model class F. (ii) When one does create an interpretable
model, one invariably realizes that the data are problematic and require trou-bleshooting, which slows down deployment (but leads to a better model). (iii)

==== Page 5 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 5
It might not be initially clear which deﬁnition of interpretability to use. This
deﬁnition might require reﬁnement, sometimes over multiple iterations with do-main experts. There are many papers detailing these issues, the earliest dating
from the mid-1990s [e.g., 157].
Interpretability diﬀers across domains just as predictive performance met-
rics vary across domains. Just as we might choose from a variety of perfor-mance metrics (e.g., accuracy, weighted accuracy, precision, average precision,precision@N, recall, recall@N, DCG, NCDG, AUC, partial AUC, mean-time-to-failure, etc.), or combinations of these metrics, we might also choose froma combination of interpretability metrics that are speciﬁc to the domain. We
may not be able to deﬁne a single best deﬁnition of interpretability; regardless,
if our chosen interpretability measure is helpful for the problem at hand, weare better oﬀ including it. Interpretability penalties or constraints can includesparsity of the model, monotonicity with respect to a variable, decomposibilityinto sub-models, an ability to perform case-based reasoning or other types ofvisual comparisons, disentanglement of certain types of information within the
model’s reasoning process, generative constraints (e.g., laws of physics), pref-
erences among the choice of variables, or any other type of constraint that isrelevant to the domain. Just as it would be futile to create a complete list ofperformance metrics for machine learning, any list of interpretability metricswould be similarly fated.
Our 10 challenges involve how to deﬁne some of these interpretability con-
straints and how to incorporate them into machine learning models. For tabular
data, sparsity is usually part of the deﬁnition of interpretability, whereas for
computer vision of natural images, it generally is not. (Would you ﬁnd a modelfor natural image classiﬁcation interpretable if it uses only a few pixels from theimage?) For natural images, we are better oﬀ with interpretable neural networksthat perform case-based reasoning or disentanglement, and provide us with avisual understanding of intermediate computations; we will describe these in
depth. Choices of model form (e.g., the choice to use a decision tree, or a spe-
ciﬁc neural architecture) are examples of interpretability constraints. For mostproblems involving tabular data, a fully interpretable model, whose full calcula-tionscanbeunderstoodbyhumanssuchasasparsedecisiontreeorsparselinearmodel, is generally more desirable than either a model whose calculations canonly be partially understood, or a model whose predictions (but not its model)
can be understood. Thus, we make a distinction between fully interpretable and
partially interpretable models, often preferring the former.
Interpretable machine learning models are not needed for all machine learn-
ing problems. For low-stakes decisions (e.g., advertising), for decisions where anexplanation would be trivial and the model is 100% reliable (e.g., “there is no le-sion in this mammogram” where the explanation would be trivial), for decisionswhere humans can verify or modify the decision afterwards (e.g., segmentation
of the chambers of the heart), interpretability is probably not needed.
1On the
1Obviously, this document does not apply to black box formulas that do not depend on
randomness in the data, i.e., a calculation of deterministic function, not machine learning.

==== Page 6 ====
6 C. Rudin et al.
other hand, for self-driving cars, even if they are very reliable, problems would
arise if the car’s vision system malfunctions causing a crash and no reason forthe crash is available. Lack of interpretability would be problematic in this case.
Our second fundamental principle concerns trust:
Principle 2 Despite common rhetoric, interpretable models do not necessarily
create or enable trust – they could also enable dis
trust. They simply allow users
todecidewhether to trust them. In other words, they permit a decision of trust,
rather than trust itself.
With black boxes, one needs to make a decision about trust with much less
information; without knowledge about the reasoning process of the model, itis more diﬃcult to detect whether it might generalize beyond the dataset. As
stated by Afnan et al .[4] with respect to medical decisions, while interpretable
AI is an enhancement of human decision making, black box AI is a replacementof it.
Animportantpointaboutinterpretablemachinelearningmodelsisthat there
is no scientiﬁc evidence for a general tradeoﬀ between accuracy and interpretabil-
itywhen one considers the full data science process for turning data into knowl-
edge. (Examples of such pipelines include KDD, CRISP-DM, or the CCC BigData Pipelines; see Figure 1,o r[95,51,7].) In real problems, interpretability
Fig 1. Knowledge Discovery Process. Figure adapted from [ 95].
is useful for troubleshooting, which leads to better accuracy, not worse. In that
sense, we have the third principle:
Principle 3 It is important not to assume that one needs to make a sacriﬁce
in accuracy in order to gain interpretability. In fact, interpretability often begetsaccuracy, and not the reverse. Interpretability versus accuracy is, in general, afalse dichotomy in machine learning.
Interpretability has traditionally been associated with complexity, and specif-

==== Page 7 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 7
ically, sparsity, but model creators generally would not equateinterpretability
with sparsity. Sparsity is often one component of interpretability, and a modelthat is suﬃciently sparse but has other desirable properties is more typical.
While there is almost always a tradeoﬀ of accuracy with sparsity (particularly
for extremely small models), there is no evidence of a general tradeoﬀ of ac-curacy with interpretability. Let us consider both (1) development and use ofML models in practice, and (2) experiments with static datasets; in neither casehave interpretable models proven to be less accurate.
Development and use of ML models in practice. A key example of the pitfalls
of black box models when used in practice is the story of COMPAS [ 224,258].
COMPAS is a black box because it is proprietary: no one outside of its design-ers knows its secret formula for predicting criminal recidivism, yet it is usedwidely across the United States and inﬂuences parole, bail, and sentencing de-
cisions that deeply aﬀect people’s lives [ 13]. COMPAS is error-prone because
it could require over 130 variables, and typographical errors in those variablesinﬂuence outcomes [ 317]. COMPAS has been explained incorrectly ,w h e r et h e
news organization ProPublica mistakenly assumed that an important variablein an approximation to COMPAS (namely race) was also important to COM-PAS itself, and used this faulty logic to conclude that COMPAS depends on
race other than through age and criminal history [ 13,258]. While the racial bias
of COMPAS does not seem to be what ProPublica claimed, COMPAS still hasunclear dependence on race . And worst, COMPAS seems to be unnecessarily
complicated as it does not seem to be any more accurate than a very sparse de-
cision tree [ 10,11] involving only a couple of variables. The story of COMPAS
is a key example simultaneously demonstrating many pitfalls of black boxes in
practice. And, it shows an example of when black boxes are unnecessary, but
used anyway.
Other systemic issues arise when using black box models in practice, or when
developing them as part of a data science process, that would cause them to beless accurate than an interpretable model. A full list is beyond the scope of this
survey, but an article that points out many serious issues that arise with black
box models in a particular domain is that of Afnan et al .[4], who discuss in
vitro fertilization (IVF). In modern IVF, black box models that have not beensubjected to randomized controlled trials determine who comes into existence.Afnan et al .[4] point out ethical and practical issues, ranging from the inabil-
ity to perform shared decision-making with patients, to economic consequences
of clinics needing to “buy into” environments that are similar to those where
the black box models are trained so as to avoid distribution shift; this is nec-essary precisely because errors cannot be detected eﬀectively in real-time usingthe black box. They also discuss accountability issues (“Who is accountablewhen the model causes harm?”). Finally, they present a case where a standardperformance metric (namely area under the ROC curve – AUC) has been mis-
construed as representing the value of a model in practice, potentially leading to
overconﬁdence in the performance of a black box model. Speciﬁcally, a reportedAUC was inﬂated by including many “obvious” cases in the sample over which

==== Page 8 ====
8 C. Rudin et al.
it was computed. If we cannot trust reported numerical performance results,
then interpretability would be a crucial remaining ingredient to assess trust.
In a full data science process, like the one shown in Figure 1, interpretability
plays a key role in determining how to update the other steps of the process for
the next iteration. One interprets the results and tunes the processing of thedata, the loss function, the evaluation metric, or anything else that is relevant,as shown in the ﬁgure. How can one do this without understanding how themodel works? It may be possible, but might be much more diﬃcult. In essence,
the messiness that comes with messy data and complicated black box models
causes lower quality decision-making in practice.
Let’s move on to a case where the problem is instead controlled, so that we
have a static dataset and a ﬁxed evaluation metric.
Static datasets. Most benchmarking of algorithms is done on static datasets,
where the data and evaluation metric are not cleaned or updated as a result of
a run of an algorithm. In other words, these experiments are not done as partof a data science process, they are only designed to compare algorithms in acontrolled experimental environment.
Even with static datasets and ﬁxed evaluation metrics, interpretable models
do not generally lead to a loss in accuracy over black box models. Even for deep
neural networks for computer vision, even on the most challenging of benchmark
datasets, a plethora of machine learning techniques have been designed that do
not sacriﬁce accuracy but gain substantial interpretability [333,53,158,58,12,
216].
Let us consider two extremes of data types: tabular data, where all vari-
ables are real or discrete features, each of which is meaningful (e.g., age, race,
sex, number of past strokes, congestive heart failure), and “raw” data, such as
images, sound ﬁles or text, where each pixel, bit, or word is not useful on itsown. These types of data have diﬀerent properties with respect to both machinelearning performance and interpretability.
For tabular data, most machine learning algorithms tend to perform similarly
in terms of prediction accuracy. This means it is often diﬃcult even to beat
logistic regression, assuming one is willing to perform minor preprocessing suchas creating dummy variables [e.g., see 61]. In these domains, neural networks
generally ﬁnd no advantage. It has been known for a very long time that verysimple models perform surprisingly well for tabular data [ 128]. The fact that
simple models perform well for tabular data could arise from the Rashomon
Eﬀect discussed by Leo Breiman [ 41]. Breiman posits the possibility of a large
Rashomon set, i.e., a multitude of models with approximately the minumumerror rate, for many problems. Semenova et al .[269] show that as long as a large
Rashomonsetexists,itismorelikelythatsomeofthesemodelsareinterpretable.
For raw data, on the other hand, neural networks have an advantage cur-
rently over other approaches [ 164]. In these raw data cases, the deﬁnition of
interpretability changes; for visual data, one may require visual explanations.
In such cases, asdiscussed earlierand inChallenges 4and 5, interpretable neuralnetworks suﬃce, without losing accuracy.

==== Page 9 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 9
These two data extremes show that in machine learning, the dichotomy be-
tween the accurate black box and the less-accurate interpretable model is false.The often-discussed hypothetical choice between the accurate machine-learning-
based robotic surgeon and the less-accurate human surgeon is moot once some-
one builds an interpretable robotic surgeon. Given that even the most diﬃcultcomputervisionbenchmarkscanbesolvedwithinterpretablemodels,thereisnoreason to believe that an interpretable robotic surgeon would be worse than itsblack box counterpart. The question ultimately becomes whether the Rashomon
set should permit such an interpretable robotic surgeon–and all scientiﬁc evi-
dence so far (including a large-and-growing number of experimental papers oninterpretable deep learning) suggests it would.
Our next principle returns to the data science process.
Principle 4 As part of the full data science process, one should expect both the
performance metric and interpretability metric to be iteratively reﬁned.
The knowledge discovery process in Figure 1explicitly shows these important
feedback loops. We have found it useful in practice to create many interpretablemodels (satisfying the known constraints) and have domain experts choose be-tween them. Their rationale for choosing one model over another helps to reﬁne
the deﬁnition of interpretability. Each problem can thus have its own unique
interpretability metrics (or set of metrics).
The ﬁfth principle is as follows:
Principle 5 For high stakes decisions, interpretable models should be used if
possible, rather than “explained” black box models.
Hence, this survey concerns the former. This is not a survey on Explainable
AI (XAI, where one attempts to explain a black box using an approximationmodel, derivatives, variable importance measures, or other statistics), it is a sur-vey onInterpretable Machine Learning (creating a predictive model that is not
a black box). Unfortunately, these topics are much too often lumped together
within the misleading term “explainable artiﬁcial intelligence” or “XAI” despitea chasm separating these two concepts [ 250]. Explainability and interpretability
techniques are not alternative choices for many real problems, as the recent sur-veys often imply; one of them (XAI) can be dangerous for high-stakes decisionsto a degree that the other is not.
Interpretable ML is not a subset of XAI. The term XAI dates from ∼2016,
and grew out of work on function approximation; i.e., explaining a black boxmodel by approximating its predictions by a simpler model [e.g., 70,69], or
explaining a black box using local approximations. Interpretable ML also has a(separate) long and rich history, dating back to the days of expert systems inthe 1950’s, and the early days of decision trees. While these topics may sound
similar to some readers, they diﬀer in ways that are important in practice.
Inparticular,therearemanyseriousproblemswiththeuseofexplainingblack
boxes posthoc, as outlined in several papers that have shown why explaining

==== Page 10 ====
10 C. Rudin et al.
black boxes can be misleading and why explanations do not generally serve their
intended purpose [ 250,173,171]. The most compelling such reasons are:
•Explanations for black boxes are often problematic and misleading, poten-
tially creating misplaced trust in black box models. Such issues with ex-planations have arisen with assessment of fairness and variable importance[258,82] as well as uncertainty bands for variable importance [ 113,97].
There is an overall diﬃculty in troubleshooting the combination of a blackbox and an explanation model on top of it; if the explanation model is
not always correct, it can be diﬃcult to tell whether the black box model
is wrong, or if it is right and the explanation model is wrong. Ultimately,posthoc explanations are wrong (or misleading) too often.One particular type of posthoc explanation, called saliency maps (alsocalled attention maps) have become particularly popular in radiology
and other computer vision domains despite known problems [ 2,53,334].
Saliency maps highlight the pixels of an image that are used for a predic-tion, but do not explain how the pixels are used. As an analogy, considera real estate agent who is pricing a house. A “black box” real estate agentwouldprovidethepricewithnoexplanation.A“saliency”realestateagentwould say that the price is determined from the roof and backyard, but
doesn’t explain how the roof and backyard were used to determine the
price. In contrast, an interpretable agent would explain the calculation indetail, for instance, using “comps” or comparable properties to explainhow the roof and backyard are comparable between properties, and howthese comparisons were used to determine the price. One can see from thisreal estate example how the saliency agent’s explanation is insuﬃcient.
Saliency maps also tend to be unreliable; researchers often report that dif-
ferent saliency methods provide diﬀerent results, making it unclear whichone (if any) actually represents the network’s true attention.
2
•Black boxes are generally unnecessary, given that their accuracy is gener-
ally not better than a well-designed interpretable model. Thus, explana-
tions that seem reasonable can undermine eﬀorts to ﬁnd an interpretable
model of the same level of accuracy as the black box.
•Explanations for complex models hide the fact that complex models are
diﬃcult to use in practice for many diﬀerent reasons. Typographical errorsin input data are a prime example of this issue [as in the use of COMPAS
2To clear possible confusion, techniques such as SHAP and LIME are tools for explaining
black box models, are not needed for inherently interpretable models, and thus do not belongin this survey. These methods determine how much each variable contributed to a prediction.Interpretable models do not need SHAP values because they already explicitly show what
variables they are using and how they are using them. For instance, sparse decision trees
and sparse linear models do not need SHAP values because we know exactly what variablesare being used and how they are used. Interpretable supervised deep neural networks thatuse case-based reasoning (Challenge #4) do not need SHAP values because they explicitlyreveal what part of the observation they are paying attention to, and in addition, how that
information is being used (e.g., what comparison is being made between part of a test image
and part of a training image). Thus, if one creates an interpretable model, one does not needLIME or SHAP whatsoever.

==== Page 11 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 11
in practice, see 317]. A model with 130 hand-typed inputs is more error-
prone than one involving 5 hand-typed inputs.
Inthatsense, explainability methods are often used as an excuse to use a black
box model–whether or not one is actually needed . Explainability techniques give
authority to black box models rather than suggesting the possibility of modelsthat are understandable in the ﬁrst place [ 253].
XAI surveys have (thus far) universally failed to acknowledge the important
pointthatinterpretabilitybegetsaccuracywhenconsideringthefulldatascience
process, and not the other way around. Perhaps this point is missed because of
the more subtle fact that one does generally lose accuracy when approximatinga complicated function with a simpler one, so it would appear that the simplerapproximation is less accurate. (Again the approximations must be imperfect,otherwise one would throw out the black box and instead use the explanation asan inherently interpretable model.) But function approximators are not used in
interpretable ML; instead of approximating a known function (a black box ML
model), interpretable ML can choose from a potential myriad of approximately-equally-good models, which, as we noted earlier, is called “the Rashomon set”[41,97,269]. We will discuss the study of this set in Challenge 9. Thus, when
one explains black boxes, one expects to lose accuracy, whereas when one creates
an inherently interpretable ML model, one does not.
In this survey, we do not aim to provide yet another dull taxonomy of “ex-
plainability” terminology. The ideas of interpretable ML can be stated in justone sentence: an interpretable model is constrained, following a domain-speciﬁcset of constraints that make reasoning processes understandable. Instead, wehighlight important challenges, each of which can serve as a starting point for
someone wanting to enter into the ﬁeld of interpretable ML.
1. Sparse logical models: Decision trees, decision lists, decision sets
The ﬁrst two challenges involve optimization of sparse models. We discuss both
sparse logical models in Challenge #1 and scoring systems (which are sparse
linearmodels withintegercoeﬃcients) inChallenge#2. Sparsityisoftenused asa measure of interpretability for tabular data where the features are meaningful.Sparsity is useful because humans can handle only 7 ±2 cognitive entities at
t h es a m et i m e[ 208], and sparsity makes it easier to troubleshoot, check for
typographical errors, and reason about counterfactuals (e.g., “How would my
prediction change if I changed this speciﬁc input?”). Sparsity is rarely the only
consideration for interpretability, but if we can design models to be sparse, wecan often handle additional constraints. Also, if one can optimize for sparsity,a useful baseline can be established for how sparse a model could be with aparticular level of accuracy.
We remark that more sparsity does not always equate to more interpretabil-
ity. This is because “humans by nature are mentally opposed to too simplistic
representations of complex relations” [ 93,100]. For instance, in loan decisions,
we may choose to have several sparse mini-models for length of credit, history of

==== Page 12 ====
12 C. Rudin et al.
default, etc., which are then assembled at the end into a larger model composed
oftheresultsofthemini-models[see 54,whoattemptedthis].Ontheotherhand,
sparsity is necessary for many real applications, particularly in healthcare and
criminal justice where the practitioner needs to memorize the model.
Logical models, which consist of logical statements involving “if-then,” “or,”
and “and” clauses are among the most popular algorithms for interpretablemachine learning, since their statements provide human-understandable reasonsfor each prediction.
When would we use logical models? Logical models are usually an excellent
choice for modeling categorical data with potentially complicated interactionterms (e.g., “IF (female AND high blood pressure AND congenital heart fail-ure), OR (male AND high blood pressure AND either prior stroke OR age >
70) THEN predict Condition 1 = true”). Logical models are also excellent formulticlass problems. Logical models are also known for their robustness to out-
liers and ease of handling missing data. Logical models can be highly nonlinear,
and even classes of sparse nonlinear models can be quite powerful.
Figure2visualizes three logical models: a decision tree, a decision list, and
a decision set. Decision trees are tree-structured predictive models where each
branch node tests a condition and each leaf node makes a prediction. Decision
lists, identical to rule lists or one-sided decision trees, are composed of if-then-
else statements. The rules are tried in order, and the ﬁrst rule that is satisﬁed
makes the prediction. Sometimes rule lists have multiple conditions in eachsplit, whereas decision trees typically do not. A decision set ,a l s ok n o w na sa
“disjunction of conjunctions,” “disjunctive normal form” (DNF), or an “OR ofANDs” is comprised of an unordered collection of rules, where each rule is aconjunction of conditions. A positive prediction is made if at least one of the
rules is satisﬁed. Even though these logical models seem to have very diﬀerent
forms, they are closely related: every decision list is a (one-sided) decision treeand every decision tree can be expressed as an equivalent decision list (by listingeach path to a leaf as a decision rule). The collection of leaves of a decision tree(or a decision list) also forms a decision set.
Let us provide some background on decision trees. Since Morgan and Son-
quist [212] developed the ﬁrst decision tree algorithm, many works have been
proposed to build decision trees and improve their performance. However, learn-ing decision trees with high performance and sparsity is not easy. Full decisiontree optimization is known to be an NP-complete problem [ 174], and heuristic
greedy splitting and pruning procedures have been the major type of approach
since the 1980s to grow decision trees [ 40,239,192,205]. These greedy methods
for building decision trees create trees from the top down and prune them backafterwards.Theydonotgobacktoﬁxabadsplitifonewasmade.Consequently,the trees created from these greedy methods tend to be both less accurate andless interpretable than necessary. That is, greedy induction algorithms are notdesigned to optimize any particular performance metric, leaving a gap between
the performance that a decision tree might obtain and the performance that
the algorithm’s decision tree actually attains, with no way to determine howlarge the gap is (see Figure 3for a case where the 1984 CART algorithm did

==== Page 13 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 13
Fig 2. Predicting which individuals are arrested within two years of release by a decision
tree (a), a decision list (b), and a decision set (c). The dataset used here is the ProPublica
recidivism dataset [ 13].
not obtain an optimal solution, as shown by the better solution from a 2020
algorithm called “GOSDT,” to the right). This gap can cause a problem inpractice because one does not know whether poor performance is due to thechoice of model form (the choice to use a decision tree of a speciﬁc size) or pooroptimization (not fully optimizing over the set of decision trees of that size).When fully optimized, single trees can be as accurate as ensembles of trees, or
neural networks, for many problems. Thus, it is worthwhile to think carefully
about how to optimize them.
Fig 3. (a) 16-leaf decision tree learned by CART [ 40] and (b) 9-leaf decision tree generated by
GOSDT [ 185] for the classic Monk 2 dataset [ 88]. The GOSDT tree is optimal with respect
to a balance between accuracy and sparsity.
GOSDT and related modern decision tree methods solve an optimization

==== Page 14 ====
14 C. Rudin et al.
problem that is a special case of ( *):
min
f∈set of trees1
n/summationdisplay
iLoss(f,zi)+C·Number of leaves ( f),(1.1)
where the user speciﬁes the loss function and the trade-oﬀ (regularization) pa-
rameter.
Eﬀorts to fully optimize decision trees, solving problems related to ( 1.1),
have been made since the 1990s [ 28,85,94,220,221,131,185]. Many recent
papers directly optimize the performance metric (e.g., accuracy) with soft orhard sparsity constraints on the tree size, where sparsity is measured by the
number of leaves in the tree. Three major groups of these techniques are (1)
mathematical programming, including mixed integer programming (MIP) [seetheworksof 28,29,251,301,302,118,6]andSATsolvers[ 214,130][seealsothe
reviewof 47],(2)stochasticsearchthroughthespaceoftrees[e.g., 321,114,228],
and (3) customized dynamic programming algorithms that incorporate branch-and-boundtechniquesforreducingthesizeofthesearchspace[ 131,185,222,78].
Decision list and decision set construction lead to the same challenges as
decision tree optimization, and have a parallel development path. Dating backto1980s,decisionlistshaveoftenbeenconstructedinatop-downgreedyfashion.Associative classiﬁcation methods assemble decision lists or decision sets froma set of pre-mined rules, generally either by greedily adding rules to the model
one by one, or simply including all “top-scoring” rules into a decision set, where
each rule is scored separately according to a scoring function [ 247,63,188,
184,325,275,200,298,252,62,108,65,99,104,199,
198]. Sometimes decision
lists or decision sets are optimized by sampling [ 180,321,306], providing a
Bayesian interpretation. Some recent works can jointly optimize performancemetrics and sparsity for decision lists [ 251,327,10,11,8] and decision sets
[311,110,170,132,77,197,109,80,328,45]. Some works optimize for individual
rules [77,255].
In recent years, great progress has been made on optimizing the combination
of accuracy and sparsity for logical models, but there are still many challenges
that need to be solved. Some important ones are as follows:
1.1Can we improve the scalability of optimal sparse decision trees?
A lofty goal for optimal decision tree methods is to fully optimize treesas fast as CART produces its (non-optimal) trees. Current state-of-the-art
optimaldecisiontreemethodscanhandlemedium-sizeddatasets(thousands
of samples, tens of binary variables) in a reasonable amount of time (e.g.,within 10 minutes) when appropriate sparsity constraints are used. But howto scale up to deal with large datasets or to reduce the running time remainsa challenge.These methods often scale exponentially in p, the number of dimensions
of the data. Developing algorithms that reduce the number of dimensions
through variable screening theorems or through other means could be ex-tremely helpful.

==== Page 15 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 15
For methods that use the mathematical programming solvers, a good for-
mulation is key to reducing training time. For example, MIP solvers usebranch-and-bound methods, which partition the search space recursively
and solve Linear Programming (LP) relaxations for each partition to pro-
duce lower bounds. Small formulations with fewer variables and constraintscan enable the LP relaxations to be solved faster, while stronger LP relax-ations (which usually involve more variables) can produce high quality lowerbounds to prune the search space faster and reduce the number of LPs to
be solved. How to formulate the problem to leverage the full power of MIP
solvers is an open question. Currently, mathematical programming solversare not as eﬃcient as the best customized algorithms.For customized branch-and-bound search algorithms such as GOSDT andOSDT [185,131], there are several mechanisms to improve scalability: (1)
eﬀective lower bounds, which prevent branching into parts of the search
space where we can prove there is no optimal solution, (2) eﬀective schedul-
ing policies, which help us search the space to ﬁnd close-to-optimal solu-tions quickly, which in turn improves the bounds and again prevents usfrom branching into irrelevant parts of the space, (3) computational reuse,whereby if a computation involves a sum over (even slightly) expensivecomputations, and part of that sum has previously been computed and
stored, we can reuse the previous computation instead of computing the
whole sum over again, (4) eﬃcient data structures to store subproblemsthat can be referenced later in the computation should that subproblemarise again.
1.2Can we eﬃciently handle continuous variables? While decision trees
handle categorical variables and complicated interactions better than other
types of approaches (e.g., linear models), one of the most important chal-
lenges for decision tree algorithms is to optimize over continuous features.Many current methods use binary variables as input [ 131,185,301,222,78],
which assumes that continuous variables have been transformed into indi-cator variables beforehand (e.g., age >50). These methods are unable to
jointly optimize the selection of variables to split at each internal tree node,
the splitting threshold of that variable (if it is continuous), and the treestructure (the overall shape of the tree). Lin et al .[185] preprocess the data
by transforming continuous features into a set of dummy variables, withmany diﬀerent split points; they take split points between every orderedpair of unique values present in the training data. Doing this preserves opti-
mality, but creates a huge number of binary features, leading to a dramatic
increase in the size of the search space, and the possibility of hitting eithertime or memory limits. Some methods [ 301,222] preprocess the data using
an approximation, whereby they consider a much smaller subset of possiblethresholds, potentially sacriﬁcing the optimality of the solution [see 185,
Section 3, which explains this]. One possible technique to help with this
p r o b l e mi st ou s e similar support bounds, identiﬁed by Angelino et al .[11],
but in practice these bounds have been hard to implement because checkingthe bounds repeatedly is computationally expensive, to the point where the

==== Page 16 ====
16 C. Rudin et al.
bounds have never been used (as far as we know). Future work could go
into improving the determination of when to check these bounds, or prov-ing that a subset of all possible dummy variables still preserves closeness to
optimality.
1.3Can we handle constraints more gracefully? Particularly for greedy
methods that create trees using local decisions, it is diﬃcult to enforceglobalconstraintsontheoveralltree.Giventhatdomain-speciﬁc constraintsmay be essential for interpretability, an important challenge is to deter-
minehowtoincorporatesuch constraints. Optimization approaches (mathe-
matical programming, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound) are moreamenable to global constraints, but the constraints can make the prob-lem much more diﬃcult. For instance, falling constraints [306,55] enforce
decreasing probabilities along a rule list, which make the list more inter-pretable and useful in practice, but make the optimization problem harder,
even though the search space itself becomes smaller.
Example: Suppose a hospital would like to create a decision tree that will
be used to assign medical treatments to patients. A tree is convenient becauseit corresponds to a set of questions to ask the patient (one for each internalnode along a path to a leaf). A tree is also convenient in its handling of multiple
medicaltreatments;eachleafcouldevenrepresentadiﬀerentmedicaltreatment.
The tree can also handle complex interactions, where patients can be askedmultiple questions that build on each other to determine the best medication forthe patient. To train this tree, the proper assumptions and data handling weremade to allow us to use machine learning to perform causal analysis (in practicethese are more diﬃcult than we have room to discuss here). The questions
we discussed above arise when the variables are continuous; for instance, if
we split on age somewhere in the tree, what is the optimal age to split atin order to create a sparse tree? (See Challenge 1.2.) If we have many othercontinuous variables (e.g., blood pressure, weight, body mass index), scalabilityin choosing how to split them all becomes an issue. Further, if the hospitalhas additional preferences, such as “falling probabilities,” where fewer questions
should be asked to determine whether a patient is in the most urgent treatment
categories, again it could aﬀect our ability to ﬁnd an optimal tree given limitedcomputational resources (see Challenge 1.3).
2. Scoring systems
Scoring systems are linear classiﬁcation models that require users to add, sub-
tract, and multiply only a few small numbers in order to make a prediction.These models are used to assess the risk of numerous serious medical con-ditions since they allow quick predictions, without using a computer. Suchmodels are also heavily used in criminal justice. Table 2shows an example
of a scoring system. A doctor can easily determine whether a patient screens
positive for obstructive sleep apnea by adding points for the patient’s age,whether they have hypertension, body mass index, and sex. If the score is above

==== Page 17 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 17
a threshold, the patient would be recommended to a clinic for a diagnostic
test.
Scoring systems commonly use binary or indicator variables (e.g., age ≥60)
and point values (e.g., Table 2) which make computation of the score easier for
humans. Linear models do not handle interaction terms between variables likethelogicalmodelsdiscussedaboveinChallenge1.1,andtheyarenotparticularly
useful for multiclass problems, but they are useful for counterfactual reasoning:
if we ask “What changes could keep someone’s score low if they developedhypertension?” the answer would be easy to compute using point scores such as“4, 4, 2, 2, and -6.” Such logic is more diﬃcult for humans if the point scoresare instead, for instance, 53.2, 41.1, 16.3, 23.6 and -61.8.
Table 2
A scoring system for sleep apnea screening [ 295]. Patients that screen positive may need to
come to the clinic to be tested.
Patient screens positive for obstructive sleep apnea if Score >1
1. age ≥60 4p o i n t s ......
2. hypertension 4p o i n t s +......
3. body mass index ≥302p o i n t s +......
4. body mass index ≥402p o i n t s +......
5. female -6 points +......
Add points from row 1-5 Score =......
Risk scores are scoring systems that have a conversion table to probabilities.
For instance, a 1 point total might convert to probability 15%, 2 points to 33%
and so on. Whereas scoring systems with a threshold (like the one in Table 2)
would be measured by false positive and false negative rates, a risk score mightbe measured using the area under the ROC curve (AUC) and calibration.
The development of scoring systems dates back at least to criminal justice
work in the 1920s [ 44]. Since then, many scoring systems have been designed
for healthcare [ 154,152,153,38,175,14,107,211,274,315,286]. However,
none of the scoring systems mentioned so far was optimized purely using an
algorithm applied to data. Each scoring system was created using a diﬀerent
method involving diﬀerent heuristics. Some of them were built using domainexpertise alone without data, and some were created using rounding heuristicsfor logistic regression coeﬃcients and other manual feature selection approachesto obtain integer-valued point scores [see, e.g., 175].
Such scoring systems could be optimized using a combination of the user’s
preferences (and constraints) and data. This optimization should ideally be ac-complished by a computer, leaving the domain expert only to specify the prob-lem. However, jointly optimizing for predictive performance, sparsity, and other
user constraints may not be an easy task. Equation ( 2.1) shows an example of
a generic optimization problem for creating a scoring system:
min
f∈F1
n/summationdisplay
iLoss(f,zi)+C·Number of nonzero terms ( f),subject to

==== Page 18 ====
18 C. Rudin et al.
fis a linear model, f(x)=p/summationdisplay
j=1λjxj,
with small integer coeﬃcients, ∀j, λj∈{ −10,−9,..,0,..,9,10}
and additional user constraints. (2.1)
Here, the user would specify the loss function (logistic loss, etc.), the tradeoﬀ
parameter Cbetween the number of nonzero coeﬃcients and the training loss,
and possibly some additional constraints, depending on the domain.
The integrality constraint on the coeﬃcients makes the optimization problem
verydiﬃcult. Theeasiest waytosatisfy these constraints is toﬁt realcoeﬃcients
(e.g., run logistic regression, perhaps with /lscript1regularization) and then round
these real coeﬃcients to integers. However, rounding can go against the lossgradient and ruin predictive performance. Here is an example of a coeﬃcientvector that illustrates why rounding might not work:
[5.3,6.1,0.31,0.30,0.25,0.25,0.24,...,0.05]→(rounding) →[5,6,0,0,...,0].
When rounding, we lose all signal coming from all variables except the ﬁrst
two. The contribution from the eliminated variables may together be signiﬁcanteven if each individual coeﬃcient is small, in which case, we lose predictive
performance.
Compounding the issue with rounding is the fact that /lscript
1regularization in-
troduces a strong bias for very sparse problems. To understand why, considerthat the regularization parameter must be set to a very large number to get avery sparse solution. In that case, the /lscript
1regularization does more than make
the solution sparse, it also imposes a strong /lscript1bias. The solutions disintegrate
in quality as the solutions become sparser, then rounding to integers only makes
the solution worse.
An even bigger problem arises when trying to incorporate additional con-
straints, as we allude to in ( 2.1). Even simple constraints such as “ensure pre-
cision is at least 20%” when optimizing recall would be very diﬃcult to satisfy
manually with rounding. There are four main types of approaches to building
scoring systems: i) exact solutions using optimization techniques, ii) approxi-mation algorithms using linear programming, iii) more sophisticated roundingtechniques, iv) computer-aided exploration techniques.
Exact solutions. There are several methods that can solve ( 2.1) directly [ 294,
291,292,293,256]. To date, the most promising approaches use mixed-integer
linear programming solvers (MIP solvers) which are generic optimization soft-ware packages that handle systems of linear equations, where variables can beeitherlinearorinteger.CommercialMIPsolvers(currentlyCPLEXandGurobi)are substantially faster than free MIP solvers, and have free academic licenses.MIP solvers can be used directly when the problem is not too large and when
the loss function is discrete or linear (e.g., classiﬁcation error is discrete, as it
takes values either 0 or 1). These solvers are ﬂexible and can handle a hugevariety of user-deﬁned constraints easily. However, in the case where the loss

==== Page 19 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 19
function is nonlinear, like the classical logistic loss/summationtext
ilog(1 + exp( −yif(xi))),
MIP solvers cannot be used directly. In that case, it is possible to use an algo-rithm called RiskSLIM [ 293] that uses sophisticated optimization tools: cutting
planes within a branch-and-bound framework, using “callback” functions to a
MIP solver. A major beneﬁt of scoring systems is that they can be used asdecision aids in very high stakes settings; RiskSLIM has been used to create amodel (the 2HELPS2B score) that is used in intensive care units of hospitals tomake treatment decisions about critically ill patients [ 281].
While exact optimization approaches provide optimal solutions, they strug-
gle with larger problems. For instance, to handle nonlinearities in continuouscovariates, these variables are often discretized to form dummy variables bysplitting on all possible values of the covariate (similar to the way continuousvariables are handled for logical model construction as discussed above, e.g.,create dummy variables for age <30, age<31, age<32, etc.). Obviously doing
this can turn a small number of continuous variables into a large number of
categorical variables. One way to reduce the size of the problem is to use onlya subset of thresholds (e.g., age <30, age<35, age<40, etc.), but it is possible
to lose accuracy if not enough thresholds are included. Approximation methodscan be valuable in such cases.
Approximate methods. Several works solveapproximate versions of ( 2.1), includ-
ingworksof[ 277,276,35,34,48].Theseworksgenerallyuseapiecewiselinearor
piecewise constant loss function, and sometimes use the /lscript
1norm for regulariza-
tion as a proxy for the number of terms. This allows for the possibility of solvinglinear programs using a mathematical programming solver, which is generallycomputationally eﬃcient since linear programs can be solved much faster than
mixed-integer programs. The main problems with approximation approaches is
that it is not clear how well the solution of the approximate optimization prob-lem is to the solution of the desired optimization problem, particularly whenuser-deﬁned constraints or preferences are required. Some of these constraintsmay be able to be placed into the mathematical program, but it is still not clear
whether the solution of the optimization problem one solves would actually be
close to the solution of the optimization problem we actually care about.
It is possible to use sampling to try to ﬁnd useful scoring systems, which can
be useful for Bayesian interpretations, though the space of scoring systems canbe quite large and hard to sample [ 251].
Sophisticated rounding methods. Keeping in mind the disadvantages to rounding
discussed above, there are some compelling advantages to sophisticated round-ing approaches, namely that they are easy to program and use in practice.Rounding techniques cannot easily accommodate constraints, but they can beused for problems without constraints, problems where the constraints are weakenough that rounding would not cause us to violate them, or they can be used
within the middle of algorithms like RiskSLIM [ 293] to help ﬁnd optimal solu-
tions faster. There are several variations of sophisticated rounding. Chevaleyreet al.[60] propose randomized rounding, where non-integers are rounded up or

==== Page 20 ====
20 C. Rudin et al.
down randomly. They also propose a greedy method where the sum of coef-
ﬁcients is ﬁxed and coeﬃcients are rounded one at a time. Sokolovska et al .
[277] propose an algorithm that ﬁnds a local minimum by improving the so-
lution at each iteration until no further improvements are possible. Ustun and
Rudin [293] propose a combination of rounding and “polishing.” Their rounding
method is called Sequential Rounding. At each iteration, Sequential Roundingchooses a coeﬃcient to round and whether to round it up or down. It makes thischoice by evaluating each possible coeﬃcient rounded both up and down, and
chooses the option with the best objective. After Sequential Rounding produces
an integer coeﬃcient vector, a second algorithm, called Discrete Coordinate De-scent (DCD), is used to “polish” the rounded solution. At each iteration, DCDchooses a coeﬃcient, and optimizes its value over the set of integers to obtaina feasible integer solution with a better objective. All of these algorithms areeasy to program and might be easier to deal with than troubleshooting a MIP
or LP solver.
Computer-aided exploration techniques. These are design interfaces where do-
main experts can modify the model itself rather than relying directly on opti-mizationtechniquestoencodeconstraints.Billietetal .[35,34]createdatoolbox
that allows users to make manual adjustments to the model, which could po-tentially help users design interpretable models according to certain types ofpreferences. Xie et al .[320] also suggest an expert-in-the-loop approach, where
heuristics such as the Gini splitting criteria can be used to help discretize con-
tinuous variables. Again, with these approaches, the domain expert must knowhow they want the model to depend on its variables, rather than consideringoverall performance optimization.
2.1Improve the scalability of optimal sparse scoring systems: As dis-
cussed, for scoring systems, the only practical approaches that produce op-timal scoring systems require a MIP solver, and these approaches may notbe able to scale to large problems, or optimally handle continuous vari-
ables. Current state-of-the-art methods for optimal scoring systems (like
RiskSLIM) can deal with a dataset with about thousands of samples andtens of variables within an hour. However, an hour is quite long if one wantsto adjust constraints and rerun it several times. How to scale up to largedatasets or to reduce solving time remains a challenge, particularly whenincluding complicated sets of constraints.
2.2Ease of constraint elicitation and handling: Since domain experts
often do not know the full set of constraints they might want to use in ad-vance, and since they also might want to adjust the model manually [ 34],
a more holistic approach to scoring systems design might be useful. Thereare many ways to cast the problem of scoring system design with feedbackfrom domain experts. For instance, if we had better ways of representing
and exploring the Rashomon set (see Challenge 9), domain experts might
be able to search within it eﬀectively, without fear of leaving that set andproducing a suboptimal model. If we knew domain experts’ views about the

==== Page 21 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 21
importance of features, we should be able to incorporate that through regu-
larization[ 307].Betterinterfacesmightelicitbetterconstraintsfromdomain
experts and incorporate such constraints into the models. Faster optimiza-
tion methods for scoring systems would allow users faster turnaround for
creating these models interactively.
Example : A physician wants to create a scoring system for predicting seizures
in critically ill patients [similarly to 281]. The physician has upwards of 70
clinical variables, some of which are continuous (e.g., patient age). The physi-cian creates dummy variables for age and other continuous features, combinesthem with the variables that are already binarized, runs /lscript
1-regularized logis-
tic regression and rounds the coeﬃcients. However, the model does not look
reasonable, as it uses only one feature, and isn’t very accurate. The physician
thinks that the model should instead depend heavily on age, and have a falsepositive rate below 20% when the true positive rate is above 70% (see Chal-lenge 2.2). The physician downloads a piece of software for developing scoringsystems. The software reveals that a boosted decision tree model is much more
accurate, and that there is a set of scoring systems with approximately the
same accuracy as the boosted tree. Some of these models do not use age andviolate the physician’s other constraint, so these constraints are then added tothe system, which restricts its search. The physician uses a software tool tolook at models provided by the system and manually adjusts the dependenceof the model on age and other important variables, in a way that still main-
tains predictive ability. Ideally, this entire process takes a few hours from start
to ﬁnish (see Challenge 2.1). Finally, the physician takes the resulting modelinto the clinic to perform a validation study on data the model has not beentrained with, and the model is adopted into regular use as a decision aid forphysicians.
3. Generalized additive models
Generalizedadditivemodels(GAMs)wereintroducedtopresentaﬂexibleexten-
sion of generalized linear models (GLMs) [ 217], allowing for arbitrary functions
for modeling the inﬂuence of each feature on a response ([ 122], see also [ 318]).
The set of GAMs includes the set of additive models, which, in turn, includes
the set of linear models, which includes scoring systems (and risk scores). Figure4shows these relationships.
The standard form of a GAM is:
g(E[y]) =β
0+f1(x·1)+...+fp(x·p),
wherex·jindicates the jth feature, g(·) is a link function and the fi’s are
univariate component functions that are possibly nonlinear; common choices are
step functions and splines. If the link function g(·) is the identity, the expression
describes an additive model such as a regression model; if the link functionis the logistic function, then the expression describes a generalized additive

==== Page 22 ====
22 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 4. Hierarchical relationships between GAMs, additive models, linear models, and scoring
systems.
model that could be used for classiﬁcation. The standard form of GAMs is
interpretable because the model is constrained to be a linear combination ofunivariate component functions. We can plot each component function withf
j(x·j) as a function of x·jto see the contribution of a single feature to the
prediction. The left part of Figure 5shows all component functions of a GAM
(with no interactions) that predicts whether a patient has diabetes. The rightenlarged ﬁgure visualizes the relationship between plasma glucose concentrationafter 2 hours into an oral glucose tolerance test and the risk of having diabetes.
Fig 5. Left: All component functions of a GAM model trained using the interpret package
[223] on a diabetes dataset [ 88]; Right: zoom-in of component function for glucose concentra-
tion.
If the features are all binary (or categorical), the GAM becomes a linear
model and the visualizations are just step functions. The visualizations becomemore interesting for continuous variables, like the ones shown in Figure 5.I fa
GAM has bivariate component functions (that is, if we choose an f
jto depend
on two variables, which permits an interaction between these two variables), a
heatmapcanbeusedtovisualizethecomponentfunctiononthetwodimensionalplaneandunderstandthepairwiseinteractions[ 196].Asacomparisonpointwith

==== Page 23 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 23
decision trees, GAMs typically do not handle more than a few interaction terms,
and all of these would be quadratic (i.e., involve 2 variables); this contrastswith decision trees, which handle complex interactions of categorical variables.
GAMs, like other linear models, do not handle multiclass problems in a natural
way. GAMs have been particularly successful for dealing with large datasets ofmedical records that have many continuous variables because they can elucidatecomplex relationships between, for instance, age, disease and mortality. (Ofcourse, dealing with large raw medical datasets, we would typically encounter
serious issues with missing data, or bias in the labels or variables, which would
be challenging for any method, including GAMs.)
A component function f
jcan take diﬀerent forms. For example, it can be a
weighted sum of indicator functions, that is:
fj(x·j)=/summationdisplay
thresholds j/primecj,j/prime1[x·j>θj/prime]. (3.1)
If the weights on the indicator functions are integers, and only a small set of
weights are nonzero, then the GAM becomes a scoring system. If the indicators
are all forced to aim in one direction (e.g., 1[x·j>θj/prime] for all j/prime,w i t hn o
indicators in the other direction, 1[x·j<θj/prime]) and the coeﬃcients cj,j/primeare all
constrained to be nonnegative, then the function will be monotonic. In the casethat splines are used as component functions, the GAM can be a weighted sum
of the splines’ basis functions, i.e. f
j(x·j)=/summationtextKj
k=1βjkbjk(x·j).
There are many diﬀerent ways to ﬁt GAMs. The traditional way is to use
backﬁtting, where we iteratively train a component function to best ﬁt theresiduals from the other (already-chosen) components [ 122]. If the model is ﬁt-
ted using boosting methods [ 101,102,103], we learn a tree on each single feature
in each iteration and then aggregate them together [ 195]. Among diﬀerent es-
timations of component functions and ﬁtting procedures, Binder and Tutz [ 36]
found that boosting performed particularly well in high-dimensional settings,and Lou et al .[195] found that using a shallow bagged ensemble of trees on
a single feature in each step of stochastic gradient boosting generally achievedbetter performance.
We remark that GAMs have the advantage that they are very powerful,
particularly if they are trained as boosted stumps or trees, which are reliableout-of-the-box machine learning techniques. The AdaBoost algorithm also hasthe advantage that it maximizes convex proxies for both classiﬁcation error andarea under the ROC curve (AUC) simultaneously [ 254,72]. This connection
explains why boosted models tend to have both high AUC and accuracy. How-
ever, boosted models are not naturally sparse, and issues with bias arise under
/lscript
1regularization, as discussed in the scoring systems section.We present two interesting challenges involving GAMs:
3.1How to control the simplicity and interpretability for GAMs :T h e
simplicity of GAMs arises in at least two ways: sparsity in the number of
component functions and smoothness of the component functions. Imposingmonotonicity of the component functions also helps with interpretability

==== Page 24 ====
24 C. Rudin et al.
when we have prior knowledge, e.g., that risk increases with age. In the
case when component functions are estimated by splines, many works ap-ply convex regularizers (e.g., /lscript
1) to control both smoothness and sparsity
[186,245,206,324,234,194,262,121]. For example, they add “roughness”
penaltiesandlassotypepenaltiesonthe fj’sintheobjectivefunctiontocon-
trol both the smoothness of component functions and sparsity of the model.Similarly, if the f
j’s are sums of indicators, as in ( 3.1), we could regularize
to reduce the cj,j/primecoeﬃcients to induce smoothness. These penalties are
usually convex, therefore, when combined with convex loss functions, con-
vex optimization algorithms minimize their (regularized) objectives. Therecould be some disadvantages to this setup: (1) as we know, /lscript
1regulariza-
tion imposes a strong unintended bias on the coeﬃcients when aiming forvery sparse solutions. (2) Lou et al .[195] ﬁnd that imposing smoothness
may come at the expense of accuracy, (3) imposing smoothness may miss
important naturally-occurring patterns like a jump in a component func-
tion; in fact, they found such a jump in mortality as a function of age thatseems to occur around retirement age. In that case, it might be more in-terpretable to include a smooth increasing function of age plus an indicatorfunction around retirement age. At the moment, these types of choices arehand-designed, rather than automated.
As mentioned earlier, boosting can be used to train GAMs to produce ac-
curate models. However, sparsity and smoothness are hard to control withAdaBoost since it adds a new term to the model at each iteration.
3.2How to use GAMs to troubleshoot complex datasets? GAMs are
often used on raw medical records or other complex data types, and thesedatasets are likely to beneﬁt from troubleshooting. Using a GAM, we might
ﬁnd counterintuitive patterns; e.g., as shown in [ 49], asthma patients fared
better than non-asthma patients in a health outcomes study. Caruana etal.[49] provides a possible reason for this ﬁnding, which is that asthma
patients are at higher natural risk, and are thus given better care, leadingto lower observed risk. Medical records are notorious for missing important
information or providing biased information such as billing codes. Could
a GAM help us to identify important missing confounders, such as retire-ment eﬀects or special treatment for asthma patients? Could GAMs help usreconcile medical records from multiple data storage environments? Thesedata quality issues can be really important.
Example : Suppose a medical researcher has a stack of raw medical records and
would like to predict the mortality risk for pneumonia patients. The data arechallenging, including missing measurements (structural missingness as well asdata missing not at random, and unobserved variables), insurance codes thatdo not convey exactly what happened to the patient, nor what their state was.However, the researcher decides that there is enough signal in the data that it
could be useful in prediction, given a powerful machine learning method, such
as a GAM trained with boosted trees. There are also several important con-tinuous variables, such as age, that could be visualized. A GAM with a small

==== Page 25 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 25
number of component functions might be appropriate since the doctor can vi-
sualize each component function. If there are too many component functions(GAM without sparsity control), analyzing contributions from all of them could
be overwhelming (see Challenge 3.1). If the researcher could control the sparsity,
smoothness, and monotonicity of the component functions, she might be able todesign a model that not only predicts well, but also reveals interesting relation-ships between observed variables and outcomes. This model could also help usto determine whether important variables were missing, recorded inconsistently
or incorrectly, and could help identify key risk factors (see Challenge 3.2).
From there, the researcher might want to develop even simpler models, such
as decision trees or scoringsystems, foruse in the clinic (see Challenges 1 and 2).
4. Modern case-based reasoning
Case-based reasoning is a paradigm that involves solving a new problem using
known solutions to similar past problems [ 1]. It is a problem-solving strategy
that we humans use naturally in our decision-making processes [ 219]. For ex-
ample, when ornithologists classify a bird, they will look for speciﬁc featuresor patterns on the bird and compare them with those from known bird speciesto decide which species the bird belongs to. The interesting question is: can a
machine learning algorithm emulate the case-based reasoning process that we
humans are accustomed to? A model that performs case-based reasoning is ap-pealing, because by emulating how humans reason, the model can explain itsdecision-making process in an interpretable way.
The potential uses for case-based reasoning are incredibly broad: whereas
the earlier challenges apply only to tabular data, case-based reasoning applies
to both tabular and raw data, including computer vision. For computer vision
and other raw data problems, we distinguish between the feature extraction andprediction steps. The feature extraction can be veriﬁed by a human, and theprediction steps are simple calculations. That is, while a human may not under-standthemappingfromtheoriginalimagetothefeaturespace,theycanvisuallyverify that a particular interpretable concept/feature has been extracted. Then,
the features/concepts are combined to form a prediction, which is done via a
sparse linear combination, or another calculation that a human can understand.
Case-based reasoning has long been a subject of interest in the artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) community [ 246,160,120]. There are, in general, two types of
case-based reasoning techniques: (i) nearest neighbor-based techniques, and (ii)prototype-based techniques, illustrated in Figure 6. There are many variations
of each of these two types.
Fig 6. Case-based reasoning types. Left: Nearest neighbors (just some arrows are shown for
3-nearest neighbors). Right: Prototype-based reasoning, shown with two prototypes.

==== Page 26 ====
26 C. Rudin et al.
Nearest neighbor-based techniques. These techniques make a decision
for a previously unseen test instance, by ﬁnding training instances that mostcloselyresembletheparticulartestinstance(i.e.,thetraininginstancesthathave
thesmallest“distance”orthelargest“similarity”measurestothetestinstance).
A classic example of nearest neighbor-based techniques is k-nearest neighbors
(kNN) [98,68]. Traditionally, a kNN classiﬁer is non-parametric and requires no
trainingatall–givenapreviouslyunseentestinstance,a kNNclassiﬁerﬁndsthe
ktraining instances that have the smallest /lscript
2distances to the test instance, and
the class label of the test instance is predicted to be the majority label of those k
training instances. Many variants of the original kNN classiﬁcation scheme have
been developed in the 1970s and 80s [ 89,106,142,30]. Some later papers on
nearest neighbor-based techniques focused on the problem of “adaptive kNN,”
where the goal is to learn a suitable distance metric to quantify the dissimilaritybetween any pair of input instances (instead of using a pre-determined distance
metric such as the Euclidean /lscript
2distance measure), to improve the performance
of nearest neighbor-based techniques. For example, [ 316] proposed a method to
learn a parametrized distance metric (such as the matrix in a Mahalanobis dis-tance measure) for kNN. Their method involves minimizing a loss function on
the training data, such that for every training instance, the distance between thetraininginstanceandits“target”neighbors(ofthesameclass)willbeminimized
while the distance between the training instance and its “imposter” neighbors
(from other classes) will be maximized (until those neighbors are at least 1 dis-tance unit away from the training instance). More recently, there are works thatbegan to focus on “performing kNN in a learned latent space,” where the latent
space is often learned using a deep neural network. For example, Salakhutdinovand Hinton [ 264] proposed to learn a nonlinear transformation, using a deep
neural network that transforms the input space into a feature space where a
kNN classiﬁer will perform well (i.e., deep kNN). Papernot and McDaniel [ 229]
proposed an algorithm for deep kNN classiﬁcation, which uses the k-nearest
neighbors of a test instance from every hidden layer of a trained neural network.Card et al .[46] introduced a deep weighted averaging classiﬁer, which classiﬁes
an input based on its latent-space distances to other training examples.
We remark that the notion of “adaptive kNN” is mathematically the same as
“performing kNNinalearnedlatentspace.”Letusshowwhythatis.Inadaptive
kNN, we would learn a distance metric d(·,·) such that k-nearest neighbors
tends to be an accurate classiﬁer. The distance between points x
1andx2would
bed(x1,x2). For latent space nearest neighbor classiﬁcation, we would learn a
mapping φ:x→φ(x) from our original space to the latent space, and then
compute /lscript2distances in the latent space. That is, /bardblφ(x1)−φ(x2)/bardbl2. Equating
these two perspectives, we have d(x1,x2)=/bardblφ(x1)−φ(x2)/bardbl2. That is, the latent
space mapping acts as a transformation of the original metric so that /lscript2distance
works well for kNN.
As an aside, the problem of matching in observational causal inference also
can use case-based reasoning. Here treatment units are matched to similar con-
trol units to estimate treatment eﬀects. We refer readers to recent work on thistopic for more details [ 310,231].

==== Page 27 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 27
Prototype-based techniques. Despite the popularity of nearest-neighbor
techniques, those techniques often require a substantial amount of distance com-putations (e.g., to ﬁnd out the nearest neighbors of a test input), which can be
slow in practice. Also, it is possible that the nearest neighbors may not be par-
ticularly good representatives of a class, so that reasoning about nearest neigh-bors may not be interpretable. Prototype-based techniques are an alternative tonearest-neighbortechniquesthathaveneitherofthesedisadvantages.Prototype-based techniques learn, from the training data, a set of prototypical cases for
comparison. Given a previously unseen test instance, they make a decision by
ﬁnding prototypical cases (instead of training instances from the entire trainingset) that most closely resemble the particular test instance. One of the earliestprototype learning techniques is learning vector quantization (LVQ) [ 159]. In
LVQ, each class is represented by one or more prototypes, and points are as-signed to the nearest prototype. During training, if the training example’s class
agrees with the nearest prototype’s class, then the prototype is moved closer
to the training example; otherwise the prototype is moved further away fromthe training example. In more recent works, prototype learning is also achievedby solving a discrete optimization program, which selects the “best” prototypesfrom a set of training instances according to some training objective. For exam-ple, Bien and Tibshirani [ 33] formulated the prototype learning problem as a
set-cover integer program (an NP-complete problem), which can be solved using
standard approximation algorithms such as relaxation-and-rounding and greedyalgorithms. Kim et al .[145] formulated the prototype learning problem as an
optimization program that minimizes the squared maximum mean discrepancy,which is a submodular optimization problem and can be solved approximatelyusing a greedy algorithm.
Part-based prototypes. One issue that arises with both nearest neighbor
and prototype techniques is the comparison of a wholeobservation to another
wholeobservation.Thismakeslittlesense,forinstance,withimages,wheresome
aspects resemble a known past image, but other aspects resemble a diﬀerent im-age. For example, we consider architecture of buildings: while some architectural
elements of a building may resemble one style, other elements resemble another.
Another example is recipes. A recipe for a cheesecake with strawberry toppingmay call for part of a strawberry pancake recipe according to the typical prepa-ration for a strawberry sauce, while the cheesecake part of the recipe couldfollow a traditional plain cheesecake recipe. In that case, it makes more sense tocompare the strawberry cheesecake recipe to both the pancake recipe and the
plain cheesecake recipe. Thus, some newer case-based reasoning methods have
been comparing partsof observations to partsof other observations, by creating
comparisons on subsets of features. This allows case-based reasoning techniquesboth more ﬂexibility and more interpretability.
Kim et al .[146] formulated a prototype-parts learning problem for structured
(tabular) data using a Bayesian generative framework. They considered the
example (discussed above) of recipes in their experiments. Wu and Tabak [ 319]
used a convex combination of training instances to represent a prototype, wheretheprototypedoesnotnecessarilyneedtobeamemberofthetrainingset.Using

==== Page 28 ====
28 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 7. (a) Prototype-based classiﬁcation of the network from Li et al .[183]. The network
compares a previously unseen image of “6” with 15 prototypes of handwritten digits, learnedfrom the training set, and classiﬁes the image as a 6 because it looks like the three proto-types of handwritten 6’s, which have been visualized by passing them through a decoder from
latent space into image space. (b) Part-based prototype classiﬁcation of a ProtoPNet [ 53].
The ProtoPNet compares a previously unseen image of a bird with prototypical parts of aclay colored sparrow, which are learned from the training set. It classiﬁes the image as aclay colored sparrow because (the network thinks that) its head looks like a prototypical headfrom a clay-colored sparrow, its wing bars look like prototypical wing bars from a clay-colored
sparrow, and so on. Here, the prototypes do not need to be passed through a decoder, they are
images from the training set.
a convex combination of training examples as a prototype would be suitable for
some data types (e.g., tabular data, where a convex combination of real training
examples might resemble a realistic observation), but for images, averaging the
latent positions of units in latent space may not correspond to a realistic-lookingimage, which means the prototype may not look like a real image, which couldbe a disadvantage to this type of approach.
Recently, there are works that integrate deep learning with prototype- and
prototype-parts-based classiﬁcation. This idea was ﬁrst explored by Li et al .
[183] for image classiﬁcation. They created a neural network architecture that
contains an autoencoder and a special prototype layer, where each unit of thatlayer (i.e., a prototype) stores a weight vector that resembles some encodedtraininginput.Givenaninputinstance,thenetworkcomparestheencodedinputinstance with the learned prototypes (stored in the prototype layer), which can
be visualized using the decoder. The prediction of the network is based on the /lscript
2
distances between the encoded input instance and the learned prototypes. The
authors applied the network to handwritten digit recognition [MNIST, 177], and
the network was able to learn prototypical cases of how humans write digits byhand. Given a test image of a handwritten digit, the network was also able toﬁnd prototypical cases that are similar to the test digit (Figure 7(a)).
More recently, Chen et al .[53] extended the work of Li et al .[183] to create
aprototypical part network (ProtoPNet) whose prototype layer stores proto-

==== Page 29 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 29
typical parts of encoded training images. The prototypical parts are patches
of convolutional-neural-network-encoded training images, and represent typicalfeatures observed for various image classes. Given an input instance, the net-
work compares an encoded input image with each of the learned prototypical
parts, and generates a prototype activation map that indicates both the location
and the degree of the image patch most similar to that prototypical part. Theauthors applied the network to the benchmark Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011(CUB-200-2011) dataset [ 305] for bird recognition, and the ProtoPNet was able
to learn prototypical parts of 200 classes of birds, and use these prototypes to
classify birds with an accuracy comparable to non-interpretable black-box mod-els. Given a test image of a bird, the ProtoPNet was able to ﬁnd prototypicalparts that are similar to various parts of the test image, and was able to providean explanation for its prediction, such as “this bird is a clay-colored sparrow,because its head looks like that prototypical head from a clay-colored sparrow,
and its wingbars looklikethose prototypical wing bars from aclay-coloredspar-
row” (Figure 7(b)). In their work, Chen et al .[53] also removed the decoder, and
instead introduced prototype projection , which pushes every prototypical part
to the nearest encoded training patch of the same class for visualization. Thisimproved the visualization quality of the learned prototypes (in comparison tothe approach of Li et al .[183] which used a decoder).
These two works (i.e., [ 183,53]) have been extended in the domain of deep
case-based reasoning and deep prototype learning. In the image recognitiondomain, Nauta et al .[215] proposed a method for explaining what visual char-
acteristics a prototype (in a trained ProtoPNet) is looking for; Nauta et al .
[216] proposed a method for learning neural prototype trees based on a proto-
type layer; Rymarczyk et al .[260] proposed data-dependent merge-pruning of
the prototypes in a ProtoPNet, to allow prototypes that activate on similarlylooking parts from various classes to be pruned and shared among those classes.In the sequence modeling domain (such as natural language processing), Minget al.[209] and Hong et al .[129] took the concepts in [ 183]a n d[53], and inte-
gratedprototypelearningintorecurrentneuralnetworksformodelingsequential
data. Barnett et al .[21] extended the ideas of Chen et al .[53] and developed an
application to interpretable computer-aided digital mammography.
Despite the recent progress, many challenges still exist in the domain of case-
based reasoning, including:
4.1How to extend the existing case-based reasoning approach to han-
dling more complex data, such as video? Currently, case-based reason-
ing has been used for structured (tabular) data, static images, and simplesequences such as text. It remains a challenge to extend the existing case-based reasoning approach to handling more complex data, such as videodata, which are sequences of static images. While Trinh et al .[290] recently
extended the ideas in Chen et at .[53] and developed a dynamic prototype
network (DPNet) which learns prototypical video patches from deep-faked
and real videos, how to eﬃciently compare various videos and ﬁnd simi-lar videos (for either nearest-neighbor or prototype-based classiﬁcation) re-

==== Page 30 ====
30 C. Rudin et al.
mainsanopenchallengeforcase-basedvideoclassiﬁcationtasks.Performing
case-based reasoning on video data is technically challenging because of thehigh dimensionality of the input data. On the other hand, a video is an or-
deredcombinationofframesandwecantakeadvantageofthesequentialna-
ture of the data. For example, current algorithms can be reﬁned or improvedwith more information that comes from neighboring video frames; couldprototypes be designed from neighboring frames or parts of the frames?
4.2How to integrate prior knowledge or human supervision into pro-
totype learning? Current approaches to prototype learning do not take
into account prior knowledge or expert opinions. At times, it may be ad-vantageous to develop prototype-learning algorithms that collaborate withhuman experts in choosing prototypical cases or prototypical features. Forexample, in healthcare, it would be beneﬁcial if a prototype-based classi-ﬁer learns, under the supervision of human doctors, prototypical signs of
cancerous growth. For example, the doctors might prune prototypes, design
them, or specify a region of interest where the prototypes should focus. Suchhuman-machine collaboration would improve the classiﬁer’s accuracy andinterpretability, and would potentially reduce the amount of data needed totrain the model. However, human-machine collaboration is rarely exploredin the context of prototype learning, or case-based reasoning in general.
4.3How to troubleshoot a trained prototype-based model to improve
the quality of prototypes? Prototype-basedmodelsmakedecisionsbased
on similarities with learned prototypes. However, sometimes, the prototypesmay not be learned well enough, in the sense that they may not capturethe most representative features of a class. This is especially problematicfor part-based prototype models, because these models reason by compar-
ing subsets of features they deem important. In the case of a (part-based)
prototype model with “invalid” prototypes that capture non-representativeor undesirable features (e.g., a prototype of text in medical images, whichrepresents information that improves training accuracy but not test accu-racy), one way to “ﬁx” the model is to get rid of the invalid prototypes, but
this may lead to an imbalance in the number of prototypes among diﬀerent
classes and a bias for some classes that are over-represented with abundantprototypes. An alternative solution is to replace each undesirable prototypewith a diﬀerent prototype that does not involve the undesirable features.The challenge here lies in how we can replace undesirable prototypes sys-tematically without harming the model performance, and at the same time
improve the given model incrementally without retraining from scratch.
Example: Suppose that a doctor wants to evaluate the risk of breast cancer
among patients [see 21]. The dataset used to predict malignancy of breast can-
cer usually contains a set of mammograms, and a set of patient features (e.g.,age). Given a particular patient, how do we characterize prototypical signs of
cancerous growth from a sequence of mammograms taken at various times (this
is similar to a video, see Challenge 4.1)? How can a doctor supervise prototypelearning by telling a prototype-based model what (image/patient) features are

==== Page 31 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 31
typical of breast cancer (Challenge 4.2)? If a trained model contains a prototype
of “text” in the mammograms (such text could be doctor’s notes or patient IDsleft on some training images), how can we replace the unwanted prototype with
another prototype that is more medically relevant, without retraining the model
from scratch (Challenge 4.3)?
5. Complete supervised disentanglement of neural networks
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art predictive perfor-
mance for many important tasks [ 176]. DNNs are the quintessential “black box”
because the computations within its hidden layers are typically inscrutable. As a
result, there have been many works that have attempted to “disentangle” DNNs
in various ways so that information ﬂow through the network is easier to under-stand. “Disentanglement” here refers to the way information travels through thenetwork: we would perhaps prefer that all information about a speciﬁc concept(say “lamps”) traverse through one part of the network while information aboutanother concept (e.g., “airplane”) traverse through a separate part. Therefore,
disentanglement is an interpretability constraint on the neurons. For example,
suppose we hope neuron “neur” in layer lis aligned with concept c,i nw h i c h
case, the disentanglement constraint is
DisentanglementConstraint( c,neur,l) : Signal( c,neur) = Signal( c,l),(5.1)
where Signal( c,x) means the signal of concept cthat passes through x,w h i c h
measures similarity between its two arguments. This constraint means allsignal
about concept cin layerlwillonlypass through neuron neur. In other words,
using these constraints, we could constrain our network to have the kind of
“Grandmother node” that scientists have been searching for in both real andartiﬁcial convolutional neural networks [ 115].
In this challenge, we consider the possibility of fully disentangling a DNN
so that each neuron in a piece of the network represents a human-interpretable
concept.
The vector space whose axes are formed by activation values on the hidden
layer’s neurons is known as the latent space of a DNN. Figure 8shows an exam-
ple of what an ideal interpretable latent space might look like. The axes of thelatent space are aligned with individual visual concepts, such as “lamp,” “bed,”“nightstand,” “curtain.” Note that the “visual concepts” are not restricted to
objects but can also be things such as weather or materials in a scene. We hope
all information about the concept travels through that concept’s correspondingneuron on the way to the ﬁnal prediction. For example, the “lamp” neuron willbe activated if and only if the network thinks that the input image contains in-formation about lamps. This kind of representation makes the reasoning processof the DNN much easier to understand: the image is classiﬁed as “bedroom”
because it contains information about “bed” and “lamp.”
Suchalatentspace,madeofdisjointdatagenerationfactors,isadisentangled
latent space [ 26,123]. An easy way to create a disentangled latent space is just

==== Page 32 ====
32 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 8. Disentangled latent space. The axes (neurons) of the latent space are aligned with
supervised concepts, e.g. “lamp,” “bed,” “nightstand,” “curtain.” All information about theconcept up to that point in the network travels through that concept’s corresponding neuron.
to create a classiﬁer for each concept (e.g., create a lamp classiﬁer), but this
is not a good strategy: it might be that the network only requires the lightof the lamp rather than the actual lamp body, so creating a lamp classiﬁercould actually reduce performance. Instead, we would want to encourage the
information that is used about a concept (if any is used) to go along one path
through the network.
Disentanglement is not guaranteed in standard neural networks. In fact, in-
formation about any concept could be scattered throughout the latent space of
a standard DNN. For example, post hoc analyses on neurons of standard con-volutional neural networks [ 336,337] show that concepts that are completely
unrelated could be activated on the same axis, as shown in Figure 9.E v e ni fw e
create a vector in the latent space that is aimed towards a single concept [as isdone in147,338], that vector could activate highly on multiple concepts, which
means the signal for the two concepts is not disentangled. In that sense, vectors
in the latent space are “impure” in that they do not naturally represent singleconcepts [see 58, for a detailed discussion].
This challenge focuses on supervised disentanglement of neural networks, i.e.,
the researcher speciﬁes which concepts to disentangle in the latent space. (In thenext section we will discuss unsupervised disentanglement.) Earlier work in thisdomain disentangles the latent space for speciﬁc applications, such as face recog-nition, where we might aim to separate identity and pose [ 341]. Recent work
in this area aims to disentangle the latent space with respect to a collection of
predeﬁned concepts [ 58,158,193,3]. For example, Chen et al .[58] adds con-
straints to the latent space to decorrelate the concepts and align them with axesin the latent space; this is called “concept whitening.” (One could think of this

==== Page 33 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 33
Fig 9. Example of an impure neuron in standard neural network from [ 337]. This ﬁgure shows
images that highly activate this neuron. Both dining tables (green) and Greek-style buildings(red) are highly activated on the neuron, even though these two concepts are unrelated.
as analogous to a type of principal components analysis for neural networks.)
To deﬁne the concepts, a separate dataset is labeled with concept information(or the main training dataset could also serve as this separate dataset as longas it has labels for each concept.) These concept datasets are used to align thenetwork’s axes along the concepts. This type of method can create disentangledlatent spaces where concepts are more “pure” than those of a standard DNN,
without hurting accuracy. With the disentangled latent space, one can answer
questions about how the network gradually learns concepts over layers [ 58], or
one could interact with the model by intervening on the activations of con-cept neurons [ 158]. Many challenges still exist for supervised disentanglement
of DNNs, including:
5.1How to make a whole layer of a DNN interpretable? Current meth-
ods can make neurons in a single layer interpretable but all of them havelimitations. Several works [ 158,193,3] have tried to directly learn a con-
cept classiﬁer in the latent space. However, good discriminative power on
concepts does not guarantee concept separation and disentanglement [ 58].
That is, we could easily have our network classify all the concepts correctly,in addition to the overall classiﬁcation task, but this would not mean thatthe information ﬂow concerning each concept goes only though that con-cept’s designated path through the network; the activations of the diﬀerent
concept nodes would likely still be correlated. The method discussed earlier,
namely that of [ 58], can fully disentangle the latent space with respect to
a few pre-deﬁned concepts. But it also has two disadvantages if we want todisentangle all neurons in a layer, namely: (i) this method currently has agroupofunconstrainedneuronstohandleresidualinformation,whichmeansit does not disentangle all neurons in a layer, just some of them, and (ii) it
requires loading samples of all target concepts to train the latent space. If
the layer to be disentangled contains 500 neurons, we would need to loadsamples for all 500 concepts, which takes a long time. Perhaps the latterproblem could be solved by training with a small random subset of conceptsat each iteration; but this has not been tried in current methods at the timeof this writing. The ﬁrst problem might be solved by using an unsupervised
concept detector from Challenge 6 and having a human interact with the
concepts to determine whether each one is interpretable.
5.2How to disentangle all neurons of a DNN simultaneously? Current

==== Page 34 ====
34 C. Rudin et al.
methods try to disentangle at most a single layer in the DNN (that is, they
attempt only the problem discussed above). This means one could only in-terpret neurons in that speciﬁc layer, while semantic meanings of neurons
in other layers remain unknown. Ideally, we want to be able to completely
understand and modify the information ﬂowing through all neurons in thenetwork. This is a challenging task for many obvious reasons, the ﬁrst onebeing that it is hard practically to deﬁne what all these concepts couldpossibly be. We would need a comprehensive set of human-interpretable
concepts, which is hard to locate, create, or even to parameterize. Even if
we had this complete set, we would probably not want to manually specifyexactly what part of the network would be disentangled with respect toeach of these numerous concepts. For instance, if we tried to disentanglethe same set of concepts in all layers, it would be immediately problem-atic because DNNs are naturally hierarchical: high-level concepts (objects,
weather, etc.) are learned in deeper layers, and the deeper layers leverage
low-level concepts (color, texture, object parts, etc.) learned in lower layers.Clearly, complex concepts like “weather outside” could not be learned wellin earlier layers of the network, so higher-level concepts might be reservedfor deeper layers. Hence, we also need to know the hierarchy of the conceptsto place them in the correct layer. Deﬁning the concept hierarchy manually
is almost impossible, since there could be thousands of concepts. But how
to automate it is also a challenge.
5.3How to choose good concepts to learn for disentanglement? In su-
pervised disentanglement, the concepts are chosen manually. To gain usefulinsights from the model, we need good concepts. But what are good con-cepts in speciﬁc application domains? For example, in medical applications,
past works mostly use clinical attributes that already exist in the datasets.
However, Chen et al .[58] found that attributes in the ISIC dataset might
be missing the key concept used by the model to classify lesion malignancy.Active learning approaches could be incredibly helpful in interfacing withdomain experts to create and reﬁne concepts.
Moreover, it is challenging to learn concepts with continuous values. These
concepts might be important in speciﬁc applications, e.g., age of the patientand size of tumors in medical applications. Current methods either deﬁnea concept by using a set of representative samples or treat the concept as abinary variable, where both are discrete. Therefore, for continuous concepts,a challenge is how to choose good thresholds to transform the continuous
concept into one or multiple binary variables.
5.4How to make the mapping from the disentangled layer to the out-
put layer interpretable? The decision process of current disentangled
neural networks contains two parts, x→cmapping the input xto the
disentangled representation (concepts) c,a n dc→ymapping the disen-
tangled representation cto the output y. [The notations are adopted from
158]. All current methods on neural disentanglement aim at making the
cinterpretable, i.e., making the neurons in the latent space aligned with
human understandable concepts, but how these concepts combine to make

==== Page 35 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 35
the ﬁnal prediction, i.e., c→y, often remains a black box. This leaves a
gap between the interpretability of the latent space and the interpretabilityof the entire model. Current methods either rely on variable importance
methods to explain c→yposthoc [ 58], or simply make c→ya linear
layer [158]. However, a linear layer might not be expressive enough to learn
c→y.[158] also shows that a linear function c→yis less eﬀective than
nonlinear counterparts when the user wants to intervene in developing thedisentangled representation, e.g., replacing predicted concept values ˆ c
jwith
true concept values cj. Neural networks like neural additive models [ 5]a n d
neural decision trees [ 322] could potentially be used to model c→y,s i n c e
they are both diﬀerentiable, nonlinear, and intrinsically interpretable oncethe input features are interpretable.
Example: Suppose machine learning practitioners and doctors want to build
a supervised disentangled DNN on X-ray data to detect and predict arthritis.
First, they aim to choose a set of relevant concepts that have been assessed by
doctors (Challenge 5.3). They should also choose thresholds to turn continuousconcepts (e.g., age) into binary variables to create the concept datasets (Chal-lenge 5.3). Using the concept datasets, they can use supervised disentanglementmethods like concept whitening [ 58] to build a disentangled DNN. However, if
they choose too many concepts to disentangle in the neural network, loading
samples from all of the concept datasets may take a very long time (Challenge5.1). Moreover, doctors may have chosen diﬀerent levels of concepts, such asbone spur (high-level) and shape of joint (low-level), and they would like thelow-level concepts to be disentangled by neurons in earlier layers, and high-levelconcepts to be disentangled in deeper layers, since these concepts have a hi-
erarchy according to medical knowledge. However, current methods only allow
placing them in the same layer (Challenge 5.2). Finally, all previous steps canonlymakeneuronsintheDNNlatentspacealignedwithmedicalconcepts,whilethe way in which these concepts combine to predict arthritis remains uninter-pretable (Challenge 5.4).
6. Unsupervised disentanglement of neural networks
The major motivation of unsupervised disentanglement is the same as Challenge
5, i.e., making information ﬂow through the network easier to understand andinteract with. But in the case where we do not know the concepts, or in the
case where the concepts are numerous and we do not know how to parameter-
ize them, we cannot use the techniques from Challenge 5. In other words, theconceptcin Constraint ( 5.1) is no longer a concept we predeﬁne, but it must
still be an actual concept in the existing universe of concepts. There are situ-ations where concepts are actually unknown; for example, in materials science,the concepts, such as key geometric patterns in the unit cells of materials, have
generally not been previously deﬁned. There are also situations where concepts
are generally known but too numerous to handle; a key example is computervision for natural images. Even though we could put a name to many concepts

==== Page 36 ====
36 C. Rudin et al.
that exist in natural scenes, labeled datasets for computer vision have a severe
labeling bias: we tend only to label entities in images that are useful for a spe-ciﬁc task (e.g., object detection), thus ignoring much of the information found
in images. If we could eﬀectively perform unsupervised disentanglement, we can
rectify problems caused by human bias, and potentially make scientiﬁc discov-eries in uncharted domains. For example, an unsupervised disentangled neuralnetwork can be used to discover key patterns in materials and characterize theirrelation to the physical properties of the material (e.g., “will the material al-
low light to pass through it?”). Figure 10shows such a neural network, with
a latent space completely disentangled and aligned with the key patterns dis-covered without supervision: in the latent space, each neuron corresponds toa key pattern and all information about the pattern ﬂows through the corre-sponding neuron. Analyzing these patterns’ contribution to the prediction of adesired physical property could help material scientists understand what corre-
lates with the physical properties and could provide insight into the design of
new materials.
Fig 10. Neural network with unsupervised disentanglement in the latent space. The input (on
the left) is a unit cell of metameterial, made of stiﬀ (yellow) and soft (purple) constituentmaterials. The target of the neural network is predicting whether the material with unit cellon the left supports the formation of forbidden frequency bands of propagation, i.e. existenceof “band gaps.” Key patterns related to the band gap (illustrated in blue) have been discov-
ered without supervision. Neurons in the latent space are aligned with these patterns. Figure
adapted from [ 59].
Multiple branches of works are related to unsupervised disentanglement of
deep neural networks, and we will describe some of them.
Disentangled representations in deep generative models: Disentanglement of
generative models have long been studied [ 267,79]. Deep generative models such
as generative adversarial networks [GANs, 112] and variational auto-encoders
[VAE,149] try to learn a mapping from points in one probability distribution
to points in another. The ﬁrst distribution is over points in the latent space,
and these points are chosen i.i.d .according to a zero-centered Gaussian dis-
tribution. The second distribution is over the space from which the data are

==== Page 37 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 37
drawn (e.g., random natural images in the space of natural images). The statis-
tical independence between the latent features makes it easy to disentangle therepresentation [ 27]: a disentangled representation simply guarantees that know-
ing or changing one latent feature (and its corresponding concept) does not
aﬀect the distribution of any other. Results on simple imagery datasets showthat these generative models can decompose the data generation process intodisjoint factors (for instance, age, pose, identity of a person) and explicitly rep-resent them in the latent space, without any supervision on these factors; this
happens based purely on statistical independence of these factors in the data.
Recently, the quality of disentanglement in deep generative models has beenimproved [ 57,124]. These methods achieve full disentanglement without super-
vision by maximizing the mutual information between latent variables and theobservations. However, these methods only work for relatively simple imagerydata, such as faces or single 3D objects (that is, in the image, there is only one
object, not a whole scene). Learning the decomposition of a scene into groups of
objects in the latent space, for example, is not yet achievable by these deep gen-erative models. One reason for the failure of these approaches might be that theoccurrence of objects may not be statistically independent; for example, someobjects such as “bed” and “lamp” tend to co-occur in the same scene. Also, thesame type of object may occur multiple times in the scene, which cannot be
easily encoded by a single continuous latent feature.
Neural networks that incorporate compositional inductive bias: Another line
of work designs neural networks that directly build compositional structure intoa neural architecture. Compositional structure occurs naturally in computervision data, as objects in the natural world are made of parts. In areas thathave been widely studied beyond computer vision, including speech recognition,
researchers have already summarized a series of compositional hypotheses, and
incorporated them into machine learning frameworks. For example, in computervision, the “vision as inverse graphics” paradigm [ 23] tries to treat vision tasks
astheinverseofthecomputergraphicsrenderingprocess.Inotherwords,ittriesto decode images into a combination of features that might control rendering of
a scene, such as object position, orientation, texture and lighting. Many studies
on unsupervised disentanglement have been focused on creating this type of rep-resentation because it is intrinsically disentangled. Early approaches toward thisgoal includes DC-IGN [ 165] and Spatial Transformers [ 135]. Recently, Capsule
Networks [ 126,261] have provided a new way to incorporate compositional as-
sumptions into neural networks. Instead of using neurons as the building blocks,
Capsule Networks combine sets of neurons into larger units called “Capsules,”
and force them to represent information such as pose, color and location of ei-ther a particular part or a complete object. This method was later combinedwith generative models in the Stack Capsule Autoencoder (SCAE) [ 163]. With
the help of the Set Transformer [ 179] in combining information between layers,
SCAE discovers constituents of the image and organizes them into a smaller set
of objects. Slot Attention modules [ 191] further use an iterative attention mech-
anism to control information ﬂow between layers, and achieve better results onunsupervised object discovery. Nevertheless, similar to the generative models,

==== Page 38 ====
38 C. Rudin et al.
these networks perform poorly when aiming to discover concepts on more realis-
ticdatasets.Forexample,SCAEcanonlydiscoverstroke-likestructuresthatareuninterpretable to humans on the Street View House Numbers (SVHN) dataset
[218]( s e eF i g u r e 11). The reason is that the SCAE can only discover visual
structures that appear frequently in the dataset, but in reality the appearanceof objects that belong to the same category can vary a lot. There have beenproposals [e.g., GLOM 125] on how a neural network with a ﬁxed architecture
could potentially parse an image into a part-whole hierarchy. Although the idea
seems to be promising, no working system has been developed yet. There is still
a lot of room for development for this type of method.
Fig 11. Left: Sample images collected from the SVHN dataset [ 218]. Right: Stroke-like tem-
plates discovered by the SCAE. Although the objects in the dataset are mostly digits, currentcapsule networks are unable to discover them as concepts without supervision.
Works that perform unsupervised disentanglement implicitly : Many other in-
terpretable neural networks can also learn disjoint concepts in the latent space
although the idea of “disentanglement” is not explicitly mentioned in these pa-
pers. For example, as mentioned in Section 4,C h e ne ta l .[53] propose to create
a prototype layer, storing prototypical parts of training images, to do case basedreasoning.Whenclassifyingbirds,theprototypicalpartsareusuallyobjectpartssuch as heads and wings of birds. Interestingly, a separation cost is applied tothe learned prototypes to encourage diversity of the prototypical parts, which
is very similar to the idea of disentanglement. Zhang et al .[333]p r o p o s et o
maximize mutual information between the output of convolutional ﬁlters andpredeﬁned part templates (feature masks with positive values in a localized re-gion and negative in other places). The mutual information regularization termis essentially the sum of two disentanglement losses, (a) an inter-category en-tropy loss that encourages each ﬁlter to be exclusively activated by images of
one category and not activated on other categories; (b) a spatial entropy loss
that encourages each ﬁlter to be activated only on a local region of the image.Results show the convolutional ﬁlters with the mutual information loss tend

==== Page 39 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 39
to be activated only on a speciﬁc part of the object. These two methods are
capable of learning single objects or parts in the latent space but have not yetbeen generalized to handle more comprehensive concepts (such as properties of
scenes, including style of an indoor room – e.g., cozy, modern, etc., weather for
outdoor scenes, etc.), since these concepts are not localized in the images.
Despite multiple branches of related work targeting concept discovery in dif-
ferent way, many challenges still exist:
6.1How to quantitatively evaluate unsupervised disentanglement?
Recall that unsupervised disentanglement is desired (but challenging) intwo diﬀerent types of domains: (a) domains in which we do not know whatthe concepts are (e.g., materials science); (b) domains in which concepts areknown but labeling biases exist.Let us start with a version of case (b) where some concepts are known,
such as objects in natural images. Let us say we are just missing a subset
of concept labels in the dataset, which is a simple type of missing databias. If we build a neural network that disentangles the latent space, we canquantitatively evaluate the quality of disentanglement. For instance, let ussay we know a collection of concepts that we would like disentangled (say,a collection of speciﬁc objects that appear in natural images). If we use
an unsupervised algorithm for disentangling the space, and then evaluate
whether it indeed disentangled the known concepts, then we have a usefulquantitative evaluation [ 124,56,148,92,84].
If we are working in a domain where we do not know the concepts to disen-tangle (case (a)), we also might not know what regularization (or other typeof inductive bias) to add to the algorithm so that it can discover concepts
that we would ﬁnd interpretable. In that case, it becomes diﬃcult to eval-
uate the results quantitatively. Materials science, as discussed above, is anexample of one of these domains, where we cannot ﬁnd ground-truth labelsof key patterns, nor can we send queries to human evaluators (since evenmaterial scientists do not know the key patterns in many cases). Evaluation
metrics from natural images do not work. Evaluating disentanglement in
these domains is thus a challenge.Going back to case (b), in situations where labeling biases exist (i.e., whenonly some concepts are labeled, and the set of labels are biased), currentevaluation metrics of disentanglement that rely only on human annota-tions can be problematic. For instance, most annotations in current im-
agery datasets concern only objects in images but ignore useful information
such as lighting and style of furniture. An unsupervised neural network maydiscover important types of concepts that do not exist in the annotations.Medical images may be an important domain here, where some conceptsare clearly known to radiologists, but where labels in available datasets areextremely limited.
6.2How to adapt neural network architectures designed with compo-
sitional constraints to other domains?Incorporating compositional assumptions into network architecture design

==== Page 40 ====
40 C. Rudin et al.
is a way to create intrinsically interpretable disentangled representations.
Thatsaid,suchassumptionsareusuallymodality-andtask-speciﬁc,severelylimiting the general applicability for such designs. Let us take Capsule Net-
works [261] and the Slot Attention module [ 191] in the computer vision ﬁeld
as examples: these modules try to create object-centric and part-centric rep-resentations inside the latent space of the network. These ideas are based onthe assumption that an image can be understood as a composition of diﬀer-ent objects, and the interference between objects is negligible. Nevertheless,
such an assumption cannot necessarily be applied to materials science, in
which a material’s physical properties could depend jointly, in a complexway, on the patterns of constituent materials within it. How would we re-deﬁne the compositional constraints derived in computer vision for naturalimages to work for other domains such as materials science?
6.3How to learn part-whole disentanglement for more complicated
patterns in large vision datasets? A speciﬁc area within unsupervised
disentanglement in computer vision is to semantically segment the imageinto diﬀerent parts, where each part represents an object or a part of anobject [71,261,163,191]. Current networks can achieve convincing results
over simple, synthetic datasets (where objects consist of simple geometricshapes or digits). (Such datasets include CLEVR6, [ 137], d-Sprite, [ 202],
and Objects Room and Tetrominoes, [ 139].) However, no work has suc-
cessfully learned part-whole relationships on more realistic datasets such asImageNet. New techniques may be needed to handle various interactionsbetween diﬀerent objects in a real-world dataset.
Example: Suppose material scientists want to build a classiﬁcation model that
can predict whether the designs of metameterials support existence of band
gaps (same example as Figure 10). Because unit cells of metamaterials are usu-
ally represented as a matrix/tensor of what constituent materials are placed ateach location, the researchers plan to build a deep neural network, since neuralnetworks excel at extracting useful information from raw inputs. They might en-counter several challenges when building the disentangled neural network. First,
they need to identify the disentanglement constraints to build into the network
architecture. Architectures that work well for imagery data may not work forunit cells of metamaterials, since key patterns in unit cells can be completelydiﬀerent from objects/concepts in imagery data (Challenge 6.2 above). More-over, evaluation of disentanglement can be challenging as the material patterns
have no ground truth labels (Challenge 6.1 above).
7. Dimension reduction for data visualization
Even in data science, a picture is worth a thousand words. Dimension reduc-
tion (DR) techniques take, as input, high-dimensional data and project it down
to a lower-dimensional space (usually 2D or 3D) so that a human can better
comprehend it. Data visualization can provide an intuitive understanding of theunderlying structure of the dataset. DR can help us gain insight and build hy-

==== Page 41 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 41
potheses. DR can help us design features so that we can build an interpretable
supervised model, allowing us to work with high-dimensional data in a way wewould not otherwise be able to. With DR, biases or pervasive noise in the data
may be illuminated, allowing us to be better data caretakers. However, with
the wrong DR method, information about the high-dimensional relationshipsbetween points can be lost when projecting onto a 2D or 3D space.
DR methods are unsupervised ML methods that are constrained to be in-
terpretable. Referring back to our generic interpretable ML formulation ( *),
DR methods produce a function mapping data x
1,x2,...,xnfromp-dimensional
space to y1,y2, ...ynin a low dimensional space (usually 2D). The constraint of
mapping to 2 dimensions is an interpretability constraint. DR methods typically
have a loss function that aims to preserve a combination of distance informa-
tion between points and neighborhood information around each point whenprojecting to 2D. Each DR algorithm chooses the loss function diﬀerently. Eachalgorithmalsochoosesitsowndistanceorneighborhoodinformationtopreserve.
Fig 12. Visualization of the MNIST dataset [ 177] using diﬀerent kinds of DR methods: PCA
[232], t-SNE [ 297,187,236], UMAP [ 204], and PaCMAP [ 313]. The axes are not quantiﬁed
because these are projections into an abstract 2D space.
Generally speaking, there are two primary types of approaches to DR for
visualization, commonly referred to as local and global methods. Global meth-
ods aim mainly to preserve distances between any pair of points (rather thanneighborhoods), while the local methods emphasize preservation of local neigh-borhoods (that is, which points are nearest neighbors). As a result, local meth-ods can preserve the local cluster structure better, while failing to preserve the
overall layout of clusters in the space, and vice versa. Figure 12demonstrates
the diﬀerence between the two kinds of algorithms over the MNIST handwrittenﬁgure dataset [ 177], which is a dataset where local structure tends to be more
important than global structure. The only global method here, Principal Com-ponent Analysis (PCA) [ 232], fails to separate diﬀerent digits into clusters, but
it gives a sense of which digits are diﬀerent from each other. t-SNE [ 297], which
is a local method, successfully separated all the digits, but does not keep the
scale information that is preserved in the PCA embedding. More recent meth-ods, such as UMAP [ 204]a n dP a C M A P[ 313] also separated the digits while
preserving some of the global information.
Early approaches toward this problem, including PCA [ 232] and Multidi-
mensional Scaling (MDS) [ 289], mostly fall into the global category. They aim

==== Page 42 ====
42 C. Rudin et al.
to preserve as much information as possible from the high-dimensional space,
includingthedistancesorrankinformationbetweenpairsofpoints.Thesemeth-ods usually apply matrix decomposition over the data or pairwise distance ma-
trix, and are widely used for data preprocessing. These methods usually fail to
preserve local structure, including cluster structure.
To solve these problems, researchers later (early 2000s) developed methods
thataimedatlocalstructure,becausetheyhadknowledgethathighdimensionaldata lie along low-dimensional manifolds. Here, it was important to preserve the
local information along the manifolds. Isomap [ 285], Local Linear Embedding
(LLE) [249], Hessian Local Linear Embedding [ 87], and Laplacian Eigenmaps
[24] all try to preserve exact local Euclidean distances from the original space
when creating low-dimensional embeddings. But distances between points be-have diﬀerently in high dimensions than in low dimensions, leading to problemspreserving the distances. In particular, these methods tended to exhibit what
is called the “crowding problem,” where samples in the low-dimensional space
crowd together, devastating the local neighborhood structure and losing infor-mation. t-SNE [ 297] was able to handle this problem by transforming the high-
dimensional distances between each pair of points into probabilities of whetherthe two points should be neighbors in the low-dimensional space. Doing thisaims to ensure that local neighborhood structure is preserved. Then, during
the projection to low dimensions, t-SNE enforces that the distribution over dis-
tances between points in the low-dimensional space is a speciﬁc transformationof the distribution over distances between points in the high-dimensional space.Forcing distances in the low-dimensional space to follow a speciﬁc distributionavoids the crowding problem, which is when a large proportion of the distancesare almost zero.
Though more successful than previous methods, t-SNE still suﬀers from slow
running times, sensitivity to hyperparameter changes, and lack of preservationof global structure. A series of t-SNE variants aim to improve on these short-comings. The most famous among them are BH t-SNE [ 296] and FIt-SNE [ 187].
BH t-SNE constructs a k-nearest neighbor graph over the high dimensional
space to record local neighborhood structure, and utilizes the Barnes-Hut force
calculation algorithm [which is typically used for multi-body simulation; 20]
to accelerate optimization of the low-dimensional embedding. These choices re-duced the complexity for each step in the optimization from O(n
2), where nis
the number of samples in the dataset, to a smaller O(nlogn). FIt-SNE further
accelerates the rendering phase with a Fast Fourier Transform, and brings down
the complexity to O(n). Besides these variants, multiple new algorithms have
been created based on the framework of t-SNE. Prominent examples includeLargeVis [ 284], which is widely used in network analysis, and UMAP [ 204],
which is widely used in computational biology. With a better initialization cre-ated by unsupervised machine learning algorithms (such as spectral clustering)andbetter lossfunctions, thesealgorithmsimproveglobalstructurepreservation
and run-time eﬃciency. Figure 13demonstrates diﬀerences in results from DR
methods on a dataset of isotropic Gaussians. As the ﬁgure shows, the results ofdiﬀerent DR techniques look quite diﬀerent from each other. Recent studies on

==== Page 43 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 43
Fig 13. Visualization of 4000 points sampled from 20 isotropic Gaussians using Laplacian
Eigenmap [ 24,233], t-SNE [ 297,187,236], ForceAtlas2 [ 134], UMAP [ 204], TriMap [ 9]a n d
PaCMAP [ 313]. The 20 Gaussians are equally spaced on an axis in 50-dimensional space,
labelled by the gradient colors. The best results are arguably those of t-SNE and PaCMAP in
this ﬁgure, which preserve clusters compactly and their relative placement (yellow on the left,purple on the right).
DR algorithms shed light on how the loss function aﬀects the rendering of local
structure [ 37], and provide guidance on how to design good loss functions so
that the local and global structure can both be preserved simultaneously [ 313].
Nevertheless, several challenges still exists for DR methods:
7.1How to capture information from the high dimensional space more
accurately?Most of the recent DR methods capture information in the high dimensionalspace mainly from the k-nearest-neighbors and their relative distances, at
the expense of information from points that are more distant, which wouldallow the preservation of more global structure. Several works [ 314,64]d i s -
cuss possible pitfalls in data analysis created by t-SNE and UMAP due to
loss of non-local information. Recent methods mitigate the loss of global in-formation by using global-aware initialization [ 204,155] (that is, initializing
the distances in the low-dimensional space using PCA) and/or selectivelypreserving distances between non-neighbor samples [ 105,313]. Neverthe-
less, these methods are still designed and optimized under the assumption
that the nearest neighbors, deﬁned by the given metric (usually Euclidean
distance in the high dimensional space), can accurately depict the relation-ships between samples. This assumption may not hold true for some data,

==== Page 44 ====
44 C. Rudin et al.
for instance, Euclidean distance may not be suitable for measuring distances
between weights (or activations) of a neural network [see 50, for a detailed
example of such a failure]. We would like DR methods to better capture
information from the high dimensional space to avoid such pitfalls.
7.2How should we select hyperparameters for DR?
ModernDRmethods,duetotheirmulti-stagecharacteristics,involvealargenumberofhyperparameters,includingthenumberofhigh-dimensionalnear-est neighbors to be preserved in the low-dimensional space and the learn-
ing rate used to optimize the low-dimensional embedding. There are often
dozens of hyperparameters in any given DR method, and since DR meth-ods are unsupervised and we do not already know the structure of thehigh-dimensional data, it is diﬃcult to tune them. A poor choice of hy-perparameters may lead to disappointing (or even misleading) DR results.Fig14shows some DR results for the Mammoth dataset [ 133,64]u s i n g
t-SNE, LargeVis, UMAP, TriMAP and PaCMAP with diﬀerent sets of rea-
sonable hyperparameters. When their perplexity parameter or the numberof nearest neighbors is not chosen carefully, algorithms can fail to preservethe global structure of the mammoth (speciﬁcally, the overall placement ofthe mammoth’s parts), and they create spurious clusters (losing connectiv-ity between parts of the mammoth) and lose details (such as the toes on the
feet of the mammoth). For more detailed discussions about the eﬀect of dif-
ferent hyperparameters, see [ 314,64]. Multiple works [for example 25,313]
aimed to alleviate this problem for the most inﬂuential hyperparameters,but the problem still exists, and the set of hyperparameters remains data-dependent. The tuning process, which sometimes involves many runs of aDR method, is time and power consuming, and requires user expertise in
both the data domain and in DR algorithms. It could be extremely helpful
to achieve better automatic hyperparameter selection for DR algorithms.
7.3Can the DR transformation from high- to low-dimensions be made
more interpretable or explainable? The DR mapping itself – that is,
the transformation from high to low dimensions – typically is complex.
There are some cases in which insight into this mapping can be gained, for
instance, if PCA is used as the DR method, we may be able to determinewhich of the original dimensions are dominant in the ﬁrst few principlecomponents. It may be useful to design modern approaches to help usersunderstand how the ﬁnal two or three dimensions are deﬁned in terms of thehigh-dimensional features. This may take the form of explanatory post-hoc
visualizations or constrained DR methods.
Example: Computational biologists often apply DR methods to single-cell
RNA sequence data to understand the cell diﬀerentiation process and discoverpreviously-unknown subtypes of cells. Without a suitable way to tune parame-ters, they may be misled by a DR method into thinking that a spurious cluster
from a DR method is actually a new subtype of cell, when it is simply a failure
of the DR method to capture local or global structure (Challenge 7.2 above).Since tuning hyperparameters in a high-dimensional space is diﬃcult (with-

==== Page 45 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 45
Fig 14. Projection from [ 313] of the Mammoth dataset into 2D using t-SNE [ 297,187,236],
LargeVis [ 284], UMAP [ 204], TriMap [ 9] and PaCMAP [ 313]. Incorrectly-chosen hyperpa-
rameters will lead to misleading results even in a simple dataset. This issue is particularly
visible for t-SNE (ﬁrst two columns) and UMAP (fourth column). The original dataset is 3
dimensional and is shown at the top.
out the ground truth aﬀorded to supervised methods), the researchers have no
way to see whether this cluster is present in the high-dimensional data or not
(Challenge 7.1 above). Scientists could waste a lot of time examining each suchspurious cluster. If we were able to solve the problems with DR tuning andstructure preservation discussed above, it will make DR methods more reliable,leading to potentially increased understanding of many datasets.
8. Machine learning models that incorporate physics and other
generative or causal constraints
Thereisagrowingtrendtowardsdevelopingmachinelearningmodelsthatincor-
porate physics (or other) constraints. These models are not purely data-driven,in the sense that their training may require little data or no data at all [e.g.,244].Instead,thesemodelsaretrainedtoobservephysicallaws,oftenintheform
of ordinary (ODEs) and partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs). These physics-
guided models provide alternatives to traditional numerical methods (e.g., ﬁnite
element methods) for solving PDEs, and are of immense interest to physicists,chemists, and materials scientists. The resulting models are interpretable, in the

==== Page 46 ====
46 C. Rudin et al.
sense that they are constrained to follow the laws of physics that were provided
to them. (It might be easier to think conversely: physicists might ﬁnd that astandard supervised machine learning model that is trained on data from a
known physical system – but that does not follow the laws of physics – would
be uninterpretable.)
The idea of using machine learning models to approximate ODEs and PDEs
solutions is not new. Lee and Kang [ 178] developed highly parallel algorithms,
basedonneuralnetworks,forsolvingﬁnitediﬀerenceequations(whicharethem-
selves approximations of original diﬀerential equations). Psichogios and Ungar
[238] created a hybrid neural network-ﬁrst principles modeling scheme, in which
neural networks are used to estimate parameters of diﬀerential equations. La-garis et al .[168,169] explored the idea of using neural networks to solve initial
andboundaryvalueproblems.Severaladditionalworks[ 167,43,259]usedsparse
regression and dynamic mode decomposition to discover the governing equa-
tions of dynamical systems directly from data. More recently, Raissi et al .[242]
extended the earlier works and developed the general framework of a physics-
informed neural network (PINN). In general, a PINN is a neural network that
approximatesthesolutionofasetofPDEswithinitialandboundaryconditions.The training of a PINN minimizes the residuals from the PDEs as well as theresiduals from the initial and boundary conditions. In general, physics-guided
models (neural networks) can be trained without supervised training data. Let
usexplainhowthisworks.Givenadiﬀerentialequation,say, f
/prime(t)=af(t)+bt+c,
wherea,bandcare known constants, we could train a neural network gto ap-
proximate f, by minimizing ( g/prime(t)−ag(t)−bt−c)2at ﬁnitely many points t.
Thus, no labeled data in the form ( t,f(t)) (what we would need for conven-
tional supervised machine learning) is needed. The derivative g/prime(t) with respect
to input t(at each of those ﬁnitely many points tused for training) is found by
leveraging the existing network structure of gusing back-propagation. Figure
15illustrates the training process of a PINN for approximating the solution of
one-dimensional heat equation∂u
∂t=k∂2u
∂x2with initial condition u(x,0) =f(x)
and Dirichlet boundary conditions u(0,t)=0a n d u(L,t) = 0. If observed data
are available, a PINN can be optimized with an additional mean-squared-errorterm to encourage data ﬁt. Many extensions to PINNs have since been devel-oped, including fractional PINNs [ 226] and parareal PINNs [ 207]. PINNs have
been extended to convolutional [ 340] and graph neural network [ 270] backbones.
They have been used in many scientiﬁc applications, including ﬂuid mechanics
modeling [ 243], cardiac activation mapping [ 263], stochastic systems modeling
[323], and discovery of diﬀerential equations [ 241,240].
In addition to neural networks, Gaussian processes are also popular mod-
els for approximating solutions of diﬀerential equations. For example, Archam-beau et al .[16] developed a variational approximation scheme for estimating
the posterior distribution of a system governed by a general stochastic diﬀeren-
tial equation, based on Gaussian processes. Zhao et al .[335] developed a PDE-
constrained Gaussian process model, based on the global Galerkin discretizationof the governing PDEs for the wire saw slicing process. More recently, Pang et

==== Page 47 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 47
Fig 15. Physics-informed neural network (PINN) framework for solving the one-dimensional
heat equation∂u
∂t=k∂2u
∂x2with initial condition u(x,0) = f(x)and Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions u(0,t)=0and u(L, t)=0. Here, uis the model, which is the output of a neural network
(left), obeys the heat equation (upper right) and initial and boundary conditions (lower right).
The degree to which udoes not obey the heat equation or initial or boundary conditions is
reﬂected in the loss function.
al.[227] used the neural-network-induced Gaussian process (NNGP) regression
for solving PDEs.
Despite recent success of PINNs or physics-guided machine learning in gen-
eral, challenges still exist, including:
8.1How to improve training of a PINN? Wang et al .[308] discussed the
problem of numerical stiﬀness in gradient backpropagation during trainingof a PINN. To mitigate the problem, they proposed an algorithm to dynam-
ically balance various loss terms during training. How to further improve
training of a PINN is still an open challenge that needs to be addressed.
8.2How do we combine PINNs with optimal experimental/simulation
design to quickly reduce uncertainty in approximating physicalmodels? Currently, data that might be used for training PINNs are often
collected (from experiments or simulations) beforehand (i.e., prior to train-
ing of PINNs). This could lead to large uncertainty bands on areas of the
input domain where data are scarce, and when the parameters of the PDEneed to be learned from these data. Integrating experimental/simulationdesign with training of PINNs could lead to a more eﬃcient data collectionprocess and could reduce uncertainty of PINNs in approximating physicalmodels. However, how to achieve this is still an open question.
8.3Are there other ways of incorporating PDE (or other) constraints
into models other than neural networks? Neural networks can be
easily diﬀerentiated using the chain rule. This makes them ideal for ap-

==== Page 48 ====
48 C. Rudin et al.
proximating solutions to PDEs. Other models, especially non-parametric
regression models cannot be diﬀerentiated easily – even though there havebeen some works that used Gaussian processes for approximating solutions
to PDEs, these Gaussian-process solutions often rely on discrete (ﬁnite-
diﬀerence) approximations for the original PDEs [see 335], or they could be
non-diﬀerentiable at times where there are observations [see 16]. How one
can incorporate diﬀerential constraints (in terms of diﬀerential equations)into non-parametric regression models remains an open question.
Going beyond PDEs to other types of complex constraints that encode prior
knowledge, Kursuncu et al .[166] proposed the concept of knowledge infused
deep learning, where the learning of a deep neural network is guided bydomain knowledge represented as a knowledge graph. Knowledge graphsencode relationships between entities in the world, including common senseknowledge. Thus, being able to incorporate information from a knowledge
graph could be very helpful if we can ﬁgure out ways to do it eﬀectively.
Example: Suppose that a team of aerospace engineers wants to study the aero-
dynamics for a new design of aircraft wing. They want to use a physics-guidedmachine learning model to approximate a solution to the physical model (a setof PDEs), because numerically computing the PDE solution is computationally
expensive. They want to try diﬀerent machine learning models, but they need
to ﬁrst think about how they can integrate the PDE constraints into machinelearning models that are not easily diﬀerentiable with respect to input (Chal-lenge 8.3). If they use a PINN, they need to ensure that training does not suﬀerfrom gradient pathologies (Challenge 8.1). In addition, collecting data to sup-port training of a PINN by conducting experiments or running simulations can
be expensive. They want to know how to integrate experimental/simulation de-
sign with training of PINNs to achieve the best model (Challenge 8.2). How tointegrate constraints into various models, and how to improve training and toco-design experiments/simulations with model training are challenges that bur-den not only aerospace engineers but any scientist working with physics-guidedmachine learning models.
9. Characterization of the “Rashomon” set of good models
In many practical machine learning problems, there is a multiplicity of almost-
equally-accurate models. This set of high performing models is called the
Rashomon set , based on an observation of the Rashomon eﬀect by the statis-
tician Leo Breiman. The Rashomon eﬀect occurs when there are multiple de-scriptions of the same event [ 41] with possibly no ground truth. The Rashomon
set includes these multiple descriptions of the same dataset [and again, none ofthem are assumed to be the truth, see 269,97,86,201]. Rashomon sets occur
in multiple domains, including credit score estimation, medical imaging, nat-
ural language processing, health records analysis, recidivism prediction, model
explanations for planning and robotics, and so on [ 74,201,280]. We have dis-
cussed in Challenges 4 and 5 that even deep neural networks for computer

==== Page 49 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 49
vision exhibit Rashomon sets, because neural networks that perform case-based
reasoning on disentanglement still yielded models that were equally accurateto their unconstrained values; thus, these interpretable deep neural models are
within the Rashomon set. Rashomon sets present an opportunity for data scien-
tists: if there are many equally-good models, we can choose one that has desiredproperties that go beyond minimizing an objective function. In fact, the modelthat optimizes the training loss might not be the best to deploy in practiceanyway due to the possibilities of poor generalization, trust issues, or encoded
inductive biases that are undesirable [ 74]. More careful approaches to problem
formulation and model selection could be taken that include the possibility ofmodel multiplicity in the ﬁrst place. Simply put – we need ways to explore theRashomon set, particularly if we are interested in model interpretability.
Formally, the Rashomon set is the set of models whose training loss is below a
speciﬁc threshold, as shown in Figure 16(a). Given a loss function and a model
classF, the Rashomon set can be written as
R(F,f
∗,/epsilon1)={f∈Fsuch that Loss(f)≤Loss(f∗)+/epsilon1},
wheref∗can be an empirical risk minimizer, optimal model or any other refer-
ence model. We would typically choose Fto be complex enough to contain
models that ﬁt the training data well without overﬁtting. The threshold /epsilon1,
which is called the Rashomon parameter, can be a hard hyper-parameter set
by a machine learning practitioner or a percentage of the loss (i.e., /epsilon1becomes
/epsilon1/primeLoss(f∗)). We would typically choose /epsilon1or/epsilon1/primeto be small enough that suﬀering
this additional loss would have little to no practical signiﬁcance on predictiveperformance. For instance, we might choose it to be much smaller than the(generalization) error between training and test sets. We would conversely want
to choose /epsilon1or/epsilon1
/primeto be as large as permitted so that we have more ﬂexibility to
choose models within a bigger Rashomon set.
It has been shown by Semenova et al .[269] that when the Rashomon set is
large, under weak assumptions, it must contain a simple (perhaps more inter-pretable) model within it. The argument goes as follows: assume the Rashomonset is large, so that it contains a ball of functions from a complicated functionclassF
complicated (think of this as high-dimensional polynomials that are com-
plex enough to ﬁt the data well without overﬁtting). If a set of simpler functions
Fsimplercould serve as approximating set for Fcomplicated (think decision trees
of a certain depth approximating the set of polynomials), it means that eachcomplicated function could be well-approximated by a simpler function (andindeed, polynomials can be well-approximated by decision trees). By this logic,the ball of F
complicated that is within the Rashomon set must contain at least
one function within Fsimpler, which is the simple function we were looking for.
Semenova et al .[269] also suggested a useful rule of thumb for determining
whether a Rashomon set is large: run many diﬀerent types of machine learn-
ing algorithms (e.g., boosted decision trees, support vector machines, neural
networks, random forests, logistic regression) and if they generally perform sim-ilarly, it correlates with the existence of a large Rashomon set (and thus the

==== Page 50 ====
50 C. Rudin et al.
possibility of a simpler function also achieving a similar level of accuracy). The
knowledge that there might exist a simple-yet-accurate function before ﬁndingit could be very useful, particularly in the cases where ﬁnding an optimal sparse
model is NP-hard, as in Challenge 1. Here, the user would run many diﬀer-
ent algorithms to determine whether it would be worthwhile to solve the hardproblem of ﬁnding an interpretable sparse model.
The knowledge of the functions that lie within Rashomon sets sees value in
multiple interesting use cases. Models with various important properties be-sides interpretability can exist in the Rashomon set, including fairness [ 67]a n d
monotonicity. Thus, understanding the properties of the Rashomon set couldbe pivotal for analysis of a complex machine learning problem and its possiblemodeling choices.
Thesize of the Rashomon set can be considered as a way of measuring the
complexity of a learning problem . Problems with large Rashomon sets are less
complicated problems, since more good solutions exist to these problems. TheRashomon set is a property of the model class and dataset. The size of the
Rashomon set diﬀers from other known characterizations of the complexity in
machinelearning.Waysthatcomplexityoffunctionclasses,algorithms,orlearn-ing problems are typically measured in statistical learning theory include theVC dimension, covering numbers, algorithmic stability, Rademacher complexity,or ﬂat minima [see, for instance, 279,140,339,266,161,39,299]; the size of the
Rashomon set diﬀers from all of these quantities in fundamental ways, and it is
important in its own right for showing the existence of simpler models.
A useful way to represent the hypothesis for a problem is by projecting it
to variable importance space, where each axis represents the importance of a
variable. That way, a single function is represented by a point in this space (i.e.,
a vector of coordinates), where each coordinate represents how important avariable is to that model. (Here, variable importance for variable vis measured
bymodel reliance orconditional model reliance , which represents the change
in loss we would incur if we scrambled variable v.) The Rashomon set can be
represented as a subset of this variable importance space. Fisher et al .[97]u s e d
this representation to create a model independent notion of variable importance:
speciﬁcally, they suggest to consider the maximum and minimum of variableimportance across all models in the Rashomon set. This is called the ModelClass Reliance (MCR). For any user who would pick a “good” model (i.e., amodel in the Rashomon set), then the importance of the variable is within therange given by the MCR. Dong and Rudin [ 86] expand on this by suggesting
to visualize the “cloud” of variable importance values for models within the
Rashomon set. This cloud helps us understand the Rashomon set well enoughto choose a model we might ﬁnd interpretable.
Current research works have barely scratched the characterization and usage
of model multiplicity and Rashomon sets in machine learning. Exploring theRashomon set is critical if we hope to ﬁnd interpretable models within the setof accurate models. We ask the following questions about the Rashomon set:
9.1How can we characterize the Rashomon set? As discussed above, the

==== Page 51 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 51
Fig 16. (a) An illustration of a possible Rashomon set in two-dimensional hypothesis space.
Models from two local minima that are below the red plane belong to the Rashomon set. (b)
An illustration of a possible visualization of the Rashomon set. Models inside the shaded redregions belong to the Rashomon set. The plot is created as a contour plot of the loss over thehypothesis space. Green dots represent a few simpler models inside the Rashomon set. Thesemodels are simpler because they are sparse: they depend on one less dimension than other
models in the Rashomon set.
volume of the Rashomon set is a useful indirect indicator of the existence of
interpretablemodels.Therehavebeenseveralworksthatsuggestcomputingstatistics of the Rashomon set in parameter space, such as the volume in pa-rameterspace,whichiscalledthe Rashomon volume .TheRashomonvolume
orotherstatisticsthatcharacterizetheRashomonsetcanbecomputedmore
easily if the volume in parameter space has a single global minimum [ 127,
83,144,144,52]; these variations include /epsilon1-ﬂatness [ 127,83]a n d/epsilon1-sharpness
[144,83]. TheRashomon ratio provides some perspective on the size of the
Rashomon set, deﬁned as the ratio of the Rashomon volume to the volumeof the whole hypothesis space [ 269], assuming that both are bounded.
There are several problems that arise when computing the size of the
Rashomon set in parameter space. First, the volume of a set of functionscan be hard to compute or estimate, but there are ways to do it, includ-ing sampling (or analytical computation in some simple cases when thereis one minimum). Second, the choice of parameterization of the hypothe-sis space matters when working in parameter space. Overparametrization
or underparametrization can cause volumes in parameter space to be ar-
tiﬁcially made larger or smaller without a change in the actual space offunctions [ 83]. For instance, if we make a copy of a variable and include it
in the datasets, it can change the Rashomon ratio. A third but separateproblem with the Rashomon ratio is its denominator: the denominator isthe volume of all models we might reasonably consider before seeing the
data. If we change the set of models we might consider, we change the de-
nominator, and the ratio changes. And, because diﬀerent model spaces arediﬀerent, there might not be a way to directly compare the Rashomon ratios

==== Page 52 ====
52 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 17. A one-dimensional example of computation of the Rashomon ratio. The hypothesis
space consists of decision stumps f(x)={1[x≤a]},a∈[0,1]. (The function is 1ifx≤aand
0otherwise.) The loss function is the zero-one loss: loss (f,x,y)=1[f(x)=y], which is 1 if
the model makes a mistake and zero otherwise. A model fbelongs to the Rashomon set if/summationtext
iloss(f,xi,yi)≤0.2, that is, the model made 2mistakes. The Rashomon ratio in (a) is
equal to 0.4and is computed as the ratio of volumes of decision stumps in the Rashomon set
(blue shaded region) to the volume of all possible decision stumps in the area where data reside(blue and orange shaded region). The pattern Rashomon ratio in (b) is equal to 3/11and is
computed as the ratio of classiﬁers that belong to the Rashomon set (blue stumps, of which
there are 3 unique stumps with respect to the data) to the number of all possible classiﬁers(orange and blue stumps, of which there are 11). This ﬁgure shows that there are multipleways to compute the size of the Rashomon set and it is not clear which one to choose.
computed on diﬀerent hypothesis spaces to each other.
This brings us to another way to measure the Rashomon set: The pat-
tern Rashomon ratio [269,201], which could potentially be used to handle
some of these problems. The pattern Rashomon ratio considers unique pre-dictions on the data (called “patterns”) rather than the count of functionsthemselves. In other words, the pattern Rashomon ratio considers the countof predictions that could be made rather than a count of functions. Figure17illustrates the diﬀerence between the Rashomon ratio and the pattern
Rashomon ratio. The pattern Rashomon ratio has a ﬁxed denominator (all
possible patterns one could produce on the data using functions from theclass). A direct comparison of the pattern Rashomon ratio over functionclasses is meaningful. However, it is still diﬃcult to compute. It is also moresensitive to small shifts and changes in data.
Despite that multiple measures, including /epsilon1-ﬂatness, /epsilon1-sharpness, Rashomon
ratio, and pattern ratio, have been proposed to measure the size of theRashomon set, they do not provide a universal and simple-to-calculate wayof characterization the size of the Rashomon set. Many challenges to remainopen:
(a)What is a good space in which to measure the size of the
Rashomon set? What is a good measure of the size of theRashomon set? As discussed above, the parameter space suﬀers from

==== Page 53 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 53
issues with parameterization, but the pattern Rashomon ratio has its
own problems. Would variable importance space be suitable, whereeach axis represents the importance of a raw variable, as in the work
of Dong and Rudin [ 86]? Or is there an easier space and metric to work
with?
(b)Are there approximation algorithms or other techniques that
will allow us to eﬃciently compute or approximate the sizeof the Rashomon set? At worst, computation over the Rashomon
set requires a brute force calculation over a large discrete hypothesis
space. In most cases, the computation should be much easier. Perhapswe could use dynamic programming or branch and bound techniquesto reduce the search space so that it encompasses the Rashomon setbut not too much more than that? In some cases, we could actuallycompute the size of the Rashomon set analytically. For instance, for
linear regression, a closed-form solution in parameter space for the vol-
ume of the Rashomon set has been derived based on the singular valuesof the data matrix [ 269].
9.2What techniques can be used to visualize the Rashomon set? Visu-
alizationoftheRashomonsetcanpotentiallyhelpustounderstanditsprop-
erties, issues with the data, biases, or underspeciﬁcation of the problem. To
give an example of how visualization can be helpful in troubleshooting mod-els generally, Li et al .[181] visualized the loss landscape of neural networks
and, as a result, found answers to questions about the selection of the batchsize, optimizer, and network architecture. Kissel and Mentch [ 151]p r o p o s e d
a tree-based graphical visualization to display outputs of the model path
selection procedure that ﬁnds models from the Rashomon set based on a for-
ward selection of variables. The visualization helps us to understand the sta-bility of the model selection process, as well as the richness of the Rashomonset, since wider graphical trees imply that there are more models availablefor the selection procedure. To characterize the Rashomon set in variable
importance space, variable importance diagrams have been proposed [ 86],
which are 2-dimensional projections of the variable importance cloud .T h e
variable importance cloud is created by mapping every variable to its impor-
tance for every good predictive model (every model in the Rashomon set).Figure16(b) uses a similar technique of projection in two-dimensional space
and depicts the visualization of the example of the Rashomon set of Figure
16(a). This simple visualization allows us to see the Rashomon set’s layout,
estimate its size or locate sparser models within it. Can more sophisticatedapproaches be developed that would allow good visualization? The successofthese techniquesmostlikelywillhavetodepend onwhether wecandesigna good metric for the model class. After the metric is designed, perhaps wemight be able to utilize techniques from Challenge 7 for the visualization.
9.3What model to choose from the Rashomon set? When the Rashomon
setislarge,itcancontainmultipleaccuratemodelswithdiﬀerentproperties.Choosing between them might be diﬃcult, particularly if we do not know

==== Page 54 ====
54 C. Rudin et al.
how to explore the Rashomon set. Interactive methods might rely on dimen-
sion reduction techniques (that allow users to change the location of dataon the plot or to change the axis of visualization), weighted linear models
(that allow the user to compute weights on speciﬁc data points), continuous
feedback from the user (that helps to continuously improve models predic-tion in changing environments, for example, in recommender systems) inorder to interpret or choose a speciﬁc model with desired property. Das etal.[75] design a system called BEAMES that allows users to interactively
select important features, change weights on data points, visualize and se-
lect a speciﬁc model or even an ensemble of models. BEAMES searches thehypothesis space for models that are close to the practitioners’ constraintsand design choices. The main limitation of BEAMES is that it works withlinear regression classiﬁers only. Can a similar framework that searches theRashomon set, instead of the whole hypothesis space, be designed? What
would the interactive speciﬁcation of constraints look like in practice to help
the user choose the right model? Can collaboration with domain experts inother ways be useful to explore the Rashomon set?
Example : Suppose that a ﬁnancial institution would like to make data-driven
loan decisions. The institution must have a model that is as accurate as possible,
and must provide reasons for loan denials. In practice, loan decision prediction
problems have large Rashomon sets, and many machine learning methods per-form similarly despite their diﬀerent levels of complexity. To check whether theRashomon set is indeed large, the ﬁnancial institution wishes to measure thesize of the Rashomon set (Challenge 9.1) or visualize the layout of it (Challenge9.2) to understand how many accurate models exist, and how many of them
are interpretable. If the Rashomon set contains multiple interpretable models,
the ﬁnancial institution might wish to use an interactive framework (Challenge9.3) to navigate the Rashomon set and design constraints that would help tolocate the best model for their purposes. For example, the institution couldadditionally optimize for fairness or sparsity.
10. Interpretable reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods determine what actions to take at diﬀer-
ent states in order to maximize a cumulative numerical reward [e.g., see 282]. In
RL, a learning agent interacts with the environment by a trial and error process,
receiving signals (rewards) for the actions it takes. Recently, deep reinforcement
learning algorithms have achieved state-of-the-art performance in mastering thegame of Go and various Atari games [ 273,210] and have been actively used in
robotic control [ 156,283], simulated autonomous navigation and self-driving
cars [150,265], dialogue summarization, and question answering [ 182]. RL has
also been applied to high-stakes decisions, such as healthcare and personalized
medicine, including approaches for dynamic treatment regimes [ 190,326], treat-
ment of sepsis [ 162], treatment of chronic disorders including epilepsy [ 117], for
HIV therapy [ 230], and management of Type 1 diabetes [ 136].

==== Page 55 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 55
In reinforcement learning, at each timestep, an agent observes the state (sit-
uation) that it is currently in, chooses an action according to a policy (a learnedmapping from states to actions), and receives an intermediate reward that de-
pends on the chosen action and the current state, which leads the agent to the
next state, where the process repeats. For example, let us consider an RL systemthat is used for the management of glucose levels of Type 1 diabetes patientsby regulating the amount of synthetic insulin in the blood. The state is repre-sented by the patient’s information, including diet, exercise level, weight, so on;
actions include the amount of insulin to inject; rewards are positive if the blood
sugar level is within a healthy range and negative otherwise. Figure 18shows
the schematic diagram of a reinforcement learning system based on the diabetesexample.
Reinforcement learning is more challenging than a standard supervised set-
ting: the agent does not receive all the data at once (in fact, the agent is re-
sponsible for collecting data by exploring the environment); sometimes besides
immediate rewards, there are delayed rewards when feedback is provided onlyafter some sequence of actions, or even after the goal is achieved (for example,the positiverewardonaself-driving caragentisprovidedafteritreachesadesti-nation). Because reinforcement learning involves long-term consequences to ac-tions, because actions and states depend on each other, and because agents need
to collect data through exploration, interpretability generally becomes more dif-
ﬁcult than in a standard supervised learning. Search spaces for RL can be mas-sive since we need to understand which action to take in each state based onan estimate of future rewards, uncertainty of these estimates, and explorationstrategy. In deep reinforcement learning [ 210,273], policies are deﬁned by deep
neural networks, which helps to solve complex applied problems, but typically
the policies are essentially impossible to understand or trust.
Interpretability could be particularly valuable in RL. Interpretability might
help to reduce the RL search space; if we understand the choices and intent ofthe RL system, we can remove actions that might lead to harm. Interpretabil-ity could make it easier to troubleshoot (and use) RL for long-term medical
treatment or to train an agent for human-robot collaboration.
One natural way to include interpretability in a reinforcement learning sys-
tem is by representing the policy or value function by a decision tree or rule list[248,272]. In a policy tree representation, the nodes might contain a small set
of logical conditions, and leaves might contain an estimate of the optimal prob-ability distribution over actions (see Figure 19). A policy tree can be grown, for
example, in a greedy incremental way by updating the tree only when the esti-
mated discounted future reward would increase suﬃciently [ 248]; in the future,
one could adapt methods like those from Challenge 1 to build such trees.
Other methods make speciﬁc assumptions about the domain or problem that
allows for interpretable policies. One of the most popular simpliﬁcations is toconsider a symbolic or relational state representation. In this case, the state
is a combination of logical or relational statements. For example, in the classic
Blocks World domain, where the objective is to learn how to stack blocks on topof each other to achieve a target conﬁguration, these statements comprising the

==== Page 56 ====
56 C. Rudin et al.
Fig 18. An illustration of an RL system based on the example of Type 1 diabetes manage-
ment. This is theoretically a closed-loop system, where the agent observes the state from theenvironment, makes an action, and receives a reward based on the action. For diabetes con-trol, the state consists of measurements of glucose and other patient data, the actions are
injections of insulin, and the rewards are based on sugar levels.
statemightlooklike on(block1, block2) ;on(block1, table) ;free(block2) .Typically,
in relational reinforcement learning, policies are represented as relational regres-sion trees [ 90,91,143,96,76] that are more interpretable than neural networks.
A second set of assumptions is based on a natural decomposition of the prob-
lemformulti-taskorskillslearning.Forexample,Shuetal .[271]usehierarchical
policies that are learned over multiple tasks, where each task is decomposed intomultiple sub-tasks (skills). The description of the skills is created by a human,so that the agent learns these understandable skills (for instance, task stack blue
blockcan be decomposed into the skills ﬁnd blue block ,get blue block ,a n dput
blue block ).
Asfarasweknow,therearecurrentlynogeneralinterpretablewell-performing
methods for deep reinforcement learning that allow transparency in the agent’sactions or intent. Progress has been made instead on explainable deep rein-forcement learning (posthoc approximations), including tree-based explanations[66,189,81,22,73], reward decomposition [ 138], and attention-based methods
[330,213]. An interesting approach is that of Verma et al .[300], who deﬁne
rule-based policies through a domain-speciﬁc, human-readable programminglanguage that generalizes to unseen environments, but shows slightly worse per-formance than neural network policies it was designed to explain. The approachworks for deterministic policies and symbolic domains only and will not workfor the domains where the state is represented as a raw data image, unless an
additional logical relation extractor is provided.
Based on experience from supervised learning (discussed above), we know
that post-hoc explanations suﬀer from multiple problems, in that explanationsare often incorrect or incomplete. Atrey et al .[18] have argued that for deep
reinforcement learning, saliency maps should be used for exploratory, and not
explanatory, purposes. Therefore, developing interpretable reinforcement learn-
ing policies and other interpretable RL models is important. The most crucialchallenges for interpretable reinforcement learning area include:

==== Page 57 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 57
Fig 19. (a) An example of a learned decision tree policy for the Cart-Pole balancing problem
adapted from Silva et al .[272]. In the Cart-Pole environment, a pole is attached to a cart
by a joint. The cart moves along the horizontal axis. The goal is to keep the pole balancedupright, preventing it from falling. The state consists of four features: Cart Position, CartVelocity, Pole Angle and Pole Velocity At Tip. Here, angle 0
◦means straight upwards. There
are two possible actions at each state, including push cart to the left or push cart to the right.(b) is a visualization of the policy from Silva et al .[272] based on two features: Pole Angle
and Pole Velocity At Tip. Interestingly, it is easy to see from this ﬁgure that the policy is not
left-right symmetric. Note that there are many reasonable policies for this problem, includingmany that are asymmetric.
10.1What constraints would lead to an accurate interpretable policy?
In relational methods, policies or value functions could be represented bydecision or regression trees, however, since these methods work for sym-bolic domains only, they have limited practical use without a method of
extracting interpretable relations from the domain. Can interpretable deep
neural network methods similar to those in Challenge 5 provide an inter-pretablepolicywithouttheperformancecompromise?Arethereotherwaysof adding constraints or structure to the policy that will ensure human-understandable actions and intent? Will adding other sparsity or inter-
pretability constraints, as in Challenges 1 and 2, to the policy or value
function help improve interpretability without sacriﬁcing accuracy? Canwedesigninterpretablemodelswhoseexplanationscancapturelongertermconsequences of actions?
10.2Under what assumptions does there exist an interpretable pol-
icy that is as accurate as the more complicated black-box model?
Reinforcement learning systems are tricky to train, understand and debug.
It is a challenge in itself to decide what constraints will lead to an inter-pretable policy without loss of performance. For example, for PIRL [ 300],
there was a drop in performance of the resulting rule-based policy. Ofcourse, one of the possible reasons for this drop could be the fact thatit used posthoc approximations rather than inherently interpretable mod-
els; another reason is that there might not be a well-performing sparse
rule-based policy. So, the question is: how would we know if it is useful tooptimize for an interpretable policy? A simple test that tells the modeler if

==== Page 58 ====
58 C. Rudin et al.
such a model exists (similar to the characterizations of the Rashomon sets
in Challenge 9) would be helpful before trying to develop an algorithm toﬁnd this well-performing model (if it exists).
10.3Can we simplify or interpret the state space? Deep reinforcement
learning often operates on complex data (raw data) or huge, if not continu-ous state spaces. The agent might be required to do a lot of exploration tolearn useful policies in this case. Simplifying the state space might not onlymake the RL system learn more eﬃciently, but might also help humans to
understand the decisions it is making. For example, by applying t-SNE to
the last layer activation data of Mnih et al .’s deep Q-learning model [ 210],
Zahavy [ 329] showed that the network automatically discovers hierarchical
structures. Previously, these structures had not been used to simplify thestate space. Guan et al .[116] improved sample eﬃciency by incorporat-
ing domain knowledge through human feedback and visual explanations.
Zhang et al .[332] improved over batch RL by computing the policy only at
speciﬁc decision points where clinicians treat patients diﬀerently, insteadof at every timestep. This resulted in a signiﬁcantly smaller state spaceand faster planning.
Example: Consider a machine learning practitioner that is working on plan-
ning for assistive robots that help the elderly to perform day-to-day duties. Incases when the robot does some damage during its task execution or chooses aunusual plan to execute, it might be hard to understand the logic behind the
robot’s choices. If the practitioner can check that an interpretable model exists
(Challenge 10.2), optimize for it (Challenge 10.1), and interpret the state space(Challenge 10.3), debugging the robot’s failed behavior and correcting it can bemuch faster than without these techniques. Further, interpretability will help tostrengthen trust between the robot and the human its assisting, and help it togeneralize to new unforeseen cases.
11. Problems that were not in our top 10 but are really important
We covered a lot of ground in the 10 challenges above, but we certainly did not
cover all of the important topics related to interpretable ML. Here are a few
that we left out:
•Can we improve preprocessing to help with both interpretabil-
ity and test accuracy? As we discussed, some interpretable modeling
problems are computationally diﬃcult (or could tend to overﬁt) without
preprocessing. For supervised problems with tabular data, popular meth-ods like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) would generally transformthe data in a way that damages interpretability of the model. This isbecause each transformed feature is a combination of all of the originalfeatures. Perhaps there are other general preprocessing tools that would
preserve predictive power (or improve it), yet retain interpretability.
•Can we convey uncertainty clearly? Uncertainty quantiﬁcation is al-
ways important. Tomsett et al .[288] discuss the importance of uncertainty

==== Page 59 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 59
quantiﬁcation and interpretability, and Antoran et al .[15] discuss inter-
pretable uncertainty estimation.
•Can we divide the observations into easier cases and harder
cases, assigning more interpretable models to the easier cases?
Not all observations are equally easy to classify. As noted in the workof Wang et al .[309,312], it is possible that easier cases could be han-
dled by simpler models, leaving only the harder cases for models with lessinterpretability.
•Do we need interpretable neural networks for tabular data? There
have been numerous attempts to design interpretable neural networks fortabular data, imposing sparsity, monotonicity, etc. However, it is unclearwhether there is motivation for such formulations, since neural networksdo not generally provide much beneﬁt for tabular data over other kindsof models. One nice beneﬁt of the “optimal” methods discussed above is
that when we train them we know how far we are from a globally optimal
solution; the same is not true for neural networks, rendering them not justless interpretable but also harder to implement reliably.
•What are good ways to co-design models with their visualiza-
tions?Work in data and model visualization will be important in convey-
ing information to humans. Ideally, we would like to co-design our model
in a way that lends itself to easier visualization. One particularly impres-
sive interactive visualization was done by Gomez et al .[111] for a model
on loan decisions. Another example of an interactive model visualizationtool is that of Chen et al .[54]. These works demonstrate that as long as
the model can be visualized eﬀectively, it can be non-sparse but still beinterpretable. In fact, these works on loan decisions constitute an example
of when a sparse model might not be interpretable, since people might
ﬁnd a loan decision model unacceptable if it does not include many typesof information about the applicant’s credit history. Visualizations can al-low the user to hone in on the important pieces of the model for eachprediction.
•Can we do interpretable matching in observational causal infer-
ence?In the classical potential outcomes framework of causal inference,
matching algorithms are often used to match treatment units to con-trol units. Treatment eﬀects can be estimated using the matched groups.Matching in causal inference can be considered a form of case-based rea-soning (Challenge 4). Ideally, units within each matched group would be
similar on important variables. One such framework for matching is the
Almost Matching Exactly framework [also called “learning to match,” see310], which learns the important variables using a training set, and prior-
itizes matching on those important variables.Matchingopensthedoorforinterpretablemachinelearningincausalinfer-ence because it produces treatment and control data whose distributions
overlap. Interpretable machine learning algorithms for supervised classi-
ﬁcation discussed in Challenges 1, 2, and 3 can be directly applied tomatched data; for instance, a sparse decision tree can be used on matched

==== Page 60 ====
60 C. Rudin et al.
data to obtain an interpretable model for individual treatment eﬀects, or
an interpretable policy (i.e., treatment regimes).
•How should we measure variable importance? There are several
types of variable importance measures: those that measure how important
a variable is to a speciﬁc prediction, those that measure how important avariable is generally to a model, and those that measure how importanta variable is independently of a model. Inherently interpretable modelsshould generally not need the ﬁrst one, as it should be clear how much a
variable contributed to the prediction; for instance, for decision trees and
otherlogicalmodels,scoringsystems,GAMs,case-basedreasoningmodels,and disentangled neural networks, the reasoning process that comes witheach prediction tells us explicitly how a variable (or concept) contributedto a given prediction. There are many explainable ML tutorials to describehow to estimate the importance of variables for black box models. For the
other two types of variable importance, we refer readers to the work of
Fisher et al .[97], which has relevant references. If we can decide on an
ideal variable importance measure, we may be able to create interpretablemodels with speciﬁc preferences on variable importance.
•What are the practical challenges in deploying interpretable ML
models? There are many papers that provide useful background about
the use of interpretability and explainability in practice. For instance,
an interesting perspective is provided by Bhatt et al .[31] who conduct
an explainability survey showing that explanations are often used onlyinternally for troubleshooting rather than being shown to users. Severalstudies, e.g. [ 141,237], have performed extensive human experiments on
interpretable models and posthoc explanations of black box models, with
some interesting and sometimes nonintuitive results.
•What type of explanation is required by law? The question of what
explanations are legally required is important and interesting, but we willleave those questions to legal scholars (e.g., [ 32,303]). Interestingly, schol-
ars have explicitly stated that a “Right to Explanation” for automated
decision-making does not actually exist in the European Union’s General
Data Protection Regulation, despite the intention [ 303]. Rudin [ 250]p r o -
poses that for a high-stakes decision that deeply aﬀects lives, no black boxmodel should be used unless the deployer can prove that no interpretablemodel exists with a similar accuracy. If enacted, this would likely meanthat black box models rarely (if ever) would be deployed for high-stakes
decisions.
•What are other forms of interpretable models? It is not possible
to truly review all interpretable ML models. One could argue that mostof applied Bayesian statistics ﬁts into our deﬁnition of interpretable MLbecause the models are constrained to be formed through an interpretablegenerative process. This is indeed a huge ﬁeld, and numerous topics that
we were unable to cover also would have deserved a spot in this survey.

==== Page 61 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 61
12. Conclusion
In this survey, we hoped to provide a pathway for readers into important topics
in interpretable machine learning. The literature currently being generated on
interpretableandexplainableAIcanbedownrightconfusing.Thesheerdiversityof individuals weighing in on this ﬁeld includes not just statisticians and com-puter scientists but legal experts, philosophers, and graduate students, many ofwhom have not either built or deployed a machine learning model ever. It is
easy to underestimate how diﬃcult it is to convince someone to use a machine
learning model in practice, and interpretability is a key factor. Many works overthe last few years have contributed new terminology, mistakenly subsumed theolder ﬁeld of interpretable machine learning into the new ﬁeld of “XAI,” andreview papers have universally failed even to truly distinguish between the ba-sic concepts of explaining a black box and designing an interpretable model.
Because of the misleading terminology, where papers titled “explainability” are
sometimes about “interpretability” and vice versa, it is very diﬃcult to followthe literature (even for us). At the very least, we hoped to introduce some fun-damental principles, and cover several important areas of the ﬁeld and showhow they relate to each other and to real problems. Clearly this is a massiveﬁeld that we cannot truly hope to cover, but we hope that the diverse areas we
covered and problems we posed might be useful to those needing an entrance
point into this maze.
Interpretable models are not just important for society, they are also beauti-
ful. One might also ﬁnd it absolutely magical that simple-yet-accurate modelsexist for so many real-world datasets. We hope this document allows you to seenot only the importance of this topic but also the elegance of its mathematics
and the beauty of its models.
Acknowledgments
We thank Leonardo Lucio Custode for pointing out several useful references to
Challenge 10. Thank you to David Page for providing useful references on early
explainable ML. Thank you to the anonymous reviewers that made extremelyhelpful comments.
References
[1]Aamodt, A. andPlaza, E. (1994). Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational
Issues, Methodological Variations, and System Approaches. AI Communi-
cations739–59.
[2]Adebayo, J. ,Gilmer, J. ,Muelly, M. ,Goodfellow, I. ,Hardt, M.
andKim, B. (2018). Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. In Proceedings of
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[3]Adel, T. ,Ghahramani, Z. andWeller, A. (2018). Discovering in-
terpretable representations for both deep generative and discriminative

==== Page 62 ====
62 C. Rudin et al.
models. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML) 50–59.
[4]Afnan, M. A. M. ,Rudin, C. ,Conitzer, V. ,Savulescu, J. ,
Mishra, A. ,Liu, Y. andAfnan, M. (2021). Ethical Implementation of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence to Select Embryos in In Vitro Fertilization .I nPro-
ceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics,
and Society (AIES) .
[5]Agarwal, R. ,Frosst, N. ,Zhang, X. ,Caruana, R. andHin-
ton, G. E. (2020). Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learning
with neural nets. In Proceedings of the ICML Work shop on Human Inter-
pretability in Machine Learning .
[6]Aghaei, S. ,Gomez, A. andVayanos, P. (2020). Learning Opti-
mal Classiﬁcation Trees: Strong Max-Flow Formulations. arXiv e-print
arXiv:2002.09142 .
[7]Agrawal, D. ,Bernstein, P. ,Bertino, E. ,Davidson, S. ,Dayal, U. ,
Franklin, M. andWidom, J. (2012). Challenges and Opportunities with
Big Data: A white paper prepared for the Computing Community Consor-tium committee of the Computing Research Association Technical Report,CRA.
[8]A¨ıvodji, U. ,Ferry, J. ,Gambs, S. ,Huguet, M.-J. andSiala, M.
(2019). Learning Fair Rule Lists. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1909.03977 .
[9]Amid, E. andWarmuth, M. K. (2019). TriMap: Large-scale Dimension-
ality Reduction Using Triplets. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1910.00204 .
[10]Angelino, E. ,Larus-Stone, N.
,Alabi, D. ,Seltzer, M. and
Rudin, C. (2017). Learning certiﬁably optimal rule lists for categorical
data. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) .
[11]Angelino, E. ,Larus-Stone, N. ,Alabi, D. ,Seltzer, M. and
Rudin, C. (2018). Certiﬁably optimal rule lists for categorical data. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 181–78.MR3845533
[12]Angelov, P. andSoares, E. (2020). Towards Explainable Deep Neural
Networks (xDNN). Neural Networks 130185–194.
[13]Angwin, J. ,Larson, J. ,Mattu, S. andKirchner, L. (2016). Machine
Bias. Available from: https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-
bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing .
[14]Antman, E. M. ,Cohen, M. ,Bernink, P. J. ,McCabe, C. H. ,Ho-
racek, T. ,Papuchis, G. ,Mautner, B. ,Corbalan, R. ,Radley, D.
andBraunwald, E. (2000).TheTIMIriskscoreforunstableangina/non–
ST elevation MI: a method for prognostication and therapeutic decisionmaking. Journal of the American Medical Association 284835–842.
[15]Antor`an, J.,Bhatt, U. ,Adel, T. ,Weller, A. andHern´andez-
Lobato, J. M. (2021). Getting a CLUE: A Method for Explaining Uncer-
tainty Estimates. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (ICLR) .
[16]Archambeau, C. ,Cornford, D. ,Opper, M.
andShawe-Taylor, J.
(2007). Gaussian process approximations of stochastic diﬀerential equa-

==== Page 63 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 63
tions. In Gaussian Processes in Practice 1–16.
[17]Ashoori, M. andWeisz, J. D. (2019). In AI We Trust? Factors That
Inﬂuence Trustworthiness of AI-infused Decision-Making Processes. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 1912.02675 .
[18]Atrey, A. ,Clary, K. andJensen, D. (2020). Exploratory not explana-
tory: Counterfactual analysis of saliency maps for deep reinforcement learn-ing. InProceedings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR) .
[19]Badgeley, M. A. ,Zech, J. R. ,Oakden-Rayner, L. ,Glicks-
berg, B. S. ,Liu, M.,Gale, W. ,McConnell, M. V. ,Percha, B. ,
Snyder, T. M. andDudley, J. T. (2019). Deep learning predicts hip
fracture using confounding patient and healthcare variables. npj Digital
Medicine 2.
[20]Barnes, J. andHut, P. (1986). A hierarchical O(NlogN) force-
calculation algorithm. Nature324446–449.
[21]Barnett, A. J. ,Schwartz, F. R. ,Tao, C. ,Chen, C. ,Ren, Y. ,
Lo, J. Y. andRudin, C. (2021). IAIA-BL: A Case-based Interpretable
Deep Learning Model for Classiﬁcation of Mass Lesions in Digital Mam-mography. Nature Machine Intelligence 31061–1070.
[22]Bastani, O. ,Pu, Y.andSolar-Lezama, A. (2018). Veriﬁable reinforce-
ment learning via policy extraction. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2499–2509.
[23]Baumgart, B. G. (1974). Geometric modeling for computer vision Tech-
nical Report, Stanford University Department of Computer Science.
[24]
Belkin, M. andNiyogi, P. (2001). Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral
techniques for embedding and clustering. In Proceedings of Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 14585–591.MITPress.
[25]Belkina, A. C. ,Ciccolella, C. O. ,Anno, R. ,Halpert, R. ,Spi-
dlen, J. andSnyder-Cappione, J. E. (2019). Automated optimized
parameters for T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding improve vi-sualization and analysis of large datasets. Nature Communications 10.
[26]Bengio, Y. (2009).Learning deep architectures for AI . Now Publishers
Inc.
[27]Bengio, Y. ,Courville, A. andVincent, P. (2013). Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 351798–1828.
[28]Bennett, K. P. andBlue, J. A. (1996). Optimal Decision Trees Techni-
cal Report, R.P.I. Math Report No. 214, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
[29]Bertsimas, D. andDunn, J. (2017).Optimalclassiﬁcationtrees. Machine
Learning 1061039–1082. MR3665788
[30]Bezdek, J. C. ,Chuah, S. K. andLeep, D. (1986). Generalized k-nearest
neighbor rules. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 18237–256. MR0834703
[31]Bhatt, U. ,Xiang, A. ,Sharma, S. ,Weller, A. ,Taly, A. ,Jia, Y.,
Ghosh, J. ,Puri, R. ,Moura, J. M. F. andEckersley, P. (2020).
Explainable Machine Learning in Deployment. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 648–657. Asso-

==== Page 64 ====
64 C. Rudin et al.
ciation for Computing Machinery.
[32]Bibal, A. ,Lognoul, M. ,de Streel, A. andFr´enay, B. (2020). Legal
Requirements on Explainability in Machine Learning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Law July 30.
[33]Bien, J. andTibshirani, R. (2011). Prototype Selection for Interpretable
Classiﬁcation. The Annals of Applied Statistics 2403–2424. MR2907120
[34]Billiet, L. ,Van Huffel, S. andVan Belle, V. (2017). Interval Coded
Scoring extensions for larger problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE Sympo-
sium on Computers and Communications 198–203. IEEE.
[35]Billiet, L. ,Van Huffel, S. andVan Belle, V. (2018). Interval Coded
Scoring: A toolbox for interpretable scoring systems. PeerJ Computer Sci-
ence4e150.
[36]Binder, H. andTutz, G. (2008). A comparison of methods for the ﬁt-
ting of generalized additive models. Statistics and Computing 1887–99.
MR2416441
[37]B¨ohm, J. N. ,Berens, P. andKobak, D. (2020). A Unifying Perspective
on Neighbor Embeddings along the Attraction-Repulsion Spectrum. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 2007.08902 .
[38]Bone, R. C. ,B a l k ,R .A . ,C e r r a ,F .B . ,Dellinger, R. P. ,
Fein, A. M. ,Knaus, W. A. ,Schein, R. M. andS i b b a l d ,W .J . (1992).
Deﬁnitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of inno-
vative therapies in sepsis. Chest1011644–1655.
[39]Bousquet, O. andElisseeff, A. (2002). Stability and generalization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 2499–526. MR1929416
[40]Breiman, L. ,Friedman, J. H. ,Olshen, R. A. andStone, C. J. (1984).
Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees . Wadsworth. MR0726392
[41]Breiman, L. et al. (2001). Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with
comments and a rejoinder by the author). Statistical Science 16199–231.
MR1874152
[42]Brundage, M. ,Avin, S. ,Wang, J. ,Belfield, H. ,Krueger, G. and
et al., G. H. (2020). Toward Trustworthy AI Development: Mechanisms
for Supporting Veriﬁable Claims. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2004.07213 .
[43]Brunton, S. L. ,Proctor, J. L. andKutz, J. N. (2016). Discover-
ing governing equations from data by sparse identiﬁcation of nonlineardynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 113
3932–3937. MR3494081
[44]Burgess, E. W. (1928). Factors determining success or failure on parole.
The workings of the indeterminate sentence law and the parole system in
Illinois221–234.
[45]Cao, H. E. ,Sarlin, R. andJung, A. (2020). Learning Explainable De-
cision Rules via Maximum Satisﬁability. IEEE Access 8218180–218185.
[46]Card, D. ,Zhang, M. andSmith, N. A. (2019). Deep Weighted Averag-
ing Classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountabil-
ity, and Transparency 369–378.
[47]Carrizosa, E. ,Molero-Rıo, C. andRomero Morales, D. (2021).
Mathematical optimization in classiﬁcation and regression trees. TOP, An

==== Page 65 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 65
Oﬃcial Journal of the Spanish Society of Statistics and Operations Research
295–33.MR4236627
[48]Carrizosa, E. ,Nogales-G ´omez, A. andRomero Morales, D.
(2016). Strongly agree or strongly disagree?: Rating features in Support
Vector Machines. Information Sciences 329256–273. Special issue on Dis-
covery Science.
[49]Caruana, R. ,Lou, Y. ,Gehrke, J. ,Koch, P. ,Sturm, M. andEl-
hadad, N. (2015).Intelligiblemodelsforhealthcare:Predictingpneumonia
risk and hospital 30-day readmission. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD)1721–1730.
[50]Chan, D. M. ,Rao, R. ,Huang, F. andCanny, J. F. (2019). GPU ac-
celerated t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding. Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing 1311–13.
[51]Chapman, P. et al. (2000). CRISP-DM 1.0 – Step-by-step data mining
guide Technical Report, SPSS.
[52]Chaudhari, P. ,Choromanska, A. ,Soatto, S. ,LeCun, Y. ,Bal-
dassi, C. ,Borgs, C. ,Chayes, J. ,Sagun, L. andZecchina, R. (2019).
Entropy-SGD: Biasing gradient descent into wide valleys. Journal of Sta-
tistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2019124018. MR4063616
[53]Chen, C. ,Li, O.,Tao, D. ,Barnett, A. ,Rudin, C. andSu, J. K.
(2019). This Looks Like That: Deep Learning for Interpretable ImageRecognition. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS) 8930–8941.
[54]Chen, C. ,Lin, K. ,Rudin, C.
,Shaposhnik, Y. ,Wang, S. and
Wang, T. (2021). An interpretable model with globally consistent expla-
nations for credit risk. Decision Support Systems .
[55]Chen, C. andRudin, C. (2018). An optimization approach to learning
fallingrulelists.In Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
TATS)604–612.
[56]C h e n ,R .T .Q . ,Li, X.,Grosse, R. B. andDuvenaud, D. K.
(2018). Isolating Sources of Disentanglement in Variational Autoencoders.
InProceedings of Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) (S. Bengio ,H. Wallach ,H. Larochelle ,K. Grauman ,
N. Cesa-Bianchi andR. Garnett ,e d s . )31.
[57]Chen, X. ,Duan, Y. ,Houthooft, R. ,Schulman, J. ,Sutskever, I.
andAbbeel, P. (2016). Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by
information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Proceedings of Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2172–2180.
[58]Chen, Z. ,Bei, Y. andRudin, C. (2020). Concept whitening for inter-
pretable image recognition. Nature Machine Intelligence 2772-782.
[59]Chen, Z. ,Ogren, A. ,Lin, A.,Daraio, C. ,Brinson, C. andRudin, C.
(2021). How to See Hidden Patterns in Metamaterials with Interpretable
Machine Learning. (In progress).
[60]Chevaleyre, Y. ,Koriche, F. andZucker, J.-D. (2013). Rounding
methods for discrete linear classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of International

==== Page 66 ====
66 C. Rudin et al.
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 651–659.
[61]Christodoulou, E. ,Ma, J.,Collins, G. S. ,Steyerberg, E. W. ,
Verbakel, J. Y. andVan Calster, B. (2019). A systematic review
shows no performance beneﬁt of machine learning over logistic regression
for clinical prediction models. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 11012–22.
MR4156846
[62]Clark, P. andBoswell, R. (1991). Rule induction with CN2: Some
recent improvements. In European Working Session on Learning 151–163.
Springer. MR1101394
[63]Clark, P. andNiblett, T. (1989). The CN2 induction algorithm. Ma-
chine Learning 3261–283.
[64]Coenen, A. andPearce, A. (2019). Understanding UMAP. https://
pair-code.github.io/understanding-umap/ .
[65]Cohen, W. W. (1995). Fast eﬀective rule induction. In Proceedings of the
Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 115–123.
[66]Coppens, Y. ,Efthymiadis, K. ,Lenaerts, T. ,Now´e, A.,Miller, T. ,
Weber, R. andMagazzeni, D. (2019). Distilling deep reinforcement
learning policies in soft decision trees. In Proceedings of the IJCAI Work-
shop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence 1–6.
[67]Coston, A. ,Rambachan, A. andChouldechova, A. (2021). Charac-
terizing Fairness Over the Set of Good Models Under Selective Labels. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[68]Cover, T. andHart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 1321-27.
[69]Craven, M. W. (1996). Extracting comprehensible models from trained
neural networks, PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin-Madison Department
of Computer Sciences.
[70]Craven, M. W. andShavlik, J. W. (1995). Extracting Tree-Structured
RepresentationsofTrainedNetworks.In Proceedings of Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 24–30.
[71]Crawford, E. andPineau, J. (2019). Spatially invariant unsupervised
object detection with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) 333412–3420.
[72]S¸eyda Ertekin andRudin, C. (2011). On Equivalence Relationships Be-
tweenClassiﬁcationand RankingAlgorithms. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 122905–2929. MR2854352
[73]Dahlin, N. ,Kalagarla, K. C. ,Naik, N. ,Jain, R. andNuzzo, P.
(2020). Designing interpretable approximations to deep reinforcement
learning with soft decision trees. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2010.14785 .
[74]D’Amour, A. ,Heller, K. ,Moldovan, D. ,Adlam, B. ,Alipanahi, B. ,
Beutel, A. ,Chen, C. ,Deaton, J. ,Eisenstein, J. ,Hoffman, M. D.
et al. (2020). Underspeciﬁcation presents challenges for credibility in mod-ern machine learning. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2011.03395 .
[75]Das, S.,Cashman, D. ,Chang, R. andEndert, A. (2019). BEAMES:
Interactive Multimodel Steering, Selection, and Inspection for RegressionTasks.IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 3920–32.

==== Page 67 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 67
[76]Das, S. ,Natarajan, S. ,Roy, K. ,Parr, R. andKersting, K.
(2020). Fitted Q-Learning for Relational Domains. arXiv e-print
arXiv:2006.05595 .
[77]Dash, S. ,G¨unl¨uk, O.andWei, D. (2018). Boolean Decision Rules via
Column Generation. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 314655–4665.
[78]Demirovi ´c, E.,Lukina, A. ,Hebrard, E. ,Chan, J. ,Bailey, J. ,
Leckie, C. ,Ramamohanarao, K. andStuckey, P. J. (2020).MurTree:
Optimal Classiﬁcation Trees via Dynamic Programming and Search. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 2007.12652 .
[79]Desjardins, G. ,Courville, A. andBengio, Y. (2012). Disen-
tangling factors of variation via generative entangling. arXiv e-print
arXiv:1210.5474 .
[80]Dhamnani, S. ,Singal, D. ,Sinha, R. ,Mohandoss, T. andDash, M.
(2019). RAPID: Rapid and Precise Interpretable Decision Sets. In 2019
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) 1292–1301. IEEE.
[81]Dhebar, Y. ,Deb, K. ,Nageshrao, S. ,Zhu, L. andFilev, D. (2020).
Interpretable-AI policies using evolutionary nonlinear decision trees for dis-crete action systems. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2009.09521 .
[82]Dimanov, B. ,Bhatt, U. ,
Jamnik, M. andWeller, A. (2020). You
Shouldn’t Trust Me: Learning Models Which Conceal Unfairness From
Multiple Explanation Methods. In 24th European Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (ECAI) .
[83]Dinh, L. ,Pascanu, R. ,Bengio, S. andBengio, Y. (2017). Sharp min-
ima can generalize for deep nets. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML) 1019–1028.
[84]Do, K.andTran, T. (2019). Theory and evaluation metrics for learning
disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[85]Dobkin, D. ,Fulton, T. ,Gunopulos, D. ,Kasif, S. andSalzberg, S.
(1997). Induction of shallow decision trees. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence .
[86]Dong, J. andRudin, C. (2020). Exploring the cloud of variable impor-
tanceforthesetofallgoodmodels. Nature Machine Intelligence 2810–824.
[87]Donoho, D. L. andGrimes, C. (2003). Hessian eigenmaps: Locally lin-
ear embedding techniques for high-dimensional data. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Arts and Sciences 1005591-5596. MR1981019
[88]Dua, D. andGraff, C. (2017). UCI Machine Learning Repository.
[89]D u d a n i ,S .A . (1976). The Distance-Weighted k-Nearest-Neighbor Rule.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics SMC-6 325-327.
[90]Dˇzeroski, S. ,De Raedt, L. andBlockeel, H. (1998). Relational re-
inforcement learning. In International Conference on Inductive Logic Pro-
gramming 11–22. Springer.
[91]Dˇzeroski, S. ,De Raedt, L. andDriessens, K. (2001). Relational re-
inforcement learning. Machine Learning 437–52.
[92]Eastwood, C. andWilliams, C. K. (2018). A framework for the quan-

==== Page 68 ====
68 C. Rudin et al.
titative evaluation of disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[93]Elomaa, T. (1994).InDefenseofC4.5:NotesonLearningOne-LevelDeci-
sionTrees.In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML) 62–69. Morgan Kaufmann.
[94]Farhangfar, A. ,Greiner, R. andZinkevich, M. (2008).AFastWayto
Produce Optimal Fixed-Depth Decision Trees. In International Symposium
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Mathematics (ISAIM) .
[95]Fayyad, U. ,Piatetsky-Shapiro, G. andSmyth, P. (1996). From data
mining to knowledge discovery in databases. AI Magazine 1737–54.
[96]Finney, S. ,Gardiol, N. H. ,Kaelbling, L. P. andOates, T. (2002).
The thing that we tried didn’t work very well: deictic representation in re-inforcement learning. In Proceedings of Conference on Uncertainty in Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI) 154–161.
[97]Fisher, A. ,Rudin, C. andDominici, F. (2019). All Models are Wrong,
but Many are Useful: Learning a Variable’s Importance by Studying an En-tire Class of Prediction Models Simultaneously. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research 201–81.MR4048988
[98]Fix, E.andHodges, J. L. (1951). Discriminatory analysis, nonparamet-
ric discrimination: Consistency properties Technical Report No. 4, USAF
School of Aviation Medicine, Randolph Field, Texas.
[99]Frank, E. andWitten, I. H. (1998). Generating accurate rule sets with-
out global optimization. In Proceedings of International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML) 144–151.
[100]Freitas, A. A. (2014). Comprehensible classiﬁcation models: a position
paper.ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 151–10.
[101]Freund, Y. andSchapire, R. E. (1997). A decision-theoretic gener-
alization of on-line learning and an application to boosting. Journal of
Computer and System Sciences 55119–139. MR1473055
[102]Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: a gradient
boosting machine. Annals of Statistics 1189–1232. MR1873328
[103]
Friedman, J. H. (2002). Stochastic gradient boosting. Computational
Statistics & Data Analysis 38367–378. MR1884869
[104]Friedman, J. H. andFisher, N. I. (1999). Bump hunting in high-
dimensional data. Statistics and Computing 9123–143.
[105]Fu, C.,Zhang, Y. ,Cai, D. andRen, X. (2019). AtSNE: Eﬃcient and
Robust Visualization on GPU through Hierarchical Optimization. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (KDD) 176–186.
[106]Fukunaga, K. andHostetler, L. (1973). Optimization of k nearest
neighbor density estimates. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 19
320–326. MR0405701
[107]G a g e ,B .F . ,Waterman, A. D. ,Shannon, W. ,Boechler, M. ,
R i c h ,M .W . andRadford, M. J. (2001). Validation of clinical classiﬁ-
cation schemes for predicting stroke: results from the National Registry ofAtrial Fibrillation. Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)

==== Page 69 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 69
2852864–2870.
[108]Gaines, B. R. andCompton, P. (1995). Induction of ripple-down rules
applied to modeling large databases. Journal of Intelligent Information
Systems 5211–228.
[109]Ghosh, B. andM e e l ,K .S . (2019). IMLI: An incremental framework for
MaxSAT-based learning of interpretable classiﬁcation rules. In Proceedings
of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES) 203–210.
[110]Goh, S. T. andRudin, C. (2014).BoxDrawingsforLearningwithImbal-
anced Data. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 333–342.
[111]Gomez, O. ,Holter, S. ,Yuan, J. andBertini, E. (2020). ViCE: Vi-
sual Counterfactual Explanations for Machine Learning Models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces(IUI’20).
[112]Goodfellow, I. ,Pouget-Abadie, J. ,Mirza, M. ,Xu, B.,Warde-
Farley, D. ,Ozair, S. ,Courville, A. andBengio, Y. (2014). Genera-
tive Adversarial Nets. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 272672–2680.
[113]Gosiewska, A. andBiecek, P. (2020). Do Not Trust Additive Expla-
nations. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1903.11420 .
[114]Gray, J. B. andFan, G. (2008). Classiﬁcation tree analysis us-
ing TARGET. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 521362–1372.
MR2422741
[115]Gross, C. C. (2002). Genealogy of the “Grandmother Cell”. The Neu-
roscientist 8512-518.
[116]Guan, L. ,Verma, M. ,Guo, S. ,Zhang, R. and
Kambhampati, S.
(2020). Widening the Pipeline in Human-Guided Reinforcement Learning
with Explanation and Context-Aware Data Augmentation.
[117]Guez, A. ,Vincent, R. D. ,Avoli, M. andPineau, J. (2008). Adaptive
TreatmentofEpilepsyviaBatch-modeReinforcementLearning.In Proceed-
ings of AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) 1671–1678.
[118]G¨unl¨uk, O.,Kalagnanam, J. ,Li, M.,Menickelly, M. andSchein-
berg, K. (2021). Optimal decision trees for categorical data via integer
programming. Journal of Global Optimization 1–28.MR4299184
[119]Hamamoto, R. ,Suvarna, K. ,Yamada, M. ,Kobayashi, K. ,
Shinkai, N. ,Miyake, M. ,Takahashi, M. ,Jinnai, S. ,Shimoyama, R. ,
Sakai, A. ,Takasawa, K. ,Bolatkan, A. ,Shozu, K. ,Dozen, A. ,
Machino, H. ,Takahashi, S. ,Asada, K. ,Komatsu, M. ,Sese, J. and
Kaneko, S. (2020). Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology in
Oncology: Towards the Establishment of Precision Medicine. Cancers 12.
[120]Hammond, K. (1989).Proceedings of the Second Case-Based Re asoning
Workshop (DARPA) . Morgan Kanfmann Publishers, Inc., San Mateo, CA.
[121]Haris, A. ,Simon, N. andShojaie, A. (2019). Generalized sparse addi-
tive models. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1903.04641 .
[122]Hastie, T. J. andTibshirani, R. J. (1990).Generalized additive models
43. CRC press. MR1082147

==== Page 70 ====
70 C. Rudin et al.
[123]Higgins, I. ,Amos, D. ,Pfau, D. ,Racaniere, S. ,Matthey, L. ,
Rezende, D. andLerchner, A. (2018). Towards a deﬁnition of disen-
tangled representations. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1812.02230 .
[124]Higgins, I. ,Matthey, L. ,Pal, A. ,Burgess, C. ,Glorot, X. ,
Botvinick, M. ,Mohamed, S. andLerchner, A. (2017). beta-VAE:
Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework.InProceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).
[125]Hinton, G. (2021). How to represent part-whole hierarchies in a neural
network. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2102.12627 .
[126]Hinton, G. E. ,Krizhevsky, A. andWang, S. D. (2011).Transforming
Auto-Encoders. In Proceedings of International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks 44–51. Springer.
[127]Hochreiter, S. andSchmidhuber, J. (1997). Flat minima. Neural
Computation 91–42.
[128]Holte, R. C. (1993). Very simple classiﬁcation rules perform well on
most commonly used datasets. Machine Learning 1163-91.
[129]Hong, D. ,B a e k ,S .S . andWang, T. (2020). Interpretable Sequence
Classiﬁcation Via Prototype Trajectory. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2007.01777 .
[130]Hu, H.,Siala, M. ,H´ebrard, E. andHuguet, M.-J. (2020). Learning
Optimal Decision Trees with MaxSAT and its Integration in AdaBoost.
InIJCAI-PRICAI 2020, 29th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and the 17th Paciﬁc Rim International Conference on ArtiﬁcialIntelligence .
[131]Hu, X.,Rudin, C. andSeltzer, M. (2019). Optimal Sparse Decision
Trees. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS) .
[132]Ignatiev, A. ,Pereira, F. ,Narodytska, N. andMarques-Silva, J.
(2018). A SAT-based approach to learn explainable decision sets. In Inter-
national Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning 627–645. MR3836041
[133]The Smithsonian Institute (2020). Mammuthus primigenius
(Blumbach). https://3d.si.edu/object/3d/mammuthus-primigenius-
blumbach:341c96cd-f967-4540-8ed1-d3fc56d31f12 .
[134]Jacomy, M. ,Venturini, T. ,Heymann, S. andBastian, M. (2014).
ForceAtlas2, a Continuous Graph Layout Algorithm for Handy NetworkVisualization Designed for the Gephi Software. PLoS One 91-12.
[135]Jaderberg, M. ,Simonyan, K. ,Zisserman, A. and
Kavukcuoglu, K. (2015). Spatial transformer networks. In Proceedings
of Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)2017–2025.
[136]Javad, M. O. M. ,Agboola, S. O. ,Jethwani, K. ,Zeid, A. andKa-
marthi, S. (2019). A reinforcement learning–based method for manage-
ment of type 1 diabetes: exploratory study. JMIR Diabetes 4e12905.
[137]Johnson, J. ,Hariharan, B. ,van der Maaten, L. ,Fei-Fei, L. ,
Lawrence Zitnick, C. andGirshick, R. (2017). CLEVR: A Diagnos-
tic Dataset for Compositional Language and Elementary Visual Reasoning.

==== Page 71 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 71
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) .
[138]Juozapaitis, Z. ,Koul, A. ,Fern, A. ,Erwig, M. andDoshi-
Velez, F. (2019). Explainable reinforcement learning via reward decom-
position. In Proceedings of the IJCAI/ECAI Work shop on Explainable Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence .
[139]Kabra, R. ,Burgess, C. ,Matthey, L. ,Kaufman, R. L. ,Gr-
eff, K. ,Reynolds, M. andLerchner, A. (2019). Multi-Object
Datasets. https://github.com/deepmind/multi-object-datasets/ .
[140]Kakade, S. M. ,Sridharan, K. andTewari, A. (2009). On the com-
plexity of linear prediction: Risk bounds, margin bounds, and regulariza-tion. InProceedings of Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS) 793–800.
[141]Kaur, H. ,Nori, H. ,Jenkins, S. ,Caruana, R. ,Wallach, H. and
Wortman Vaughan, J. (2020). Interpreting Interpretability: Under-
standing Data Scientists’ Use of Interpretability Tools for Machine Learn-ing. InProceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems 1–14.
[142]Keller, J. M. ,G r a y ,M .R . andGivens, J. A. (1985). A fuzzy k-
nearest neighbor algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics 4580–585.
[143]Kersting, K. andDriessens, K. (2008). Non-parametric policy gradi-
ents: A uniﬁed treatment of propositional and relational domains. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning 456–
463.
[144]K e s k a r ,N .S . ,Mudigere, D. ,Nocedal, J. ,Smelyanskiy, M. and
T a n g ,P .T .P .
(2017). On large-batch training for deep learning: Gener-
alization gap and sharp minima. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[145]Kim, B. ,Khanna, R. andK o y e j o ,O .O . (2016). Examples are not
enough, learn to criticize! Criticism for Interpretability. In Proceedings of
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (D. Lee,
M. Sugiyama ,U. Luxburg ,I. Guyon andR. Garnett ,e d s . )292280–
2288.
[146]Kim, B.,Rudin, C. andShah, J. A. (2014). The Bayesian Case Model:
A Generative Approach for Case-Based Reasoning and Prototype Classi-ﬁcation. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS) 271952–1960.
[147]Kim, B. ,Wattenberg, M. ,Gilmer, J. ,Cai, C.,Wexler, J. ,Vie-
gas, F. et al. (2018). Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quan-
titative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav). In Proceedings of
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2668–2677.
[148]Kim, H. andMnih, A. (2018). Disentangling by factorising. In Proceed-
ings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2649–2658.
[149]Kingma, D. P. andWelling, M. (2013). Auto-encoding variational
bayes. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-

==== Page 72 ====
72 C. Rudin et al.
sentations (ICLR) .
[150]Kiran, B. R. ,Sobh, I. ,Talpaert, V. ,Mannion, P. ,Al Sal-
lab, A. A. ,Yogamani, S. andP´erez, P. (2021). Deep reinforcement
learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems 1-18.
[151]Kissel, N. andMentch, L. (2021). Forward Stability and Model Path
Selection. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2103.03462 .
[152]Knaus, W. A. ,Draper, E. A. ,Wagner, D. P. andZimmerman, J. E.
(1985).APACHEII:aseverityofdiseaseclassiﬁcationsystem. Critical Care
Medicine 13818–829.
[153]Knaus, W. A. ,Wagner, D. P. ,D r a p e r ,E .A . ,Zimmerman, J. E. ,
Bergner, M. ,B a s t o s ,P .G . ,Sirio, C. A. ,Murphy, D. J. ,
Lotring, T. ,Damiano, A. et al. (1991). The APACHE III prognostic
system: risk prediction of hospital mortality for critically ill hospitalized
adults.Chest1001619–1636.
[154]Knaus, W. A. ,Zimmerman, J. E. ,W a g n e r ,D .P . ,Draper, E. A.
andLawrence, D. E. (1981). APACHE-acute physiology and chronic
health evaluation: a physiologically based classiﬁcation system. Critical
Care Medicine 9591–597.
[155]Kobak, D. andBerens, P. (2019). The art of using t-SNE for single-cell
transcriptomics. Nature Communication 105416.
[156]Kober, J. ,Bagnell, J. A. andPeters, J. (2013).Reinforcementlearn-
ing in robotics: A survey. The International Journal of Robotics Research
321238–1274.
[157]Kodratoff, Y. (1994). The comprehensibility manifesto. KDD Nugget
Newsletter 94.
[158]Koh, P. W. ,Nguyen, T. ,T a n g ,Y .S . ,Mussmann, S. ,Pierson, E. ,
Kim, B. andLiang, P. (2020). Concept bottleneck models. In Proceedings
of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 5338–5348.
[159]Kohonen, T. (1995). Learning Vector Quantization. The Handbook of
Brain Theory and Neural Networks 537–540.
[160]K o l o d n e r ,J .L . (1988).Proceedings of the Case-Based Re asoning Work-
shop (DARPA) . Morgan Kaufmmnn Publishers, Inc., San Mateo, CA.
[161]Koltchinskii, V. andPanchenko, D. (2002). Empirical margin distri-
butions and bounding the generalization error of combined classiﬁers. The
Annals of Statistics 301–50.MR1892654
[162]Komorowski, M. ,Celi, L. A. ,Badawi, O. ,G o r d o n ,A .C . and
Faisal, A. A. (2018). The artiﬁcial intelligence clinician learns optimal
treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nature Medicine 241716–
1720.
[163]Kosiorek, A. ,Sabour, S. ,Teh, Y. W. andHinton, G. E. (2019).
Stacked capsule autoencoders. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 15512–15522.
[164]Krizhevsky, A. ,Sutskever, I. andHinton, G. E. (2017). ImageNet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. Communications of
the ACM 60.

==== Page 73 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 73
[165]Kulkarni, T. D. ,Whitney, W. ,Kohli, P. andTenenbaum, J. B.
(2015).Deepconvolutionalinversegraphicsnetwork.In Proceedings of Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[166]Kursuncu, U. ,Gaur, M. andSheth, A. (2020). Knowledge Infused
Learning(K-IL):TowardsDeepIncorporationofKnowledgeinDeepLearn-ing. InProceedings of the AAAI 2020 Spring Symposium on Combining
Machine Learning and Knowledge Engineering in Practice (AAAI-MAKE2020)I.
[167]K u t z ,J .N . ,B r u n t o n ,S .L . ,Brunton, B. W. andProctor, J. L.
(2016).Dynamic mode decomposition: data-driven modeling of complex sys-
tems.S I A M . MR3602007
[168]L a g a r i s ,I .E . ,Likas, A. andFotiadis, D. I. (1998). Artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks for solving ordinary and partial diﬀerential equations. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 9987–1000.
[169]L a g a r i s ,I .E . ,Likas, A. C. andPapageorgiou, D. G. (2000).Neural-
network methods for boundary value problems with irregular boundaries.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 111041-1049.
[170]Lakkaraju, H. ,Bach, S. H. andLeskovec, J. (2016). Interpretable
decision sets: A joint framework for description and prediction. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discov-
ery and Data Mining (KDD) 1675–1684.
[171]Lakkaraju, H. andBastani, O. (2020). “How do I fool you?”: Manip-
ulating User Trust via Misleading Black Box Explanations. In Proceedings
of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES) 79–85.
[172]Lapuschkin, S. ,W¨aldchen, S. ,Binder, A. ,Montavon, G. ,
Samek, W. andM¨uller, K.-R. (2019). Unmasking Clever Hans pre-
dictors and assessing what machines really learn. Nature Communications
10
.
[173]Laugel, T. ,Lesot, M.-J. ,Marsala, C. ,Renard, X. andDe-
tyniecki, M. (2019).TheDangersofPost-hocInterpretability:Unjustiﬁed
Counterfactual Explanations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, (IJCAI) 2801–2807.
[174]Laurent, H. andRivest, R. L. (1976). Constructing optimal binary
decision trees is NP-complete. Information Processing Letters 515–17.
MR0413598
[175]Le Gall, J.-R. ,Lemeshow, S. andSaulnier, F. (1993). A new simpli-
ﬁedacutephysiologyscore(SAPSII)basedonaEuropean/NorthAmerican
multicenter study. Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)
2702957–2963.
[176]LeCun, Y. ,Bengio, Y. andHinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature
521436–444.
[177]LeCun, Y. ,Cortes, C. andBurges, C. (2010). MNIST handwritten
digit database. ATT Labs [Online]. Available: http: // yann. lecun. com/
exdb/ mnist 2.
[178]Lee, H. andK a n g ,I .S . (1990). Neural algorithm for solving diﬀerential
equations. Journal of Computational Physics 91110–131. MR1078748

==== Page 74 ====
74 C. Rudin et al.
[179]Lee, J.,Lee, Y.,Kim, J.,Kosiorek, A. ,Choi, S. andTeh, Y. W.
(2019). Set transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML) 3744–3753.
[180]Letham, B. ,Rudin, C. ,McCormick, T. H. ,Madigan, D. et al.
(2015). Interpretable classiﬁers using rules and bayesian analysis: Build-ing a better stroke prediction model. The Annals of Applied Statistics 9
1350–1371. MR3418726
[181]Li, H.,Xu, Z.,Taylor, G. ,Studer, C. andGoldstein, T. (2018).
Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets. In Proceedings of Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[182]Li, J.,Monroe, W. ,Ritter, A. ,Galley, M. ,Gao, J. andJuraf-
sky, D. (2016). Deep reinforcement learning for dialogue generation. In
Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP) .
[183]Li, O.,Liu, H.,Chen, C. andRudin, C. (2018).DeepLearningforCase-
Based Reasoning through Prototypes: A Neural Network that Explains ItsPredictions. In Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI).
[184]Li, W.,Han, J. andPei, J.(2001). CMAR: Accurate and eﬃcient classi-
ﬁcation based on multiple class-association rules. In Proceedings 2001 IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) 369–376. IEEE.
[185]Lin, J.,Zhong, C. ,Hu, D.,Rudin, C. andSeltzer, M. (2020). Gen-
eralized and scalable optimal sparse decision trees. In Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 6150–6160.
[186]Lin, Y.,Zhang, H. H. et al. (2006). Component selection and smoothing
inmultivariatenonparametricregression. The Annals of Statistics 342272–
2297.MR2291500
[187]Linderman, G. C. ,Rachh, M. ,Hoskins, J. G. ,Steinerberger, S.
andKluger, Y. (2019). Fast interpolation-based t-SNE for improved vi-
sualization of single-cell RNA-seq data. Nature Methods 16243-245.
[188]Liu, B.,Hsu, W. ,Ma, Y. et al. (1998). Integrating classiﬁcation and
association rule mining. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 9880–86.
[189]Liu, G.,Schulte, O. ,Zhu, W. andLi, Q.(2018). Toward interpretable
deep reinforcement learning with linear model u-trees. In Joint European
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases
414–429. Springer.
[190]Liu, Y.,Logan, B. ,Liu, N.,Xu, Z.,Tang, J. andWang, Y. (2017).
Deep reinforcement learning for dynamic treatment regimes on medicalregistry data. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Infor-
matics (ICHI) 380–385. IEEE.
[191]Locatello, F. ,Weissenborn, D. ,Unterthiner, T. ,Mahen-
dran, A. ,Heigold, G. ,Uszkoreit, J. ,Dosovitskiy, A. andKipf, T.
(2020). Object-Centric Learning with Slot Attention. In Proceedings of
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .

==== Page 75 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 75
[192]Loh, W.-Y. andShih, Y.-S. (1997). Split selection methods for classiﬁ-
cation trees. Statistica Sinica 7815–840. MR1488644
[193]Losch, M. ,Fritz, M. andSchiele, B. (2019). Interpretability be-
yond classiﬁcation output: Semantic bottleneck networks. arXiv e-print
arXiv:1907.10882 .
[194]Lou, Y. ,Bien, J. ,Caruana, R. andGehrke, J. (2016). Sparse par-
tially linear additive models. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics 251126–1140. MR3572032
[195]Lou, Y. ,Caruana, R. andGehrke, J. (2012). Intelligible models for
classiﬁcation and regression. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 150–
158.
[196]Lou, Y.,Caruana, R. ,Gehrke, J. andHooker, G. (2013). Accurate
intelligible models with pairwise interactions. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing (KDD) 623–631.
[197]Malioutov, D. andMeel, K. S. (2018). MLIC: A MaxSAT-based
framework for learning interpretable classiﬁcation rules. In International
Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming 312–
327. Springer.
[198]Malioutov, D. andVarshney, K. (2013). Exact rule learning via
boolean compressed sensing. In Proceedings of International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML) 765–773.
[199]Marchand, M. andShawe-Taylor, J. (2002). The set covering ma-
chine.Journal of Machine Learning Research 3723–746. MR1983944
[200]Marchand, M. andSokolova, M. (2005). Learning with decision lists
of data-dependent features. Journal of Machine Learning Research 6427–
451.MR2249827
[201]Marx, C. ,Calmon, F. andUstun, B. (2020). Predictive multiplicity
in classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) 6765–6774.
[202]Matthey, L. ,Higgins, I. ,Hassabis, D. andLerchner, A. (2017).
dSprites: Disentanglement testing Sprites dataset. https://github.com/
deepmind/dsprites-dataset/ .
[203]McGough, M. (2018). How bad is Sacramento’s air, exactly? Google
results appear at odds with reality, some say. Sacramento Bee .
[204]McInnes, L. ,Healy, J. andMelville, J. (2018). UMAP: Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 1802.03426 .
[205]Mehta, M. ,Agrawal, R. andRissanen, J. (1996). SLIQ: A fast scal-
able classiﬁer for data mining. In International Conference on Extending
Database Technology 18–32. Springer.
[206]Meier, L. ,Van de Geer, S. ,B¨uhlmann, P. et al. (2009). High-
dimensional additive modeling. The Annals of Statistics 373779–3821.
MR2572443
[207]Meng, X. ,Li, Z.,Zhang, D. andKarniadakis, G. E. (2020).

==== Page 76 ====
76 C. Rudin et al.
PPINN: Parareal physics-informed neural network for time-dependent
PDEs.Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 370
113250. MR4121078
[208]Miller, G. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some
limits on our capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review
6381–97.
[209]Ming, Y. ,Xu, P.,Qu, H. andRen, L. (2019). Interpretable and
Steerable Sequence Learning via Prototypes. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing (KDD) 903–913.
[210]Mnih, V. ,Kavukcuoglu, K. ,Silver, D. ,Rusu, A. A. ,Veness, J. ,
Bellemare, M. G. ,Graves, A. ,Riedmiller, M. ,F i d j e l a n d ,A .K . ,
Ostrovski, G. et al. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforce-
ment learning. Nature518529–533.
[211]Moreno, R. P. ,Metnitz, P. G. ,Almeida, E. ,Jordan, B. ,
Bauer, P. ,Campos, R. A. ,Iapichino, G. ,Edbrooke, D. ,Ca-
puzzo, M. ,Le Gall, J.-R. et al. (2005). SAPS 3 — From evaluation of
the Patient to Evaluation of the Intensive Care Unit. Part 2: Developmentof a prognostic model for hospital mortality at ICU admission. Intensive
Care Medicine 311345–1355.
[212]Morgan, J. N. andSonquist, J. A. (1963). Problems in the analy-
sis of survey data, and a proposal. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 58415–434.
MR3646572
[213]Mott, A. ,Zoran, D. ,Chrzanowski, M. ,Wierstra, D. and
Rezende, D. J. (2019). Towards interpretable reinforcement learning us-
ing attention augmented agents. In
Proceedings of Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 12350–12359.
[214]Narodytska, N. ,Ignatiev, A. ,Pereira, F. andMarques-Silva, J.
(2018). Learning Optimal Decision Trees with SAT. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence(IJCAI) 1362–1368.
[215]Nauta, M. ,Jutte, A. ,Provoost, J. andSeifert, C. (2020). This
Looks Like That, Because... Explaining Prototypes for Interpretable ImageRecognition. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2011.02863 .
[216]Nauta, M. ,van Bree, R. andSeifert, C. (2021). Neural Proto-
type Trees for Interpretable Fine-grained Image Recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
[217]Nelder, J. A. andWedderburn, R. W. (1972). Generalized linear
models.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General) 135
370–384. MR0375592
[218]Netzer, Y. ,Wang, T. ,Coates, A. ,Bissacco, A. ,Wu, B. and
Ng, A. Y. (2011). Reading Digits in Natural Images with Unsupervised
Feature Learning. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS Work shop on Deep Learn-
ing and Unsupervised Feature Learning .
[219]Newell, A. ,S i m o n ,H .A . et al. (1972). Human Problem Solving .

==== Page 77 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 77
Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ.
[220]Nijssen, S. andFromont, E. (2007). Mining optimal decision trees
from itemset lattices. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 530–539.
ACM.
[221]Nijssen, S. andFromont, E. (2010). Optimal constraint-based decision
tree induction from itemset lattices. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
219-51.MR2720512
[222]Nijssen, S. ,Schaus, P. et al. (2020). Learning Optimal Decision Trees
Using Caching Branch-and-Bound Search. In Proceedings of AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[223]Nori, H. ,Jenkins, S. ,Koch, P. andCaruana, R. (2019). Inter-
pretML: A uniﬁed framework for machine learning interpretability. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 1909.09223 .
[224]Northpointe (2013). Practitioner’s Guide to COMPAS Core Technical
Report, Northpointe.
[225]O’Connor, M. (2021). Algorithm’s ‘unexpected’ weakness raises larger
concerns about AI’s potential in broader populations. Health Imaging, Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence section April 05 .
[226]Pang, G. ,Lu, L.andKarniadakis, G. E. (2019). fPINNs: Fractional
physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing
41A2603–A2626. MR3995303
[227]Pang, G. ,Yang, L. andKarniadakis, G. E. (2019). Neural-net-
induced Gaussian process regression for function approximation and PDEsolution. Journal of Computational Physics 384270–288. MR3920923
[228]Papagelis, A. andKalles, D. (2000). GA Tree: genetically evolved de-
cision trees. In Proceedings 12th IEEE Internationals Conference on Tools
with Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICTAI) 203–206. IEEE.
[229]Papernot, N. andMcDaniel, P. (2018). Deep k-Nearest Neighbors:
Towards Conﬁdent, Interpretable and Robust Deep Learning. arXiv e-print
arXiv:1803.04765 .
[230]
Parbhoo, S. ,Bogojeska, J. ,Zazzi, M. ,Roth, V. andDoshi-
Velez, F. (2017). Combining kernel and model based learning for HIV
therapy selection. AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings
2017239.
[231]Parikh, H. ,Rudin, C. andVolfovsky, A. (2019). An Application of
Matching After Learning To Stretch (MALTS) to the ACIC 2018 Causal
Inference Challenge Data. Observational Studies 118–130.
[232]Pearson, K. (1901). On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit to Systems of
Points in Space. Philosophical Magazine 2559–572.
[233]Pedregosa, F. ,Varoquaux, G. ,Gramfort, A. ,Michel, V. ,
Thirion, B. ,Grisel, O. ,Blondel, M. ,Prettenhofer, P. ,Weiss, R. ,
Dubourg, V. ,Vanderplas, J. ,Passos, A. ,Cournapeau, D. ,
Brucher, M. ,Perrot, M. andDuchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn:
Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12
2825–2830. MR2854348

==== Page 78 ====
78 C. Rudin et al.
[234]Petersen, A. ,Witten, D. andSimon, N. (2016). Fused lasso additive
model.Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 251005–1025.
MR3572026
[235]Lo Piano, S. (2020). Ethical principles in machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence: cases from the ﬁeld and possible ways forward. Humanit Soc
Sci Commun 7.
[236]Poliˇcar, P. G. ,Straˇzar, M. andZupan, B. (2019). openTSNE: a
modular Python library for t-SNE dimensionality reduction and embed-
ding.bioRxiv.
[237]Poursabzi-Sangdeh, F. ,Goldstein, D. G. ,Hofman, J. M. ,
Vaughan, J. W. andWallach, H. M. (2021).ManipulatingandMeasur-
ing Model Interpretability. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI) .
[238]Psichogios, D. C. andUngar, L. H. (1992). A hybrid neural network-
ﬁrst principles approach to process modeling. AIChE Journal 381499–
1511.
[239]Quinlan, J. R. (1993).C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning . Morgan
Kaufmann. MR3729316
[240]Raissi, M. (2018). Deep Hidden Physics Models: Deep Learning of Non-
linearPartialDiﬀerentialEquations. Journal of Machine Learning Research
191-24.MR3862432
[241]Raissi, M. ,Perdikaris, P. andKarniadakis, G. E. (2018). Multi-
step Neural Networks for Data-driven Discovery of Nonlinear DynamicalSystems. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1801.01236 .MR3881695
[242]Raissi, M. ,Perdikaris, P. andKarniadakis, G. E. (2019). Physics-
informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward
and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations.
Journal of Computational Physics 378686–707. MR3881695
[243]
Raissi, M. ,Yazdani, A. andKarniadakis, G. E. (2020). Hidden ﬂuid
mechanics: Learning velocity and pressure ﬁelds from ﬂow visualizations.Science3671026–1030. MR4265157
[244]Rao, C. ,Sun, H. andLiu, Y. (2021). Physics-Informed Deep Learn-
ing for Computational Elastodynamics without Labeled Data. Journal of
Engineering Mechanics 14704021043.
[245]Ravikumar, P. ,Lafferty, J. ,Liu, H. andWasserman, L. (2009).
Sparse additive models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology) 711009–1030. MR2750255
[246]R i e s b e c k ,C .K . andSchank, R. S. (1989).Inside Case-Based Reason-
ing. Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc., Inc., Hillsdale, NJ.
[247]Rivest, R. L. (1987). Learning decision lists. Machine Learning 2229–
246.
[248]Roth, A. M. ,Topin, N. ,Jamshidi, P. andVeloso, M. (2019).
Conservative Q-improvement: Reinforcement learning for an interpretable
decision-tree policy. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1907.01180 .
[249]Roweis, S. T. andS a u l ,L .K . (2000). Nonlinear Dimensionality Re-
duction by Locally Linear Embedding. Science2902323-2326.

==== Page 79 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 79
[250]Rudin, C. (2019). Stop Explaining Black Box Machine Learning Models
for High Stakes Decisions and Use Interpretable Models Instead. Nature
Machine Intelligence 1206–215.
[251]Rudin, C. andErtekin, S. (2018). Learning Customized and Optimized
Lists of Rules with Mathematical Programming. Mathematical Program-
ming C (Computation) 10659–702. MR3863707
[252]Rudin, C. ,Letham, B. andMadigan, D. (2013). Learning theory anal-
ysis for association rules and sequential event prediction. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 143441–3492. MR3144468
[253]Rudin, C. andRadin, J. (2019). Why Are We Using Black Box Mod-
els in AI When We Don’t Need To? A Lesson From An Explainable AICompetition. Harvard Data Science Review 1.
[254]Rudin, C. andSchapire, R. E. (2009). Margin-Based Ranking and
an Equivalence between AdaBoost and RankBoost. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 102193–2232. MR2563980
[255]Rudin, C. andShaposhnik, Y. (2019). Globally-Consistent Rule-
Based Summary-Explanations for Machine Learning Models: Applicationto Credit-Risk Evaluation. May 28, 2019. Available at SSRN: https://
ssrn.com/abstract=3395422 .
[256]Rudin, C. andUstun, B. (2018). Optimized scoring systems: Toward
trust in machine learning for healthcare and criminal justice. Interfaces 48
449–466.
[257]Rudin, C. andWagstaff, K. L. (2014). Machine Learning for Science
and Society. Machine Learning 95.MR3179975
[258]Rudin, C. ,Wang, C. andCoker, B. (2020). The Age of Secrecy and
Unfairness in Recidivism Prediction. Harvard Data Science Review 2.
[259]Rudy, S. H. ,B r u n t o n ,S .L . ,Proctor, J. L. andK u t z ,J .N . (2017).
Data-driven discovery of partial diﬀerential equations.
Science Advances 3
e1602614.
[260]Rymarczyk, D. ,Struski, /suppress L.,Tabor, J. andZieli´nski, B. (2020).
ProtoPShare: Prototype Sharing for Interpretable Image Classiﬁcation and
Similarity Discovery. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2011.14340 .
[261]Sabour, S. ,Frosst, N. andHinton, G. E. (2017). Dynamic rout-
ing between capsules. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 3856–3866.
[262]Sadhanala, V. ,Tibshirani, R. J. et al. (2019). Additive models with
trend ﬁltering. The Annals of Statistics 473032–3068. MR4025734
[263]Sahli Costabal, F. ,Yang, Y. ,Perdikaris, P. ,Hurtado, D. E. and
Kuhl, E. (2020). Physics-informed neural networks for cardiac activation
mapping. Frontiers in Physics 842.
[264]Salakhutdinov, R. andHinton, G. (2007). Learning a Nonlinear Em-
bedding by Preserving Class Neighbourhood Structure. In Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 412–419.
[265]Sallab, A. E. ,Abdou, M. ,Perot, E. andYogamani, S. (2017).
Deep reinforcement learning framework for autonomous driving. Electronic
Imaging 201770–76.

==== Page 80 ====
80 C. Rudin et al.
[266]Schapire, R. E. ,Freund, Y. ,Bartlett, P. ,Lee, W. S. et al. (1998).
Boosting the margin: A new explanation for the eﬀectiveness of votingmethods. The Annals of Statistics 261651–1686. MR1673273
[267]Schmidhuber, J. (1992). Learning factorial codes by predictability min-
imization. Neural Computation 4863–879.
[268]Schramowski, P. ,Stammer, W. ,Teso, S. ,Brugger, A. ,Her-
bert, F. ,Shao, X. ,Luigs, H.-G. ,Mahlein, A.-K. andKersting, K.
(2020). Making deep neural networks right for the right scientiﬁc reasons
by interacting with their explanations. Nature Machine Intelligence 2476–
486.
[269]Semenova, L. ,Rudin, C. andParr, R. (2019). A study in Rashomon
curves and volumes: A new perspective on generalization and model sim-plicity in machine learning. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1908.01755 .
[270]Seo, S.,Meng, C. andLiu, Y. (2019). Physics-aware diﬀerence graph
networks for sparsely-observed dynamics. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[271]Shu, T. ,Xiong, C. andSocher, R. (2018). Hierarchical and inter-
pretable skill acquisition in multi-task reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[272]Silva, A. ,Gombolay, M. ,Killian, T. ,Jimenez, I. andSon, S.-H.
(2020). Optimization methods for interpretable diﬀerentiable decision trees
applied to reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 1855–1865.
[273]Silver, D. ,Huang, A. ,Maddison, C. J. ,
Guez, A. ,Sifre, L. ,Van
Den Driessche, G. ,Schrittwieser, J. ,Antonoglou, I. ,Panneer-
shelvam, V. ,Lanctot, M. et al. (2016). Mastering the game of Go with
deep neural networks and tree search. Nature529484–489.
[274]Six, A.,Backus, B. andKelder, J. (2008).Chestpainintheemergency
room: value of the HEART score. Netherlands Heart Journal 16191–196.
[275]Sokolova, M. ,Marchand, M. ,Japkowicz, N. andShawe-
taylor, J. S. (2003). The decision list machine. In Proceedings of Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 945–952.
[276]Sokolovska, N. ,Chevaleyre, Y. ,Cl´ement, K. andZucker, J.-D.
(2017). The fused lasso penalty for learning interpretable medical scor-ing systems. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN) 4504–4511. IEEE.
[277]Sokolovska, N. ,Chevaleyre, Y. andZucker, J.-D. (2018). A Prov-
able Algorithm for Learning Interpretable Scoring Systems. In Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research Vol. 84: Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics(AISTATS) 566–574.
[278]Spiegelhalter, D. (2020). Should We Trust Algorithms? Harvard Data
Science Review 2.
[279]Srebro, N. ,Sridharan, K. andTewari, A. (2010). Smoothness, low
noise and fast rates. In Proceedings of Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2199–2207.
[280]Sreedharan, S. ,Chakraborti, T. andKambhampati, S. (2018).

==== Page 81 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 81
Handling Model Uncertainty and Multiplicity in Explanations via Model
Reconciliation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Auto-
mated Planning and Scheduling 28518–526.
[281]Struck, A. F. ,Ustun, B. ,Ruiz, A. R. ,Lee, J. W. ,LaRoche, S. M. ,
Hirsch, L. J. ,Gilmore, E. J. ,Vlachy, J. ,H a i d e r ,H .A . ,Rudin, C.
andW e s t o v e r ,M .B . (2017). Association of an Electroencephalography-
Based Risk Score With Seizure Probability in Hospitalized Patients. JAMA
Neurology 741419-1424.
[282]Sutton, R. S. andBarto, A. G. (2018).Reinforcement learning: An
introduction . MIT press. MR3889951
[283]Tai, L.,Zhang, J. ,Liu, M.,Boedecker, J. andBurgard, W. (2016).
A survey of deep network solutions for learning control in robotics: Fromreinforcement to imitation. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1612.07139 .
[284]Tang, J. ,Liu, J.,Zhang, M. andMei, Q. (2016). Visualizing large-
scale and high-dimensional data. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on the World Wide Web 287–297. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee.
[285]Tenenbaum, J. B. ,de Silva, V. andLangford, J. C. (2000). A
Global Geometric Framework for Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Sci-
ence2902319-2323.
[286]Than, M. ,Flaws, D. ,Sanders, S. ,Doust, J. ,Glasziou, P. ,
Kline, J. ,Aldous, S. ,Troughton, R. ,
Reid, C. ,Parsonage, W. A.
et al. (2014). Development and validation of the Emergency DepartmentAssessment of Chest pain Score and 2h accelerated diagnostic protocol.Emergency Medicine Australasia 2634–44.
[287]Thiebes, S. ,Lins, S. andSunyaev, A. (2020). Trustworthy artiﬁcial
intelligence. Electronic Markets .
[288]Tomsett, R. ,Preece, A. ,Braines, D. ,Cerutti, F. ,
Chakraborty, S. ,Srivastava, M. ,Pearson, G. andKaplan, L.
(2020). Rapid Trust Calibration through Interpretable and Uncertainty-Aware AI. Patterns 1100049.
[289]Torgerson, W. (1952). Multidimensional scaling: ITheoryand Method.
Psychometrika 17401-419. MR0054219
[290]Trinh, L. ,Tsang, M. ,Rambhatla, S. andLiu, Y. (2021). Inter-
pretable and Trustworthy Deepfake Detection via Dynamic Prototypes.InProceedings of the I EEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision (WACV) 1973–1983.
[291]Ustun, B. andRudin, C. (2016). Supersparse linear integer models
for optimized medical scoring systems. Machine Learning 102349–391.
MR3463093
[292]Ustun, B. andRudin, C. (2017). Optimized risk scores. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discoveryand Data Mining (KDD) 1125–1134.
[293]Ustun, B. andRudin, C. (2019). Learning Optimized Risk Scores. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 201–75.MR4030164
[294]Ustun, B. ,Traca, S. andRudin, C. (2013). Supersparse linear integer

==== Page 82 ====
82 C. Rudin et al.
models for predictive scoring systems. In Proceedings of the AAAI Work-
shop Late Breaking Track .
[295]Ustun, B. ,W e s t o v e r ,M .B . ,Rudin, C. andBianchi, M. T. (2016).
Clinical Prediction Models for Sleep Apnea: The Importance of Medical
History over Symptoms. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 12161–168.
[296]van der Maaten, L. (2014). Accelerating t-SNE using tree-based algo-
rithms.Journal of Machine Learning Research 153221-3245. MR3277169
[297]van der Maaten, L. andHinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using
t-SNE.Journal of Machine Learning Research 92579–2605.
[298]Vanhoof, K. andDepaire, B. (2010). Structure of association rule clas-
siﬁers: a review. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Sys-
tems and Knowledge Engineering (ISKE) 9–12. IEEE.
[299]Vapnik, V. andChervonenkis, A. Y. (1971). On the Uniform Conver-
gence of Relative Frequencies of Events to Their Probabilities. Theory of
Probability and its Applications 16264.MR0288823
[300]Verma, A. ,Murali, V. ,Singh, R. ,Kohli, P. andChaudhuri, S.
(2018). Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
ings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 5045–5054.
[301]Verwer, S. andZhang, Y. (2019). Learning optimal classiﬁcation trees
using a binary linear program formulation. In Proceedings of AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[302]Vilas Boas, M. G. ,Santos, H. G. ,Merschmann, L. H. d. C. and
Vanden Berghe, G. (2019). Optimal decision trees for the algorithm
selection problem: integer programming based approaches. International
Transactions in Operational Research .
[303]Wachter, S. ,Mittelstadt, B. andFloridi, L. (2017). Why a Right
to Explanation of Automated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in the Gen-
eral Data Protection Regulation. International Data Privacy Law .
[304]Wagstaff, K. L. (2012). Machine Learning that Matters. In Proceedings
of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 529-536.
[305]Wah, C. ,Branson, S. ,Welinder, P. ,Perona, P. andBelongie, S.
(2011). The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset Technical Report No.
CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology.
[306]Wang, F. andRudin, C. (2015). Falling rule lists. In Proceedings of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 1013–1022.
[307]Wang, J. ,Oh, J.,Wang, H. andWiens, J. (2018). Learning Credible
Models. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 2417–2426.
[308]Wang, S. ,Teng, Y. andPerdikaris, P. (2020). Understanding and
mitigating gradient pathologies in physics-informed neural networks. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 2001.04536 .
[309]Wang, T. (2019). Gaining Free or Low-Cost Interpretability with Inter-
pretable Partial Substitute. In Proceedings of the 36th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML) 976505–6514.
[310]Wang, T. ,Morucci, M. ,Awan, M. U. ,Liu, Y.,Roy, S.,Rudin, C.
andVolfovsky, A. (2021). FLAME: A Fast Large-scale Almost Match-

==== Page 83 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 83
ing Exactly Approach to Causal Inference. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 221-41.
[311]Wang, T. andRudin, C. (2015).LearningoptimizedOr’sofAnd’s. arXiv
e-print arXiv: 1511.02210 .
[312]Wang, T. ,Yang, J. ,Li, Y.andWang, B. (2021). Partially In-
terpretable Estimators (PIE): Black-Box-Reﬁned Interpretable MachineLearning. arXiv e-print 2105.02410 arXiv: 2105.02410 .
[313]Wang, Y. ,Huang, H. ,Rudin, C. andShaposhnik, Y. (2021). Under-
standing How Dimension Reduction Tools Work: An Empirical Approach
to Deciphering t-SNE, UMAP, TriMap, and PaCMAP for Data Visualiza-tion.Journal of Machine Learning Research .
[314]Wattenberg, M. ,Vi´egas, F. andJohnson, I. (2016). How to use
t-SNE eﬀectively. Distill1e2.
[315]Weathers, F. W. ,Litz, B. T. ,K e a n e ,T .M . ,Palmieri, P. A. ,
Marx, B. P. andSchnurr, P. P. (2013). The PTSD checklist for DSM-
5 (PCL-5) – Standard [Measurement instrument]. Scale available from theNational Center for PTSD at www.ptsd.va.gov .
[316]W e i n b e r g e r ,K .Q . andSaul, L. K. (2009). Distance Metric Learn-
ing for Large Margin Nearest Neighbor Classiﬁcation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 10.
[317]Wexler, R. (2017). When a Computer Program Keeps You in Jail: How
Computers are Harming Criminal Justice. New York Times .
[318]Wood, S. N. (2017).Generalized additive models: an introduction with
R. CRC press.
[319]Wu, C. andTabak, E. G. (2017). Prototypal Analysis and Prototypal
Regression. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1701.08916 .
[320]
Xie, F.,Chakraborty, B. ,Ong, M. E. H. ,Goldstein, B. A. and
Liu, N.(2020). AutoScore: A Machine Learning–Based Automatic Clinical
Score Generator and Its Application to Mortality Prediction Using Elec-tronic Health Records. JMIR Medical Informatics 8e21798.
[321]Yang, H. ,Rudin, C. andSeltzer, M. (2017). Scalable Bayesian rule
lists. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML) 3921–3930.
[322]Yang, Y. ,Morillo, I. G. andHospedales, T. M. (2018). Deep neu-
ral decision trees. In Proceedings of the ICML Work shop on Human Inter-
pretability in Machine Learning .
[323]Yang, Y. andPerdikaris, P. (2019).Conditionaldeepsurrogatemodels
for stochastic, high-dimensional, and multi-ﬁdelity systems. Computational
Mechanics 64417–434.
[324]Yin, J.andYu, Y.(2017). Convex-constrained sparse additive modeling
and its extensions. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(UAI).
[325]Yin, X.andHan, J. (2003). CPAR: Classiﬁcation based on predictive as-
sociation rules. In Proceedings of the 2003 SIAM International Conference
on Data Mining (SDM) 331–335. SIAM.

==== Page 84 ====
84 C. Rudin et al.
[326]Yu, C.,Liu, J.andNemati, S. (2019).Reinforcementlearninginhealth-
care: A survey. arXiv e-print arXiv: 1908.08796 .
[327]Yu, J.,Ignatiev, A. ,Bodic, P. L. andStuckey, P. J. (2020).Optimal
Decision Lists using SAT. arXiv e-print arXiv: 2010.09919 .
[328]Yu, J.,Ignatiev, A. ,Stuckey, P. J. andLe Bodic, P. (2020). Com-
puting Optimal Decision Sets with SAT. In International Conference on
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming 952–970. Springer.
[329]Zahavy, T. ,Ben-Zrihem, N. andMannor, S. (2016). Graying the
black box: Understanding DQNs. In International Conference on Machine
Learning 1899–1908.
[330]Zambaldi, V. ,Raposo, D. ,Santoro, A. ,Bapst, V. ,Li, Y.,
Babuschkin, I. ,Tuyls, K. ,Reichert, D. ,Lillicrap, T. ,Lock-
hart, E. et al. (2019). Relational deep reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[331]Zech, J. R. et al. (2018). Variable generalization performance of a deep
learning model to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs: A cross-sectionalstudy.PLoS Med. 15.
[332]Zhang, K. ,Wang, Y. ,Du, J.,Chu, B. ,Celi, L. A. ,Kindle, R. and
Doshi-Velez, F. (2021). Identifying Decision Points for Safe and Inter-
pretableReinforcementLearninginHypotensionTreatment.In Proceedings
of the NeurIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for Health .
[333]Zhang, Q.
,Nian Wu, Y. andZhu, S.-C. (2018). Interpretable convolu-
tionalneuralnetworks.In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 8827–8836.
[334]Zhang, Y. ,Song, K. ,Sun, Y.,Tan, S. andUdell, M. (2019). “Why
Should You Trust My Explanation?” Understanding Uncertainty in LIME
Explanations. In Proceedings of the ICML AI for Social Good Work shop.
[335]Zhao, H. ,Jin, R.,Wu, S.andShi, J.(2011).PDE-constrainedGaussian
process model on material removal rate of wire saw slicing process. Journal
of Manufacturing Science and Engineering 133.
[336]Zhou, B. ,Bau, D. ,Oliva, A. andTorralba, A. (2018). Interpreting
deep visual representations via network dissection. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .
[337]Zhou, B. ,Khosla, A. ,Lapedriza, A. ,Oliva, A. andTorralba, A.
(2014). Object detectors emerge in deep scene CNNs. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[338]Zhou, B. ,Sun, Y.,Bau, D. andTorralba, A. (2018). Interpretable
basis decomposition for visual explanation. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 119–134.
[339]Zhou, D.-X. (2002). The covering number in learning theory. Journal of
Complexity 18739–767.
[340]Zhu, Y. ,Zabaras, N. ,Koutsourelakis, P.-S. andPerdikaris, P.
(2019). Physics-constrained deep learning for high-dimensional surrogate
modeling and uncertainty quantiﬁcation without labeled data. Journal of
Computational Physics 39456–81.

==== Page 85 ====
Interpretable machine learning grand challenges 85
[341]Zhu, Z.,Luo, P. ,Wang, X. andTang, X. (2014). Multi-view per-
ceptron: a deep model for learning face identity and view representations.InProceedings of Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) 217–225.

