==== Page 1 ====
PersPective
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00744-z1Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2Catalysis Science and T echnology Institute, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ✉e-mail: bgoldsm@umich.edu; linic@umich.eduDespite their enormous importance, most commercial hetero -
geneous catalysts have been discovered using trial-and-error 
experimental approaches that rely on the chemical intuition 
of catalysis practitioners. The difficulties associated with moving 
away from empirical experimental approaches towards catalyst 
design using predictive models are multifaceted, including the fact that heterogeneous catalysis spans time and length scales of more than nine orders of magnitude
1, and that the catalyst performance 
depends on many variables, such as the catalyst composition, mor -
phology, support material and reaction environment (for example, temperature, solvent and external potential). This large parameter space makes the design and optimization of heterogeneous catalysts 
challenging.
Researchers have recently turned to machine learning (ML) to 
accelerate the study and discovery of heterogeneous catalysts, using 
these tools to navigate the parameter space more efficiently
2–5. ML 
is a subfield of artificial intelligence that encompasses methods that self-infer patterns from data. Catalysis researchers leverage these 
learned patterns to streamline their work in many areas, including 
the atomistic simulation of reaction conditions
6,7, catalyst surface 
phase diagram construction8, reaction mechanism prediction9,10 
and catalyst structure elucidation11,12. Most applications of ML in 
catalysis thus far have used black-box models (see Table 1) to make predictions of computable physical properties (descriptors), such as 
adsorption or formation energies, that can be related to the catalytic 
performance (that is, activity or stability)
2–5. Extracting meaningful 
physical insights from black-box models has proved challenging, as the internal logic of black-box models is not readily interpretable 
due to the high degree of complexity of these models.
Interpretable ML methods that merge the predictive capacity of 
black-box models with the physical interpretability of physics-based 
models offer an alternative to black-box models. Herein, we refer 
to interpretable ML as models that extract relevant knowledge 
about relationships between catalytic variables in the form of suc
-
cinct data formats such as visualizations, rule sets, or mathematical equations
13. For example, an interesting fundamental question that 
interpretable ML can help to address, which we elaborate on below, is determining which physical properties of a catalyst surface gov -
ern the chemisorption strength of different adsorbates. In our view, interpretable ML methods present a complementary approach to black-box methods (Fig. 1). Translating the hidden patterns identi
-
fied by ML models into interpretable information formats can lead to testable theories and hypotheses, further advancing scientific understanding. Knowledge gained from interpretation can help to 
explain why a model fails to make some predictions accurately and 
thus guide model improvement. The development and application of interpretable ML algorithms is an active area of research across law, healthcare, business, engineering and science
14–18.
In this Perspective, we discuss the interpretable ML methods 
that are available to catalysis researchers and the potential of inter -
pretable ML to accelerate hypothesis formation and knowledge generation in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. We frame our discussion by briefly describing black-box models, whose generally 
opaque internal logic makes extracting physical insights challenging 
 
(Fig. 2a). We then introduce two general categories of interpretable 
ML: grey-box ML methods, which rely on model-agnostic post-hoc 
analyses to interpret black-box models (Fig. 2b), and glass-box 
methods in which outputting an interpretation is an inherent fea -
ture of the method (Fig. 2c). We highlight studies in heterogeneous 
catalysis that use interpretable methods (Table 1) and studies from chemistry and materials science research that use methods that have 
yet to see use in catalysis but may be of interest to the catalysis com
-
munity. We note that interpretable ML is also helping to improve 
the design and study of homogeneous catalysts19–24, which in many 
respects is a more mature field due to its substantial crossover with molecular design, although discussion of these applications 
is beyond the scope of this Perspective. Finally, we outline critical 
challenges for interpretable ML in heterogeneous catalysis.
Black-box methods
Black-box models, such as Gaussian process models or neural net -
works, are widely used in catalysis. One area that has benefitted from black-box models is computational high-throughput cata
-
lyst screening25–28. In most cases, these screening studies search Interpretable machine learning for knowledge 
generation in heterogeneous catalysis
Jacques A. Esterhuizen   1,2, Bryan R. Goldsmith   1,2 ✉ and Suljo Linic   1,2 ✉
Most applications of machine learning in heterogeneous catalysis thus far have used black-box models to predict computable 
physical properties (descriptors), such as adsorption or formation energies, that can be related to catalytic performance (that is, 
activity or stability). Extracting meaningful physical insights from these black-box models has proved challenging, as the inter -
nal logic of these black-box models is not readily interpretable due to their high degree of complexity. Interpretable machine 
learning methods that merge the predictive capacity of black-box models with the physical interpretability of physics-based 
models offer an alternative to black-box models. In this Perspective, we discuss the various interpretable machine learning 
methods available to catalysis researchers, highlight the potential of interpretable machine learning to accelerate hypothesis formation and knowledge generation, and outline critical challenges and opportunities for interpretable machine learning in 
heterogeneous catalysis.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 175

==== Page 2 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsfor model surface sites that bind relevant adsorbates with desired 
adsorption energies. The motivation for using these approaches is that, in many cases, the design space of possible catalysts is too large 
to be studied using quantum chemical methods alone. ML models 
serve as computationally efficient surrogates to minimize expensive quantum chemical calculations, enabling an accelerated screening of the catalyst design space. For example, an ML-accelerated screen
-
ing of electrochemical carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction catalysts 
identified copper–aluminium alloys as active and selective mate -
rials based on the computed binding energy of carbon monoxide (CO), which has been proposed to be a descriptor of CO
2 reduction 
activity27.
Black-box ML models are referred to as such because the param -
eters (weights, rules or connections) they learn are so overwhelm -
ing in number that directly extracting meaningful insight regarding the different physical behaviours captured by these parameters is unfeasible. For example, in the case of the aforementioned cop
-
per–aluminium alloy, the model is too complex to interpret (that is, shed light on the features of aluminium atoms that electroni
-
cally change the copper atoms to modulate their interaction with the CO adsorbate) and is therefore too complex to explain (that is, contextualize the model’s behaviour within the framework of exist
-
ing CO2 reduction catalysis knowledge). Nonetheless, their large 
number of parameters enables black-box models to typically out -
perform glass-box models in terms of computational accuracy for large and complex datasets. This benefit is sufficient for specific ML applications in catalysis, such as high-throughput active-site screen
-
ing or creating machine-learned potentials for molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations because accuracy is more desired than interpretation.
Grey-box methods
While a critical problem with black-box models is that it is chal -
lenging to interpret the internal logic that led to the conclusions of a model, there exists a class of methods for indirectly extracting interpretable information from black-box ML models after training. 
These approaches are called post-hoc analysis methods, referred 
to herein as grey-box methods. Many grey-box methods are model-agnostic and therefore usable with any class of ML model. The information from grey-box methods can take many forms 
but is usually a set of visualizations or sensitivity measures called 
feature-importance scores. Grey-box methods can generate expla
-
nations that are either global or local. Global explanations allow interpretation of the dataset-level relationships and patterns learned by black-box models, whereas local explanations allow practitioners 
to understand why black-box models make a specific prediction for 
a single data point.
The primary grey-box interpretation methods used in cataly
-
sis applications so far are global feature-importance scores25,26,29,30. 
A global feature-importance score is a sensitivity measure that describes how an individual feature or combination of features con
-
tributes to a model’s predictions at the dataset level. These scores yield insight into which features the model generally finds impor
-
tant and allow practitioners to quantify the relative importance of different features for describing a specific type of behaviour. For example, normalized sensitivity coefficients (a measure of feature T able 1 | Examples of black-box, grey-box and glass-box ML methods used in catalysis applications
Method Description Example application
Black box
 Neural networks77highly tunable and empirically state-of-the-art 
predictive models.high-throughput prediction of CO and h adsorption energies on diverse intermetallic alloys
38.
 Gaussian process models78Bayesian models that quantify the prediction uncertainty.Accelerating the construction of catalyst surface phase diagrams
8.
 AdaBoost regressor79Models that refine their focus during training to better fit difficult examples.Discovery of stable materials such as oxides, phosphides, sulfides and alloys
80.
Grey box
 Global feature-importance scores81Describes a feature’s contribution to predictions at 
the dataset level.Determining the physical properties that govern CO adsorption during CO
2 electroreduction catalyst 
screening25.
 Partial dependence plots31Visual explanations of how each feature affects the model output.Visualizing the impact of small-molecule and oxide-surface properties on chemisorption
34.
 Shapley additive explanations35Game-theoretic metric for describing a feature’s contribution to an individual prediction.Quantifying the influence of the catalyst composition and experimental conditions on the selectivity to C
2 products 
during the oxidative coupling of methane36.
Glass box
 Symbolic regression82Identifies simple closed-form models for predicting 
target properties.Identifying an easily calculable descriptor that predicts chemisorption for various adsorbates on alloys with different compositions and surface facets
40.
 Subgroup discovery83Identifies and characterizes subgroups that share common traits in data.Identifying single-atom catalysts that can break scaling relations for the nitrogen reduction reaction
51.
 Generalized additive models55Predictive models that are interpretable because the independent segments of the model decision-making process can be interpreted independently.Quantifying and understanding chemisorption on alloys
57.
 Principal component analysis84An unsupervised ML algorithm that projects the data onto a reduced basis while describing the maximum dataset variance.Finding electronic-structure descriptors for metal alloys and oxides
49.
 Probabilistic graphical models85Predictive models that can be used to enforce causal structure and quantify error.Quantitatively attributing errors in an activity volcano plot for the oxygen reduction reaction
63.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 176

==== Page 3 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsimportance) were generated for neural networks used to perform 
high-throughput screening of core–shell alloy catalysts for CO2 
electroreduction using the CO adsorption energy as an activity descriptor (Fig. 3a)
25. The sensitivity coefficients showed that the 
local Pauli electronegativity at a catalyst surface site plays a crucial role in predicting the CO adsorption energies, particularly for alloys 
that contain surface sites with fully occupied d bands such as cop
-
per (Cu), silver (Ag) and gold (Au). In addition, feature-importance 
scores of a random forest model have been used to determine the relative impact of the calculated geometric and electronic features 
of doped nickel phosphide (Ni
2P) catalysts on their hydrogen evolu -
tion reaction activity, ultimately identifying the Niβ–Niγ bond length 
(with the α, β and γ notation used by the authors shown in Fig. 3b) 
as the most important descriptor of hydrogen evolution reaction activity
29. These examples highlight the utility and relative ease with 
which feature-importance scores can extract insight from black-box 
models.
In addition to global feature-importance scores, there have 
also been limited efforts to bring post-hoc global visualizations to catalysis. Global visualization methods, such as partial dependence plots
31, accumulated local effects plots32 and transparent model dis -
tillation16,33, provide visual explanations of the change in the model 
behaviour subject to a change in only one or two feature values, which allows these effects to be plotted in a line chart or heat map, 
respectively. One recent application used partial dependence plots 
to visualize the marginal change in the predicted adsorption ener
-
gies of various adsorbates such as alkanes, aromatics and amines on group 13 metal oxide surfaces (for example, aluminium oxide and gallium oxide) from a regression model subject to changing the physical properties of the adsorbate and the oxide surface
34. 
The partial dependence plots indicated that the adsorbate’s highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy and the oxide’s surface 
energy play crucial roles in determining the adsorption energy (Fig. 
3c), with the adsorption strength increasing for a higher-in-energy HOMO and a higher surface energy. Although limited in their applications thus far, we believe that global visualizations will be a 
valuable tool for researchers to interpret their black-box catalysis 
models in the future.
Local explanations are an alternative approach for interpret
-
ing black-box models. The most common form of local expla -
nation is local feature-importance scores. In contrast to global feature-importance scores, which describe a feature’s general contri
-
bution across many different predictions, local feature-importance scores describe a feature’s contribution to an individual prediction (for example, giving insight into the contributions of electronic or 
geometric features to the performance of a specific material). One 
important method that assigns local feature-importance scores is Shapley additive explanations (SHAP)
35, which have been used in 
several recent catalysis studies36,37. For example, a recent study used 
SHAP in a literature meta-analysis of around 2,000 catalysts for the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM)
36. SHAP elucidated the 
relative influence of different catalysts and experimental conditions on the selectivity to desired C
2 products in OCM, suggesting that 
a high operating temperature, a higher partial pressure of meth -
ane relative to oxygen and the presence of lanthanum and sodium in the catalyst were critical parameters for steering OCM towards the desired C
2 products. There have also been efforts in catalysis at 
providing local explanations, such as generating post-hoc visualiza -
tions, for black-box adsorption energy prediction models that show the contributions of individual atoms to the predicted binding ener
-
gies (Fig. 3d)38.
Grey-box methods are a promising approach for interpreting 
black-box models that can often yield plausible explanations of the 
black-box model’s behaviour. Nevertheless, we add a warning that 
grey-box explanations can also be misleading and misrepresent black-box model behaviour
13,39. This is because, in most cases, there 
exists a gap between the simple explanations offered by a grey-box method and the complex behaviour learned by the black-box 
model. Nonetheless, developing higher resolution grey-box meth
-
ods remains an open field of research in ML that will undoubtedly 
benefit advances in catalysis research and in science and engineer -
ing in general.
Glass-box methods
Not all ML methods require a grey-box method to interpret the relationships they have uncovered. Some ML methods yield such insights directly, referred to herein as glass-box methods. Generally, 
these glass-box methods have constraints, such as enforced simplic
-
ity, that make direct interpretation of glass-box ML results possible. 
Glass-box methods are used to find simple analytical expressions that relate input variables to target properties, to identify hidden 
or underlying structures in the data, to make predictions under 
enforced modularity or causal structure, or to suggest causal struc
-
ture directly. It is our view that glass-box methods are preferred if extracting scientific insight is the central objective.
The most applied glass-box method in catalysis applications thus 
far is symbolic regression
40–44. Symbolic regression methods (for 
example, SISSO45 and genetic programming46) algorithmically com -
bine input features using mathematical operators (for example, +, −, ×, ÷ and log) to find functionally simple mathematical expres
-
sions that can predict target properties as a function of those fea -
tures. Models from symbolic regression methods are interpretable because the simplicity of their closed-form analytical expressions allows researchers to step through the models and understand the 
numerical relationships between the various input features and the 
?
?
Hypothesis
formationInterpretation
Black-box ML
Experimental/
computational validationFingerprinting
and recording
structure–property
dataPhysics-based explanations Materials discovery
Interpretable ML
Fig. 1 | Synergistic relationship between black-box and interpretable ML 
approaches. Both interpretable and black-box ML models can be used in materials discovery applications to identify promising catalysts. Validating ML-predicted catalysts via experimental synthesis and characterization and computational validation can lead to materials that exhibit desirable properties such as low cost, high stability, high activity and high selectivity. In addition, fingerprinting (that is, uniquely labelling) and recording the structure–property data from detailed characterization studies can be used to iteratively improve ML models and accelerate catalyst discovery. Interpretable ML algorithms have the advantage of outputting human-interpretable information regarding the patterns or dependencies learned by the ML model. These interpretations enable hypothesis formation about what underlying physical mechanisms might play a role in the task. This knowledge can guide feature selection such that features are linked to the target property and inform additional experiments, thereby improving the ML models and accelerating catalyst discovery further.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 177

==== Page 4 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIscorresponding outputs. For example, researchers used symbolic 
regression to identify an activity descriptor for the oxygen evolu -
tion reaction (OER) on perovskite oxides (oxides with an ABO3 
structure)43. From a feature set containing numerous electronic 
(for example, valence electron structure and electronegativity) and structural features (for example, atomic radii and other structural 
parameters), symbolic regression identified an activity descrip
-
tor (μ/t) that combined two well-known structural parameters of 
perovskites, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) and the octahe -
dral factor (μ). The identified μ/t descriptor (Fig. 4a) suggested 
that increasing t, by incorporating large cations at the A site, and decreasing μ, by incorporating small cations at the B site, should 
lead to higher OER activity. Ultimately, four perovskites with exper
-
imental activities higher than previously reported perovskite oxide catalysts were identified for the OER based on these criteria. This example highlights the potential of symbolic regression for build
-
ing accurate and interpretable models that relate geometric or elec -
tronic features of catalysts to their performance.
Another strategy for finding interpretable scientific insights 
is through unsupervised ML. Unsupervised ML algorithms are 
pattern-recognition algorithms that probe for underlying struc -
ture in the data47, which can help to accelerate an exploration of the 
dataset. The two primary methods of unsupervised learning used 
in catalysis thus far are clustering algorithms and dimensionality 
reduction algorithms. In clustering, the goal is to identify and seg -
ment similar subpopulations, or clusters, in the data. Interpreting 
the clusters can facilitate an understanding of the similarities and differences between data (for example, spectra, mechanisms and 
structures). For example, clustering has been used in homoge
-
neous catalysis to help identify the optimal phosphine ligands for 
a stereoselective Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction catalysed by phosphine-ligand-mediated palladium catalysis
48. To address 
this challenge, researchers used clustering for the rapid identifica -
tion of representative phosphine ligand motifs so that the choice of phosphine ligands could be optimized systematically. K-means clustering grouped 365 commercially available phosphines into 
24 chemically distinct clusters based on their molecular proper
-
ties such as the HOMO–LUMO gap, Fukui index and volume. One 
compound from each cluster was experimentally evaluated based on availability, price and anticipated stability, and one of the ligands, 2-(diphenylphosphino)-2′,6′-dimethoxy-1,1′-biphenyl, was identi
-
fied as having superior performance. Further investigation revealed that structurally similar triarylphosphine ligands were also effec
-
tive. We note that, in general, clusters are most likely to be interpre -
table when clustering is performed on low-dimensional data of two or three features, as the clusters and decision boundaries used for cluster assignment can then be easily visualized.
In dimensionality reduction, high-dimensional data (for exam
-
ple, signals, images or large feature sets) are transformed to a lower-dimensional subspace that still captures the essence of the data. In the lower-dimensional space, the data can be visualized and may 
be interpretable. Nonetheless, the transformation from high to low 
dimensions can be complex, non-linear and highly parameterized, making it difficult to understand how the lower-dimensional data relate to the original high-dimensional data. One method of devel
-
oping this understanding is through explanatory visualizations. For example, we recently used a dimensionality reduction technique called principal component analysis (PCA) to establish relationships 
between the geometric structures of subsurface alloys based on rho
-
dium (Rh), palladium (Pd), iridium (Ir) and platinum (Pt) (in which a 
ligand metal composes the layer immediately beneath the surface) and the chemisorption strengths of different adsorbates on the alloys
49. We 
used electronic-structure descriptors as a bridge to relate the chemi -
sorption strength to the geometric structure and composition of the alloys. To accomplish this goal, we employed PCA on the d -projected 
density of states at the adsorption site to derive principal compo
-
nent (PC) descriptors of the sites’ electronic structure. Interpretation of the PC descriptors using signal reconstruction showed that they mapped to the geometric structure of the sites. For example, one of the 
machine-learned PC descriptors (Fig. 4c), found to be negatively cor
-
related with the chemisorption energy, was associated with a broad -
ening and downshift in the surface electronic d  band. Relating this 
machine-learned descriptor to geometric structure revealed that this 
broadening and downshift is caused by increasing the surface metal 
size, increasing the ligand metal size and decreasing the number of 
ligand d electrons. Ultimately, the PCA-based approach led us to con -
clude that selecting larger surface metal atoms, larger ligand metal atoms or ligand metals with fewer d  electrons lowers the chemisorp
-
tion energies of most adsorbates. Such insights are critical to designing surface sites with a specific chemical activity.
a
b
c
Black box
Grey box
Glass boxy*x1x2
 xn …
y*x1x2
 xn …
y*x1x2
 xn …
Fig. 2 | Schematic depiction of black-box, grey-box and glass-box ML methods. The objective of supervised learning applications is to predict a target 
property, y*. The predictions are made using a set of variables, called features (x1,x2,...xn), that characterize the catalyst. T ypically, these features are 
compositional, electronic or geometric fingerprints of the catalytic system of interest. a, Many highly predictive ML approaches fall under the umbrella description of black-box methods because their models contain numerous interdependent weights, rules and connections. Although the many learned patterns can lead to a high predictive accuracy, interpreting them without additional processing is a task that is beyond the means of human cognition. b, Post-processing to extract insight from black-box models can be done using grey-box methods, which use a separate model or technique to derive explanations of the black-box model behaviour. c, Glass-box methods can output explanations directly. These methods typically have constraints on their functional behaviour that make their interpretation straightforward.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 178

==== Page 5 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsAnother class of models that probe for latent or underlying 
structure in a dataset are subgroup discovery (SGD) algorithms50. 
Applications of ML in heterogeneous catalysis often focus on learn -
ing a single global model to predict a target property for many dif -
ferent catalysts. However, global models can fail to account for the 
possibility that the physical mechanism governing a target property may differ across different subgroups of catalysts, with the global 
model obfuscating or misrepresenting the physics affecting the tar
-
get property. Therefore, it may sometimes be beneficial to identify 
and segment physically similar subgroups and learn local models for each subgroup. The interpretation of these subgroups can enable an 
understanding of the geometric and chemical similarities between 
the catalysts
51–53. A recent application of SGD identified single-atom 
catalysts capable of breaking scaling relations between reaction intermediates for the nitrogen reduction reaction (Fig. 4d)
51. This 
analysis demonstrated that scaling relations were only broken by early transition metal atoms, with additional electronic-structure 
analysis showing that early transition metals offer this advantage 
because of charge transfer to the support, limiting the amount of charge available for bonding electronegative adsorbates like N* and NH*, where the asterisk indicates an adsorbed species. SGD 
can also identify regions of feature space where an ML model’s pre
-dictions are trustworthy, called the domain of applicability. Recent 
work used such an approach to identify the domain of applicability for ML models predicting the stability of transparent conducting 
oxides
54. These examples highlight the potential of SGD for identi -
fying geometrically or chemically similar groupings of catalysts and 
improving predictive models.
There have also been efforts to leverage glass-box models with 
enforced modularity for extracting catalysis insights. A model is modular if each feature’s contribution to the model decision-making process can be independently interpreted. For example, generalized additive models (GAMs) make predictions by summing indepen
-
dent, potentially non-linear, functions of each input variable55,56. 
Because the overall model is a linear combination of functions that are dependent on only one or two variables of interest, each 
independent function can be visualized easily, thus shedding light 
on the model behaviour. We recently used GAMs to develop che
-
misorption models for OH, Cl, O and S adsorbates on Rh-, Pd-, Ag-, Ir-, Pt- and Au-based subsurface alloys (Fig. 4e)
57. The GAMs 
identified a few critical material properties that control the che -
misorption strength on the alloys, showing that for a fixed surface atom, the number of d electrons in the ligand subsurface metal and the size of the ligand atom are two critical parameters that 
b
c dNi/uni03B2–Ni/uni03B3
Importance<Ni–Ni>
AreaFeature
0 100 50Perimeter
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B3
qX2
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B3–Ni/uni03B2
Ni/uni03B1–Ni/uni03B2
/uni03C3qX
qX3A–A = bond length
A–A–A = bond angle
q = residual charge
/uni03C3 = standard deviation
143
526
–0.25
–0.50
–0.75
–1.00
–1.25
–1.50
–1.75
–2.00050
020
20 40 60 80 100 120 –10 –9 –8 –7 –6 –5 –4–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.0
aPartial dependence (Eads (eV))
Surface energy (meV Å–2) HOMO (isolated) (eV)Eads (eV) Normalized sensitivity coefficient2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0Ni Pd Pt Cu Ag AuLocal electronegativity
Kurtosis
Skewness
Width
Centred-band characteristics
/uni03B3/uni03B2
/uni03B1
Fig. 3 | Grey-box methods in catalysis applications. a, Normalized sensitivity coefficients are used to assess the feature importance in a neural network for 
predicting CO adsorption on Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag and Au core–shell alloys, where the listed metal is the shell. b, r elative feature importance on the hydrogen 
evolution reaction activity of Ni2P catalysts obtained using a random forest model. Features are defined based on the displayed Ni2P model system, in 
which nickel is coloured grey and phosphorus doping sites are coloured purple. The angled brackets on <Ni–Ni> indicate an average bond length. The 
X notation loosely relates to the dopants. For example, qX2 denotes the residual charge on the dopants when there are two dopants, and qX3 denotes the 
residual charge on the dopants when there are three. The standard deviation of the dopant charges is given by σqX. c, Partial dependence plots showing 
the marginal effect of an adsorbate’s hOMO energy and an oxide’s surface energy on the adsorption energy (Eads) of the corresponding system. The black 
lines indicate the partial dependence plot, and the points, coloured according to the adsorption strength, show the actual values. histograms showing the distribution of the actual values are displayed above. d, A saliency map for a crystal graph convolutional neural network model shows which individual atoms in a Cu(211) model contribute the most to the predicted CO binding energy (where O is coloured red, C is coloured dark grey and Cu atoms are coloured light grey and light brown), with the light brown Cu atomic colouring indicating a larger contribution. Panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 
25, American Chemical Society. Panels adapted with permission from: b, ref. 29, American Chemical Society; c, ref. 34, American Chemical Society;  
d, ref. 38, American Chemical Society.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 179

==== Page 6 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIs
µ/tBa0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3
La0.5Ca0.5CoO3
La0.5Ca0.5MnO3 La0.75Ca0.25FeO3La0.5Ca0.5FeO3
LaFeO3 LaMn0.5Cu0.5O3
LaCrO3LaNiO3
LaCoO3
LaMnO3LaMn0.5Ni0.5O31.45
1.501.55
1.60
1.651.701.751.80
0.50 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
b
a
OH
Cl
0.4
0.2
Change in binding energy (eV)
O
S
0
–0.2
–0.4
Change in valence d-electrons
–4
–2
0
Covalent for O and S
Pauli repulsion for OH and Cl
–3
–2
–1
0
Pauli repulsion for all adsorbates
Pt
4
2
0
–2
HS
TV
d
nd /uni2265 4
nd /uni2264 3
HS
TV
e
OH
Cl
0.4
0.2
Change in binding energy (eV)
O
S
0
–0.2
–0.4
Au
f
/uni03C9e0
/uni03C9d0
/uni03C9c1
/uni03C9c4
/uni03C9s0
/uni03C9s1
/uni03C9s4
/uni03C9e1
/uni03C9e4
/uni03C9d1
/uni03C9d4
Energy (eV)
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
c
–0.50
0.25
0.00
–0.25
0.50
First principal component
–10
–5
0
5
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Density of states (a.u.)
*N adsorption free energy (eV)E (V versus RHE)
Change in valence d-electrons
21
Sc22
Ti23
V24
Cr25
Mn26
Fe27
Co28
Ni29
Cu
39
Y40
Zr41
Nb42
Mo43
Tc44
Ru45
Rh46
Pd47
Ag
57
La72
Hf73
Ta74
W75
Re76
Os77
Ir78
Pt79
Au*NH2 adsorption free energy (eV)/uni0394GO/uni0394G*O/uni0394G1
/uni0394G4r*/uni0394GO(DFT)
Fig. 4 |  Interpreting glass-box ML results. a, The limiting potential (E ) at 50 mA cm−2
ox of the OEr current plotted as a function of the geometric μ /t 
descriptor identified using symbolic regression. The dashed grey line shows the predicted limiting potential based on the identified μ /t descriptor, given by E 
= 2.52μ /t + 0.55. The error bars indicate the standard deviation of at least three independent experimental measurements. b , A directed acyclic graph was 
used to predict the optimal oxygen binding energy ( ΔG∗
O) and optimal reaction rate (r *) for the Orr. The uncertainty from sources like solvation treatment 
(ωs), density functional theory error (ωd), experimental error (ωe) and imperfect empirical correlations (ωc) were quantified and interpreted using directed 
acyclic graphs, which increases model credibility and offers insight into how a model’s predictive accuracy can be improved. c , Signal reconstruction shows 
the electronic-structure effects captured using a PC descriptor learned on the surface d -projected density of states of subsurface alloys based on rh, Pd, Ir 
and Pt. d , Calculated *Nh2 adsorption free energy as a function of the calculated *N adsorption free energy on single transition metal atoms on vanadium 
disulfide (VS2) supports. All single-atom systems containing four or more d  electrons (nd ≥ 4; filled points) fulfil the scaling relation, whereas early transition 
metals with three or fewer d  electrons (nd ≤ 3; open data points) do not. The overview of the single metal atoms studied (left) and a top view of the VS2 
substrate in which V atoms are coloured grey and S atoms are coloured yellow (right) is shown under the plot. The two single-atom adsorption sites 
considered are shown: one hexagonal close-packed hollow site atop a V atom (TV) and one face-centred cubic hollow site atop a subsurface hollow site (hS). e,f, GAMs shed light on the effect of the number of ligand valence d  electrons relative to the host metal on the chemisorption energies of O, Oh, S, 
and Cl on Pt (e ) and Au (f ) subsurface alloys. The subsurface alloy model systems are shown in the insets, with Pt coloured grey, Au coloured gold and the 
generic ligand metal atom coloured green. Panel a  reproduced with permission from ref. 
43, Springer Nature Ltd under a Creative Commons license  
CC BY 4.0 . Panels adapted with permission from: b , ref. 63, AAAS; c , ref. 49, Elsevier; d , ref. 51, American Chemical Society; e ,f, ref. 57, Elsevier.
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 180

==== Page 7 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIscontrol the chemisorption behaviour, which corroborated earlier 
reports58,59. Notably, the GAM models suggested that the number of 
d electrons in the ligand metal describes the degree of Pauli repul -
sion between the alloy surface and the adsorbate. Specifically, the GAMs connected the opposite adsorption trends of electron-rich adsorbates, such as OH and Cl, compared with adsorbates that are 
relatively electron-poor, such as O and S, on platinum alloys to the 
number of ligand d electrons (Fig. 4e). A previous chemisorption study, which used a physics-based chemisorption model
60, attrib -
uted similar opposite trends in the chemisorption strength of OH and Cl compared with O and S on platinum alloys to Pauli repul
-
sion61. Additional analysis of adsorption trends on metals with 
completely full d bands, such as gold (Fig. 4f ), whose chemisorption 
trends should depend primarily on Pauli repulsion, corroborated 
this hypothesis as they mirrored the behaviour of the electron-rich 
adsorbates on platinum. We expect that modular ML models will be a valuable tool for catalysis researchers in the future, especially with the expanding availability of open-source software packages 
that contain these model classes, such as InterpretML
62.
Generally, interpretations can shed light on the physical correla -
tions between a catalyst’s performance and its geometric and chemi -
cal properties. Nonetheless, many of these methods require the 
catalysis researcher to interpret and validate the results to ensure that their ML models do not learn illogical causal connections. However, 
it is also possible to build models with an enforced causal structure 
to ensure that ML models will behave in a manner that is consis
-
tent with previous physical knowledge63–65. Recent work used such 
an approach to quantify and attribute the errors introduced during the construction of an activity volcano plot for the oxygen reduc
-
tion reaction (ORR) by platinum-group-metal-based catalysts63. 
Researchers used a probabilistic graphical model, represented by the directed graph in Fig. 4b , to enforce a causal structure between 
the primary microkinetic input (the oxygen binding energy) and potential error sources when predicting the optimal oxygen bind
-
ing energy for the ORR. The model accounted for errors in solva -
tion treatment, density functional theory (DFT), experiment and the empirical scaling correlations used to predict the activation and intermediate chemisorption energies. They found that the primary 
sources of error were errors in the DFT calculations and imper
-
fect correlations between OOH* and OH* binding energies and 
O* binding energies. There also exist methods, called causal infer -
ence methods, to determine causal structure from raw data alone66. 
Although there have only been limited applications of causal infer -
ence thus far in the physical sciences67, the diffusion of advances 
in causal inference to catalysis research is likely to have a notable impact.
In contrast to the information gap present when interpreting 
black-box models with grey-box methods, glass-box methods pro
-
vide a full-resolution explanation of their behaviour. As a result, glass-box methods are preferable for applications where develop
-
ing scientific insight is the central objective. Although glass-box models may have a worse predictive performance compared with black-box models in practice due to their functional forms that 
are constrained to enforce modularity, causal structure or simplic
-
ity, there is, in theory, no reason that glass-box models cannot be 
competitive in terms of predictive accuracy. For problems where the data are well structured and the features are physically linked to the 
target property, there are often little to no performance differences 
between black-box models and simpler glass-box models
39.
Challenges and opportunities for progress
Despite the successes of interpretable ML in catalysis thus far, the field is still nascent, with substantial challenges to be overcome for it to reach its full potential. Below we highlight the critical chal
-
lenges that are related to integration with experiment, dataset size, model reusability, and explaining interpretations. Addressing these 
 challenges will require close collaboration between experimental -
ists, theoreticians and computer scientists.
Integrating interpretable ML with experimental data. Most inter -
pretable ML studies in heterogeneous catalysis thus far have used 
computational datasets due to a lack of suitably large experimen -
tal datasets. Typical ML studies include 100–10,000 training data points
68, which can be prohibitively time-consuming to obtain 
experimentally. One possible avenue for constructing large experi -
mental datasets for interpretable ML studies is to data-mine the wealth of catalyst data already available in the literature. Despite this approach being the most straightforward because the data already 
exist, and such processes can be done by applying natural language 
processing (that is, text extraction
69), it is questionable if such an 
approach would yield a coherent dataset amenable to interpretable ML analysis. Data reporting in the field of heterogeneous catalysis 
often lacks common standards in both experimental operating con
-
ditions and catalyst characterization that may limit the interpret -
ability of insights gained from such a dataset. Another approach 
would be proliferating new combinatoric high-throughput catalyst synthesis and characterization techniques aided using flow reactors, 
robotics or computer vision
70,71. Advances in such approaches will 
facilitate the construction of large experimental datasets with com -
mon operating conditions, which may be more amenable to inter -
pretable ML.
Capturing the experimental complexity of catalysts with 
ML-derived descriptors. An additional challenge facing the inte -
gration of interpretable ML with experiments arises from the 
reliance of most existing interpretable ML studies on computa -
tional descriptors, such as the adsorption energies of surface reac -
tive intermediates2–5. Despite the successes of descriptor-based 
screening approaches in heterogeneous catalysis, we emphasize that they have their limitations and can often be inadequate for 
predicting the behaviour of real catalysts under reaction condi
-
tions. Descriptor-based approaches often neglect the complexities 
present in real catalytic materials, such as environment-induced changes to surface sites, an abundance of diverse surface sites and 
an inability to synthesize the desired surface sites, among many 
others. Consequently, generating new hypotheses and descriptor sets that can better predict the behaviour of real catalytic materials under reaction conditions is a critical challenge, but one that we are 
optimistic that future applications of interpretable ML can help to 
address.
Dataset size. Even though most ML applications in catalysis thus 
far have relied on computational datasets generated using quan
-
tum chemical calculations, these datasets are still expensive and time-consuming to generate, as many of the calculations rely on high-performance supercomputing resources. Merging black-box 
ML with interpretable ML may aid future efforts. For example, 
approaches that leverage black-box surrogate models (for exam
-
ple, active learning28, Bayesian global optimization72 and myopic 
multi-scale sampling73) show promise for efficiently constructing 
large computational datasets for high-throughput catalyst screen -
ing. Researchers could use such datasets not only for screening but also to uncover scientific insights using interpretable ML.
Model accessibility and reusability. Most published ML models are 
seldom reused. One reason for this is that models are usually learned on datasets generated ad hoc; the development of standardized datasets would certainly improve reusability
74. An additional bar -
rier to reusability is the considerable amount of domain expertise in mathematics and computer science that is required to leverage ML models beyond the typical skill set acquired by chemists, materials 
scientists and chemical engineers. Furthermore, the features used 
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 181

==== Page 8 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIsin the models can provide an additional barrier to use if they are 
computational or experimental values that are difficult to obtain, as opposed to easily accessible tabulated properties. One route to 
expanding the accessibility of machine-learned results would be the 
development of user-friendly web applications that interface with ML models, similar to those provided by the Materials Project
75. 
Another route is the proliferation of interpretable ML models. We believe that interpretable models using easily obtainable tabulated 
properties will help to broaden the community use and impact of 
machine-learned results. For example, a machine-learned stabil
-
ity descriptor of perovskites identified using symbolic regression has begun to see widespread use, probably due to its closed-form expression and easy computability
76.
Explaining interpretations. As helpful as interpretation tools 
might be, ML cannot eliminate the role of catalysis scientists in 
advancing scientific theories and hypotheses. While the ML model and the interpretability method are critical in yielding insightful interpretations, the features used as inputs to the model also play a 
pivotal role in enabling interpretation. Features should be selected 
using domain expertise. We believe that, if possible, the best prac
-
tice is to use features that align with earlier physical explanations, as the interpretation is likely to be more insightful if it reinforces or connects to pre-existing domain knowledge. Such features could 
include electronic and geometric descriptions of surface sites, spec
-
troscopic data and experimental operating conditions (temperature, 
pressure and reactant concentrations). Nonetheless, we emphasize that there are no universal criteria for choosing features for inter
-
pretable ML applications. The features selected depend heavily on the system being studied, and therefore the need for domain exper
-
tise cannot be eliminated.
Even more importantly, it is up to researchers to contextualize, 
audit and frame interpretable ML models using existing catalysis 
knowledge. It is unlikely that an ML model in and of itself will dis -
cover new or unexpected physics. Quite the opposite is true. If an 
ML model predicts unexpected physics, the model is more likely to be incorrect (for example, learning correlation rather than cau
-
sation). The power of interpretable ML lies in its ability to enable researchers to generate hypotheses more easily from data, which can inform additional characterization and experiments. An excellent 
example of using interpretable ML for hypothesis formation was the 
previously mentioned work that used SGD to identify single-atom catalysts capable of breaking scaling relations between reaction intermediates for the nitrogen reduction reaction
51. The researchers 
used SGD to identify that only early transition metals could break scaling the relations between N* and NH*. They then performed 
additional electronic-structure analysis to elucidate that early tran
-
sition metals are superior due to charge transfer to the support, 
limiting the amount of charge available for bonding electronega -
tive adsorbates. In the same way that the SGD result helped guide the subsequent electronic-structure analysis, future applications of interpretable ML in catalysis should use ML to guide additional 
computational or experimental corroboration of their hypotheses. 
Ultimately, the interpretations derived from ML models are mean
-
ingless unless catalysis researchers can explain them.
Final remarks
It is near certain that applications of ML in heterogeneous cataly -
sis will increase in the future. The field of heterogeneous catalysis has many complex problems that are ripe for exploration with ML, such as uncovering structure–mechanism–reactivity relationships 
for multi-component catalysts, elucidating the physicochemical 
properties that govern photocatalytic, plasma-catalytic and elec
-
trocatalytic reactions, and analysing microscopic and spectroscopic data. The early success of ML for accelerating research progress inspires confidence in its ability to help tackle these challenges. Nevertheless, applications of ML to generate new knowledge and hypotheses remain few and far between, mainly because most appli
-
cations of ML in catalysis thus far have used black-box models. Whereas black-box models can be advantageous from the pragmatic standpoint of high predictive accuracy, directly interpreting their 
behaviour is intractable. Several interpretable ML methods have 
been employed in recent heterogeneous catalysis studies, which we broadly group into grey-box and glass-box methods. Grey-box methods enable the interpretation of black-box models, but relying 
solely on these methods is risky due to a potential information gap 
between the black-box model and the explanation. Glass-box mod
-
els, in which interpretation is an inherent feature of the model, are superior for applications where developing scientific insight is the primary objective. Ultimately, it is our view that further applications 
of interpretable ML methods in heterogeneous catalysis will acceler
-
ate knowledge generation in the field.
Data availability
The panels of Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 were adapted from refs. 25,29,34,38,43,49,51,57,63 
and have associated raw data.
Received: 12 October 2021; Accepted: 20 December 2021;  
Published online: 17 March 2022
References
 1. Vlachos, D. G. in Advances in Chemical Engineering Vol. 30 (ed. Marin, G. B.) 
1–61 (Academic, 2005).
 2. Goldsmith, B. R., Esterhuizen, J., Liu, J.-X., Bartel, C. J. & Sutton, C. Machine 
learning for heterogeneous catalyst design and discovery. AlChE J. 64, 
2311–2323 (2018).
 3. Schlexer Lamoureux, P . et al. Machine learning for computational heterogeneous catalysis. ChemCatChem 11, 3581–3601 (2019).
 4. Kitchin, J. R. Machine learning in catalysis. Nat. Catal.  1, 230–232 (2018).
 5. Toyao, T. et al. Machine learning for catalysis informatics: recent applications and prospects. ACS Catal. 10, 2260–2297 (2020).
 6. Artrith, N. & Kolpak, A. M. Understanding the composition and activity of electrocatalytic nanoalloys in aqueous solvents: a combination of DFT and accurate neural network potentials. Nano Lett.  14, 2670–2676 (2014).
 7. Boes, J. R. & Kitchin, J. R. Modeling segregation on AuPd(111) surfaces with 
density functional theory and Monte Carlo simulations. J. Phys. Chem. C 121, 
3479–3487 (2017).
 8. Ulissi, Z. W ., Singh, A. R., Tsai, C. & Nørskov, J. K. Automated discovery and construction of surface phase diagrams using machine learning. J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 7, 3931–3935 (2016).
 9. Peterson, A. A. Acceleration of saddle-point searches with machine learning. 
J. Chem. Phys. 145, 074106 (2016).
 10. Ulissi, Z. W ., Medford, A. J., Bligaard, T. & Nørskov, J. K. To address surface reaction network complexity using scaling relations machine learning and 
DFT calculations. Nat. Commun.  8, 14621 (2017).
 11. Kolsbjerg, E. L., Peterson, A. A. & Hammer, B. Neural-network-enhanced 
evolutionary algorithm applied to supported metal nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B 
97, 195424 (2018).
 12. Jennings, P . C., Lysgaard, S., Hummelshøj, J. S., Vegge, T. & Bligaard, T. Genetic algorithms for computational materials discovery accelerated by 
machine learning. NPJ Comput. Mater. 5, 46 (2019).
 13. Murdoch, W . J., Singh, C., Kumbier, K., Abbasi-Asl, R. & Yu, B. Definitions, methods, and applications in interpretable machine learning. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 116, 22071–22080 (2019).
 14. Caruana, R. et al. Intelligible models for healthcare: predicting pneumonia 
risk and hospital 30-day readmission. In Proc. 21th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 1721–1730 
(ACM, 2015).
 15. Unceta, I., Nin, J. & Pujol, O. Towards global explanations for credit risk 
scoring. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07698 (2018).
 16. Tan, S., Caruana, R., Hooker, G. & Lou, Y . Distill-and-compare: auditing black-box models using transparent model distillation. Proc. 2018 AAAI/ACM 
Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 303–310 (ACM, 2018)
 17. Azodi, C. B., Tang, J. & Shiu, S.-H. Opening the black box: interpretable 
machine learning for geneticists. Trends Genet.  36, 442–455 (2020).
 18. Dybowski, R. Interpretable machine learning as a tool for scientific discovery 
in chemistry. New J. Chem. 44, 20914–20920 (2020).
 19. Rothenberg, G. Data mining in catalysis: separating knowledge from garbage. Catal. Today  137, 2–10 (2008).
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 182

==== Page 9 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIs 20. Janet, J. P . & Kulik, H. J. Resolving transition metal chemical space: feature 
selection for machine learning and structure–property relationships. J. Phys. Chem. A 121, 8939–8954 (2017).
 21. Ahneman, D. T., Estrada, J. G., Lin, S., Dreher, S. D. & Doyle, A. G. Predicting reaction performance in C–N cross-coupling using machine learning. Science  360, 186–190 (2018).
 22. Maley, S. M. et al. Quantum-mechanical transition-state model combined with machine learning provides catalyst design features for selective Cr olefin oligomerization. Chem. Sci. 11, 9665–9674 (2020).
 23. Reid, J. P . & Sigman, M. S. Holistic prediction of enantioselectivity in asymmetric catalysis. Nature  571, 343–348 (2019).
 24. Gallarati, S. et al. Reaction-based machine learning representations for predicting the enantioselectivity of organocatalysts. Chem. Sci. 12, 6879–6889 
(2021).
 25. Ma, X., Li, Z., Achenie, L. E. K. & Xin, H. Machine-learning-augmented chemisorption model for CO
2 electroreduction catalyst screening. J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 6, 3528–3533 (2015).
 26. Li, Z., Wang, S., Chin, W . S., Achenie, L. E. & Xin, H. High-throughput screening of bimetallic catalysts enabled by machine learning. J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 24131–24138 (2017).
 27. Zhong, M. et al. Accelerated discovery of CO
2 electrocatalysts using active 
machine learning. Nature  581, 178–183 (2020).
 28. Tran, K. & Ulissi, Z. W . Active learning across intermetallics to guide discovery of electrocatalysts for CO
2 reduction and H2 evolution. Nat. Catal.  
1, 696–703 (2018).
 29. Wexler, R. B., Martirez, J. M. P . & Rappe, A. M. Chemical pressure-driven enhancement of the hydrogen evolving activity of Ni
2P from nonmetal 
surface doping interpreted via machine learning. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 
4678–4683 (2018).
 30. Wexler, R. B., Qiu, T. & Rappe, A. M. Automatic prediction of surface phase diagrams using ab initio grand canonical Monte Carlo. J. Phys. Chem. C 123, 
2321–2328 (2019).
 31. Friedman, J. H. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Ann. Stat. 29, 1189–1232 (2001).
 32. Apley, D. W . & Zhu, J. Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised learning models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 82, 1059–1086 (2020).
 33. Tan, S., Caruana, R., Hooker, G., Koch, P . & Gordo, A. Learning global additive explanations for neural nets using model distillation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.08640 (2018).
 34. Liu, C. et al. Frontier molecular orbital based analysis of solid–adsorbate interactions over group 13 metal oxide surfaces. J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 
15355–15365 (2020).
 35. Lundberg, S. M. & Lee, S.-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Proc. 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems  (eds Guyon, I. et al.) 4768–4777 (Curran Associates, 2017).
 36. Mine, S. et al. Analysis of updated literature data up to 2019 on the oxidative coupling of methane using an extrapolative machine-learning method to identify novel catalysts. ChemCatChem 13, 3636–3655 (2021).
 37. Ding, R. et al. Machine learning-guided discovery of underlying decisive factors and new mechanisms for the design of nonprecious metal electrocatalysts. ACS Catal. 11, 9798–9808 (2021).
 38. Back, S. et al. Convolutional neural network of atomic surface structures to predict binding energies for high-throughput screening of catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10, 4401–4408 (2019).
 39. Rudin, C. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 206–215 
(2019).
 40. Andersen, M., Levchenko, S., Scheffler, M. & Reuter, K. Beyond scaling relations for the description of catalytic materials. ACS Catal. 9, 2752–2759 
(2019).
 41. Jonayat, A. S. M., van Duin, A. C. T. & Janik, M. J. Discovery of descriptors for stable monolayer oxide coatings through machine learning. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 1, 6217–6226 (2018).
 42. O’Connor, N. J., Jonayat, A. S. M., Janik, M. J. & Senftle, T. P . Interaction trends between single metal atoms and oxide supports identified with density functional theory and statistical learning. Nat. Catal.  1, 531–539 (2018).
 43. Weng, B. et al. Simple descriptor derived from symbolic regression accelerating the discovery of new perovskite catalysts. Nat. Commun.  11, 3513 
(2020).
 44. Liu, C.-Y ., Zhang, S., Martinez, D., Li, M. & Senftle, T. P . Using statistical learning to predict interactions between single metal atoms and modified MgO(100) supports. NPJ Comput. Mater. 6, 102 (2020).
 45. Ouyang, R., Curtarolo, S., Ahmetcik, E., Scheffler, M. & Ghiringhelli, L. M. SISSO: a compressed-sensing method for identifying the best low-dimensional descriptor in an immensity of offered candidates. Phys. Rev. Mater.  2, 083802 (2018).
 46. Wang, Y ., Wagner, N. & Rondinelli, J. M. Symbolic regression in materials science. MRS Commun. 9, 793–805 (2019). 47. Murphy, K. P . Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (MIT Press, 2012).
 48. Christensen, M. et al. Data-science driven autonomous process optimization. Commun. Chem. 4, 112 (2021).
 49. Esterhuizen, J. A., Goldsmith, B. R. & Linic, S. Uncovering electronic and geometric descriptors of chemical activity for metal alloys and oxides using unsupervised machine learning. Chem Catal. 1, 923–940 (2021).
 50. Atzmueller, M. Subgroup discovery. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 5, 
35–49 (2015).
 51. Li, H. et al. Subgroup discovery points to the prominent role of charge transfer in breaking nitrogen scaling relations at single-atom catalysts on VS
2. 
ACS Catal. 11, 7906–7914 (2021).
 52. Goldsmith, B. R., Boley, M., Vreeken, J., Scheffler, M. & Ghiringhelli, L. M. Uncovering structure-property relationships of materials by subgroup discovery. New J. Phys. 19, 013031 (2017).
 53. Foppa, L. & Ghiringhelli, L. M. Identifying outstanding transition-metal-alloy heterogeneous catalysts for the oxygen reduction and evolution reactions via subgroup discovery. Top. Catal . https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-021-01502-4 
(2021).
 54. Sutton, C. et al. Identifying domains of applicability of machine learning models for materials science. Nat. Commun.  11, 4428 (2020).
 55. Hastie, T. J. & Tibshirani, R. J. Generalized Additive Models (Chapman and Hall, 1990).
 56. Lou, Y ., Caruana, R. & Gehrke, J. Intelligible models for classification and regression. In Proc. 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 150–158 (ACM, 2012).
 57. Esterhuizen, J. A., Goldsmith, B. R. & Linic, S. Theory-guided machine learning finds geometric structure-property relationships for chemisorption on subsurface alloys. Chem 6, 3100–3117 (2020).
 58. Mavrikakis, M., Hammer, B. & Nørskov, J. K. Effect of strain on the reactivity of metal surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2819–2822 (1998).
 59. Kitchin, J. R., Nørskov, J. K., Barteau, M. A. & Chen, J. G. Role of strain and ligand effects in the modification of the electronic and chemical properties of bimetallic surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 156801 (2004).
 60. Hammer, B., Morikawa, Y . & Nørskov, J. K. CO chemisorption at metal surfaces and overlayers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2141–2144 (1996).
 61. Xin, H. & Linic, S. Communications: exceptions to the d-band model of chemisorption on metal surfaces: the dominant role of repulsion between adsorbate states and metal d-states. J. Chem. Phys. 132, 221101 (2010).
 62. Nori, H., Jenkins, S., Koch, P . & Caruana, R. InterpretML: a unified framework for machine learning interpretability. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09223 (2019).
 63. Feng, J., Lansford, J. L., Katsoulakis, M. A. & Vlachos, D. G. Explainable and trustworthy artificial intelligence for correctable modeling in chemical sciences. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc3204 (2020).
 64. Wang, S., Pillai, H. S. & Xin, H. Bayesian learning of chemisorption for bridging the complexity of electronic descriptors. Nat. Commun.  11, 6132 
(2020).
 65. Wang, S.-H., Pillai, H. S., Wang, S., Achenie, L. E. K. & Xin, H. Infusing theory into deep learning for interpretable reactivity prediction. Nat. Commun.  12, 5288 (2021).
 66. Pearl, J. Causal inference in statistics: an overview. Stat. Surv.  3, 96–146 (2009).
 67. Schölkopf, B. et al. Modeling confounding by half-sibling regression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 7391–7398 (2016).
 68. Andersen, M. & Reuter, K. Adsorption enthalpies for catalysis modeling through machine-learned descriptors. Acc. Chem. Res. 54, 2741–2749 (2021).
 69. Kim, E. et al. Materials synthesis insights from scientific literature via text extraction and machine learning. Chem. Mater. 29, 9436–9444 (2017).
 70. Tabor, D. P . et al. Accelerating the discovery of materials for clean energy in the era of smart automation. Nat. Rev. Chem. 3, 5–20 (2018).
 71. Y ang, L. et al. Discovery of complex oxides via automated experiments and data science. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2106042118 (2021).
 72. Flores, R. A. et al. Active learning accelerated discovery of stable iridium oxide polymorphs for the oxygen evolution reaction. Chem. Mater. 32, 
5854–5863 (2020).
 73. Tran, K. et al. Computational catalyst discovery: Active classification through myopic multiscale sampling. J. Chem. Phys. 154, 124118 (2021).
 74. Chanussot, L. et al. Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and community challenges. ACS Catal. 11, 6059–6072 (2021).
 75. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: a materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).
 76. Bartel, C. J. et al. New tolerance factor to predict the stability of perovskite oxides and halides. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav0693 (2019).
 77. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y . & Courville, A. Deep Learning  (MIT Press, 2016).
 78. Rasmussen, C. E. in Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning  (eds Bousquet, 
O. et al.) 63–71 (Springer, 2004).
 79. Freund, Y . & Schapire, R. E. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 55, 119–139 
(1997).
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 183

==== Page 10 ====
PersPective NaTurE CaTalysIs 80. Montoya, J. H. et al. Autonomous intelligent agents for accelerated materials 
discovery. Chem. Sci. 11, 8517–8532 (2020).
 81. Morris, M. D. Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experiments. Technometrics  33, 161–174 (1991).
 82. Augusto, D. A. & Barbosa, H. J. C. Symbolic regression via genetic programming. In Proc. Vol.1. Sixth Brazilian Symposium on Neural Networks 173–178 (IEEE, 2000).
 83. Herrera, F., Carmona, C. J., González, P . & del Jesus, M. J. An overview on subgroup discovery: foundations and applications. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 29, 
495–525 (2011).
 84. Hastie, T., Friedman, J. & Tibshirani, R. The Elements of Statistical Learning (Springer, 2001).
 85. Koller, D. & Friedman, N. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and 
Techniques  (MIT Press, 2009).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the US DOE Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division 
of Chemical Sciences (DE-SC0021008) (analysis of alloy chemisorption) and the CBET-National Science Foundation under DMREF grant no. 2116646. We acknowledge support from the Michigan Institute for Data Science (MIDAS) PODS Grant. J.A.E. 
acknowledges support from the University of Michigan J. Robert Beyster Computational 
Innovation Graduate Fellows Program.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence should be addressed to Bryan R. Goldsmith or Suljo Linic.
Peer review information Nature Catalysis  thanks Johannes Margraf and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature Limited 2022
NAtuRE C AtALySIS | VOL 5 | MAr Ch 2022 | 175–184 | www.nature.com/natcatal 184

