==== Page 1 ====
Introduction to the K -Means Clustering Algorithm Based 
on the Elbow Method 
Mengyao Cui 
Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, Shandong, China 
178742173@qq.com 
Keywords:  K-means clustering, Elbow method 
Abstract:  The K -means clustering algorithm is a commonly used algorithm in the financial 
field, and it is also an unsupervised learning algorithm. It is characterized as an easy and 
simple algorithm and is widely used in t he fields such as machine learning and stock 
trading. However, the K -means algorithm also has certain shortcomings. The k value is 
difficult to determine, and the initial center of the cluster is difficult to find. This article introduces the idea of K- means algorithm, using the elbow method to find the most suitable 
k value. 
1. Introduction 
2. Clustering Algorithms  
Clustering is a data mining technique that divides a data set into multiple different categories by 
calculating the similarity between data
】 【1. There is a high degree of similarity within each cluster of 
data classified by the clustering algorithm , and the similarity between different clusters of data is 
relatively large . Clustering algorithms usually include hierarchical me thods, density- based methods , 
and partitioning methods . K-means algorithm is a widely used clustering method and is also the 
method used in this article. 
3. K- Means Clustering  
3.1 General Principle  
k-means clustering is abbreviated as K -means , which is an unsupervised learning model】 【2. 
Unsupervised learning models are used for data sets that have never been labeled or classified . It 
records the same points in the data set and responds accordingly to these same points in each data 
point. 
The model is a centroid -based algorithm or a distance -based algorithm , and we calculate the 
distance to assign points to each cluster . First take a K value , and then divide the data into K 
categories, so that the similarity of the data in the same category is higher , which is convenient for 
distinguishing. 
Accounting, Auditing and Finance (2020) 1: 5-8 
Clausius Scientific Press, Canada
DOI: 10.23977/accaf.2020.010102 
ISSN 2616-3136
5

==== Page 2 ====
3.2 Euclidean Distance  
Usually , the index to measure the similarity between data is Euclidean distance. Euclidean 
distance is the distance between two points in two -dimensional and three- dimensional space. 
 Two -dimensional formula: 
2
2 12
2 1 ) ( ) ( dy y x x− + − = 
 Three -dimensional formula: 
2
2 12
2 12
2 1 ) ( ) ( ) d z z y y x x− + − + − = （  
 It can also be generalized to n-dimensional space: 
∑− =2
2 1) ( di ix x  
where i=1 , 2, .., n; i1x represents the i -th dimensional coordinate of the first point ; i2x 
represents the i -th dimensional coordinate of the second point. 
The n -dimensional Euclidean space is a set of points, and each point of it can be represented as 
(x(1),  x(2),...x(n)),  where x (i)(i=1, 2. ..n) is a real number , called the i -th coordinate of x, the 
distance between two points x and y=(y(1), y(2)... y(n)) d(x,y ) is defined as the above formula. 
The smaller the Euclidean distance between data, the higher the similarity between them . At the 
same time, there are only K centroids at the beginning, and each cluster is associated with a centroid , 
and data points close to the centroid will be classified as a cluster for classification . 
3.3 The Main Goal and Steps of K -Means 
The main goal of the K -Means algorithm is to minimize the sum of the distances between the 
points and their respective cluster centroids , and cluster  them in an iterative manner . The steps are 
as follows】 【3: 
First, select K objects as the center of the initial cluster according to our research objective. 
Calculate the Euclidean distance between the data and the cluster center , and divide the data with 
close distance into one category】 【4. 
 
Second, recalculate the cluster centers of the newly divided clusters , and re -divide the clusters in 
the previous way according to the new cluster centers. 
 
Third , iterati ve operation in this way until the cluster center no longer changes , then the 
algorithm can be stopped. 
There are three types of criteria for stopping the algorithm : first, the centroid of the newly 
formed cluster remains unchanged , second , the points rema in in the same cluster , and the third 
reaches the maximum number of iterations. If the centroid of the newly formed cluster has not 
changed, we can stop the algorithm . Even after multiple iterations , if all clusters have the same 
centroid , then the algorithm has not learned any new patterns , and training can be stopped at this 
time. Another sign of explicitly stopping training is that even after training the algorithm multiple 
iterations , if these points are still in the same cluster , the training process should be stopped at this 
time. Finally , if the maximum number of iterations is reached , we can stop training . Suppose we set 
the number of iterations to 200. Before stopping, the process will repeat 200 iterations . 
6

==== Page 3 ====
4. Elbow Method 
To make the centroid of this algorithm no longer change , it must pay attention to the choice of K 
value, but there is a shortcoming, which is related to the choice of the initial K points . To solve this 
problem, the performance of the algorithm is calculated for d ifferent numbers of centroids . When 
evaluating, as long as convergence occurs, the distance between the centroid of each cluster and the 
data point can be calculated . Then add up all the calculated distances as a performance indicator . As 
the number of cluster centroids increases, the size of the objective function will decrease . In order to 
select the best K , the elbow method is usually used. 
The elbow method is suitable for relatively small k values . The elbow method calculates the 
squared difference of different k values . As the k value increases, the average distortion degree 
becomes smaller . The number of samples contained in each category decreases, and the samples are 
closer to the center of gravity . As the k value increases, the position where the improvement effect 
of the distortion degree decreases the most is the k value corresponding to the elbow. 
Here we introduce a variable, WCSS (Within -Cluster Sum -of-Squares ), which measures the 
variance within each cluster . The better the clustering , the lower the overall WCSS . 
For example , at first, the value of K is defined as 1 , and the value of WCSS is higher at this time . 
Then the value of k is equal to 2, and the calculated WCSS value is lower than when k is equal to 1. 
When k is equal to 3, the value of WCSS also decreases. But when we choose k to be equal to 4, the 
drop in WCSS value is small and not obvious . The WCSS will equate to zero because ever y single 
point has its own cluster . It has its own centroid and that centroid is going to be exactly where that 
point is so the distance between the point and centroid is going to be zero. 
 Elbow Method Formula for WCSS : 
2
3
3 Cluster in  2
2
2 Cluster in  2
1
1 Cluster in  ) , distance ) , distance ) , distance
i i iC P C P C P WCSSi
Pi
Pi
P（ （ （ ∑ ∑ ∑ + + =  
We use the following figure as an example . When k is equal to 3, it is an inflection point of this 
curve, which can be regarded as the “elbow” of this curve . It determines the k value , that is , the 
optimal number of clusters in this example is three .】 【5 
 
Fig.1 An Example of Wcss 
5. Conclusion 
Although this algorithm is well developed now , it still faces challenges in the future and has a lot 
of room for improvement . At the same time, we can apply this algorithm to many fields and 
accomplish many practical tasks. For example , we can apply the K -mean algorithm to stock trading. 
When investing on the U .S. stocks, we can use data science techniques to narrow the search scope 
and group sim ilar stocks using K -means clustering algorithm . We know that the purpose of the 
7

==== Page 4 ====
clustering algorithms is to classify data sets and aggregate similar data together . 
Since the K -means algorithm was proposed, many scholars have continued explaining and 
improving to enrich the content of the algorithm . The K -means algorithm has been widely used and 
will be very useful in the future . For the process of the k- means algorithm and how to select the 
optimal K value, this article has already elaborated . 
References  
[1] Dubey A,Choubey A.A systematic review on k -means clustering techniques[J].International Journal of Scientific 
Research Engineering & Technology,2017,6(6):624- 627. 
[2] Saroj,Kavita.Review:study on simple k mean and modified K mean clustering technique[J ].International Journal of 
Computer Science Engineering and Technology,2016,6(7):279 -281. 
[3] Anil K.Jain, Data clustering: 50years beyond k -means, 2009, pp.651- 666. 
[4] Jain A K,Murty M N,Flynn P J.Data clustering:a review[J].ACM Computing Surveys,1999,3( 3):264 -323. 
[5] Alexander L,Jiang S,Murga M,et al.Origin -destination trips by purpose and time of day inferred from mobile phone 
data[J].Transportation Research:Part C Emerging Technologies,2015,58:240 -250. 
 
8

