==== Page 1 ====
  
Delft University of Technology
Introductory overview
Optimization using evolutionary algorithms and other metaheuristics
Maier, H. R.; Razavi, S.; Kapelan, Z.; Matott, L. S.; Kasprzyk, J.; Tolson, B. A.
DOI
10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.018
Publication date
2019
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript
Published in
Environmental Modelling and Software
Citation (APA)
Maier, H. R., Razavi, S., Kapelan, Z., Matott, L. S., Kasprzyk, J., & Tolson, B. A. (2019). Introductory
overview: Optimization using evolutionary algorithms and other metaheuristics. Environmental Modelling 
and Software , 114, 195-213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.018 
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology. 
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10. 

==== Page 2 ====
1 Introductory Overview: Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms and other Metaheuristics 
Maier H.R.a, Razavi S.b,c, Kapelan Z.d,h, Matott L.S.e, Kasprzyk Jf. and Tolson B.A.g 
a School of Civil, Environmental and Mining Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide  SA 
5005, Australia 
b Global Institute for Water Security & School of Environment and Sustainability, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada, 
c Department of Civil and Geological Engineering, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Canada 
d College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, Harrison Building, 
North Park Road, Exeter EX4 4QF, United Kingdom 
e Center for Computational Research, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 14203, USA 
f  Civil Environmental and Architectural Engineering Department, University of Colorado Boulder, 
UCB 428, Boulder, CO 80309, USA 
g  Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 
3G1, Canada 
h  Department of Water Management, Faculty of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Delft University 
of Technology, Stevinweg 1, 2628 CN Delft, Netherlands 
Abstract 
Environmental models are used extensively to evaluate the effectiveness of a range of design, 
planning, operational, management and policy options.  However, the number of options that can be 
evaluated manually is generally limited, making it difficult to identify the most suitable options to 
consider in decision-making processes.  By linking environmental models with evolutionary and 
other metaheuristic optimization algorithms, the decision options that make best use of scarce 
resources, achieve the best environmental outcomes for a given budget or provide the best trade-
offs between competing objectives can be identified.  This Introductory Overview presents reasons 
for embedding formal optimization approaches in environmental decision-making processes, details 
how environmental problems are formulated as optimization problems and outlines how single- and 
multi-objective optimization approaches find good solutions to environmental problems. Practical 
guidance and potential challenges are also provided. 
© 2018 Manuscript version made available under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

==== Page 3 ====
2 
  
 
 
  
Learning Objectives 
As Introductory Overviews are designed to provide a concise topic overview so as to break down 
barriers to shared understanding and dialogue within multidisciplinary teams, the learning objectives 
of this paper are: 
 To gain an appreciation of the suitability and benefits of using formal optimization approaches, 
and evolutionary algorithms (EAs) in particular, to support decision-making when using 
environmental models 
 To gain an understanding of how to formulate and solve environmental problems as 
optimization problems 
 To gain an understanding of the way single- and multi-objective EAs work 
 To gain an understanding of how to implement EAs in practice 
 To gain an understanding of potential challenges associated with the implementation of EAs 
 Assumed Background Knowledge 
 Familiarity with mathematics and environmental modelling 
 Familiarity with the use of environmental models to support decision-making 
 Familiarity with the calibration of environmental models 
 
  

==== Page 4 ====
3 
 1. Introduction and Learning Objectives 
Many environmental decision-making problems can be cast as trying to find a preferred option among 
different alternatives.  The use of environmental models can play a central role in this task (Merritt et 
al., 2017), as they can be used to assess the utility of different decision alternatives (e.g. infrastructure 
interventions, management strategies, policy options).  However, identifying the most suitable option 
can be difficult, as environmental problems are generally complex and the number of available 
alternatives is often large.  Consequently, significant benefits can be achieved by linking simulation 
models with a modern family of optimization techniques referred to as “metaheuristics” in order to 
identify the options that make best use of scarce resources, achieve the best environmental outcomes 
for a given budget or provide the best trade-offs between competing objectives for further scrutiny.  
This enables decision-making processes to focus on options that provide the “best bang for buck”, 
rather than options that are potentially less reliable, more expensive and achieve worse 
environmental outcomes. 
The term “metaheuristic” (coined by Glover, 1986) is composed of two Greek words, the prefix “meta” 
meaning “beyond” and “heuristic” meaning “to discover”.  From an optimization perspective, 
metaheuristics are high level procedures designed to intelligently utilize heuristics to efficiently find a 
near-optimal solution to complex optimization problems (for definitions, see Blum and Roli, 2003). 
From an environmental management perspectives, they provide a means to make use of (existing) 
environmental models to identify a set of solutions (decision alternatives) that provide (near) optimal 
trade-offs between desired outcomes.   Many metaheuristics are “nature-inspired” (also alternatively 
called “metaphor-based”), as they involve heuristics that imitate processes in natural systems (Blum 
et al., 2011; Boussaïd et al., 2013; Dréo et al., 2006; Zavala et al., 2014). Metaheuristics can be divided 
into two classes, including those that work with populations of solutions and those that do not.  
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs), which are population based, are a major, and arguably the most 
popular, class of metaheuristics. Consequently, as was done in Maier et al. (2014), the focus of this 
paper is on EAs, although many of the concepts discussed also broadly apply to other metaheuristics. 
EAs have proven to be highly effective in solving a wide range of environmental problems (Maier et 
al., 2014), as they can be used in realistic decision-contexts. This is because they (i) can be used as one 
element in broader, participatory environmental decision-making processes (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; 
Kaim et al., 2018; Piscopo et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016), (ii) can be linked with existing simulation 
models to assist with the exploration of large solution spaces (Maier et al., 2015), (iii) can cater to 
multiple competing objectives (Newland et al., 2018; Verstegen et al., 2017), (iv) can take into account 
uncertainties (Beh et al., 2017; Eker and Kwakkel, 2018) and (v) generally provide a number of “good” 
solutions that can be explored further, rather than being prescriptive (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; Kaim 
et al., 2018).  Their main disadvantages are (i) that they are potentially computationally expensive, 
although this primarily depends on the computational efficiency of the simulation model with which 
they are linked, (ii) that they are not guaranteed to identify the globally optimal solution (from a 
mathematical perspective) and (iii) that they generally need to be tuned to the problem under 
consideration (Maier et al., 2014; Mala-Jetmarova et al., 2017). 
The purpose of this Introductory Overview is to introduce EAs to the environmental modelling 
community, where environmental models are commonly used to assist with identifying the course of 
action that should be undertaken (e.g. pollution control, operation of infrastructure system, 

==== Page 5 ====
4 
 implementation of policy option) to produce desired environmental outcomes, but without formal 
strategies for achieving this.  Consequently, before details of EAs are given, a case is made for why 
formal optimization methods can be useful where environmental models are used to support 
decisions.  In addition, details are given of how to structure environmental decision problems to 
enable such optimization methods to be used.  Then, information is provided on how EAs work, how 
EAs can be implemented and what some of the challenges are when applying EAs to real-world 
problems.  For ease of understanding, key concepts related to the way decision problems are 
structured are introduced in the context of five classes of environmental problems, which are 
illustrated via five specific examples:  
 The mitigation of global climate change impacts:   This problem type is illustrated via the example 
of designing water distribution systems so as to minimise their impact on greenhouse gas 
emissions.  As climate change is caused by anthropogenic systems, mitigation options typically 
require modifications to be made to engineered systems.  In the specific example presented here, 
this corresponds to the selection of the components of the systems of pipes, tanks, pumps and 
valves that deliver water from sources (e.g. rivers, lakes, groundwater) to domestic, industrial and 
agricultural consumers.  Such water distribution systems contribute to greenhouse gas emissions 
through both the embodied energy of their system components (e.g. pipes, tanks) and the energy 
required for operating pumps to maintain the required system pressures.  By optimizing the design 
of these systems, the best possible trade-offs between cost and climate change impacts (via 
greenhouse gas emissions) can be identified, while ensuring such systems perform reliably. 
 Regional resource consumption in urban systems: This problem type is illustrated via the example 
of the long-term planning of water resources systems, where optimization can be used to ensure 
that the best possible balance between the benefits (i.e. water supply security) and impacts (e.g. 
social and environmental impacts of water extraction) of natural resource consumption can be 
identified. 
 Natural resource management:   This problem type is illustrated via the example of the operation 
of reservoir systems, where optimization can be used to determine how to operate an 
infrastructure system so as to achieve the best possible trade-offs between various economic, 
social and environmental outcomes in catchments (watersheds). 
 Pollution management in an environmental system:  This problem type is illustrated via the 
example of the determination of wastewater treatment levels, where optimization can be used to 
determine the lowest-cost treatment strategies that maintain environmental health in a river 
system. 
 Environmental model development:  This problem type is illustrated via the example of model 
calibration, where optimization can be used to identify the model parameters that provide the 
best match between model outputs and the corresponding measured data. 
It should be noted that the above example applications are illustrative only and were selected to 
ensure that the principles presented are accessible to as wide an audience as possible, which is one 
of the objectives of Introductory Overviews.  This is why examples belonging to five different classes 
of problems are presented, so that the underlying principles are likely to resonate with as many 
readers as possible.  However, the basic principles on optimization and evolutionary algorithms 
presented in this paper are applicable to all problems where environmental models are calibrated or 

==== Page 6 ====
5 
 used to support decisions (see Section 2).  It should also be noted that as this paper belongs to the 
Introductory Overview class of papers, it presents fundamental principles in a simple, easy-to-
understand fashion.  More detailed descriptions can be found elsewhere (e.g. Maier et al., 2014). 
2. Why do we need Optimization? 
As mentioned in the Introduction, environmental simulation models are used extensively to support 
decision-making processes in a variety of application areas, such as: the development and evaluation 
of national and international environmental regulations (Giupponi, 2007; Laniak et al., 2013); land use 
management (Amato et al., 2018); natural hazard management (Newman et al., 2017); the operation 
and management of reservoir systems (Razavi et al., 2014); the assessment of environmental and 
human health (Morley and Gulliver, 2018; Reis et al., 2015); the management of river systems (He, 
2003; Humphrey et al., 2016; Hunter et al., 2018; Ravalico et al., 2010) ; the management of drains 
(Humphrey et al., 2016); the management of air pollution (Baró et al., 2014; Borge et al., 2014); flood 
inundation assessment (Teng et al., 2017); groundwater management and remediation (Jakeman et 
al., 2016; Piscopo et al., 2015; Singh, 2014); the design of water distribution networks so as to minimize 
global climate impacts (Stokes et al., 2015a; Stokes et al., 2014b; Wu et al., 2010a); the prediction of 
and adaption to natural hazards such as floods or droughts (Basher, 2006); crop and livestock 
management (Moore et al., 2014; van Keulen and Asseng, 2018); the design of green infrastructure 
for stormwater management and urban renewal (Liu et al., 2014; Yigitcanlar and Teriman, 2015); and 
evaluating the effects of resource extraction by the petroleum (Fiori and Zalba, 2003), natural gas 
(McJeon et al., 2014), mining (Côte et al., 2010) and timber (Alavalapati and Adamowicz, 2000) 
industries. Environmental models are in such widespread use because they can be designed to 
effectively reproduce the dynamics of real-world systems under traditional management situations as 
well as alternative  virtual realities, including different environmental conditions and management 
alternatives, enabling optimal designs, strategies and policies to be developed under a range of 
scenarios (Maier et al., 2016). 
In order to use environmental simulation models to support decisions, the model inputs have to 
correspond to the proposed decision alternatives (e.g. infrastructure interventions, management 
strategies, policy options) and the model outputs have to correspond to the environmental (and other) 
outcomes of interest.  In a decision-support context, the outcomes of interest are generally referred 
to as objectives , but can also correspond to system constraints  (e.g. allowable pollution levels), and 
the available decision alternatives are referred to as decision variables.  The environmental model is 
then used to find the values of the decision variables  (i.e. model inputs) that optimize (maximize or 
minimize) the environmental (and other) objectives  (i.e. corresponding values of model outputs) and 
ensure that any constraints  are satisfied.  The selected values for all decision variable  are referred to 
as a solution to the problem under consideration.  These terms are illustrated below for the five 
example environmental problems introduced in Section 1 (see also Figure 1):  
 The design of water distribution systems to mitigate global climate change impacts:   For this 
problem, the objectives  (i.e. outcomes of interest) are to minimize greenhouse gas emissions and 
system cost by selecting appropriate sizes of pipes, valves, pumps, tanks etc., which are the 
decision variables  (i.e. interventions).  The constraints  are that water of sufficient pressure and 

==== Page 7 ====
6 
 quality has to be delivered to consumers. A solution consists of the selected sizes for the pipes, 
valves, pumps, tanks etc. 
 
Figure 1. Details of formulation of five example environmental problems, including problem 
representation as well as example decision variables, constraints and objectives.        
 
 The long-term planning of water resources systems for managing regional resource 
consumption: For this problem, the objectives  (i.e. outcomes of interest) are to minimize the 
impact on available water resources, energy usage and system cost while maximizing water supply 
security by selecting an appropriate  portfolio of supply and demand interventions, which are the 
decision variables.  The constraints  are the available water supply and demand management 
options. A solution consists of the selected portfolio of supply and demand interventions. 
 The operation of reservoir systems for natural resources management:   For this problem, the 
objectives  (i.e. outcomes of interest) are to maximize environmental, social and economic benefits 


==== Page 8 ====
7 
 and to minimize environmental, social and economic costs by selecting appropriate reservoir 
release magnitudes and durations over time, which are the decision variables (i.e. interventions).  
The constraints  are the available water resources and limits on reservoir outflows. A solution 
consists of the selected reservoir release schedule. 
 The determination of wastewater treatment levels for pollution control in environmental 
systems: For this problem, the outcomes of interest correspond to both constraints  (i.e. the 
maintenance of acceptable water quality levels in the river system under consideration) and 
objectives  (i.e. minimizing the cost of the interventions required to achieve the desired water 
quality outcomes).  The decision variables  (i.e. interventions) are the required wastewater 
treatment levels and a solution consists of the selected treatment levels at each wastewater 
treatment plant. 
 The calibration of simulation models:  For this problem, the objectives  (i.e. outcomes of interest) 
are to minimize an error measure between simulated flux/state variables and corresponding 
measured flux/state variables by selecting appropriate values of the parameters of a simulation 
model, which are the decision variables.  The constraints  are the allowable ranges of the 
parameters. A solution consists of a selected value for each of the model parameters to be 
obtained by calibration. 
Once an environmental problem has been formulated in terms of objectives  (i.e. the values to be 
maximized or minimized), decision variables  (i.e. the values that can be changed to maximize or 
minimize the objective(s)) and constraints  (i.e. the allowable values of decision variables and/or 
objectives/constraints), the best solutions are generally identified using an informal “optimization” 
process, where the “best” solutions are identified via trial-and-error (Simon, 1996), as illustrated in 
Figure 2.  The first step of this process involves the selection of a plausible solution to the problem 
under consideration from the available alternatives. This selection is generally based on domain 
knowledge, experience and intuition.  For example: 
 
 
Figure 2. Steps in a traditional informal “optimization” process for finding optimal solutions to 
environmental problems with the aid of environmental simulation models via trial-and-error. 
 
 For the water distribution system design problem, this would involve the selection of the 
diameters of all of the pipes in the network, the sizes and locations of all of the tanks and the 
types, locations and sizes of the valves and pumps. 


==== Page 9 ====
8 
  For the long-term water resources planning problem, this would involve the selection of the 
capacities of the various potential supply sources, as well as the various demand management 
strategies. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, this would involve the selection of when to release water, 
how much to release and how long for. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, this would involve the selection of the treatment level at 
each wastewater treatment plant. 
 For the model calibration problem, this would involve the selection of values for each model 
parameter to be obtained by calibration. 
The performance of the selected solution in terms of objective function values and constraint violation 
(i.e. the outcomes of interest) is then evaluated, typically with the aid of one or more environmental 
simulation models.  For example: 
 For the water distribution system design problem, a hydraulic simulation model (e.g. Rossman, 
2000) would typically be used to check whether minimum pressure constraints are violated for 
the selected pipe diameters, in addition to the calculation of the values of the cost and greenhouse 
gas emission objectives. 
 For the long-term water resources planning problem, a river basin planning model would generally 
be used to simulate the interactions between various sources and demands throughout the year 
in order to enable the impact on water resources, supply cost, energy and greenhouse gas 
emissions, as well as reliability of supply, to be calculated for different combinations of water 
sources and extraction amounts/capacities and demand management strategies. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, an integrated model would be required, linking reservoir 
releases to the hydropower, environmental health, crop production and flood protection 
objectives. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, a water quality model (e.g. Ambrose et al., 2017) would 
generally be used to check whether the water quality constraints in the river are violated for the 
selected treatment levels, in addition to the calculation of the corresponding treatment costs. 
 For the model calibration problem, the simulation model to be calibrated (e.g. Arnold et al., 1998) 
would be run with the selected parameter values, and the error metric (see Bennett et al., 2013) 
for a comprehensive range of metrics) would be calculated between the simulated model outputs 
for a set of inputs and the corresponding measured outputs. 
The next step in the informal “optimization” process involves selection of an alternative, hopefully 
improved, solution. This selection takes into account the performance of the solution that was 
selected initially, as well as experience, domain knowledge, and intuition. For example: 
 For the water distribution system design problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in a 
violation of the pressure constraint in a particular part of the system, some of the pipe diameters 
in this region of the network might be increased, reducing pressure losses, but increasing cost and 
greenhouse gas emissions.  Conversely, if the previously selected solution resulted in a large 
pressure excess in a particular part of the system, some of the pipe diameters in this region of the 

==== Page 10 ====
9 
 network might be decreased, increasing pressure losses, but decreasing cost and greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 For the long-term water resources planning problem, if the previously selected solution resulted 
in a demand shortfall, the capacities of one or more of the sources might be increased, resulting 
in increased cost and water resources impact.  In contrast, if the previously selected solution 
resulted in a large supply excess, the capacities of one or more of the sources might be decreased, 
reducing cost and water resources impact. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in unacceptably 
high levels of spillage (water flowing over the spillway and not generating power), less water might 
be held back in the reservoir prior to the spillage event, increasing the storage capacity at the cost 
of reducing the amount of water available for irrigation and environmental flows.  Conversely, if 
the previously selected solution resulted in very low levels of flood risk, more water might be 
stored in the reservoir for hydropower, environmental and irrigation usage. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in a violation 
of the water quality standard in the river, some of the upstream treatment levels might be 
increased, improving water quality, but increasing cost. Conversely, if the previously selected 
solution resulted in water quality that is above the required level, some of the treatment levels 
might be decreased, reducing water quality, but decreasing cost. 
 For the model calibration problem, in the case of a rainfall-runoff model, if the previously selected 
solution resulted in an underestimation of peak flows, the value of the runoff curve number 
parameter might be increased to intensify the runoff response to rainfall, and vice versa. 
Conversely, if that solution resulted in a longer time-to-peak than reality, the value of the 
roughness coefficient might be decreased to allow faster movement of water through channels.  
The steps of selecting a trial solution, evaluating its performance with the aid of one or more 
environmental models and selecting a new (hopefully improved) solution based on experience and 
domain knowledge, as well as the performance of the previously selected solution(s), are repeated 
until no further improvement in objective function values can be achieved or the analyst is satisfied 
with the selected solution.  
While the informal optimization approach described above works reasonably well when the problem 
under consideration and simulation model used are well understood by the analyst, and the number 
of decision variables and their feasible ranges (i.e., number of alternative solutions) are relatively 
small, it is unlikely to yield the best possible outcome for the majority of environmental problems.  
This is because the size of the solution space of typical environmental problems is extremely large, as 
illustrated in Table 1 for particular instances of the five example problems considered previously.  
While a vast majority of these solutions might not be considered reasonable from a practical 
perspective, and would thus be excluded from consideration as part of the informal optimization 
process outlined above, the resulting search spaces would still be extremely large, as shown in the last 
column of Table 1, which shows the size of the solution spaces after 99.99% of possible solutions have 
been discarded. As a result, it is extremely unlikely that optimal, or even near-optimal, solutions can 
be identified by using the informal optimization process outlined above, as only a very small fraction 
of the search space is explored.  This problem is exacerbated by the fact that many environmental 

==== Page 11 ====
10 
 problems are complex and poorly understood, making it more difficult to bring domain knowledge to 
bear, especially for inexperienced analysts. 
At the other end of the spectrum of possible solution approaches, every possible value in the solution 
space could be evaluated (i.e. complete enumeration of the search space), such that the best possible 
solution is guaranteed to be identified. However, this is generally not possible from a practical 
perspective, as the simulation times associated with the search space sizes in Table 1 are likely to be 
prohibitively long. Assuming each run of the simulation model(s) used to evaluate the utility of the 
solutions takes only one second, the total simulation times for the examples in Table 1 will range from 
~35,000 to ~2x1070 years (for example, in the water distribution system problem, the total simulation 
time is calculated as (6.5x1077x 1second) / (60second x60minute x24hour x365day) ~ 2x1070 years). In 
real-world problems, simulation models can be computationally expensive, taking minutes or longer 
for a single run, making the full enumeration of all possible solutions even less feasible.  
The fact that informal optimization approaches are unlikely to enable near-optimal solutions to be 
identified and that the evaluation of every possible solution is computationally intractable provides a 
compelling case for the use of formal optimization methods in order to identify optimal or near-
optimal solutions to complex environmental problems in a reasonably computationally efficient 
manner.  Thus, formal optimization approaches enable innovative solutions to complex problems to 
be identified and result in the most efficient use of increasingly constrained economic and natural 
resources.  In fact, the use of formal optimization methods can result in improvements on the order 
of 10% to 50% compared with the use of the informal trial-and-error process outlined in Figure 2 (Liner 
and Maier, 2015). In addition, the use of formal optimization methods provides a more consistent 
approach to solving environmental problems with conflicting objectives (Liebman, 1976), especially 
for complex problems that are poorly understood (Di Matteo et al., 2017b). 
 
Table 1: Example search space sizes for the five environmental problems considered for illustration 
purposes in Figure 1.  It should be noted that for problems for which potential decision variable 
values are continuous, as is generally the case for model calibration, the size of the search space is 
theoretically infinite. 
Problem Number of 
decision 
variables Number of 
decision variable 
options (levels) Number of 
potential 
solutions (i.e. size 
of search space 0.01% of 
number of 
potential 
solutions 
Water distribution 
system design 100 pipes 6 diameters 6100 = 6.5x1077 6.5x1073 
Long-term water 
resources 
planning 25 potential 
sources 10 potential 
capacities 1025 = 1.0x1025 1.0x1021 
Reservoir 
operation 52 weeks 5 different 
releases 552 = 2.2x1036 2.2x1032 
Wastewater 
treatment 20 WWTPs 4 treatment 
levels 420 = 1.1x1012 1.1x108 
Model  
Calibration 15 parameters 100 values 10015=1.0x1030 1.0x1034 

==== Page 12 ====
11 
 3. How do we Formulate and Solve Optimization Problems? 
3.1 Problem formulation 
The formulation of formal optimization problems is very similar to that of problems that are solved 
using the informal optimization process outlined in Section 2, requiring the specification of the 
following three components: 
 Objective functions, which represent the values that should be maximized (e.g. system 
performance) or minimized (e.g. environmental impact) (see Figure 1). 
 Decision variables, which are the values that can be manipulated in order to maximize or minimize 
the objective functions (see Figure 1). These can take on discrete (e.g.  integer) or continuous (real) 
values, depending on the problem under consideration. 
 Constraints, which can generally be placed on the values that decision variables can take, or used 
to avoid undesirable/infeasible system responses (see Figure 1).  
A solution is defined as a set of selected values of the decision variables, and a feasible solution is one 
that satisfies all problem constraints. The quality of different solutions is evaluated using the objective 
function.  As mentioned previously, the (environmental) outcomes of interest are represented by the 
objectives and constraints, which generally correspond to the outputs of environmental models, and 
the potential interventions/choices are represented by the decision variables, which generally 
correspond to the inputs of environmental models.  Generally, decision variables correspond to 
anthropogenic changes to natural systems, either directly (e.g. revegetation) or via an engineered 
system (e.g. pollution control). 
Formally, optimization problems are represented (Cohon and Marks, 1975) as a maximization problem 
of an objective function, subject to inequality (and sometimes equality) constraints, as follows: 
maximize f( x)          (1) 
subject to 
gi(x) ≤ 0,  i = 1, 2, …, m       (2) 
 xjl ≤ xj ≤ xju  j = 1, 2, …, n       (3) 
where x is the vector of decision variables, x j indicates the jth value in this vector, and x jl and x ju are 
lower and upper bounds on the decision variables, respectively; f is the objective function and g i is the 
ith constraint function of vector x. These functions can be highly non-linear and complex, and their 
collective evaluation for any given x requires the running of environmental simulation models.  
For minimization problems, the maximization formulation above can be easily transformed into a 
minimization formulation by multiplying the objective function by minus one (i.e., maximize -f( x) is 
equivalent to minimize f( x)). Also, the “single-objective” optimization formulation above can be 
extended to a “multi-objective” optimization formulation by introducing more objective functions to 
be maximized simultaneously in Eq. (1) above; that is, to maximize (f 1(x), …, f k(x)), where k is the 
number of objective functions.  

==== Page 13 ====
12 
 It should be noted that the translation of environmental and water resources management problems 
into the somewhat rigid formulation outlined above can be challenging, especially for real-world 
problems, which are often complex, high-dimensional, ill-defined and not well structured.  
Consequently, where possible, stakeholders should be directly involved in the formulation of 
optimization problems, informing the objectives, decisions and constraints as part of an interactive 
process (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; Smith et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2016). 
3.2 Problem representation 
Optimization problems can be represented geometrically by considering a “fitness landscape”. A 
fitness landscape, or synonymously called a “response surface”, depicts the shape of the fitness 
(objective) function for a particular objective with respect to the decision variables (e.g. model error 
as a function of different values of model parameters for model calibration problems). For an 
optimization problem with only one decision variable, the resulting fitness landscape is a (typically 
nonlinear) line, and for a problem with two decision variables, the fitness landscape is a plane (see 
Figure 3). For higher-dimensional problems with three or more decision variables, the fitness 
landscape becomes a hyperplane that cannot be visualised easily. 
 
Figure 3. A typical fitness landscape (response surface) and its contour plot for a model calibration 
problem, where the objective function f is a goodness-of-fit metric to be maximized and the decision 
variables x 1 and x 2 are model parameters. This optimization problem has two regions of attraction 
(one local maximum in addition to the global maximum). 
 
When there is a single objective to be maximized, there is a single fitness landscape and the purpose 
of optimization is to identify the highest peak (or the lowest trough for minimization problems) in the 
fitness landscape for the problem under consideration. In other words, the purpose of optimization is 
to identify the feasible combination of decision variable values that results in the largest value of the 
objective function (fitness).  Consequently, the optimization process is akin to identifying the “highest 
hill” in the fitness landscape, which is referred to as the “global optimum”, as it is the best performing 


==== Page 14 ====
13 
 among all possible solutions. It should be noted that there may exist one or multiple other hills in the 
fitness landscape with lower peaks, which are referred to as “local optima”, as their respective 
solutions are optimal only within their neighbourhood in the decision variable space.  
When there is more than one objective, each objective has its own fitness landscape, as variations in 
objective values with changes in decision variable values are likely to be different for different 
objectives.  For many problems, objectives compete with each other, so that solutions that improve 
values of one objective might degrade values in another.  For example, a reservoir release schedule 
that increases ecological health in the river is unlikely to also increase agricultural production.   
Consequently, when considering competing objectives, it is less clear which solutions are better than 
others, as the solution that results in the highest peak in the fitness landscape for one objective might 
result in the lowest peak in the fitness landscape for the other objective and vice versa.  In such cases, 
the optimality of a solution is determined using the concept of dominance. 
If a solution ( xi) performs better than another ( xj) in at least one objective and does not perform worse 
in any of the other objectives (e.g. f 1(xi) < f1(xj) and f l(xi) <= fl(xj) for l = 2…k) , then the first solution ( xi) 
is said to dominate the other solution ( xj), as it is clearly better with respect to all objectives.  However, 
given a pair of solutions ( xp, xq) where each solution performs better than the other in at least one 
objective (e.g. f 1(xp) < f1(xq) and f 2(xp) > f2(xq)), it is not possible to determine which solution is best 
without some value judgement about the relative importance of different objectives.  Consequently, 
for problems with more than one competing objective, it is not possible to determine a single best 
solution, as there are a number of solutions (e.g. xp and xq above) that are not dominated by any 
others.  This set of non-dominated solutions forms the Pareto front (Pareto, 1896), which is unique 
and provides the optimal trade-off between objectives.  
The above concepts are illustrated in Figures 4 and 5 for a hypothetical problem with two decision 
variables (2-dimensional decision space) and two objective functions (2-dimensional objective space), 
both of which are to be minimized.  Figure 4 illustrates the mapping from the solution to the objective 
space, which is generally done with the aid of one or more simulation models.  As can be seen, the 
solutions that are non-dominated in the objective space lie on the Pareto front, whereas dominated 
solutions do not.  The relationship between the different fitness landscapes for the two objectives and 
the Pareto front is illustrated in Figure 5. 
3.3 Problem solution 
As mentioned previously, the solution of single objective optimization problems corresponds to the 
process of searching the fitness landscape for the highest peak or lowest trough, depending on 
whether the objective is to maximize or minimize the objective function.  For problems with more 
than one objective, the optimization process corresponds to searching the fitness landscapes for each 
of the objectives so as to identify non-dominated solutions.  As the globally optimal objective function 
value(s), and the corresponding decision variable values (i.e. the solution), are unknown for real-life 
optimization problems (i.e. the whole purpose of the optimization process is to identify these), it is 
not possible to assess how well an optimization algorithm has performed.  The exception to this is 
model calibration, where the “best” value that can possibly be achieved (i.e. a calibration error of 
zero) is known.  Consequently, split sample testing (i.e. using a subset of the available data for 
calibration and a subset for validation) can be used for these types of optimization problems to obtain 
a measure of the “robustness” of the calibration process. This, however, is generally affected by a 

==== Page 15 ====
14 
 number of factors in addition to the optimization method used, including the statistical properties of 
the available data and how they are divided in calibration and validation subsets (Wu et al., 2013; 
Zheng et al., 2018). 
 
 
Figure 4. Mapping of (a) a decision space onto (b) an objective space, where both objectives are to 
be minimized. 
 
 
Figure 5. Illustration of the relationship between (a) the fitness landscape of objective 1, (b) the 
fitness landscape of objective 2 and (c) the Pareto-front of the two-objective optimization problem. 
 
How difficult it is to search the fitness landscape(s) and find the globally optimal solution(s) is 
dependent on the following factors: 
1. The size of the area to be searched.   The size of the search space is a function of the number of 
decision variables (e.g. how many pipes have to be sized in a water distribution system), the ranges of 
x1x2
f1f2(a)                                                                      (b)Non-dominated solution Dominated solution Pareto front


==== Page 16 ====
15 
 the decision variables (e.g. what is the smallest and what is the largest diameter to be considered), 
and the level of discretization (resolution) in cases where discrete variables are considered (e.g. how 
many commercially available diameters are considered within the selected range of diameters).  The 
larger the number of decision variables, the larger the ranges of the decision variables and the finer 
the resolution, the larger the search space and the more difficult it is likely to be to identify the optimal 
solution(s). 
However, it is not only the size of the total search space that matters, but also the size of the feasible 
portion of this space (i.e. the size of the space for which all constraints are met).  For some problems, 
many of the decision variable combinations result in solutions that violate constraints related to target 
system performance (i.e. infeasible solutions).  For example, for the wastewater treatment problem 
(Figure 1), various combinations of treatment levels at the WWTPs might result in better objective 
function values (i.e. lower treatment costs), but might result in water quality levels in the receiving 
waters that do not satisfy minimum water quality constraints.  If the size of the feasible portion of the 
decision variable space is small, it might be difficult to find a combination of decision variables that 
results in feasible solutions.  Consequently, the ability to find optimal solutions can not only be made 
more difficult if the size of the search space is very large, but also if the feasible region of the total 
search space is very small. 
2. The properties of the fitness landscape.  If the fitness landscape is very smooth, like the “big bowl” 
in Figure 6a, the search is relatively easy, as there is a single optimum (for a minimization problem).  
However, if the fitness landscape is very rugged, as shown in Figure 6b, finding the lowest point in the 
landscape is very difficult.  This is because there are many troughs, making it difficult to navigate the 
landscape and to know if a trough that has been found is the lowest trough (i.e. the global optimum), 
or just a local optimum.  For real-world problems, fitness landscapes tend to be complex (e.g. Gibbs 
et al., 2011, 2015; Kingston et al., 2005), characterized by a range of features from small-scale 
features, such as roughness or noise, to large-scale features, such as multimodality (Razavi and Gupta, 
2015). Consequently, the fitness landscapes for many environmental problems are likely to be rugged 
and characterized by many local optima, a large degree of non-linearity and possibly discontinuities, 
especially if objective function values are calculated with the aid of complex simulation or integrated 
assessment models (Hamilton et al., 2015). 
Although increasing the difficulty of the optimization problem, the presence of multiple local optima 
with similar objective function values in the fitness landscape can be either advantageous or 
disadvantageous from a practical perspective.  A potential advantage is the provision of choice 
(diversity) to decision-makers in relation to which option to implement based on factors not formally 
considered during the optimization.  For example, if there are a number of equally “good” 
management options, these can be fed into a participatory decision-making process to determine 
which should be implemented.  However, the existence of multiple local optima with similar objective 
function values in the fitness landscape creates problems with model identifiability during model 
calibration (Shin et al., 2015), as it is difficult to determine which set of model parameters is the 
“correct” one. Another potential complicating factor related to model calibration is that the global 
optimum in the fitness landscape might not necessarily correspond to the model parameterization 
that results in the model that best represents the underlying physical processes.  This is because for 
model calibration problems, the fitness landscape is a function of which error measure is used, how 
much data are available for calibration and which subset of the available data are used for model 

==== Page 17 ====
16 
 calibration and which subset for model validation (e.g. see Zheng et al., 2018), all of which can have a 
significant impact on the properties of the fitness landscape. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Illustrations of smooth (a) and rugged (b) fitness landscapes for minimization problems, 
where f represents an objective function and x represents a decision variable. 
 
3. The behaviour of the search method.   How well a search space of a particular size and ruggedness 
can be explored, both in terms of the ability to find globally optimal or near-globally optimal solutions 
and the computational efficiency with which this is achieved, is a function of the way a particular 
optimization algorithm navigates the fitness landscape(s).  All optimization algorithms generally 
search the fitness landscape(s) in a stepwise fashion, starting from a random point and making 
incremental improvements over a number of iterations, as formalized in Equation 4 below, with the 
only difference between optimization algorithms being the mechanism that is used decide how to 
make adjustments to the decision variables from one iteration to the next (i.e. ∆x Xt-1). If we write 
xt = xt-1 + ∆xt-1             (4) 
where t denotes the iteration number, then xt-1 is the vector of decision variables (solutions) in the 
previous iteration, xt is the updated vector of decision variables, and ∆ xt-1 denotes the change in the 
vector of decision variables from one iteration to the next.   
The adjustment mechanisms used by different optimization algorithms are generally characterised by 
two competing processes: diversification (exploration) and intensification (exploitation).  The goal of 
diversification is to explore the search space as widely as possible.  This is an advantage if the search 
space is rugged and characterised by a large number of local optima, as illustrated in Figure 6b, so that 
the region containing the global optimum can be found.  This is particularly important for large search 
spaces.  However, an algorithm that explores more than is needed is less computationally efficient 
and, while it might be able to find the region of the search space that contains the global optimum, it 
might not be able to converge on this solution.   xf
xf(a)                                                                 (b)

==== Page 18 ====
17 
 The goal of intensification is to exploit any information about the fitness landscape in order to 
converge to good solutions as quickly as possible.  This works well for relatively smooth fitness 
landscapes, such as the one illustrated in Figure 6a, as globally optimal solutions can be identified in a 
computationally efficient manner.  However, for rugged fitness landscapes (Figure 6b), exploitative 
searching behaviour generally results in convergence to local optima that are in the vicinity of the 
starting position of the search, as there is insufficient exploration of other regions of the search space. 
Consequently, for rugged fitness landscapes, the performance of algorithms that exhibit exploitative 
behaviour can be highly variable, depending on the starting position in the search space.   
4. Why should we use Evolutionary Algorithms? 
There are a number of reasons why EAs are a good choice for finding optimal solutions to 
environmental problems, as discussed below.   
EAs are able to find (near-) globally optimal solutions: A major advantage of EAs is that they are 
population-based.  This is analogous to having an entire search party exploring the fitness landscape(s) 
on the lookout for the globally optimal solution(s), rather than a single person. As a result, large and 
rugged search spaces can be explored more effectively and efficiently because the use of a search 
party, rather than a single person, enables a greater area of the search space to be covered.  In 
addition, the members of the search party often exchange and share information with each other 
using a range of mechanisms (see Sections 5 and 6), enabling promising regions of the search space to 
be identified more effectively and subsequently enabling the search to be concentrated in these 
regions. 
The searching behaviour of EAs can be customised to the problem under consideration:  EAs have 
the ability to be tuned to determine ∆ xt-1 values (Equation 4) that represent an appropriate balance 
between exploration (diversification) and exploitation (intensification), depending on the properties 
of the fitness landscape (i.e. the problem under consideration). This enables EAs to escape local 
optima in the fitness landscape, while still being able to converge relatively quickly (to global, or near-
global, optima).  In contrast, most conventional optimization algorithms do not have this ability. 
For example, gradient methods, which are a classical optimization strategy, calculate ∆ xt-1 as a function 
of the local gradient of the current solution ( xt-1) in the fitness landscape and a step size (Figure 7a). 
Consequently, gradient-based methods exhibit a high degree of exploitation (intensification) and 
therefore only search locally in certain regions of the fitness landscape, but they do not have the ability 
to escape local optima. In contrast, as part of traditionally used random search strategies, ∆ xt-1 is 
chosen randomly by sampling the feasible space, as shown in Figure 7b. Consequently, this strategy 
exhibits a high degree of exploration (diversification), enabling larger areas of the fitness landscape to 
be searched, but does not have the ability to converge to good solutions. 

==== Page 19 ====
18 
  
Figure 7. Examples of (a) search using a gradient-based approach, and (b) random (exhaustive) 
search that “blindly” samples the search space. Here, the response surface of Figure 1 is shown as 
contour plots. 
 
The fact that these more traditional optimization algorithms exhibit fixed searching behaviours that 
cannot be tailored to match the characteristics of the fitness landscape limits their range of 
applicability, as they are generally only suited to certain types of problems.  For example, gradient-
based methods are generally only suited to problems with relatively smooth fitness landscapes with a 
single basin of attraction (see Figure 6a), whereas random search methods are generally only suited 
to problems with very rough and unstructured search spaces (see Figure 6b).  However, as mentioned 
previously, the searching behaviour of EAs can be adjusted to achieve the most appropriate balance 
between diversification and intensification for the problem under consideration.  
EAs are easily linked with (existing) simulation models:  One of the greatest advantages of using EAs 
is that they can be easily linked with existing simulation and integrated assessment models (see 
Section 8).  This can be achieved in a straightforward manner, only requiring a two-way coupling 
between the optimization algorithm and an (existing) simulation model (Figure 8).  In the coupling, (i) 
the optimization algorithm determines decision variable values that are passed to the simulation 
model, (ii) the simulation model evaluates the corresponding objective function and constraint values 
and (iii) the objective function and constraint values are passed back to the optimization algorithm. 
Consequently, if the performance of a system can be simulated using an existing model, it can also be 
optimized using EAs. This facilitates the comparison of solutions created via informal optimization 
(using the simulation model as an engine) with the solutions coming from the EA optimization process, 
which can aid in users’ trust of the optimization results (Smith et al., 2015). 
 


==== Page 20 ====
19 
  
 
Figure 8. Illustration of coupling between the evolutionary optimization module and the simulation 
model, where the optimization module can be “bolted onto” any simulation model.  The 
optimization module identifies which solutions to try and passes these to the simulation model, 
which evaluates the utility of these solutions (i.e., objective function and constraints).  This 
information is passed back to the optimization module, where it is used to determine which 
solutions to try next. 
 
An implication of this is that EAs have a wider range of applicability compared with many more 
traditional optimization approaches, such as linear programming (Md. Azamathulla et al., 2008) and 
gradient-based methods (Kessler and Shamir, 1989).  For example: 
 Linear programming works when the objective function and constraints are linear, while 
many environmental processes are highly non-linear. Therefore, when linear 
programming is used, the outputs from simulation models can generally not be used 
directly, and instead, a simplified (linear approximation) version of the problem has to be 
solved.  In this way, although linear programming is very computationally efficient and 
guaranteed to find the globally optimal solution, the solution that is found is generally not 
to the actual problem (unless the problem is linear), but a simplified version of the 
problem. 
 
 When gradient methods are used, information about the gradient of the fitness function 
is used to decide in which direction the search should proceed (i.e., how ∆ xt-1 is 
determined), as mentioned previously.  However, the gradient (derivative) information of 
environmental models is not typically available, requiring the derivative of the objective 
function to be approximated numerically.  This increases the computational demand, as 
many more objective function values (i.e., model runs) need to be evaluated.  In addition, 
in fitness landscapes with significant roughness/noise (small-scale features that might be 
due to simulation model errors), the resulting derivative information might be deceptive 
and misguide the search. Related to this, the objective function might be non-
differentiable (e.g. due to discontinuity) in some areas of the feasible space. The 
derivative-free nature of EAs, however, makes them insensitivet to possible discontinuity 
and ruggedness in fitness landscapes.   


==== Page 21 ====
20 
 The way EAs are used is intuitive:  The application of EAs is intuitive, as the optimization process that 
is used mirrors the informal optimization process adopted when using simulation models to assist with 
the identification of solutions to environmental problems (Figure 2).  The major difference between 
the informal optimization process in Figure 2 and the formal EA-based optimization process is in how 
solutions are altered (i.e., how ∆ xt-1 is obtained).  As part of informal optimization processes, values of 
∆xt-1 are obtained using personal domain knowledge, experience and intuition, but in the EA-based 
process, these changes in decision variable values from one iteration to the next are obtained 
automatically with the aid of evolutionary operators (Figure 9).  The operators are generally based on 
optimization strategies found in nature, such as survival of the fittest, although this is not always the 
case (see Sections 5 and 6 for details).   
 
 
Figure 9. Process of identifying optimal solutions when evolutionary algorithms are used. 
 
EAs are applicable to discrete and continuous decision variables:  Another advantage of EAs is that 
they can generally work with both discrete and continuous decision variables, as opposed to most 
traditional optimization methods, which require continuous decision variables (exceptions include 
integer programming (Samani and Mottaghi, 2006) and combinatorial optimization methods (Da 
Conceição Cunha and Sousa, 1999)). This is of benefit for a large number of real-world applications 
where decision variables are either categorical (e.g. distinct crop choices, distinct infrastructure 
options) or where continuous variables are constrained by practical considerations (e.g. pipes are only 
manufactured in discrete diameters, wasteload reduction levels are aligned with particular treatment 
processes).  However, while EAs can cater to both discrete and continuous variables, the mechanisms 
that aim to improve solution quality from one iteration to the next are different for discrete and 
continuous variables, requiring these mechanisms to be implemented in a single algorithm, as is done 
for example in the Exploratory Modeling Workbench (Kwakkel, 2017), the Water System Multi 
Objective Genetic Algorithm (WSMGA) (https://github.com/jeffrey-newman/WSMGA-with-Wrapper-
and-Analytics; Wu et al., 2010b) and the mixed integer implementation of the Pareto Archived 
Dynamically Dimensioned Search algorithm applied in Tolson et al. (2012).    
EAs can handle constraints in a straightforward manner:  Constraint handling in EAs is easy and 
straightforward. The most common approach to handling constraints is to use penalty functions. The 
idea is to transform a constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained problem by adding a 
penalty value to the objective function based on the amount of constraint violation of a candidate 
solution (see Section 5.3). As reviewed by (Coello, 2002), there are other constraint handling 
techniques that work well, such as restricted tournament selection for multi-objective optimization, 


==== Page 22 ====
21 
 in which the feasibility of solutions is integrated into the selection procedure (see Section 5.3 for 
details, especially Figure 13). 
EAs have the ability to deal with multiple objectives simultaneously:  Many traditional approaches to 
solving multi-objective optimization problems merge the different fitness landscapes into one, 
typically through their weighted summation based on their perceived importance, thereby turning a 
multi-objective optimization problem into a single objective problem. Such approaches, however, limit 
any insights that can be gained into the problem and its solutions, as trade-offs between objectives 
are not able to be explored. EAs, however, are able to overcome this limitation, as they typically have 
multi-objective analogues.  Such analogues navigate multiple fitness landscapes simultaneously during 
the optimization process and are able to approximate Pareto fronts in a single algorithm run, as 
explained in Section 3.2.   
EAs are easily parallelizable:  EAs are naturally suited to being implemented in parallel computing 
environments. At each generation, individual solutions in the population can be evaluated in parallel 
on multiple processors to accelerate the search. This can result in a significant saving in 
(computational) time, compared with most traditional optimization methods, where candidate 
solutions would have to be evaluated serially during the search. 
EAs are not prescriptive:   As EAs work with populations of solutions, they produce a number of near-
optimal solutions, which might be similar in objective function space, but quite different in decision 
variable space (either for single- or multi-objective problems).  This enables consideration of factors 
other than those captured in the mathematical formulation of the optimization problem when 
selecting the final “optimal” solution.  As a result, decision-makers have greater control in terms of 
using their judgement and intuition to select the final solution based on a number of good solutions 
“suggested” by the optimization algorithm (Di Matteo et al., 2017b).  In this way, EAs are used to assist 
with “sifting through” the very large solution spaces that are a feature of environmental problems 
(see Table 1) in order to identify a set of near-optimal candidate solutions that can then be scrutinized 
by decision-makers to identify those that make most sense, either informally or with the aid of multi-
criteria decision analysis methods (e.g. Hyde and Maier, 2006). 
EAs result in increased trust in optimization results: The fact that the evaluation of objectives and 
constraints when EAs are used is based on the outputs of (existing) environmental simulation models, 
and that the iterative process of identifying improved solutions mimics that used by experienced 
environmental modellers, reduces the black-box nature of the optimization process and increases 
trust in the optimal solutions identified.  This is in contrast to the use of more traditional optimization 
methods, such as linear programming, where simplified versions of existing models are likely to be 
used, the application of which is unlikely to evoke the same level of trust.  The fact that solutions are 
not “prescriptive”, as outlined above, is also likely to increase trust in the overall optimization process.  
However, the degree to which the solutions developed with the aid of simulation-optimization 
approaches are trusted is likely to be a function of the degree to which decision-makers are familiar 
with and trust the simulation model, especially of the optimal solutions do not correspond with 
expectations (Di Matteo et al., 2018). 
 

==== Page 23 ====
22 
 5. How do Single Objective EAs and other Metaheuristics work? 
As mentioned previously, EAs are similar to many conventional optimization algorithms in that they 
update decision variable values in an iterative fashion (Equation 4) in order to identify solutions that 
optimize the objective function.  However, as shown in the high-level pseudo-code for single-objective 
EAs below, they work with populations of solutions, rather than a single solution, as discussed in 
Section 4, and update decision variable values using heuristic operators.  These operators can vary 
significantly between different types of EAs, but are usually inspired by examples from nature. In 
general, there are two major philosophies for determining ∆ xt-1, “evolutionary computation” and 
“swarm intelligence”. The former, such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs) (Goldberg, 1989), was inspired by 
biological evolution, such as selection, recombination (crossover), and mutation, while the latter, such 
as Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995) and Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO) (Dorigo et al., 1996), was inspired by the collective social behaviour of natural organisms such 
as birds, ants, and fish. 
A range of “operators” has been developed over the past decades to mimic the functioning of these 
natural systems for optimization purposes. An EA utilizes a collection of such operators that work 
together to determine ∆ xt-1 intelligently based on feedback from the performance of the solutions 
generated in the previous iteration (Figure 9), while keeping “some” balance between diversification 
and intensification. The relative degree of exploration and exploitation of the search is adjusted by 
changing the values of a number of parameters that control the function of theses operators, which 
can be done in a variety of ways (see e.g. Zheng et al., 2017). 
 
A high-level pseudo-code for single-objective EAs
 
 
In general, as shown in Figure 10 for an example with a 2-dimensional fitness landscape, EAs begin 
with a randomly distributed initial population (Figure 10a) and an exploration-oriented search in the 
first iterations to locate the main regions of attraction (Figure 10b). As the search continues, it 
becomes more exploitation-oriented in the regions of attraction, and identifies the best solution in 
the final iteration (Figure 10c). Examples of how this is achieved using evolutionary computation- and 
swarm intelligence-based algorithms are given in Sections 5.1 and 5.2, respectively. 
  Generate an initial population of solutions, x0, and evaluate their  fitness 
 REPEAT 
o Generate a new population, xt, by updating xt-1 using heuristic operators  
(e.g. evolution operators including selection, recombination, and mutation that focus on the best 
solutions in the set so far) 
o Evaluate the fitness of solutions in the new population by using the simulation model to evaluate 
the fitness function 
 UNTIL stopping criteria are met 
 Return the best solution in the current population and respective fitness function  

==== Page 24 ====
23 
  
Figure 10.  An example performance of an evolutionary algorithm. Plot (a) shown an initial 
population of solutions randomly distributed in the decision variable space (population size=10).  
Plot (b) shows the “evolving” population after a limited number of generations where both regions 
of attraction have been identified. Plot (c) shows the final population that has converged to the 
global optimum. 
 
5.1 Genetic algorithms 
Figure 11 shows how a set of operators works consecutively to determine ∆ xt-1 in Genetic Algorithms 
(GAs). Individual solutions (sets of decision variables) of a population and their individual decision 
variables are analogous to chromosomes (or genotypes) and genes, respectively. To update the 
current population, the algorithm utilizes some “selection” operator to repeatedly select parent 
chromosomes (a pair of individual solutions) from the current population, typically based on their 
fitness function. The selected parent chromosomes are then used for breeding via some “crossover” 
and “mutation” operators, and the resulting pair of offspring are used to form the next-generation 
population.  
 
Figure 11.  Genetic heuristic operators for population updating in EAs 
 
A selection operator is generally based on the “survival of the fittest” concept from Darwinian 
evolution theory and picks probabilistically the fittest candidate solutions (best in terms of objective 
function) in the current population for breeding. An example selection operator is called “Roulette 
wheel”, named after a casino game for gambling, where the fitness level is used to associate a 
probability of selection to each candidate solution of the population. Alternatively, fitter candidate 
solutions can be identified by comparing the fitness of a subset of solutions (usually pairs) in 
Parents
OffspringCrossover and 
MutationCurrent 
PopulationSelection
New 
PopulationReplacement

==== Page 25 ====
24 
 “tournaments”, with the winner of the tournament selected for reproduction.  Selection can also 
directly carry over the best solution(s) in a population to the next. This mechanism is called “elitism” 
and is to guarantee that solution quality will not degrade during optimization. Overall, selection 
promotes intensification during search. 
When two parent solutions are selected, the crossover operator is applied to reproduce two offspring 
solutions. Figure 12a shows two parent solutions (chromosomes) i and j of a 5-decision variable 
problem (5 genes) where a “single-point crossover” is applied. In this crossover, a single point on the 
chromosomes is selected randomly, and all genes (decision variable values) beyond that point are 
swapped between the two parents to reproduce the two offspring. Figure 12c illustrates how a single-
point crossover operator functions with 2 decision variables on the fitness landscape of Figure 10. 
Crossover operators may work for both intensification and diversification during the search, 
depending on the type of the crossover operator and the locations of parents with respect to each 
other.  
A mutation operator may be applied to mutate a small number of offspring that resulted from the 
crossover. Figure 12b shows an example mutation where one of the decision variables (genes) is 
randomly selected and replaced by a uniformly distributed random number in its feasible range. Figure 
12d illustrates how this mutation works in the 2-decision variable space where x 1 is mutated. Mutation 
works to preserve and introduce diversity during the search. It enables the EA to escape local optima.  
The heuristic operators above can be easily applied to both continuous and discrete problems. In case 
of continuous problems, such as model calibration, the procedure explained above directly applies to 
model parameters that can be varied within their feasible ranges. In case of discrete problems, such 
as water distribution system design where the optimal size of pipes is of interest, the feasible range 
of each decision variable is reduced to a set of possible values (e.g. commercially available pipe sizes) 
that can be directly incorporated into the procedure. For example, for mutation of Figure 12b, the 
pipe size can be directly replaced by another pipe size chosen randomly from the available set of pipe 
sizes.  Further details on GAs can be found in Holland (1975), Goldberg (1989), Michalewicz (1992) 
Coley (1999), Nicklow et al. (2009) and Maier et al. (2014).  
 

==== Page 26 ====
25 
  
Figure 12.  Example crossover and mutation operators and their performance on a fitness landscape. 
(a) Single-point crossover that reproduces two offspring from two parents in a 5D decision variable 
space. (b) Uniform mutation that replaces the value of a decision variable by a uniformly distributed 
random number between the variable lower and upper bounds (R 2 = random number in [x 2l, x2u]). 
Example outcome of (c) single-point crossover and (d) uniform mutation in a 2D decision variable 
space. 
 
5.2 Ant colony optimization algorithms 
In contrast to GAs, in ACO algorithms (ACOAs), the evolutionary operators are not applied to solutions 
directly.  Instead, the solution space is modified to encourage the selection of decision variable values 
that have resulted in good solutions in previous iterations.  As a result, completely new solutions are 
generated in each iteration, rather than modifying solutions from previous iterations. 
This searching behaviour is inspired by the way colonies of ants look for food in nature.  As part of this 
process, ants deposit pheromone, leaving trails, and other ants are more likely to follow trails with 
higher concentrations of pheromone.  As shorter paths between a colony’s nest and a food source can 
be traversed more quickly, shorter paths receive more pheromone per unit time, encouraging more 
ants to follow this path, further increasing its pheromone concentration.  In this way, a positive 
feedback loop is created, reinforcing shorter paths (i.e. better solutions) from one iteration to the 
next.  At the same time, the attractiveness of longer paths diminishes over time due to pheromone 
evaporation. 
When using ACO to identify optimal solutions to environmental problems, the values particular 
decision variables can take correspond to the different paths ants can traverse (e.g. Golding et al., 
2017; Nguyen et al., 2016; Szemis et al., 2012).  As these paths are discrete, the decision variable 
options also have to be discrete, which requires continuous decision variables to be discretized using 


==== Page 27 ====
26 
 an appropriate resolution.  In the example in Figure 13, there are two decision variables, X 1 and X 2, 
each of which can take on nine discrete values (i.e. X 1,1, X1,2, … X1,9; X2,1, X2,2, … X2,9).  At the beginning 
of the optimization process, the same pheromone concentrations are assigned to all decision variable 
options, as indicated by the same thickness of blue shading for each of the nine paths for both decision 
variables in Figure 13a.  As the optimization process progresses, decision variable options (i.e. paths) 
that result in better solutions (i.e. better objective function values) receive more pheromone, 
increasing their chances of being selected in subsequent iterations, creating the positive 
reinforcement loop observed in nature.  Consequently, at the end of the optimization process, the 
paths that result in the globally optimal solution have significantly larger pheromone concentrations 
than the other paths, as shown in Figure 13b (i.e. the paths corresponding to decision variable options 
(X1,7 and X 2,6). 
 
 
Figure 13.  Illustration of the evolution of pheromone concentrations over a large number of 
iterations, where the thickness of the blue shading of the paths corresponding to discrete decision 
variable choices corresponds to pheromone concentration.  As can be seen, the discrete values of 
X1nd X2 that correspond to the globally optimal solution (i.e. X 1,7 and X 2,6) have higher pheromone 
concentrations during the final iteration, thereby increasing the probability that these decision 
variable values will be selected. 
 
At each iteration of the optimization process, decision variable options (i.e. paths) are selected as a 
function of the relative pheromone concentrations on different paths.  A common way of achieving 
this is by using a biased roulette wheel, although the way the probabilities of selecting a particular 
path are calculated generally varies between algorithms (Dorigo and Gambardella, 1997; Dorigo et al., 
1996).  For example, in many algorithms, these probabilities are often also a function of a preference 
for locally optimal solutions (i.e. decision variable values that are known to increase objective function 
values (for a maximization problem)), in addition to pheromone levels, with the relative contribution 


==== Page 28 ====
27 
 of these two mechanisms based on user-selected weightings.  Once paths have been selected for each 
decision variable, a trial solution to the problem under consideration has been obtained.  In general, 
a number of solutions is obtained in each iteration, which is akin to the size of the ant colony in natural 
systems and is equivalent to the population size in GAs. 
The way pheromone levels on each of the paths are updated from one iteration to the next is generally 
a function of the quality of the solutions obtained, where paths that contribute to solutions with better 
objective function values receive a greater amount of pheromone than paths that contribute to poorer 
quality solutions.  The specific way in which this is achieved varies between algorithms, where some 
algorithms use information from all ants in the colony, while others only use information from ants 
that select high-performing solutions (Bullnheimer et al., 1999; Dorigo et al., 1996; Stützle and Hoos, 
2000).  Further details on ACO algorithms and their applications can be found in Dorigo et al. (1996), 
Stützle and Hoos (2000), Dorigo et al. (2006), García-Martínez et al. (2007), Zecchin et al. (2007) and  
Afshar et al. (2015).    
 
5.3 Constraint handling 
The design of EAs and other metaheuristics is typically such that they can search for optimal solutions 
in a hypercube decision space, where there are only bound constraints (see Equation 3). In some cases, 
the design of an algorithm functions naturally to respect bound constraints (e.g. binary decision 
variable problem solved with a GA). However, in many algorithms, some special constraint handling 
procedures, often invisible to users, are required to respect bound constraints.  If during the search a 
generated solution goes beyond a bound, it may be rejected (and a new solution would be generated), 
absorbed to the bound, or reflected back into the hypercube. Figure 14 shows an example with these 
three simple “constraint handling” mechanisms for bound constraints.  
 
Figure 14.  Bound constraint handling in metaheuristic optimization. Three strategies are shown: 1- 
the new solution violating the constraint is rejected in order to generate another new solution, 2- 
the new solution is modified and absorbed to the bound, and 3- the new solution is modified and 
reflected by the bound. 
 
The ability to handle other types of constraints (see Equation 2) may not be as straightforward. In 
general, the “rejecting” approach is the simplest but most inefficient way of handling any type of 
constraint. With this approach, any candidate solution that violates a constraint will be rejected and x1x2
x1uxt-1xtxtrejected
solutionabsorbed
solutionreflected
solution
boundabs ref∆xt-1
xt

==== Page 29 ====
28 
 removed from the search and the degree of constraint violation is not considered. An efficient, and 
perhaps the most popular, way of handling any type of constraint is the “penalizing” approach. In this 
general-purpose approach, which is also referred to as the “penalty function” approach, a penalty 
function is defined to quantify the degree of infeasibility (constraint violation) of an infeasible solution 
and penalize it proportionally. In this way, the constraint is removed from the optimization 
formulation, and instead, a corresponding penalty function is integrated into to the objective function. 
This integration is typically by weighted averaging with a carefully chosen weight for the penalty 
function. In practice, the user may need to identify the appropriate penalty function and 
corresponding weights via trial and error. 
6. How do Multi-Objective EAs work? 
The searching mechanisms of multi-objective EAs (MOEAs) are based on the same basic principles that 
underpin single objective EAs.  However, as shown in the high-level pseudo-code below, a major 
difference between the two is in the way they evaluate the fitness of a solution. Unlike single-objective 
optimization, where fitness evaluation is straightforward and is performed simply by evaluating a 
single objective function, multi-objective optimization requires a more elaborate “fitness assignment” 
scheme that brings together and unifies the different objective functions. Fitness assignment is a 
major component of multi-objective EAs and other metaheuristics and basically refers to the process 
of translating a vector of objective function values into a scalar-valued fitness that can be used for 
ranking and selecting solutions of higher quality during the course of the search.  
 
A high-level pseudo-code for multi-objective EAs
 
 
There are different strategies for fitness assignment, but these are generally based on the dominance 
concept illustrated in Section 3. The idea is to rank candidate solutions based on their dominance 
strength in objective space and to use the rank numbers of the solutions as their respective fitness 
values. Figure 15 shows three strategies for ranking the solutions in a population, namely “dominance 
depth”, “dominance rank” and “dominance count”. In the dominance depth strategy (e.g., used in  Generate an initial population of solutions, x0, and assign their fitness using code a 
 REPEAT 
o Generate a new population, xt, by updating xt-1 using heuristic operators  
(e.g. evolution operators including selection, recombination, and mutation) 
o Assign the fitness of solutions in the new population using code A below 
 UNTIL stopping criteria are met 
 Return the non-dominated solutions in the current population and respective fitness functions 
 
 
 A: Sub-pseudo-code for fitness assignment in multi -objective EAs  
o Evaluate the multiple fitness functions for each solution 
o Rank the solutions based on their dominance and density 

==== Page 30 ====
29 
 NSGA-ll developed by Deb et al., 2000), the solutions in a population are grouped into multiple fronts. 
The non-dominated solutions form the first front and receive rank 1, and the remaining solutions that 
are non-dominated by all solutions, excluding the solutions on the first front, form the second front 
and receive rank 2. This will continue to the third and higher fronts. In this strategy, candidate 
solutions lying on the same front are deemed equally fit. In the dominance rank strategy, the fitness 
of any given solution is the number of other solutions that dominate that solution (e.g., used in MOGA 
developed by Fonseca and Fleming, 1993); while in the dominance count strategy, fitness of a given 
solution is defined as the number of other solutions this solution dominates (e.g., used in SPEA2 
developed by Ziztler et al., 2002). Readers may refer Zitzler et al. (2004) for more details on the 
different fitness assignment strategies for multi-objective optimization. 
In multi-objective EAs, diversification is not limited to the decision-variable space. It is also important 
to introduce diversity in the objective space (see Figure 16) to diversify the optimal solutions and 
spread them uniformly on the Pareto front. This is because the purpose of the optimization process is 
not to identify a single, optimal solution, but to identify a set of optimal solutions that are distributed 
with a uniform “density” over the Pareto front.  For this purpose, “crowding distance”, which is a 
measure to estimate the density of solutions surrounding any given point in the objective space, is 
often used to encourage solutions to “spread out”.  Accurately stated, in a bi-objective space, the 
crowding distance of a solution is defined as one half of the circumference of the rectangle formed by 
the two neighbouring solutions of the same front on either side of that solution (Figure 16). In 
addition, the three ranking strategies in Figure 15 may result in multiple solutions receiving the same 
rank, while EAs may need to differentiate such solutions in the process of selection. For example, in 
the dominance depth strategy, all solutions lying on the same front would be seen equally. In this case, 
density, as quantified, for example, by crowding distance, can be used for a second-level fitness 
assignment of these solutions, indicating that solutions lying on the same front, but with larger 
crowding distance, would receive a higher fitness value (i.e., a higher chance to be selected). 
 
 
Figure 15.  Strategies for dominance-based ranking (fitness assignment) of candidate solutions in the 
objective space: (a) dominance depth, (b) dominance rank, and (c) dominance count. The number by 
each candidate solution is the associated rank to that solution; in (a) and (b), a smaller number 
indicates a better solution, while in (c) a larger number indicates a better solution 
 f1 f1 f1f2 f2 f2
1112
23
3
3013
5
0013
2432
20
0
0
front 1front 2front 3(a)                                                 (b)                                            (c)

==== Page 31 ====
30 
 Unlike the above strategies for MOEAs, some other algorithms take a more simplified approach and 
only search from dominance rank 1 (nondominated solutions).  That is, the population or set of current 
solutions maintained during the search only contains those that are currently non-dominated.  Two 
examples would be PAES and PADDS (Asadzadeh and Tolson, 2013; Asadzadeh and Tolson, 2009; 
Knowles and Corne, 2000).  In both of these algorithms, a measure such as crowding distance is utilized 
to influence algorithm trajectory when preference between two or more non-dominated solutions is 
required. 
It should be noted that the number of Pareto-optimal solutions increases with an increase in the 
number of objective functions. This is because all of the Pareto-optimal solutions of a k-objective 
optimization problem would remain Pareto optimal in the same problem with additional objective 
functions, while any additional objective function would introduce a new dimension in the objective 
space and extend the Pareto front.  So as more objectives are added to a problem, the proportion of 
feasible solutions being Pareto-optimal also increases.  This increase limits the ability of MOEAs (and 
any multi-objective algorithm) to accurately approximate high dimensional Pareto fronts and as such, 
the application of MOEAs is often limited to two or three objectives.  Further details on MOEAs and 
their applications can be found in Coello et al. (2007),  Deb (2001), Nicklow et al. (2009) and  Reed et 
al. (2013). 
 
Figure 16.  Ranking of solutions lying on the same front by crowding distance. The crowding distances 
of solutions A and B are df 1A+df2A and df 1B+df2B, respectively. As crowing distance of A is larger than 
that of B, A will receive a better rank for selection. 
7. What are the Challenges associated with using EAs?  
While EAs have a number of advantages over more conventional optimization methods, as discussed 
in Section 4, they also present a number of additional challenges, especially related to computational 
efficiency and the adjustment of their searching behaviour. 
Challenges with computational efficiency:  As EAs work with populations of solutions and generally 
evolve better solutions over tens or hundreds of iterations, the number of times objective function 
and constraint values have to be calculated is the product of the population size and the number of 
iterations.  This can make their use computationally demanding, especially if objective function and/or 
constraint values are obtained with the aid of environmental models.  The application of EAs to 
complex, real-world problems are of particular concern in this regard, as (i) model run-times can be in f1f2
B
df1df2df1df2AA
A
B
B

==== Page 32 ====
31 
 the order of minutes or even hours and (ii) search spaces can be extremely large and rugged, requiring 
larger population sizes and/or numbers of generations in order to find good solutions. These 
computational challenges are exacerbated when considering uncertainties, as performance metrics 
such as risk, resilience, reliability or robustness (Hashimoto et al., 1982; McPhail et al., 2018) generally 
require simulation models to be run hundreds or even thousands of times during each iteration of the 
optimization process (Beh et al., 2017). 
These computational challenges can be addressed using a number of strategies. A commonly used 
approach is replace computationally expensive simulation models with more efficient surrogate-, 
meta- or emulation- models (Razavi et al., 2012), which can increase the computational efficiency of 
EAs by one to two orders of magnitude (Beh et al., 2017; Broad et al., 2015b; Timani and Peralta, 
2017). As EAs are easily parallelizable (see Section 4), the use of parallel computing can also be an 
effective means of reducing overall runtime (Newland et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2007). Depending on 
the type of the problem and the EA algorithm used, “pre-emption” strategies can be used to 
opportunistically evade running computationally expensive models during optimization (Asadzadeh 
et al., 2014; Razavi et al., 2010).  Alternatively, the size and complexity of the optimization problem 
can be decreased by reducing the size of the search space (Fu et al., 2012) or re-formulating the 
optimization problem (Garner and Keller, 2018; Quinn et al., 2017). 
Challenges with adjustment of searching behaviour:   As mentioned in Section 4, one of the 
advantages of EAs is that their searching behaviour (i.e. their degree of diversification (exploration) 
and intensification (exploitation)) can be adjusted to match the properties of the fitness landscape for 
the problem under consideration.  However, in practice, this can be a challenge, as the properties of 
the fitness landscape are unknown.  As a result, the parameters that control the searching behaviour 
of EAs are commonly determined with the aid of extensive sensitivity analysis, although guidelines for 
the selection of appropriate parameters have been developed for some problem types (e.g. Gibbs et 
al., 2015; Zecchin et al., 2005).  Alternatively, algorithm searching behaviour can be adjusted 
dynamically throughout the search by automatically adjusting (i) parameter values to achieve pre-
determined searching behaviours (Hadka and Reed, 2013; Vrugt et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017; Zheng 
et al., 2017) or (ii) the utilisation rate of different operators in response to algorithm performance 
(Hadka and Reed, 2013; Vrugt et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2017). 
8. How do we Implement EAs?  
A typical implementation strategy for the workflow described by Figure 8 is to view the search 
algorithm and simulation model as “black box” components that are coupled via an I/O (input/output) 
interface. This I/O interface manages run-time execution and data transfers of both the algorithm and 
the simulation model. As discussed in Section 4 (e.g. see Figure 8), data transfer consists of preparing 
model input and processing model output and can be accomplished by reading and writing files or by 
in-memory or inter-process communication.  
As summarized by Matott et al. (2009), a number of software packages have been built using the black 
box approach described above, and such packages typically support multiple algorithms and may be 
written in compiled (i.e., C/C++ or FORTRAN) or interpreted (i.e., R, Python, or MATLAB) languages. 
Figure 17 illustrates a black-box approach to implementing EAs. As indicated in Figure 16, the primary 
operators of the optimizer (e.g. elitism, selection, crossover and mutation) are invariant with respect 

==== Page 33 ====
32 
 to the simulation model and linkage between the optimizer and simulation model is only required for 
evaluation of the fitness of the population of each generation.  
 
Figure 17 . Illustration of the 'black-box' approach to linking an evolutionary algorithm with a water 
resources model. x and f(x) are as described in equations 1-3 (see Section 3.1) and y( x) represents a 
set of model outputs (response variables) that are computed as a function of the decision variables 
(i.e. x) represents a vector of objective functions and/or constraints that are to be optimized and 
which are computed using the model outputs. 
 
In addition to standalone EA packages, there has been a variety of APIs (application programming 
interfaces) and libraries developed to support EA implementations (e.g. Hadka, 2016; Wilhelmstötter, 
2018). These APIs and libraries generally prescribe a specific I/O interface that will ensure 
interchangeability and interoperability across algorithms implemented using a given API or library. In 
this way, libraries and APIs foster a community of practice with respect to EA implementation and 
their adoption is highly encouraged for advanced users. 
The difficulty of comparing alternative algorithm implementations and of assessing incremental 
changes to a given algorithm is now being increasingly recognized (e.g.  Hansen et al., 2016; Sörensen, 
2013; Weyland, 2012, 2015). This has led some algorithm developers to formalize “standard” 
algorithm implementations that can be used to establish the expected baseline reference behaviour 
and performance of a given algorithm (Bratton and Kennedy, 2007; Swan et al., 2015). 
The choice of programming language for implementing an EA algorithm is typically made pragmatically 
based on the historical preferences and experience of the code developer. In general, compiled 
languages are capable of delivering significantly better computational performance, relative to 
interpreted languages. However, these effects are not likely to be significant within a given algorithm 
implementation since runs of the simulation model usually dominate the overall compute 
requirements of a given simulation-based optimization exercise. 


==== Page 34 ====
33 
 As mentioned previously, EAs that iteratively operate on a population of candidate solutions sets are 
readily parallelized using distributed computing, whereby population members are evaluated 
simultaneously by a team of processors.  These processors may reside on the same motherboard (e.g. 
in a typical desktop system), within the same rack or cluster of a data centre, within multiple data 
centres that are geographically separated, or, most generally, across multiple interconnected 
computing devices (e.g. desktops, laptops, tablets, and smartphones). In addition to choosing an 
appropriate communications interface (e.g. the message passing interface (MPI)(Gibson and Meter, 
2000; Gropp et al., 2014), the sockets protocol, network attached storage (NAS), etc.) for relaying 
information between these processors, implementers must decide whether the processors should 
operate synchronously or asynchronously. Figure 18 illustrates the difference between the 
synchronous (left hand side of Figure 18) and asynchronous (right hand side of Figure 18) schemes in 
the context of evaluating the new generation of an EA using parallel computing.   
As illustrated in Figure 18, in the synchronous mode of operation, each processor is assigned a set of 
a priori compute tasks and these are typically keyed to the processor’s unique id. For example, 
processor 0 might always be responsible for evaluating the first 10 population members, with 
processor 1 assigned the next 10 members, and so on. While this approach minimizes inter-processor 
communication overhead, it can result in significant bottlenecking if simulation run times are markedly 
heterogeneous across the population members. For example, such heterogeneity can occur if model 
pre-emption is employed (Razavi et al., 2010). Consequently, some processors may take longer than 
others to complete a given round of evaluations, thereby forcing those that finish early to wait.  
As shown in the right hand side of Figure 18, in the asynchronous mode of operation, one or more 
processors are designated as “managers” or “coordinators”. These managers communicate 
asynchronously and on-demand with the remaining “worker” processors to assign compute tasks. This 
asynchronous approach entails more inter-processor communication overhead but has the benefit of 
minimizing the idle time of “worker” processors. 
As the use of EAs enters into the state of practice, there has been increased interest in incorporating 
them into decision support systems and related integrated modelling frameworks (e.g.  Babendreier 
and Castleton, 2005; Laniak et al., 2013). Such “meta-systems” involve complex modelling workflows 
that can include parameter estimation, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis, and design optimization. 
Ideally, these systems should be structured to accommodate varied programming languages, libraries 
and APIs. Furthermore, the execution management used within a given meta-system should be 
implemented in a manner that can exploit the inherent parallelism of EAs.  
Looking to the future, various EA research directions and emerging technologies are already 
influencing their implementation in computer software.  For example, the ubiquity of cloud computing 
has fostered the emergence of optimization as a service (OaaS) as a practical on-demand tool for 
decision makers to apply EAs to solve previously intractable problems (Broad et al., 2015a; Kurschl et 
al., 2014). Rapid and agile OaaS implementation is facilitated by portable and interpreted web-ready 
languages that support reflection and introspection (e.g. python, php, and javascript). Furthermore, 
researchers are in the early stages of exploring how EAs can best exploit exascale parallel computing 
technologies like accelerators and graphics processing units (GPUs) (Alonso, 2015; Cárdenas-Montes 
et al., 2016; Hadka and Reed, 2015). Finally, the development of hybridized EA algorithms is an 

==== Page 35 ====
34 
 ongoing line of research (e.g. Hadka and Reed, 2013; Lozano and García-Martínez, 2010) that is likely 
to further motivate the desire for increased interoperability among EA implementations. 
 
 
Figure 18.  Schematic comparison of synchronous vs. asynchronous approaches to EA parallelization. 
The hypothetical CPU timings illustrate how different evaluations can get assigned to different 
processors. Gaps in the asynchronous CPU time graphs represent overhead from interprocess 
communication. 
 
9. Conclusion 
Environmental simulation models are used extensively to support decisions.  However, in many 
instances, the problems being addressed are complex, non-linear, relatively poorly understood and, 
probably most importantly, characterised by extremely large solution spaces.  This makes it almost 
impossible to identify a set of solutions that provides the best trade-offs between competing 
objectives, such as minimizing cost and maximizing environmental outcomes, using an informal 
“optimization” approach, as part of which the best solution is identified with the aid of domain 
knowledge, experience and intuition, coupled with the outputs from one or more environmental 
simulation models. 
Evolutionary algorithms and other metaheuristics provide a means of addressing the above 
shortcoming, as they can be linked directly with the environmental simulation models used as part of 
the commonly used informal optimization approach outlined above, while allowing large search 


==== Page 36 ====
35 
 spaces to be explored in a computationally efficient manner.  This is achieved using the same process 
employed during informal optimization in that a trial solution is proposed, which is then evaluated 
using a simulation model leading to the selection of a new (hopefully improved) solution and so on.  
The primary difference is that the decision of which solution to try in the next iteration is not informed 
by the domain knowledge of the user, but by operators inspired by examples from nature, such as 
survival of the fittest and the way colonies of ants search for food.  This generally enables the 
identification of solutions that achieve better environmental performance for the same cost or 
solutions that achieve a particular environmental outcome for reduced financial outlay, rather than 
solutions that result in inferior environmental outcomes for higher costs.  In this way, formal 
optimization processes can be incorporated into integrated environmental decision-making 
processes, rather than prescribing a single optimal solution using a black-box process. 
However, it is important to note that despite all of the advantages of EAs, they are not necessarily 
always the best optimization method to use.  For example, if in some specific case where the analysed 
real-life problem could be linearized without losing its key features, and/or a planner needs an answer 
very quickly (e.g. hydropower scheduling), other optimization methods (such as Linear Programming) 
may be better suited.  This highlights the importance of using any optimization method appropriately.  
EAs are particularly well suited to solving large, complex, discrete and non-linear real-life problems 
and are particularly useful for providing decision support in suitably formulated and solved 
optimization problems accompanied with relevant expert analyses, ideally in some iterative 
exploratory-type setup. When used in this way, EAs can be very helpful and can reduce the 
computational burden of the analysed problem, thereby enabling simulation modellers to explore 
many more options and trade-offs than would otherwise be possible. Thus they allow modellers to 
focus in general on more important aspects of the analysed problem. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge the following graduate students who have helped to proofread this 
manuscript, including Mikaela DeRousseau at the University of Colorado Boulder and Kasra Keshavarz 
and Mustakim Ali at the University of Saskatchewan.  The authors would also like to thank David 
Vowels from the University of Adelaide and Tony Jakeman from the Australian National University for 
reading the draft manuscript and their useful comments for improving it, as well as Gayani Fernando 
from the University of Adelaide for assisting with compiling and formatting the references.  Finally, 
the authors would like to thank the reviewers of this paper, Andrea Rizzoli, Jan Kwakkel and one 
anonymous reviewer, whose feedback have helped with improving the quality of this paper 
significantly. 
 
References 
Afshar, A., Massoumi, F., Afshar, A., Mariño, M.A., 2015. State of the art review of ant colony 
optimization applications in water resource management. Water Resources Management 
29(11), 3891-3904. 

==== Page 37 ====
36 
 Alavalapati, J.R.R., Adamowicz, W.L., 2000. Tourism impact modeling for resource extraction regions. 
Annals of Tourism Research 27(1), 188-202, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0160-
7383(99)00064-X . 
Alonso, J.J., 2015. Opportunities and Challenges for Multi-Disciplinary Analysis and Optimization at 
Exascale (Invited), In: 22nd AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference. American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, doi: 10.2514/6.2015-3052. 
Amato, F., Tonini, M., Murgante, B., Kanevski, M., 2018. Fuzzy definition of Rural Urban Interface: An 
application based on land use change scenarios in Portugal. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 104, 171-187. 
Ambrose, B., B. Avant, B., Han, Y., Knightes, C., Wool, T., 2017. Water Quality Assessment Simulation 
Program (WASP8): Upgrades to the Advanced Toxicant Module for Simulating Dissolved 
Chemicals, Nanomaterials, and Solids. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, 
DC.EPA/600/R-17/326. 
Arnold, J.G., Srinivasan, R., Muttiah, R.S., Williams, J.R., 1998. Large area hydrologic modeling and 
assessment part I: Model development. Journal of the American Water Resources 
Association 34(1), 73-89. 
Asadzadeh, M., Razavi, S., Tolson, B.A., Fay, D., 2014. Pre-emption strategies for efficient multi-
objective optimization: Application to the development of Lake Superior regulation plan. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 54, 128-141, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.01.005. 
Asadzadeh, M., Tolson, B., 2013. Pareto archived dynamically dimensioned search with 
hypervolume-based selection for multi-objective optimization. Engineering Optimization 
45(12), 1489-1509, doi: 10.1080/0305215X.2012.748046. 
Asadzadeh, M., Tolson, B.A., 2009. A new multi-objective algorithm, pareto archived DDS, In 
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference Companion on Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computation Conference: Late Breaking Papers, Montreal, Qubec, 
Canada.https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1570256.1570259 . 
Babendreier, J.E., Castleton, K.J., 2005. Investigating uncertainty and sensitivity in integrated, 
multimedia environmental models: tools for FRAMES-3MRA. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 20(8), 1043-1055, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2004.09.013 . 
Baró, F., Chaparro, L., Gómez-Baggethun, E., Langemeyer, J., Nowak, D.J., Terradas, J., 2014. 
Contribution of Ecosystem Services to Air Quality and Climate Change Mitigation Policies: 
The Case of Urban Forests in Barcelona, Spain. AMBIO 43(4), 466-479, doi: 10.1007/s13280-
014-0507-x. 
Basher, R., 2006. Global early warning systems for natural hazards: systematic and people-centred. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences 364(1845), 2167-2182. 
Basupi, I., Kapelan, Z., Butler, D., 2013. Reducing life-cycle carbon footprints in the redesign of water 
distribution systems. Journal of Water and Climate Change 4(3), 176-192. 
Beh, E.H.Y., Zheng, F., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., Kapelan, Z., 2017. Robust optimization of water 
infrastructure planning under deep uncertainty using metamodels. Environmental Modelling 
& Software 93, 92-105, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.03.013. 
Bennett, N.D., Croke, B.F., Guariso, G., Guillaume, J.H., Hamilton, S.H., Jakeman, A.J., Marsili-Libelli, 
S., Newham, L.T., Norton, J.P., Perrin, C., 2013. Characterising performance of environmental 
models. Environmental Modelling & Software 40, 1-20. 
Blum, C., Puchinger, J., Raidl, G.R., Roli, A., 2011. Hybrid metaheuristics in combinatorial 
optimization: A survey. Applied Soft Computing 11(6), 4135-4151, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2011.02.032 . 
Blum, C., Roli, A., 2003. Metaheuristics in Combinatorial Optimization: Overview and Conceptual 
Comparison. ACM Computing Surveys 35(3), 268-308, doi: 10.1145/937503.937505. 

==== Page 38 ====
37 
 Borge, R., Lumbreras, J., Pérez, J., de la Paz, D., Vedrenne, M., de Andrés, J.M., Rodríguez, M.E., 
2014. Emission inventories and modeling requirements for the development of air quality 
plans. Application to Madrid (Spain). Science of the Total Environment 466, 809-819. 
Boussaïd, I., Lepagnot, J., Siarry, P., 2013. A survey on optimization metaheuristics. Information 
Sciences 237, 82-117, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2013.02.041 . 
Bratton, D., Kennedy, J.(Eds.), 2007.Defining a standard for particle swarm optimization, In Swarm 
Intelligence Symposium, 2007. SIS 2007. IEEE. 
Broad, D., McIver, D., Duncker, A., Dandy, G., McMichael, S.(Eds.), 2015a.Incorporating Hydraulic 
Criteria into a Water Mass Balance Model for Optimal Operations, In Watermatex, 9th IWA 
Symposium. 
Broad, D.R., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2015b. A systematic approach to determining metamodel 
scope for risk-based optimization and its application to water distribution system design. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 69, 382-395, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.11.015. 
Bullnheimer, B., Hartl, R.F., Strauss, C., 1999. A new rank based version of the Ant System. A 
computational study. Central European Journal for Operations Research and Economics 7(1), 
25-38. 
Burn, D.H., Yulianti, J.S., 2001. Waste-load allocation using genetic algorithms. Journal of Water 
Resources Planning and Management 127(2), 121-129. 
Cárdenas-Montes, M., Vega-Rodríguez Miguel, A., Rodríguez-Vázquez Juan, J., Gómez-Iglesias, A., 
2016. Parallel evaluation of nonseparable functions by evolutionary algorithms on GPU. 
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 29(5), e3949, doi: 
10.1002/cpe.3949. 
Cho, J.H., Sung, K.S., Ha, S.R., 2004. A river water quality management model for optimising regional 
wastewater treatment using a genetic algorithm. Journal of Environmental Management 
73(3), 229-242. 
Coello, C.A.C., 2002. Theoretical and numerical constraint-handling techniques used with 
evolutionary algorithms: A survey of the state of the art. Computer Methods in Applied 
Mechanics and Engineering 191(11-12), 1245-1287, doi: 10.1016/S0045-7825(01)00323-1. 
Coello, C.A.C., Lamont, G.B., Van Veldhuizen, D.A., 2007. Evolutionary algorithms for solving multi-
objective problems, 2 ed. Springer. 
Cohon, J.L., Marks, D.H., 1975. A review and evaluation of multiobjective programing techniques. 
Water Resources Research 11(2), 208-220, doi: 10.1029/WR011i002p00208. 
Coley, D.A., 1999. An introduction to genetic algorithms for scientists and engineers. World Scientific 
Publishing Company, Singapore. 
Côte, C.M., Moran, C.J., Hedemann, C.J., Koch, C., 2010. Systems modelling for effective mine water 
management. Environmental Modelling & Software 25(12), 1664-1671, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2010.06.012 . 
Da Conceição Cunha, M., Sousa, J., 1999. Water distribution network design optimization: Simulated 
annealing approach. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 125(4), 215-
221, doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9496(1999)125:4(215). 
Deb, K., 2001. Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms. John Wiley, New York. 
Deb, K., Agrawal, S., Pratap, A., Meyarivan, T.(Eds.), 2000.A fast elitist non-dominated sorting genetic 
algorithm for multi-objective optimization: NSGA-II, In International Conference on Parallel 
Problem Solving From Nature. 
Di Matteo, M., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2017a. A multi-stakeholder portfolio optimization 
framework applied to stormwater best management practice (BMP) selection. 
Environmental Modelling and Software 97, 16-31, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.07.012. 
Di Matteo, M., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2017b. A multi-stakeholder portfolio optimization 
framework applied to stormwater best management practice (BMP) selection. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 97, 16-31, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.07.012. 

==== Page 39 ====
38 
 Di Matteo, M., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2018. Many-objective portfolio optimization approach for 
stormwater management project selection encouraging decision maker buy-in. 
Environmental Modelling and Software, accepted for publication. 
Dorigo, M., Birattari, M., Stutzle, T., 2006. Ant colony optimization. IEEE Computational Intelligence 
Magazine 1(4), 28-39, doi: 10.1109/MCI.2006.329691. 
Dorigo, M., Gambardella, L.M., 1997. Ant colony system: a cooperative learning approach to the 
traveling salesman problem. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 1(1), 53-66, doi: 
10.1109/4235.585892. 
Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., Colorni, A., 1996. Ant system: Optimization by a colony of cooperating 
agents. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics 26(1), 29-
41, doi: 10.1109/3477.484436. 
Dréo, J., Siarry, P., Pétrowski, A., Taillard, E., 2006. Metaheuristics for hard optimization: Methods 
and case studie. Springer, Berlin. 
Eker, S., Kwakkel, J.H., 2018. Including robustness considerations in the search phase of Many-
Objective Robust Decision Making. Environmental Modelling & Software 105, 201-216. 
Fiori, S.M., Zalba, S.M., 2003. Potential impacts of petroleum exploration and exploitation on 
biodiversity in a Patagonian Nature Reserve, Argentina. Biodiversity & Conservation 12(6), 
1261-1270, doi: 10.1023/A:1023091922825. 
Fonseca, C.M., Fleming, P.J.(Eds.), 1993.Genetic Algorithms for Multiobjective Optimization: 
FormulationDiscussion and Generalization, In Icga. 
Fu, G., Kapelan, Z., Reed, P., 2012. Reducing the Complexity of Multiobjective Water Distribution 
System Optimization through Global Sensitivity Analysis. Journal of Water Resources 
Planning and Management 138(3), 196-207, doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000171. 
García-Martínez, C., Cordón, O., Herrera, F., 2007. A taxonomy and an empirical analysis of multiple 
objective ant colony optimization algorithms for the bi-criteria TSP. European Journal of 
Operational Research 180(1), 116-148. 
Garner, G.G., Keller, K., 2018. Using direct policy search to identify robust strategies in adapting to 
uncertain sea-level rise and storm surge. Environmental Modelling & Software 107, 96-104, 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.05.006 . 
Gibbs, M.S., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2011. Relationship between problem characteristics and the 
optimal number of genetic algorithm generations. Engineering Optimization 43(4), 349-376. 
Gibbs, M.S., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2015. Using characteristics of the optimisation problem to 
determine the genetic algorithm population size when the number of evaluations is limited. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 69, 226-239. 
Gibson, G.A., Meter, R.V., 2000. Network attached storage architecture. Commun. ACM 43(11), 37-
45, doi: 10.1145/353360.353362. 
Giupponi, C., 2007. Decision support systems for implementing the European water framework 
directive: the MULINO approach. Environmental Modelling & Software 22(2), 248-258. 
Glover, F., 1986. Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelligence. Computers 
and operations research 13(5), 533-549, doi: 10.1016/0305-0548(86)90048-1. 
Goldberg, D.E., 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Golding, P., Kapadia, S., Naylor, S., Schulz, J., Maier, H.R., Lall, U., van der Velde, M., 2017. 
Framework for minimising the impact of regional shocks on global food security using multi-
objective ant colony optimisation. Environmental Modelling & Software 95, 303-319, doi: 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.004. 
Gropp, W., Hoefler, T., Thakur, R., Lusk, E., 2014. Using advanced MPI: Modern features of the 
message-passing interface. MIT Press. 
Gupta, H.V., Sorooshian, S., Yapo, P.O., 1999. Status of automatic calibration for hydrologic models: 
Comparison with multilevel expert calibration. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering 4(2), 135-
143. 

==== Page 40 ====
39 
 Hadka, D., 2016. Beginner's Guide to the MOEA Framework. CreateSpace Independent Publishing 
Platform. 
Hadka, D., Reed, P., 2013. Borg: An auto-adaptive many-objective evolutionary computing 
framework. Evolutionary Computation 21(2), 231-259. 
Hadka, D., Reed, P., 2015. Large-scale parallelization of the Borg multiobjective evolutionary 
algorithm to enhance the management of complex environmental systems. Environmental 
Modelling & Software 69, 353-369, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.10.014 . 
Hamilton, S.H., ElSawah, S., Guillaume, J.H., Jakeman, A.J., Pierce, S.A., 2015. Integrated assessment 
and modelling: overview and synthesis of salient dimensions. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 64, 215-229. 
Hansen, N., Auger, A., Mersmann, O., Tusar, T., Brockhoff, D., 2016. COCO: A platform for comparing 
continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08785. 
Hashimoto, T., Stedinger, J.R., Loucks, D.P., 1982. Reliability, resiliency, and vulnerability criteria for 
water resource system performance evaluation. Water Resources Research 18(1), 14-20. 
He, C., 2003. Integration of geographic information systems and simulation model for watershed 
management. Environmental Modelling & Software 18(8-9), 809-813. 
Herstein, L., Filion, Y., Hall, K., 2010. Evaluating the environmental impacts of water distribution 
systems by using EIO-LCA-based multiobjective optimization. Journal of Water Resources 
Planning and Management 137(2), 162-172. 
Holland, J., 1975. Adaptation in artificial and natural systems. The University of Michigan Press. 
https://github.com/jeffrey-newman/WSMGA-with-Wrapper-and-Analytics , Accessed on 
26/11/2018. 
Humphrey, G.B., Gibbs, M.S., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2016. A hybrid approach to monthly 
streamflow forecasting: integrating hydrological model outputs into a Bayesian artificial 
neural network. Journal of Hydrology 540, 623-640. 
Hunter, J.M., Maier, H.R., Gibbs, M.S., Foale, E.R., Grosvenor, N.A., Harders, N.P., Kikuchi-Miller, T.C., 
2018. Framework for developing hybrid process-driven, artificial neural network and 
regression models for salinity prediction in river systems. Hydrology and Earth System 
Sciences 22(5), 2987-3006. 
Hyde, K.M., Maier, H.R., 2006. Distance-based and stochastic uncertainty analysis for multi-criteria 
decision analysis in Excel using Visual Basic for Applications. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 21(12), 1695-1710, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2005.08.004. 
Jakeman, A.J., Barreteau, O., Hunt, R.J., Rinaudo, J.D., Ross, A.(Eds.), 2016. Integrated Groundwater 
Management: Concepts, Approaches and Challenges, Springer (open access), 762. 
Kaim, A., Cord, A.F., Volk, M., 2018. A review of multi-criteria optimization techniques for 
agricultural land use allocation. Environmental Modelling & Software 105, 79-93. 
Kasprzyk, J.R., Nataraj, S., Reed, P.M., Lempert, R.J., 2013. Many objective robust decision making for 
complex environmental systems undergoing change. Environmental Modelling and Software 
42, 55-71. 
Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R.(Eds.), 1995.Particle swarm optimization, In Proceedings of IEEE 
international conference on neural networks, Perth, Australia. 
Kessler, A., Shamir, U., 1989. Analysis of the linear programming gradient method for optimal design 
of water supply networks. Water Resources Research 25(7), 1469-1480, doi: 
10.1029/WR025i007p01469. 
Kingston, G.B., Maier, H.R., Lambert, M.F., 2005. Calibration and validation of neural networks to 
ensure physically plausible hydrological modeling. Journal of Hydrology 314(1-4), 158-176. 
Knowles, J.D., Corne, D.W., 2000. Approximating the nondominated front using the Pareto Archived 
Evolution Strategy. Evolutionary Computation 8(2), 149-172, doi: 
10.1162/106365600568167. 

==== Page 41 ====
40 
 Kurschl, W., Pimminger, S., Wagner, S., Heinzelreiter, J.(Eds.), 2014.Concepts and requirements for a 
cloud-based optimization service, In 2014 Asia-Pacific Conference on Computer Aided 
System Engineering (APCASE). https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6924464/ . 
Kwakkel, J.H., 2017. The Exploratory Modeling Workbench: An open source toolkit for exploratory 
modeling, scenario discovery, and (multi-objective) robust decision making. Environmental 
Modelling & Software 96, 239-250, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.054 . 
Laniak, G.F., Olchin, G., Goodall, J., Voinov, A., Hill, M., Glynn, P., Whelan, G., Geller, G., Quinn, N., 
Blind, M., Peckham, S., Reaney, S., Gaber, N., Kennedy, R., Hughes, A., 2013. Integrated 
environmental modeling: A vision and roadmap for the future. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 39, 3-23, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2012.09.006 . 
Liebman, J.C., 1976. Some Simple-Minded Observations on the Role of Optimization in Public 
Systems Decision-Making. Interfaces 6(4), 102-108, doi: 10.1287/inte.6.4.102. 
Liner, B.L., Maier, H.R., 2015. H2optimization: An Introduction to Optimization and Operations 
Research for Infrastructure Professionals. Aldera. 
Liu, W., Chen, W., Peng, C., 2014. Assessing the effectiveness of green infrastructures on urban 
flooding reduction: A community scale study. Ecological Modelling 291, 6-14, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2014.07.012 . 
Lozano, M., García-Martínez, C., 2010. Hybrid metaheuristics with evolutionary algorithms 
specializing in intensification and diversification: Overview and progress report. Computers 
& operations research 37(3), 481-497, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2009.02.010 . 
Maier, H., Kapelan, Z., Kasprzyk, J., Matott, L., 2015. Thematic issue on Evolutionary Algorithms in 
Water Resources. Environmental Modelling & Software 69(C), 222-225. 
Maier, H.R., Guillaume, J.H.A., van Delden, H., Riddell, G.A., Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J.H., 2016. An 
uncertain future, deep uncertainty, scenarios, robustness and adaptation: How do they fit 
together? Environmental Modelling & Software 81, 154-164, doi: 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.03.014. 
Maier, H.R., Kapelan, Z., Kasprzyk, J., Kollat, J., Matott, L.S., Cunha, M.C., Dandy, G.C., Gibbs, M.S., 
Keedwell, E., Marchi, A., Ostfeld, A., Savic, D., Solomatine, D.P., Vrugt, J.A., Zecchin, A.C., 
Minsker, B.S., Barbour, E.J., Kuczera, G., Pasha, F., Castelletti, A., Giuliani, M., Reed, P.M., 
2014. Evolutionary algorithms and other metaheuristics in water resources: Current status, 
research challenges and future directions. Environmental Modelling & Software 62, 271-299, 
doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.09.013. 
Mala-Jetmarova, H., Sultanova, N., Savic, D., 2017. Lost in optimisation of water distribution 
systems? A literature review of system operation. Environmental Modelling & Software 93, 
209-254. 
Matott, L.S., Babendreier Justin, E., Purucker, S.T., 2009. Evaluating uncertainty in integrated 
environmental models: A review of concepts and tools. Water Resources Research 45(6), 
doi: 10.1029/2008WR007301. 
McJeon, H., Edmonds, J., Bauer, N., Clarke, L., Fisher, B., Flannery, B.P., Hilaire, J., Krey, V., 
Marangoni, G., Mi, R., 2014. Limited impact on decadal-scale climate change from increased 
use of natural gas. Nature 514(7523), 482. 
McPhail, C., Maier, H., Kwakkel, J., Giuliani, M., Castelletti, A., Westra, S., 2018. Robustness Metrics: 
How Are They Calculated, When Should They Be Used and Why Do They Give Different 
Results? Earth's Future 6(2), 169-191. 
Md. Azamathulla, H., Wu, F.-C., Ghani, A.A., Narulkar, S.M., Zakaria, N.A., Chang, C.K., 2008. 
Comparison between genetic algorithm and linear programming approach for real time 
operation. Journal of Hydro-environment Research 2(3), 172-181, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jher.2008.10.001 . 
Merritt, W., Fu, B., Ticehurst, J., El Sawah, S., Vigiak, O., Roberts, A., Dyer, F., Pollino, C., Guillaume, 
J., Croke, B., 2017. Realizing modelling outcomes: A synthesis of success factors and their use 

==== Page 42 ====
41 
 in a retrospective analysis of 15 Australian water resource projects. Environmental 
Modelling & Software 94, 63-72. 
Michalewicz, Z., 1992. Genetic algorithms+ Data structures= Evolution program. Artificial 
Intelligence, Berlin: Springer, 1992. 
Moore, A.D., Holzworth, D.P., Herrmann, N.I., Brown, H.E., de Voil, P.G., Snow, V.O., Zurcher, E.J., 
Huth, N.I., 2014. Modelling the manager: Representing rule-based management in farming 
systems simulation models. Environmental Modelling & Software 62, 399-410, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.09.001 . 
Morley, D.W., Gulliver, J., 2018. A land use regression variable generation, modelling and prediction 
tool for air pollution exposure assessment. Environmental Modelling & Software 105, 17-23. 
Newland, C.P., Maier, H.R., Zecchin, A.C., Newman, J.P., van Delden, H., 2018. Multi-objective 
optimisation framework for calibration of Cellular Automata land-use models. 
Environmental Modelling and Software 100, 175-200, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.11.012. 
Newman, J.P., Maier, H.R., Riddell, G.A., Zecchin, A.C., Daniell, J.E., Schaefer, A.M., van Delden, H., 
Khazai, B., O'Flaherty, M.J., Newland, C.P., 2017. Review of literature on decision support 
systems for natural hazard risk reduction: current status and future research directions. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 96, 378-409. 
Nguyen, D.C.H., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., Ascough, J.C., 2016. Framework for computationally 
efficient optimal crop and water allocation using ant colony optimization. Environmental 
Modelling & Software 76, 37-53, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.11.003. 
Nicklow, J., Reed, P., Savic, D., Dessalegne, T., Harrell, L., Chan-Hilton, A., Karamouz, M., Minsker, B., 
Ostfeld, A., Singh, A., 2009. State of the art for genetic algorithms and beyond in water 
resources planning and management. Journal of Water Resources Planning and 
Management 136(4), 412-432. 
Pareto, V., 1896. Course of Political Economy. Lausanne. 
Paton, F.L., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2014. Including adaptation and mitigation responses to climate 
change in a multiobjective evolutionary algorithm framework for urban water supply 
systems incorporating GHG emissions. Water Resources Research 50(8), 6285-6304. 
Piscopo, A.N., Kasprzyk, J.R., Neupauer, R.M., 2015. An iterative approach to multi-objective 
engineering design: Optimization of engineered injection and extraction for enhanced 
groundwater remediation. Environmental Modelling & Software 69, 253-261, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.08.030 . 
Quinn, J.D., Reed, P.M., Keller, K., 2017. Direct policy search for robust multi-objective management 
of deeply uncertain socio-ecological tipping points. Environmental Modelling & Software 92, 
125-141, doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.02.017. 
Ravalico, J.K., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., 2010. Management Option Rank Equivalence (MORE)–A new 
method of sensitivity analysis for decision-making. Environmental Modelling & Software 
25(2), 171-181. 
Razavi, S., Asadzadeh, M., Tolson, B., Fay, D., Moin, S., Bruxer, J., Fan, Y., 2013. Evaluation of new 
control structures for regulating the Great Lakes system: Multiscenario, multireservoir 
optimization approach. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 140(8), 
04014018. 
Razavi, S., Asadzadeh, M., Tolson, B., Fay, D., Moin, S., Bruxer, J., Fan, Y., 2014. Evaluation of new 
control structures for regulating the great lakes system: Multiscenario, multireservoir 
optimization approach. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 140(8), doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000375. 
Razavi, S., Gupta, H.V., 2015. What do we mean by sensitivity analysis? The need for comprehensive 
characterization of “global” sensitivity in Earth and Environmental systems models. Water 
Resources Research 51(5), 3070-3092. 
Razavi, S., Tolson, B.A., 2013. An efficient framework for hydrologic model calibration on long data 
periods. Water Resources Research 49(12), 8418-8431. 

==== Page 43 ====
42 
 Razavi, S., Tolson, B.A., Burn, D.H., 2012. Review of surrogate modeling in water resources. Water 
Resources Research 48(7), doi: 10.1029/2011WR011527. 
Razavi, S., Tolson, B.A., Matott, L.S., Thomson, N.R., MacLean, A., Seglenieks, F.R., 2010. Reducing 
the computational cost of automatic calibration through model preemption. Water 
Resources Research 46(11), doi: doi:10.1029/2009WR008957. 
Reddy, M.J., Kumar, D.N., 2006. Optimal reservoir operation using multi-objective evolutionary 
algorithm. Water Resources Management 20(6), 861-878. 
Reed, P.M., Hadka, D., Herman, J.D., Kasprzyk, J.R., Kollat, J.B., 2013. Evolutionary multiobjective 
optimization in water resources: The past, present, and future. Advances in Water Resources 
51, 438-456. 
Reis, S., Seto, E., Northcross, A., Quinn, N.W., Convertino, M., Jones, R.L., Maier, H.R., Schlink, U., 
Steinle, S., Vieno, M., 2015. Integrating modelling and smart sensors for environmental and 
human health. Environmental Modelling & Software 74, 238-246. 
Rossman, L.A., 2000. EPANET 2 user manual U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati. 
Samani, H.M.V., Mottaghi, A., 2006. Optimization of water distribution networks using integer linear 
programming. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering 132(5), 501-509, doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9429(2006)132:5(501). 
Shin, M.-J., Guillaume, J.H., Croke, B.F., Jakeman, A.J., 2015. A review of foundational methods for 
checking the structural identifiability of models: results for rainfall-runoff. Journal of 
Hydrology 520, 1-16. 
Simon, H.A., 1996. The sciences of the artificial. MIT press. 
Singh, A., 2014. Groundwater resources management through the applications of simulation 
modeling: A review. Science of the Total Environment 499, 414-423. 
Smith, R., Kasprzyk, J., Dilling, L., 2017. Participatory Framework for Assessment and Improvement of 
Tools (ParFAIT): Increasing the impact and relevance of water management decision support 
research. Environmental Modelling & Software 95, 432-446, doi: 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.05.004. 
Smith, R., Kasprzyk, J., Zagona, E., 2015. Many-objective analysis to optimize pumping and releases 
in multireservoir water supply network. Journal of Water Resources Planning and 
Management 142(2), 04015049, doi: https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-
5452.0000576 . 
Sörensen, K., 2013. Metaheuristics—the metaphor exposed. International Transactions in 
Operational Research 22(1), 3-18, doi: 10.1111/itor.12001. 
Stokes, C.S., Maier, H.R., Simpson, A.R., 2014a. Water distribution system pumping operational 
greenhouse gas emissions minimization by considering time-dependent emissions factors. 
Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 141(7), 04014088. 
Stokes, C.S., Maier, H.R., Simpson, A.R., 2015a. Effect of storage tank size on the minimization of 
water distribution system cost and greenhouse gas emissions while considering time-
dependent emissions factors. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 142(2), 
04015052. 
Stokes, C.S., Simpson, A.R., Maier, H.R., 2014b. The cost–greenhouse gas emission nexus for water 
distribution systems including the consideration of energy generating infrastructure: an 
integrated conceptual optimization framework and review of literature. Earth Perspectives 
1(1), 9. 
Stokes, C.S., Simpson, A.R., Maier, H.R., 2015b. A computational software tool for the minimization 
of costs and greenhouse gas emissions associated with water distribution systems. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 69, 452-467. 
Stützle, T., Hoos, H.H., 2000. MAX–MIN ant system. Future generation computer systems 16(8), 889-
914. 

==== Page 44 ====
43 
 Swan, J., Adriaensen, S., Bishr, M., Burke, E.K., Clark, J.A., De Causmaecker, P., Durillo, J., Hammond, 
K., Hart, E., Johnson, C.G.(Eds.), 2015.A research agenda for metaheuristic standardization, 
In Proceedings of the XI Metaheuristics International Conference. 
Szemis, J.M., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2012. A framework for using ant colony optimization to 
schedule environmental flow management alternatives for rivers, wetlands, and floodplains. 
Water Resources Research 48(8), doi: 10.1029/2011WR011276. 
Szemis, J.M., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2014. An adaptive ant colony optimization framework for 
scheduling environmental flow management alternatives under varied environmental water 
availability conditions. Water Resources Research 50(10), 7606-7625. 
Tang, Y., Reed, P.M., Kollat, J.B., 2007. Parallelization strategies for rapid and robust evolutionary 
multiobjective optimization in water resources applications. Advances in Water Resources 
30(3), 335-353, doi: 10.1016/j.advwatres.2006.06.006. 
Teegavarapu, R.S.V., Simonovic, S.P., 2002. Optimal operation of reservoir systems using simulated 
annealing. Water Resources Management 16(5), 401-428. 
Teng, J., Jakeman, A., Vaze, J., Croke, B.F., Dutta, D., Kim, S., 2017. Flood inundation modelling: A 
review of methods, recent advances and uncertainty analysis. Environmental Modelling & 
Software 90, 201-216. 
Timani, B., Peralta, R., 2017. Aggregated surrogate simulator for groundwater-surface water 
management via simulation-optimization modeling: Theory, development and tests. 
Environmental Modelling & Software 96, 210-231. 
Tolson, B.A., Khedr, A., Asadzadeh, M., 2012. The battle of the water networks (BWN-II): PADDS 
based solution approach, In WDSA 2012: 14th Water Distribution Systems Analysis 
Conference, 24-27 September 2012 in Adelaide, South Australia. 
(http://www.civil.uwaterloo.ca/btolson/software.aspx) . 
van Keulen, H., Asseng, S., 2018. Simulation Models as Tools for Crop Management. Encyclopedia of 
Sustainability Science and Technology, 1-20. 
Vasquez, J.A., Maier, H.R., Lence, B.J., Tolson, B.A., Foschi, R.O., 2000. Achieving water quality 
system reliability using genetic algorithms. Journal of Environmental Engineering 126(10), 
954-962. 
Verstegen, J.A., Jonker, J.G.G., Karssenberg, D., van der Hilst, F., Schmitz, O., de Jong, S.M., Faaij, 
A.P., 2017. How a Pareto frontier complements scenario projections in land use change 
impact assessment. Environmental Modelling & Software 97, 287-302. 
Vrugt, J.A., Gupta, H.V., Bastidas, L.A., Bouten, W., Sorooshian, S., 2003. Effective and efficient 
algorithm for multiobjective optimization of hydrologic models. Water Resources Research 
39(8), doi: 10.1029/2002WR001746. 
Vrugt, J.A., Robinson, B.A., Hyman, J.M., 2009. Self-adaptive multimethod search for global 
optimization in real-parameter spaces. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 
13(2), 243-259. 
Wang, Q., Savić, D., Kapelan, Z., 2017. GALAXY: A new hybrid MOEA for the optimal design of Water 
Distribution Systems. Water Resources Research 53(3), 1997-2015. 
Weyland, D., 2012. A Rigorous Analysis of the Harmony Search Algorithm: How the Research 
Community can be Misled by a “Novel” Methodology, In: Modeling, Analysis, and 
Applications in Metaheuristic Computing: Advancements and Trends. IGI Global, 72-83. 
Weyland, D., 2015. A critical analysis of the harmony search algorithm—How not to solve sudoku. 
Operations Research Perspectives 2, 97-105, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2015.04.001 . 
Wilhelmstötter, F., 2018. Jenetics library user's manual 4.1, http://jenetics.io/ , Accessed on 
12/04/2018. 
Wu, W., Dandy, G.C., Maier, H.R., Maheepala, S., Marchi, A., Mirza, F., 2017. Identification of optimal 
water supply portfolios for a major city. Journal of Water Resources Planning and 
Management 143(9), 05017007. 

==== Page 45 ====
44 
 Wu, W., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., Leonard, R., Bellette, K., Cuddy, S., Maheepala, S., 2016. Including 
stakeholder input in formulating and solving real-world optimisation problems: Generic 
framework and case study. Environmental Modelling & Software 79, 197-213, doi: 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.02.012. 
Wu, W., Maier, H.R., Simpson, A.R., 2010a. Single-objective versus multiobjective optimization of 
water distribution systems accounting for greenhouse gas emissions by carbon pricing. 
Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 136(5), 555-565. 
Wu, W., May, R.J., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2013. A benchmarking approach for comparing data 
splitting methods for modeling water resources parameters using artificial neural networks. 
Water Resources Research 49(11), 7598-7614. 
Wu, W., Simpson, A.R., Maier, H.R., 2010b. Accounting for greenhouse gas emissions in 
multiobjective genetic algorithm optimization of water distribution systems. Journal of 
Water Resources Planning and Management 136(2), 146-155. 
Yandamuri, S.R., Srinivasan, K., Murty Bhallamudi, S., 2006. Multiobjective optimal waste load 
allocation models for rivers using nondominated sorting genetic algorithm-II. Journal of 
Water Resources Planning and Management 132(3), 133-143. 
Yapo, P.O., Gupta, H.V., Sorooshian, S., 1998. Multi-objective global optimization for hydrologic 
models. Journal of Hydrology 204(1-4), 83-97. 
Yigitcanlar, T., Teriman, S., 2015. Rethinking sustainable urban development: towards an integrated 
planning and development process. International Journal of Environmental Science and 
Technology 12(1), 341-352. 
Zavala, G.R., Nebro, A.J., Luna, F., Coello Coello, C.A., 2014. A survey of multi-objective 
metaheuristics applied to structural optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary 
Optimization 49(4), 537-558, doi: 10.1007/s00158-013-0996-4. 
Zecchin, A.C., Maier, H.R., Simpson, A.R., Leonard, M., Nixon, J.B., 2007. Ant colony optimization 
applied to water distribution system design: Comparative study of five algorithms. Journal of 
Water Resources Planning and Management 133(1), 87-92. 
Zecchin, A.C., Simpson, A.R., Maier, H.R., Nixon, J.B., 2005. Parametric study for an ant algorithm 
applied to water distribution system optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary 
Computation 9(2), 175-191. 
Zheng, F., Maier, H.R., Wu, W., Dandy, G.C., Gupta, H.V., Zhang, T., 2018. On Lack of Robustness in 
Hydrological Model Development Due to Absence of Guidelines for Selecting Calibration and 
Evaluation Data: Demonstration for Data-Driven Models. Water Resources Research 54(2), 
1013-1030. 
Zheng, F., Zecchin, A.C., Newman, J.P., Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2017. An adaptive convergence-
trajectory controlled ant colony optimization algorithm with application to water 
distribution system design problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 21(5), 
773-791. 
Zitzler, E., Laumanns, M., Bleuler, S., 2004. A tutorial on evolutionary multiobjective optimization, In: 
Metaheuristics for multiobjective optimisation. Springer, 3-37. 
Ziztler, E., Laumanns, M., Thiele, L., 2002. SPEA2: Improving the strength Pareto evolutionary 
algorithm for multiobjective optimization, In: Giannakoglou, K., Tsahalis, D., Periaux, J., 
Papailiou, K., Fogarty, T. (Eds.), Evolutionary Methods for Design, Optimization, and Control, 
Barcelona, Spain, 95-100. 
 

