==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01445-8
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Investing in AI for social good: an analysis of European national 
strategies
Francesca Foffano1,2 · Teresa Scantamburlo2,3 · Atia Cortés4
Received: 30 July 2021 / Accepted: 24 March 2022 / Published online: 5 May 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022, corrected publication 2022
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become a driving force in modern research, industry and public administration and the Euro-
pean Union (EU) is embracing this technology with a view to creating societal, as well as economic, value. This effort has 
been shared by EU Member States which were all encouraged to develop their own national AI strategies outlining policies 
and investment levels. This study focuses on how EU Member States are approaching the promise to develop and use AI 
for the good of society through the lens of their national AI strategies. In particular, we aim to investigate how European 
countries are investing in AI and to what extent the stated plans contribute to the good of people and society as a whole. 
Our contribution consists of three parts: (i) a conceptualization of AI for social good highlighting the role of AI policy, 
in particular, the one put forward by the European Commission (EC); (ii) a qualitative analysis of 15 European national 
strategies mapping investment plans and suggesting their relation to the social good (iii) a reflection on the current status 
of investments in socially good AI and possible steps to move forward. Our study suggests that while European national 
strategies incorporate money allocations in the sphere of AI for social good (e.g. education), there is a broader variety of 
underestimated actions (e.g. multidisciplinary approach in STEM curricula and dialogue among stakeholders) that can boost 
the European commitment to sustainable and responsible AI innovation.
Keywords AI policy · AI for social good · European National Strategy · AI investments · Trustworthy AI
1 Introduction
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) into social life 
has raised concerns worldwide and efforts to limit the nega-
tive impact associated with the use of such systems have 
multiplied in recent years. Research communities, non-profit 
organisations and governmental agencies have stressed the 
point that AI is not “simply” a technological artifact. AI 
is a socio-technical system made of an imprecise number of heterogeneous components ranging from pieces of code, 
high-performing CPUs to human assumptions and social 
habits.
Although the complex interdependencies underlying an 
AI system makes it difficult to fully predict and control its 
behavior, there is a large consensus on steering AI develop-
ment towards the good of people and the environment. In 
this regard, a truly global effort is the movement of AI for 
Social Good, a flurry of AI-related activities aimed at deliv -
ering positive social impact (Tomašev et al. 2020; Floridi 
et al. 2020). These include AI projects addressing specific 
social problems, such as hate speech or climate change, as 
well as guidelines and frameworks offering guidance on the 
implementation of safe and ethical AI.
However, what counts as AI for social good is still 
debated both theoretically and practically (Floridi et al. 
2020). The simple availability of AI systems with socially 
good outcomes might not guarantee that they are being used 
for the common good as ethics guidelines would recommend 
(HLEG AI 2019a ). For example, certain applications can 
originate from a genuine aspiration to solve a social problem  * Francesca Foffano 
 ff716@york.ac.uk
 Teresa Scantamburlo 
 teresa.scantamburlo@unive.it
 Atia Cortés 
 atia.cortes@bsc.es
1 University of York, York, UK
2 European Centre for Living Technology, Venice, Italy
3 Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy
4 Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain

==== Page 2 ====
480 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
(e.g. student dropout or prison overcrowding) and then gen -
erate unexpected harms or inconveniences as they go live 
(e.g. outcomes benefiting a small portion of the population 
or users’ over reliance). Ethics principles, moreover, will 
remain a sterile exercise if we do not put them into prac-
tice. Good AI policies are essential to support a more prac-
tical approach to ethical principles whose impact depends 
on how they integrate into larger governance ecosystems 
including relevant policies, laws, regulations and existing 
practices (Fjeld et al. 2020). In addition, AI policies can 
operate at different scales and impact on a variety of stake-
holders thereby promoting a more inclusive and responsible 
innovation approach across all ramifications of our society. 
For example, education and vocational training constitute a 
key area of intervention for a successful undertaking of AI 
for social good. Organisations and governments planning 
measures in this sphere give greater support to future and 
present workers in dealing with the challenges and opportu-
nities brought by AI.
In this paper, we focus on European AI policies and how 
these relate to AI for social good. We want to explore how 
Member States introduce AI for social good in their national 
strategies. In particular, we focus on their investment plans 
and how these commit to the human-centric approach pro-
posed by the European Commission (EC) and embedded 
into European Guidelines for Trustworthy AI. Our choice 
is motivated by the assumption that information about con-
crete investments can be a meaningful indicator of coun -
tries’ commitment towards AI for social good and the Euro-
pean human-centric vision. Therefore the identification of 
concrete measures presented in the strategies will help to 
envision how European countries are planning to fulfill the 
EC projections on AI. Our guiding questions are: What do 
Member States plan to do for a responsible development of 
AI? Do they translate the human-centric vision into targeted 
measures? What plans do they have to make AI development 
more democratic and open to society? In other words, is AI 
made in Europe truly fostering social good? We will try to 
answer these questions by analysing the investment plans 
stated in the European national strategies and providing a 
critical reflection on the definition of AI for social good 
using the EU AI Policy as a reference. The aim is to iden-
tify general trends and types of investments that can foster 
the development of a beneficial and sustainable AI. While 
our analysis suggests that Member States are trying to make 
concrete steps towards socially good AI, there is room for 
reflection on the maturity of their efforts.
The article is structured as follows. Section  2 introduces 
the idea of AI for social good, highlighting the role played 
by AI policies, and provides an overview of the European AI 
strategy and related key initiatives. In Sect.  3 we dig into the 
European Member States’ strategies and analyse the invest-
ment plans stated in such documents. Section  4 describes the results of our analysis providing an overview of the general 
trends. In Sect.  5 we comment on our findings based on the 
policy directions taken by the EU on AI for social good. 
Finally, we provide some concluding remarks summarising 
the work done and highlighting some open issues.
2  Moving towards a good AI society
The field of AI for social good spans a variety of stakehold-
ers and actions such as public events,1 scientific publica-
tions,2  movements and organisations’ special programmes.3
In the following sections, we will explore the notion of 
AI for social good at the semantic level by outlining the 
meanings that usually relate to it. In particular, we will focus 
on the policy element, which can guide and complement 
other components (i.e. AI applications with a socially good 
outcome and ethical principles), and provide an overview 
of the European strategy towards AI. The latter is, in fact, 
an example of a policy approach that aims to be “human-
centric” and for the well-being of society, and, thus, it is a 
source of stimuli for discussing how strategic choices can 
influence the implementation of AI for social good.
2.1  Framing AI for social good
What do we mean by “AI for Social Good”? To answer this 
question we identify three possible and complementary 
meanings.
1. AI for Social Good as applications
A first, intuitive meaning is to achieve a positive impact 
by applying AI to societal and environmental challenges 
such as natural disaster management, poverty reduction 
and climate change. For example, Climate Change AI is an 
organisation of volunteers using machine learning to help 
1 Conferences on this theme abounded in the past years and reached 
well-established communities in the AI field. See, for instance, the 
NeurIps 2018 workshop (https:// aifor socia lgood. github. io/ 2018/) and 
ICLM 2019 AISG (https:// aifor socia lgood. github. io/ icml2 019/ index. 
htm).
2 As well as journal special issues, see also Cambridge University 
Press’ book series: https:// www. cambr  idge. org/ core/ series/ artifi  cial- 
intel ligen ce- for- social- good/ 4E546 39036 00210 6212C 0A381 2752C  
7C.
3 Consider, for example, multi-stakeholder forums like “AI4Peo-
ple” (https:// www. eismd. eu/ ai4pe ople/) and “AI for Good” (https:// 
ai4go od. org/), United Nations’ platform “AI for Good Global Sum-
mit”, companies’ programme such as Google AI’s open call (https:// 
ai. google/ social- good/) and Microsoft’s AI for Humanitarian Action 
(https:// www. micro soft. com/ en- us/ ai/ ai- for- human itari an- action) and 
Oxford Initiative AIxSDGs (https:// www. sbs. ox. ac. uk/ resea rch/ centr 
es- and- initi atives/ oxford- initi ative- aisdgs).

==== Page 3 ====
481 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
reduce gas emissions. At Stanford University a group of 
researchers combined publicly available satellite imagery 
with deep learning to predict the level of poverty across 
African villages and support organizations to deliver ser -
vices to those most in need (Yeh et al. 2020). Usually, a 
shared objective of these and similar projects is to advance 
social good as defined by the UN Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDGs) (The Future Society 2020). However, 
note that applying AI to a specific social or environmental 
challenge alone is not a guarantee for the achievement of 
social good. For instance, a study on the impact of AI on the 
achievement of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals 
revealed that AI can act as an enabler on 79% of sustainable 
development targets but also inhibits 35% of them (Vinuesa 
et al. 2020).
Other challenges include AI for social good applications 
resulting in a failure because of poor ethical considerations 
(the so-called “good-AI-gone-bad”) or reflecting an acci -
dental success which misses the opportunity to extend the 
positive effects of AI to other settings (Floridi et al. 2020). 
To address these issues, Floridi et al. (2020) propose seven 
ethical factors that provide both theoretical and practical 
guidance for the design and implementation of AI projects in 
agreement with well-known ethical principles (beneficence, 
non maleficence, justice, autonomy, and explicability).
2. AI for Social Good as ethical principles
Another way to spell out the meaning of AI for social 
good is to define a set of principles that can inspire the 
design and assessment of AI systems. Popular examples 
include the European Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (HLEG 
2019a) and the intergovernmental principles adopted by the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD 2019). Similar efforts have produced an impressive 
literature in the last few years and extensive reviews suggest 
a meaningful convergence around common themes, such as 
accountability and non-discrimination, but also the need for 
more concrete approaches making such principles practi-
cally relevant (Fjeld 2020; Hagendorff 2020; Jobin et al. 
2019; Zeng et al. 2018). Whittleston et al. (2019) argue that 
a way to move principled AI forward is to acknowledge and 
address the tensions that arise when applying ethical prin-
ciples in practice. Many scholars developed specific tools 
and methodologies supporting the implementation of ethical 
principles in the deployment and assessment of AI systems, 
and recent works have provided classification, more or less 
articulated, of available tools (Morley et al. 2019; Scantam-
burlo et al 2020).
3. AI for Social Good as policies
A third important strand in the field of AI for social good 
is the development of AI policies which set up priorities and 
action plans for the development and adoption of AI in the public interest. Note that “policy” is a general term that may 
apply to different entities, such as firms and associations, 
but here we focus on public policy, i.e. those adopted by 
states to harness the potential of AI and protect citizens. In 
broad terms, an AI policy refers to a plan of actions which 
addresses both the opportunities and the risks brought about 
by AI. Usually, it includes statements about resource alloca-
tions and commitments to specific areas of concerns (Mat-
tingly-Jordan et al. 2019). It may inspire new laws or solicit 
changes to current regulations in response to specific AI 
characteristics. In general, a policy “conveys the necessity of 
exploration and planning, the finality of law, and the primacy 
of public interest without definitely endorsing or rejecting 
regulatory intervention” (Calo 2017).
AI policies can play a key role in the field of AI for social 
good complementing and integrating the other two elements 
(i.e. AI applications and ethical principles). First, they can 
offer a roadmap for a wide range of actors (companies, non-
profit organisations, research centres, public administrations, 
individual citizens, etc.) offering guidance and bringing 
cohesion to a variety of initiatives and projects. Second, AI 
policies translate ideals and goals into action plans provid-
ing concrete information on fundamental aspects such as 
funding and investments, governance mechanisms, areas of 
development and risks mitigation. Although policy docu-
ments may contain partial or provisional information, they 
can work as a mirror reflecting the values and the priorities 
of a government, but also the incoherences and the gaps 
between the aspirations and the planned actions. Nonethe-
less, the choice to approach AI for social good from a pol-
icy perspective does not exclude other conceptualizations, 
such as those described above. In fact, our idea of AI for 
Social Good cannot be reduced to a single dimension. AI 
projects that implement UN SDGs are genuine examples of 
AI for social good. However, we also acknowledge that set-
ting up AI for social good policies is paramount to give an 
agenda soliciting and steering more concrete initiatives. In 
this paper, we highlight the policy dimension because it can 
offer new, fresh insights to the field of AI for social good.
Since 2017, 60 countries, territories and the EU have 
published over 700 AI policy documents,4 also known as 
National or Regional AI Strategies, to set out their vision on 
AI, define specific interventions and coordinate governmen-
tal or intergovernmental efforts (for an inventory of these 
documents see Van Roy 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). In the fol-
lowing section, we direct our attention towards the European 
AI strategy to better understand the priorities and initiatives 
undertaken by the European Union to steer the development 
of AI. This overview, moreover, will set the stage for our 
analysis of Member States’ strategies.
4 See the OECD Observatory website: https:// www. oecd. ai/ count 
ries- and- initi atives.

==== Page 4 ====
482 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
2.2  The European strategy
In the last few years, the development and the deployment 
of AI have grown dramatically at a global scale. While some 
top players such as China and the United States are moving 
faster to achieve leadership in AI, focusing mostly on the 
industry, the vision of the European Union (EU) is to bring 
a balance between innovation and ethical sustainability. In 
particular, the ambition stated by the EC is: “to become the 
world-leading region for developing and deploying cutting-
edge, ethical and secure AI, promoting a human-centric 
approach in the global context.” (European Commission 
2018c).
To move towards this goal, the EC put forward specific 
initiatives including policy documents, ethics guidelines and, 
more recently, a proposal for a regulation (European Com-
mission 2021a; b). All these efforts aim to define a unified 
approach across all EU Member States and ensure respon-
sible AI innovation. The ethics guidelines for Trustworthy 
AI represent a milestone in the European pathway which has 
involved an articulated production process (Smuha 2019). 
A more recent effort has been the preparation of a regula-
tory framework, first announced in a white paper (European 
Commission 2020a), and now officially proposed in a EC’s 
communication (European Commission 2021a; b) specify -
ing a set of rules based on AI systems’ risk level.
The aforementioned initiatives are part of a wider process 
which is guided by three goals defining the pillars of the 
European AI strategy (European Commission 2018b):
1. Boost the EU’s technological and industrial capacity and 
AI uptake across the economy by private and public sec-
tors. This implies to strengthen research and develop -
ment investments in AI in the EU.
2. Prepare for socio-economic changes brought by the 
transformation of AI in the labor market. Member States 
will need to prepare the Society to develop basic digital 
skills; re-skill or up-skill workers affected by automa-
tion, robotics and AI; and train more AI specialists, aim-
ing for academic excellence.
3. Ensure an appropriate ethical and legal framework 
to promote trustworthy and accountable AI made in 
Europe.
Table  1 provides an overview of the main takeaways from 
fundamental policy documents (for an overview of the EU 
AI landscape see Stix 2019). Surveying the recommenda-
tions set out in these documents we identified some macro-
areas of policy directions that can help us contextualise the 
analysis of national strategies and their investment plans (see 
Sect.  3):• Beneficial innovation to improve public services and 
tackle social problems: e.g. the use of AI for policy 
development and sustainable challenges (such as reduc-
ing pesticides in agriculture), more efficient and tar -
geted interventions in the public sectors (e.g. healthcare, 
employment, security, etc.), accessibility of AI services 
to the whole society including protected groups.
• Education and life-long learning to prepare the society 
for an AI future: e.g. access to AI literacy in primary and 
secondary schools, courses for up- or re-skilling, increas-
ing gender balance in AI and STEM, introduction of non-
technical skills in AI and STEM curricula.
• Governance mechanisms to steer AI towards a benefi-
cial use aligned with human rights and the rule of law 
through the elaboration and adoption of ethics guidelines 
and legal framework, systems to continuously monitor 
the impact of AI on society.
• Cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders:  e.g. 
exchange of best practices, creation of multi-stakeholder 
alliances, facilitating partnerships (e.g. private and pub-
lic) and research networks also to maximize investments 
and facilitate technology transfer.
• Pan-European data and technological infrastructure  
including the creation of trusted data spaces, the provi-
sion of testing facilities and sandboxes, and investments 
in clouds and high-performance computing, among oth-
ers.
The policy directions outlined above aim to achieve the 
goals set out in the European AI strategy (see the three pil-
lars) and try to contribute to sustainable innovation. In addi-
tion, each policy area suggests measures that can foster AI 
for social good and contribute to build a roadmap for our 
quality analysis of the investment plans stated in National 
AI strategies.
In addition to policy documents, The EU strategy is sup -
ported by other initiatives such as collaborations, projects 
and funding opportunities. Some activities facilitate the 
monitoring of AI development along different dimensions 
including industrial, technological and research capacity 
and policy initiatives, such as the AI Watch5 (JRC). While 
5 The AI Watch is an initiative of the European Commission (EC) 
jointly developed by the EC Joint Research Centre (JRC) and the 
Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and 
Technology (DG CONNECT). See more at https:// knowl edge4 
policy. ec. europa. eu/ ai- watch_ en. Note that another relevant monitor -
ing activity is conducted by the OECD (Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development), an intergovernmental economic 
organisation aiming to encourage economic progress and world trade 
https:// www. oecd. org/. In particular, the OECD AI Policy Observa-
tory aims at collecting data on AI worldwide. See more at https:// 
oecd. ai/.

==== Page 5 ====
483 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
Table 1  Takeaways of the European policy documents on AI from 2018 to 2020
Document Takeaways
Declaration of cooperation on Artificial Intelli-
gence, April 2018 (EC 2018a)Addressing the transformation of the labour market and modernising Europe’s education and 
training:
 Encouraging discussion with stakeholders
 Exchanging views on ethical and legal frameworks
 Ensuring that humans remain at the centre of the development, deployment and decision-
making of AI
 Advancing public understanding of AI
 Exchanging views on the impact of AI on the labour market
Artificial Intelligence for Europe, April 2018 (EC 
2018b)The EU strategy aims to (EU pillars):
 Boost the EU’s technological and industrial capacity and AI uptake across the economy by 
private and public sectors
 Prepare for socio-economic changes brought by the transformation of AI in the labour 
market
 Ensure an appropriate ethical and legal framework to promote trustworthy and accountable 
AI made in Europe
Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence, 
December 2018 (EC 2018c)Strategic actions such as:
 Recommendation for all Member States to develop national AI strategies outlining invest-
ment levels and implementation measures
 Access to the necessary AI and ICT skills in primary and secondary schools
 Ethics and other non-STEM skills should be part of the talent fostering chapter of AI 
national and international strategies
 Exchange best practices on how to reinforce excellence and to retain AI talent in Europe and 
on the re- and upskilling of the current workforce
 Creation of a common European data space accessible to a broad range of users in full 
respect of GDPR and based on shared standards
 Use of AI to improve public services (e.g. detection of criminal activities) and facilitate 
citizen-government interaction
 Increasing international cooperation to promote ethics guidelines and integrate AI into 
development policy
Policy and Investment recommendations of AI 
June 2019 (HLEG AI 2019b)Recommendations associated with four areas where AI can bring a positive impact (civil 
society, private sector, public sector, and research and academia), such as:
 Increasing digital and AI literacy through courses (e.g. MOOCs)
 Encouraging the development of AI tools and applications that are specifically targeted to 
help vulnerable demographics
 Monitoring mechanisms at national and EU level to continuously analyse, measure and 
score the societal impact of AI
 Gaining access to data and infrastructure for developing welfare-enhancing AI solutions 
through privacy-preserving means
 Stimulating beneficial innovation by funding EU hackathons, competitions and industry 
challenge-driven research missions in AI
Recommendations linked to four enablers (data and Infrastructure, Education and Skills, a 
Governance and Regulatory framework and Funding and Investment):
 Network of testing facilities and sandboxes with appropriate governance mechanisms to set 
legal and ethical standards
 Fostering the creation of trusted data spaces for specific sectors (e.g. healthcare) and the 
creation of AI-based services that are available for all
 Promoting skills related to data and AI in all academic disciplines and professional fields to 
increase the potential of areas where AI applications can be developed
 Incorporating humanities, social sciences, and gender research into AI research programmes 
to increase diversity and guarantee a multidisciplinary approach
White Paper on AI: a European approach to excel-
lence and trust, 2020 (EC 2020a)Policy options to enable a trustworthy and secure development of AI:
 Mobilising resources to achieve an ‘ecosystem of excellence’ and create the right incentives 
to accelerate the adoption of solutions based on AI
 Outlining the elements of a regulatory framework for AI in Europe that will create a unique 
‘ecosystem of trust’

==== Page 6 ====
484 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
others promote cooperation through industrial and research 
networks such as the Digital SME Alliance,6 Claire,7  Ellis,8  
and EurAI.9
Among projects, the AI4EU10 platform fosters collabora-
tion among AI actors, sharing expertise and research at the 
European level. The platform also includes the European 
Observatory on Society and AI, which is coordinated by 
the authors of this work. The goal of the Observatory is to 
present and reflect on the development of AI in Europe, in 
particular regarding the ethical, legal, social, economic and 
cultural aspects of AI. This paper results from the collection 
of EU policy documents carried out by the AI4EU Obser -
vatory team and incorporate the reflections developed and 
shared in this research context.
3  European national strategy analysis
As we saw, the European AI strategy is premised on the 
idea that AI should be a “force for good in society with the 
ultimate aim of increasing human well-being.” (European 
Commission 2021a; b, p. 1). Moreover, the goals and the 
clusters of policy proposals identified in key EU documents 
(see Sect.  2.2) set out priorities and action plans that can 
facilitate the implementation of AI for the social good.
This paper aims to analyse how the goals and the policy 
directions of the European AI strategy translate in practice. 
In particular, we will examine what Member States plan to 
allocate resources in their AI national strategies. Are they 
promoting AI for social good?
To answer this question we analysed 15 European 
national policies to understand how Member States plan to 
contribute to the achievement of Trustworthy AI. In par -
ticular, we focus on investment plans to see whether the 
ethical and social aspiration emerging from the European 
AI policy documents translates into concrete actions and 
specific resource allocations.In the following sections, we contextualise our work and 
illustrate similar research comparing recent ethical guide-
lines and frameworks. We then describe the documents stud-
ied, also from a quantitative perspective, and present the 
selection process as well as the method used for the quali-
tative analysis. Finally, we discuss the results and identify 
some general trends based on our area of interest (i.e. the 
social good).
3.1  Related works
This work connects to a large literature dealing with a vari-
ety of guidelines and frameworks, which have rapidly sprung 
up worldwide to promote the responsible and sustainable 
development of AI. Several studies carried out a comparative 
analysis to identify similarities and divergences among these 
initiatives. Examples include studies mapping keywords 
of different guidelines (Zeng et al. 2018) and broad scope 
reviews (Bradley et al. 2020; Jobin et al. 2019; Hagendorff  
2020). Most of these studies consider a heterogeneous set of 
documents released by a variety of entities, including private 
companies, non-profit organisations and public institutions. 
Also, their main purpose is to study common ethical topics 
and their coverage across principles and guidelines issued in 
the last few years. Compared to these works, our study pre-
sents some points of contact, but also important distinctions. 
On the one hand, it shares the attention towards the ethical 
development of AI. But, on the other hand, it focuses on a 
more homogeneous set of documents (i.e. national strate-
gies) which are all part of a challenging European strategy. 
So, rather than (dis)agreements on AI ethical principles, our 
focus is more on how these principles translate into plans 
and measures taken by the European countries. In particu-
lar, we do agree with Fjeld et al. (2020) that principles are 
better understood in their cultural, linguistic, geographic, 
and organisational context. Hence, investigating Europe’s 
AI strategy from the perspective of different Member States 
adds value to the study of the European AI landscape 
(Fig.  1).
3.2  Materials and methods
To conduct our analysis of the investment plans stated in 
European national strategies, we selected the set of docu-
ments to be considered. We generated this selection based 
on the EU national strategies available from May 2020 to 
August 2020. According to AI Watch (Van Roy 2020) 22 
nations were at least at the final draft of their strategy, a 
count that achieved 27 in the last revised report (Van Roy 
2021). However, we have reduced the selection to 15 nations 
based on the following requirements:7 Claire AI is a network of confederation of Laboratories for Artifi-
cial Intelligence research in Europe. See more at https:// claire- ai. org/
8 Ellis (European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems) 
is an European network for research including programs for PhD. See 
more at https:// ellis. eu/.
9 EurAI (the European Association for Artificial Intelligence or 
ECCAI) represents the European community in Artificial Intelli-
gence. See more at https:// eurai. org/.
10 The AI4EU is a European project funded by Horizon 2020 aim-
ing to create a platform for collaboration between the different stake-
holders in Europe. The platform is present at https:// www. ai4eu. eu/ 
and includes the Observatory on Society and AI. See more at https:// 
www. ai4eu. eu/ obser  vatory .6 The Digital SME Alliance is a network of ICT small and medium 
sized enterprises in Europe. See more at https:// www. digit  alsme. eu/.

==== Page 7 ====
485 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
1. The national strategy needs to be official. Neither draft 
nor action plans were considered.
2. Only AI strategies from Member States of the EU were 
included to ensure a common commitment towards the 
objectives of the Commission.3. The documents need to be available in English to avoid 
language misinterpretations.
We gathered the national strategies selected in a list of 
documents alphabetically ordered in Table  2.Table 2  List of the selected national strategies with a number of pages (PP)
Country Year Title PP
Austria 2018 ATM AT 2030: Artificial Intelligence Mission Austria 2030 (FMTI 2018) 16
Belgium 2019 AI4Belgium (AI4BELGIUM Coalition, 2019) 29
Czech republic 2019 National Artificial Intelligence Strategy of the Czech Republic (MITCR, 2019) 54
Denmark 2019 National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (MIB, 2019) 74
Finland 2017 Finland’s Age of Artificial Intelligence (MEAE 2017) 76
France 2018 For a meaningful Artificial Intelligence (Villani, 2018) 154
Germany 2018 Artificial Intelligence Strategy (FEELS 2018) 45
Lithuania 2019 Lithuanian Artificial Intelligence Strategy: A Vision for the Future (MEI 2019) 22
Luxemburg 2019 Artificial Intelligence: A Strategic Vision for Luxembourg (GGDL, 2019) 28
Malta 2019 Malta the Ultimate AI launchpad: A strategy and Vision for Artificial Intelligence in Malta 2030 
(PSFDI 2019)57
Netherlands 2019 Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence (MEC 2019) 64
Portugal 2019 AI Portugal 2030 (INCoDe.2030, 2019) 36
Slovakia 2019 Action Plan for the Digital Transformation of Slovakia (Government of Slovakia, 2019) 78
Spain 2019 Spanish RDI Strategy in Artificial Intelligence (IMSU, 2019) 48
Sweden 2018 National Approach to Artificial Intelligence, (MEIn 2019) 12
Fig. 1  Representation of the initiatives promoted by the European Commission on AI. The figure is adapted from https:// www. ai4eu rope. eu/ 
Netwo rk- of- Excel lence

==== Page 8 ====
486 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
In the initial phase of our analysis, we extracted some 
quantitative information about our set of documents and 
the vocabulary employed. With this step, we aim to add 
the first layer of information describing the documents at 
large by means of simple statistics, such as term frequen-
cies and terms’ relevance. We applied basic pre-process -
ing techniques to remove useless terms (such as articles 
and prepositions) and broke up the text into essential units 
(tokens). This process highlighted the heterogeneity of our 
documents, whose length varies significantly ranging from 
1000 to 30,000 tokens (for instance, see Austria vs France 
in Fig.  2a). In addition, we created a dictionary including a 
set of unique words11 to provide an overview of the vocabu-
lary characterising the national strategies. Among the 10,262 
unique terms, the 30 most frequent words in the whole cor -
pus are reported in Fig.  2b. These include several terms that 
connect to the web of meanings characterizing the idea of 
socially good AI introduced in Sect.  1. Some of these relate 
to the public sphere (‘public’, ‘government’, ‘services’, ‘soci-
ety’, ‘national’, ‘european’) while others are associated with 
a technological transition (‘research’, ‘development’, ‘inno-
vation’, ‘education’, ‘work’, ‘companies’, ‘skills’). However, 
we observed that among the most frequent terms there are 
some general words lacking relevance for our research focus 
(e.g. ‘use’, ‘order’, ‘new’). Since this exercise was meant to 
give an overview of the vocabulary used by documents, we 
preferred to minimize our intervention, adding many con-
straints on the search and hence influencing the final result. 
An in-depth analysis of the context is hence required .
The core of our analysis consists in the application of 
grounded theory (Charmaz 2014) to explore our research question. In our case, this inductive approach is used to iden-
tify and collect meaningful pieces of text (i.e. the data) in the 
documents reporting specific budgets for investments. These 
data will be tagged with descriptive labels, hereafter referred 
to as codes, that summarise the concept or idea behind the 
text according to the open code method (Strauss and Cor -
bin 1998). As compared to other qualitative approaches, 
grounded theory offers the flexibility to revisit the codes 
created by the researchers based on the emergence of new 
themes during the analysis of the text. The collection of data 
(i.e. portions of text) and codes (i.e. the label assigned) then 
formed our dataset.
We organized our analysis on a two-stage process involv -
ing two researchers. In the first stage, each researcher ana -
lysed independently the list of documents (see Table  2) to 
generate their own dataset with their own list of codes. In 
the second stage, the datasets were merged and the codes 
revised to obtain the final results. Figure  3 presents a sketchy 
representation of our process with respect to the theme of 
education.
To facilitate the analysis, before starting the process the 
researchers agreed on some common criteria in order to 
identify pieces of text of interest. The inclusion criteria were 
the following: (i) investments must include clear estimations 
in terms of money allocation; (ii) investments must be made 
by the country under consideration; and (iii) investments 
must be planned for the year of the publication or the years 
to come.
In the first stage, each researcher selected relevant por -
tions of text based on the aforementioned criteria and 
assigned them to a code creating her own set of codes. Dur -
ing this process, the researchers were free to reiterate the 
process, adjust or create new categories of codes. This step 
was conducted individually to avoid that researchers were 
influenced by each other while interpreting the documents. 
Fig. 2  Lengths in unique tokens of National Strategies (a) and most frequent terms (b)
11 The dictionary was created by using the Gentism library available 
at the following link: https:// radim rehur  ek. com/ gensim/.

==== Page 9 ====
487 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
Once completed the two datasets, the researchers cross-
checked the results obtained to ensure a uniform joint data-
set. Codes which were specific to only one of the two dataset 
were collaboratively revised and accepted/rejected according 
to the initial criteria. At the end of the control phase, five 
codes were deleted due to a lack of compatibility with the 
defined criteria (e.g. fundings returned entirely from the EU 
or investments made before the year of publication of the 
strategy).
In the second stage, the researchers created a new ver -
sion of the dataset inspecting all the code to unify similar 
categories. The final version of the dataset is composed of 18 
codes that cluster our 49 data related to investments. These 
codes referred also as first-order codes, describe directly 
the thematic content identified in the documents. We then 
organized the first-order codes into 8 higher-level catego -
ries by applying the axial coding methodology (Strauss and 
Corbin 1998 ). This second process generated the second-
order codes, helping the researchers to generate new high-
level relations between the codes. Table  3 represents the 
first and second-order codes and their descriptions while 
Fig. 4 presents the occurrences of second-order codes based 
on the Member States they refer to. The table includes the 
results from the analysis of 11 national strategies that have 
reported information related to investments based on our 
requirements. The complete version of the analysis, includ-
ing the text selected and document details can be found in 
the appendix.
3.3  Limitations
Our analysis is bounded by some limits regarding the fram-
ing of our research questions and the corpus of the docu-
ments selected. For example, even if the EC provided some guidance (European Commission 2018a) in the definition 
of priorities and policy measures, each national strategy 
presents differences in the structure and details provided. 
Since there were documents which did not provide specific 
and exhaustive information on investments, it was not pos-
sible to run a full comparison. For this reason, we decided to 
consider only current or future investments with a specified 
budget. This choice was motivated by a twofold reason: on 
the one hand, to define in a clear way the area of interest for 
coding, on the other hand, to focus on concrete actions taken 
by the states, not merely general intentions. We believe that 
the presence of a budget represents a stronger commitment 
that the State takes towards the EU directives. However, we 
are aware that the findings of this research might not cor -
rectly represent the current status of the investment in the 
EU. Thus, future studies in this area may complement our 
findings with estimation from the market to have a more 
representative vision of the AI landscape in the EU.
4  Results
According to the results, 11 national strategies have reported 
investment plans that meet our requirements. These include 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Lithuania, Malta, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands. In 
the following subsections, we highlight the main findings 
distinguishing between general investment plans and invest -
ments with an explicit commitment to society (e.g. welfare 
solutions, education and social impact).
The table presents the 1st and 2nd order codes, their 
occurrences (#occ), and the countries reporting the code 
in their strategies with the related occurrences and a brief 
Fig. 3  A visual representation of our two-stages qualitative analysis process and the creation of first and second-order codes with respect to the 
theme of education

==== Page 10 ====
488 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
Table 3  Qualitative analysis of the investment area in the European AI national strategies
2nd ORDER CODES
1st order codesN (#occ) Description NATIONS (#of occurrences)
SOCIETY 2
Social Impact 1 Investment to evaluate the impact of AI on 
society and employmentNetherlands
Digital Welfare Solution 1 Investment to accelerate the dissemination 
of digital welfare solutionsDenmark
COOPERATION 3
Public Collaboration 1 Funding to foster collaboration between 
public entities on AI researchNetherlands
Public–Private Collaboration 1 Funding to develop joint projects and col-
laborations between public and private 
sectorsDenmark
International Collaboration 1 Investment to foster international collabo-
ration among AI researchersDenmark
NATIONAL FUND 11
Current Investment 6 Description of ongoing packages of invest-
ments in AI for general purposesBelgium, Denmark (2) Germany, Malta, 
Spain
Future Investment 5 Projections of future money allocations 
or packages of investments that will 
conclude in the futureBelgium (2), Denmark, Finland, Netherlands
INNOVATION 7
Digital Technology 4 Investments to research and develop new 
technologies and services to achieve a 
digital transformationBelgium, Denmark (3)
Cybersecurity 1 Funding to improve the national cyberse-
curityDenmark
Data Collection 1 Investment intended to improve the data 
quality and the public accessibility to the 
data setDenmark
Supercomputing 1 Funding to acquire a new supercomputer to 
support the researchNetherlands
INTERNATIONAL REPRESENTATION 1
National promotion 1 Investment to promote the visibility of the 
country as an opportunity for companies 
and research in AIMalta
EDUCATION 12
Employee Training 6 Investments for training, upskill, or facili-
tating access to new workers in the AI 
sectorMalta, Netherlands (5)
AI Literacy for Citizens 2 Fundings to support the general public 
(e.g. NEETs) in developing their digital 
competencies through the creation of 
vocational trainingDenmark, France
Educational Fund 4 Investments to support and strengthen 
education in AI with the creation of 
scholarships, university programs, and 
higher educationDenmark, Finland, Netherlands (2)
PRIVATE 8
Companies Investment 8 Investments made to launch, support, or 
co-support enterprise and start-upsDenmark (3), Germany, Malta (2), Nether -
lands (2)
PUBLIC 5
Investment for Local Administrations 1 Investment for local administrations (e.g. 
municipality and region) to improve their 
servicesDenmark

==== Page 11 ====
489 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
description (e.g. Employee Training 1 investment in Malta 
and 5 investments in the Netherlands).
Most of the national strategies (7 out of 11) report pack -
ages of investments in AI initiatives (National Fund). These 
investments vary depending on whether they refer to ongoing 
efforts (Current Investment) or future plans (Future invest-
ment). Their description is usually generic and reports total 
volumes, which often cover different areas of application 
(e.g. such as healthcare and life sciences). Some strategies 
provide figures which connect to the digital transformation 
(Innovation). For example, the Netherlands is investing EUR 
18 million in a new national supercomputer (Supercomput-
ing), while Denmark allocated DKK 1.5 billion (EUR 200 
million) on cyber and information security (Cybersecurity) 
and DKK 250 million (EUR 33.5 million) in data quality and 
cross-sectoral cooperation on health data (Data Collection).
Another emerging trend regards investments in the pri-
vate sector (Private), putting special attention to support 
start-ups and SMEs in the uptake of AI, as they make 99% 
of business in Europe (European Commission 2018b ). Thus, 
it is clear that the early adoption of new technologies will 
help boost innovation and competition in the AI landscape. 
In some strategies, there are figures that refer more specifi-
cally to the public sector (Public). For instance, Denmark 
allocates resources for testing and deploying digital wel-
fare solutions in municipalities and regions (Investment for 
Local Administration), while Austria, Lithuania, Denmark, and Sweden report investments in academic research (AI 
Research). Another interesting case regards Malta, which 
plans to spend EUR 1 million per annum to promote their 
international visibility and become an emerging hub for 
technologies in Europe (International Representation). Our 
findings on investments regarding the private and public 
sector well align with the estimates of investments made 
in 2018 in the EU (Nepelski and Sobolewski 2020), which 
suggested, among others, higher pro-capital investments for 
northern countries (e.g. Denmark, Ireland, Finland, Sweden 
and the Netherlands). Further evidence comes from a recent 
EC’s survey which found that 42% of European companies 
are already using AI (European Commission 2020b).
A few documents report quantified investments regard-
ing actions related to society. For example, the Netherlands 
assigns funding to study the impact of AI on work and 
employment (Social Impact). Denmark specifies allocated 
resources for digital welfare solutions (DigitalWelfare Solu-
tion), which connect to a wider reform in the Public Sector 
aimed at contributing to better and more cohesive welfare 
services.
Regarding education, seven strategies propose economic 
plans. For example, Denmark and France reported invest-
ments to support the population in developing digital skills 
on AI and facilitate their integration into the new labour 
market. (AI Literacy for Citizens). The Netherlands describe 
multiple economic initiatives (5 codes) for training workers Table 3  (continued)
2nd ORDER CODES
1st order codesN (#occ) Description NATIONS (#of occurrences)
AI Research 4 Investment in educational and research 
resourcesAustria, Lithuania, Denmark, Sweden
Fig. 4  List of the 2nd order codes presented by European Member States in their AI national strategy with corresponding occurrences

==== Page 12 ====
490 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
and promoting a learning culture in SMEs (Employee Train -
ing). As a reference, during 2018 just a few EU countries 
(e.g. Bulgaria 23.47% Luxembourg 2.9%, Slovenia 2.6% 
Croatia 2.23%) invested in corporate training with marginal 
movements in their national budget on AI (Nepelski and 
Sobolewski 2020 ). Moreover, along with Denmark and Fin -
land, they propose concrete investments in higher educa -
tion. For example, the Danish government set aside a pool 
of DKK 190 million (EUR 25.5 million) to cover all techni-
cal fields, including new technologies like AI (Educational 
Fund). Another interesting proposal regards the investments 
for cooperation. Indeed, the Netherlands reported an open 
call, worth EUR 2.3 million, that involved different public 
organisations to coordinate efforts in research on explaina-
ble, socially aware and responsible AI (Public collaboration).
5  A discussion of social good in national 
strategies
In this section, we consider the collected results in the light 
of the policy directions put forward by the EC to understand 
to what extent National Strategies care about AI for social 
good. In particular, we focus on the macro-areas identified 
in Sect.  2.2 to classify the measures outlined in EC’s Policy 
documents for the achievement of the European AI strategy 
goals.12
Beneficial innovation
With respect to a beneficial use of AI, we did not find 
explicit figures claiming the use of AI to tackle social prob-
lems. While the Netherlands refers to specific investments 
for a social purpose, that is for studying the impact of AI 
on work and employment, other countries claim figures to 
improve the public sector. In particular, Denmark plans to 
disseminate digital welfare solutions at the national and local 
levels, while other countries target resources for the growth 
of AI research and development (Denmark, Austria, Sweden, 
and Lithuania).
Planning AI-related investments to improve the efficiency 
of public service can play an important role in promoting AI 
for Social Good. These for example can allow the state antic-
ipate and target interventions in social and health care. How -
ever, similar actions need to consider potential harms that 
may derive from the application of AI in the public sector. 
For instance, some studies showed that healthcare risk-pre-
diction algorithms can increase inequalities within society 
(Obermayer et al. 2019) and similar mechanisms can extend to a vast array of services to regulate a community of people 
or even a country (Cristianini and Scantamburlo 2020). To 
avoid potential risks for society (such as discrimmiation and 
intrusive surveillance), the introduction of AI in the public 
sector would need prevention mechanisms and measures to 
ensure that the risk is carefully considered and monitored. 
An example of such measures includes participatory design 
approaches which strive for citizens’ participation, in par -
ticular those who are part of marginalised groups, in the 
whole lifecycle of an AI system (e.g. for testing and collect-
ing feedback). Even without reporting specific funds, some 
national strategies aim to involve citizens in the process of 
defining future applications of AI, especially those that will 
be deployed and used by public administrations (e.g. Austria 
plans to support societal discussion and increase the accept-
ance of AI, and Czech Republic aims to involve employees 
in technological transformation).
Education and life-long learning
Education and life-long learning identifies a cluster of 
measures aimed at preparing society for the transformation 
brought about by AI in the labour market. In our research, 
even if few national strategies reported investments in this 
domain (5 nations out of 11), our analysis shows high diver -
sification investment in this area. Note that already in 2018 
there was an estimation of 58% of the European budget in AI 
covering education-related areas (Nepelski and Sobolewski 
2020). These plans mostly regard the re-training and upskill-
ing of the population, and will play an important role in 
promoting a more inclusive and sustainable innovation. 
In particular, AI literacy and education can contribute to 
filling the gap created by the rapid growth in AI between 
the “producers”, who know the strengths and limits of this 
technology, and the “consumers”, who may lack knowledge 
about AI and be more exposed to harmful applications. This 
will lead, on one side, to new opportunities for citizens to 
develop AI-based competences at work and contribute to 
the digital transformation that will shape our society. On 
the other hand, a widespread knowledge about AI can lead 
to a faster acceptance of new technology and penetration in 
society, bringing to life the aim to improve the society that 
Europe is wishing for.
Governance mechanisms
An area of intervention which explicitly addresses the 
good of society is the introduction of governance mecha-
nisms through the creation and adoption of ethics guidelines 
and legal frameworks. With respect to this policy area, we 
did not observe quantified investments. In particular, five 
national strategies (Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, Malta, 
Spain) state that they want to create an ethical committee to 
supervise the use and development of AI systems. Malta puts 
forward the proposal of a national AI certification program 12 Note that, given the nature of the documents analysed, our discus-
sion rests upon a policy-based approach to AI for Social Good (what 
we called “AI for Social Good as policies” in Sect. 2.1).

==== Page 13 ====
491 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
based on its Ethical AI Framework. However, all these 
propositions lack details about allocated resources. While 
some of these proposals build upon existing initiatives and 
investments schemes we expect to see further measures like 
the ambitious goal of Trustworthy AI cannot be achieved 
without costs. The setup of an appropriate ethical and legal 
framework is, in fact, a demanding effort which implies a 
long-term view and the mobilisation of huge resources (e.g. 
experts in different fields, new business processes, holis-
tic assessment methodologies, audits, etc.). However, as of 
today, national strategies take a reflexive approach based on 
ethical principles and changes are to be made rather than 
defining clear rule-based systems (Radu 2021).
Cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders
Another set of policy recommendations aims to increase 
cooperation and dialogue among stakeholders to exchange 
best practices and facilitate the partnership. Creating a 
web of stable interactions among AI stakeholders can also 
optimise efforts targeting social good (e.g. projects fac-
ing global social or environmental challenges or sharing 
standards and good practices implementing ethical require-
ments). For example, the EC sets out the AI Alliance pre-
cisely to engage different stakeholders, including citizens, 
in a broad and open discussion of different aspects of AI. 
Another important example of international collaboration 
is the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI), funded in 2020 to 
undertake common AI projects and share mechanisms for 
multidisciplinary analysis and coordination.13
In our analysis we found only 2 national strategies allocat-
ing explicit resources for cooperation. The Netherlands, for 
example, reports investments to foster collaborations among 
public entities on explainable, socially-aware and responsi-
ble AI. The other case is Denmark, which specifies funds 
for both national and international collaborations. Build-
ing synergies between different countries or even different 
continents has important implications in the creation of a 
common ground for Trustworthy AI. Indeed, international 
collaborations can help overcome cultural barriers and build 
mutual understanding of how to ensure safe and ethical AI 
innovation at a global level (ÓhÉigeartaigh et al. 2020).
Pan-European data and technological infrastructure
In the effort of achieving the expected transformation 
for AI, the infrastructure and the computational capabili-
ties play a fundamental role in making this plan possible. 
Actions such as ensuring the data quality, making datasets 
publicly available, and putting in place mechanisms to pro-
tect their security are necessary to maintain trustworthiness at all levels of the AI pipeline. While this lays down the 
ground to implement projects and initiatives for AI for social 
good, we identified only two nations involved in this pro-
cess: Denmark and the Netherlands. The former reports the 
intention to publicly share and improve the quality of the 
data collected for weather and forecasts. They also commit 
to prevent cyber attacks by investing in strengthening their 
cybersecurity. The latter instead focuses on the acquisition 
of a new supercomputer to ensure the computing capacity 
necessary for their research. The lack of infrastructure con-
sideration presented in the national strategies raises concerns 
over the realistic possibility of the implementation of these 
plans. Moreover, specific measures for cybersecurity and 
detecting biases are expected to preserve the EU principle 
of prevention of harm.
6  Concluding remarks
In this paper, we explored the field of AI for Social Good 
from the perspective of European policies and, in particular, 
through the lens of EU national strategies. Starting from the 
goals and the policy recommendations put forward by the 
EC, we define three possible and complementary approaches 
to AI for Social Good: “as applications”, “as ethical princi-
ples” and “as policies”. In this paper, we focus on the latter 
approach, “AI for social good as policies”, to analyse which 
of the investments extracted from the national strategies 
could promote AI for Social Good in concrete ways. We 
discovered some general patterns of investments and more 
specific plans for the social good, such as those concern-
ing education, vocational training, welfare services, and 
research cooperation on responsible AI. A general obser -
vation regards the imbalance between the vocabulary used 
by national strategies and the statements concerning money 
allocations. While terms associated with social good abound 
throughout the documents—e.g. ‘public’, ‘society’, ‘educa-
tion’ and ‘services’ are among 30 most frequent terms in all 
documents—, money allocations in areas that can be stra-
tegic for the development of AI for social good are limited. 
This points to a gap between words and actions marking the 
general debate on AI ethics. On the one hand, declarations 
by states and private organizations seem to put responsible 
and beneficial AI on the top of their agenda, but, on the other 
hand, the actions needed to implement such priorities are 
not yet clearly formulated. In this regard, our analysis con-
firms that resource and money allocation is a good proxy for 
understanding to what extent an organization pushes ahead 
with AI for social good, going beyond slogans and empty 
rhetoric. In that sense, a natural way to progress the work 
presented in this paper would be a follow-up investigation 
on the status of planned investments and future allocation 
schemes.13 For more information about GPAI see the website of the initiative: 
https:// gpai. ai

==== Page 14 ====
492 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
Among policy directions suggested by the EC (see 
Sect.  2.2), only education attracted significant investments. 
However, the investments reported in this area are mostly 
concerned with the introduction of AI in high schools and 
workforce training. While these measures are fundamental 
for guaranteeing an equitable access to the opportunities 
offered by AI, further funding could extend to other EC’s 
policy recommendations such as the integration of ethics and 
humanities into AI and STEM curricula, the strengthening of 
the multidisciplinary research environment and the improve-
ment of gender balance in computer science and engineering 
disciplines. These findings are aligned with those presented 
in Schiff (2021), who also provides recommendations to 
boost ethics and policy-oriented AI in education research 
and create a real impact for the public good.
Other categories of policy recommendations, such as 
cooperation and dialogue with stakeholders remain relatively 
new and few nations report concrete funding in this field. 
Close collaboration with stakeholders and representatives 
of vulnerable groups is of crucial importance in the devel -
opment and deployment of AI, in particular when its appli-
cation regards the public sectors and services that should 
be available for the whole society. Collaboration can also 
mean more opportunities for public–private partnerships that 
address societal and environmental challenges, for example, 
by funding hackathons and competitions.
With respect to governance mechanisms, we observed 
several good initiatives but no specific information about 
numeric investments. Considering the recent EC’s pro-
posal for an AI regulation, we expect to see more concrete 
measures in this domain. In particular, we believe that more 
resources would be needed to develop testing facilities and 
sandboxes to allow AI researchers and practitioners assess 
compliance with AI regulation. However, we also warn that 
actions guided only by the goal of legal compliance may 
not be enough to internalise the intrinsic motivations which 
underpin the development of AI for social good and sub-
stantiate the application of ethical principles (see the second 
meaning of AI4SG in Sect.  2.1). Self-interests from compa-
nies and the market may sometimes find a way to take over the existing law or use ethics to delay the work on regula-
tions (Nemitz 2018). For this reason investments in AI for 
social good should, on the one hand, be well regulated to 
avoid grey areas and overtaking interests from the market 
and, on the other, be more connected to produce long-lasting 
effects. In this regard, defining numerical expectation in the 
investments for social good could not predict the effective-
ness of the measures taken. The efforts should perhaps be 
more directed upon common goals based on genuine Euro-
pean values. More solidarity among EU states, for example 
by financially supporting the sharing and reuse of knowledge 
and tools, would help more equitable and common progress, 
as well as the consolidation of the goals achieved. Indeed, 
the European view of a suitable and responsible AI should 
not imply that some countries move faster and further than 
others. Europe should have a unified approach towards AI 
for social good with the same active participation by all 
the parts involved. Note that the revised version of the EU 
coordinated plan stresses this point by suggesting, for exam-
ple, sharing, developing and implementing actions on the 
national/regional level that proved to be successful in the 
other Member States (European Commission 2021b).
Moreover, a proportionality principle can ensure that 
resources and efforts are fairly distributed across all sectors, 
not only in AI. The development of an ethical and suitable 
approach to AI would be more credible if we address other 
issues, such as climate change, health and migration with 
the same intensity and strength. The use of AI for social and 
environmental issues, like the recent Covid-19 crisis, should 
not reduce our efforts in other directions such as guaran-
teeing access to health treatments and vaccines to all. In 
conclusion, the use of an “ethics narrative” should not be 
used to cover marketing or political interest but to support 
real actions to achieve not only a “Trustworthy AI” but also 
a culture of trustworthiness. It is essential that all stakehold -
ers engage in this process. In particular governments and 
policy-makers need to provide means to put into practice AI 
for Social Good, but also the Society (i.e. the citizens) needs 
to remain aware and actively demand changes in favour of 
social and environmental well-being.

==== Page 15 ====
493 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 37  Appendix
2nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
Society 2 Social impact 1 NL The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment and the NWO are investing approximately €3 
million in research to gain more insight into the impact of digital technologies (such as AI) 
on work and employmentp. 31 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
Digital welfare 
solution1 DK The government has also proposed a new investment fund to expedite the dissemination of 
digital welfare solutions. Together with initiatives already launched, the investment fund 
will have a total investment budget of DKK 410 million (EUR 63.1 million) for 2018–2022p. 20 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB, 2019)
Cooperation 3 Public collabo-
ration1 NL There will be thematic research calls for public-public collaboration, such as a recent call 
from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), initiated by the Ministry 
of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and worth €2.3 million, on explainable, socially 
aware and responsible AI (closing date 5 November 2019)p. 44 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
Public–Private 
collaboration1 DK In 2019, Digital Hub Denmark will also spend up to DKK 7 million (EUR 930,000) to 
develop public–private collaboration models to, among other things, improve the possibili-
ties for life-science businesses to use, for example artificial intelligence in connection with 
research into health datap. 58 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB, 2019)
International 
collaboration1 DK In collaboration with researchers from the US and Australia, researchers from Aalborg Uni-
versity will develop algorithms that can manage systems associated with great uncertainty. 
Independent Research Fund Denmark has granted DKK 5.8 million (EUR 800,000) to the 
projectp. 69 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB, 2019)
National Funds 11 Current Invest-
ment6 BE While many European countries now have an AI-focused strategy, Belgium does not yet. 
Having said that, multiple initiatives are now underway. Flanders has launched its AI 
strategy, planning to spend an annual EUR 30 m on implementing AI in companies, top 
strategic research and flanking measures such as education, outreach and ethicsp. 5 AI4Belgium (AI4BELGIUM 
Coalition 2019)
DK In collaboration with the social partners and representatives from higher education institu-
tions, the government has set up a vocational adult education and training working group 
which, among other things, will advise on the competence needs of the labour market in 
the light of technological and digital developments. As part of this National Strategy for 
Artificial Intelligence, the working group will examine whether there is a need to launch 
initiatives on the basis of the development of artificial intelligence, for example in the form 
of new education programmes, analyses and development projects. An annual amount of 
DKK 5 million (EUR 670,000) has been allocated for initiatives by the working group
Under the Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth, the government has allocated DKK 110 
million (EUR 15 million) for the Digital Hub Denmark initiative, which, among other 
things, is to market and strengthen Denmark’s position as an attractive growth environment 
for artificial intelligencep. 48 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019) p. 58
DE In the 2019 federal budget, the Federation has taken the first step, allocating a total of €500 
million to beef up the AI strategy for 2019 and the following years. Up to and including 
2025, the Federation intends to provide around €3 billion for the implementation of the 
Strategy. The leverage effect this will have on business, science and the Länder will mean 
that the overall amount available is at least doubledp. 6 Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
(FEELS 2018)

==== Page 16 ====
494 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 32nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
MT Financial support will be provided for AI-related research commercialisation programmes 
and technology development (including financial support for research, development and 
innovation) in Malta’s areas of Smart Specialisation (ICT as an Enabler, ICT Based Innova-
tion, Tourism Product Development, Aviation and Aerospace, Health, Resource Efficient 
Buildings, High Value-Added Manufacturing, Aquaculture) through the Malta Council for 
Science and Technology (MCST) R&I FUSION Programme until 2020. The annual budget 
currently allocated to the R&I FUSION Programme is €2.2 mp. 21 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)
ES The contributions made by the state bodies financing RDI, CDTI, AEI, ISCIII, MINECO and 
MINCOTUR, to the activities contributing to AI have involved 457 actions worth almost 
114 million euros in financing (subsidies and credits)47. These actions have been granted 
through the tools offered by the four State Programmes developed in the State Plans and 
their Strategic Actions included in the EECTI 2013–2020 and the Natural Language Tech-
nologies Plan (2016–2018 calls). In the same period for the R&D Framework Programme 
H2020 there was Spanish participation in 116 actions related to AI that obtained a funding 
of € 79.30 millionp. 20 Spanish RDI Strategy in Arti-
ficial Intelligence (IMSU 
2019)
Future Invest-
ment5 BE Based on a yearly per capita investment, to match Finland, France and Germany, our mini-
mum ambition level should be EUR 80 million per year. This corresponds to at least EUR 1 
billion by 2030
A few principles to ensure a sustainable implementation: ensuring continued trust from 
the public, a European approach, collaboration between all stakeholders, a grass-roots/
community-led approach, focus on specific areas (such as healthcare/life sciences) and, 
lastly, daring to be ambitious and audacious. This will require an investment of at least EUR 
1 billion by 2030p. 28 AI4Belgium (AI4BELGIUM 
Coalition, 2019)
p. 8
DK With their declaration AI in the Nordic-Baltic region, the Nordic and Baltic countries have 
agreed to cooperate on artificial intelligence to secure digital skills, access to data based on 
common standards, ethical guidelines for artificial intelligence, and to promote the develop-
ment of the technology in Europe. The strategy contains 24 initiatives. The government has 
earmarked DKK 60 million (EUR 9.2 million) for 2019–2027p. 19 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
FI In the short term, innovation funding should be targeted to the following themes in particular, 
with €100 m as a permanent increase in innovation funding from 2019:
 − The application of artificial intelligence in different sectors and the development of busi-
ness expertise
 − Enterprise-driven ecosystems and strategic projects, the funding models for which will 
make it possible for new actors to join flexiblyp. 53 Finland’s Age of Artificial 
Intelligence (MEAE 2017)
NL The Netherlands is already benefiting from European opportunities and will continue to focus 
on them. Within the European Horizon 2020 programme, €986 million was allocated to 580 
AI-related projects from 2014 to 2017. Dutch parties received €61 million (6.1%) of this. 
Assuming the same share, a budget of €48 million per year will be available for Dutch par -
ties in AI-related European projects in the coming years. This can only be achieved if Dutch 
parties are and remain well connected at the European level by highlighting and supporting 
European initiativesp. 29 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)

==== Page 17 ====
495 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
2nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
Innovation 7 Digital Tech-
nology4 BE Moreover, the Investment Pact, proposed by the Prime Minister, identified close to EUR 30 
billion worth of investments in digital transformationp. 5 AI4Belgium (AI4BELGIUM 
Coalition, 2019)
DK In the 2019 State Budget, the Danish government has allocated DKK 215 million (EUR 27 
million) to Innovation Fund Denmark to conduct research into new technological possibili-
ties. The Budget also allocates DKK 80 million (EUR 10.7 million) to the Independent 
Research Fund Denmark to conduct research into digital technologies, including artificial 
intelligence. As part of the funds allocated for research into new technological possibilities 
under Innovation Fund Denmark, DKK 100 million (EUR 13.4 million) will be earmarked 
for a national centre for research into new digital technologies
This is a supplement to the DKK 295 million (EUR 45.4 million) allocated in the Finance Act 
2019 from the research reserve for research into new technological possibilities and digital 
technologies and for a national centre for research into digital technologies
More than DKK 600 million (EUR 80.5 million) have been set aside to develop technological 
services for Danish businesses for the period 2019–2020. This will supplement the funding 
that has been set aside under Innovation Fund Denmark, which also promotes new techno-
logical solutions, see focus area 3p. 46 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019) p. 20
p. 53
Cybersecurity 1 DK In the years to come, DKK 1.5 billion (EUR 200 million) will be invested in work by the 
Ministry of Defence on cyber and information security. Furthermore, six targeted strategies 
have been drawn up for work in the most critical sectors on cyber and information security 
in accordance with the principle of sector responsibilityp. 30 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
Data Collec-
tion1 DK Up to 2023, a large number of datasets on weather observations and forecasts will be made 
freely available for everyone. This will make it possible for electricity plants, for example, 
to develop solutions that adjust the production of electricity to wind and weather conditions, 
or for businesses to develop new apps for consumers. With its Health Data Programme, the 
government has also earmarked DKK 250 mill. to ensure better data quality and databases 
and to strengthen cross-sectoral cooperation on health datap. 33 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
Supercomput-
ing1 NL Ministerial departments have the opportunity to invest in AI-related research themselves. The 
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport has chosen to invest in Prevention and Big Data and 
this investment has been doubled by the National Science Agenda. To ensure that research-
ers have access to sufficient computing capacity, the Ministry of Education, Culture and 
Science is investing €18 million in a new national supercomputer at SURFp. 27 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
International 
representation1 National pro-
motion1 MT The Maltese Government has placed the development of new emerging technological sectors 
such as AI as a national priority. Through Tech.mt, a public–private foundation tasked 
with promoting Malta as a leading global hub for emerging technologies, including AI, the 
Government will provide €1 m per annum in funding to raise the visibility of the country’s 
offering and promote Maltese AI businesses through various marketing activities, with par -
ticipation in and sponsorship of leading global AI and tech summits in Malta and overseasp. 21 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)

==== Page 18 ====
496 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 32nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
Education 12 Employee 
Training6 MT The Investing in Skills programme, co-financed through the European Social Fund (ESF), 
will be operational until 30 June 2023 and has a budget of €5 m to help employed people 
develop and increase knowledge and skills through trainingp. 37 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)
NL A scheme that will structurally make more than €200 million available in the form of indi-
vidual budgets for training and development will be presented to the House of Representa-
tives after the summer of 2019. This ‘STAP’ (Labour Market Position Stimulus) budget 
replaces the current tax deduction scheme for training and is accessible to everyone up to 
the state pension age
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment is developing a scheme to implement the 
Wiersma motion, which will structurally make €48 million a year available from 2020 to 
promote a learning culture in SMEs
and the Heerma motion, which will make a total of €60 million available over a period of five 
years to provide additional support to the agricultural, hospitality and recreation sectors in 
order to attract more ‘BBL’ students (students in the ‘work-based’ VET learning pathway)
With ‘MKB!dee’, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is challenging SMEs 
to come up with ideas that will lead to more investment in the training and development of 
workers. While intended for all SMEs, the scheme focuses in particular on the challenges of 
technical SMEs and digitalisation. It relates to the broad effects of digitalisation, not to the 
ICT sector as such. In 2019, €7.5 million is available
The Regioal MBO Investment Fund (Regionaal Investeringsfonds mbo) scheme provides 
€25 million a year until 2022 for projects that improve the connection of Senior secondary 
vocational education (MBO) to the labour market, for example, if the profession for which 
they offer training changes as a result of AIp. 31 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
p. 31
p. 31
p. 31
p. 32
AI Literacy for 
Citizens2 DK The tripartite agreement from October 2017 put focus on creating a vocational adult educa-
tion and training system that is better geared to strengthening digital competences of the 
entire workforce and to adapting to the changing needs of the labour market. To support 
this, a transition fund of DKK 95 million (EUR 12.7 million) annually was set up. In 
addition to the transition fund DKK 8 million (EUR 1.1 million) is allocated to additional 
activitiesp. 48 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
FR Under the Big Investment Plan 2018–2022, €15bn have been ring-fenced 
for vocational training, primarily for the benefit of low-skilled jobseek -
ers and low-skilled young NEETs (not in employment, education or train -
ing). This budget forms the skills investment plan (PIC)p. 91 For a meaningful Arti -
ficial Intelligence (Vil -
lani, 2018)
Educational 
Fund4 DK The government has launched a talent programme to provide the most talented and motivated 
students with better opportunities and greater challenges, so they become even more skilled 
in their fields. The government will set aside a pool of DKK 190 million (EUR 25 million) 
to cover all technical fields, including new technologies like artificial intelligencep. 45 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
FI The absence of applied studies is also evident in universities of applied sciences and in 
vocational education and training. However, as stated in the budget proposal, universities of 
applied sciences will be allocated five million euros for their RDI activities. This appropria-
tion should be used in a targeted way in cooperation with business to create high added-
value products and services, especially in the utilisation of artificial intelligence, robotics 
and digitalisation applications in various sectorsp. 50 Finland’s Age of Artificial 
Intelligence (MEAE 2017)

==== Page 19 ====
497 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
2nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
NL Commissioned by the Minister of Education, Culture and Science, the universities have drawn 
up sectoral plans for the STEM, Social Sciences and Humanities sectors. The Ministry will 
contribute an extra €70 million to this, and the periodic resources for profiling can also be 
used for this purpose
The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science support the Education Innovation with ICT 
Acceleration Plan for all higher education institutions (universities of applied sciences and 
research universities) by making €15 million available over four yearsp. 32 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)
p. 32
Private 8 Companies 
Investments8 DK It is proposed to launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool of DKK 20 million 
(EUR 3.1 million) over four years targeting companies with a business model based on arti-
ficial intelligence. The prerequisite for this is 50 percent financing from the private sector 
amounting to a total investment pool of DKK 40 million (EUR 6.2 million). The fund will 
be managed by the Danish Growth Fund
The government will launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool of DKK 20 mil-
lion (EUR 2.7million) over four years, and this will be targeted at enterprises with a busi-
ness model based on artificial intelligence. The fund will be managed by the Danish Growth 
Fund. The aim of the project is to build a bridge between investors and Danish businesses 
within artificial intelligence and thereby nurture the Danish market for artificial intelligence 
solutions
Given the requirement for private co-financing, the initiative will have a leverage effect, as 
private capital is also invested in the businesses. If the private level of funding is assumed 
to be about 50%, about DKK 40 million (about EUR 5.4 million) will be invested in the 
development of Danish businesses based on artificial intelligence. The effect of investments 
will be regularly reviewed and the project will be adjusted accordinglyp 0.21 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
p. 56
p. 57
DE We are creating new funding opportunities for venture capital and venture debt and will 
launch a Tech Growth Fund Initiative. The Federal Government is continuing to use its 
successful, well-established funding instruments for start-ups and is also developing new 
instruments designed to strengthen the German venture capital and venture debt markets. 
This includes the new, independent KfW Capital equity entity, which is to increase the 
annual amount of investment KfW provides to the Venture Capital and Venture Debt Funds 
to €200 million by 2020, thereby making it easier for young, innovative and high-growth 
technology firms to secure financing for their start-up and growth stagesp. 24 Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
(FEELS 2018)
MT Malta Enterprise has launched various incentives schemes which can finance innovative AI 
undertakings with a viable business concept in their early stages of development. The incen-
tive schemes will run through 2019 and 2020 and may be extended to the following years. 
Assistance includes: seed funding grants of up to €25,000 under Business START (B.Start). 
The total budget available for this scheme is currently €1 m per year
Repayable advances structured as a mezzanine finance instrument to support start-ups with 
a proven business concept undertake initiatives linked to raising equity investment from 
third parties, procuring equipment and crowd-funding. Typical support is in the range of 
€200,000 and advances are repayable over a number of yearsp. 23 Malta the Ultimate AI launch-
pad: A strategy and Vision 
for Artificial Intelligence in 
Malta 2030 (PSFDI 2019)p. 23

==== Page 20 ====
498 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 32nd order code (OCC) 1st order codes
(OCC)Text selected and Nation of reference Page References
NL In order to stimulate technology-driven entrepreneurship, a new government-wide start-up 
and scale-up strategy was published in June 2018, with an implementation budget of €65 
million
The Limburg Business Development Fund of LIOF (the Regional Development Agency of 
the Province of Limburg) provided eight early-stage AI-related financings and grants total-
ling €3.8 millionp. 23 Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence (MEC 
2019)p. 24
Public 5 Investment 
for Local 
Administra-
tions1 DK The initiatives will support the implementation of artificial intelligence in the public sector. 
The ambition of the government is to allocate to the municipalities and the regions DKK 
200 million (almost EUR 27 million) to establish an investment fund to test and deploy new 
technologies and digital welfare solutions in municipalities and regions. Together with ini-
tiatives already launched, the fund will have a total investment budget of DKK 410 million 
(EUR 55 million) up to 2022p. 53 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
AI research 4 AT Public funding at the federal level for AI research totalled to EUR 349.9 million between 
2012 and 2017p. 8 ATM AT 2030: Artificial 
Intelligence Mission Austria 
2030 (FMTI 2018)
DK Denmark is among the countries in the OECD with the highest public investment in research 
and development, measured in relation to GDP, and there are strong research environments 
within artificial intelligence. The total public research budget for 2019 is DKK 23 billion 
(EUR 3.1 billion)p. 14 National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence (MIB 2019)
LT AI academic research projects also received EUR 6.5 million from the Ministry of Education 
and Science. Private investment came primarily from venture capital firms with varying 
origins including Lithuania, United States, France and Russiap. 8 Lithuanian Artificial Intelli-
gence Strategy: A Vision for 
the Future (MEI 2019)
SE In November 2017, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (KAW) also announced that it 
would donate SEK 1 billion to AI researchp. 7 National Approach to Arti-
ficial Intelligence, (MEIn 
2019)

==== Page 21 ====
499 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500 
1 3
Acknowledgements The authors are supported by the project A Euro-
pean AI On Demand Platform and Ecosystem (AI4EU) H2020-ICT-26 
#825619. The views expressed in this paper are not necessarily those 
of the consortium AI4EU. The authors would also thank Sinem Aslan 
and Chiara Bissolo for their support in the quantitative overview and 
qualitative analysis respectively.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
AI4BELGIUM Coalition (2019) AI4Belgium. https:// www. ai4be lgium.  
be/ wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2019/ 04/ report_ en. pdf
Bradley C, Wingfield R, Metzger M (2020) National artificial intel-
ligence strategies and human rights: a review. Report of Global 
Partners Digital and Stanford’s Global Digital Policy Incubator, 
https:// cyber. fsi. stanf  ord. edu/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ natio nal_ artifi  cal_ 
intel ligen ce_ strat egies_ and_ human_ rights- a_ review_ 1_0. pdf
Calo R (2017) Artificial intelligence policy: a primer and roadmap, 51 
UC Davis L. Rev. 399–435
Charmaz K (2014) Constructing grounded theory. Sage, Thousand 
Oaks
Cristianini N, Scantamburlo T (2020) On social machines for algorith -
mic regulation. AI & Soc 35:645–662. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s00146- 019- 00917-8
European Commission (2018a) EU Declaration of cooperation on 
Artificial Intelligence. 10th April. https:// ec. europa. eu/ jrc/ commu  
nities/  en/ node/  1286/  docum  ent/ eu- decla  ration-  coope  ration-  artif 
icial- intel ligen ce
European Commission (2018b) Artificial Intelligence for Europe, 
Communication, COM/2018b/237 final 25th April. https:// eur-  
lex. europa. eu/ legal- conte nt/ EN/ TXT/? uri= COM% 3A2018%  
3A237% 3AFIN
European Commission (2018c). Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intel-
ligence, Communication, COM/2018c/795 final 7 December. 
https:// eur- lex. europa. eu/ legal- conte nt/ EN/ TXT/? uri= COM:  
2018: 795: FIN
European Commission (2019) Factsheet on Artificial Intelligence—
Artificial Intelligence for Europe. https:// ec. europa. eu/ digit  al- sin-
gle- market/ en/ news/ facts heet- artifi  cial- intel ligen ce- europe
European Commission (2020a) What’s in for me—Shaping Europe’s 
digital future. February 2020a—2 pages ISBN 978-92-76-15907-
0. https:// ec. europa. eu/ commi ssion/ press corner/ detail/ en/ fs_ 20_  
280
European Commission (2020b) White Paper on Artificial Intelligence- 
A European Approach to Excellence and Trust. Communication, 
COM(2020b) 65 final 19 February. https:// ec. europa. eu/ info/ sites/  
info/ files/ commi ssion- white- paper- artifi  cial- intel ligen ce- feb20 20_  
en. pdf
European Commission (2020c) European enterprise survey on the 
use of technologies based on artificial intelligence. Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union. 28 July – 149 pages 
ISBN 978-92-76-20108-3
European Commission (2021a) Proposal for a Regulation on a Euro-
pean approach for Artificial Intelligence. Communication, COM 
(2021a) 206 final. 21 April. https:// digit  al- strat egy. ec. europa. eu/  
en/ libra ry/ propo sal- regul ation- europ ean- appro ach- artifi  cial- intel  
ligen ce
European Commission (2021b) Fostering a European approach to Arti-
ficial Intelligence. COM(2021b) 205 final. 21 April. https:// eur-  
lex. europa. eu/ legal- conte nt/ EN/ ALL/? uri= COM: 2021: 205: FIN
Federal Ministry of Education, Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs 
Research, Federal Ministry of Labour Energy, and Social Affairs 
(FEELS) (2018) Artificial intelligence strategy.  https:// www. ki-  
strat egie- deuts chland. de/ home. html? file= files/ downl oads/ Natio  
nale_ KI- Strat egie_ engl. pdf
Fjeld J, Achten N, Hilligoss H, Nagy A, Srikumar M (2020) Principled 
artificial intelligence: mapping consensus in ethical and rights-
based approaches to principles for AI (January 15, 2020). Berk -
man Klein Center Research Publication No. 2020-1, Available at 
SSRN: https://  ssrn.  com/  abstr  act=  35184  82 or https://  doi. org/ 10. 
2139/ ssrn. 35184 82
Floridi L, Cowls J, King TC, Taddeo M (2020) How to design AI for 
social good: seven essential factors. Sci Eng Ethics 26:1771–1796. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11948- 020- 00213-5
Federal Ministry for Transport Innovation, Federal Technology, and 
Economic Affairs (FMTI) (2018) Aim at 2030: Artificial Intelli-
gence Mission Austria 2030. https:// www. mpo. cz/ assets/ en/ guide  
post/ for- the- media/ press- relea ses/ 2019/5/ NAIS_ eng_ web. pdf
Government of Slovakia (2019) Action plan for the digital transfor -
mation of Slovakia for 2019–2022. https:// www. mirri. gov. sk/  
wp- conte nt/ uploa  ds/ 2019/  10/ AP- DT- Engli sh-  Versi on- FINAL. pdf
Hagendorff T (2020) The ethics of AI ethics: an evaluation of 
guidelines. Mind Mach 30:99–120. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s11023- 020- 09517-8
High-Level Expert Group on AI (2019a) Ethics Guidelines 
for Trustworthy AI. 8 April 2019a. https://ec:europa:eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
High-Level Expert Group on AI (2019b) Policy and investment recom-
mendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. 26 June 2019b. 
https:// digit  al- strat egy. ec. europa. eu/ en/ libra ry/ policy- and- inves  
tment- recom menda tions- trust worthy- artifi  cial- intel ligen ce
INCoDe.2030 (2019) AI Portugal 2030. https:// www. incod e2030. gov.  
pt/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ julho_ incode_ broch ura. pdf
Innovation Ministry of Science and Universities (IMSU) (2019) Span-
ish rdi strategy in artificial intelligence. https:// www. cienc ia. gob.  
es/ stfls/ MICINN/ Cienc ia/ Fiche ros/ Estra tegia_ Intel igenc ia_ Artif  
icial_ EN. PDF
Jobin A, Ienca M, Vayena E (2019) The global landscape of AI ethics 
guidelines. Nat Mach Intell 1:389–399. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s42256- 019- 0088-2
Mattingly-Jordan S, Day R, Donaldson B, Gray P, Ingram LM (2019) 
Ethically Aligned Design, First Edition Glossary. Prepared for The 
IEEE Global Initiative for Ethically Aligned Design, Feb. 2019.
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy (MEC) (2019) 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence. https://
www.government:nl/binaries/government/documents/
reports/2019/10/09/strategic-action-planfor-artificial-intelligence/
Strategic+Action+Plan+for+Artificial+Intelligence.pdf
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment (MEAE) (2017) Fin-
land’s Age of Artificial Intelligence. https:// julka isut. valti oneuv  
osto. fi/ bitst ream/ handle/ 10024/ 160391/ TEMrap_ 47_ 2017_ verkk  
ojulk  aisu. pdf? seque nce= 1& isAll owed=y
Ministry of Economy and Innovation (MEI) (2019). Lithuanian artifi-
cial intelligence strategy: A vision for the future. http:// kurklt. lt/  
wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2018/ 09/ Strat egyIn desig npdf. pdf

==== Page 22 ====
500 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:479–500
1 3
Ministry of Enterprise and Innovation (MEIn) (2019) National 
approach to artificial intelligence. https:// www. gover  nment. se/  
4a7451/ conte ntass ets/ fe2ba 005fb 49433 58757 4c513 a837f  ac/ natio  
nal- appro ach- to- artifi  cial- intel ligen ce. pdf
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic (MITCR) (2019) 
National Artificial Intelligence Strategy of the Czech Republic. 
https:// www. mpo. cz/ assets/ en/ guide post/ for- the- media/ press- relea  
ses/ 2019/5/ NAIS_ eng_ web. pdf
Ministry of Industry Business Ministry of Finance and Financial 
Affairs (MIB) (2019) National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence. 
https:// en. digst. dk/ media/ 19337/ 305755_ gb_ versi on_ final-a. pdf
Morley J, Floridi L, Kinsey L, Elhalal A (2019) From what to how: 
an initial review of publicly available AI ethics tools, methods 
and research to translate principles into practices. Sci Eng Eth-
ics 26:2141–2168. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11948- 019- 00165-5
Nemitz P (2018) Constitutional democracy and technology in the age 
of artificial intelligence. Philos Trans R Soc A 376:20180089. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rsta. 2018. 0089
Nepelski D, Sobolewski M (2020) Estimating investments in General 
Purpose Technologies. The case of AI Investments in Europe (No. 
JRC118953). Joint Research Centre (Seville site)
Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S (2019) Dissecting 
racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of popula-
tions. Science 366(2019):447–453
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(2019) OECD Council Recommendation on Artificial Intel-
ligence. https:// legal instr  uments. oecd. org/ en/ instr  uments/  
OECD- LEGAL- 0449
ÓhÉigeartaigh SS, Whittlestone J, Liu Y et al (2020) Overcoming 
Barriers to Cross-cultural Cooperation in AI Ethics and Gov -
ernance. Philos Technol 33:571–593. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s13347- 020- 00402-x
Parliamentary Secretariat for Financial Services Digital Economy and 
Innovation (PSFDI) (2019) Malta the ultimate AI launchpad: A 
strategy and vision for artificial intelligence in malta 2030. https://  
malta. ai/ wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2019/ 11/ Malta_ The_ Ultim ate_ AI_  
Launc  hpad_ vFinal. pdf
Radu R (2021) Steering the governance of artificial intelligence: 
national strategies in perspective. Policy Soc 40(2):178–193. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14494 035. 2021. 19297 28
Van Roy V (2020) AI Watch—National Strategies on Artificial Intel-
ligence: A European Perspective in 2019, EUR 30102 EN, Publi-
cations Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 
978-92-76-16409-8
Van Roy V, Rossetti F, Perset K, Galindo-Romero L (2021) AI Watch—
National strategies on Artificial Intelligence: A European perspec-
tive, 2021 edition. EUR 30745 EN, Publications Office of the 
European Union, Luxembourg, ISBN 978-92-76-39081-7, https://  
doi. org/ 10. 2760/ 069178, JRC122684
Scantamburlo T, Cortés A, Schacht M (2020) Progressing Towards 
Responsible AI. 1st International Workshop on Evaluating Pro-
gress in Artificial Intelligence - EPAI 2020 In conjunction with 
the 24th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence—ECAI 2020 Santiago de Compostela, Spain. https:// dmip. webs. upv. es/  
EPAI2 020/ papers/ EPAI_ 2020_ paper_ 14. pdf
Schiff D (2021) Education for AI, not AI for Education: the Role of 
Education and Ethics in National AI Policy Strategies. Int J Artif 
Intell Educ. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40593- 021- 00270-2
Smuha NA (2019) The EU approach to ethics guidelines for trust-
worthy artificial intelligence. Comput Law Rev Int 20(4):97–106
Stix C (2019) A Survey of the European Union's Artificial Intelligence 
Ecosystem. SSRN: https:// ssrn. com/ abstr  act= 37564 16 or https://  
doi. org/ 10. 2139/ ssrn. 37564 16
Strauss A, Corbin J (1998) Basics of qualitative research techniques. 
Sage publications, Thousand Oaks
The Future Society (2020) Areas for Future Action in the Responsible 
Ai Ecosystem, https:// thefu tures ociety. org/ wp- conte nt/ uploa ds/  
2021/ 02/ Areas- for- Future-  Action- in- the- Respo nsible-  AI- Ecosy  
stem. pdf
The Government of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (GGDL) (2019) 
Artificial intelligence: A strategic vision for luxembourg. https://  
digit  al- luxem bourg. public. lu/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ 2020- 09/ AI_  
EN_0. pdf
Tomašev N, Cornebise J, Hutter F, Mohamed S, Picciariello A, Con-
nelly B, Belgrave DC, Ezer D, van der Haert FC, Mugisha F, 
Abila G (2020) AI for social good: unlocking the opportunity for 
positive impact. Nat Commun 11:2468. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s41467- 020- 15871-z
Villani C (2018) For a meaningful artificial intelligence. https:// www.  
aifor  human ity. fr/ pdfs/ Missi onVil lani_ Report_ ENG-  VF. pdf
Vinuesa R, Azizpour H, Leite I, Balaam M, Dignum V, Domisch S, 
Felländer A, Langhans SD, Tegmark M, Nerini FF (2020) The 
role of artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals. Nat Commun 11:233. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s41467- 019- 14108-y
Whittlestone J, Nyrup R, Alexandrova A, Cave S (2019) The Role and 
Limits of Principles in AI Ethics: towards a Focus on Tensions. In: 
Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, 
and Society (AIES '19). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, pp 195–200. DOI: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/  
33066 18. 33142 89
Yeh C, Perez A, Driscoll A, Azzari G, Tang Z, Lobell D, Ermon S, 
Burke M (2020) Using publicly available satellite imagery and 
deep learning to understand economic well-being in Africa. Nat 
Commun 11:2583. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41467- 020- 16185-w
Zeng Y, Lu E, Huangfu C (2018) Linking artificial intelligence princi-
ples. Preprint at https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 1812. 04814
Zhang D, Mishra S, Brynjolfsson E, Etchemendy J, Ganguli D, Grosz 
B, Lyons T, Manyika J, Niebles JC, Sellitto M, Shoham Y, Clark 
J, Perrault J (2021) The AI Index 2021 Annual Report,” AI Index 
Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI Institute, Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford, CA, March 2021
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

