==== Page 1 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 1 
  
Abstract — Internet of things (IoT) results in massive amount of 
streaming data, often referred to as “big data”, which brings new 
opportunities to monitor agricultural and food processes. Besides 
sensors, big data from social media  is also becoming important for 
the food industry. In this review we present an overview of IoT, 
big data, and artificial intelligence (AI)  and their disruptive role in 
shaping the future of agri -food systems. Following an introduction 
to the fields of IoT, big data, and AI, we discuss the role of IoT and 
big data analysis in agriculture (incl uding greenhouse monitoring, 
intelligent farm machines, and drone -based crop imaging), supply -
chain modernization, social media (for open innovation and 
sentiment analysis) in food industry, food quality assessment 
(using spectral methods and sensor fusion ), and finally, food safety 
(using  gene sequencing and blockchain based digital traceability). 
A special emphasis is laid on t he commercial status of application s 
and translational research outcomes . 
 
Index Terms — precision agriculture; social media; gene 
sequencing; blockchain; sensors; internet; digital; robotics  
I. INTRODUCTION  
NTERNET  of things (IoT), big data and artificial intelligence 
(AI) are perhaps old buzzwords in the tech -industry, that are 
making an impact only in very recent times. In fact, dat a from 
Google Trends search history for these topics shows that IoT 
and big data have drawn considerable interest of broad -based 
internet users within last five to six years, while AI remains a 
topic of interest for much over a decade (see Fig. 1). In fact, 
with the increase in communication devices the volume of data 
generated is rising and AI is continuing to well -integrate into 
the lives of a big population of the planet in one form or the 
other. Unlike AI, IoT primarily being industrial technology 
remains to be of low interest to the general public. A natural 
topic of interest for agri -food scientists and engineers would be 
to maximize the impacts of these emerging information 
technologies for sustainably feeding the planet. As a first aim 
of this re view, we will begin by briefly introducing these topics  
for those audiences who are coming from a background in 
agriculture and food sciences . 
 
This paragraph of the first footnote will contain the date on which you 
submitted your paper for review.  
N.N. Misra is with Ingenium Naturae Pvt Ltd, Gujarat, 392001, India  
N.N.  Misra, Ahmad Al -Mallahi, and Alex Martynenko are with the 
Department of Engineering at Dalhousie University, NS, B2N 5E6, Canada 
(Corresponding author: e -mail: misra.cftri@gmail.com ). 
Yash Dixit is with AgResea rch Grasslands Research Centre, 11 Dairy Farm 
Rd, Palmerston North  4442 , New Zealand . (Corresponding author: e -mail: 
yash.dixit@agresearch.co.nz ).  
Fig. 1 Relative worldwide search traffic for the terms Internet of 
Things (IoT), Big D ata and Artificial Intelligence on Google over the 
last decade. Data accessed from Google Trends on June 16, 2019. 
Numbers represent search interest relative to the highest point on the 
chart for the given time. A score of zero means that there was not 
enough data for this term.  
 
 First coined by Kevin Ashton, IoT is a technology paradigm 
contemplated as a vast network of digitally connected devices 
and machines [1]. Here, the digital connection of the machines 
or ‘things’ occurs over ‘internet’. IoT is sometimes also referred 
to as the Internet of Everything or the Industrial Internet. The 
influence of IoT arises from its ability to enable robust 
communication between the physical world with that of the 
digital, a concept often referred to as the fourth industrial 
revolution. In fact, the use of IoT in industry is sometimes also 
referred to as ‘Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)’. In the IIoT 
framework, remote sensors gather information generated by 
machines (and increasingly, humans too) to increase ef ficiency, 
promote better decision -making and build competitive 
advantages, regardless of industry or company size. IoT 
platforms serve as the bridge between the devices' sensors and 
the data networks, wherein the connected IoT devices exchange 
information using internet transfer protocols. The sensors of the 
devices within an IoT network yield large volumes of data that 
continuously stream to a “data lake”, which could be a local 
physical server or cloud based storage (i.e. distributed across 
the internet w orldwide) for enabling necessary data processing 
via appropriate algorithms or machine learning techniques to 
generate actionable insights. Thus, we note that IoT is 
essentially the means to generating and transmitting large 
Manreet Singh Bhullar is with the Department of Horticultu re and Natural 
Resources, Kansas State University, Olathe, USA.  
Rohit Upadhyay is with the Nestlé R esearch and Development  Centre, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India 122050 . 
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available  
online at http://ieee xplore.ieee.org.  
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018020406080100Relative Frequency
Time Internet of things
 Big data
 Artificial intelligenceIoT, big data and artificial intelligence in 
agriculture and food industry  
N.N. Misra, Yash Dixit, Ahmad Al -Mallah i, Manreet Singh Bhullar, Rohit Upadhyay, Alex Martynenko  
I 

==== Page 2 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 2 
amounts of data with informatio n of practical use embedded in 
it. 
 The concept and scope of big data, as a matter of fact, lacks 
a formal definition. Big data in the IoT context does not only 
refer to the structured or unstructured data, but also includes the 
aspects of analytics, insig hts, and (automated) decisions, all of 
which typically happen in real -time. In addition to the massive 
data generated from devices/sensors, the social media is an 
important source of user generated big data, which deserves 
special discussion. Though increa singly valuable, one should 
note that the social media data does not (strictly) fall into the 
IoT framework. We will discuss the usefulness of social media 
big data analytics later in this review in a dedicated section. The 
recent developments in machine l earning, artificial intelligence 
and boom in the data science field, coupled with improvements 
in computing power has enabled the automated decision 
support, real -time analytics for insights, and better performance 
of supervised (learning) models. A discus sion of the relevant 
machine learning tools for artificial intelligence is also included 
later in this review.  
 In Fig. 2 , we provide a gr aphical summary of the IoT and big 
data framework in agri -food context to facilitate discussion of 
several concepts within our review. Here we note that the data 
can come from agriculture, food processing/manufacturing, 
supply chain, traceability, or consu mers. While sensors are 
points of data source in case of IoT, data from consumers comes 
in the form opinions shared on social media platforms. The data 
from multiple sensors and sources when appropriately 
combined, it provides information about the primary  production 
or processing or retail activities. Upon suitable analysis of the 
information using computer models, the information is 
transformed into knowledge about the performance of the said 
activities. In modern times, the data processing typically occu rs 
at remote locations using high performance computers; this is 
known as “cloud computing”. The knowledge obtained about 
the system can be leveraged to make decisions for improving 
the performance of the activities or make suitable 
recommendations. When t his entire process from data to 
decision is automated through self -learning methods, it is 
known as artificial intelligence. This trend of high level of 
automation in industry using cyber -physical systems, IoT, 
cloud and cognitive computing put together is  known as 
“Industry 4.0”, literally meaning the fourth industrial revolution 
[2].  
 In this review, we take a holistic appro ach to several frontier 
areas dealing with agri -food-consumer triad, bridging the 
language barrier among the disciplines of agricultural, food, 
electronics, and computer science. The applications we have 
chosen for discussion are based on our experiences a s well as 
those of high significance to global agriculture and food 
industry. The discussions are based around the IoT devices – 
the sources of data, basic data processing, the disruption 
brought about by the technology, the implementation 
challenges, as w ell as research needs. We target this review at 
hard-core electronics, instrumentation and computer engineers, 
as well as, agri -food scientists, to provide an exposition of the 
meaningful impacts created by the new cyber -physical 
technologies. We hope that  a cross -fertilization across the vast 
landscape of topics will motivate further research for building 
agri-food industry 4.0.   
II. FROM DATA TO ACTION  
Sensing is the birthplace of all data in IoT. Agri-food sector 
produces a large number of diverse datasets, both in content, 
structure, and storage format with the use of various IoT devices 
[3]. Common characteristics of big data include heterogeneity, 
variety, unstructured nature, noise, and high redundancy [4]. 
Such huge amounts of data require complex methods for data 
curation and storage, as well as intensive statistica l approaches 
and programming models to extract relevant information. The 
conditioning and pre -processing of primary data results in 
information required to understand the state of the (agri -food) 
system. By applying advanced algorithms and measuring the 
performance of the system with respect to desired outcome, a 
system can be made capable of making independent localized 
decisions and take appropriate actions. This level of 
independence allowing autonomy in sensing, decision making, 
and actuation is what ma kes an IoT system “intelligent”.  
 The field of artificial intelligence (AI) involves the 
development of theory and computer systems capable of 
performing tasks normally requiring human intelligence, such 
as sensorial perception and decision making. Kaplan and 
Haenlein [5]  defined AI as “… a system’s ability to interpret 
external data correctly, to learn from such data, and to use 
those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through 
flexible adaptation ”. Thus, AI 
acts on external information 
sourced from I oT and other big 
data sources, use knowledge -
based rules (provided by 
developers) or identifies the 
underlying rules and patterns 
using machine learning, to 
drive the systems towards set 
objectives. A truly intelligent 
system can learn, generalize (if 
there be such scope), 
accumulate knowledge, set 
objectives and priorities, and 
minimize risks for decision -
 Fig. 2 A pictorial representation of the IoT framework within agri -food industry context.  

==== Page 3 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 3 
making processes.  
AI can be brought into ind ustry through “expert systems” 
built on rules, and this approach is referred to as “rule -based” 
AI [6]. The collection of all rules governing the behaviour of 
the system are  either based on physical principles or 
experience -based human expert knowledge. In this approach, 
the system or process is constantly 
monitored using IoT devices or 
sensors. The IoT sensors yield data 
about individual system descriptors 
which is analysed using the rules. 
The raw data is occasionally also 
curated and stored into a database to 
depict trends. It is to be noted that 
the complexity in agri -food systems 
is very high due to the involvement 
of many unpredictable variables in 
agriculture, the heter ogeneity of 
food materials, and the food -habits 
of consumers. This makes it almost 
impossible to translate the farmers, 
industry experts, and consumers 
knowledge into clearly expressed, 
well-defined rules (computer 
programs) that can be implemented 
into AI  based expert systems [7]. 
Nevertheless, rule -based based AI 
is suitable in scenarios where real -time decisions and control 
are a necessity and when one cannot afford to frequently train 
the AI system.  
Considering the drawbacks of rule -based AI, machine 
learning based AI has bec ome more popular in recent times [8]. 
In ML based AI, there may be a lag period between data 
collection (sensing) and making predicti ons or decisions, as the 
system is programmed to look for patterns in the data collected 
(e.g. from IoT sensors). At present, ML based AI systems do 
not involve use of human intelligence -based computer rules 
(i.e. compliance with any kind of science or phy sical reality or 
expert experiences); rather, these are purely data driven. ML 
based AI is suitable for systems where frequently training the 
system is not a constraint and higher accuracy is desired, which 
is quite true for agri -food systems.  
 Machine Lea rning (ML) is one of the central topics of AI, 
since a feature usually attached to intelligence is the ability to 
learn from the environment. ML is a technique for developing 
AI which gives computer the ability to learn without being 
explicitly programmed [9]. Simply put, ML algorithms distill 
and coalesce knowledge  from unorganized data in a manner that 
their outputs are computer programs able to accomplish useful 
tasks such as alert a user or actuate critical steps [7]. It explores 
the study and structure of algorithms that can learn from and 
make predictions on data; such algorithms ove rcome strictly 
static programing instructions by making data -driven 
predictions/decisions [10]. ML algorithms can be broadly 
class ified into the following four main categories: (a) 
Supervised learning: These algorithms receive labeled data as 
training sets and make predictions for unseen points. (b) Unsupervised learning: These algorithms receive unlabeled 
data as training sets and m ake predictions for unseen points. (c) 
Reinforcement learning: These algorithms continuously 
interacts with the environment, under certain cases it affects the 
environment, and receives award for each action; the objective 
here is to maximize the reward ov er a course of actions and 
iterations with the environment [11]. (d) Representation 
learning: also known as feature learning , these include a set of 
methods that allow a machine to be fed with raw data and to 
automatically discover the representations needed for detection 
or classification [12]. The widely acclaimed deep learning 
based on neural networks is the best example of representation 
learning. Fig. 3  shows various models under these mentioned 
categories and their technological applications. Detailed 
discussions about ML methods and their agri -food specific 
applications can be found elsewhere [9, 13] . 
Owing to its unprecedented impacts, the area of deep 
learnin g with neural networks deserves a special mention. Deep 
learning methods enable extraction of high levels of 
information from very large volumes of data. Unlike traditional 
machine learning methods, the algorithms in deep learning are 
hierarchically organi zed according to increasing complexity. 
The computational models in deep learning comprise of 
multiple processing layers to learn representations of data with 
multiple levels of abstraction [12]. 
The overall flow of data from source, through the data 
processing or AI platform, until the final action – usually some 
kind of control, is summarized in Fig. 4 . AI techniques are 
advancing rapidly, but most upcoming applications will likely 
involve  a combination of both rule -based analysis (to represent 
first-principles constructs in the data) and new AI methods.  
This is especially the case when daisy -chaining datasets 
through a supply chain.  Further, data and new algorithms are 
expected to be combined with practiced human domain 
expertise, so that people will  understand and trust the process 
by which computer programs came to their conclusions.  
Fig. 3 Machine learning paradigms and their applications in the agri -food space.  

==== Page 4 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 4 
The end objective of AI or big data workflow is usually some 
kind of process control or automation in the industrial context. 
Nonetheless, the end -application of all Io T, big data analytics 
and AI systems is context dependent, and besides automation, 
could also involve obtaining insights, making predictions, 
providing alerts (fault detection). The final nodes of the 
learning methods in Fig. 3  provide some common examples  of 
end applications for which the insights from data are generated 
using the machine learning tools.   
 
Fig. 4. A simplified workflow from data to action in the IoT ecosystem, 
and the role of artificial intelligence.  
III. BIG DATA AND IOT IN SMART FARMING  
With the planet’s population projected to reach almost 10 
billion by 2050, innovative approaches to food production will 
be required to meet the food demands. However, the current rate 
of agricultural yield increases are way below than those 
predicted to be met for feeding the world in future [14]. 
Therefore, much like in the 1970’s when we had the first 
agricultural re volution, the world needs to see a disruption in 
the agricultural practices. It is imperative that novel and smart 
solutions are developed for global food security, food safety, 
sustainable food -consumption, and health and well -being of 
society. Technologi es that could enable reduced use of 
resources for agriculture, e.g. water, fertilizers and 
agrochemicals, and help to significantly cut -down the carbon 
footprint of farming will be important drivers for global 
agricultural sustainability. Likewise, environ ment friendly 
intervention strategies that protect food crops or food products 
from decay or pests, which lead to reduced losses and/or allow 
extension of shelf -life are important levers to address global 
food security challenges. The application of modern ised 
technologies in agriculture is broadly referred to as “smart 
farming”. Of the many developments, the use of (i) sensors 
deployed to monitoring farm conditions, and (ii) low altitude 
air-borne hyperspectral imaging are topics we consider 
worthwhile dis cussing in this review. A detailed review of the 
role of big data in smart farming is already available [15]; 
hence, our aim is to provide an exposition of the developments 
where many agri -food-automation companies are actively 
contributing or reaping the benefits.  
A. Connected field sensors and machines  
Precision Agriculture (PA) is a management concept which 
recognizes variabilit y within the soil environment and 
maximizes economic agricultural production while minimizing 
environmental impact for a specific location [16]. PA is all 
about applying the right material in the right amount at the right location and right time, which is known as the 4R concept [17, 
18]. Since its introduction in the 1990’s, PA has had high 
expectations to increase efficiency of agricultural operations 
especially in commercial production where the fear of losing 
yield has led to management practices that are based on 
excessive imple mentation of chemicals. Though crop yield 
monitoring has been around for almost two decades, the 
development and implementation of smarter farm machines, 
crop sensors, and the software to analyse data that these devices 
collect has recently become a game -changer in yield results.  
 The technology development over the last few decades has 
enhanced the position of PA as an emerging management 
concept. Digital sensors that monitor real word parameters 
continue to be presented in the market at affordable prices.  For 
instance, digital temperature sensors priced at a few dollars and 
as small as few cubic millimetres are available for placing at 
any place in an agricultural field to obtain accurate temperature 
data, provided they are correctly enclosed and powered [19-21]. 
Also, machine to machine commu nication protocols via 
electronic components have been revolutionized, among which 
the internet stands out as a global communication protocol that 
can pass data and information between a set of remote 
computers anywhere in the globe.  
 The continuous shrink  in size and cost of electronic 
components, such as processing units, modems, and antennas 
enabled the connectivity of mobile devices and sensors to the 
internet as stand -alone objects, which is why the term IoT is 
used [1]. Now, te chnology companies have IoT -based solutions 
for precision agriculture which consist of; sensors being able to 
measure the environmental conditions, for instance, at different 
localized spots within a farm; cloud -based platform to collect 
and integrate data ; artificial intelligence algorithms that extract 
information and predict patterns; communication mechanism 
with farm manager over the internet to notify about conditions, 
instructions, or required actions.  
 Bosch Corporation is a global engineering compan y that has 
adopted Industry 4.0 in its business and has emerged into the 
field of agriculture by providing a number of solutions [22]. 
Industry 4.0 on its own is the digital transformation of industrial 
markets with smart manufacturing currently on the forefront. It 
represents the so -called fourth industrial revolution in discrete 
and process manufacturing, logistics and supply chain. 
Although Industry 4.0 has been  conceived in the context of 
manufacturing, many of the technologies applied and 
converged in Industry 4.0 find their way in agriculture [23]. 
 Bosch’s Deepfield Connect  provides solutions to monitor the 
agricultural fields for different parameters [24]. Each solution 
consists of a set of sensors connected directly to the internet via 
a communication box which sends the data to Cloud, which in 
turn sends information and alerts to the farmer on his/her smart 
phone or computer. Once the set of sensors are installed in one 
location, it will start sending environmental temperature and 
humidity information as well as soil moisture information 
periodically to the farmer so that unnecessary journeys to the 
field to check on frost, heat, or dryness can be avoided. To 
exemplify with asparagus crop, through in -field temperature 
sensors, the fa rmer can know the temperature at different layers 


==== Page 5 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 5 
of the subsoil - an information essential for high yield output. 
The advantages of such connected solution extend to the 
maintenance services that companies provide as they can 
simultaneously monitor the dro p in the performance of an 
equipment or a component (for instance, a battery) and send 
timely replacements.  
 Another organization, Yield Technology Solution, places 
sensor nodes (a group of environmental and soil sensors) at 
different locations in an agric ultural field that communicate 
with one gateway over local communication system [25]. The 
gateway, in turn, connects to the internet to store and process 
data in the Microsoft Azure  cloud. Their system  measures 
microclimate data from around the farm and uses artificial 
intelligence and data science to provide information that helps 
in making decisions – e.g. when to plant, harvest, irrigate, feed 
and protect crops.  The system builds a detail ed picture of the 
farm’s microclimate across a range of conditions and delivers 
these insights to the farmers as current and future predictions.  
 In Japan, Bosch has launched Plantect , a solution targeting 
greenhouses, in which one farmer can connect a set  of sensors 
located in different greenhouses within certain proximity to be 
connected locally to a single gateway which is connected to the 
internet [26]. From the information received about the changes 
in environmental conditions in the greenhouses, Bosch employs 
cloud comput ing and artificial intelligence to predict disease 
breakouts and advice on pest control management for 
individual greenhouses. Such a solution aims ultimately to 
optimize the usage of plant protection products by spraying 
fungicide, for instance, which con tributes to the PA 
management of optimizing spraying. Although the solution is 
available now for tomato greenhouses, it should be 
straightforward to expand this system to other crops via 
development of specific prediction models for each disease 
while usin g the same hardware to collect and visualize data.  
 For greenhouses, fully automated solutions to control the 
internal weather and irrigation schedule are available in the 
market (see Fig. 5 ). Priva provides such systems where a local 
communication system between the sensors and actuators 
within one greenhouse work together to maintain optimum 
growing conditions for the plants [27]. For instance, 
temperature and humidity sensors talk to the motors that open 
and close side windows and ceiling to avoid over heating inside 
the greenhouse during the day. In cold nights, they can turn on 
a heater, if the greenhouse is equipped with one, to maintain a 
minimum temperature to avoid frost. These sensors can also get 
assistance from a rain detection sensor placed on the roof of the 
greenhouse, that can actuate c losing of the ceilings and 
maintain the side windows open on rainy hot days, for instance. 
Also, as the need for irrigation is closely related to light, the 
irrigation pump is controlled by solar radiation sensor that 
requests the pump to irrigate when it detects the accumulation 
of a certain amount of solar energy during the daytime. Lately, 
with the drop of carbon di -oxide (CO 2) sensor prices and the 
increasing evidence of the correlation between higher CO 2 
concentration levels and yield, modern greenhous e control 
systems include CO 2 sensors which control CO 2 generators that 
turn on when the photosynthesis activity is high during daytime. Several other new companies are rapidly emerging with distinct 
solutions to provide greenhouse control and cloud connec tivity. 
Agrinet  is a solution that combines greenhouse machinery 
provided by Nepon Inc. and information and communication 
technology (ICT) provided by NEC Corporation to enable 
monitoring and controlling the equipment in the greenhouse 
remotely [28, 29] . 
 
Fig. 5. IoT based monitoring and control of greenhouse cultivation 
environments. The greenhouse environment is monitored using a 
variety of IoT based sensors, and the automated control is 
implemented through heating, ventilation, or opening of windows 
using actuated motors.  
 
Similarly, E -Kakashi, which was lau nched by Softbank in 
2015 as a sensor box to monitor greenhouses [30], was 
upgraded into a platform after Sof tbank teamed up with CKD 
Corporation and Ericsson [31]. The platfor m not only keeps 
constant watch over fields and greenhouses, but also control the 
environment inside the greenhouse. The sensors monitor 
parameters such as temperature, humidity, and CO 2 and the 
machines in the greenhouse are connected to the cloud via 
Softbank’s NB -IoT cellular network. The PS Solutions’ e -
kakashi platform applies AI to adjust equipment based on 
environmental data and Ericsson IoT Accelerator powers the 
device onboarding and data management. Finally, CKD 
Corporation’s electro -pneumatic dev ices allow machinery to be 
controlled remotely. Accordingly, E -kakashi can make 
appropriate adjustments to machinery such as fertilization, 
irrigation and greenhouse ventilation systems. Whenever and 
wherever he/she wishes, the e -kakashi user can access an d 
interact with the system using a smartphone, tablet or computer. 
The farmer can modify the AI -based standard settings to apply 
their personal know -how.  
 Finally, John Deere, the largest agricultural machinery 
manufacturer in the world is estimated to hav e deployed several 
hundred thousand connected machines in the field since 2012. 
The company estimates that their IoT data collection and 
automation has boosted yield and reduced costs by >10% for 
farmers [32]. The IoT device installations in the agriculture  
world is predicted to increase from 30 million in 2015 to 75 
million in 2020, with a compound annual growth rate of 20% 
[33]. Several large public -private EU consortia are involved in 
assessing the benef its of IoT and big data application in 
agriculture, dairy, poultry, and meat production. An EU 
sponsored project named DataBio ( Data -Driven Bioeconomy ) 
is being carried out to understand the benefits of big data 
technologies in the raw material production from agriculture, 


==== Page 6 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 6 
forestry and fishery/aquaculture for the bioeconomy industry to 
produce food, energy and biomaterials, responsibly and 
sustainably [34]. Likewise, the project IoF 2020 ( Internet of 
Food and Farm 2020 ) funded by the EU Horizon 2020 and 
coordinated by Wageningen University, dealt with the “Farm of 
the Future”, trying to translate and adapt the “internet  of things” 
technologies to the farm’s environment [35]. 
B. Advances in intelligent farm machinery  
The traditional farming equipment companies are engaged in 
designing of smarter equipment that can integrate with 
computing environments, connect to IoT devices, smart 
tractors, and pumps, capable of sensing their environments and 
responding in real -time to an omalies. In recent years, attempts 
to build agricultural autonomous systems for implementing PA 
techniques have significantly increased and being implemented 
by many start -ups in farms. Cameras have followed the same 
trend of environmental sensors of becom ing smaller and 
cheaper. Their ability of collecting spatial and spectral data 
made them subject of research although the need for high spec 
processing units in comparison to other sensors was one of the 
main initial concerns for its application in real -time conditions. 
However, this has changed in the recent years as powerful 
processing units are widely accessible.  
 The high cost of applying herbicides and the increasing 
awareness about the impacts of excessive usage of chemicals 
on the environment and hum an health, are driving the efforts to 
implement cameras as sensors in the field of agriculture to 
detect weeds. There has been traditionally, two approaches to 
control weeds, which are the chemical and mechanical. In 
principal, mechanical control has the a dvantage of being 
environment -friendly but labour intensive whereas chemical 
control has the opposite features. Recently, some start -ups have 
emerged as providers of intelligent and autonomous weeding 
machines based on cameras for sensing weeds in the fiel ds. We 
will provide a few examples of recent commercial 
developments in this area.  
 Garford Farm Machinery has developed a tractor 
propelled weeding machine (marketed as Robocrop in -row 
weeder ) that consists of machine vision, control system, and 
weeding m echanism [36]. The main feature of this m achine is 
that it mechanically removes weeds which are located within 
the rows. This is achieved using a weeding mechanism that 
rotates around each plant in a spiral trajectory. The plant in turn 
is detected using RGB colour cameras whose data are processe d 
within the machine to determine the centre of the crop around 
which the mechanism will rotate. It was originally developed 
for use on transplanted crops such as lettuce, cabbage, celery, 
etc. but it can be used for most crops that have regular plant and 
row spacing as long as the plant foliage is separated from the 
next plan [36]. It can be used on most crops that are planted 
with regular plant and row spacing where the plant foliage is 
clearly separated from the next plant.  
 Deepfield robotics of Bosch have developed and tested 
autonomous mecha nical weed controller that uses GPS antenna 
to be self -guided within the field and cameras to distinguish 
crops, such as sugar beet, from weed. The robot whose weeding mechanism lies underneath the machine can work also at night 
under artificial lighting c onditions [37]. This autonomous 
vehicle was designed to target weeds in cultivation of sugar 
beets - a crop of high economic value in Germany.  
 Blue River Technology, a start -up recently acquired by 
John Deere, has developed yet another type of weed control 
machine that also uses cameras, computers, and artificial 
intelligence to distinguish crops from weeds [38]. The tractor -
propelled machine currently operating on a limited basis in 
cotton weeding uses chemical metho dology to combat weeds 
by specifically spraying herbicides on spots where weed is 
present. The main advantage of this technology is reducing the 
quantities of chemicals used in agriculture which will bring 
economic and environmental advantages.  
 Besides we eding, there are trials to apply vision 
technology in orchard harvesting operations which are 
characterized by labour intensity and time sensitivity. Typical 
examples of these trials can be found in apple and kiwifruit 
harvesting. The main challenge in aut omating orchard 
harvesting is that the fruits grow in usually an unstructured 
environment. Unlike weed, whose distance from the machine is 
estimated by the approximately constant distance between the 
machine and ground, the location of fruits on tree canno t be 
predicted. Also, the sceneries surrounding fruits contain more 
noise than weeds whose background is limited to other plants 
and soil. This makes developing commercial harvester a real 
challenge despite the need for such machines for labour saving 
and optimizing yield.  
 In academic literature, research tackling apple recognition 
and picking is available since the early 21st century as Bulanon 
[39] developed a machine vision software to detect location of 
apples on trees. Likewise, research of robotic arms and effectors 
started to ta ke place relatively at the same period as Setiawan, 
et al. [40]  developed a gripper that can pick apples without 
harming the skin. Appl e fruit recognition on trees continued to 
develop as Bulanon, et al. [41]  developed a real -time detection 
system, Mao et al [42] developed a stereo vision to detect also 
the distance between the machine and apple to be harvested, and 
Kong et al [43] used least square support vector machine to 
improve accuracy and speed of stereo vision in detecting 
apples. Robotic arm and end effector research continued to 
improve accuracy and spee d of gripping and detaching apples 
from trees [44-46]. Silwal, et al. [47]  reported the design, 
integration, a nd field evaluation of a robotic apple harvester 
able to detect and pick 84% of the apples with an average 
picking time of 6 seconds per fruit.  
 Kiwifruit recognition system based on imaging, for future 
robotic harvester, has some advancements in academic 
research. In order to overcome the problem of noise caused by 
variation of ambient light, Fu, et al. [48]  suggested harvesting 
at night using artificial lighting to minimize the chance of 
kiwifruit misclassification. Unlike a pples, kiwifruits tend to 
cluster in groups which makes ‘visual individualizing’ an 
essential feature of any kiwifruit picking robot; this was tackled 
by Fu, et al. [49] . However, issues such as insufficient success 
rate in detection and slow reco gnition time are two challenges 
that remain to be tackled before a commercial product could be 

==== Page 7 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 7 
developed. Despite the slow progress in developing vision 
system for robotic orchard fruits picking, investment in this 
technology is expected to continue as the  need to replace 
manual harvesting is becoming increasingly urgent in countries 
such as the United States, Japan, and China.  
C. Low altitude spectral imaging  
Healthy agricultural plants normally reject much of the 
infrared spectrum. However, when facing a cri sis 
(diseased/stressed) plants tend to absorb more infrared light. 
This information is useful for identifying plant infestation, 
nutrient or moisture deficiency. Similarly, the greenness of an 
agricultural field (related to the chlorophyll content of the 
crops) usually correlates with the nitrogen supply. Traditionally 
monitoring of field and agricultural conditions (such as crop 
health, and coverage) was carried out using low -resolution 
satellite based remote sensing techniques that measured the 
vegetation  cover over the scales of counties or states. Such 
methods allowed to get country -wide insights about the yield 
were of little use to farmers. To overcome the issues arising 
from low spatial resolution and make spectral imaging 
techniques accessible at ind ividual farm levels, low -altitude 
manned vehicle based spectral imaging was adopted as a 
solution. This approach was somewhat useful considering that 
the spectral cameras operating in the infrared region were bulky 
with a big footprint. With the advancemen ts in spectral imaging 
technologies, the size and weight of spectral cameras has 
drastically decreased, and now these could easily be mounted 
on drones or quadcopters. The most notable advancement with 
respect to spectral cameras is the availability of com pact palm -
sized snapshot hyperspectral imagers. These have a much lower 
footprint and weight compared to push -broom (or line scanning 
hyperspectral imagers) and are also less expensive.  
 Data companies are now gathering aerial images of 
standing crops in f arms using hyperspectral and multi -spectral 
cameras mounted on manned or unmanned aerial vehicles 
(MAV or UAV), e.g. quadcopters, drones. Spectral cameras 
capture image stacks at several wavelengths, with loosely up to 
10 bands referred as “multispectral”,  and over 10 - 
“hyperspectral”. Some imaging service providers couple multi -
spectral cameras in non -visible regions with high resolution R -
G-B (visible) cameras. The images from spectral imaging 
systems are generally taken at sufficiently high resolution (f rom 
metre scale to even centimetre scale), but generally down -
sampled (smoothed) for delivery of practically useful results.  
 Spectral images of vegetation show considerable variation 
due to the heterogeneity of natural conditions of the fields (e.g., 
hydrothermal, soil, geomorphological) and the agricultural 
systems (tillage methods, irrigation, use of fertilizers, 
herbicides, pesticides, etc.) [50]. Using machine learning 
algorithms applied to the imaging datasets and incorporating 
environmental variables, data analysis platforms can generate 
insights about various indices of importance to crop growth and 
quality. Examples of such insights include, vegetation index, 
weed cover, pest infestation, water logging, yield monitoring, 
nutrient deficiencies, and maps for variable rate application. 
Such information is generally gathered by flying the drones and imag ing the fields between 2 to 3 times in a cropping season. 
Eventually, time series analysis of imaging data to assess the 
effectiveness of agricultural practices and self -learning 
techniques for improvement may also be included into the data 
analysis in som e systems. A notable example of the ‘data 
analytics as a service’ business model for the drone -based 
hyperspectral imaging of sugarcane and soybean fields is the 
Swiss start -up, Gamaya ( www.gamaya.com ). Gamaya  employs 
crop, variety, and region -specific analysis of hyperspectral 
imaging data (with 40 bands) using crop models and artificial 
intelligence to produce detailed information on crop phenology 
and physiological traits.  
IV. FOOD SUPPLY -CHAIN MODERNIZATION  
The United Nation  reports that one -third of the world's food 
is thrown away each year, which adds up to $750 billion that is 
completely wasted. That means that about 28% of the world's 
agricultural land is used to produce food that is eventually 
wasted. The s upply chain management in a food business is 
very challenging owing to the need for advanced control 
systems for coping with perishables, fluctuating supply -
demand variations and narrow food safety and sustainability 
goals. Consequently, the use of IoT net works involving 
humidity, temperature, light, microbiological and product 
quality sensors for real -time monitoring of products in transit is 
useful for the food industry in rescheduling, recalling or taking 
appropriate actions. According to a report by Zio n Market 
Research, the global AI application in supply chain market 
stood at US $491 million in 2017 and is projected to reach about 
US $6,548 million by 2024, at a CAGR of around 44.76% 
between 2018 and 2024 [51]. An exhaustive review of the role 
of IoT in supply chain management in general has been made 
by Ben-Daya, et al. [52] , while one specific to agri -food 
industry  is presented by Lezoche, et al. [53] . 
 Considering that food supply chains extend over wide 
geographical areas and are vulnerable to many global risks, IoT 
could hel p in minimizing the risks. Recently, the virtualization 
of the food supply chain through IoT and an information 
systems architecture was successfully demonstrated for a fish 
export business from Norway to the Netherlands [54]. In their 
paper, the team provided ample arguments to show that supply -
chain virtualization through integra tion of real -time product 
observations (via IoT devices), combined with business 
processes provide rich representations of the objects and its 
context. Such virtualization will enable stakeholders to act 
immediately when deviations are observed (e.g. tempe rature 
fluctuations leading to product quality change). The essential 
features of the virtual IoT based supply chain include free 
exchange of logistics information, and functionality for 
intelligent analysis and reporting of exchanged data to enable 
early warning and advanced forecasting [55]. 
 A more generalized approach to v irtualize the supply chain 
stages has been demonstrated by a group from Italy, who 
developed an IoT based tool in LabViewTM to integrate the 
entities involved, the product flows and the food ecosystem 
boundaries [56]. The authors concluded that IoT based 
virtualization of food supply chain w ill allow a dramatic 

==== Page 8 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 8 
reduction in the inefficiencies, costs, emissions and social 
impacts. To provide an example of the power of virtual (or 
cyber -physical) supply -chain systems, let us consider a food 
truck equipped with temperature, humidity, and locatio n (GPS) 
sensors carrying soft berries (say, strawberries). Through 
virtual supply -chain systems, logistics providers can accurately 
track the location of the food truck at any point in time. Now, 
in the unlikely event of food shortage at a different locati on, the 
nearest truck can be rerouted to the new destination. 
Alternatively, if a temperature fluctuation is noticed, such that 
it may affect the shelf -life of the berries, the truck can be 
diverted to the closest market for immediate sale at discounted 
price. Thus, IoT technology could not only help the growers or 
help to meet the product demand, but also prevent food 
wastage.  
 The destination of the food truck in our example can also 
be decided based on customers identified through social media 
platforms or mobile phone applications. Food Cowboy 
(www.foodcowboy.com ), for example, uses a mobile app to 
allow truckers and food companies to reroute imperfect produce 
to charities, spoiled produce to composting sites, and surplus 
food from local restaurants to food banks and soup kitchens. 
Many other online interactive maps linking places with food 
surplus to charities and people who need it, and apps connecting 
neighbours for food sharing have also evolved. Howe ver, the 
safety of food and legal implications in such peer -to-peer food 
sharing platforms remains unclear.  
 The past decade has seen a significant rise in the use of 
machine (or computer) vision to efficiently and timely execute 
repetitive tasks in supply  chain, including quality control 
inspection. The supply chain industry is increasingly relying on 
automated guided vehicles (AGVs) based on AI, machine 
vision, and navigation technologies (e.g. simultaneous 
localization and mapping, SLAM) for automated ma terial 
handling in manufacturing [57, 58] . Machine vision has helped 
companies in implementing end -to-end automation [59], and 
now the application of AI for its integration with supply -chain 
for individual product tracking is being explored . In recent 
times, grocers are using inventory barcodes and sensor -
collected data to determine the rates of inventory consumption, 
such that stocking levels can be set to meet but not exceed 
demand.  Radiofrequency Identification (RFID) is another 
sensor te chnology that has seen an exponentially rising 
adoption by producers, food processors, agri-food supply chain 
industry, and merchants to establish traceability systems [60]. 
 In a related context, introduction of counterfeit products 
into the market is a big challenge for food and pharmaceutical 
companies. Similarly, ‘product diversion’, i.e. the movement of 
a product consignment to a location not originally intended, 
though uncommon, also occurs sometimes. While technologies 
such as barcodes and holograms have been in use for decades 
heretofore, the minor deviations during the print of barcodes 
has been exploited as a unique fingerprint by the company, 
Systech International ( www.systechone.com ). Their unique 
process uses the microscopic differences (arising from 
production environment variables) in the same barcodes on 
multiple products as a unique fingerprint. Thus, this fingerprint data retrieved in the manufacturing facility using a computer 
vision system can be used to track individual products 
throughout the supply chain, thereby preventing product 
diversion. Furthermore, th is data can also be used for validation 
of the product by retail outlets and consumers using 
applications owned by brand owners, thereby helping to prevent 
counterfeiting.  
 Should IoT integrated with cloud computing take up the 
space of connecting movement  of raw materials and finished 
products to the automated databases, the process of 
documentation and regulatory compliance will become much 
easier and efficient. Next, it will be interesting to note that 
customers are more and more demanding in terms of fo od 
choice – portion size, shape, flavour, colour, price and the level 
of service [61]. IoT, and AI could serve as enablers for ‘end of 
line’ and ‘last minute’ customiz ation technologies for the food 
industry [62]. Thus, in future, an internet -based food purchase 
order received from a customer with several peculiar 
specifications could automatically be redirected to the robots on 
the production line for ‘last minute’ customization. In fact, it 
will not be exagg erating to state that IoT and AI enabled 
customization -oriented production will be one of the significant 
achievements of food industry 4.0.  
Despite the projected potential benefits, the integration of 
IoT with business processes is still at a very early s tage of 
development in food supply chains and food industry, in 
general.  Several challenges with respect to granular data 
alignment exist when creating end -to-end digital thread from 
farm to consumer. It is to be noted that supply -chain systems 
are very cr oss-functional and additionally involve data sharing 
between companies/business entities. As such, cross -entity data 
sharing becomes much more challenging in the agri -food sector 
where data from farms is currently very limited. Even when 
considering large food manufacturers and enterprises, they rely 
on co -packers or outsource to contract processors, meaning a 
third -party holds all the production facility data , that too under 
different naming conventions . Moreover, many raw agricultural 
materials are often sourced by industry in developed world from 
developing or under -developed regions, where there often is a 
lack of data -awareness. The process of including most partners 
into the AI system is crucial to avoid under -performance of the 
algor ithms due to missing data and prevent loss of opportunities 
for optimization. Next, most agricultural products undergo 
dynamic changes in their quality and therefore pricing . This 
additional  layer of high uncertainty adds difficulty  in tracking 
such data i n real -time as compared to other supply -chains . The 
development of appropriate frameworks for reaping the benefits 
of IoT , big data  and AI  needs immediate attention for its 
success.  
V. WEB AND SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYSIS  
The massive rise in the number of computing and mobile 
devices in use has resulted in an exponential growth in data 
volumes over the Internet. It is estimated that every minute of 
internet activity in 2016 resulted in 3.3 million Facebook posts 
and 448,800 tweets, 65,972 pictures and 3.8 million sea rches on 
google [63]. Socia l media data can come from a variety of 

==== Page 9 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 9 
platforms, such as, blogs, discussions or comments on websites 
(e.g. news pages), microblogs (Twitter), collaborative projects 
(e.g. Wikipedia), social networking sites (Facebook, LinkedIn), 
and content communities ( e.g. YouTube and Instagram) [64]. 
Typical examples of metrics that can be drawn from social  
media content created by users include; followers, shares (or 
retweets), likes, comments, mentions, metadata associated with 
the clicks. The metadata associated with users’ activities could 
include information such as the age, nationality, education, 
profession, geolocation, and more, depending on what the user 
had preferred to share.  
 Briefly, social media data refers to the information 
gathered from social networks that reveals how users share, 
view or engage with the content or profiles created by a use r or 
organization. As the most common example, Facebook pages 
of companies “liked” by users results in the user receiving 
brand page updates and contents in their news feed. This way 
brands can interact with those who like or follow their pages 
and vice -versa. Nearly all food companies have a social 
presence with a huge number of people who follow their 
Facebook pages and thus, are part of the social interaction and 
data creation process (see  Fig. 6 ). The aim of a typical social 
big data analysis is to retrieve valuable chunks of knowledge 
from the huge amount of complex user generated content (often 
linguistically or graphically expressed), and help agencies, 
industry, or stakeholders make informed decisions.  
 
Fig. 6. Number of  people liking the Facebook pages of major food 
companies. Note that the bars are a sum of all filtered company pages 
(but not brands) that are verified by Facebook. Data retrieved on 7th 
July 2019. The numbers could include repeated measurements when a 
user has liked more than one page.  
A. Open innovation and renovation via crowdsourcing  
Innovation refers to introducing something as a novelty, which 
could be in terms of product, market, service, or business 
model. The concept of open innovation encourages companies 
to acquire outside sources of innovation to improve product 
lines and short en the time required to bring products to market. 
In addition, it also emphasizes on marketing or releasing 
internally developed innovations which do not fit the company's 
business model but could be effectively used elsewhere [65]. 
Several reviews have dealt with various aspects of open 
innovation within the food industry [66-69]. 
Data min ing via machine learning techniques are increasingly 
being employed to identify the most preferred and disliked 
features of existing products, by analysing thousands of 
consumer comments on websites like Amazon, eBay, 
Facebook, YouTube and other e -commerce  website. Insights generated from natural language processing (NLP) and 
sentiment analysis (see section 5.2 ) of social media and e -
commerce data can guide development of new products or 
technologies as per consumer preferences, helping determine 
important design decisions to meet customer needs more 
accurately. This approach arms an industry with the information 
to make future products highly innovative, consumer friendly, 
resilient and respectful of market requirements. Note that the 
intellectual inputs fo r the new or improved product in such 
cases are fundamentally crowd -sourced through online 
platforms.  
Besides unsolicited user generated content, it is worthwhile 
noting that businesses also adopt web media as channels for 
building and distributing informa tion and values. Social 
platforms are increasingly being leveraged as grounds for 
connecting, interacting and collaborating with consumers. For 
example, in recent years multinational food companies have 
been engaging consumers in co -creation via social med ia 
marketing campaigns for the development of new flavour and 
texture for their products. When users respond with a unique 
hashtag or media -handle to the campaign, all user responses 
with its associated can be gathered to obtain a huge corpus of 
informatio n. Analysis of the textual data collected overlaid with 
user related metadata (such as geolocation, age, profession, 
time of content creation etc.) from social campaigns can be a 
valuable way to both gather insights and to market segmented 
brands.  
Finally,  it is worthwhile mentioning that web -scraping and big 
data analysis is also being employed by many enterprises to 
compare the prices of the products and assess where the sales 
price of your products lie within that product category in the e -
commerce world . In conclusion, enterprises should consider big 
data analytics as one of the tools in their research toolkits and 
learn from the successful programs leading the way. By 
understanding what consumer’s value and engaging in active 
dialogue and interaction, c ompanies can develop superior value 
propositions that are more relevant to their target audience.  
B. Sentiment analysis  
To determine the sentiments that consumers associate with a 
given product, brand or company - be it positive, negative, or 
neutral - big data  analysts perform “Sentiment Analysis” on the 
huge corpus of text data from social websites, merchant sites, 
and blogs. In fact, several companies have either assembled or 
are in the process of assembling “digital acceleration teams”, 
also called “social l istening teams”, to monitor social media 
sentiments at high frequencies (sometimes even at hour 
intervals). For scraping large -scale reviews at regular intervals 
several new start -ups around the concept of “Data -as-a-
Service” provider (DAAS) have mushroome d in recent years. 
DaaS providers have the computational infrastructure for high 
quality data extraction from e -commerce and social media 
websites without interruption.  
The first aim of most sentiment analysis workflows is to 
overcome the information barri er from social slang and lingos, 
non-textual expressions (emojis) and language. This is usually 
followed by matching of user generated words against a pre -
built, pre -classified custom lexicon (dictionary of words). 
Using tools for real -time analysis of str eaming social data, the 
digital teams of companies can detect upcoming challenges and 
Coca-ColaPepsicoNestléUnileverHeinzAnheuser-BuschGeneral MillsTyson FoodsCargill
105106107108 
likes on facebook

==== Page 10 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 10 
opportunities in a timely manner. Companies can then engage 
with the concerned parties - consumers, organizations, suppliers 
or government bodies to harness the opportunit y or resolve the 
challenge.  As an example, a food industry can monitor the 
changes in sentiment scores associated with a reformulated 
product and thus assess the success of the reformulation to 
overcome the negative sentiments.  
C. Personalized nutrition and h ealth advice  
Nutrition can be a highly complex and individualized facet of 
life. What works for one person may not be effective for 
another. The Internet has allowed the proliferation of advice 
relating to nutrition and health. It has been observed that 
between 55% and 67% of American adults search for health and 
wellness information on the internet, and 20 -34% of them use 
social media [70]. In a recent work it was concluded that young 
adults are generally open to receiving healthy eating and recipe 
tips through social media [71]. Thus, it becomes clear that with 
an expanding population getting access to internet, nutritionists, 
health educators, and food companies can take advantage of 
social media campaigning and consented social data collection 
for personalized nutrition and health recommendations.  
Social media is increasingly being exploited as a platform for 
distributing nutrition and wellness campaigns, increase 
exposure to evidence -based health messages and encourage 
users to parti cipate and engage with interventions [71]. In an 
exemplary multichannel social marketing campaign named 
Food H ero, a focused target audience in Oregano, USA were 
provided with nutrition related messages [70]. The audience 
were messaged with evi dence -based research findings to 
promote an increase in the amount and variety of vegetables and 
fruit consumed. The metadata of users and their activity was 
used to understand the audience’s learning behaviour, tuning 
the content for effectiveness and lon g-term planning. While, 
cloud -based frameworks for effectively managing health 
related social big data has recently been proposed and 
demonstrated [72], such frameworks are yet to be reported in 
the nutrition space. It is also to be noted that the effectiveness 
of social media based targeting could become limited when 
users do not wish to share their personal health or nutrition 
related information [71]. 
Freeman, et al. [73]  reported that young adults are being 
bombarded with messages about energy -dense, nutrient -poor 
(EDNP) food and beverages on social media platforms, that are 
sponsored by food industry organizations with commercial 
interests. A strict check on such conflicts between public 
interest and commercial interests through appropriate 
regulations is highly desirable. Unfortunately, governments 
around the world are yet to define and frame proper guidelines 
and regulate the con tent released on social media. It will be 
interesting if the academic world can come together with 
appropriate social media analytics to identify and classify the 
advertisements based on cleverly chosen metrics.  Moreover, the 
fact that few enterprises stor e and use the data of consumers and 
their interactions with products for intensive marketing and 
influencing the decisions, is a matter of concern to many 
consumers. Governments need to regulate the privacy of data 
of its citizens and consumers, taking the  European Union’s 
recently enacted General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
as a good example.  VI. FOOD QUALITY AND AUTH ENTICITY  
In recent times consumer awareness towards food 
composition and quality has surged owing to an increasing 
awareness about healthy lifestyle and technological 
advancements in food science and technology. Moreover, food 
safety regulations demand detailed labelling of product 
composition along with strict quality monitoring [74]. In this 
context, UV -Visible -near infrared spectroscopy (UV -Vis-
NIRS) based IoT sensors and big data are evolving as important 
players in food composition, quality and food safety assessment 
areas.  
A. Spectral fingerprinting of foods  
UV-Visible -near infrared spectroscopy (UV -Vis-NIRS) is an 
extensively researched technology with regard to food 
composition and quality predictions [75-78]. Numerous studies 
have been conducted using UV -Vis-NIRS for evaluating food 
composition and quality with the aid of chemometrics [79-81]. 
The review by Reid, et al. [82]  discusses the successful 
application of spectroscopic techniques such as UV, NIR, MIR, 
visible, and Raman for food authentication. Another review by 
Porep, et al. [83]  emphasizes on the studies dealing with on -line 
application of NIR spectroscopy for industrial processes in the 
food industry. Similarly, the review article by Dixit, et al. [84]  
contributes a detailed discussion on the var ious studies 
regarding applications of NIR spectroscopy for online 
monitoring of meat and meat products. UV -Vis-NIRS is a rapid 
and non -destructive technology which has motivated the food 
industry to use it for quality monitoring purposes. The UV-Vis-
NIR r egion covers the wavelength range from 200–2500 nm.  
UV-Vis spectroscopy typically yields broad, overlapping 
bands; spectroscopic measurements for most liquid and gaseous 
samples rely on the Beer -Lambert Law. Spectra of solid 
samples are usually recorded in  the units of reflectance (R) or 
percent reflectance (%R). Color measurements are conducted 
by utilizing the transmittance and reflectance data for liquid and 
solid samples respectively [85]. NIR spectroscopy is based on 
molecular vibrations produced by functional groups containing 
hydrogen atoms: C -H, N -H and O -H. These molecu lar 
vibrations generate spectral signatures which are specific to a 
compositional attribute, ingredient, adulterant or a contaminant. 
A characteristic UV -Vis-NIRS system consists of a light 
source, spectrophotometer and a computer for data acquisition. 
The light source illuminates the sample, which is then either 
reflected, transmitted or diffusely reflected followed by its 
detection via an interferometric or a dispersive system [86]. 
One of the major issue with NIR spectra is the noise 
generated from non -linearities introduced by light scattering 
phenomenon su ch as Mie scattering and optical scattering [87], 
which necessitates the use of statistical and mathematical 
routines. This branch at the interface of data science and 
chemical physics is widely known as chemometrics. 
Chemometrics plays a significant role in overcoming the 
challenge of non -linearities and thus helps in extracting useful 
information from UV -Vis-NIR spectra. Typi cal processing of 
spectral data involves enhancing the signal -to-noise ratio 
(SNR), (2) pattern recognition/classification/quantitative 

==== Page 11 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 11 
predictions: pre -processed spectral data are subjected to various 
multivariate statistical methods for building either q ualitative or 
quantitative models [85]. In an IoT context, spectral data 
acquired is typically transferred to a remote server where 
spectral processing is performed while validating the data over 
pre-built calibration models. This approach allows utilizing 
large spectral databases and trained models for near real -time 
assessmen t of various food materials.  
B. Miniature spectrometers as IoT sensors  
Until some years ago, UV -Vis-NIRS systems were bulky, 
immobile and accessible by laboratories only. However, recent 
developments in micro -fabrication and miniaturization of 
optical systems  via holographic optical elements (HOEs) have 
empowered the creation of “palm -sized” spectrophotometers 
which are compact, mobile, pocket -fit and can be connected to 
the internet for real -time data transmission to remote servers. 
Organizations like Hamamat su [88], Texas instruments (Texas 
Instruments Inc., Texas, U SA) and consumer physics [89] have 
develop ed such “palm -sized” spectrophotometers which can be 
used for real -time quality checks, agri -food authentication and 
identification. In fact, Hamamatsu Photonics has developed the 
world’s smallest “fingertip size” micro -spectrophotometer 
which is ultra -compact, lightweight and low -cost device. The 
micro -spectrophotometer offers measurement in the visible 
wavelength range and can be used for applications such as color 
sensing, point -of-care testing connected to smartphones, and 
other types of portable measur ement.  
The large amount of data necessitates remote data analysis 
on powerful computers for receiving real -time insights 
regarding the product on compact UV -Vis-NIRS devices or say, 
mobile phones of a consumer. Thus, such technologies offer an 
opportunity to develop real -time composition and quality 
assessment methods. To exemplify the significance of 
emerging UV -Vis-NIRS IoT platforms, let us consider a typical 
quality monitoring scenario in a flour storage facility. 
Traditionally, to check the authenticit y of wheat flour, a safety 
inspector would perform sampling followed by time -
consuming offline analysis. However, the situation demands for 
a rapid decision at the storage facility. Similar situations could 
arise when real -time decisions are to be sought r egarding 
quality or authenticity of agri -food products. The duo of UV -
Vis-NIRS as IoT sensors and big data methods can provide a 
robust solution to such situations by availing real -time product 
information such as detection of adulteration, allergen 
detect ion, geographic origin and composition.  
Tellspec is a data company which has combined NIR 
spectroscopy, bioinformatics techniques and learning 
algorithms for real -time analysis of consumer foods at the 
molecular level [90]. The system includes Tellspec’s food 
sensor which is based on the technology from Texas 
instruments, a cloud -based patented analysis engin e and a 
mobile app that work together to scan foods, identify 
ingredients and provide details about the food scanned. Tellspec 
has conducted various studies with respect to food quality, 
authentication and characterization. Tellspec evaluated a 
handheld NI R scanner for simultaneous prediction of melamine and urea in wheat gluten samples [91]. In another study, the 
handheld NIR scanner was successfully employed for detection 
of beef aging combined with the differentiation of tenderloin 
and sirloin [92]. 
SCiO is a technology developed by Consumer physics which 
combines two integ rated technological components: the Sensor 
and the Cloud [89]. The SCiO sensor’s optical head is only a 
few millimeters in size; provides high sensitivity and accuracy. 
It has low power consumption and zero warm up time which 
makes it highly responsive and extremely efficient. The SCiO 
cloud provi des the analytical processing power and hosts the 
material databases. The SCiO cloud hosts the chemometric 
models and algorithms that analyze spectra and convert them 
into useful material data. Chemometric models run on a linearly 
scalable architecture, wh ich allows to provide fast response 
times to a practically infinite number of users and devices.  
C. Spectroscopy and sensor fusion  
The intelligent convergence and processing of data from 
multiple sensors for making a process autonomous, is 
commonly referred t o as “sensor fusion”. The results of 
efficient sensor fusion are almost always better than those 
obtained from the interpretation of data from individual sensors.  
In a recent EU -funded project named “MUSE -Tech”, the 
fusion of state -of-the-art sensing techn ologies (photoacoustic 
spectroscopy, quasi imaging UV -Vis spectrometry and 
distributed temperature sensing) was demonstrated to improve 
the handling of raw and in -process materials in food 
manufacturing. The project developed a multisensor device that 
can react in real time to variations in raw material and 
processing conditions to optimise the quality and safety of 
processed foods. For instance, one leg of the project focussed 
on reducing the risk of developing the toxic polar compound(s) 
such as acrylamid e in starchy foods (e.g. potato chips) during 
cooking by specifying the guidelines for frying time and 
temperature. A computer vision system was developed for on -
line inspection of potato chips and frying oil quality with 
industrial settings. The chips wer e classified according to 
colour, oil uptake, polar matter, and acrylamide levels using 
NIR and imaging sensors. The relevant datasets from the 
network of such sensors, the IoT, can be clustered to a cloud 
portal and mined to assist in regulating quality s tandards [93] 
within the industry 4.0 framework.  
The future of agri -food quality and authenticity looks bright 
under the influence of IoT and big data. Advancements in 
micro -fabrication and miniaturization of optical systems has led 
to the development of “palm -sized” or even “fingertip -sized” 
spectroscopic devices. Moreover, constant improvement in 
chemometrics has helped in extracting further relevant 
information from the acquired spectral data. Overall, UV -Vis-
NIRS based IoT, in collaborat ion with big data offers a valuable 
and robust quality and authenticity monitoring tool for the agri -
food sector.  

==== Page 12 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 12 
VII. FOOD SAFETY  
A. Big Data and Foodborne outbreaks  
 Food safety from farm to fork has emerged as an 
international priority for all the stakeholders around the globe. 
The recent foodborne outbreaks of fresh produce in the United 
States, with two large occurrences of Escherichia coli  
contaminated romaine lettuce in 2018, a lot of food (which also 
included large quantities of the safe produce) was dumped  to 
protect public health  [94]. Knowing that the demand for food is 
expected to increase by 50% from 2012 t o 2050  [95], the current 
practices t o defending public health from foodborne outbreaks 
might not be the viable option of the future. Realizing the 
significant economic impact of outbreaks, technological 
advancements and integrated measures from informatics can 
play a crucial role in mitigati on of food safety risks and 
prevention of future outbreaks, saving millions and lives of 
many [96]. 
 A large amount of food safety data is created each day within 
the food industry and identifying means to extract robust 
information from different sources would support microbial 
risk assessment, prevention of outbreaks, identification of 
trends through pathogen surveillance; all that will facilitate 
food safety outcomes and decision maki ng [96, 97] . Real -time 
monitoring of food during storage and transportation, digital 
labeling methods that are easy to synchronize to cloud 
information and enhanc ed traceability through blockchain are 
some of the many advantages that informatics can contribute to 
the future of food safety.  
 The key points in handling an outbreak are primarily focused 
on protecting public health and minimizing the damage. It 
include s identification of hazard, effective containment, and the 
mitigation of the risk in a limited time period. To limit the 
impact on public health, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) has web -based tools, FoodNet, PulseNet, 
and GenomerTrakr t o quickly identify and contain food borne 
illness outbreak. The FoodNet is the Foodborne Diseases 
Active Surveillance Network that tracks trends for infections 
transmitted commonly through food; PulseNet uses DNA 
fingerprinting to identify patients and fin d clusters of disease 
that might represent potential outbreaks; and GenomeTrakr is a 
FDA managed database that contains information of foodborne 
bacterial germs from food products and the environment, with 
27 domestic and 3 international laboratory sites  [98]. The 
pathogen is isolated from the samples collected from sic k 
people and DNA fingerprinting is conducted to get the Whole 
Genome Sequence  of the pathogen. The data collected from 83 
laboratories (PulseNet Network) in the United States is 
analyzed and matches are detected using Foodborne Disease 
Outbreak Surveillanc e System (FDOSS). CDC’s division of 
Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental diseases extracts 
the information from these web tools using the big data 
analytics and identify trends in foodborne illnesses [99]. Also, 
CDC has an internat ional database called PulseNet 
International and partners with Canada, Europe, Asia Pacific, 
Africa, Middle East, Latin America, and the Caribbean, to share 
WGS information through global laboratory networks and 
support foodborne disease surveillance and o utbreak response  
[100] . PulseNet impacts public health by identifying the 
fingerprints of the pathogen (Whole Genome Sequence) from the sick people a nd find clusters of similar information to 
isolate an unrecognized outbreak  [101] . 
 WHO has recently ventured towards big data analytics to 
support decision making in global food safety outbreaks via a 
food safety platform called “FOSCOLLAB” [102] . This 
platform encompasses data (structured and unstructured) 
derived from evaluations of Joint FAO/ WHO Expert 
Committee on Food Additives (JECFA), Joi nt FAO/WHO 
Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), and Global 
Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) databases, among 
others to cover multiple segments viz., animal, agriculture, 
food, public health, and economics which are integrated and 
accessible to all sta keholders.  
B. Whole Genome Sequencing  
 In the recent past, phenomenal advancements have been 
made in the field of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) and has 
gained significant acceptance in food industry in surveillance 
of foodborne outbreaks. It is a genomic tool  to determine the 
genetic makeup of microbes by reading the unique DNA 
sequence of the sample. WGS has replaced use of traditional 
microbial typing techniques including pulsed -field gel 
electrophoresis (PFGE) and multi -locus variable number 
tandem repeat a nalysis (MLVA) with superior sensitivity, 
specificity, and higher resolution to outbreak clustering  [100, 
103-105]. The traditional methods unlike WGS have never been 
used for real -time surveillance of foodborne illnesses [105] . 
The process of characterization of DNA isolates from 
pathogenic organisms is more efficient with WGS, and thus 
supports rapid detection of outbreaks and timely containment 
of illness to protect public health. The microbial DNA 
sequencing can be done using platforms such as Illumina, Ion 
Torrent, PacBio,  and Nano -pore [106] . The three commonly 
used analysis methods used to process WGS data are k -mer, 
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP), and multi -locus 
sequencing typing (MLST) (also called gene -by-gene based 
method), and is used by PulseNet International  [100] .  
 Sharing of WGS data among the leading food regulatory 
agencies of the world will enhance the surveillance and 
prevention of epidemic diseases and outbreak globally. The 
United  States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) has 
pioneered to o ffer WGS data sharing through GenomeTrakr 
with other potential agencies worldwide to accommodate 
regulatory and compliance activities  [107] . The European 
COMPARE project (COllaborative Management Platform for 
detection and Analyses of (Re -) emerging and foodborne 
outbr eaks in Europe) is working on to sharing WGS data and 
analysis, to speed up detection and response to human and 
animal disease outbreaks worldwide ( https://www.compare -
europe.eu/ ) [100] . For the complete implementation of WGS 
based worldwide surveillance of outbreaks, several challenges 
need to be met including technical (WGS sharing, standardized 
subtypin g) and political limitations. The international efforts to 
minimize the effects of foodborne illnesses and prevent 
foodborne outbreaks can enormously benefit from WGS based 
surveillance, thereby supporting the health demands of the 
public.  

==== Page 13 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 13 
 An example of the synergistic impression of genome 
sequencing and big data analytics on food safety is a 
collaboration between IBM Research and Mars, Inc., that 
focused on sequencing and constructing of a genomic database 
of bacterial species across global  supply chains (see Fig. 7 for 
a graphical summary). The main essence of this project is the 
building of a genetic index of normal bacterial species that are 
natural inhabitants of food ingredients and pairing them with 
genetic fingerprints of food ingredi ents and their environments 
to capture the anomalies. Using big -data methods and bio -
informatics algorithms, researchers constructed and aggregated 
terabytes of genomic data to identify the active genes and 
metabolic processes in the food ingredients. The index 
produced from this study will serve as a benchmark 
representing the normal microbial communities of food 
ingredients with geographical variations. This would facilitate 
the identification of genomic fingerprints of healthy food, equip 
food regulatory  officials with rapid and precise information to 
assess the irregularities in food samples that show the presence 
of spoilage/pathogenic bacteria and design the most appropriate 
tests and standard operating procedures. Presumably, this will 
also deliver cr itical understanding of anticipated causes of food  
spoilage/hazards that can be fixed at the point of incidence and 
allow appropriate strategies to be amended [108] . 
 Next Generation Sequence (NGS) is one of the lates t 
advancement in genome sequencing that is widely accepted in 
food microbiology world for outbreak investigations, food 
authenticity, and antimicrobial resistance  [109] . The new 
technique uses whole genome sequencing, metagenomics, and 
amplicon sequencing (metabarcoding). WGS will answer the 
phenotypic characteristic of growth and inactivat ion of an 
isolate; however, knowing that these phenotypic factors can 
vary at transcriptional and post -transcriptional level, multi -
omics approach may be the need of future to precisely 
characterize the pathogen isolates  [106] . 
 The vital challenge to implementation of WGS data analysis 
and potential opportunities to safeguard the food supply chain 
worldwide is the privacy of data among the leading companies. 
Not enough legal measures are in place to protect the companies 
from regulatory actions, putting reputation and e quity at stake, that ultimately insists companies to limit data sharing. Other 
challenges include correct interpretation of data, legal 
infrastructure, and data ownership  [106] . 
 Beyond genomic information, there are other equally 
important factors that can be used to establish the source of 
contaminati on. The combination of socio -environmental 
information and whole -genome sequencing of prevailing and 
historical isolates were used by Gardy, et al. [110]  to ascertain 
the point of origin of a tuberculosis outbreak. Although the 
collected data were not colossal (36 isolates), the variety of data 
was important which was amplified by social listening and 
networking with patients. Some investigators applied an 
interesting approach of proactive geospatial modelling to food 
logistics to recognize the traders involved in the dispersal of 
contaminated fo od [111] . The model encompassed the 
distribution network of traders, population density, locations, 
and consumer behaviour to predict the 
probability of food safety outbrea ks or 
recall. In another interesting investigation, 
the reviews of online restaurant customers 
[112]  were analysed for key words 
pertaining to ‘food poisoning’. The 
outcome of the study was related to the 
outbreak control database of Center for 
Disease Control and P revention. They 
concluded that this type of assessments 
could complement the traditional 
surveillance systems in providing real time 
outbreak information. The potential of IoT 
to augment food surveillance systems are 
up-lifting and acting synergistically w ith 
big data analytics as a rapid salvage to food 
safety outbreaks [113] . It is anticipated that 
IoT would be advantageous to implement 
a holistic approach in food safety where 
key drivers viz., climate change, economy, 
and human behaviour could be combined to envisage food 
safety risks.  
C. Traceability  
 The inability of the food regulatory agencies to identify the 
origin of contamination in foodborne outbreaks shatters the 
public tru st in the food supply chain significantly. As an 
example  during  the Spinach outbreak of 2006, it took two 
weeks to isolate the contaminant and ample resources were 
expended  [114] . Another recent instance includes the romaine 
lettuce outbreak of 2018 where all the lettuce was pulled off the 
shelves without knowing the origin of contamination. All 
lettuce was discarded due to inefficient back -tracing by the food 
regulatory agencies. The FDA issued a recall a fter 67 days since 
the first person reported sickness due to consumption of 
romaine lettuce [94] (See Fig. 8). The inability to trace products 
comes from inadequate record keeping methods in place such 
as the widely accepted “One Up, One Down – OUOD 
approach”. One can only hold responsible the immediate 
supplier and the immediate buyer up and down the supply 
chain, and in times of outbreak investigations, it takes days to 
connect the records and identify the source of contamination. 
This leads to degradation of consumer trust and results in 
significant setback to produce growers (such as spinach and 
Fig. 7. Process flow to build genetic index of food and its normal microbiome. Adapted from 
Beck, et al. (2019).  

==== Page 14 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 14 
lettuce grow ers). To address this issue, blockchain technology 
can be introduced. Introduction of blockchain will enable rapid 
and accurate traceability, reducing cost from food losses and  
saving precious human lives [114, 115] . 
 
 
Figure 8 The timeline of events that led to recalls following the 
romaine lettuce outbreak of 2018.  
 Blockchain t echnology is a success in the cryptocurrency 
world, since its launch in 2008. Blockchain is known for its 
digital decentralized ledger system that does not require a 
trusted intermediary for transactions  [116] . The blockchain 
technology is essentially a database of records stored in the 
form of ‘blocks’, shared among all members of the group, 
resistant to data modification, and can be accessed at any time 
in the future [117] . Similar approach can be extended to a food 
supply chain where information like production data of food, 
origin, storage and shipping temperatures, expiry date, etc. can 
be digitally stored in a database (see Fig. 9(A)). This will enable 
rapid identification of an outbreak or authenticity of food 
(kosher, organic)  [116] . The numerous actors involved in the 
food supply chain make it challenging to keep records and keep 
track of food items.  
 Blockchain can potentially provide solution to this issue and 
can assist with implementing food safety, food securit y, and 
food integrity measures, while bringing transparency and 
accountability to the supply chain  [118] . A Study conducted by 
Walmart  and IBM to trace sliced mangoes from South and 
Central America to North America exposed the potential 
benefits of blockchain, highlighting the significant gap in the 
current traceability procedures [119, 120] . Two different supply 
chains were studied; pork in china and mangoes in the USA. The traditional method of traceability took 7 days to connect the 
supply chain from consumer to the origin of the mangoes.  
However, when the same data was  fed to blockchain, it 
delivered information within 2.2 seconds [114]  (See Fig. 9 (B)).  
 In agricultural logistics, big data analytics could be used to 
predict the occurrence of food hazards by linking the biotic or 
abiotic information to the growth and probabilistic occurrence 
of pathogens and toxicants. For instance, close monitoring of 
biotic and abiotic conditions in crops field has been reported to 
help identify the areas of increased incidence of aflatoxins 
before the harvested crop could enter the food chain [121] . IoT 
in food logistics, enabled by GPS, RFID, and other sens or-
based tracking and traceability, are key to ensure rapid recalls 
and real -time data collection of food attributes at the site. The 
Cheesecake Factory, a large U.S. restaurant chain, routinely 
gathers and transmit data on transportation temperature, shel f 
life, and food recalls, which is subsequently analysed by IBM’s 
data analytics solutions before significant information can be 
shared across its logistic chain [122] . Walmart uses a 
Sustainable Paperless Auditing and Record Keeping (SPARK) 
system that automatically uploads data pertaining key food 
attributes to an online databas e. This allow s Walmart  to keep a 
check on food product quality, like internal cooking 
temperature of rotisserie chickens , to isolate uncooked product 
for future inspection by health officers and private investigators 
[123] . In an investigation by Van der Fels -Klerx, et al. [124] , 
quantitative mod els and databases were leveraged to forecast 
the mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) contamination of wheat 
in north -western Europe. Likewise, farm -based 
characterization of pathogens combined with environmental 
and meteorological data allowed the presence of Listeria 
monocytogenes  pathogen to be predicted [125] . 
VIII. FUTURE TRENDS , CHALLENGES  AND NEEDS  
 IoT, Big data handling and computation:  The massive 
amount of data generated from IoT devices and social media 
generally demands appropriate infrastructure to store, process 
or analyse, and instruct appropriate automated actions based on 
the insights obtai ned. Because of the cost associated with such 
infrastructure, the ‘platform as a service’ business model is 
Fig. 9 (A) The concept of blockchain technology as applied to food supply chain for traceability and outbreak detection. (B) The traceability 
time in the farm to fork chain will be practically eliminated through the implementation of blockchain ledger.  

==== Page 15 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 15 
becoming increasingly popular. Examples of some of the top 
IoT platforms on the market today include, Amazon Web 
Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, Th ingWorx IoT Platform, 
IBM's Watson, Cisco IoT Cloud Connect, Salesforce IoT 
Cloud, Oracle Integrated Cloud, and GE Predix. With the cost 
of sensors projected to plummet and the need for cloud 
computing expected to rapidly peak, database management, 
cloud c omputing, and analytics as a service are expected to be 
the future business models of choice.  
 Agriculture : The cost of data acquisition in data -driven 
agriculture continues to remain very high, thereby significantly 
decreasing the impact of IoT and artifi cial intelligence in 
increasing agricultural productivity. This situation can only 
improve through innovations leading to inexpensive sensing 
technologies, which does not appear to become a reality in the 
immediate future. As the partnership between the bi g data 
technology industry and the farming community progresses, the 
question of who holds and owns the data will remain a top 
priority for farmers as well the technology companies.  
The use of advanced technologies in agriculture is limited to 
highly devel oped countries, while most farmers across the rest 
of world are struggling to survive. The advanced technologies 
are generally suited to the needs of large factory -farm s, like 
those present in north America or Europe . This implies that 
internet -based techn ologies cannot emerge as influential drivers 
in changing the global agricultural productivity. Therefore, the 
success of these technologies in developing and 
underdeveloped countries can only by improved through strong 
political willpower leading to govern mental support to the 
farmers.  
 Social media : Social media and personal level data is slowly 
becoming the new “most valuable resource” of this era. New 
challenges are emerging such as the concerns over data privacy 
raised by consumers and businesses, cyber -attacks, use of bots 
and fraudulent social media accounts by anti -enterprise bodies 
to negatively affect the reputation of companies and promote 
marketing of counterfeit/fake products on the world -wide web. 
Therefore, digital teams of companies must const antly innovate 
to proactively tackle adverse situations and handle mishaps on 
social platforms.  
 Food supply -chain modernization : Quantitative studies on 
the beneﬁts of IoT in supply -chain are yet to be carried out. IoT 
integration with food business proce sses for control of the 
supply chain is a challenging topic that needs further study on 
a case by case basis. In general, IoT implementation in the food 
supply -chain business is being rapidly improved considering 
that product -level tracking using sensors w as a familiar concept 
to this sector. The decentralized food diversion and 
consignment redirection based on shelf -life prediction are the 
new trends which are expected to grow.  These developments 
will help to significantly reduce the food wastage.  It is li kely 
that end -to-end supply chain traceability in agri -food industry 
will be achieved in future via technology implementations that 
differ slightly from blockchain methodologies due to the 
involvement of several stakeholders and actors, including end -
consu mers.  
 Food quality via spectral data : At present, hyperspectral 
cameras and UV -Vis spectrophotometers are being used more 
commonly in the food industry for quality monitoring purposes 
than ever before. Tech start -ups are producing consumer focussed pocket -size spectral devices considering health 
conscious mindset of millennials. Miniaturized and faster 
hyperspectral cameras are being actively designed and 
developed keeping the needs of the industry in mind. Currently, 
a pocket -size spectral sensor costs as  low as USD 300, but can 
be priced at USD 100,000 for commercial spectrophotometers. 
Cost of hyperspectral cameras is prohibitively high with 
starting prices of approximately USD 20,000 and can reach to 
several million dollars depending on the specificatio ns. Further, 
the databases of spectral features for foods is also evolving and 
far from commercial acceptability. While similar issues are 
being rapidly resolved for field applications in precision 
agriculture, the food industry is significantly lagging. 
Nevertheless, the demand for spectral technologies is envisaged 
to continue to grow for food applications.  
 Food safety : With the recent change in food safety 
regulations, focus has changed from reaction and response to 
prediction and prevention. The curren t food safety challenges 
require comprehensive and organized ways to address future 
foodborne outbreaks with gathering and examining large 
volumes of genetic information for early identification of food 
safety issues. Future food safety challenges insist s takeholders 
to develop better methods of tracing food supply chains 
protecting food and public health. Ensuring the safety of food 
would be key to the future of sustainable agriculture meeting 
high food demands of the world. Science -based decision 
making a nd the use of advanced technologies ( whole genome 
sequencing, blockchain, and digital process data logging ) 
would play a crucial  role in gathering critical information from 
around the world and connecting various disease and outbreak 
databases to enhance t he food safety. The future food safety 
measures demand better digital innovations to make the food 
supply chain safer and secure d, with better traceability and 
accountability.  
 Data Ownership , privacy  and security : The growing 
digital trend in agri-food space in the form of cloud computing, 
IoT and big data also comes with new challenges when it comes 
to cybersecurity. This is because, technologies like data 
platforms, wireless sensor networks, RFID, GPS, business 
management systems can be vulne rable to breakdown, abuse 
and misuse  [126] . A breach of data security could be fatal to 
companies in terms of loss of business or reputation. While 
software companies constantly release updates to thei r 
applications and data platforms, updating is a very difficult task 
in some cases,  for example, process control software.  In 
addition, power failure is a common issue causing  outages in 
farm -based IT systems.   
 While the use of data for AI approaches is s een as highly 
rewarding, there also exist many concerns, issues and 
unaddressed questions around data ownership and privacy to be 
addressed.  Since there is no guarantee that leakage of data upon 
sharing can be overruled, companies are hesitant to participa te 
in AI efforts. Likewise, farmers, consumers, and smaller 
players in business are often left in dilemma with regards to 
their privacy or monetary share,  should  the data be used for 
commercial benefit. With regards to data ownership, 
blockchain being a peer -to-peer network that allows each 
participant to own his data and be involved in trade could 
prevent data monopoly. Efforts are needed to standardize the 
protocols used in blockchain technology for its  mass -adoption, 

==== Page 16 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 16 
and its integration with AI for ensuring strong data 
immutability, greater transparency  and enhanced security.  
Smart contracts for data sharing and strong algorithms for data 
privacy are two important ways which can ensure that data’s 
value  is distributed without losing trust of the parties involved.  
IX. CONCLUSIONS  
 IoT is recognized as one of the most important areas of future 
technology and is gaining considerable attention from a wide 
range of industries. With the implementation of IoT 
infra structure in farming, farmers will be more efficient, 
intelligent and connected , feeding vast amounts of information 
to analysts regarding crop yields, soil mapping, fertilizer 
applications, weather data, machinery and animal health. The 
use of sensors is steadily increasing in early reporting of issues 
pertinent to crop health in farms, thereby enabling early checks 
for public health and safety. Efforts leading to easy integration 
of various IoT devices in terms of data and instruction flow 
from farm to co nsumer chain is important to obtain a viable and 
efficient IoT system.  
 The food supply -chain industry is at the forefront of IoT 
adoption to track the consignments and re -route them in real -
time. Food quality and authenticity evaluation using miniature 
spectral cameras has become popular in the industry and efforts 
are underway to bring this capability to consumers through their 
smartphones. The industry is also exploring the benefits of 
blockchain technology and next generation genome sequencing 
for trace ability in case of pathogen outbreaks and to ensure food 
safety. The huge volumes of data from social media is being 
analysed for consumer behaviour and crowdsourcing  of ideas 
for new food product development.  
 In conclusion, the key performance indices th at IoT and big 
data technologies will be potentially impacting are economical 
(e.g. increased productivity, lower production cost, and higher 
quality), environmental (e.g. less resource consumption, lower 
emission and carbon footprint) as well as social (e .g. improved 
public health, consumer demand driven, quality of life 
improvement). The pace of innovations in the field of IoT, big 
data, and AI are astounding and tasks that seemed impossible a 
few years ago have now been implemented with great success. 
Embracing the technology innovations and putting them to 
advantage are important for success of modern agriculture and 
food industry.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
This work has  received financial support from the New Zealand 
Government Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment 
(MBIE), through AgResearch Strategic Science Investment 
Fund (SSIF); Project: Food Integrity Transparency - Verifiable 
and digital food integrity PR J0126328/A25768.  Authors 
acknowledge Dr Marlon M. Reis, AgResearch, for helpful 
discussions and constant encouragement.  
REFERENCES  
[1] K. Ashton, "How the term 'Internet of Things' was invented," A. D. 
Rayome, Ed., ed: Tech Republic, 2018 . 
[2] H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H. -G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, 
"Industry 4.0," Business & information systems engineering, vol. 6, 
no. 4, pp. 239 -242, 2014.  [3] R. Lokers, R. Knapen, S. Janssen, Y. van Randen, and J. Jansen, 
"Analysis of Big Data techno logies for use in agro -environmental 
science," Environmental Modelling & Software, vol. 84, pp. 494 -
504, 2016.  
[4] M. Ahmed, S. Choudhury, and F. Al -Turjman, "Big Data Analytics 
for Intelligent Internet of Things," in Artificial Intelligence in IoT : 
Spring er, 2019, pp. 107 -127. 
[5] A. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, "Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who’s the 
fairest in the land? On the interpretations, illustrations, and 
implications of artificial intelligence," Business Horizons, vol. 62, 
no. 1, pp. 15 -25, 2019.  
[6] N. J.  Nilsson, Principles of artificial intelligence . Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1980.  
[7] F. Goyache  et al. , "The usefulness of artificial intelligence 
techniques to assess subjective quality of products in the food 
industry," Trends in Food Science & Technology, vol. 1 2, no. 10, 
pp. 370 -381, 2001.  
[8] K. Rajan and A. Saffiotti, "Towards a science of integrated AI and 
Robotics," Artificial Intelligence, vol. 247, pp. 1 -9, 2017.  
[9] R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, and T. M. Mitchell, Machine 
learning: An artificial inte lligence approach . Springer Science & 
Business Media, 2013.  
[10] J. L. Solé, "Book review: Pattern recognition and machine learning. 
Cristopher M. Bishop. Information Science and Statistics. Springer 
2006, 738 pages," SORT -Statistics and Operations Researc h 
Transactions, vol. 31, no. 2, 2007.  
[11] M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar, Foundations of 
machine learning . MIT press, 2012.  
[12] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, "Deep learning," Nature, vol. 
521, no. 7553, pp. 436 -44, May 28 2015.  
[13] T. U. Rehman, M. S. Mahmud, Y. K. Chang, J. Jin, and J. Shin, 
"Current and future applications of statistical machine learning 
algorithms for agricultural machine vision systems," Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 156, pp. 585 -605, 2019.  
[14] D. K. Ray, N. D. Mueller, P. C. West, and J. A. Foley, "Yield Trends 
Are Insufficient to Double Global Crop Production by 2050," PLoS 
One, vol. 8, no. 6, p. e66428, 2013.  
[15] S. Wolfert, L. Ge, C. Verdouw, and M. -J. Bogaardt, "Big Data in 
Smart Farming – A review," Agricultural Systems, vol. 153, pp. 69 -
80, 2017.  
[16] T. Krill, "An introduction to site specific management," presented 
at the Agricultural Finance Seminar, Ohio, 1994.  
[17] T. Bruulsema, "4R Phosphorus Management Practices for Major 
Commodity C rops of North America," 2017.  
[18] C. Snyder, "Suites of 4R nitrogen management practices for 
sustainable crop production and environmental protection," 
International Plant Nutrition Institute.(3 January 2018, 2016.  
[19] Sensirion, "Datasheet STS21,"  vol.  2, ed: SENSIRION, 2011.  
[20] Aosong, "Temperature and humidity module. AM2302Product 
Manual," L. Aosong(Guangzhou) Electronics Co., Ed., ed.  
[21] Bosch, "BME280Combined humidity and pressure sensor," in 
BME280 –Data sheet BST -BME280 -DS002 -15, ed: Bosch 
Sensortec, 2018.  
[22] R. Harvey, "How the internet of things will revolutionize 
agriculture,"  Accessed on: 12/07/2019Available: https://blog.bosch -
si.com/projects/how -the-internet -of-things -will-revolutionise -
agriculture/  
[23] i-Scoop, "Industry 4.0: the fourth industrial revolution – guide to 
Industrie 4.0,"  Accessed on: 12/07/2019Available: https:/ /www.i -
scoop.eu/industry -4-0/ 
[24] Bosch. (2019, 12 July). Deepfield Connect Field Monitoring Basic . 
Available: https://shop.deepfield -connect.com/en/field -
monitoring.html  
[25] T. Yield. (2019, 12/07). End-to-end farm sensing, analytics & apps 
for faster, more informed decision -making . Available: 
https://www.theyield.com/products/sensing -plus-for-agriculture  
[26] Plantect. (2019, 12/07). Bosch's monitoring service with disease 
prediction functionality . Available: http://www.bosch -plantect.jp/  
[27] Priva. (2019, 12/07). Greenhouse controls by Priva - reliable and 
futuristic . Available: 
https://www.priva.com/ca/solutions/horticulture/greenhouse -
controls  
[28] Nepon. (2019, 12/07). Agrinet: Greenhouse monitoring service . 
Available: https://www.nepon.co.jp/agrinet/index.html  

==== Page 17 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 17 
[29] NEC. (2 012, 12/07). Monitoring outstanding farmers' 
craftsmanship Available: 
https://jpn.nec.com/cloud/features/agri.html  
[30] E-Kakashi. (2019, 21 August). The agriculture AI Brain"e -kakashi" . 
Availabl e: http://www.e -kakashi.com/en/  
[31] Ericsson. (2019). E-kakashi, dig into agricultural IoT . Available: 
https://www.eric sson.com/en/cases/2018/e -kakashi -dig-into-
agricultural -iot 
[32] R. Marvin. (2017, 25 November). How to Build a Business -Ready 
Internet of Things: Use Cases . Available: 
http://in.pcmag.com/feature/113349/how -to-build -a-business -
ready -internet -of-things -use-cases  
[33] A. Meola. (2016, 14 August). Why IoT, big data & smart farming 
are the future of agriculture . Available: 
https://www.businessinsider.com/internet -of-things -smart -
agriculture -2016 -10?IR=T  
[34] DataBio. (2019, 14 August). The Data -Driven Bioeconomy project 
(DataBio) Available: https://www.databio.eu/en/  
[35] IOF2020. (2019, 14 August). IOF2020: MAKING PRECISION 
FARMING A REALITY . Available: 
https://www.iof2020.eu/about/story  
[36] Garford. (2019, 12/07).  Robocrop InRow Weeder   Remove Inter 
Row Weeds  Available: https://garford.com/products/robocrop -
inrow -weeder/  
[37] Bosch. (2017, 12/07). Deepfield Robotics: We develop autonomous 
machine s to improve conventional and organic weed managemen . 
Available: https://www.deepfield -robotics.com/en/#deepfield -
robotics  
[38] B. River. (2018, 12/07). See & Spray Agricultural  Machines . 
Available: http://www.bluerivertechnology.com/  
[39] D. Bulanon, "Estimating of apple fruit location using machine vision 
system for apple harvesting robot," in Proceeding of The XIV 
Memorial CIGR World Congress 2000 , 2000, pp. 540 -545. 
[40] A. I. Setiawan, T. Furukawa, and A. Preston, "A low -cost gripper 
for an apple picking robot," in IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA'04. 2004 , 2004, 
vol. 5, pp. 4448 -4453: IEEE.  
[41] D. M. Bulanon, T. Kataoka, H. Okamoto, and S. -i. Hata, 
"Development of a real -time machine vis ion system for the apple 
harvesting robot," in SICE 2004 Annual Conference , 2004, vol. 1, 
pp. 595 -598: IEEE.  
[42] W. Mao, B. Ji, J. Zhan, X. Zhang, and X. Hu, "Apple location 
method for the apple harvesting robot," in 2009 2nd International 
Congress on Ima ge and Signal Processing , 2009, pp. 1 -5: IEEE.  
[43] D.-y. Kong, D. -a. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. -j. Wang, and H. -x. Zhang, 
"Research of apple harvesting robot based on least square support 
vector machine," in 2010 International Conference on Electrical 
and Control  Engineering , 2010, pp. 1590 -1593: IEEE.  
[44] J. Baeten, K. Donné, S. Boedrij, W. Beckers, and E. Claesen, 
"Autonomous fruit picking machine: A robotic apple harvester," in 
Field and service robotics , 2008, pp. 531 -539: Springer.  
[45] D. M. Bulanon and T. Kataoka, "Fruit detection system and an end 
effector for robotic harvesting of Fuji apples," Agricultural 
Engineering International: CIGR Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, 2010.  
[46] Z. De -An, L. Jidong, J. Wei, Z. Ying, and C. Yu, "Design and 
control of an apple h arvesting robot," Biosystems engineering, vol. 
110, no. 2, pp. 112 -122, 2011.  
[47] A. Silwal, J. R. Davidson, M. Karkee, C. Mo, Q. Zhang, and K. 
Lewis, "Design, integration, and field evaluation of a robotic apple 
harvester," Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1140 -1159, 
2017.  
[48] L. Fu, B. Wang, Y. Cui, S. Su, G. Yoshinori, and K. Taiichi, 
"Kiwifruit recognition at nighttime using artificial lighting based on 
machine vision," International Journal of Agricultural and 
Biological Engineering, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 52 -59, 2015.  
[49] L. Fu, E. Tola, A. Al -Mallahi, R. Li, and Y. Cui, "A novel image 
processing algorithm to separate linearly clustered kiwifruits," 
Biosystems Engineering, vol. 183, pp. 184 -195, 2019.  
[50] Y. Akhtman, E. Golubeva, O. Tutub alina, and M. Zimin, 
"Application of hyperspectural images and ground data for precision 
farming," Geography, Environment, Sustainability, vol. 10, no. 4, 
pp. 117 -128, 2017.  
[51] Zion. (2018, July 10). Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Supply Chain 
Market By  Technology: Global Industry Perspective, 
Comprehensive Analysis, and Forecast, 2017 – 2024 . Available: https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/report/artif icial-intelligence -
in-supply -chain -market  
[52] M. Ben -Daya, E. Hassini, and Z. Bahroun, "Internet of things and 
supply chain management: a literature review," International 
Journal of Production Research, pp. 1 -24, 2017.  
[53] M. Lezoche, J. E. Hernandez, M . d. M. E. Alemany Díaz, H. 
Panetto, and J. Kacprzyk, "Agri -food 4.0: A survey of the supply 
chains and technologies for the future agriculture," Computers in 
Industry, vol. 117, p. 103187, 2020/05/01/ 2020.  
[54] C. N. Verdouw, J. Wolfert, A. J. M. Beulens, and A. Rialland, 
"Virtualization of food supply chains with the internet of things," 
Journal of Food Engineering, vol. 176, pp. 128 -136, 2016.  
[55] C. N. Verdouw, H. Sundmaeker, F. Meyer, J. Wolfert, and J. 
Verh oosel, "Smart agri -food logistics: requirements for the future 
internet," in 3rd International Conference on Dynamics in Logistics 
(LDIC 2012) , Bremen, Germany, 2013, pp. 247 -257: Springer.  
[56] R. Accorsi, M. Bortolini, G. Baruffaldi, F. Pilati, and E. Fe rrari, 
"Internet -of-things Paradigm in Food Supply Chains Control and 
Management," Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 11, pp. 889 -895, 2017.  
[57] G. Ullrich, "Automated guided vehicle systems," Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg. doi, vol. 10, pp. 978 -3, 2015.  
[58] A. Rushton, P. Croucher, and P. Baker, The handbook of logistics 
and distribution management: Understanding the supply chain . 
Kogan Page Publishers, 2014.  
[59] N. P. Mahalik and A. N. Nambiar, "Trends in food packaging and 
manufacturing systems and tech nology," Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 117 -128, 2010.  
[60] D. G. Caldwell, Robotics and automation in the food industry - 
Current and future technologies . PA, USA: Woodhead Publishing, 
2012.  
[61] M. Christopher, Logistics & supply  chain management . Pearson 
UK, 2016.  
[62] K. O'Marah. (2015, July 10). Mass Customization and the Factory 
of the Future . Available: https://www.industryweek.com/factory -
of-future  
[63] R. Allen.  (2017, 06 June). What happens online in 60 seconds?  
Available: https://www.smartinsights.com/internet -marketing -
statistics/happens -online -60-seconds/  
[64] N. V. Olsen and K. Christensen, "Social media, new digital 
technologies and their potential application in sensory and consumer 
research," Current Opinion in Food Science, vol. 3, pp. 23 -26, 2015.  
[65] H. W. Chesbrough, Open innovation: The new imperati ve for 
creating and profiting from technology . Harvard Business Press, 
2006.  
[66] S. Sarkar and A. Costa, "Dynamics of open innovation in the food 
industry," Trends in Food Science & Technology, vol. 19, no. 11, 
pp. 574 -580, 2008.  
[67] S. Saguy and P. S. T aoukis, "From open innovation to enginomics: 
Paradigm shifts," Trends in Food Science & Technology, vol. 60, 
pp. 64 -70, 2017.  
[68] I. S. Saguy and V. Sirotinskaya, "Challenges in exploiting open 
innovation's full potential in the food industry with a focus  on small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs)," Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 136 -148, 2014.  
[69] B. Bigliardi and F. Galati, "Models of adoption of open innovation 
within the food industry," Trends in Food Science & Technology, 
vol. 3 0, no. 1, pp. 16 -26, 2013.  
[70] L. N. Tobey and M. M. Manore, "Social media and nutrition 
education: the food hero experience," J Nutr Educ Behav, vol. 46, 
no. 2, pp. 128 -33, Mar -Apr 2014.  
[71] K. M. Klassen, C. H. Douglass, L. Brennan, H. Truby, and M. S.  C. 
Lim, "Social media use for nutrition outcomes in young adults: a 
mixed -methods systematic review," Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act, vol. 
15, no. 1, p. 70, Jul 24 2018.  
[72] A. Abbas, M. Ali, M. U. S. Khan, and S. U. Khan, "Personalized 
healthcare cloud servi ces for disease risk assessment and wellness 
management using social media," Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 
vol. 28, pp. 81 -99, 2016.  
[73] B. Freeman  et al. , "Digital junk: food and beverage marketing on 
Facebook," Am J Public Health, vol. 104, no. 12, pp. e56 -64, Dec 
2014.  
[74] N. Alexandratos and J. Bruinsma, "World agriculture towards 
2030/2050: the 2012 revision," ESA Working paper Rome, 
FAO2012.  

==== Page 18 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 18 
[75] A. H. Gomez, Y. He, and A. G. Pereira, "Non -destructive 
measurement of acidity, soluble solids and firmness of Satsuma 
mandarin using Vis/NIR -spectroscopy techniques," Journal of food 
engineering, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 313 -319, 2006.  
[76] A. Gowen, C. Odonnell,  P. Cullen, G. Downey, and J. Frias, 
"Hyperspectral imaging – an emerging process analytical tool for 
food quality and safety control," Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 590 -598, 2007.  
[77] Y. Dixit  et al. , "Multipoint NIR spectrome try and collimated light 
for predicting the composition of meat samples with high standoff 
distances," Journal of Food Engineering, vol. 175, pp. 58 -64, 2016.  
[78] B. M. Nicolai  et al. , "Nondestructive measurement of fruit and 
vegetable quality by means of  NIR spectroscopy: A review," 
Postharvest biology and technology, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 99 -118, 
2007.  
[79] Y. Dixit  et al. , "NIR spectrophotometry with integrated beam 
splitter as a process analytical technology for meat composition 
analysis," Analytical Met hods, vol. 8, no. 20, pp. 4134 -4141, 2016.  
[80] L. Salguero -Chaparro, V. Baeten, J. A. Fernandez -Pierna, and F. 
Pena -Rodriguez, "Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) for on -line 
determination of quality parameters in intact olives," Food 
Chemistry, vol. 139, no. 1 -4, pp. 1121 -1126, Jul 2013.  
[81] X. Li and Y. He, "Discriminating varieties of tea plant based on 
Vis/NIR spectral characteristics and using artificial neural 
networks," Biosystems engineering, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 313 -321, 
2008.  
[82] L. M. Reid, C. P. O'donnell, and G. Downey, "Recent technological 
advances for the determination of food authenticity," Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 344 -353, 2006.  
[83] J. U. Porep, D. R. Kammerer, and R. Carle, "On -line applica tion of 
near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy in food production," Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 211 -230, 2015.  
[84] Y. Dixit  et al. , "Developments and Challenges in Online NIR 
Spectroscopy for Meat Processing," Comprehensive Reviews in 
Food Science and Food Safety, 2017.  
[85] K. A. Bakeev, Process analytical technology: spectroscopic tools 
and implementation strategies for the chemical and pharmaceutical 
industries . John Wiley & Sons, 2010.  
[86] B. G. Osborne, T. Fearn, and P. H. Hind le, Practical NIR 
spectroscopy with applications in food and beverage analysis . 
Longman scientific and technical, 1993.  
[87] Å. Rinnan, F. van den Berg, and S. B. Engelsen, "Review of the 
most common pre -processing techniques for near -infrared spectra," 
TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1201 -
1222, 2009.  
[88] Hamamatsu. (2017, 27 November). Hamamatsu Photonics . 
Available: www.hamamatsu.com  
[89] Consumer Physics. (2017, 27 November). SCiO . Available: 
https://www.consumerphysics.com  
[90] TellSpec Inc. (2017, 27 November, 2017). TellSpec . Available: 
www.tellspec.com  
[91] Zoltan Kovacs, George Bazar, Behafarid Darvish, Frederik 
Nieuwenhuijs, and I. Hoffmann, "Simultaneous detec tion of 
melamine and urea in gluten with a handheld NIR scanner," in 3rd 
International Conference On Optical Characterization of Materials , 
Karlsruhe, Germany, 2017, pp. 13 -23: KIT Scientific Publishing.  
[92] George Bazar, Zoltan Kovacs, and I. Hoffmann, " Detection of beef 
aging combined with the differentiation of tenderloin and sirloin 
using a handheld NIR scanner," in 3rd International Conference On 
Optical Characterization of Materials , Karlsruhe, Germany, 2017, 
pp. 25 -32: KIT Scientific Publishing.  
[93] MUSE -Tech. (2019, 06 June). Potato chips frying . Available: 
https://www.musetech.eu/cases/potato -chips -frying/  
[94] CDC. (2019, 7 October). Outbreak of E. Coli Infections Linked to 
Romain e Lettuce . Available: 
https://www.cdc.gov/Ecoli/2018/O157h7 -11-18/Index.Html  
[95] FAO. (2017, 16 April). The Future of Food and Agriculture: Trends 
and Challenges . Available: www.fao.org/publications  
[96] W. J. Armbuster and M. M. MacDonell, "Informatics to Support 
International Food Safety," pre sented at the Proceedings of the 28th 
EnviroInfo 2014 Conference, Oldenburg, Germany, September 10 -
12, 2014.  
[97] S. Sonka, "Big Data and the Ag Sector: More than Lots of 
Numbers," vol. 17 , pp. 1 -20Accessed on: 2014 -02-01. doi: 10.22004/ag.econ.163351 Ava ilable: 
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/163351/files/20130114.pdf  
[98] CDC. (2018). What Is CDC’s Role in Food Safety?  Available: 
https://www.cdc.gov/cdc -and-food-safety.html  
[99] CDC. (2019). Center for Disease Control and Prevention National 
Outbreak Reporting System, NORS . Available: 
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/norsdashboard/  
[100]  CDC. (2016). PulseNet International: On the Path to Implementing 
Whole Genome Sequencing for Foodborne Disease Surveillance . 
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/pulsenet/pdf/pulsenet -
international -wgs.pdf  
[101]  C. Nadon  et al. , "PulseNet International: Vision for the 
implementation of whole genome sequencing (WGS) for global 
food-borne disease surveillance," Euro Surveill, vol. 2 2, no. 23, Jun 
8 2017.  
[102]  WHO. (2014, 06 June). FOSCOLLAB Dashboards and Sources . 
Available: 
https://www.who.int/foodsafety/foscollab_dashboards/en/  
[103]  F. M. Aarestrup  et al. , "Integrating genome -based informatics to 
modernize global disease monitoring, information sharing, and 
response," Emerg Infect Dis, vol. 18, no. 11, p. e1, Nov 2012.  
[104]  H. Butcher  et al. , "Whole genome sequencing improved case 
ascertainment in an outbreak  of Shiga toxin -producing Escherichia 
coli O157 associated with raw drinking milk," Epidemiol Infect, vol. 
144, no. 13, pp. 2812 -23, Oct 2016.  
[105]  B. R. Jackson  et al. , "Implementation of Nationwide Real -time 
Whole -genome Sequencing to Enhance Listeriosi s Outbreak 
Detection and Investigation," Clin Infect Dis, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 380 -
6, Aug 1 2016.  
[106]  B. Jagadeesan  et al. , "The use of next generation sequencing for 
improving food safety: Translation into practice," Food Microbiol, 
vol. 79, pp. 96 -115, Jun 2019.  
[107]  M. W. Allard  et al. , "Practical Value of Food Pathogen Traceability 
through Building a Whole -Genome Sequencing Network and 
Database," J Clin Microbiol, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1975 -83, Aug 2016.  
[108]  K. L. Beck, G. Dubois, N. Haiminen, and B. Kawas. (2019, 06 June). 
Consortium for Sequencing the Food Supply Chain . Available: 
https://researcher.watson.ibm.com/researcher/view_group.php?id=
9635  
[109]  M. W. Allard  et al. , "Genomics of foodborne pathogens for 
microbial food safety," Current Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 49, 
pp. 224 -229, 2018/02/01/ 2018.  
[110]  J. L. Gardy  et al. , "Whole -genome sequencing and social -network 
analysis of a tuberculosis outbreak," New England Journal of 
Medicine, vol. 364, no. 8, pp. 730 -739, 2011.  
[111]  D. Doerr  et al. , "Accelerating investigation of food -borne disease 
outbreaks using pro -active geo spatial modeling of food supply 
chains," in Proceedings of the First ACM SIGSPATIAL 
International Workshop on Use of GIS in Public Health , 2012, pp. 
44-47: ACM.  
[112]  M. Pomranz. (2018, 06 June). Yelp Is on the Front Line in the Fight 
Against Food Poisonin g, Suggests New Study . Available: 
https://www.foodandwine.com/news/yelp -food-poisoning  
[113]  R. W. Newkirk, J. B. Bender, and C. W. Hedberg, "The potential 
capability of social media as a  component of food safety and food 
terrorism surveillance systems," Foodborne pathogens and disease, 
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 120 -124, 2012.  
[114]  R. Kamath, "Food traceability on blockchain: Walmart’s pork and 
mango pilots with IBM," The Journal of the British Blockchain 
Association, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 3712, 2018.  
[115]  S. Hodge. (2017, 7 October). Can blockchain technology transform 
safety standards in the global food supply chain?  Available: 
https://www.supplychaindigital.com/technology/can -blockchain -
technology -transform -safety -standards -global -food-supply -chain  
[116]  J. F. Galvez, J. C. Mejuto, and J. Simal -Gandara, "Futur e challenges 
on the use of blockchain for food traceability analysis," TrAC 
Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 107, pp. 222 -232, 2018.  
[117]  J. Bonneau, A. Miller, J. Clark, A. Narayanan, J. A. Kroll, and E. 
W. Felten, "SoK: Research Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin 
and Cryptocurrencies," pp. 104 -121, 2015.  
[118]  A. Kamilaris, A. Fonts, and F. X. Prenafeta -Boldύ, "The rise of 
blockchain technology in agriculture and food supply chains," 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, vol. 91, pp. 640 -652, 2019.  

==== Page 19 ====
> REPLACE THI S LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <  
 19 
[119]  F. Yiannas, "A new era of food transparency powered by 
blockchain," Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 
vol. 12, no. 1 -2, pp. 46 -56, 2018.  
[120]  D. Galvin, "IBM and Walmart: Blockchain for Food Safety," vol. 
2019, no. April 16 , Available: https://www -
01.ibm.com/events/wwe/grp/grp308.ns f/vLookupPDFs/6%20Usin
g%20Blockchain%20for%20Food%20Safe%202/$file/6%20Using
%20Blockchain%20for%20Food%20Safe%202.pdf  
[121]  W. J. Armbruster and M. M. MacDonell, "Informatics for 
Environmental Protection, Sustainable Development and Risk 
Management (Enviro Info)," in Proceedings of the 28th Conference 
on Environmental Informatics , 2014, pp. 127 -134. 
[122]  N. Y. Armonk. (2013). The Cheesecake Factory® Tackles Big Data 
with IBM Analytics for an Exceptional Brand Experience . 
Available: https://www -
03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/40436.wss  
[123]  F. Yiannas. (2015, 06 June). How Walmart’s SPARK Keeps Your 
Food Fresh . Available: 
https://blog.walmart.com/sustainability/20150112/how -walmarts -
spark -keeps -your-food-fresh  
[124]  H. Van der Fels -Klerx, J. E. Olesen, M. Madsen, and P. Goedhart, 
"Climate change increases deoxynivalenol contamin ation of wheat 
in north -western Europe," Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 
vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1593 -1604, 2012.  
[125]  L. K. Strawn  et al. , "Landscape and meteorological factors affecting 
prevalence of three food -borne pathogens in fruit and vegetable  
farms," Appl. Environ. Microbiol., vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 588 -600, 2013.  
[126]  C. Consulting and W. UR, "Cybersecurity in the Agrifood sector: 
Securing data as crucial asset for agriculture," Netherlands2016, 
Available: https://www.capgemini.com/consulting -nl/wp -
content/uploads/sites/33/2017/08/02 -
029.16_agrifood_pov_consulting_web.pdf . 
 
N.N. Misra  is the director of Ingeni um Naturae Pvt 
Ltd, Gujarat, India and an adjunct faculty in the 
Department of Engineering, Dalhousie University, 
Canada . He is a food process engineer with a PhD 
from Technological University Dublin (TUD), 
Dublin, Ireland.  In the past, he was employed with 
Iowa State University , Ames, USA  (Postdoctoral 
Fellow, 2018), and General Mills , Mumbai, India  
(Senior  Scientist, 2015 -2017). He is an author or co -
author of over 100 publications in peer -reviewed 
journals, conferences. His research interests  
circumscribe the broad areas of food processing, cold plasma, computational 
modelling, smart equipment design  and open innovation in the food industry.  
His private research interests include algorithm s, scaling of social networks  and 
tacit knowledge.  
 
Yash Dixit  is currently working as a scientist at 
AgResearch Grasslands, New Zealand under Food 
and Bio -based group in Meat Quality team. His work 
involves development of systems for meat quality and 
safety assessment at meat processing plants. His 
research interests and expertise include spectroscopic 
and imaging sensors for food safety and quality, 
chemometrics and image processing.  
Yash earned his Ph.D. in Food engineering from 
Technological University Dublin (TUD), Ireland , 
master’s in food technology  from CSIR -Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (Mysore, India) and bachelor’s  degree in 
Agricultural Engineering from College of Agricultural Engineering, JNKVV  
(Jabalpur, India).  His PhD research focussed on the use of novel spectroscopic 
techniques for meat quality and safety assessment. He has authored several 
peer-reviewed articles in international journals and technical magazines.  
 
Ahmad Al -Mallahi is an Assistant Professor a nd 
Industrial Research Chair in Precision Agriculture. He  
received his PhD degree in Bioproduction 
Engineering (2010) and master’s degree in Crop 
Production Engineering (2007) from Hokkaido 
University, Japan. From 2015 to 2018, he was a 
Product Development  Engineer with Bosch Japan. 
His research aims at developing engineering systems that maintain sustainable agricultural operations and contribute to obtaining 
high quality crop production; focusing on field application -driven research 
while adopting state -of-the-art technologies in the engineering systems. His 
expertise include development of autonomous machinery for robotic tractors; 
machine vision systems; sensor networking systems for horticulture, to which 
he integrates technologies such as sensing (obje ct detection, environment 
monitoring, etc.), digital connectivity (sensor networking, IoT), and machine 
communication (ISO -bus communication, wireless connectivity).  
 
Manreet Singh Bhullar  is Research Assistant 
Professor in the Department of Horticulture and 
Natural Resources, Kansas State University , Olathe, 
USA . He earned his Ph.D. degree in food science and 
technology (2019) from Iowa State University, a 
master’s degree in food and animal sciences (2016) 
from Tennessee State University, and  a bachelor’s 
degree in agricultural sciences (2013) from Punjab 
Agricultural University. His research expertise 
includes non -thermal processing of liquid foods, and 
fresh produce safety with specific focus on agricultural water quality. Manreet’s 
research  lab aims at identifying vulnerabilities to the safety of fresh produce 
from farm to fork continuum and developing antimicrobial interventions to 
minimize the food safety risk and protect public health.  
 
Rohit Upadhyay  is a food technology and flavor 
chemistry professional with extensive  research 
experience uniquely spanning across academics and 
food industry. He holds a PhD in food chemistry from 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur , master’s 
in food technology fr om CSIR -Central Food 
Technological Research Institute, India, bachelor’s 
degree in Biomedical Sciences from University of 
Delhi,  and is currently employed with Nestlé R&D 
Centre , India . His overarching research interest 
priorities are food chemistry, flavo r technology, plant 
bioactives , and adoption of digital technologies in the food industry . Rohit  
specializes in lipid chemistry and ha s been working under the broader theme of 
food ingredient simplicity, novel food protection, and flavor chemistry. Besides  
his industry stint, he has published in scientific journals ( over 25 publications), 
granted two industry trade secrets, and voluntarily served in academics.  
 
Alex Martynenko  is professor in Bioelectronics and 
Bioinstrumentation at Dalhousie University, working 
in the area of industrial automation, robotics, machine 
vision, machine learning and intelligent control 
systems. Using his expertise in electronics, sensor 
fusion, control and optimization, he is developing 
practical applications for a gricultural and food 
processing industries, including controlled 
hydrodynamic cavitation and electrohydrodynamic 
drying. He is author and coauthor of four books and 
11 patents, and an instructor for industry -oriented 
short courses.  


