==== Page 1 ====
Vol:.(1234567890)Digital War (2020) 1:164–170
https://doi.org/10.1057/s42984-020-00007-w
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity
Tim Stevens1
Published online: 31 March 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Cybersecurity protects citizens and society from harm perpetrated through computer networks. Its task is made ever more 
complex by the diversity of actors—criminals, spies, militaries, hacktivists, firms—operating in global information net -
works, so that cybersecurity is intimately entangled with the so-called grey zone of conflict between war and peace in the 
early twenty-first century. To counter cyber threats from this environment, cybersecurity is turning to artificial intelligence 
and machine learning (AI) to mitigate anomalous behaviours in cyberspace. This article argues that AI algorithms create 
new modes and sites of cybersecurity knowledge production through hybrid assemblages of humans and nonhumans. It 
concludes by looking beyond ‘everyday’ cybersecurity to military and intelligence use of AI and asks what is at stake in the 
automation of cybersecurity.
Keywords Algorithms · Artificial intelligence · Automation · Cybersecurity · Grey zone · Knowledge
Cybersecurity in the grey zone
Discussions of ‘digital war’ quickly resolve to an under -
standing that global digital connectivity has disturbed our 
orthodox understandings of war and peace. In the so-called 
grey zone (Wirtz 2017) below the threshold of armed con-
flict, a diverse and fluid cast of actors attempts to derive 
political, strategic and economic gain through the ever-
proliferating assemblage of information communications 
technologies. Even if it is a step too far to label many of 
these activities—political activism, crime, espionage, sub-
version—as ‘war’ or ‘war-like’ (Levinson, this volume), it 
is not unreasonable to characterise the wider environment 
of cybersecurity as one of persistent grey-zone conflict 
(Corn 2019, 347–354). At the strategic level, for instance, 
suitably equipped states view ‘cyber’ as a coercive tool 
worth exploiting for national gain, be it in military opera -
tions, intelligence-gathering or commercial cyberespionage 
(Brantly 2018; Valeriano et al. 2018). As most of this occurs 
below the level of conventional conflict, it is seen as a way of 
limiting conflict escalation, albeit always with the potential 
to generate just the opposite (Brands 2016; Schneider 2019).The twists and turns of operations in this digital domain 
may be surprising and their effects—inasmuch as causal-
ity can ever be demonstrated—remarkable, but the vectors 
of their propagation are familiar, omnipresent and quotid-
ian, including the global internet and the myriad consumer 
electronics that share and shape our lives. So too the prac-
tices of cybersecurity, which, for all the justifiable inter -
est in ‘cyberwarfare’ and ‘cyberespionage’, constitute the 
‘everyday’ of digital conflict in the grey zone. In the daily 
exchanges of technical cybersecurity, there is a constant to-
and-fro between network defenders and attackers. Cyberse-
curity practitioners tend to wring the most out of existing 
technologies to wrest the upper hand from their adversar -
ies, whether the humblest hacker or the best-resourced state 
entity. Inevitably, however, they also seek to employ innova-
tive technologies as the environment evolves. In tune with 
the zeitgeist, artificial intelligence and machine learning 
(hereafter, AI) are proposed as an essential ‘solution’ to all 
manner of cybersecurity threats.
The following discussion addresses the identification of 
cyber threats through AI and algorithmic means and demon-
strates a shift from signature- to anomaly-based approaches 
to threat detection and mitigation. It then moves to the spe-
cific application of AI to anomaly detection, particularly in 
relation to the construction of ‘normal’ organisational ‘pat-
terns of life’. The epistemic implications of this technical 
orientation are then unpacked, specifically how AI creates  * Tim Stevens 
 tim.stevens@kcl.ac.uk
1 King’s College London, London, UK

==== Page 2 ====
165 Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity  
new sites of knowledge production through new human–non-
human subjectivities. This brief exploration concludes by 
looking beyond everyday cybersecurity to military and intel-
ligence ‘cyber’ and asks what is at stake in the automation 
of cybersecurity.
From signatures to anomalies
Cybersecurity cannot proceed without data. Access to and 
protection of data are core practical considerations for cyber -
security professionals. As more computing devices become 
networked in the ‘Internet of Things’ and data volumes—at 
rest and in transit—continue to grow, the ‘attack surface’ of 
the global information environment expands continuously. 
Understood as the totality of weak points exploitable by 
nefarious actors, the attack surface is less a physical bound-
ary to be defended than a logical membrane of potential 
vulnerability distributed in space and time. Preventing 
exploitation of flaws in this integument, through which mali-
cious code can be inserted or valuable data extracted, is a 
near-impossible task, not least as vulnerabilities are inherent 
in information systems. As Libicki (2009, 14) notes, there 
is ‘no forced entry in cyberspace. Whoever gets in enters 
through pathways produced by the system itself’. This onto-
logical insecurity is compounded by the sheer diversity and 
growth of this environment, so that defence can never be per -
fect and attackers seem always to be one step ahead. Cyber -
security is about making visible those vulnerabilities and 
threats in order to counter them, an informational challenge 
that relies on timely and intelligible data for interpretation 
and effective use in prevention and remediation.
The collection and filtering of data about the status of 
information systems and threats to their intended function-
ing have long been largely automated. Humans do not have 
the cognitive or sensory capacity to cope with the enormous 
data volumes produced by software and hardware dedicated 
to alerting systems administrators to problems inside and 
outside their networks. Add to this a human capital shortfall 
in the cybersecurity industry (Shires 2018) and automation 
is a reasonable technical fix for some of these problems. 
Cybersecurity vendors, for example, offer thousands of dif-
ferent products for automated malware detection. These soft-
ware packages inspect network traffic and match data packets 
to known signatures of malicious software (malware) that 
install themselves on users’ machines and act in deleterious 
ways. Now much more than just ‘anti-virus’ protection, these 
software packages also detect and deny worms, Trojans, 
spyware, adware, ransomware, rootkits and other software 
entities searching for and exploiting digital vulnerabilities. 
Automated in this fashion, malware can be repelled, quar -
antined, destroyed or otherwise prevented from infecting a 
system and opening it up for exploitation. Effective as this has been in the past, new types of polymorphic and meta-
morphic malware, which change their ‘appearance’ every 
few seconds, can evade traditional techniques of ‘signature-
based’ detection that rely on existing knowledge of malware 
species. You cannot defend against these rapidly mutating 
threats if they have no signature matches in databases that 
are inevitably always out of date.
Signature-based detection is still effective against known 
malware, but technical cybersecurity is developing ‘anom-
aly-based’ capabilities that compare network traffic to con-
tinuously revised baselines of ‘normal’ behaviour to detect 
intrusions, analyse malware and detect spam and phishing 
attacks. Traffic classified as legitimate against a given base-
line is permitted across network boundaries, but unusual 
behaviours will be detected automatically and flagged for 
further investigation, including by human analysts. Yet, as 
the number of alerts triggered increases, many requiring 
human attention, we are thrown back again on the limits 
of organisational and cognitive capacity. This situation is 
exacerbated by the persistent creation of false negatives (bad 
behaviour treated as good) and false positives (good behav -
iour labelled as bad), which further drain resources (Libicki 
et al. 2015, 28–29). One response has been to add a new 
layer of automation to the parsing and analysis of these ‘big 
data’ sets, using emerging technologies of AI to process and 
interpret anomalous behaviour and feed it back into cyberse-
curity decision-making processes in ever-shortening cycles 
of action and reaction. Cybersecurity and AI have not always 
been obvious bedfellows. In the early days of each field, 
computer security researchers viewed with some distrust 
the relative unpredictability of AI system behaviours, their 
multiple possible outputs anathema to the order sought by 
software engineers (Landwehr 2007). Now, the possibility 
that AI can learn and adapt in dynamic ways makes it more 
attractive for countering similarly adaptive cybersecurity 
threats.
The promise of AI
The use of AI in cybersecurity is not entirely new. If we 
understand ‘AI’ as a placeholder for a set of algorithmic 
machine learning heuristics rather than a new form of ‘intel-
ligence’, cybersecurity has been alive to its potential since 
at least the 1990s. Early applications include the filtering 
of spam email using Bayesian logic and the classification 
of spam by large neural networks (Brunton 2013). AI has 
increased significantly in sophistication since then and its 
development has partly been occasioned by adversaries’ use 
of those same technologies. Learning algorithms fuel the 
evolution of the aforementioned polymorphic and metamor -
phic malware, for instance. They have also been created to 
detect vulnerabilities in target systems and assist in their 

==== Page 3 ====
166 T. Stevens 
exploitation and subversion: the cybersecurity industry is 
deeply worried by the future deployment of ‘adversarial’ 
or ‘offensive’ AI, a concern shared with governments and 
military and intelligence agencies (Brundage et al. 2018). 
In this respect, AI deployments are part of an emerging 
‘arms race’ between attackers and defenders (Scharre 2018, 
229–230). This message is not lost on enterprises, 61% of 
which reported in 2019 that they could not detect network 
breaches without AI technologies and 69% believed AI 
would be necessary to respond to those breaches (Capgemini 
2019).
One notable response to this market demand has been 
the development of cybersecurity AI platforms that claim 
to mimic natural ‘immune systems’, borrowing from a long 
analogical association between cybersecurity and notions 
of public health and epidemiology (Betz and Stevens 2013; 
Weber 2017 ). Companies promote anomaly-based AI as a 
way of learning what ‘normal’ means for an organisation 
and then begin to explore unusual behaviours. The toler -
ance of the AI engine to anomalous behaviours can then 
be adjusted, based on the risk appetite of the organisation 
and its resourcing levels (Wilkinson 2019). The ‘immune 
system’ metaphor plays out in a platform’s putative capacity 
to detect, root out and inoculate against further suspicious 
behaviours. In one firm’s account of its ‘Enterprise Immune 
System’ package, ‘[b]y detecting subtle deviations from the 
organisation’s “pattern of life”, it can distinguish friend from 
foe—and highlight true cyber threats or attacks that would 
otherwise go unnoticed’ (Darktrace n.d.). These vendors 
claim another benefit for potential clients, in that they free 
up analysts’ time to focus on more important tasks, instead 
of being mired in ‘low-priority or benign events from the 
start’ (Darktrace n.d.). This is a recognition of the frequency 
of false negatives and positives—although AI promises to 
reduce their incidence by learning what is ‘normal’ over 
time—but is also a legitimate comment on the exigencies 
of life in modern security operations centres. These are 
bombarded with security reports, whose importance at first 
glance can be difficult to discern. Automated AI systems can 
handle the bulk of low-level threat detection and response, 
allowing analysts to tackle high-level behaviours and inci-
dents instead. This includes developing profiles of the 
human actors behind sophisticated cyber campaigns, such 
as so-called advanced persistent threats (APTs), in order to 
tailor deterrence and response regimes. A further promising 
avenue of research is to capture analysts’ real-life behaviours 
and feed this data back into learning algorithms as a way of 
shaping AI responses to cybersecurity incidents (Bresniker 
et al. 2019).
AI systems learn about the threat environment within 
and without the notional perimeters of organisations. This 
includes employees and other people interacting with those 
networks: clients, customers and, in the case of government agencies, citizens and service-users. Monitoring these 
individuals allows AI to establish an organisation’s inter -
nal rhythms and patterns, a normal baseline against which 
anomalies can be registered, such as ‘insider threats’ posed 
by disgruntled employees, leakers and whistle-blowers (Wall 
2013). AI-powered behavioural analytics might detect, for 
instance, unusual employee activities at odd times of the 
night or unexpected spikes in transfers of sensitive com-
mercial data or intellectual property. Combined with mul-
tiple other data streams, a picture is developed of anoma-
lous behaviour within an organisation’s immediate purview 
organisation, leading to further investigation and possible 
censure. Using AI to predict human rather than just machine 
behaviour is an important contributor to ‘sociotechnical’ 
framings of cybersecurity that address how technology, 
users and processes interact in complex organisational sys-
tems (Coles-Kemp and Hansen 2017). An uneasy tension 
exists in this field between designing computer networks that 
enhance the human security of end-users (Coles-Kemp et al. 
2018 ) and using technology to discern anomalous behav -
iours, a perspective that tends to perceive all end-users as 
potential vectors of threat (Schneier 2016).
AI, anomalies and episteme
The search for anomalies shifts the emphasis of cybersecu-
rity from known threats to the prolepsis of as-yet-unknown 
threats and into an anticipatory posture that has received 
much attention in the critical security literature (e.g. Amoore 
2013). It also suggests a more inductive approach to the 
creation of useful cybersecurity knowledge from big data 
sets. Driven by AI, anomaly-based cybersecurity practices 
search for patterns, associations and correlations that cannot 
be identified solely by signature analysis, the latter under -
stood as a form of deductive reasoning. In part, this chan-
nels the infamous claim made of big data analytics that they 
make the hypothetico-deductive method ‘obsolete’ (Ander -
son 2000). As critics of this position observe, all enquiry, 
big data analytics included, instantiates any number of theo-
retical assumptions and biases (Kitchin 2014). In AI-driven 
machine learning, parameters and data categories are often 
set in advance by human programmers. This ‘supervised 
learning’ is very different from ‘unsupervised’ learning tech-
niques, in which algorithms do the labelling and categorisa-
tion themselves and might therefore be ‘unbounded from the 
bias of specific localities’ (Parisi 2019, 98). The quality of 
training data is therefore key to determining output quality, 
and supervised machine learning can give rise to outcomes 
that reproduce programmers’ biases (McDonald 2019). In 
cybersecurity, the assembling of ‘cyber threat intelligence’ 
(CTI) from multiple data streams is prone to various biases, 
as analysts are swayed by groupthink, external social media 

==== Page 4 ====
167 Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity  
and reporting, seduction by the power of expertise, and their 
personal beliefs and prejudices; responsible CTI cannot 
therefore be the preserve of machines alone (Collier 2019). 
These everyday decisional acts constitute ‘little security 
nothings’ that have even greater import in the aggregrate 
than in their individual existence alone (Husymans 2011)
Furthermore, as Aradau and Blanke (2018) identify in 
their critique of ‘algorithmic rationalities’, the hunt for 
anomalies in big data security environments subtly alters 
the logics of security in three specific ways. Referring to 
intelligence and counter-terrorism, rather than cybersecu-
rity, they note first how advanced analytics are, as outlined 
above, a response to the increased data volumes of interest to 
security practitioners. Anomaly-based analytics are geared, 
therefore, to the practical requirement for ‘actionable infor -
mation’, rather than ‘good or truthful information’, which 
unravels claims to ‘algorithmic objectivity’ and shows ‘how 
uncertainty is radically embedded within algorithmic rea-
soning’ (Aradau and Blanke 2018, 20). This is compounded 
by the lack of standardised data collection and classification 
procedures, which complicates comparisons between data 
sets. Second, anomalies are constructed by their divergence 
from normality, which is defined as similarity between data 
points rather than predetermined categories. ‘Otherness’ is 
expressed as ‘dots, spikes or nodes’ in geometric or topo-
logical space that are anomalous in their dissimilarity to 
the ‘normal’ so constructed. Whilst this may seem to avoid 
the questions of bias previously noted, this unmooring from 
negative categorisations presents a political problem: how to 
‘reconnect techniques of producing dots, spikes and nodes 
with vocabularies of inequality and discrimination’? (Ara -
dau and Blanke 2018 , 20). Third, stable categories—as in 
statistical analyses—give way to ‘continuous calculations of 
similarity and dissimilarity’, thereby refusing direct politi-
cal contestation, particularly as those calculations ‘remain 
invisible, often even to the data analysts themselves’ (Aradau 
and Blanke 2018, 21). Hidden within the archetypal ‘black 
box’ of technology, defined in terms of inputs and outputs 
only (Von Hilgers 2011), the computation of AI technolo-
gies is frequently unknowable and therefore radically opaque 
(Castelvecchi 2016).
The complexity, uncertainty and lack of transparency 
of anomaly-based AI technologies in cybersecurity and 
elsewhere raise questions of AI trust, safety and control. 
The postulated solution is either to double down on AI as 
an engineering solution to these problems, or to figure out 
precisely where humans should be located in respect of 
the ‘loop’ of AI decision-making. In the context of lethal 
autonomous weapons systems and the use of AI in war, the 
question has become: should humans be in, on or out of this 
loop? (Jensen et al. 2019; Scharre 2018) In cybersecurity, 
as in war, analysts and operators are enmeshed in hybrid 
human–machine assemblages that generate knowledge of particular utility in specific decision-making circumstances. 
The production of cyber threat intelligence is referred to in 
terms of hybrid configurations of people, data, machines 
and organisations, tasked with meeting specific operational 
and strategic demands (Jasper 2017 ). Srnicek ( 2014 , 45) 
captures this dynamic when he analyses the ‘delegation of 
thought’ to machines in ‘cognitive assemblages’ of socio-
technical composition. In these epistemic loci, heteroge-
neous human and nonhuman actors, including algorithms, 
contribute to the creation of expert knowledges, which are 
‘collective and distributed rather than individual or solely 
social’ (Srnicek 2014 , 45; Hayles 2016 ). They establish ‘col -
laborations of influence’ (Kaufmann 2019) that have agency 
in how and what kind of knowledge is produced. Are we ‘in 
the loop’ if our choices are between paths of action relayed 
by machines? (Weber and Suchman 2016) If unsupervised 
learning systems develop their own questions and goals, 
what becomes of the human at all? The traditional mantra 
that cybersecurity is a ‘team sport’ is better read as a ‘dance 
of agency’ (Pickering 2010) once this relational process of 
delegation and complex agency in AI-rich environments 
takes hold.
Beyond the everyday
The foregoing review has addressed the everyday cyberse-
curity necessary to maintain the ordinary functioning of the 
information systems on which daily life depends. AI has 
an important role in this diverse landscape, automating 
the mundane, learning from its environment and promot-
ing better protection for users, organisations and societies. 
However, as alluded to above, the role of algorithms in cre-
ating and sustaining specific socioeconomic and political 
arrangements is never neutral (Kitchin 2017; Berry 2019). 
AI-driven anomaly detection creates new subjectivities in 
the grey zone of modern informational conflict and risks sac-
rificing ‘truth’ for ‘utility’ and ‘convenience’ in the manage-
rial practices of organisational cybersecurity. This radical 
contingency creates political problems as AI substitutes for 
human cognition as the arbiter of network decision-making 
and regulation of data flows. Anomalies may escape easy 
mapping to established groupings of people and behaviours, 
but there are multiple examples of the insidious effects of 
this computational logic. Tools of data manipulation similar 
to those in AI-fuelled cybersecurity are easily turned to eco-
nomic and political projects of worrisome scale and impact. 
From the ‘behavioural futures markets’ of surveillance capi-
talism (Zuboff 2019) to the Chinese social credit system 
(Matsakis 2019), from the excesses of domestic surveillance 
(Bauman et al. 2014) to online information operations in a 
post-truth era (Woolley and Howard 2018 ), algorithms con -
stitute new modalities and mediators of political influence 

==== Page 5 ====
168 T. Stevens 
and control. Whilst we have few grounds for assuming that 
AI is inferior to human intelligence (Collins 2019), ques-
tions of knowledge, power and subjectivity are intimately 
bound up with these algorithmic rationalities (Aradau and 
Blanke 2018).
AI and cybersecurity are also far from neglected in the 
realms of secret intelligence and military operations. AI is 
a sine qua non for modern militaries (Lewis 2019) and a 
potent augmentation to strategic planning (Payne 2018). 
Without AI in cyberspace, the former head of US Cyber 
Command remarked in Senate testimony, ‘you are always 
behind the power curve’ (Congressional Research Service 
2019, 11). Militaries and intelligence agencies are investing 
heavily in AI-enabled cyber, including the US Department of 
Defense’s new Joint Artificial Intelligence Centre (Corrigan 
2019) and numerous other initiatives leveraging AI to gen-
erate operational and strategic effect in and through cyber -
space. The UK is developing ‘human–machine teaming’ in 
AI-rich environments including cyber, so as to promote ‘the 
effective integration of humans, artificial intelligence (AI) 
and robotics into warfighting systems … that exploit the 
capabilities of people and technologies to outperform our 
opponents’ (Ministry of Defence 2018, 39). Known in the 
USA as ‘centaur warfighters’, these hybrids will ‘leverage 
the precision and reliability of automation without sacri-
ficing the robustness and flexibility of human intelligence’ 
(Scharre 2018 , 321). This continues a long lineage of hybrid 
military subjectivities (Coker 2013), oriented now to predic-
tive machine cognition providing decision advantage to the 
new military operations of ‘cognitive manoeuvre’ in global 
information space (Dear 2019). These hybrid entities are 
not just network defenders but agents of cyberwarfare and 
cyberespionage. As the US adopts new doctrines of ‘per -
sistent engagement’ and ‘defending forward’ in cyberspace 
(Healey 2019), they will be on the front lines of digital 
warfare and intelligence, with as-yet unknown autonomy in 
decision-making and target discrimination. In this assem-
blage, ‘we may never know if a decision is  a decision … 
or if it has been “controlled by previous knowledge” and 
“programmed”’ (Amoore and de Goede 2008, 180).
Militaries and intelligence agencies join firms, citizens, 
criminals, hacktivists and others using AI-enabled cyber 
tools in the complex battlespaces of the grey zone. Tech-
nical cybersecurity exploits AI to overcome constraints on 
human cognition, to speed decision-making and to provide 
better protection to organisations and end-users of informa-
tion systems. In so doing, it prioritises operational efficiency 
over truth and creates new subjectivities and targets of inter -
vention. Algorithms and automation also create new sites 
of knowledge production whilst simultaneously obfuscat -
ing the precise calculations that lead to particular outputs. 
This draws attention to problematic aspects of the delega-
tion of thought to machines, in that it portends a decrease in opportunities for meaningful oversight and regulation. 
The stakes could not be higher in military cyber targeting 
or digital intelligence—strategic cybersecurity—by which 
standards the use of AI in everyday cybersecurity is a 
straightforward proposition. Nevertheless, the role of AI in 
cybersecurity generally, a core modality of offence–defence 
dynamics in the grey zone, remains open to contestation, 
modulating as it does the global flows of data in our nomi-
nal ‘information age’. In considering AI in cybersecurity 
and elsewhere, perhaps we should revisit Lewis Mumford’s 
(1964, 273) provocation: ‘Unless you have the power to stop 
an automatic process, you had better not start it’. Where is 
agency in the new cybersecurity assemblage and who or 
what makes the decisions that matter?
Acknowledgements  I am grateful to Joe Devanny, Lilly Pijnenburg 
Muller, Erik Reichborn-Kjennerud, Max Smeets and the editors for 
their insightful comments and suggestions.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.
References
Amoore, Louise. 2013. The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security 
Beyond Probability. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Amoore, Louise, and Marieke de Goede. 2008. Transactions after 9/11: 
the banal face of the preemptive strike. Transactions of the Insti-
tute of British Geographers 33 (2): 173–185.
Anderson, Chris. 2000. The end of theory: The data deluge makes the 
scientific method obsolete. Wired, 23 June. https ://www.wired  
.com/2008/06/pb-theor  y/.
Aradau, Claudia, and Tobias Blanke. 2018. Governing others: Anom-
aly and the algorithmic subject of security. European Journal of 
International Security 3 (1): 1–21.
Bauman, Zygmunt, Didier Bigo, Paulo Esteves, Elspeth Guild, Vivi-
enne Jabri, David Lyon, and R.B.J. Walker. 2014. After Snowden: 
Rethinking the impact of surveillance. International Political 
Sociology 8 (2): 121–144.
Berry, David M. 2019. Against infrasomatization: Towards a critical 
theory of algorithms. In Data Politics: Worlds, Subjects, Rights, 
ed. Didier Bigo, Engen Isin, and Evelyn Ruppert, 43–63. London: 
Routledge.
Betz, David, and Tim Stevens. 2013. Analogical reasoning and cyber 
security. Security Dialogue 44 (2): 147–164.
Brands, Hal. 2016. Paradoxes of the gray zone. Foreign Policy Research 
Institute, 5 February. https ://www.fpri.org/artic le/2016/02/parad  
oxes-gray-zone/.

==== Page 6 ====
169 Knowledge in the grey zone: AI and cybersecurity  
Brantly, Aaron F. 2018. The Decision to Attack: Military and Intel-
ligence Decision-Making. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Bresniker, Kirk, Ada Gavrilovska, James Holt, Dejan Milojicic, and 
Trung Tran. 2019. Grand challenge: Applying artificial intelli-
gence and machine learning to cybersecurity. Computer 52 (12): 
45–52.
Brundage, Miles and 25 others. 2018. The Malicious Use of Artificial 
Intelligence: Forecasting, Prevention and Mitigation. Oxford: 
Future of Humanity Institute and 13 others. https ://malic iousa  
irepo rt.com/.
Brunton, Finn. 2013. Spam: A Shadow History of the Internet . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Capgemini. 2019. Reinventing Cybersecurity with Artificial Intel-
ligence: A New Frontier in Digital Security. https ://www.capge  
mini.com/resea  rch/reinv  entin  g-cyber  secur  ity-with-arti fi  cial 
-intel ligen ce/. Accessed 8 Jan 2020.
Castelvecchi, Davide. 2016. Can we open the black box of AI? 
Nature 538: 20–23.
Coker, Christopher. 2013. Warrior Geeks: How 21st Century Tech-
nology is Changing the Way We Fight and Think About War. 
London: Hurst.
Coles-Kemp, Lizzie, Debi Ashenden, and Kieron O’Hara. 2018. 
Why should I? Cybersecurity, the security of the state and the 
insecurity of the citizen. Politics and Governance  6 (2): 41–48.
Coles-Kemp, Lizzie, and René Rydhof Hansen. 2017. Walking the 
line: The everyday security ties that bind. In Human Aspects 
of Information Security, Privacy and Trust, ed. Theo Tryfonas, 
464–480. Cham: Springer.
Collier, Jamie. 2019. A threat intelligence analyst’s guide to today’s 
sources of bias. Digital Shadows, 5 December. https ://www.
digit  alsha dows.com/blog-and-resea rch/a-threa t-intel ligen ce-
analy  sts-guide -to-today  s-sourc es-of-bias/.
Collins, Jason. 2019. Principles for the application of human intelli-
gence. Behavioral Scientist, 30 September. https ://behav ioral scien  
tist.org/princ iples -for-the-appli catio n-of-human -intel ligen ce/.
Congressional Research Service. 2019. Artificial Intelligence and 
National Security . Washington, DC. https  ://crsre  ports  .congr  ess.
gov/produ ct/pdf/R/R4517 8. Accessed 8 Jan 2020.
Corn, Gary P. 2019. Cyber national security: Navigating gray-zone 
challenges in and through cyberspace. In Complex Battlespaces: 
The Law of Armed Conflict and the Dynamics of Modern Warfare, 
ed. Christopher M. Ford and Winston S. Williams, 345–428. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Corrigan, Jack. 2019. Pentagon, NSA prepare to train AI-powered 
cyber defences. Defense One, 4 September. https ://www.defen  
seone .com/techn ology /2019/09/penta gon-nsa-layin g-groun dwork  
-ai-power  ed-cyber  -defen ses/15965 0/.
Darktrace. n.d. Cyber AI platform. https ://www.darkt race.com/en/
techn ology /. Accessed 1 Jan 2020.
Dear, Keith. 2019. Artificial intelligence and decision-making. RUSI 
Journal 164 (5–6): 18–25.
Hayles, N. Katherine. 2016. Cognitive assemblages: Technical agency 
and human interactions. Critical Inquiry 43 (1): 32–55.
Healey, Jason. 2019. The implications of persistent (and permanent) 
engagement in cyberspace. Journal of Cybersecurity. https ://doi.
org/10.1093/cybse c/tyz00 8.
Husymans, Jef. 2011. What’s in an act? On security speech acts and 
little security nothings. Security Dialogue 42 (4–5): 371–383.
Jasper, Scott E. 2017. US cyber threat intelligence sharing frameworks. 
International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence 30 
(1): 53–65.
Jensen, Benjamin M., Christopher Whyte, and Scott Cuomo. 2019. 
Algorithms at war: The promise, perils, and limits of artifi-
cial intelligence. International Studies Review. https ://doi.
org/10.1093/isr/viz02 5.Kaufmann, Mareile. 2019. Who connects the dots? Agents and agency 
in predictive policing. In Technologies and Agency in Interna-
tional Relations, ed. Marijn Hoijtink and Matthias Leese, 141–
163. London: Routledge.
Kitchin, Rob. 2014. Big data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts. 
Big Data and Society. https ://doi.org/10.1177/20539 51714 52848 1.
Kitchin, Rob. 2017. Thinking critically about and researching algo-
rithms. Information, Communication and Society 20 (1): 14–29.
Landwehr, Carl E. 2007. Cybersecurity and artificial intelligence: From 
fixing the plumbing to smart water. IEEE Security and Privacy  
6 (5): 3–4.
Lewis, Larry. 2019. Resolving the battle over artificial intelligence in 
war. RUSI Journal 164 (5–6): 62–71.
Libicki, Martin C. 2009. Cyberdeterrence and Cyberwar. Santa 
Monica: RAND Corporation.
Libicki, Martin C., Lillian Ablon, and Tim Webb. 2015. The Defend-
er’s Dilemma: Charting a Course Toward Cybersecurity. Santa 
Monica: RAND Corporation.
McDonald, Henry. 2019. AI expert calls for end to UK use of 
‘racially biased’ algorithms. The Guardian, 12 December. https  
://www.thegu ardia n.com/techn ology /2019/dec/12/ai-end-uk-
use-racia lly-biase d-algor  ithms -noel-shark  ey.
Matsakis, Louise. 2019. How the West got China’s social credit sys-
tem wrong. Wired, 29 July. https ://www.wired .com/story /china  
-socia l-credi t-score -syste m/.
Ministry of Defence. 2018. Human–Machine Teaming. Joint Concept 
Note 1/18. Shrivenham: Development, Concepts and Doctrine 
Centre.
Mumford, Lewis. 1964. The automation of knowledge. AV Commu-
nication Review 12 (3): 261–276.
Parisi, Luciana. 2019. Critical computation: Digital automata and 
general artificial thinking. Theory, Culture and Society 36 (2): 
89–121.
Payne, Kenneth. 2018. Artificial intelligence: A revolution in strate-
gic affairs? Survival 60 (5): 7–32.
Pickering, Andrew. 2010. Material culture and the dance of agency. 
In The Oxford Handbook of Material Culture Studies, ed. Dan 
Hicks and Mary C. Beaudry, 191–208. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Scharre, Paul. 2018. Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the 
Future of War. New York: W.W. Norton.
Schneider, Jacquelyn. 2019. The capability/vulnerability paradox and 
military revolutions: Implications for computing, cyber, and the 
onset of war. Journal of Strategic Studies 42 (6): 841–863.
Schneier, Bruce. 2016. Stop trying to fix the user. IEEE Security and 
Privacy 14 (5): 96.
Shires, James. 2018. Enacting expertise: Ritual and risk in cyberse-
curity. Politics and Governance 6 (2): 31–40.
Srnicek, Nick. 2014. Cognitive assemblages and the production of 
knowledge. In Reassembling International Theory: Assemblage 
Thinking and International Relations, ed. Michele Acuto and 
Simon Curtis, 40–47. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Valeriano, Brandon, Benjamin Jensen, and Ryan C. Maness. 2018. 
Cyber Strategy: The Evolving Character of Power and Coer -
cion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Von Hilgers, Philipp. 2011. The history of the black box: The clash 
of a thing and its concept. Cultural Politics 7 (1): 41–58.
Wall, David S. 2013. Enemies within: Redefining the insider threat 
in organizational security policy. Security Journal 26 (2): 
107–124.
Weber, Steven. 2017. Coercion in cybersecurity: What public health 
models reveal. Journal of Cybersecurity 3 (3): 173–183.
Weber, Jutta, and Lucy Suchman. 2016. Human-machine autono -
mies. In Autonomous Weapons Systems: Law, Ethics, Policy, 
ed. Nehal Bhuta, Susanne Beck, Robin Geiß, Hin-Yan Liu, and 
Claus Kreß, 75–102. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

==== Page 7 ====
170 T. Stevens 
Wilkinson, Dick. 2019. The future of AI in cybersecurity. CISO 
Mag, 29 October. https  ://www.cisom  ag.com/the-futur  e-of-ai-
in-cyber secur  ity/.
Wirtz, James J. 2017. Life in the ‘gray zone’: Observations for con-
temporary strategists. Defense and Security Analysis 33 (2): 
106–114.
Woolley, Samuel C., and Philip N. Howard (eds.). 2018. Computa-
tional Propaganda: Political Parties, Politicians, and Political 
Manipulation on Social Media. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Zuboff, Shoshana. 2019. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight 
for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. London: Profile 
Books.Dr. Tim Stevens is Senior Lecturer in Global Security at the Depart-
ment of War Studies, King’s College London. His research engages 
with the political and strategic dimensions of cybersecurity, cyber -
warfare and cyberespionage. He is head of the KCL Cyber Security 
Research Group, Senior Fellow and Associate Researcher at Conserva-
toire national des arts et métiers, Paris, and a Fellow of the Royal 
Geographical Society. His latest book, with Nicholas Michelsen, is 
Pessimism in International Relations: Provocations, Possibilities, Poli-
tics (Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).

